Title: NQ41412.pdf

URL Source: https://www.collectionscanada.ca/obj/s4/f2/dsk1/tape11/PQDD_0003/NQ41412.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 07 Feb 2005 16:20:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 457

Markdown Content:
This manuscnpt has been  reproduced  from the microfilm  master.  UMI  films the 

text  directly  from the original or copy  submitteâ.  Thus,  some  thesis  and 

dissertation  copies  are in  typewiter  face,  while  othen  rnay be from any type of 

cornputer  printer. 

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct  print,  colored  or  poor  quality illustrations and photographs,  print  bleedthrough,  substandard  margins, and  improper  alignment 

can  advsnely  affect reproduction. In the  unlikely  event that the  author  did not send UMI a complete  manuscript  and 

there  are missing pages,  these  will be  noted.  Also,  if  unauthorized  copyright 

material  had to be  removed,  a note will  indicate  the deletion. 

Oversize  materials  (e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts)  are  reproduced  by  secüoning 

the original, beginning  a!  the  upper  left-hand  corner  and  continuing  fmm  left  to 

right  in  equal  sections  with  small  ovefiaps. 

Photographs  included  in the original  manuscript  have been  reproducad 

xerographically  in this copy.  Higher  quality  6"  x 9'  black  and white  photographie 

pnnts are  available  for  any  photographs or illustrations  appearing  in this copy for an additional charge. Contact  UMI  directly  to  order. 

Bell & Howell  Information and  Learning 

300 North  Zeeb  Road,  Ann  Arbor,  MI  481064346  USA THE FORMATION AND  DEMISE  OF ROYAL  HOUSES  IN THE  PERIOD  OF  THE 

SOUTHERN  DYNASTIES: A KISTORY  OF THE  XIA0  FAMlLY  DURING  THE 

SONG,  SOUTHERN  QI AND LIANG (AND  LATER  LIANG) DYNASTIES (420-581) 

Ian  Bailie  Buttars 

A thesis  submitted  in  conformity  with  the  requirements 

for the  degree  of Doctor of Philosophy 

Graduate  Department of East  Asian  Studies University of Toronto  

> 0

Copwght  by  Ian  Bailie  Bunars  1998 National Library 

# 191  of Canada                      

> Bibliothéque nationale
> du Canada Acquisitions and Acquisitions et
> Bibliographie Services services bibliographiques 395 Wellington Street 395, rue Wellington
> OîtawaON K1AON4 Ottawa ON K1AON4
> Canada Canada

## The  author  has  granted  a non-exclusive licence  allowing  the National  Library  of Canada to reproduce,  loan,  distribute or  sell 

## copies of  this  thesis  in  microform, 

## paper or  electronic  formats. The  author  retains  ownership  of the copyright in  this  thesis.  Neither  the 

## thesis  nor  substantial  extracts  fiom  it 

## may be  printed  or  otherwise 

## reproduced  without  the  author's 

## permission. L'auteur a accordé une licence non 

## exclusive permettant à la 

## Bibliothèque nationale du Canada de reproduire, prêter, distribuer ou vendre des copies de cette thèse sous la forme de  microfiche/film,  de reproduction sur papier ou sur format électronique. L'auteur conserve la propriété du droit d'auteur qui protège cette thèse. Ni la thèse ni des extraits substantiels de  celle-ci  ne doivent être imprimés ou autrement reproduits sans son 

## autorisation. THE FORMATION AND  DEMlSE  OF ROYAL  EOUSES  IN  THE PERIOD OF THE 

SWKHERN  ~ ' ~ ' N A $ ~ ~ S : A HISTORY  OF THE MAO FAMILY  G U W G  TFCE  SONG, 

SOUTERI'?  QI LIANG  (AND LATER  LIANG) DYNASTIES  (420-58  1)  

> A

Thesis  for the  Degree  of  Doaor  of  Philosophy  1998 

Ian  Bailie  Buttars 

Graduate  Department  of East  Asian  Studies,  University of Toronto  

> AB

STRACT 

This  thesis  is an  exercise  in  exploring  the  official  dynas ltic histories to  reconstmct  the 

history  of the Xiao  family  during  the  period  of the Southem Dynasties. It  narrates  the political events of the  three  dynasties in  which  the  Xiaos  were active,  outlines  the  "normative" 

process of usurpation and presents the  various  instruments of  legitimation  by which each 

dynastic  founder  justifïed  his  accession to the throne.  Much  of  this  matenai  is presented in 

English  for the  first  time. 

Though the members of the Xiao are  recognized  for their political and  literary 

accomplishments,  their  rise  to power  originated  in their  rnilitary  background and their fortuitous  relationship  to an  earlier  branch  of the  family  which had  married  into  a royal  house 

(the Lius of the  [littie]  Song  dynasty). 

The Xiao  f d y was unique in founding  two  dynasties (the  Qi  a d  Liang). This thesis 

suggests  that  by  Wtue  of  being  outside  the sarne  mourning  group, the founder of the second Xiao  dynasty  (Liang)  was  in  technicai  confonnity  with  Heaven's  cornmand  regarding  a"change of  sumame7' when he destroyed the  preceding  Xiao dynasty (Qi). Members  of the royal  families  never  succeeded in developing a  sense  of themselves as part of a  larger  whole.  Haif-brother  relatic'nships  and the  practice  of  sending  young  sans  t s 

regional  garrisons  undermined  s sense  of  cohesioii.  In addition, the  existence  of  two 

conflicting  d e s  of succession, one through the  line  of the eldest and the  other  through the "most senior"  surviving  brother,  unleashed  centrifuga1 forces  within  the  family  itself.  In the 

wake  of the devastating  rebellion  of Hou Jing, the royal princes were  unable  to  fonn  a central 

rallying  point for the  loyalist  cause. This destroyed their political prestige and brought the end of the Xiao  famiy  as a  political  force, though they were honoured as one of the  great  families 

of this  period  following  remifkation  of the empire a few  decades  later. Table 5 Ruiers  of the  House  of Liang (the Xiao  F m l v )  ....................................................... 258 

.......................................... Table 6 GeneaIogy  of the  House  of  S m g  (the  Riiling  Liu  Family)  364 

.................................................................... Table 7 Line of  Xiao  Chengzhi  (Southern  Qi) 395   

> Table 8

Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  (Liang) ............................................................................. 432 BQS 

BS CS 

GHMJ 

HHS 

HMJ 

HS 

K S L 

JS LS 

NQS 

NS SGZ SJ SS WS 

XTS 

ZLDC 

ZS 

ZZTJ 

~ e iQi  Shu  k .aC  $

Bei  Shi  jt 

Chen  Shu  Éb 

Guang  Hongming  Ji  & %

Hou Han Shu  8 $ 

> Hongming

Ji  %

Han  Shu  +

Jiankang  Shilu  & a &

Jin  Shu  a $

Liang Shu  f

Nan  QiShu 

Nan Shi  &J 

San Guo  Zhi  S Bg  ,$ 

Shi Ji  3s 

Song Shu  st;: t

Wei  Shu  Qb  $

Xin Tang Shu  #$  & $

Zhongguo  Lishi  Diming ûdian  BP  d k 2 #& 

Zhou  Shu  a $

Zizhi  Tongjian  # ia 

A NOTE ABOUT FOOTNOTES 

The  above  works  are  referred  to  by  their  abbreviations  in the  footnotes.  Since  the  most  ment 

Zhonghua  Shuju  edition  of the  Ofncial  Histories  has  been  used  in the  writing  of this  thesis,  al1  references 

to  these  histories are by volume, page number and line number, as  they  appear  in  this  edition. The more 

generic juan number is not  M. References  to the Zizhi  Tongiian  are  based  on the 1991  Gaige  Chubanshe 

edition  (with  a baihua  translation) and  indicate  volume, page and section as  well  as the juan number. INTRODUCTION 

Drawing  pfimarily  on information  from  the  Chinese  dynastic  histories, this  thesis 

seeks to  provide  a narrative account of the Xiao  faniily  and its political activities  during 

the major part of the Southem Dynasties  period  (420 to 58 1). The  focus  is  on their nse to power  during  the Song, their  particular  use of legitimation  rituals  to  justify  and consolidate their  military  domination of the court and  eventual  usurpation of the Song, the  breakdown 

of the Xiao royal family during  the  following  Qi  Dynasty,  the subsequent overthrow of this "familial"  Qi  throne by a close royal member who established the Liang dynasty, and the 

dernise  of the royal  house  at the close of the Liang. The  thesis  examines the web of Xiao 

family  relationships  and  anaiyzes  the political machinations that resulted in the  overthrow 

and creation of dynasties. 

Within  this political  Framework,  other issues played  significant  roles.  These  include the complex  interplay  of political authority,  rnistary  power and social status which serve as the backdrop to the Xiao  family  activities dunng this long period of disunion. The  thesis 

also  addresses the ways in which traditional  Chinese  historians  from  that  period  recorded and interpreted  these  events and how their conclusions reflected the political  biases  of the times in which they were  writing. 

The prelude to the Southem Dynasties was the founding of the Eastern  Jin in 3 17 

as a refugee  dynasty  centered at  ~ i a n k a n ~ 1 (present-day Nanjing)  south  of the  Yangzi 

The  garrison  city  had  bad  its  name  changed  from  Jianye  & + to  Jiankang  &fi  by  royal  edict  in 3 13 

foiiowing  Sima Ye's of  & succession to the  throne  (Ernperor  Min 8 ) in Luoyang. This would have 

been  in keeping  with  the  taboo  on the  emperor's  given  name  (Ye). The  fact  that the  Jitznkang  Shiiu  (&A 

f e, Veritable  Records of  Jiankang),  an  eighth-century  Tang work about the  city,  uses this  name  in its 

title  would  suggest  that  Jisnkang  was  Eued  as a nanie  thereafter.  However, the old  name  Jianye  ofien 

appears  in the  dynastic  histories,  even  in  the Liang  Shu  (J#!  #,  History  of the Liang  Dynasty  ), which  was    

> compiled acenhrry

earlier  in the Tang. Even  though  both  the  Jiankang  Shilu  and the Jin  Shu  (%  $ ,

History  of the Jin  Dynasty)  use the  Chinese  character  a in their  respective  sections on the Jin  emperors   

> (JKSL, p.

92;  JS/1/126/9),  the former work uses a homonym  in  its  section on the Wu  kingdom.  There  it  

> States

that  the  name  of the city  was  changed  Erom  its  earlier  name  of  during  the Jin  Dynasty  to  avoid   

> conflicting with

the  ernperor's  name  4 if  (JKSL,p.  1 ). No  reason  is  given,  however,  for the use of 

this homonym  here. River  bmier.  This  was  the  remnant  of the  dynasty  that in  280  had  sücceeded in  uniting 

China  d e r  s i x t y  years of division  & n o m  hïstorically  as the Penod of the  Three 

Kingdorns)  following  the  collapse  of  the  Hm dynasty in 220 AD.  Zowever,  soon  afier  the 

founding  emperor of  the  Jin (or Westem Jin, to  distinguish  it fiom the  later  "eastem" 

remnant  in  Jiankang)  died in 290, the land was poised  for  civil  strife.  The resulting succession triggered a show-down  between  two  rival cliques that had  developed  around the  families  of the consorts of the deceased emperor (Empress Yang  # ) and  his  heir 

(Empress Jia ). Their machinations precipitated a deadly internecine war among the 

royal  princes that resulted in the destruction of a large part of the royal  famiiy,  the  murder 

of the emperor and the enthronement of  his  brother. This period of  strife,  known  as the 

War  of the Eight Princes  (291-306),  shattered the  prosperity  created  during  the first 

decade  of the  dynasty.  More important, however, the ensuing  instability  opened the  door 

for  semi-agmian  "barbarian" tnbes in the north and nomadic tnbes beyond them (the Xiongnu being the most  dangerous)  to  launch  invasions into the  heartland  of China. In 3 11 they sacked the capital Luoyang.  Although  the  govenunent  reorganized  itself in the western capital of  Chang'an,  the regime lasted  only  a few  years. When the  city  was  unable 

to survive a siege in 3 16, the emperor had no choice but to  surrender. 

This penod of barbarian invasion,  known  as the  Yongjia  Troubles (the invasion occurred  during  the  yongjiu  & reign  penod, 307-3  12),  precipitated a huge  outnow  of 

refugees,  largely  to the  Yangzi  delta  region  where a royal prince, Sima  Rui  4 .&  *, 

whose  father  was  a first  cousin  of the founder of the Westem Jin, had  already  established  a

gmison  in 307 to escape the  northem  barbarians.  When news of the emperor's death at the  hands  of the  Xiongnu  was  officidy  received in  Jiankang  in 3 18, Sima Rui, who had been acting as regent  since  the  preceding  year,  fonnally  declared  himself  emperor.  Thus 

began  the Eastern  Jin and the  formal  division of north and  south.  Although  the Eastern  Tin 

is  in  fact  the  first  of the  southern  thrones  in  this  period of  disunion,  the  regimes  that succeeded it - the Song, Southern Qi, Liang and  Chen  - are  those  which  are  actuaily 

designated as the Southem Dynasties. 

## The Eastern Jin endured for over a century but ended in a for~ed abdicaion  and 

surrender  of the  throne  to the Song (420-479). This pattern was reyeated by  the  Southem Qi  (479-502),  the Liang (502-557) and the  Chen  (557-589).  A smail  rump  of Liang forces continued to  s u ~ v e in the  west  under  the  tutelage  of the northem  regimes  until  its  fiagile  

> status

as a kingdom  ended when the Sui  unifïed  the north in 581 and  reunited  both  north and  south  in 589 (see Table 1 for an  outline  of the dynasties of the penod). Table 1 Outline  of Dynasties  fiom  the  Western  Jin to the Sui 

China  united 

under 

Western Jin 

(265-3 16) between 280 

and 304 

Northern Wei (By  eliminating  the last of  its  northem  rivals 

in 439, the  Northern  Wei ended the  so-

called  Sixteen  Dynasties Period (3 04-439) 

E.  N.Qi 

Wei  550-577 

> 534-

550 W. Wei 

535-

The Song, Southem Qi and Liang dynasties are central to  this  thesis  since  they 

Zhou 

557-581 

Eastern  Sin 

3 1 7-420 

involve  the Xiao  family.  The  last  two  were founded by Xiao  generals  who  likely  benefited 

60m  their  blood  relationship  to a distant  branch  that had  married  into  the Song  ruling 

family  during  the Eastern Jin, more  than  half  a century before the Song  dynasty  was 

founded.  When  the  mother  of Liu Yu  91#&,  the  fuwe  founder of the Song, died in Sui 581 

# -

# I

Song 

420-479 

Southem Qi 

479-502 

Liang  Chen 

502-557  557-589 childbirth,  her place  was  quickly  filled  by  Xiao Wenshou  2 +, who came  £iom  arelatively modest  family  as did her new  husbaGU. Through  her position as stepmother to Liu Yu, her  farnily's  fortunes  rose in  step  with Liu's gradual domination of the court and 

his  ultimstz  tisvrpation  of the throne. Her brother,  Yuanzhi  iB.  2, and a cousin, Xiao 

Mozhi  t,appear to have helped the  rnilitary  career of a distant relative, Xiao 

Chengh  & . He and  his  son, Daocheng  a & ,had the  further  benefit of a patronage  relationship  with  General  Xiao  Sihua  33 IL,  son of  Yuanzhi.  Though the 

general's  military  career  was  somewhat chequered, he did  provide  Daocheng with 

oppominities  (sometimes  inadvertently)  that  highlighted  the latter's  military  importance to the Song throne. Consequently, Xiao Daocheng was able to  develop  his  own  rnilitary power base,  especially  dunng the  period  when he was stationed on the northem border, 

which  permitted  him  to  take  over the Song court after it was  senously  weakened by murders  within  the  royal  Liu  family.  Xiao  finally  usurped  the Song throne and established the Southem Qi, drawing on  rituals  and traditions that provided a veneer of  legitimacy  by "demonstrating" the  transfer  to be in accordance with the  desire  of men and the  will  of Heaven. 

Xiao  Daocheng's achievement was  later  undone  by a nephew, Xiao  Luan  # X ,

who  diverted  the  iine  of succession to himself  through  a series  of dethronements and calculated murders. This so weakened the  dynasty  that  aAer  Luan's  death,  another relative, Xiao  Yan  # @,  a third  cousin once removed to Xiao Daocheng,  was  able to 

launch  a rnilitary  assault  from  the  west  under  the guise of a "righteous expedition". In actions that  replicated  the  transfer  fiom  the Song to the Southem Qi more  than  twenty 

years  earlier,  the Qi royal  family  yielded  the  throne  to Xiao  Yan  who thereby became 

founder  of the Liang  Dynasty. 

Though Xiao  Yan  reigned for  almost  forty-seven  years,  his  d e  ended in the 

disintegration  of the  realm  foilowing  a rebellion  launched by Hou Jing  .eR  *, a northem general whose  request  to become a subject  of the  southeni  regirne  had been accepted by Xiao  Yan.  Though  the  rebellion  was suppressed, the political and social  order  had 

cornpletely  collapsed, and Xiao  Yan's  sons,  operating  from  their  various  regional  bases, competed  arnong  themselves for the  throne.  This  struggie  balkanized  the  realm  aiid stmck 

a deathblow  to the  Xiaos  as a ruling  family.  The Liang was soon  supplanted  by the  Chen 

(although  a fiagment  of  Xiao-ruled  territory  continued in the west at the  pleasure  of the 

northem  regimes),  and  the  Chen,  in  tum,  disappeared  about thirty  years  later  when China was  reunited  under  the Sui. This  thesis  examines the Song, Southern Qi and Liang to see how the  Xiaos  came to power and ultimately  disintegrated  as a royal family. It also  atiempts  to  explain  how the last  two  dynasties (the Southem  Qi  and Liang) could be founded by members of the  sarne 

Xiao  family.  This  involves  a review  of the  legitirnation  process that  enabled  the founder of the Liang to  "receive"  the Qi throne by manipulating an  ideology  that  affirmed  the  cyclical 

manifestation of Heaven's  desire  for a change in both the  sumarne  of the  ruling  family  and the element (one of the  wuxing  5 6 ) that symbolized its strength.  Since  there was in fact no change in the  sumame  of the family that established the Liang, this  thesis  suggests that, as the founder of the Liang was one generation removed  from  the "mourning  group"  to 

which  the founder of the preceding Southem Qi belonged, this distance  may  have been sufficient  grounds  for the creation of a new dynastic  house. 

This  thesis  also considers the  various  factors that  af5ected  the  stability  of the dynastic  line  during  the Southem Qi and the Liang. The  faa  that most of the  imperial  sons  

> were

haif-brothers  seems to have  miiitated  against  a sense  of  family  cohesiveness or dynastic  solidarity.  Individuai  ambition was more important  than  the  wider  interests  of the 

entire  n h g  family. However, the  cruciai  factor in both the  Southem  Qi and the Liang  was 

the  prernature  death  of an  heir.  In  deterrnuiing  a replacement, there  was  a choice  between 

two  types of succession.  Would  it  be through the  eldest  son (the  principle  of 

primogeniture)  or  through  the  next  eldest  surviving  brother,  either  of the emperor's or decaîed  heir's  generation (the pnnciple of succession by the "most senior")? The Southem  Qi  opted to place  Xao  Zhaoye  j#  II&  -# , ~ h e child  of  the prematurely deceased heir  on  the  Uù-one,  thus  maintainhg  the line of the eldest which was the most  v.k!ely 

accepted choice for  iegitimate  succession. But  the  relativeiy  young age of the youth made 

him  a victim  of  his  cousin, Xiao  Luan,  who usurped the  throne  and decirnated the royal 

farnily,  ultirnately  destroying  the Qi dynasty. In  view  of the disastrous consequences of the Qi choice, the Liang emperor opted to  give  heir apparent  status  to Xiao Gang  fR,  the brother of the prematurely deceased heir rather  than  to the deceased heir's very young son  (Le.  another  of the emperor's mature sons was  chosen  over  his  very young grandson). This followed the  rule  of succession by the next eldest brother (the "most senior"), but this type of succession  was 

not widely accepted as  truly  legitimate,  partly  because  it involved the question of which generation  was  entitled to nomination, that of the incumbent emperor or that of  his  sons, the eldest of whom was now deceased.  Instead,  it  deepened the jealousies and  individual 

ambitions of the numerous  p ~ c e s (the other brothers of the newly appointed heir) who began to fight  each  other once the founder of the Liang died. It was probably  only  the 

longevity  of the founder, Xiao  Yan,  that allowed the Liang  royal  family  to  1st  as long as it did. Had he died as  early  as the founder of the  Southem  Qi, the Liang  rnight  have been equally ephemeral,  disappearing  in  twenty-three  years  rather  than  holding on for over  haif 

a century.  Although  there were  many  other factors  working  for the  demise  of the Liang, the  decision  conceming  the line of  successio:.  ultimately was as destructive to the  dynastic 

house  as the one  taken  during  the Southem Qi. 

The  anaiysis  in this  thesis  of the  various  aforementioned issues  pertaining  to the 

rise  and  f d  of the Xiao  family  through  the Song, Qi and Liang dynasties is  based  on the officiai histories  written  before the  appearance  of Sima Guang's  (q  6 &)  encyclopaedic 

compendium  Zishi  Tongjian  (s -*  g, Cornprehensive  Mrror  for Aid in  Goverment) in the  early  eleventh  century.  This latter work presents a more  readab!e  narrative of events 

than  the  oficial  histones but  is  used in  tlis  thesis  only  E mference of  last  resort.  Since 

Sima Guang  mdde  use of a wide  range of sources, his work  occasionaüy  ciarifies  the 

sequence  of events which even a combined  reading of earlier  o t E d  histories  can  O@ 

pady  resolve.  However,  despite  the work's  year-by-year  account of events, it  does  not 

always  avoid the practice in earlier histones of  beginning  a narrative  vaguely  with  the words  "earlief'  or "prior to this",  thus  leaving  open the temporal  comection  between certain events. The  intent  of this  thesis  is to determine what  can  be understood about the  various 

branches of the Xiao  family  and their creation of royal  houses  by  examining  the information  conceming  the Song, Southern  Qi  and Liang recorded in the  official  histories of each of  these  Xiao-related  dynasties. The  three  major works are the  Sung  Shu  (jfi  s, 

History of the Song), the  N i  Qi  Shu  (&  + ,History of the Southem Qi) and the 

Limg  Shu  (8 f , History  of the Liang). The Song  Shu  provides  information on the so-

called  h m & r i u  (&  # ,imperid  uncle) branch of  Xiaos  who  married  into the Liu  famiy 

which established the Song throne, while the  Nan  Qi Shu  and  Liang  Shu  describe  the  rise 

and  faü  of the dynasties founded by Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Yan  respectively. Each of  these  official  histones was produced by court  historians  during  the  dynasty 

that  immediately  followed.  Since  the  two  basic components of  these  histones are the  ji  R ,

the  yearly  accounts of each emperor, and  zhuan  #,  individual  biographies, there  is  no 

thematic  treatment of  any  issue. At  rnost,  the  historian  wil1  add a mordistic  commentary  at the end of each section,  assigning  "praise  and  blame"  as required by the  didactic  function 

of  historical  writing.  Even basic information  can  be  cut  into  rnisleading  or incomprehensible segments which  must  be pieced together by a wider  combing  of the 

workS2 Biographies  fiequently  put  their  subject  at the centre of an event while  rnaking  no                      

> A very succinct description of the historid method found in the Standard Histories, as contrasteci to that
> adopted by Sima Guang is found in

E.G. Puileyblank,  "Chinese  Historical  Criticism:  Liu  Chih-Chi  and mention of  other  people who, in their respective biographies, are also depicted as  playing 

the central role in the  same  event. Some biographies may also discuss major events that are  ornitted  from  the  annals  and even  from  biographies  cf  those  who  wouid  seem  to have been key  players. 

Official  histones also differ in their accounts of the  same  events.  Generally,  they 

refiect  the  prejudices  of the dynasty being recorded rather  than  of the  later  regime 

producing  the  official  history. One  such  exarnple  is found in contrasting descriptions of Xiao Daocheng in the Song  Shu  and Nan  Qi Shu.  The event in question  is  Xiao's  entry 

into  the palace in the  early  hours of the moming  after  he had secretly  ananged  for the 

murder  of Liu  Yuhh  @J  s, the second-last Song  emperor3  According to the Song  Shu, 

the history of the  dynasty  which Xiao Daocheng overîhrew, Xiao went in  imperial  disguise 

with  several  dozen  people to the palace gate  norrnaiiy  used by the emperor. There he  was 

allowed to enter  simply  because  the guards, accustomed to seeing the emperor  retum  at 

any  time of day or  night  through  this  gate,  dared  not stop or check  those  entenng  lest the emperor  was  actuaiiy  among  thern.  However, in the  Nan  Qi  Shu,  the history of the dynasty Xiao Daocheng founded, the  writer  uses one  very  small  detail  to  suggest  that Xiao  was 

aiready  regarded by  many  as the hero of the age. As the  group  arrived at the gate, one of the  guards  is  said  to have  realized  that it was Xiao and quietly  remarked  to  his  assistant that if they  refised  to open the gate, the  realm  would be in chaos, the implication being that Xiao  enjoyed  support as the  last  hope in holding the  kingdom  together.4  Since  the 

## N m  Qi  Shu  was  written  by Xiao's  grandson  (Xiao  Zixian  +a), one  might  expect an 

element  of  boosterism  to creep  in,  but the history was  compiled  durhg  the Liang which would have  had  no  interest  in  promoting  the  fourider  of the regime it had  just  overthrown. 

Thus  the Qi perspective  seems  to have been  dowed  to  remain  in the  official  account       

> -
> Ssu-Ma Kuang," in W.G. Beasiley and

E.G. Puiieyblmk,  Historions  ofChino  andJapan  (London: Oxford University Press,  1961), 152.                

> Since îhree Song emperors have homophonous given oames, adiEerent spelling is used for each

in this     

> thesis. Thus we have

Yu  S, Yuh  z$  ,and  Yuhh  X .

Compare  SS/1/190/8 with NQS/2/48  l/3.prepared by the  later  Liang regime. As for the Song Shu, it  was  officially  produced by the 

&ter  and court histonan, Shen Yue  -& 8 , during  the Liang, but the  royal  annais  and biographies had already been  wittcii  and presented  durhg  the Southem Qi when one 

might  expect  flattery  of the  Qi's  founding  emperor in the account of the  regime's 

foundation. However, Shen, who had lived through the  middle  and  later  Song and  wodd 

s u ~ v e into the  tirst  decade  of the Liang,  maintained  what  appears,  by contrast, to be an 

"objective"  viewpoint,  fiee  apparently of  any  direction  from  the  Qi  court to  embellish 

Xiao's  role in a sirniiar  manner. 

A further  waming  that  these  dynastic histories  might  not  provide  a disinterested 

record is  found  again  in the  Nan  Qi  Shu  which in its  biographical  section reports that Xiao Baoyin  jl*,  the fourteen-year-old son of Emperor Ming,  was  executed for treason in 502. In  reaiity,  he had fled to the northem Wei following an attempt to seize the  throne,  a

fact  that is acknowledged in the  imperial  annals. Perhaps the Qi had decided not to admit this desertion of a royal prince to the northem enemy and  altered  some of the archives 

during  its  tirne  in power. The historian,  then,  was either trying to  maintain  the point of 

view  of the Qi court (to which he was related) within the biographies  while  letting  the 

truth  stand  within  the impenal annals or he was  sirnply  allowing  archival  materiai  to be 

blindly  and  uncritidly  copied. In  any  case, there  does  not  appear  to have been  any 

demand for a Liang perspective on the  history  of the preceding Qi  dynasty.  In this 

particular  instance,  information  about Xiao Baoyin must be  obtained  from  the Wei  Shu  (a 

$ ,History  of the Northem Wei), completed in the  mid-sixth  century  during  the Northem Qi. The  bias  of  dynastic  histories  is  apparent when  these  ctarlier  histones are compared with the  N m  Shi  (&  k, History  of the Southem Dynasties) which  appeared  during  the 

Tang.  It  was  compileci  dong  with  the Bei S hi (jt  R ,History  of the Northem Dynasties)  

> by

the  seventh-century  historian Li Yanshou  9 / as a non-officiai work to  give  a full and  balanced  history  of the  various  dynasties now that the country was  reunited.5  One 

example  of its  objectivity  is  the  comparison  of  Bs  descnption of how Xiao  Yan  came to power with the  descriptkn  found  in the  Liinlg  Shu.  As discussed  mme  fully  in Chapter  Hi,

the Liang  S . depicts Xiao Yan as  being  bold,  cunning,  of unemng judgement, a  supreme 

strategist and a master  of psychologicai  warfare.  The  Nan  Shi, however, in describing the 

same  events, shows Xiao  Yan  as hesitant,  fearful,  and  relying  on the support ofothers 

through  negotiation rather  than  using  extraordinarily  clever  ploys.  Since  the  Limg  Shu 

was  presented to the Tang throne in the  early  seventh century, its  author,  Yao  Silian  a,!&

# a, could have had no  personal  interest  in  slanting  the description of Xiao  Yan.  His father, who  had  just  slipped into  minor  officialdom dunng the Liang, had  begun  a history of the Liang, but  his  later  seMce  to the  Chen,  Sui and Tang dynasties as a court histonan  does  

> not

indicate  any  unshakeable  loyalty  to the Liang  regime.  In  fact,  the history of the Liang 

(dong  with  those  of the  Chen,  Northem  Qi, Zhou and Sui) were  al1  produced  under  the 

official oversight  of Wei Zheng  t,who added  his  own  comments  to the  imperid 

annais,  so  this was not  just  the work of one  individuûi.  If the  histonan  cannot  be accused of  having  deliberately slanted the record, he may have simply  allowed  self-serving 

materiai  from  the archives of the Liang dynasty to be copied  uncntically  into the  officid 

dynastic  history (the  sarne  phenomenon as  already  observed in the case of the  Nan  Qi 

Shu)  .

For information on the  smail  western  remnant  of the Liang (the Hou Liang  #& 8 or 

Later  Liang) that  s u ~ v e d under  northem  tutelage  afker  the central Liang  throne  was supplanted by the  Chen  lf6,  one  must  look in the Zhou  S h  ( f i  t , History  of the Zhou            

> According to the author's biography in the Bei Shi, Li's father, who began thîs

work,  wanted  to correct the  inamiracies  in the  existing  officiai  histories  that  resulted  from  the isolation of  north  and  south  (nanbei  

> finge #j

k +R ) during  this  long  period  of  disunion.  No  dynasty  Wy  understood  its  neighbour  and 

often recordeci  the  affairs  of the other  i n a m t e l y .  Their  mutual  isolation  was  refiected  in the  epitheîs    

> they appiied to

each  other: in southem  dynastic  histories  northerners  are  referred  to as  suolu  6 # whiie     

> in the northern histories southemers

are  called  daoyi  & S.  The  biographical  section  does  not  explain  the  

> ongin

of  these  tenns  but  implies  that  they  were  disparaging,  for Li  eliminated  their  usage  fiom  his  

> historia. (BS/10/3343/1-3)

Dynasty)  written  in the  early  seventh century by Linghu Defen . Since  the 

hiu:vry  of the  Later  Liang  was  tied closely to the actions  taken  by  the Western Wei (the 

regime  that was supplanted by the Zhou), one  might  rightly  expect  to find  this  Monnation 

in the  history  of the Wei.  Howevai-, the  officia1  Wei history covers the Northem and 

Eastem  Wei. No  official  history  of the Westem Wei was ever  iricluded  in the canon of 

dynastic  histones. However, the Bei Shi  includes the Westem Wei emperors, and 

references  to events in the Western Wei are  found  within  the  Bei  Qi  Shu  ( j t  R ,

History  of the Northem Qi),  compiled  in the Tang,  since  the  beginning  of the Northem Qi 

overlapped  the  last  years  of the Westem Wei. In modem studies of the Southem Dynasties penod, the central  theme  is the role of the great families, the  political  and social  function  of elite status or "pedigree", the 

conflict  between  the elite and  those  lower  families  of  military  background,  such  as the Xiao, who usurped  thrones  and  transformed  themselves into  dynastic  families,  and the 

extent  to  which  the  aristocracy,  both as a whole and in  terms  of individual  families, 

maintained  status  and power through the period. Two major studies in English of the great  families  are by David Johnson and Patncia  Ebrey.6  The latter  also  presents a historical  review of the  literature  in  Chinese  and 

Japanese  on the  subject.  Both  writers  consider  the  entire  penod  fkom  the end of the Han 

to the end of the Tang, which they designate as the mediaeval period, but  only  their 

analysis  of the southem dynasties is  discussed  here. Johnson argues that an oligarchy of great clans controlled China  between  the Jin 

and Tang. Looking  at  midoTang  lists  of  eminent  clans discovered at Dunhuang, he  finds 

that  three-quarters  of the  highest  officiais  under  the Eastern Jin came  fiom  such  clans and 

this  proportion was  essentiaiiy  maintained  through  the Jin, Southem Dynasties and Sui.  

> David

G. Johnson,  The  Medievul  Chinese  Oligurcity  (Boulder  Westview  Press, 1977);  Patncia  Ebrey,                  

> The Aristocraiic Families of Eariy Imperial China: ACase Study of the Po-Ling Ts 'ui Fmiiy
> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).

Even in the  last  of the southem dynasties, when other historians  assert  that the growing decadence of  privileged  families  had undermined the anstocracy and Hou Jing's  rebeUon 

he?  rompletely  destroyed the old  so&ty,  he still notes that  two-thirds  of Rank Five 

officiais  (in a nine-rank  system of offices) were  fiorn  the  ereat  clans  (i.e.  those  who held at 

least  Rank Two in the  nine-rank  social  grading  system, as discussed  b e l ~ w ) . ~ 

Since  this  was  not a  hereditary  aristocracy,  Johnson prefers the term  "oligarchy".  It 

was  a niling  elite that  largely  perpetuated itself through the speciai  privileges  it enjoyed in competition for places in the bureaucracy. As opposed to the Han  period,  entry  into government  seMce  was  no longer  determined  by  merit  but by the "familial'' pnnciple. What had  begun  under  Cao Cao  ## and  his  Wei regime (referred to as Cao Wei  @ a) 

as a means  of  seeking  and measunng  talent  locally  through  "just  and impartial" 

(zhongzheng  Z) arbitrators using a  Nine  Rank  (iiupin  h O ) system  later  evolved into a tool for creating and  preserving  elite status. By the  fifih  and  sixth  centuries,  those 

assigned with Rank Two  (erpin  S ) status were  alone  able to enter the  regular  civil 

seMce  directly.  The  ranks  below  were considered "base and  cornmon".  In fact, the application of the term  erpin  as an unofficial reference to the  great  clans in Southem China 

was  already  current  by the  early  fifih  century.  The Rank Two  strahim  had changed  fiom 

an administrative  category  into one of the Ievels into which society was divided. It denoted a privileged  class  which promoted the "familial" principle for  governent  appointrnents 

and thereby  maintained  its  access to high office and high  status  in the face of a  growing 

number of candidates for office. Membership in this  elite  group  was  confirmed  by the listing of one's clan in a

"geneaiogicai-status"  work which authenticated pedigree and  ranked  clans. The                

> Ausefiil description and discussion of the Nine Rank system over the Eastern Jin and Southern
> Dynasties,

besed  on  Miyazaki  Ichisada  % 8, on  be  found in  Dennis  GmEih,  "Reinventing  

> China,"

in Albert E. Dien,  ed.,  State und Society i n Eorly  kfediwal  Chha  (Stanford:  Stanford  University Press,  1990),  160-163.  A more  recent  short  treatment  of the  Nine  Ranks  system,  with  derence  to and       

> some modification of Mjazaki, is found

in Chen  Changqi  4, Liangiin  Nonchao  Zhengzhishi  Gao   

> 6-QI#J

91  Zfi  il a (KaSeng:  Henan  Danie  Chubanshe,  1992),  16 1- 184. production of  such  works flourished over the  aediaeval  period,  beginning  in the Eastern Jin (c. 385)  with  Dossiers of the Clans  (Xingshi  Buzhuang  & W & ) hy  Jia Bi  II  W

and  ending  in the Tang (c. 71 3j i d i  Record  of the  Lineages  of the Great  Ckms  ( X l n p 

Xilu  & & & &)  by Liu Chong  d@  ÿ. The first work  expliciiiy  identified  as part of the process for selecting  officiaîs  is  Register  of ~ h e Hundred  Clam  ( w uPu  3 f) ) by Liu  Zhan  JiJ ja,  which appeared in the  very  early  Song  (430's)'  and this  undenuent 

revisions  during  the  following  two  dynasties  @y  Wang  Jian  3 & during  the Southem  Qi 

and Wang  S e n p  3 f#  ffduring  the Liang) to  remove  false  and  erroneous  entries.  As 

official  geneaiogies  became  more important in the selection of  officiais  according  to  family 

status, they took on  equal  importance as references in concluding  marriages.  Not  only 

could social status be  compromised  by  marrying  into  farnilies  of  mked  background but 

mamage  below one's  familial  status could result in impeachment. Johnson presents the 

classic  example  involving  a member of the upper-class Wang clan who is rebuked for 

attempting  to  marry  his  daughter into a  family  of  lower  status to  obtain  a large  dowry. 

Since  both  fathers  held low local posts, the crucial point  is  that their  farnily  backgrounds were considered unequal. Although Johnson  States  that status and office were  never 

separateci,  this was in  terms  of the  larger  clan. Wang's status denved  firom  the glonous heritage of  high  offices held by his ancestors who had  established  the  Wangs'  pre-eminent 

position in the social  eue.  Owing  to the  aristocratic  and familial point of  view  of the age, a 

man's own  office was  seemingly  irrelevant  to his social status, as  seen  in the great  gulf 

between  Wang and the intended father-in-law for  his  daughter . However, Johnson points out that office was important to the  extent  that the  branch  of a great clan which  failed  to 

produce  officiais would be  pmned  fkom  the  family  genealogy.  In fact,  within  the great clans,  there  were  various  levels of prestige, and the  tenn  h m  X (cold),  which could be 

appiied  by the  elite  to the lower "gentry", was  also  applied  by  successful  branches of great 

aristocratic  clans to  their  less  successful  branches.  Thus,  it would appear that the divisions and  degrees  of status  Mthin  th?  upper class itself were also an important part of the 

aristocratie  mentality. 

Ebrey  takes  a slightly  diEerent  approach to the  theme  of  this  period  as one 

dominated  by  great  families  or  elite  clans.  She  rejects  Johnson's use of  "oligârchy"  since 

the term  commonly  refers to  nile  by a few,  usually  a group  small  enough  to  h o w  each other, where there  is  no sirong or  autocratie  ruler.  Furthemore, Ebrey  feels  that Johnson's  avoidance  of the term "aristocracy" for its implication of inherited social status is  mistaken,  since  social  status  was in  fact  inherited,  although  individual  circumstances 

could  affect  how  a man built upon  such  status to acquire added  wealth,  power or prestige. Ebrey  defines  an  aristocratic  farnily  as one  enjoying  high  hereditary  social  status that was independent of full court control  because  of its local power and  legal  privileges and society's  deepiy  ingrained  respect for  birth.  These  families  she distinguishes  Born  the nobility, a lesser  stratum  composed of  families  gaining  wealth and prestige as a result of 

ties  to the  impenal  family based on kinship or  early  military  support. The  nobility  enjoyed 

hereditary titles, privileges and stipends and  ofken  produced prominent men for  three  to five generations, but  only  an  aristocratic  family could survive full  withdrawai  of  imperial 

patronage. For  these  reasons, she  categorizes  the  Xiaos  (and  many  non-Chinese  f a d e s ) 

as nobility. Ebrey  States  that by the end of the Western Jin an aristocracy had  corne  into  being for which  birth,  status and office-holding were  inseparable.  It  was composed of a few 

dozen  families  of national importance and a few thousand individuais. Their  dominance  of public  Me  was  assured  by  personal  wealth, hereditary  pnvilege  and  family  prestige.  Their 

power  was  never  absolute,  however,  and they represented a social category  rather  than  a

single,  unified  group.   

> As with

Johnson, Ebrey concludes that  such  an aristocracy  resulted  nom  the introduction of the  Nie-Rank  system  in 220. It  began  as a means  of  winning  the 

woperation  of  locally  powerful  families  which  had  become even  stronger  with  the  deciine and  coUapse  of central power  towards  the end of the  Later  Han. Previously, being 

recnmmended  for, or  appointed  to, office reveaied little about one's  status.  However,  il 

this  new  system,  al1  prospective candidates were  ranked  systematicdy,  thereby  creating  an 

officially  designated  hierarchy.  Since  ail men  assigricd  the highest  rank  could gain office, office-holding  became  the  easiest  way to  identiQ  a man with high status. The  nine  ranks 

therefore came to  divide  men by social status.  High  office became the  measure  of  status, 

and high  status  became the prerequisite for high office. Soon,  only  sons of men of  hi&

office-holding rank  (Le.  of high status) were considered for high  official  rank. By 250 the 

ranking  process was moved  from  the local  comrnandery  to the national capital where 

family  records were kept by the Department of State.  Gradually,  families  were referred to by the grades they held, and  entry-level  postings depended on  farnily  rade,  with  so-calIed 

"pure"  (qzng  A )  posts going to  higher-ranking  farnilies  and "impure"  (zhuo  s) posts going to  those  of lesser rank. The court  granted  officiais land-holding and tax-exemption privileges  commensurate  with their  official  rank to  undermine  the authority of  locally 

powerfùl  landlords who were not  otficials.  With the  collapse  of the Westem  Jin  and the 

ensuing  division into  north  and  south,  those  aristocratic  families  that  fled  south  retained their power at court  under  the  refûgee  Eastern Jin  regime  and  eventually  absorbed a srnall 

number of local southem  families  into the aristocratic social system. 

The Eastern Jin is described as  aristocratic  not  just  because  high court  politics 

were  dorninated  by the  pre-erninent  Wang  3 aîîd Xie  families  but  because  they and 

sirnilar  families  also  dominated  so  much  of its social and cultural  life.  As in Cao Wei and Western Jin, they  combined  a refined  interest  in  poetry,  caliigraphy and metaphysics with social snobbery and  personal  extravagance,  which  was  to last  throughout  the  Southem 

Dynasties penod. 

Aristocratie  power  was  not without  b i t  or  challenges  and was  most  Milnerable 

when it lost its  military  component. From the  beginning  of the  fifth  cenhiry  (the  last  two 

decades  of the  Eastem  Jin), the  highest  political  power  was  usudy  found  in the  hands  of lower-ranking  rnilitary  men.  AU  the succeeding dynasties were founded by  military 

usurpers  of non-aristocratic background  (including,  of course, the  Xiaos  who established the  Soüthem  Qi and Liang thrones).  These  new  rulers  tried  to counter the  inflzence  of aristocratic  families.  The key issue in the cornpetition between  nilers  and  aristocratic 

thmilies  was  the  right  to appoint and promote without regard to  family  origin.  Xiao  Yan, 

as emperor of the Liang, reformed the  family  ranking  system to  raise  the most 

distinguished  of the "cold"  families  to the  highest  rank.  In response, the  aristocrats  showed contempt for the emperor's  recruits  of  lesser  binh  and showcased their pedigree  through 

researching,  documenting and publishing individual and group  geneaiogies.  The court reacted by  reviewing  and publishing  genealogical  works to demonstrate that  social  status  

> was

granted  by the court. Dunng the Liang, for  example,  Emperor Wu established aBureau of  Genealogy  @uju  tg  A$  ) and ordered a definitive court  revision  of  al1  family 

registers  dating  back to the  early  Song. Ebrey argues that the aristocratic social system of the Southem Dynasties  never 

provided a strong foundation for the state.  Aristocrats  did not  take  seriously their role as servants of the emperor or work for the strengthening of the state. In addition, the aristocratic demand that posts be  given  only  to men of their  ranks  undermined  the proper 

fûnctioning  of the  bureaucracy.  Finaily,  non-aristocrats  successfùlly  bnbed record-keepers to place their  names  on the ever-swelling  lists  of  privileged  people  with  corvee 

exemptions, thereby  hampering  the state in  raising  and  supporting  large  amies. 

The  decline  of aristocratic  families  was obvious by the  t h e  of Hou  Jing's  rebeliion 

towards  the end of the Liang. Ebrey cites  two  main interpretations. Members of the 

aristocracy,  being accustomed to  leisure  and  wealth  and less  cornmitted  to public  Me,  were 

given  sinecures  - high-ranking  but  unimportant  post  S.  As a result, non-aristocrats  gained 

in power. This tendency was  fùrther  strengthened  by economic development and the spread of  leamhg  and  culture  which led to the  rise  of  new  men and changes in the 

political  system. However, aristocratic social attitudes endured. Even  into  the Tang,  &er the  Nine-Rank  system had been  abolished  and a  strong  central government re-emerged, 

social  prestige  remained  a form of power in  itself,  and  distinyishing  families  by  status 

remained  politicaily  impcrtant .

Ebrey's  own  analysis  supports the nced for some modification  dthe  prevailing 

view that  eistocratic  families  held great  poütical  power continuously. Albert  Die48  in 

summing  up the general description of the Six Dynasties  Period  as one in which  society 

and state were  dominated  by  powerful  aristocratic  clans that  originated  during  the  late 

Han,  gained  strength  during  the  following  centuries of  disorder  and  instability  and  slowly 

declined in the  early  centuries of the Tang,  calls  for a reconsideration of the evidence. Pre-

eminent  lineages or  lines  (in preference to the  term  "clans") did  exist  and their members enjoyed favoured access to office  thanks  to their mernbership in a pedigree which had been 

granted  official  status.  However, the  coun  still  chose members of  such  pedigrees based on 

individual  performance. Hence, the system relied on prestige and status rather  than  simply 

politicai  power. This  institutionalkation  of pedigree and the resulting  privileged  access to office made this penod of  history  unique. Members of  these  pedigrees exercised power 

solely  as  officers  of the state,  never  as leaders of  rniiitary  campaigns  enforcing  their  own 

interests  against  the state or as creators of new dynasties. Men of  lesser  status however, did  acquire  real  power and  usurp  thrones  at  the  expense  of  these  privileged  pedigrees (the 

Xiao  f d y being  the premier  exarnple  in this  thesis),  but even  these  lower-status  rulers 

felt  obliged  to seek out men of  high  prestige as a  means  of lending  legitimacy  to their 

regimes.  Thus,  men of  high  pedigree  retained  access to office but did not  necessady  gain 

access to real power. Two  eariier  revisionist  analyses  of the  origin  and power of  aristocratic  families  are by  Dennis  Grattlin  and  Tian  Yuqing.  Both  writers  distinguish  the  Eastern  Jin  fiom  the                

> .-
> Albert E. Dien, Introduction to Siuîe and Socieiy in E U ~ & Medieval China, ed. idem (Stanford:
> Stanford University

Press, 1990).      

> Dennis GmfBh, The Great Family

in Medieval  South  Chma,"  Harvard  J o u d  ofAsian  Siudies  41.1  

> (1981): 6544;

Ti  Yuqing  e $?  a, Dong Jin  hfenfa  Zhengzhi  *+?'j P i& % (Beijing: Beijing  Dame  

> Chubanshe, 1989).

regimes  that preceded  it  (the Western Jin and Cao Wei) and  those  that followed it (the southem  dynasties  from  the Song to the  Chen). 

while  apparently  accepting the  vieh* af  the existence of an  elite 

aristocracy,  denies  the  trzditional  view  of the  mediaeval  great  fmily  as  enjoying  long 

tenure  in a leadership  role  based  on  lineage.  His  Mew is that over the  hundred  years  of the 

Eastern Jin, the super-elite consisted of  only  five  easily  identifiable  farnilies:  the Wangs fiom Langye  5 , the Wangs fiom Taiyuan  k Jfi  3, the Yu of  Yingchuan  111, 

the Huan  & of  Qiaoguo  II& a and the Xie of  Chenguo  a . Only  the Wangs fiom

Taiyuan and the Yu were  traceable  (and  barely  so) to the Han,and only the  two  Wang 

famiies  continued into the Tang. The Wang and Yu farnilies  might  be able to  claim 

pedigree as old farnilies, but their  pre-erninent  status depended on holding both  political 

and  military  power. However,  aristocratic  power without long pedigree was  also  possible, as in the case of the  Huan  and Xie who were  emigre  families  but came fiom obscure 

military  origins  and were considered  parvenus.  Graftlin  considers that the end of great 

fmily  control of southem society  occurred  after  the Eastem Jin's great  victory  over the 

northem  invaders at the Battle of Fei Shui  7k in 383. The  aristocratic  officer corps had been  gradually  shrinking,  and  this  victory  made non-aristocratie  officers  aware  of their 

own  growing  power. With the death of Xie An  as  in 385, the aristocracy  lost  the  last  of its  rnilitarily  and  politicaily  powerfùl  figures.  His  demise  symbolizes  the end of great family

control of southem society.  Aristocratie  pre-erninence and its  institutional  foundation,  the 

Nine  Rank  System,  were  subverted  thereafler  by  various  court and  army  factions fiom 

sub-arîstocratic  sources.  (This  is  the  political  and  social  context in  which  the success of the  Xiao  family,  a Iower-status  rnilitary  family,  can  be understood. ) The  super-&te  of the Eastern  Ji  faded rapidly and  was  never  replaced by an equivalent elite  during  the subsequent southem dynasties (Song to  Chen).  While  the (Langye) Wang and Xie  did 

continue to  symbolize  social prestige  throughout  the southem period,  partly  because  they 

managed  to  maintain  reasonably  large  families,  they no longer  dominated  the governrnent. Of the five elite Eastern Jin  families,  only the Wangs of  Langye  could be descnbed as maintaining  their  importance, but  they  suffered a serious  decline  during  the  later  Southem Dynasties and  only  recovered in the Tang. As for the Xie, they remained in a state  of 

genteel  decline  through  most of the Southem Dynasties  period.  i n  terms  of  aristocratie 

power,  there  is a  clear  division between the Eastern Jin and the  following  Southem Dynasties  period. 

This theme  is  taken  up in a study  of the Eastern Jin by a  Chinese  historian,  Tian 

Yuqing. Tian identifies the Eastern  lin as a unique  example  in  Chinese  history  of an 

"abnomal  monarchy"  (biantai  huangquan  @ f # ), in which the power of elite 

farnilies  (menfa  rq  a)  surpassed that of the royal family.  These  few elite  families  of the Eastern Jin were the most  powerfùl  of a new type of aristocracy  (shizu  & ) that had evolved  during  the Western Jin and the preceding Cao Wei.  It  consisted of  two  types: old 

farnilies  ÿium  menhu  % & dii7 P ),  which had evolved out of the  great  clans  (shijia  dzm 

# a $ & ) of the  Easter  ;Han and were largely  Confucian  despite  some acceptance of the new Daoist  m a m e  Tk  philosophy of the age, and the new or "arriviste"  families 

(xinchu  menhu  8 & f'J  P ) which had  arisen  in the  turmoil  of the period and were largely proponents of the new  x u m e  philosophy rather  than  traditional  Conficianism.  Many  of the new  f a d e s  had been supporters of the royal  prince  Sima Yue  p7  6 a, who had pretensions to the  throne  and  sought  legitimacy  in support  tiom  Wang  Yan  3 @,  whose 

family  enjoyed pre-erninent social and political  status.  This  mutual  dependence  continued 

into  the  next  generation between Wang Dao  3 9and Sima  Rui  SJ  .&  $ , the  weak  and 

undisthguished  prince  of  Langye  (the home  region  of Wang Dao's  famiy),  as he 

attempted  to  establish  himseifàs  a legitimate  claimant  to the Jin  throne  in  alien  temtory. 

The  famous  phrase used to  describe  their relationship  afier  Sima Rui  becarne  founding 

emperor of the new Eastern  Jin regime  - "The  Wangs and  Simas  together  de''  (Wmg yu 

Ma gong  ti-CI  3.81$ # ff  7; ) - characterized  the joint imperid-aristocratie structure 

of the  regime.  The  northem  prince  needed  legitirnizing  support and the  emigre  families needed  a court to  reinstate  their power and wealth. Most of the  emigre  families  were new 

families  (xinchu  me&)  who had been active supporters of Sima Yue.  Many  of  those 

who  crossed  were  unable  t î  maintain  the  pre-erninent  position they  had  enjoyed  during  the Western Jin and  becarne  lower-status  families  (cideng  shizu  & & & ) as did 

uneducated  military  families  who had become  afilliated  with  aristocratic  families  ( s h )  by service or  marriage. 

Tian  differs  slightly  fiom  Grafflin  in  identifjnng  the background of the  five  f a d e s 

that occupied the top  m g of the social elite in the Eastem Jin. Tian  States  that  only  the 

Huan  could be  ranked  arnong the "old  farnilies"  that had evolved  f7om  the  great  clans 

(shijia  danr)  of the Eastern Han.  Such  families  had developed over a relatively long period of peace, become  officials  in the traditionai way and were orthodox  Conficians.  Since 

most  of the Huan members had been executed  during  Cao Wei, their descendants avoided 

mentioning  their  ignominious  past,  and the  family  came to be  regarded  as an  ordinary  new family  (xznchu  menhu). 

Both  the  Wangs  of Taiyuan and  Langye  had  just  a trace of old  family  (jiuzu  & )

origin,  going  back only one or  two  generations into the Eastern Han. The  Langye  Wang, 

in  particular,  suffered  during  the  turmoil  at the end of the Han,only to recover in the Cao Wei-Western Jin penod. They were  also  practitioners of the new  xucllzxue  philosophy. 

Hence,  they are  not  reaily  representative of  those  farnilies that had evolved  fiom  the  old 

clans  (shijia  dmrr)  of the Han. The Wangs were in fact  closer  to the "new  families''.  As for the Yu and Xie, they were arnong the "new (or  awivis~e) families"  (xinchu  menhu)  that 

appeared  in the Wei-Jin  period. 

In  explaining  the collapse of elite  famiy  power, Tian,  iike  Grafflin,  points out the importance of the  death  of the main Xie family leaders  following  the  Banle  of Fei  Shui  in 383. The  sudden  vacuum in  axistocratic  military  ranks  gave the royal Sima family the chance to regain power.  Although  its  attempt  failed,  the  elite  aristocratic  families  (menfa 

shizu  f 7 +& ) could  not  maintain  their dominance either.  Tian  implies  this  could have been due to  inbreeding  which made both royalty and  aristocrats  less competent. The  fast 

meen  years  of  the  Eastern Jin  witnessed  the resurgence of the lower  aristocratie-class 

families  (cideng shim)  in the  form  of Liu Yu who established a new  dynasty  to which the 

elite  bestowed  "acts  of  enthronemeiit",  a paitern  that was continued  through  the  foilowing 

southem dynasties and imitated by Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Yan,  whose  lower-class 

military  origins  were  similar  to  those  of Liu Yu. Although Liu Yu restored the  monarchy  to its normal independence,  freeing  it 

fiom  the  shackles  of  governance  by elite  families  (menfa  rhengshi  P l  i& % ), he did not 

bring  an  immediate  end to the social, economic and political influence of the  aristocracy. 

However,  Tian  also  states that social status and cultural prestige were insufficient at  any 

t h e  to assure  political  power for upper  aristocratie  or gentry  farnilies  (shiru jiating  f &

$ Ifi).  An econornic  basis  was  essential. Although some  families  might  encounter periods of economic  dficulty  that did not  diminish  their status,  this  was not the general situation. Not  every  emigre  family  could  maintain  its social and  political  aatus  through the acquisition of  estates  on the  scale  of native southem (Wu  $$ ) families.  And even  these 

Wu  families  could not compare to  those  of the northeast (the  Chinese  aristocracy  that had not fled  south)  for the  size  of their clans and the  security  of their  econornic  base. This econornic  fiagdity  was a major reason for the eciipse of emigre  farnilies  after  north  and 

south  were reunited. 

Their  deche  (and in some cases, disappearance) is evident in the  fact  that only 

four  emigre  famiiy  names  were considered  worthy  of recognition by Liu Fang  #p  3, the 

eighth-century  Tang  court  historian  and  genealogist.  These  were the Wang  3, Xie  a, 

Yuan  Band  Xiao  .Io  The choice of  families  in itseifmay shed some  light  on the question of the power of office  versus  the influence of social status. The  pre-eminent       

> Io The emigre families (qiaoxing Q)

# a ) were  those  that  had  crossed  to the  south  during  the  Yongjia  

> Troubles.

In  addition to  îhese  four emigre  famüies,  Liu Fang  also  lists  four  preerninent  native  southern   

> famües (wMng

A*,  or  families  of the  southeast):  the Zhu  $i, Zhang  H, Gu  &and  Lu  & 

> (XTS/18/5677/15

# - 5678/1). social position of the Wangs  @oth  those  of  Langye  and Taiyuan) and Xie  is  already  clear 

fiom  what has been stated  radier.  Howe'ror,  two  other  families,  the  Huan  and Yu,  whtch 

had once  shared  billing  ~ i t h the  two  Wangs  and Xie as members of the five  elite 

aristocratic  families  of the Eastern Jin, receive no  iii~ntion at ail. The  statïs  of the Yuan 

we  wili  ignore here, except to note that they are not one of the five  elite  families  of the Eastern Jin. With respect to the Xiaos, their self-made elevation as a royal  family  during 

the  Southem  Qi and Liang (and probably their  maniage  into the Sui  mling  family  during 

the  Later  Liang) had  raised  its  original  social status a notch or  two.  Once considered 

lower  in  status  than  the  great  aristocratic  families  that had established themselves  during 

the Eastern Jin, it was now being descnbed as one of the four major  ernigre  families  in the 

south.  This suggests that by the Tang the Xiaos' previous  imperial  power (and  marriage 

ties  with  the  royal  Sui  farnily)  had accorded the family sufficient prestige ("pedigree") to 

result  in the rewriting of history in  terms  of the Xiaos' social status. If Liu was  also 

assuming  that the status a family enjoyed in the  early  Tang had been constant  during  the 

preceding  penod of disunion,  it  is  clear  why the Xiaos are now described as one of the premier ernigre  families  of the  south.  

> As

seen  fiom  the foregoing,  rnuch  recent attention  has  been  aven  to the cultural 

and  social  history of southern  society.  Even the use of the  term  "Six Dynasties" to designate  this  period  of  disunion  seems to place the north in a secondary  position, for the 

so-called  six dynasties are all those  which  had their capital in the  south,  at  Jiankang 

(Jianye).  However, as reflected in the words of at  least  one  historian,  the more traditional 

view  has been that the  mainstrearn  of  Chinese  history resided in the north, and  only  the 

ethnic  cornpetition  among  the  nonhern  invaders  to  rule  the  various  thrones  aiiowed  the 

temporary  flourishing  of a  fiagde,  hothouse  aristocratic culture in the  south.  Once the north  was  reunified,  it  reintegrated  the  entire  middle  kingdom.ll  There had been  many 

northem  campaigns  sponsored  by the  various  southeni  dynasties, and  severai  Xiaos,  most 

# * See  Tian  Yuqing,  Dongiin  Menfa  Zhengzhi, 356. notably  Xiao  Yan,  had visions of  reuniting  the  realm.  However, the  refugee  regime  in  the 

south  was not in "home"  temtory  and was  never  able to  launch  the  military  carnpaigii  that 

would  recover the  sncient  capitds.  In the end,  it  WZE  the  rnilitary  power  of  the  north  that ended the  three  centuries o f division and made possible the  rise  of a new and glonous empire  known  as the Tang. Figure 1: Map of Southem China Showing Major Administrative Centres CHAPTER  1

(1)  FarniIy  Structure as Reflected in the  Vocabuiarv  of the  Historical  Record The  tem  "farnily"  is  used here in  tke  most  elastic  of  senses,  being  applied  where 

terms  such  as "houseyy, "clan", "branch", "lineage" or "line" would  also  fit.  These  terms are also used  in the appropriate  contcxt,  for they reflect the collateral and generational boundaries placed around a continually  expanding group of  blood  relatives. 

Traditiondy,  the  first  large  boundary  beyond the  nuclear  family and the extended family of  siblings  and  grandchildren  was  placed at the  fifth  generation when a new branch of descendants could be created. This was a  function  of the  passing  of the generations and defined the  group  of living relatives that would worship a common ancestor and moum 

officidy  for  its  fellow  members. No  such  group  would  include  anyone  beyond the relationship of  third  cousin.  Thus,  the  mernbers  of the  sixth  generation were no longer considered to be of the  same  lineage,  and  those  sixth-generation  descendants in the line of each of the  ancestor's  sons  becarne  a new lineage. This  was  repeated with each new generation, but the increasing number of  such  Iineages that traced their  descent  from  a

cornrnon  founding ancestor  maintained  their  affiliation  within  the  larger  clan, the  last  and most flexible of the  "farnily"  boundaries. If we  consider  the  Chinese  terms for kinship that are  appiied  to the  Xiao  family  in

the  official  dynastic  histones and  bear  in  mind  the  vocabulary  of  kinship  available in  

> See

Johnson,  Medieval  Chinese  Oligarchy,  108- 109.  "Clann  and "lineage" are in  fact  the  two  major terms that  appear  in  English  sources  discussing  families  of  this  period.  One source  defines  the lineage as a

unilineal  descent  group  based  on  demonstrated  relationship  whereas  a clan  is a more inclusive group which  attempts to  maximhe  its  size,  rationalizing  its  genealogy  as  necessary.  See  Morton Fried, "Clans 

and  Lineages:  How to  Tell  Them  Apart  and  Why  - with  Specid  Reference  to  Chinese  Society," Bulletin of     

> the l'iiute ofEthnology, Acadernia Sinica

X X ?(1970): 11-36;  quoted  fiom  Ebrey,  Arisrocraric   

> Families, 125

n. 2. In  another  aaalysis,  a lineage  can  be  either  widely  disperseci  or  settled  but  is  

> understood

as  working  together on a permanent  basis,  holding common  property  and  coming  together to  

> worship

common  ancestors.  This is in contrast  to the clan which  embraces  autonomous  lineages  with  acommon  founding  ancestor and common  sumame  but not  does  not  sponsor common  activities.  See      

> Johnson, Medieval Chinese Oligarchy, 89-9 1 ,

who  draws  on the  work  of Maurice  Freedman.  Johnson notes that at the  thne  there  was  no agreement on  what  "lineage" or "clan"  meant,  and  Fried  and  Freedman  

> were

ihe  principal  voices  of  cornpeting  camps. However, their  views,  as  presented  here,  seem  to  be  in

> basic agreement.

English,  three  underlying  wncepts  are discernible by the end of the  historical  period  being 

examined:  that the  Xiaos  in the  various  historical  sources were ail Rom  the  same  district of Laniiig  & and considered themselves as  belonging  to one clan  (zot~g  ); that the clan 

was  divided  into  %a  basic imperial branches  @mg  & ), one which  was  related by both 

birth  and  mamage  to the Song  imperial  family  and one which benefited  fiom  this relationship and went on to create the Iater  Southern  Qi and Liang  thrones;  and that the 

line  (men or jiu  f )  that descended  fiom  each  individual  weighed more  siéguficantly  in the  rnind  of  every  ambitious Xiao member  than  did the success of the  larger  imperkt1 

lineage or  house.  Against  this background, the principal  Chinese  terms  encountered are discussed below  because  of their relevance in defining blood relationships and how they 

affected  both the creation of new dynasties and the maintenance of the line of succession. (i)  shi  W :This term conveys the  sense  of  "house"  and seems appropriate whether 

it  refers to the  family  name,  as in the  House  of Xiao (Xiao shi), or to the dynastic  name,  as in the  houses  of Song (Song shi), Qi (Qi shi) and Liang (Liang  shz).  The  term  fits both Western convention and the  Chinese  reality. 

Histoncally,  as descnbed in the  Zuo  Zhuan  ,& # , when the Son of Heaven chose to reward men of  great  merit,  he gave them the  right  to  carry  the narne of the  locality  in which they were bom as their  xing  a, and if he  enfeoEed  them in a temtory, the  name  of this fief was  to  be  taken  as their  shi  W .  Although  xing  and  shi  eventually  took on the 

function  of  sumames,  becoming  fused  in  meaning  by the Han  period,2  the term  shi 

continued  to  cany  the connotation of a dynastic  house  based on the  narne  of the enfeoffed 

domain  ( g r n a ) ,  while  the term  xing  referred to the  sumarne  of the enfeoffed  f a d y . 

Thus,  the  dynastic  houses  of Jin, Song,  Qi  and Liang are referred to as  shi  IF.,  while  the 

sumame  of the enfeoffed, and now  reigning,  families  is referred to as  guoxing  a .3         

> The preceding is based on the commentary in

D a  Cidian  1F;  i )  & ( l985),  s.v.  xingshi  Y and  shi  fi.   

> The quotation

horn  the  Zuo  Zhuan  is  found  in the  last  item of  commentary  for the  eighîh  year  of  Duke  

> Yin(&# r%/k+

1. 

Jin shi  l%, ( S S I l M Z I i ) ;  Song  shi  El, (NQSl2/409/13);  Qi shi  IZ. (NQSlU42015);  Liang shi  fi (CSIlf3  112).                    

> An example of the use of the family suniame is the phrase "Sima is the suniame of the ruling h o w

[of Thus,  the  House  of Song (or Song shi) bore the  sumame  Liu  while  the  House  of Jin (or Jin  shi)  bore the  sumame  Sima.  Similarly,  Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Yan,  despite  being 

cousins in the  same  House  of  Xiao, were  âbk  to found the  two  distinct  dynastic  houses  of 

Qi  and  Liang  respectively. 

(ü)  fang  & : This  term,  which  cm  mean  "houseyy or  "familyyy, appears  in the Xin 

Tang  Shu  where  it  is  understood to be the  English  equivalent  of "branch". The  House  of Xiao (Xiao  shi  &,  ) is  described  as consisting of  two  Xiao  fang: 

the  huangiiu  (imperial  uncle) fang  + 3 & and the Qi-Liang fung  #k  & - 4  As 

discussed in the introduction, the former is based on  patnlineai  assumptions, for the word 

huangjiu  applies  to the brother of Xiao Wenshou, the woman who  married  the widowed father of Liu Yu, founding emperor of the Song. With the establishment of the Song throne, the Liu family  becarne  a royal  lineage,  and Liu Yu's step-uncle (Xiao  Yuanzhi, 

brother of  his  step-mother)  acquired  the title of  huangiiu  or  "royaVimpenal  uncle". The latter fung  or branch refers to the lineages which  constituted  the  two  dynasties of Qi and Liang. 

(iü)  zong  $ and  N & : These  t e m s  both  carry  the concept of  "clan"  but the 

extent  of  kinship  is  determined  by a second  character  which  is  attached. For  example,  Xiao Yuanzhi (the "royal uncle" of the  huangjiu  branch) and Xiao  Chengzhi  (father of Xiao Daocheng, founder of the Qi  dynasty)  are descnbed as  zongren  $ h ("feilow clansmen"), but about ten generations  separate  them  f?om  a comrnon  ancestor.5  Xiao  Chen  a Py amember of the  Inrmgjiu  branch,  is  referred to as a rongiao  $ ("revered clan  eldei')  by Xiao  Yan  (founder of the Liang  d y n a ~ t y ) . ~ Xiao  Yan  also  looks  on the grandsons of Xiao Daocheng (founder of the  preceding  Qi) as  his  zongslnr  8 a , or clan relatives, and says Jin]"  & (JSl1/269114). The homophoneshi  S is  also  used  in the  contes  of a dynastic  house:  Jin 

> shi

S (JSI 11149114;  LS/2/509/2),  Song shi  ff  (NQS/2/432/2),  Qi shi  (NS/4/  108415) and  Liang  shi 

f (NS/4/1282/10). There  are  also  examples  where shi  Et,  is used  simply  in the  =ose  of  "sumame" just  as     

> it sometimes is in

modern  Chinese:  "Wsj  surname  is  Xiao  & a & " (NQS/  1/1/1;  NS/1/97/1). 

XTS18/2277/1& 22781 1 & 22791 1

NQSIl/Ul 

NSIUS07/5 the relationship is not that Cistant,  dthough  they are  two  generations removed  from 

belonging  to the  same  mourning group  (iuefu  er  shi  & =e). 

The  five-gciicrational  mourning group  (Mlfu  Z W B )  encompassed male descendants of a cornmon  ancestor,  d o m  io the level of  great-great  grandson,  who  wore 

mouniing  for  al1  relatives  within  that  blood  group.  Thus,  the most distant  members  of this lineage group would be third cousins  with  the  sarne  great-great  gra~~dfather.~ In  fact,  Xiao 

Yan  and  these  grandsons of Xiao Daocheng were  fourth  cousins once removed. Hence, 

zong  is  the  anchor  word in  terms  that encompass the  larger  Xiao clan, or  House  of Xiao, as  described  in the preceding section. 

Within  the mouming group, however, the tenn  m & could be used, for the father of Xiao Yan is described as being a  zudi  #5  ("younger  clan brother",  i.e.  a cousin) of Xiao Daocheng (founder of the Qi  dynasty).  They are third cousins and, on the basis of Xiao  Yan's  own statements, belong to the  fifth  and last generation  within  the  same 

mouming  group! 

It appears at first that the  tenn  zong is used in a larger  context  while  m is used for subdivisions of the  zong.  However, as is  seen  below (in the  paragraph  under  zongshi  a

$ ), the word  N also  appears in terms for relatives  outside  the sarne  mouniing  circle.  l0 

There  is  aiso  the  term  zongqx  W & which, in one  exarnple,  appears when Xiao  Luan  (a nephew of the  Qi's  founder),  just  prior  to  his  usurpation of the Qi throne, is described by one of  his  first  cousins as being the eldest of the  rongqi,  a term which by context seems to refer  generally  to living Xiao members of the  same  dynastic  house  (in this case, the  Qi).9 

Again,  on the basis of  Xiao  Yan's  words about where  his  mourning group ended,  it    

> jue@ er shi

l& = (LS/2/508/8). Although  the  tem  Ml/u 5 IR refers  to the  five  degres  of mourning  dress  wom as  required  by  the  deceased's  degree  of  relationship  to the  bereaved,  the mourning     

> group encompassed al1 those

who  worshipped  the  same  ancestor.  The  size  of the  ancestor-worshipping            

> group was controiied through the system of clan branching by which

a new  branch  or  lineage  of a family    

> could be formed

after  fïve  generations.  See  Johnson,  Medieval  Chinese  Oligarchy, 94,  108-109. 

> LS/1/1/6
> NS/4/1084/9

appears  that  Xiao  Luan  and  this  cousin would have been  sufficiently  close to belong to a

common  mouniing  group. 

in terms  of the founding of new  dynasqies  by members of the  same  fanily  and 

sumame,  the  cricial  issue seems to have been whether one belonged to the  same  mourning 

group.  Presumably, the  fact  that Xiao  Yan  did not belong to the  same  group  (juefu 

as the founder of the  preced'ig  Qi  dynasty  gave  him  the  legitimacy  to found  his  own  

> dynasty

(the Liang)  despite  his  being of the  same  clan and  sumame  (Xlao)  and  sharhg  the 

same  founding  ancestor  (shiru  & )Io.

zongshi  @ £ : The term "clan  house"  refers in the broadest  sense  to the royal 

family.ll  However,  within  the dynastic histories,  those  who  take  the throne are discussed 

under  the  imperial  biographies  (ii  &)  while  the brothers and nephews (and  grand-

nephews) of the  imperial  founders are discussed as zongshi (except in the Liang  Shu) 

within  the  biographical  section  ( h a n * ) .  Within the  Nan  Shi the term  also  includes the founders'  uncles  and cousins,  fiom  first  cousins to  those  of  unidentified  distance, the most remote being  described  in  two  places as juefu  mzi  $& # &&  +f (sons  of cousins no longer 

belonging  to the  same  mourning  group) and  tongnc  &&  ("fellow clansman").  l2  In  actual 

fùnction,  the  significance  of  this  term  zongshi  seems to be that it demarcates  those  who are related to an  irnpenal  founder but do not  fa11  within  the line of succession as either the 

eldest  or most senior, as is discussed  later.  Xiao  Luan  (a nephew of Xiao Daocheng, the founder of the Qi)  who  usurped  the Qi line of succession, would  normally  have been in this  category  of  zongshi  but,  because  of  his  usurpation of the throne, is placed instead in the impenal  annals.               

> l0 NS11116713
> In one example, it refers specincaliy to the imperial üne inShq which

is d e s c r i i as the  Iegitimate                      

> line of rulers, as opposed to those of Wei or Wu, during the Period of Three Kingdoms (JS17/2 15418).
> l2 NQSI3l787-795; NSl411037-1055; NS/4/1259-1304. See NS/4/1050/11 forjuefu mi

# + and    

> NSl41105312 for tongzu .

The  terni  for the  reigning  irnperial  family  is  either  huangshi  & f ("imperid 

house")  or  hum~ia f $ ("imperid  farnily"). l 3 

huurzgzong  f $ : "Imperia1  (or royal) clan" is the term which Xiao  Yan  uses in reference to the Qi royal  f d y ,  m which he says  he  belongs, in an edict issued a year 

prior  to  his  usurping the Qi throne and  establishing  the Liang  regime.lJ  The question here is  how  he could  acknowledge  this  relationship  while  laying  claim  the  following  year  to Heaven's  desire  for a change in the  ruling  family in  order  to  justiQ  founding a new 

dynasty. 

(iv) men  P l  and  jia  f : Although men is used for  "family"  in the broadest  sense,  as in the reference to the  aristocratie  Wang and Xie  families  or to the less  socidy  respected 

military  farnilies,15  it  also  has the narrower  sense  of the term jia which refers to a single individual and  his  line of descendants.  Thus,  Xiao  Yan,  founder of the Liang, when 

speaking  to  several  grandsons  of the founder of the Qi dynasty, which Xiao  Yan  had just 

usurped,  refers  first  to the destruction of their farnily line (men) at the hands of  Xiao  Luan 

(the brothers' cousin who murdered  his  way into the  Qi  line of succession) and  then  goes 

on to  Say  that he  himself  (as founder of the Liang) did not  take  the  realm  fiom  their line or family  (jia)  but rather replaced the family  via)  of Xiao  Luan  whose descendants mled the 

Qi  until  abdicating to Xiao  Yan.  l6 

The concept of men or jza as a  family  line was  very  important to ambitious royal relatives,  since  attempting to  intrude  into the line of succession could be  seen  as tantamount to usurpation. This concept of men was deep enough  that  Xiao  Luan,  before usurping the throne,  emphasized  his  place  within  the direct  line  of  Xiao  Daocheng, the 

founding  emperor, as a third  son (by adoption) who was now the  only  heir  available  to     

> l3 Examples are LS/1/13/9 (huangjia

& a ) and  LS1111718  (huongshi  & ).                       

> l4 LS/1/13/10
> l5 Emperor Wu of Liang &ers to the exaited Wang and Xie families as men (NS/6/1996/9), and military
> faaiilies are referred to

as jiangmm  (NQS/3/776/7).    

> l6 LS/2/508/11 &14

continue the royal  h e .  In fact, he was  circumventhg  his  statu  within  the zongshi range of non-inhenting  relatives  as discussed  above.  The  struggles  among  members of the royal family seem to have  centred  around creating  wid  keepi~g their own  lines  as opposed to 

shoring  up the  wider  imperial  lineage  and the  greater  Xiao  throne. 

The  great  prize,  the  realm  itself,  is  generally referred to as jiaguo  @ ,although 

it  occasiondly  appears  as  guojia  S . The term  itself  seems to  confirrn  the  focus  on a 

narrow  family line. In  tenns  of this period, a usurper could not establish a new  dynasty 

before being  granted  a princely  fief  (guo),  the  name  of which  became  that of the  dynasty 

that emerged. The usurper and  his  line of descendants  (jia)  would  then  fom  the new 

dynastic  family  (house). 

(2)  Ongins  of the Xiao  Farnilv 

As was to be observed early in the twentieth  century,  the more remote the  period 

being described in the  Chinese  historical  canon, the more recent the source  text  tends to be.  l 8  The observation  suggests  that if  those  closest  to the past  knew  less  than  those  who came  later,  the  written  record requires some skepticism. This  sarne  phenomenon  can  be observed as one  attempts  to trace the  origins  of the Xiao  family  . The  Xin  Tang  Shu  is the  

> l7

The  term  guo  seems  to  enfompass  the concept of  both  fief and the  entire  royal  realm.  Since  the future 

first  emperors of a succeeding  dynasty  were  entitled  to  create  an  officialdom  in their  guo  that  w a

patterned  on the royal court and were  personally  granteci  honours  that  only  the emperor could enjoy, this 

would  seem  to  imply  that the  guo  was  king  prepared  as a microcosrn  of the  fùnire  realm.  Hence,  the term 

grro  came to be  extended  to  embrace  the  state  founded  by the  enféoffed  family. This is  already  suggested  as 

early  as the Jin in the phrase  mathe  guo  xing  & $f  $4&  (Sima is the  surname  of  [those  who  hold  the] 

guo  [of  Ji])  (JS/1/269/14). It could  weii  be  arguai  that,  since  the Sima  fmily  was  already  holding  power 

at the  t h e  of this  quotation,  the word  guo  had  taken  on a more  generai  sense  of the royal  reah  and is not 

restricted  at  al1  to  the  sense  of the fief of Jin.  

> l8

Gu  Jiegang  a J( .&Gushi Bim  B # .vol. 1,  Xu 8, 52.  While  cornparhg  the  treatment  of 

mythical  characters  in the Book  ofOdes,  the Book of History  and the  Rnalects  of Conficius,  the  writer 

was  surprised  to  find  that the  then  accepted  chronological  link  between  Yao, Shun and Yu  was  not 

substantiated  by  the  works  in question. In fact,  while  Yu  was  already  mentioned  in  those  texts  or the parts 

of them îhat  muid  be  &ted  back  to the Western Zhou,  his  "predecessors",  Yao and Shun, were  not 

mentioned  in  any  texts  that could  be  proven to have  originated  prior  to the end of the  Spring  and  Autumn 

Period  of the Eastern Zhou  From  this observation, Gu  drew  the  hypothesis  that China's ancient  history 

was  the  producî  of  anachronistic  accretions.  The  later  a text in which a new figure appeared,  the  earlier 

the period of  history  to which that figure  was  assignai! Thus,  Yao and Shun  appear  as  ancestors  of Yu 

even  though  their  names  were not  mentioned  for  several  hundred  years  d e r  Yu  nrst  appeared moa  recent of the dynastic histories consulted for the Xiao  family,  but its Tables of  Chief 

Ministers  (zaixang  9 & )19  provides  a broader  scope  of information  than  three  earlier 

dynastic  histories: the  Nan  Qi Shu  (The Southern Qi  History),  the Liang S . (The Liang 

History)  and the compendium of southem  liistories  known  as the  N m  Shi.  Whereas  these 

earlier  works  trace the  two  impenal  family  lines  as  far  back as Xiao He  f .fii,  the distinguished prime  minister  and  advisor  to the first emperor of the Han,the  later  Xin 

Trmg  Shu  goes  far  beyond that,  delving  back into the  rnythological  reaches of  high 

antiquity  to associate the family with major  legendary  figures.  M e r  a few broad  leaps  over 

several  generations, with occasional stops at a few important  narnes,  the  history  finaliy 

amves  at  Daxin who was rewarded with the fief of Xiao for  his  service to another Zhou vassal. On the basis of the Tang identification of the geographical location of this fief  

> @O),

it  would  appear to have been northwest of present-day Xiao County in the province of  Anhui?  Though  it  was  later  destroyed by the state of Chu, the  name  of the fief  (shi 

# a) was  retained  by the descendants of  Daxin  as a family  sumarne.  No  detailed  genealogy, 

however,  begins  until  the narne of Xiao He is reached, and  this  is the  sarne  point at  which 

the other dynastic histories  begin  their geneaologies. The  same  starting  point  does  not  produce  the  sarne  results, however. The 

geneaiogy  of the  Xin Tang  Shu  is not  always  consistent with sources  available  to the 

compilers.  For  example,  in  spite  of the information in the  H m  Shu,  Yi  j#  and  Ze  j@ #

are  said  to be Xiao He's sons  while  they are in fact  his  gandsons.21  When the  Xin  Tang 

Shu  is  compared  with  the Southem  Qi  and Liang histories, the reader  finds  that the Tang 

history  reverses the  order  of the descendants in the  fourth  and  fifth  generations and uses a

difFerent  character (though the modern-day pronunciation  is  unchanged) for the fourteenth descendant. The  eleventh-generation  descendant is referred to as Yong  lje  in the  N m  Qi          

> I9 For the Xiao f d y , this is found in XTS/8/2277

# - 2288.                   

> 20 Z D C , 777. At the time the hisîory was compiled, it was identifïed as king inXiao County

# 1 in  

> Xuzhou* )il.
> l

# w/ 20  12/13-14 S h  but as Bing  gic  in the  XNI Tang  Shu  (in  this  case, though, Bing also  appears  in the 

Liang  Shu). 

Since  these  discrepancies  du  exist,  they  could  cal1  the  sitire  genealogy  into  doubt. This  possibility  is important,  since  the  Xiri  Tang  Shu  does  provide  one  item  of information in the genealogy which, if considered  valid,  is  extremely  useful  in  clanfying  the relationship  between  the  houses  founded by Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Yan  respectively and the  earlier  House  of the  Imperia1  Uncle  (huangiiu fang  ), the designation  given  in the 

## X»> Tang  Shu  to the  house  created when a Xiao daughter  became  the stepmother of Liu Yu, the  future  emperor of the Song (r.  420-422). 

According  to the  Xin  Tang  Shu,  the common ancestor of  these  two  lines  was  Xiao Bao  # E ,  the adrninistrator  (xiang  # ) of Zhongshan  JI ,centered at present-day Ding Xian  & #fi in the province of  Hebei2'  His  eighth descendant, Xiao Zhuo  I f f  ;a  ,a 

was  the father of Xiao Wenshou who  married  Liu Yu's father, as mentioned  above.  Since 

Xiao Wenshou was the  sister  and cousin of  two  men who are  described  only  vaguely  as Xiao Daocheng's  "clansmen"  (zongren)  in the Southern Qi  History,  24  the  geneaiogy  in the 

## Xin Tang  S h  makes  it possible to establish their relationship, and hence the relationship of the  various  Xiao  houses  (see Table 2). This genealogy is provided here  despite  the  fact  that the  author  of the Southem 

History  (Nan Shi),  writing  in the  early  Tang, considered the whole  genealogy  of the Xiao 

farnily  to be suspect and took only Xiao Zheng  @,  the  great-great  grandfather  of Xiao Daocheng, as the  earliest  historicaiiy  reliable ancestor. He  justified  this on the  grounds  that both the Qi and Liang  dynastic  histories  claim  two  farnous  Han  officids,  Xiao He and                

> 22 ZLDC, 115
> 23 The hinory actually States that Xiao Zhuo, the Nnth "descendantn (iiu shisun t!&

# a) of Xiao Bao,     

> was the fàther of

Liu Yu's stepmother  (XTS/8/2277/8). However,  when  caiculating  generations  of    

> descendants, the anastor

h m  whom  one  is  descended  is  counted  as the  hrst  generation  (see  Nan  Shi, 32,           

> n.1).
> 24 Xiao Yuanrhi and Xiao Mozhi, as mentioned inNQSll/2/l.

Xiao  Wangzhi  I f t  t ,as ancestors, the latter  allegedly  a sixth-generation  descendant of Xiao He, whereas the biography of the latter in the Han  Shu  makes  no mention of  any 

relationship.25  This  thesis  still accepts Xiao Bao as the  cornmon  ancestor,  for the  irnpenal 

m a l s  clearly  refer to a clan relationship between the Xiao family of the Song  period  and the  later  Qi and Liang  houses,  and Xiao Bao's  name  follows  much  later  after  that of Xiao He and Xiao  Wangzh.  Hence, the relationship between Xiao Bao and the  later  Xiaos  is 

likely  valid,  even if the line  from  Xiao Bao back to Xiao He  cannot  be  confirrned.  It should 

also  be noted that the  Nan  Shi historian is not the  least  bit hesitant about  declaring  the 

geographic  origin  of Xiao Zheng's ancestors even if he is skeptical about the  genealogy 

pnor to Xiao Zheng  himselE  Apparently on the assumption that  al1  those  bearing  the Xiao 

name  must  corne  from  the  same  place even if their  actual  relationship is questionable, the 

historia  goes  back well before Xiao  Zheng's  time and  States  quite  confidentiy  that the Xiao ancestors lived in Zhongdu Li  9 $ L (Village), located in Zhongdu  Xiang  $ #

(Township) in Lanling Xian  88  & ilfi (County) in the Cornmandery of Donghai  $L  s@ .26 

The  Xin  Tmg  Shu  and the  Nan  Qi  Shu  give  the  same  geographical  origin and  explicity 

identi@ the first of the Xiao ancestors to have lived here as Xiao Biao, the  grandson  of Xiao He. In 291 (Westem Jin) the Donghai Commandery was split into the  Donghai  and 

Lanling  commanderies, and the Xiao family identified  itselfas  belonging  to the new Lanling Commandery. With the collapse of the Westem Jin, however, Xiao Zheng abandoned  Lanling  and fled across the  Yangzi  River,  taking  up residence in Dongcheng Li 

$&, !TL (Village)  in  Wujin  Xian  & &fi (County), part of  Jinling  Commandery  Q f&  q . 2 ' 

Having  transplanted  his  family to the  south,  he is referred to as the  shim  ik  & or         

> Its administrative centre was north of preseni-day Tancheng

County 8i  #$ in  the province of  

> Shandong

(ZLDC, 183). 

> 27

The administrative centre of  Wujin  Xian  was  east  of present-day  Danyang  County in Jiangsu (ZLDC, 469). The administrative centre of  Jinling  Commandery  was  fkst at present-day  Danîu  (3  I l ) ,  then  at                

> Zhenjiang (c. 320), and Wyat present-day Changzhou (4 l3), a i l in the province

of Jiangsu 

(n,DC,710). "founding  ancestor"  of both the Qi and Liang  e r n p e r ~ r s . ~ ~ How the so-called  huangjiu 

brmch  arrived  in the  south  is  unstated in the Xin Tang  S h  and  is  not  e x ~ k n e d in the other histories,  although  that  branch  seems to have lived in the  same  c~rnmunity.~~ 

As  it  was the  ciustom  for the poiitically dominant  emigre  population to transplant the  northem  administrative  entity  which had been their ancestral home to the southem 

locality  in which  they  now resided,  Jinling  Commandes, had  Lanling  Cornmandery  lodged 

within  its temtory. In 420,  after  Liu Yu had established the Song  throne,  he ordered  al 

transplanted  junsdictions  to  take  the prefix  " s ~ u t h " . ~ ~ Thus,  Lanling  Cornmandery  becarne 

known  as Southem  Lanling.  Since  this  occurred  only  three  years  before the  death  of Liu 

Yu's stepmother, she continued to be referred to as  simply  a Xiao  from  Lanling31  whereas 

her nephews (of the  hangjîu  Xiao branch) were  said  to be of the Southem Lanling Xiao 

fa mil^.)^  Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Yan,  who founded the  later  Southem Qi and Liang 

regimes  respectively, are referred to in their  imperial  biographies as  belonging  to the Xiao family of Southem Lanling.  Thus,  with  the exception of Xiao Wenshou, both the  huangjiu 

and Qi-Liang  lines  called  themselves a Southern  Lanling  family  after 420. The question of where Southem Lanling was  located  dunng the Southem Dynasties is  complicated 

somewhat  by the  fact  that in the  first  year  of the Liang, Xiao Yan changed the  narne  of Southem  Donghai  Cornrnandery to Lanling Cornmandery.  Since  the  same  edict  also   

> 29 In

a somewbat  formallzed  bit of  sparring  between  Xiao  Yan,  first  emperor  of the  Liang,  and  Xia0 

Chen,  grand-nephew  of Xiao  Sihua  of the  huangiiu  h e ,  the latter uses an expression ( su  tian  t o n g h 

f i  PR  ) that wouid  seem  to  mean  that the  two  families  had  ori@y  shared  the  same  village  lane     

> (NS/2/507/6).
> 30 SS/1/55/6. This is

the source for the  interpretation  proposed  by  Qian  D a i  and  discussed  in William G.  CmweQ  "Northem Étuigr&  and the  Pmblems  of  Census  Registration,"  in  Alben  E.  Dien,  ed., State        

> and Society in Early Mediwal China (Standford:

Stanford  University Press, 1WO),  178,  n. 18.    

> 32 For example,

her  nephew,  Xiao  Sihua  (SS/7/2011/1)  md  her  nephew's  son, Xiao  Huikai  

> (SS/8/2 l99/l).

speaks  of the Southem Lanling Commandery, it  rnight  be  argued  that  both  a Laniing 

Commandery and a Southem  Zanling  Commandery  existed  simultane~usly.~~ 

What  bappened  to the  next  Iower  administrative entity is a  little  more  confusing. 

Although  Xiao Daocheng (founder of the Southern Qi) md  Xao  Yan  (founder of the successor Liang  dynasty)  continue to  refer  to Wujin as their home  county,  the  impenal 

biography of Xiao Daocheng speaks of  him  as being  fiom  Lanling [Xian(County)]  within 

Southem  Lanling  [Commandery J -34  Lanling  Xian was est ablis hed  during  the Eastern Jin 

within  the  emigre  capital of the new  Lanling  Commandery at present-day  Wansui  8 e, 

northwest  of present-day Wujin  &,  d& .35  During  the Liang, Xiao  Yan  transferred  the  name 

of  LanIing  County to Wujin County,  which  lay east of present-day  Danyang  ++ f.  A

iikely  interpretation  is  that the Xiao  family  emigrated  to Wujin County (east of present-day 

Danyang)  and that the reference to Xiao Daocheng as being  fiom  Lanling  County (within Southem  Lanihg  Commandery) is  ar~achronistic.~~ 

As for the lowest administrative level  (fi),  the  name  of the southem village had changed by the  tirne  of the Liang  fi-om  Dongcheng to  Zhongdu,fs  as  this  was the  narne  of the village  (22)  they had inhabited in the  north.39  Presumably,  as with other northem 

jurisdictions,  Zhongdu had  "migrated"  south  and been lodged within the  borders  of the 

existing  Dongcheng  Viiiage.  

> 33 ~S/1/37/6-7.

The  Southern  Donghai  Commandery  was  located  at presentday  Zhenjiang  (ZLDC, 606). 

Although  it  appears  that Lanling and Southern Lanling  Commanderies  now  existed  simultaneously,  it  is 

possible that the  reference  CO the new Lanling Comrnandery is to  be  understood  as the Southern  Laniing 

Commandery. This appears  to  be  the  understanding  in ZLDC, 606. 

> 34

For Xiao Daocheng,  see  NQS11/1/8.  For Xiao  Yan  (founder of the Liang),  only  the  commaadery 

(Southern  Lanling)  and  viUage  (Zhongdu) jurisdictions  are  mention4  (LS/l/l/l).  Yan's  association is   

> presurnably with

Wujin County, however, for that  is  the  region  within  Southern Lanling Commandery that  was  exempteci  firom  taxes  after  he  took  the  throne  (LS/1/37/6).     

> 35 ZLDC, 249.
> 36 ZLDC, 249,469.

Some  of the  confusion  may  &se  ftom  the  fact  that in the north the  Xiaos  were  h m  Lanling  County in Lanling Commandery. Xiao  Wenshou  is  described  as  king  from  Lanling [County  in]  Lanling 

[Commsndery]  (SS/4/1280/1  l),  and the  L a d h g  Couniy  affiliation  may  have  conîinued  even  when  they 

moved  to  Wujin  and  referred  to  Wujin  as  their  "home".   

> 38 LS/l/1/1
> 39 NQS/111/6

The importance to the Xiao  farnily  of Southem  Lanling  and Wujin  can  be  seen  in the  6ct  that Xiao Daocheng,  after  becorning  the first Qi ernperor, referred  to  Southem 

Lanling  as  his  native  locality  (-mgzi  bemiang  6# ;k # ) and to Wujin as the  foundation 

of  his  "klligly  enterprise"  (wmtgye  suo ji 5 f Bf  & ).  In recognition of  this,  Sourhem Lanling  was  to be permanently exempted  fiom  taxation and Wujin  was  to enjoy a ten-year 

repneve  fiom  corvee  d~ty.~O M e r  his  death, Xiao Daocheng was  buned  in Wujin in the 

impenal  tomb of  Tai'an  @ .41  When Xiao  Yan  took the  throne  as the first emperor of the Liang, he too  declared  a special  exemption for Southem Lanling and Wujin County and  commanded  that the pnvileges  instituted  under  the Qi be continued  there.42 

(3) The  Relationship  between the Xiaos of the Song, the Southem  Oi  and the Liang The  genealogical  evidence  tyiny  the  three  "sets" of Xiaos in the historical record 

has  already  been presented. The statements of Xiao  Yan,  who in  terms  of time stands at the  far  end of development of the Xiao clan, indicate that the passage of time had not lessened the knowledge or acknowledgement of the  blood  relationship between the  

> humtgiu

branch of the Song penod and the branch that created the Qi and Liang dynasties.  It  is probably  true  as well that the  later  success  of the Xiao  f d y  in  establishing 

these  two  dynasties was due in part to the relationship of their founders to the  humgiiu 

branch of the  Xiaos. 

The  history  of the  House  of the  Imperia1  Uncle,  the  hangjïu  branch of the  family, 

begins  in the  late  Jin and continues into the Song. When Xiao Wenshou (c.  343-423)43 

married  Liu Qiao, who had  lost  his  îïrst  wife  in  childbirth,  she  became  stepmother to  his 

son, Liu Yu, who was to  overthrow  the Eastern Jin and  establish  the Song  dynasty  in 420.           

> 40 NQS/1135/2
> 41 NQSl1138/13
> 42 LSI 1/37/54
> 43 She died inthe first year ofjingping

S.  9(423)  at the age of 81 sui  (SSl4/128 ln).After Liu Yu took the  throne,  Xiao Wenshou was honoured as grand empress dowager 

(taihang  tuihm)44  and her  Xiao  relatives acquired royal status. The  relationship  was 

M e r  strengthened  by royal  rnarriages  between the Xiao  house  and the Song  impenal 

house  established  by Liu Yu. 

Xiao  Wenshou's brother,  Yuanzhi,  and her cousin,  Mozhi,  appear  to have  received 

appointments as a result  of their blood ties  during  Liu Yu's climb to power,  most  likely 

during  the  reign  of Emperor An  (405-4  18), the period when Liu Yu  gradually  gained 

control of the court. This  is  certainly  a possibility in the case of  Mozhi,  for he  is  described 

as  being  Metropoiitan  Governor  @in  ) of  Danyang  Cornrnandery  fP.  # which  was the site of the capital and needed to be in the  hands  of a trusted  person.  The capital of the 

region  of Yangzhou, one administrative level higher  than  the  Danyang  Cornrnandery,  was 

also  located here but was kept in the  hands  of Liu Yu or his  eldest  son. Xiao  Yuamhi  (the younger brother of Wenshou) died in the  first  year  of the Song, so he would have  obtained 

his  positions  during  Liu Yu's  rise  in the last years of the Eastern Jin. He  beld  the offices of Gentleman of the Palace Gate  (huangmer~ lang  # f1  ) in the State  Secretariat 

(zhongshu  ),  a minor  position, as  well  as the  much  more substantive positions of 

Inspector  (cishi)  of Xuzhou  #?  and  Yanrhou  a Jtl  and Govemor  (taishou) of Southern 

Langye  &j  a .45 

Just as the royal  status  of the  hangiiu  branch of the  Xiao  family  during  the Song gave it  opportunities  it  might  not have enjoyed  otherwise,  so the blood relationship of the 

huangjiiu  branch to the  h r e  founders of the Qi and Liang  seems  to have been of some importance in the nse of the latter. The  f i t  beneficiary was  Xiao  Chengzht,  father of Daocheng who  eventualiy  overthrew  the Song and created the Southem Qi  regime.                          

> 44 SSI4/1281R
> 45 SS/7/2011/1-2. Yanzhou isreferred to as Northern Yanzhou in NQSI WI. Northern Yanzhou was SW of present-day Huaiyin ifl& in the province of Jiangsu

(ZLDC, 2 14).  The  seat  of Southern  Langye  lay 

N W  of  present-day  Jurong  4 S i n  the province of Jiangsu (ZLDC,  607).Xiao Chengzhi was bom in 384, about  thirty-five  years before the  fa11  of the Eastern Jin, and  died  in 447, at the age of  63  or about  thirty-three  years before  his  son  was 

to found the  Southem  Qi."  Described as  ambitious  and talented, he may have  known 

how to exploit his opportunities as a young man, for he is  said  to have met  with  Xiao 

Mozhi,  then  Metropolitan  Govemor  @in)  of  Danyang,  and Xiao Yuanzhi,  then  Regional 

Inspecter  (cishi) of  Northem  Yanzhou  jt  a , both of whom appreciated  his  talents? 

As distant  clansmen  of his, they may have opened up appointments for  him.  At some  point 

f i e r  this meeting,  Chengzhi  received the  entry  position of  adjutant  (canjun  f ) in a 

military  garrison.  In  about 413, he was  given  a general's title and appointed as Govemor 

(taishou)  of the  Angu  and Wenshan  $% 3,  commanderies in the northern part of 

Yizhou  (capital at present-day Chengdu),  afler  participating in the suppression of rebellion in the western  region  of  Shu.48  M e r  Liu Yu came to power as the  ruler  of the Song  

> (420),

Chengzhi  was  shifted  to the east as the  governor  (taishou)  of Jinan  & .49 This 

commandery  was  located  within  the  Region  of Qingzhou  -$  on the northem border with Wei. At the  tirne,  the  regional  inspector  (cishi)  of Qingzhou  was  Xiao  Sihua,  son of 

Yuanzhi,  mentioned  above,  and hence the nephew of Liu Yu's stepmother and step-cousin to Liu Yu, the emperor. In 43 1 the Northem Wei launched an  attack  on this  region.  Xiao  Sihua  disgraced 

himself  by  fleeing  but  Chengzh,  who was  under  hirn,  held  firm against  the  enerny?O  Sihua 

was  condemned  to the Ordnance  Manufactory  (shmgfang  & %)  as  puunishment.  In 432, however, Emperor Wen (son of Liu Yu who had died in 422) used the  opporîunity  of northern incursions  into  Hanzhong  3 9 to release this royal relative  from  prison and  

> 46

He died  in the  twenty-fourth  year  ofyuonjio  ,& (447) at the  age  of  64  sui  (NQSIIBII  1)   

> 47 NQSll/Z/l
> 48

In  NQS/  11212, the title and position came in the  wake  of the  padïcation  of Qiao  Zong  a#, a  

> ''bandit" of Shu

4 . In  JS/1/26414,  however, Zhu  Lingshi  il$ % is  the  "hemn  who  attacked  Chengdu,   

> beheaded Qiao

Zong and brought  peace  to  Yizhou  & 9ti  (Chengdu) in the  seventh  month  of the  ninth  year  

> ofyixi

& JS (413).   

> 49 NQS/l/2/4
> 50 NQSl1/2/9

appoint  him  as  regional  inspector  (cîshî)  of  Liangzhou  8 and Southem  Qinzhou  & C

(in present-day southern  Shaanxi,  northern Sichuan and western Hubei), with 

responsibility  for  military  m-airs  in  these  twinned  regions?  Once  again,  Chengzh  played a vital  rolr,  for the inspector had  fled  his  garrison  before  Sihua  could  arrive to replace  him  in this post and  Chengzh  was able to  take  remedial  action?  The emperor  already  esteemed 

Chengzhi  for holding firm against the enemy in Jinan in 43 1 and appreciated  him  ail  the more for  his  part in  bringing  peace to  L i a n g z h ~ u . ~ ~ Chengzhi  was  appointed to a  modest 

position on the military  staff  of the heir  apparent54 and  Iater  to the staff' of Liu Yigong  a

ijk,  one of the brothers of the emperor.  These  appointments may have been a compromise between the emperor and Yikang  @J  4 ,&,  another brother who was 

becoming  a powerful  minister,  after  the latter had  refbsed  the emperor's  wish  that Xiao be made inspector  (cishi)  of Qingzhou in recognition of  his  military prowess against the northern  enemies.  The tension seems to have  stemrned  fiom  the  fact  that Xiao  was  not asupporter of  Yikang.  In what may have been a further  part of their compromise, Xiao 

Chengzhi  was  also  made govemor  (~azshou) of Southem  Taishan  & d (a lesser post 

than  that of inspector of Qingzhou) and  aven  the  entry  aristocratie  title of Baron  (mm) 

Fifth  Class of  Jhchg  County  %

passed on to  his  son,  Daocheng 

447. 56 

A d%<  L X with 340  hou~eholds.~~ This title was not untii 453,  almost  six  years  after  Chengzhi's  death  in  

> 54

Cornmandant  of  Ganison  Cavalry  (tunji  xioowei  9,  bt  ) (NQSI 11318).  According  to  Hucker,    

> Oflcial Titles, 7405,

there  were as  many  as  seven  officers  with this title on the staff of the  Heir  Apparent   

> 55 NQSlll318-9
> 56

Xiao  ChengLhi  died  in the  twenty-fourth  year  ofyuonjiio  % ,& (443,at the  Chiaese  age of  64   

> (NQSllBI1 l),

and Xiao Daocheng  acquired  his  father's  title in the  thirtieth  year  ofyumjh  (453)  

> (NQSW419).

This delay may  not  have been a sign  of  disfavour  on the part of the court, however,  for the 

titie  muid  only  be  inherited  &et  the  three-year  mouniing  period  by an  official  dedaration  h m  the court. This may have been delayed  because  Xiao Daocheng  was  away  on the northern  h n t .  However,  he  did 

r e m  to the capital  after  a military d e h t  in the  north  in  450,  but this  rnay  have been  before  the  thtee-

year  period  was  fully  over  (NQSl1/4/6).  In  any  case, he  was  sent  again  to the northern  frontier  and  did  not The  Rise  o f Xiao Daocheng: 

In 440, at the age of  thirteeqS7 Xiao Daocheng  accompanied  his  father to  Yuzhang 

# s*  (present-day  Nanchang  #J  8 in Jiangxi).  His  father was to help  mamtain  the  garrison 

following  the emperor's  decision  to oust his brother,  Yikang,  from  office and exile  him 

there in  preparation  for  his  eventual  murder.  Sending Xiao to a  locality  where an  imperial 

brother of suspected  loyalty  had been  exiled  may indicate some mark of trust and favour on the part of the emperor.  Evidence  of imperial favour may  also  be  found  in the  fact  that at the time that Daocheng accompanied  his  father to  Yuzhang  he had aiready been enrolled for a year  at  the Acaderny of Jilong Hill  #k  & studying  the  Book  of Riles  g

and  Zuok  Sprzng  and  Auhrmn  Annals  (Zuoshi  Chunqiu  ,& 9;  ). 58  This academy had been founded  by  the emperor and placed  under  the direction of Lei Cizong  % & $ , arenowned  Confician  scholar  with  Buddhist  interests whom the emperor had persuaded to corne to the capital in 438 for the sole  purpose  of  establishing  the academy. As the emperor took  great  interest  in this institution, visiting if  often  and  donating  generously to it, its population of over one hundred students must have been  from  families  enjoying 

some imperial  favour.59 

From the age of  Ween,  Xiao Daocheng was  given  various  military  appointments and,  after  his  father's death in 447 at the age of 63,  seems  to have inherited  his  father's 

military  association with  Xiao  Sihua.60  The emperor's sponsorship of another northem 

carnpaign  provided Daocheng with greater  opportunity  for  his  rnilitary  career  to develop. Though  h a h g  to retum to the capital  after  failed  attempts to repel northem  troops  in 

r e m  to  iiankang  until  learning  of the  death  of  Emperor  Wen in  153.  it  was  &er  this  r e m  that he              

> inherited his father's titie. M e r Xiao Chengdu died, the people of Liang erected a temple

in  his  memory on  Egong  Mountain  'k'  3r  to  cornmernorate  his  role  in  liberating  them  from  the northem  invaciers  and      

> local collaborators (NQS/1/3/10),
> 57 He was

bom  in the  fourth  year  of  yuanjia  It  ,& or  427  (NQS/1/3/ 12).   

> 58 NQS/l/3/13-15
> 59

Lei  Cizong  is  descn'bed  as a Coahician  who  specialized  in the  three  Books of Rites and the Book ofPoeby  (Uao  Shi).  However,  he  had  aiso  studied  Buddhism  at Lu Shan. He was  d e d  to the capital in the  

> meenth

year of  yuanjia  (43 8) to found this academy  (SS/8/2292/11 - 229417).        

> 60 His age is @en as 64 (sui) NQSIIBIl 1.

450, Daocheng led a detachment that set out in 452 and came  within  eighty  li  of 

Chang'an,  one of the former northem capitals. By the  following  year, though, he  was 

unable  to  sustain  his  momentum, for  his  troops were tired and  small  in  ncmber  and  faced 

the prospect of  having  to  fight  fiesh  northem  reinforcements. The  whoie  northem 

campaign  had in fact been controversial in the  ~ 0 ~ 1 t h . ~ ' The report of the  murder  of Emperor Wen (Liu Yilong  #IJ  lot)  in the  fourth  month  of that year (453) determined Daocheng to  retum  south.62  His  "patron77, Xiao  Sihua,  was to die in the latter half of 455, somewhere  between  the ages of 49 and 55, shortly  d e r  the new emperor took the 

throne.63  Although  on  his  own,  Daocheng, still  only  26 in 453, was  ready  to exploit any 

opportunities  that  awaited  him  under  the new regime. He in fact continued to receive 

rnilitary  appointments and  managed  to be on the  side  of the  wimer  when the royal Liu 

family  was  tearing  itseifapart.  It  was in the defense of the northem border, however, that Xiao Daocheng  was  to gain  an edge over  al1  other  military  figures and  eventually  use  this 

power to  dorninate  the  Song  court. 

The crucial, and perhaps  fortuitous,  moment  anived  in 467 when four  regions 

north  of the Huai  5% River and part of Yuzhou  Q west of the Huai were  l o s P 

Emperor Ming,  tuming  aside  the  advice  he had  sought  fiom  Xiao  and others, had sent a huge force  under  Shen  Youzhi  -a 4&  northward  in what  was  intended to be an 

impressive  display  of  impenal  rnight  as  it  welcomed the  inspector  (cishi)  of Xuzhou (among  others)  into  the fold  agaln  after  a rebellion  pitting  two  Liu  "heirs"  to the  throne 

against  each  other had been suppressed. This rebellion had revolved  around  Liu  Zixun  as the cornpetitor to Liu  Yuh  for the throne, and  Zixun  had  been backed by  several  regional 

> 61

in fact, the  court            

> officiai, Jiang Zhan
> view of the military
> seems to have overwhelmingly opposeci anorthem e?rpsdition.

Only  one  mjor  

> ir

# s, a ciose  confidant  of the emperor,  is  said  to have  supported  the emperor in  his        

> viabiiity of the project (SS/6/1849/7).
> 62 NQS/ 1/4/6-9
> 63

On  day  mmi  IfE  &of  the  seventh  month  of the  second  year of  xiaojim  4 ,or  August  7,455 

> (SS/1/117/3).

For  his  age,  see  SS/1/2016/11 & 2023, n. 1 1 ).  Ages  are  calculateci  in sui.  

> 64 SS/1/159/15

# - 160/1; SSl7/1929/13 inspectors  (cishi)  in the northem reaches of the Qi realm.  Now  that Liu Yuh  was  M y in place as the new emperor, however, the  inspector  of Xuzhou (one of four in the Huai River  region)  had requested that he be  allowed  to surrender as a loyal subject  uf  the emperor. Perhaps  thinking  that inspectors in the Huai  area  were a little too independent of the  capitai,  Liu Yu wanted to send an impressive force that would  remind  them of the 

strength  of the central  govenunent.  Xiao  wamed  the emperor that a huge  anny  would be interpreted as an attack. The histories  also  suggest that the emperor had accepted the surrender in  coldly  s p a ~ g ternis.  Hence, the  arrivai  of an  army  was interpreted as a lack of  trust.65  Fearful  for  his  Me,  the  inspector  sent  his  son to the Wei court as  guarantee  of 

loyalty  and begged for troops. The  army  sent by the Wei  ovenvhelmed  General Shen at Pengcheng  (present-day  Xuzhou in Jiangsu). The  area  south  of the Huai River  was  now without protection. Emperor Ming sent Xiao to establish a  ganison  at  Huaiyin,  and he 

was  successful  in lifting a  siege  of the fortress on the north  side  of the river. Two  years 

later  (469),  he was put in charge of  al1  military  &airs  in  Yanzhou  a , Qingzhou  + +li 

and Jizhou  a JY  , reflecting the  winning  back of  territov  north of the  H u a P  Several 

daring  and  resourceful  generals  fiom  the  region  north of the Huai had presented themselves to Xiao  while  he  was  at  Huaiyin  and been pleased  with  his  treatment of  them.6' 

## This desire  to  tum  their  allegiance  to their  south,  although  perhaps  partly  driven by 

personal  ambition, may have been influenced by a  sense  of  alienation  fiom  their northem 

rulers  - the  barbarians  who are  referred  to  disparagingly  as  lu  B o r  moh  in the 

officia1  histones and as  hulu  #in  some direct quotations. In a Ietter addressed to Emperor Ming of the  Song? one of  those  generals  who  had  chosen  to serve  under  Xiao    

> 65 NQS/1/6/2-5. It

is not  surprishg  that Xiao  Daocheng's  advice  should  aione  be  quoted  in the  N m  Qi        

> Shu, the officiai history of the Southem

Qi.However, another source  quotes  both  Xiao and another  official    

> (ZZTJ/2/2352/5 1). Within

the  imperid  biographies in the Song  Shu  as  weli  as in  General  Shen's  

> biography,

nwne's  wise  advice  is  quoted.  The latter  only  suggests  that the royal  statement  of  acceptane                           

> was too lean and sparing in content (SS/7/1929/13).
> 66 NQS/I/6/10
> 67 The importance of gaining crack troops fÎom this Sanqi region is didin Wan Shen-

ed,     

> Chen Yinke: Wei Jin

Nan  Bei Chao Shi Jiangyanlu  4#b  jt 4jiL  # ift  i& (Hefei,  l986),  182-

> 185.

states, "the people  north  of the Huai are unwilling subjects of the  barbarians  ( M u ) ; their 

hearts  are in the  south,  and they yearn day and  Nght  [for the  south  to set them  fiee]."68 

This apparent greater  sense  of identification  with  the  south  put Xiao in an  ideal  position, and he  gained  crack northern troops dunng  his  posting  at  Huaiyin,  as  evidenced  in 474, at the  tirne  of Liu  Xiufan's  f l  6rebellion, when Xiao's defense of the capital was  greatly 

strengthened by northern archers  under  his  command.  Xiao's  eventuai  success  was  to 

corne  fiom  this northern  boost  to  his  military resources and  his  military  acumen in 

employing  them to his benefit.  Thus,  what had  begun  as a  beneficial  relationship  between 

his  father,  Chengzh,  and the Xiao members of the Song  royal  family  was  parlayed ultimately by Daocheng into domination over the Song court and  seinire  of the throne. 

Ir~nicaiîy~ the Qi throne established by Xiao Daocheng was to be  overthrown  by Xiao 

## Yan, whose initial advantage  lay  in the fact that  his  father, Shunzhi, had been a relative and close  ally  of Daocheng. 

The  Rise  of Xiao Yan: 

Xiao  Shunzhi (father of Xiao  Yan)  and Xiao Daocheng were  third  cousins and had been close in their  early  years.  Shunzhi was on  his  cousin's  staff  dunng the  nonhem 

expeditions and even  saved  Daocheng's life by  overwhelrning  a Nght  intnider  who had been sent on a mission to assassinate  him.69 M e r  Daocheng ended the Song and estabiished the Qi throne,  he  sought  Shumhi's  counsel.  His  guidance must have been important, for Xiao Ze, the eldest son of Daocheng, once  stated  to another brother that they  would  not be where they were had it  m t  been for  Shun~hi.~O Xiao Ze,  however,  was 

&aid  of this cousin and,  &er  succeeding  his  father to the throne,  never  ailowed Shunzhi 

to occupy the  chef  ministerial  position? In 490, about seven  years  afier  Xiao  Ze  became emperor, he sent out an  m y 

under  Shunzhi  to chasten an  urvuly  son in the west. Shunzhi, however, accepted secret instructions  fiom  the  then-heir-apparent  to be sure to eradicate  this  son. Xiao  Ze's  grief at the loss of this son  was  so  great  that  Shunzhi  is  said  to have  fallen  il1  from  anxiety  for  his 

own  safety  and  died  soon  thereafter. 

Though he himselfdied in disfavour,  his  son, Xiao  Yan,  was  able to fashion a 

closer  relationship. Ln fact, what amounted to usurpation of the line of succession by amember of the Qi royal  family  allowed Xiao Yan an  opportunity  to  win  favour  from  the new occupant of the  throne.  In addition, he was appointed to the western  region  of 

Yongzhou  in 498 where he was able to  establish  his  military  "edge",  just  as Xiao Daocheng had  done  in the  east  two  decades  earlier.  Xiao  Yan  had no  qualms  about using 

his  rnilitary  resources to  usurp  the throne established by  his  cousin and father's  comrade-

in-arms. 

When Xiao  Yan  eventually  overthrew  the  Qi  and created the Liang  throne,  he  still 

spoke of  himself  as  being  a member of the Xiao royal family that had  ruled  during  the  Qi.72 

This is an  astonishing  statement  from  one who had in essence  just  abolished that royal family. It  flies  in the face of the basic  tenets  of  dynastic  change as they were paraded publicly in the  various  edicts  of abdication and acceptance. In the  Confucian  tradition, it 

was  Heaven's  will  that royal  houses  would change in the course of  time,  bringing  a new 

family  and a new  sumame  to the throne. "Portents of the passing of the old continue to 

appear,  and  signs  of change in the  name  of the  ruling  farniiy  (geng  xhg  R .kt)  grow  more numerous.. ..The precious mandate [to  nile]  is not held in  perpetuity  (baoming wu 

changzh  Q Q fi  1(C  f ), and the emperor is not  forever  ftom  the  sarne  clan  (diwang feei 

yinr  + 1.# - & )."73 These  were statements included in the  edicts  produced by the 

abdicating  emperor of the Qi and the  founding  emperor of the Liang  (Xiao  Yan). However, the  family  narne  (hg) was the  same  Wao)  and, as noted  above,  Xiao  Yan 

made it  quite  clear  that he considered  hirnreif  to be of  thc  same  clan as the Qi  dynasty. 

Aithough  Xiao  Ym  could make no  c l a h  to being of a different  sumame  and clan, he could  rightfùliy  ciaim  to be one  geiieration  removed  from  Xiao Daocheng in terms of the five-generation  group  of clan relatives who would belong to the sarne ancestral temple and moum for the  same  cornmon  Xiao  Yan,  founder of the Liang, and Xiao Daocheng, founder of the Qi, were not in the  same  "mourning" line. In this context,  then, 

Xiao  Yan's  founding of a new  regime  could be considered as a reflection of the tradition of  establishing  a new ancestral temple and  "lineage"  for  those  more  than  five generations removed fiom a  cornmon  ancestor.  

> An

aitemative but somewhat less convincing  explmation  might  be that xing is being  taken  anachronistically  as the equivaient of  shi  in the  sense,  explained  earlier,  of a 

"house"  whose  name  cornes  from  the narne of the founder's  fief  Hence, there  is 

indisputably a change  fiom  the  House  of Qi to the  House  of Liang.  Furthemore,  an 

historical  interpretation of  ru  makes  it the equivalent of  shi  in the  sense  of a  house  or 

family  line.  The difference between  shi  and  m is in the level at which the  name  of the 

house  was bestowed. In the pre-Qin penod a  shi  was bestowed by the son of heaven upon 

his  vassals whereas  those  same  vassals, in bestowing the equivalent upon  those  under 

them, had to refer to it as a m. In this context,  then,  emperors indeed  cannot  aiways be of the  same  m or  house,  so the  House  of Liang  does  have a rightful  place in the  legitimate 

scheme of  thing."  In  any  case, the usurpers felt  cornfortable  with what now  appears  as a

serious  contradiction. In  contrast  to the  puuling  inconsistency about the change of xing and  m, there seems to be coherency in the change of elements  goveming  the  fate  of  each  regime.76                      

> 74 Xiao Yan ailudes to this land of relationship in aslightly dinerent context when speahg to certain
> grandsons of Xiao Daocheng

whom he not  only  spared  but  honoured  (LS/2/508/8).   

> 75 Ciyuan

# B, one-vol.  ed.,  Beijing, 1988,  s.v.  xing  Y,  shi  f&,  and  zu  &.                                 

> 76 The concept of metaphysical foras which domioated or controiied certain periods of t h e in fixeci
> succession (as the seasons, for example) had its ongin early on in Chinese thought. However, it was

Zou However, there is an initial  appearance  of confusion in the  histoncal  record where one 

rnay  thuik  that the Liang  is  govemed by wood in the  same  manner  a: -ifas the  Qi.  This 

occurs  when the  last  Qi  eiiiperor  States  (in what we  m w  understand as the correct interpretation), "In the past, when the  rule  of water had weakened, the  v h e  of wood rose to succeed it ....In the  past,  when the element of water was exhausted, our  imperial 

ancestor  (taizu  f a ) [Xiao  Daocheng] received the  command  ( m i ~ g 48  ) to replace that 

which  had ended. Today, the blessing of heaven  (lionlu  ka) is  lost  to us,  and  we too, 

Yan  8, an  influentid  thinker  of the  Warring  States  period,  who was to  fim  apply the  theoxy  of five 

cosmic  forces, represented as wood,  fire,  earth,  metal  and water, to  the  evolution  of  history.  The 

reiationship  of  these  elements  was  a productive one, with each element  understood  to  give  rise  to the 

folowing  one in the cycle. When the Zhou  fl  was  overthrawn  and the founder of  the  Qin claimed  his 

title  as the  First  Emperor  f,*, he  believed  he was  ruling  by  virtue  of the power of water. At the 

beginning  of the Han, the  Confucian  scholar,  .ha  Yi  # .2È  (20 1-169  B.C.),  wged  the adoption cf the element earth as the  cosmic  agent  by  which the new  dynasty  nried.  Since  the change of element  was 

intended  to  sigmfy  that the Han  had  conquered the Qin, the choice  reflecteû  a parallel  view  that  placed  the elements in a conquering rather  than  a productive  relationship  (fire  was  conquered by water, which  was 

conquered by earth, which  was  conquered by  wood,  which  was  conquered by  metal).  Jia Yi's  proposal  was 

rejected.  This  rejection,  dong  with the  fact  that  scholars  at the  beginning  of the Han  were  drawing  on 

both  the "conquest" and "production"  theones  of the five elements,  would  suggest  that  there  was  still  no 

generally  mgnized,  systematic  exposition on the  alternation  of the five forces as  they  pertained  to the succession of dynasties. However, a generation  later,  Dong  Zhongshu  3 .I+e(c.  179  - c. 104 B.C.), the founder of Han  Confucianism,  presented  his  view that Heaven  had  five agents  - wood,  fïre,  earth,  metai 

and water  - each of which  received  from  the  preceding  element in what  was  a lineal  rather  than  a cyclic 

relationship.  Ln  104 B.C., about the  time  of his death, the Han  decideû  it  ruied  by  the force or  Mrtue  of 

earili.  Since  each element or agent was represented by a colour, the Han  changeci  the colour of  official  

> costumes

fiom black (the  symbol  of water which had  been  identifred  with  the  defated  Qin) to  yeilow  (the colour of  auth).  Towards  the end of the Western Han, Liu  Xiang  @j rPI  and his son, Liu  Xin  PJ  *, propounded  a theory  of  history  which stated that the dynasties  succeeded  each  other  according  to the 

order  in which the five elements or agents  produceci  each other.  They  went back into the  histokal  record and  reconstructed  the relationship of  rules  and dynasties in  tenus  of the  ruling  elernents,  inserting 

intercalary  reigm  of water to  maintain  consistency.  In the  process,  fire was assignecl  to the Han as the element  by  which  the  dynasty  maintained  its  power to  mie.  This view  was  retained  by  Wang  Mang  f *, the usurper  who  brought  the Western Han  to  an end, for it  aiiowed  him  to found  his  new  dynasty  under 

the element of earth, the  yellow  colour of which  suited  his  daim  to  king  the descendant of the  YeiIow 

Emperor.  AIthough  Wang  Mang's  nile  did  not  las4  the  theory  of the  L i u  remained  and  is  rdlected  in the 

order  of the elements or cosmic agents claimed by the  succeeding  dynasties as their source of power.  Thus, 

in the  dynastic  histories  examined  here,  the Han is  obviously  assumed  to  be  represented by  fke,  for its 

successor,  the Wei, is represented by earth,  while  the Jin is represented by  metal,  the Song  by  water, the Southem  Qi  by  wood and the Liang  by  h. It  is  interesting  to note that,  despite  the  acceptance  of  this 

cycle of elernents, the Jin  Shu,  which  was  compiled  in the Tang, cites the  order  of elements as water,  lire, 

wood,  metal,  earth  within  its  section on the five  elements  (JS/  3/800/9).  This  is  neither  the cycle of production (wood, fire, earth,  metal,  water),  followed  by  Han (which  adopted  fire), Wei and  Jin,  nor the cycle of  destruction  (water,  fh, metai,  wood,  earth).  See  Wm. Theodore  De  Bary,  Wing-Tsit  Chan, and Chester Tan,  eds.,  Sources of  Chinese  Tradition, vol. 1 (New York: Columbia University Press,  1960), 

198-204;  Wmg-Tsit  Chan, A Source  Book  in  Chinese  Philosophy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 

1969),  244-250,279-282; Jack  DU, "A  Historical  Introduction to the  Apocryphal  (Ch'an-Wei)  Te.- of the Han  Dynasty"  (PhD.  d i s . ,  University of Washington,  1966),  19-4 1. with  the spent power of wood, pass on the throne to the  Liang."n  This has to be the correct interpretation, aithough the ambiguous structure of the last sentence  could  lead 

one to  understand  the  meanhg  as  "we  too pass on the power of wood  !o  the Liang", 

making  both  the Qi and the Liang beneficiaries of the power of wood. The linguistic solution is found a dynasty  later  when the  identically  ambiguous structure appears in the edict of abdication issued by the last emperor of the Liang. In the latter case,  since  the last Liang emperor's words are followed by the  Chen  founder's announcement to Heaven that the end of the Liang is the end of the power of fire, the reader has a guide to the structure of both  sentences.'*  Hence, the last Liang emperor is  certainly  saying,  "In  the  past,  the power of wood  was  spent, and [the throne] was  given  to the  imperial  ancestor  (gaozu 

# a) [Xiao Yan] to receive. Today the cycle has  tumed  from  the agent of fire and the gods are  tuming  to a new centre  (shuniu  a). Respectfùlly,  as holder of the  virtue  of fire, we pass on the throne to you, the  Chen."79  Therefore, in the former case, the last Qi emperor was certainly not  thinking  of  his  House  as passing on the power of wood to  his  successor. Hence,  while  water represented the  House  of Song, wood symbolized the  House  of Qi and fire  symbolized  the  House  of Liang, as would be expected in the established "productive7' sequence of elements. (4)  Family  Cohesiveness and  Dynastic  Lovalty 

(a)  Family  Cohesiveness and the Line of Succession 

When  Xiao Daocheng  overthrew  the Song and created the  Southem  Qi  Dynasty 

in 479 (a process  which  wiIl  be detailed in Chapter II), it was clear that he owed  much  of 

his  success to the  inability  of the members of the Liu  family  to develop a  sense  of 

themselves  as heirs of a truiy  royal  lineage  comrnitted  to  maintainhg  the Song throne for the  p a t e r  Liu  farnily  as opposed to  any  one of its  particular  members. This  was  an important  lesson  for  Xiao  Daocheng  himself  and he  wamed  his  heirs to avoid the internicine  stmggles  of  their  predecessors.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  that royal progeny were 

often  numerous  and divided by their blood relationship to  various  mothers in cornpetition for  irnperïai  favour could  certainiy  work  against  family  "solidarity".  It  is  interesting  to note that some modem  mthropologists  consider  the relations between brothers to be one of the most  fiagile  bonds in  Chinese  society. One problem  is  that, as  children,  the  elder  is 

required  to  yield  to even outrageous demands  from  a younger brother  while,  as adults, the younger is  expected  to  yield  in  d l  matters to the  01der.~* Another difficult relationship is that between father and son, for  aloofhess  is considered  necessary  before a father  can 

teach his sons obedience and respect, and  it  is obedience and respect which must be 

instilled  even at the pnce of  fear  or dislike if a father is to  maintain  his  authority  over the household when  his  sons are themselves  ad~lts.*~ In a work  fiom  the  sixth  cenhiry  written 

by one who had lived  largely  through  the Liang penod, it  is  stated that  "[rlelations 

between parents and  children  should be  dignified  without  farniliarity; ... if there is 

familiarity,  carelessness and disrespect will grow." However, the  writer  also  says, "So if afather is not  kind,  the son will not be filial; if an  elder  brother is not  fkiendly,  the younger will not be  respectfil..  ."  Furthemore, "An  elder  brother should be treated in the  same 

way as a father.  #y,  then,  should love of a younger brother be less  than  love of a son?' Although the  writer  feels that brotherly love is  natural  and sustainable, he acknowledges that the relationship  can  be  underrnined  by  various  factors, the relationship between  wives 

being  a major  one?  It  is  unclear  what principles  guided  the relationships  among  the 

various  Xiaos.  Although there are occasional references to a favoured son or  grandson  (in 

itself  a possible source of  fiction  with  envious siblings) or a beloved brother, relationships of  mistrust  and  jealousy  predominate in the  historical  record.          

> *O Margery Wolf, 'Child Training and îhe Chinese Famiiy," in

Maurice  Freedman,  ecL,  Famiiy  and            

> Kinship inChinese Society (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1970), 53 and

editor's  comments  in      

> "Lntrod~cti0n", 3-4.
> *l ibid., 41, 43.
> a2 Yen Chih-T

d, Fmily  hstructionsfi  the Yen C h ,  tr. Ssu-Yii  Teng  (Leiden:  E.L  Brill,  1968),  4-5,   

> 10, 16;

Wang  Liqi  S 44  s, ed., Yanshi  Jiamrn  Jijie  & Pi,  W 8 M,  rev.  ed.  (Beijing:  Zhonghua  Shuju 

# * 8 ,  1993),  15,29,41. Xiao Daocheng's heir,  Ze  jA  a, had an excellent  relationship  with  his  one full 

brothrr  but had  tense  and stormy  dealings  with most of  those  half-brothers  who were old 

enough  to be possible cornpetitors for power  within  the  regions  or in the  court.  Rivalry 

and suspicion  seem  to have been more prevalent  than  ties of affection and disinterested support of the  royal  line. 

The heir,  especiaily,  seems to have been  particularly  wary  of  his  brothers. This is evident in the case of Xiao Ze's oldest son, Changmao  f#  #k  #,$,  who secretly  instmcted 

his  relative, General Xiao  Shunzhi,  to see that  his  half-brother,  Zixiang  -f  &,  would not  retum  aiive  from  the western  region  of  Jingzhou  after  their father sent an  arrny  under 

General  Xiao to  hait  his  son's activities.  Since  Zixiang had been  buying  arms  in a region 

that had traditionally been a military  base  fiom  which to  launch  massive attacks on the capital, Changmao, as heir apparent, may have been anticipating a  military  threat  that would  rnatenalize  upon  his  taking  the throne. This one event demonstrates the  mistrust 

that large royal  families  with  many  mothers  appears  to have engendered. Changmao did have an excellent  relationship  with his one  full  brother, both being keen patrons of 

Buddhism,  but as heir he seems to have believed that the  individual  ambitions of certain 

haKbrothers  would  inevitably  ovemde the interests of the  dpasty  as a whole. In  fact,  the record shows that  any  segment of the royal family could  righffilly  be the target of suspicion.  Ultimately,  it  was the actions of Xiao Daocheng's nephew, Xiao 

Luan,  that were to undermine the  Qi  dynasty for the  sake  of a smaller  individual  interest: 

Luan's  own  desire  to become emperor, an ambition he  fùlfilled  in 494. In a manner 

reminiscent  of the  behaviour  of the Liu  family  during  the Song  dynasty,  Luan  decimated 

the  very  royal  family  of  which  he was a member in  order  to  remove  all  other  possible  hein 

to the throne. He thereby  assured  his  "legitimate"  insertion  into  the  line  of succession and moved the  impenal  inheritame  over to  his  own  f d y  "line", a goal more important  than 

maintainhg  the Xiao  royal  family  as a whole. Xiao  Luan  succeeded in  his  personal  goal of  taking  the throne but  ultimately 

weakened  the  Qi  to  the point that another usurper could move in and  establish  a new 

xgime.  Luan's  process  of  moving  the throne to  his  own  "line"  was  taken  one step  further 

by Xiao  Yan,  who went on to  overthrow  the Qi  dynasty  and found  his  own  dynastic  house 

(the Liang)  whde  still  declaring  that he  was  a member of the Qi royal  family. 

Although  Xiao  Yan  projected a public image of a generous and  protective 

defender of the members of the abdicating royal  house,  he  was  in fact very  selective  in 

those  he sponsored.  Many  very young children were killed, on charges of rebellion 

(moufm  # k), in  order  to  eliminate  the Qi royal line and destroy any  legitimate  heir who could question  his  right  to the throne with the  backing  of a rnilitary  sponsor. Although Xiao  Yan  reigned  for almost half a century,  his  six sons (not counting  his 

prernaturely deceased heir and the son who replaced  him)  were restive, and when an 

opportunity  finally  came in the  form  of the rebellion led by Hou Jing  (548-552),  they ended up  baikanizing  the  realm  and the throne  itself  in their cornpetition for the imperiai title. Part of  this  failure  to  corne  together in an effort to  Save  the throne was  also  due to their being  haif-brothers  - sons of a  hierarchy  of  sometimes  unhappy  wives and concubines 

# - who had  never  become close enough to create alliances in the face of  such  an  obvious 

extemal  threat  as Hou Jing's  rebellion."  Once  again,  the  larger  royal  family  lacked the necessary moral cohesion to stand  strong  and  united. 

Although, as aiready suggested, the very structure of royal  families  encouraged 

dynastic  disintegration, another important factor was the system of  appointing  brothers and sons of the reigning  monarch  to  regional  (zhou)  inspectorates  (cishi). This had a long tradition, but its effectiveness received  various  assessments over the course of  history.           

> 83 Most offinal histones introduce their section of biographies of empresses (huonghou

# a g ) with  an                    

> histoncal description of the ranking of imperid wives. This does not appear in the Liang Shu but is part of the

N m  Qi  Shu  where  the  changing  ranks  are  noted  in  such  groupings  as the  threefiren  ji  Aand  nine  

> pin

& S. Ranks  were  designed  to  paraliel  those  of officialdom,  such  as the  three  si  5 SJ  and the  nine  

> qhg

# R ,and  wives  in the  category  offiren  were to  be  addressed  in a manner  quivalent  to  those  of        

> imperiai sons granted royal fi&Gfanguo )(NQSl21389).

Durhg  the Eastern Jin,  aristocratie  families  dorninated  the  regions  at the  expense  of the 

nihg  f d y .  When Liu Yu  usurped  the Jin  throne  and established the Song, he  ensured 

that the royal  pnlcss,  whatever their age, would be appointed to the  regioiis.  Although 

these  sons and brothers  should  have been  natural  balwarks of the  reigning  family,  they were  often  too young to  act  on their  own  or with mature  wisdom,  and the emperor could 

only  hope for the best by appointing an acting  administrator  (xing  /j%zhou]shi  .I-i- [ $f  

> ]

f ) to  exercize  rnilitary  authority  "in trust" when the son  was  too young and a 

garrison  clerk  (diunq~an) to keep a restraining  eye on older sons' behaviour. In effect, power came to be concentrated in the  hands  of the  dianqian,  for their role was that of an 

impenal  surrogate. They reported  regularly  on the behaviour of the princes, and their reports could be decisive on how the emperor  felt  towards the prince, whether he be a son or brother. They aiso kept  very  tight control over their charges,  often  imposing  such  tight restrictions over the years that the princes would  transfer  their resentment to the throne 

itseifand  spitefÙlIy  refuse  to  corne  to the assistance of the  realm  when the emperor  called. 

Another  hazard  was  that a restive prince would seek the support of a more  tolerant 

member of  his  staff,  thereby exacerbating any  sirnrnering  feuds  arnong  his  retinue.  These 

rnight  flue  into violence  which,  being  directed  against  the  dianqim,  would be interpreted by the emperor as attacks on the throne. The power of the  dimqian  and  his  relationship 

with  the ernperor (or regent) was  such  that no-one  dared  interfere  when a usurper  like 

Xiao  Luan  used  them to poison the boy princes whom he  viewed  as an  impediment  to  his 

right  of inheritance. 84 

Another factor that  affected  dynastic  strength  was the  manner  in  which  the succession  occurred.  There were  two  traditions: succession by the  eldest  (li  di  i #j  ) and succession by the most senior  (li  zhang  ff  ).                    

> For an andysis of the negative role of the xingshi and dianqian, see the comments of Xiao Zixian in the

Nan  Qi  Shu  (NQS/3/7 1511-9)  and in  ZZTJl2/2399/#3  5 vuan  139). For an  analysis  of the  problems  caused             

> by assigning young princes to regionai inspectorates, see also Chen Changqi, Zhengrhishi Gao, 85-93

Generally,  the proper line of succession was considered to be  through  the line of the eldest,  referred  to as the legitimate line or  di?  The eldest son was to  take  the  throne 

upon the  death  of  his  father. Brothers of the heir  zpparent  (crown prince) were  designated 

as  shu  &,  a term with the connotation of non-inheriting  relatives?6  Since  even full brothers of a  crown  prince  could  be designated as  shu,  this term  had  to be  understood  as more  than  a reference to sons of wives of lesser  status.  Although there are instances where the term  also  seems to connote  "commoner",  the consequence was that the  person 

was considered to be of non-inheriting  status."  During  the Liang, when Xiao  Yan 

decided to replace his prematurely deceased heir by  his  second son (full brother of the heir) rather  than  his  grandson  (eldest son of the prematurely deceased heir), this  was 

referred to as fei  di  li  shu  & # & RB,, for  his  grandson, the son of his deceased heir, was the  &an  Zfi  (eldest  grandson  in the line of the eldest) while  his  deceased heir's brothers were considered as  shu,  or collateral  to  the  inheriting  iine.88  Choosing  from  among  the  shu 

was  apparently  not a preferred option. In  fact,  when Hou Jing  later  installed  Xiao Dong  a

#k,  the oldest son of the  dimn  on the throne, he justified this by  arying  on the basis of the distinction between di and  shu  and  claiming  that he was  restoring  the legitimate line of succession.  Earlier,  during  the Qi, when Xiao Daocheng was considering  removing  Xiao Ze,  his  oldest son, as heir to the throne and replacing  him  with  his  second son, this 

replacement  was  referred to as  daz  di .rC  H,  or replacement of the heir in the line of the       

> 85 Sometimes the combineci
> eldest (e.g. SS/1/146/6),

but        

> to refer to the two traditions. term dizhang

fi  +k  appears  as a more  precise  reference  to  the line of the this  does  not  impinge  on the  general  usage of di and zhang as  sepante  terms     

> 86 One Simple example ocnirs

during  the  Southem  Qi,  when the eldest son in line for the throne  is  

> referred to

as di while ail  his  younger  brothers are  referred  to as  shuzi  R&  +in a statement  fiom  one of the  

> court officiais

in 480  (NS/4/  110219). 

# * See  the  example  of Liu  Yizhen  #!j  & JC  , bmther  of the heir to the throne.  Shortly  after  the  death  of Liu              

> Yu, founder of the Song, regents for the young heir dismissed Liu Yizhen

as a commoner  Ni... wei  shuren 

& .. .& A ),  thereby  r e m d g  not  just  his  title  as a royal princebut  also  any  nght he  might  have to  be  

> considered

as part of the  h e  of succession  (SSl116513).              

> 88 /, di li shu (NS/5/ 133 12/ 11); disun (NS/5/ 13 13/7). Since the deceased heir (Xiao Tong

# ) and the 

son designated  by  Xiao  Yan  to  succeed  him  (Xiao  Gang  # #l) were  fidi  brothers, the term  shu  cannot  be   

> interpreted simply

as sons of concubines or  lesser  wives. eldest.89  The fact that the di heir would have been replaced by a brother  in  the category of 

shu  likely  ended  his  musings  in this regard.  Thus,  it  would  appear  that the concept  was 

weli  anchored  during  Voth  dynasties, and  any  departure  ftorn  the di  line  was  regarded  in negative t erms. 

If  such  a departure  did occur, it involved  assigning  the succession to the one who was considered to be the "most senior"  (zhung).  The definition of who was in fact the "most senior" was evidently somewhat fluid, for the  term  could be applied to the "most senior" of the deceased emperor's generation (brother of the emperor) as well as to the  

> "most

senior" in the generation of  his  prematurely deceased heir apparent  (those  younger 

brothers of the  crown  prince normally considered to be in the category of  shu  & ).  Both were  argued  for at  various  tirnes  as the more "correct" choice. The  £irst  occasion on which the issue arose (within the focal penod of this  thesis) 

was  during  the Song  after  Liu Yuh  @J  $&  took the throne.  His  accession was the result of a 

palace  coup in which the incumbent emperor, Liu  Ziye  81+*,  was murdered. Shortly 

thereafter,  a general  in the western  garrison  of  Jiangzhou  where the next  s u ~ v i n g brother of the murdered emperor was stationed,  announced  his  sponsorship of Liu Zixun  +

as emperor and received considerable support  from  other western regions.  Aithough 

arnbitious  opportunism  played an important role, the  generals  needed an argument 

legitimizing  their  action, and this was most likely the fact that Liu Zixun was the  oldest  

> suMWig

brother of the murdered emperor. Zixun was  actudy  the  third  son, but  his  older brother in  Jiankang  had been  killed  by Liu  Yuh  before the latter  fonnally  took the throne. The fact that Liu Yuh had this son murdered before  his  enthronement may in  itseif 

demonstrate  Liu's  fear  that the next  suMWig  brother of a deceased emperor  without  issue 

had  greater  legitimacy  than  did Liu  hirnself  If Zixun had been in  Jiankang'  he would probably have been  done  away  with  as well. Although  these  brothers would  originally 

have  had  to be considered as of  shu  (rather  than  di)  datus,  they were  obviously  considered         

> NQS/2/409/2. Again, the heir and second son were hill brothers.

as strong contenders  within  the most senior  (zhang)  category  because  of the absence of heirs  within  the di line. Their  claim  was even stronger  than  that of Liu Yuh, for if the latter wanted to  assert  legitimacy  as the most senior in the preceding generation of  rulers  (the generation of Emperor  Xiaowu,  Liu Ziye's father), he in  faa  still  had one older  s u ~ v h g 

brother, Hui  a #,  ahead  of  him.  Perhaps it was Hui's reputation for diminished intellect 

which  kept  him  out of the  picture.  The edict  from  the Empress Dowager  confirming 

Heaven's  blessing  upon Liu Yuh as the proper successor to the throne provided the final mord sanction, should  any  awkard questions be raised, for the role of the emperor's 

widow  as final arbiter in the political process had been  well  established  since  the  Han.go 

One general did propose sponsoring Hui as emperor,  presumably  because  he could lay 

daim  to being the most senior in the  previous  generation, but  this  was  weU  d e r  Liu Yuh had  taken  the throne, and there was no general  suppon.  The plan  was  eventuaily exposed 

to  the court, and Hui was ordered to commit suicide.  Although  the issue of  "elder"  and "most senior"  carried  no legal  weight  in an age  fiaught  with  military  adventurism,  it  must 

have provided some moral pressure when possible supporters were being sounded out 

wit h reasoned arguments. The next occasion for the issue to be a factor in the succession was  d u ~ g the Southem Qi. The heir apparent had just passed away and the emperor (Xiao Ze)  was  lying 

on  his  deathbed. Xiao  Ze  had  called  his  grandson  to  his  bedside but as he lay in a state  of 

temporq  unconsciousness conspirators were  blocking  the grandson's way to the  palace 

and  waiting  for  hirn  to expire in  order  to present a  faise  edict  that  would  place  Ziliang 

# 3.a , a brother of the deceased heir, on the throne. Apparently  sensing  the danger of the situation, Xiao Ye  j#  4, the  oldest  suMving  brother of the  dying  emperor, is  said  to have 

publicly  criai  out that the choice  was  to place either the "most senior"  (zhang)  or the  first-

bom in the  line  of the eldest (di) on the  throne.  In the case of the  former  (li  z h g ) ,  he 

argued  that he  was  the "most senior". In the case of the latter (li  di),the proper candidate           

> See the next section for adiscussion of the dowager's role.

was  the royal  grandson  (taisun), then  about  twenty  years  of age. At the time, people  had 

been considering Xiao  Ziliang  (the next younger brother of the deceased  hsir  apparent) as the correct "most  scnior"  member to succeed to the throne.  Since  Xiao Ye  was  in fact not as old as  his  nephew, he was the  "most  senior" not in  terms  of age but rather in  terms  of generation. He was  arguing  in effect that the "most  senior"  ( h g ) had to belong to the generation of the emperor, not to the generation of the prematurely deceased heir (the  shu 

generation). Hence,  only  Xiao Ye was in the proper  generational  category to be 

recognized  as the "most senior  ( h g ) "  candidate. 91 

Xiao  Ye's  view  seerns  to have been govemed by the understanding that to choose the "most senior"  from  the generation of the prematurely deceased heir (as opposed to the generation of the emperor) was to choose  fiom  the "illegitimate"  shu.  The concept of  shu, 

then,  was understood as being restricted to the generation of the prematurely deceased heir.  Oniy  a member of the generation of the deceased emperor (father of the prematurely deceased heir) could ment the  title  of the "most  seniory7. Hence, in  tems  of  three 

generations A, B and C, where B is the generation of the prematurely deceased heir, the succession  should  be in generation C according to the principle of  prirnogeniture  (di) or in generation A according to the principle of the most senior  ( h g ) . 

In fact,  though,  Xiao Ye wanted to  maintain  the  line  of the eldest (di), probably in awareness that  any  break  fiom  that  Line  would allow  al1  the royal princes to  rnake  a claim 

as the proper  heir  and  destabilize  the throne as had happened in the  Song?  Xiao Ye's public statement made to  those  gathered around the emperor's deathbed  becarne 

superfiuous  when the  grandson  was  successfuliy  spirited  past  the conspirators who had been  trying  to prevent  his  arriva  before the emperor  actually  expired. The one who    

> 91 As early

as the Shang, however,  the king's  brothers  ascended  the throne  before  the next generation  had              

> its turn. This rdected aprincipie maîntained throughout Chinese social history that each generation
> formed

a unit and no  mixing  of  generations  was  allowed.  See  Wolfram Eberhard, "The  Upper-Class            

> Family in Traditional China," in The Famiiy in H i s t q , ed. Charles

E. Rosenberg (n. p. :University of  

> Pennsylvania

Press,  1975),  62. This principle, however,  does  not  seem  to have been  retained  in  dynastie  

> suçcession
> 92 NQS/W626R

thwarted  the plot  was  a cousin, Xiao  Luan,  who  rushed  the  grandson  past  the  blockade 

and into the room of the  dying  Xiao Ze. The emperor had by  then  regained  sufficient 

consciousness to state  his  wish  that  his  grandsan  be recognized as the  rightful  heir. The royal  grandson  took  the  Qi throne, and the  principle  of the line of the eldest  (di)  prevailed. 

However, the  tweniy-year-old  grandson  was too young and malleable to  maintain  his 

independence and  was  soon manipulated off the throne by the  very  cousin, Xiao  Luan, 

who had  brought  him  safely  to the dying emperor's bedside. It was this usurper who in the end set the Qi  regirne  on the path to its  own  destruction. 

Thirty-seven  years  later,  this  lesson  may have  deterred  Xiao  Yan  when he  wrestled 

with  the question of what he should do when he faced the  same  loss of  his  eldest son and 

royal  heir. He  realized  that if  his  young  grandson  were to  corne  to the throne soon, he could be  easily  exploited by  any  one of  his  ambitious sons who, like Xiao  Luan,  rnight 

finally destroy  his  handiwork. Hence, he opted to  make  his  next  oldest son the heir. However, the other sons must have felt that this choice of the "most senior"  ( z h m g )  was 

actually  a diversion of the line of succession into the category of the  shu,  the  normally 

non-inheriting brothers of a prematurely  deceased  heir. Once this category  was  entered, jealous  royals  and ambitious surrogates felt that no-one had more  legitimacy  than  another 

and  they  could  nghtfully  contend  for position as the proper heir. It  was  only at the  tirne  of Hou Jing's  rebeilion,  however, that the moral constraints collapsed and the royal princes 

struck out on their  own  in a manner  that suggested this must have long been  their 

intention.  

> It

is ironic  that the loss of the heir, a  calamity  cornrnon  to both the Qi and Liang dynasties, set off opposite decisions about how to guide the succession, and both decisions helped  unleash  the  divisive  tendencies  within  the royal  farnily  that  finally  destroyed the 

> dynasty.

(b)  Underminhg  the Line of Succession (the Xiao  "Models"~ The  h e  of succession was generally subverted by a process  known  as fei-li  )& 

&("disposing  and  establishing").  This subversion is bluntly described by the educated 

advisor  to the rebel Hou Jing as the  age-old  method  of  al1  usurpas?  However,  the  term 

could  also  be  applied  to  "legitimate"  circumstances, as  seen  in the  example  of Emperor Wen of the Song when he  was  considering removing the  crown  prince,  whom he suspected of  unfilial  behaviour,  and appointing a son more  d e s e ~ n g of  his  confidence (in the end, the greater necessity of  maintainhg  the line of the eldest (di) finally  overrode  the 

desûe  to  remove  his  heir)?  Generaiiy,  the fei-li process  was  put to use in  very  dubious 

circumstances.  Although  proceeding  with  a veneer of legitimacy, it consisted of the 

removal  of the incumbent by a caiculating usurper in an action  sanctioned  by an edict  fiom 

the empress  (usuaily  the empress dowager) who  declared  that Heaven  called  for an end to the present  reign  so that a worthier  d e r  might  take  the throne. The role of the empress was  extremely  important, for an edict  from  her  hand, 

however  involuntary  it may have been, was a major source of  legitimation.  Although  an emperor's daughter could  never  ascend the throne, the emperor's  widow  had an 

historically  established  role as final arbiter in the  political  process. Whether she be empress, empress dowager, or grand empress dowager, the  imperial  wife  in the oldest 

surviving  generation  had the  political  and  mord  authority  to act as regent for state  affairs 

when the  throne  suddenly  became  vacant or the incumbent was too  Young,  il1  or  feeble-

minded to govern in  his  own  right.  This included the authority to dethrone an emperor or enthrone a prince. In the  first  century  B.C.,  during  the Western Han, the  influentid 

General Huo Guang  f asked  the empress dowager to dethrone Prince  Changyi  a

Z . During  the Eastern Jin, General  Hum  Wen  &i a, who had  imperial  ambitions, 

succeeded  in  dethroning  the emperor by an  official  order  fiom  the empress dowager.     

> 93 NS/6/20 1116.

In  a slightly  expanded  form,  this  term  becornes jei  hun  li  ming  R C It  $I  (dispomng  of the  perverselignorant  and  estabkhing  the  enli~tenednuminous/sagacio~~) (NQS/3/793/2).  Eventually,                 

> the usurper would be procIaimed as Haven's choice to replace the unfit incumbent on the throne.
> 94 NS/2/589/ 13

# -14Hence, at crucial points in a  dynasty's  history,  the emperor's widow could  exercize  pre-

eminent  but temporary power. Major  shifts  in the balance of power occurred  only  when her close male relatives managed to hold senior positions in the bureaucracy and were able to swing power  fiom  the throne and unrelated members of the  bureaucratic  elite  toward the widow and  her  family.g5  It  was  against  this background that the voice of the empress dowager  was  heard  so  often  in the course of the  various  abdications and usurpations. In 

reality,  however, she  was  as  much  a victim  of  manipulation  and coercion as were the hapless emperors removed or replaced by the  many  usurpers. The  "vaiidated"  replacement (or  series  of replacements) on the throne would suit the usurper's  purposes  by being a younger and more malleable royal relative,  often  ayounger brother of the  unworthy  incumbent. Potential competing heirs in the di or  zhang 

lines  would be judiciously elirninated until eventuaily the point was reached that Heaven would  cal1  for the usurper to take the throne  himself 

The Three Xiao  Usurpers: 

Xiao Daocheng, Xiao  Luan  and Xiao  Yan  are  three  usurpers who drew on this fei-

li  tradition to  attain  their  dserent  ends. Xiao Daocheng brought an end to the Song 

dynasty  of the Liu  farnily  and established the Southem Qi. Xiao  Luan  then  destroyed 

Daocheng's  line  of direct heirs  through  a process of forced abdications and royal  murders 

that resembled what had occurred  during  the Song. He succeeded in diverting the line of succession to himselfbut did not  actually  create a new  dynasty.  Xiao  Yan,  for  his  part, 

was  able to exploit the weaknesses introduced  into  the  House  of  Qi  by  Xao  Luan's  

> 95

Yang Lien-sheng,  "Female  Rulers  in  Imperia1  China," in idem, Excursions in  Shology  (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,  1969),  38-39,  originally  published in Harvard  Journal  ofAsiatic  Studies      

> 23(1960-61): 47-6 1; Jennifer Holrngren,

"imperid  Marriage  in the Native  Chinese  and Non-Han  State, 

Han to Ming," in  Marriage  and  Ineq.ualip, ed.  Rubie S. Watson and  Patricia  B.  Ebrey  (Berkiey:  

> University

of  California  Press,  199  l),  62,74076.  The  statw  of the  empress  in the  mind  of the Xiao  ruiers, 

at  least,  may  also  be  seen  in the  fact  that,  upon  founding  the  Qi throne in 479, Xiao Daocheng  included 

his  wife,  who bore the  posthumous  titie  of  Empress  Zhao  BFI  f:  (she  had  died  in 472  [NQS/W390/13]), 

as one of the  seven  ancestors  to  be  worshipped  in the  seven  impenal  temples (qi  miao  -k  ). The other 

six  were  his  fàther and the five  generations  of  male  ancestors  preceding  his  fkther. However,  his  mother, 

known  posthumoudy  as Empress Xiao  4 (NQS/2/390/8),  was not  included,  and  by  tradition  his    

> wife shodd probably

have  been  excluded  as weii  (NQS/1/130/8-9). actions and  gradually  move the  throne  into  his  hands to create a new  dynasty,  that of the Liang.  Since  he  was  htending  to  overthrow  the established  dynasty  (the  Qi),  he had another  ideological  asset  to draw upon in  order  to  justifL  his  militas,  offensive against the 

incumbent  d e r .  This  was  the army of chastisement  (yijun  4 .f  ) which held a place of honour in the  annals  of  antiquity  and was  only  launched  with  Heaven's blessing against a 

sinfi11 d e r and  his  evil  ministers.  Xiao Yan's military action  was  further  bolstered by an 

edict  issued by the empress dowager  calling  for the replacement of the present  ruler  by  his 

brother who was  then  under  the "protection7'  (i.e.  in the clutches) of the army of chastisement in the western  garnison  of  Jiangling. 

Usurpation  was  not  sanctioned  without the manifestation of Heaven's  approval, 

both by supematural  signs  and the voice of the empress (dowager). In addition, a usurper had to  follow  a set path that led to the proper accumulation of titles and honours by which Heaven  confinned  its  desire  to transfer the power of the  throne.  Xiao  Luan's  situation differed somewhat fiom that of  his  uncle, Xiao Daocheng, and  his  cousin, Xiao Yan, for he  was  too close a relative of the Qi founder to found a new  dynastic  house  and therefore stopped at an  earîier  point on the path of usurpation. 

Precedents  for the Xiao Usurpations: 

Usurpations, though  forced,  drew on  historical  precedent and  claimed  part of  their 

legitimacy  in  this  fact.  The  various  edicts of abdication issued by the Song, Qi and Liang 

al1  look  first  to the  canonicai  example  of Yao and Shun but also refer to the  "historical" 

example  of the transition fiom the Han to the Wei in 220. In addition, when the Song abdicated to the Qi, the abdication  was  further  spoken of as  following  the  example  of the Wei and the and when the Qi abdicated to the Liang, the  historicaf  precedent of the  

> Jin

and Song  was  also  re~alied.~' 

(i) Han to Wei:                  

> 96 Han to Wei (NQS/1/21/2); Wei to Jin (NQS/1/20/10).
> 97 Han to Wei (LS/l/27/3); lin to Song (LS/l/26/9 &27/3).

If'we  look  first  at the  histoncai  exarnple  of the abdication of the Han throne to the 

House  of Wei as the  comrnody  recognized  precedent for the Xiao regimes, we  find  the 

foliowing  stages: (1)  aristocratie  title: In 196,  after  defeating  some  of the forces that were holding back the adolescent emperor's  retum  to Luoyang, Cao Cao was given the prestige 

rnilïtary  title of  East-Queliing  General  (thendong jiawun  4(t  ) and appointed Marquis of Feiting  e . The following  month  he  was  given the  powemil  court title of Overseer of the  Department  of State  Affairs  (lu  shangshu  shi).  Over a  month  later, 

following the destruction of Luoyang and the transfer of the impenal court to  his  new capital of Xu  (east  of present-day  Xuchang  8 in the province of  Henang8) where he 

installeci  his  meen-year-old  Puppet  emperor,  99  Cao Cao's title was elevated to that of Duke of  Wuphg  & q "r=  .loO  (2) prestige title of  pre-eminent  official:  In  208,  d e r  several 

Mctories  in the north that  eiiminated  the threat of  "barbarian"  alliances with  his  enemies, 

Cao Cao was given the newly re-established title of  chengxiiang  & & (Counsellor-in-

Chief),  the  pre-erninent  chief  ministerial  position.101 (3) the three "special honours"  (shli 

# g ): In 2 12, following the precedent set by the first Han emperor in  honouring  Xiao He,  his  chief  minister  and  architect  of the newly established Han  regime,  the emperor bestowed on Cao Cao the three  privileges  of  receiving  an  imperial  i n t e ~ e w without 

formal  announcement of his  name,  approaching the court at an unhumed  Pace  (speed 

wodd  nonnaily  testify  to a minister's  imrnediate  and  respectfùl  obedience  to  the  imperial 

dl),and  entering  the palace with sword and shoes. lo2  (4) change  fkom  bisyiiabic to                             

> 98 ZLDC, 365
> 99 The age of the emperor is based on the fact that he was 9sui when he took the throne in the ninth
> month of the nrst year of zhaoning BQt

# +( 1  89)  (HHS/2/3  6714).     

> IOo Although the text

uses  the title of Marquis of  Wuping  &, +e, the  reference  to Cao Cao in the  next 

h e  and  thereafter  is  by  the title of  duke  (gong2  ).  Hence,  the  assumption  is that he  was  elevated  to ducal             

> levei at îhis point (SGZ/1/13/6-9). The move to Xu is aiso descri'bed in HHSl2/380/3.
> S

W lBOl6.  In  this  year  the Han  replaceci  the  sangong  5 'z:  (the  three  paramount  officiais  with the     

> titie of the Three

Mes) with the  chengxgxlang (Counseiior-in-Chi@  and  yushi  darfir  & (Censor- 

> in-lhief).
> lo2 SWl/36/14

monosyllabic ducal title and  granting  of the  Nine  Bestowals  (Jiu  Xi  P$)F In 213, Cao Cao's title  was  changed  from  Duke of Wuping to Duke  dWei  'z: ,in recognition of  his 

loyalty to the  state  and to the emperor  !-iirn~elf.~~4 In an accompanying statement (ce  M), 

ter. of Cao Cao's  meritorious  contributions  (gong sh;  the  term  could also be  rendered  âs 

"feat"  or "exploit") to the stability of the realrn are enurnerated and  become  a sort of officiaiversion of the  histoncal  record, with the  "villains"  clearly  declared.  Essentidy,  the ce presents Cao Cao as the one who came first to the defense of the  throne,  leading  the forces of the  realm  to  fiee  the emperor  from  the  clutches  of  his  captors  and  rnoving  the 

imperial  capital to the safety of  Xu  $+ (present-day  Xuchang),  defeating  generals  who intended  to  usurp  the  irnpenai  title,  elirninating  the Yellow Turban rebels in the  east  and 

pacifymg  the  barbaxian  leaders in the  north  and west.  ".  . .AIthough  Yi Y i  @ [who helped the founder of the Shang  elirninate  the tyrant lie of the preceding Xia  a

dynasty  and Iay the  institutional  foundations of the new regime] enacted the will of Heaven, and the Duke of Zhou  "k'  [son of King W e n  W R I.and brother of King Wu 

# W r who founded the Zhou  Dynasty  after  destroying the last  "tyrannical"  d e r  of the previous Shang  regirne]  spread the light [of justice] over  al1  within  the four  seas,  theù deeds are as  nothing  in cornparison [with your accomplishments] . .. . When  the  unrest  of 

Guan  Shu  *and  Cai  Shu  & 3 ~  [brothers of King Wu of Zhou  PI  &,  Z and of the Duke of Zhou  PJ  "2  ] was  put  down  during  the time of King Cheng  &,  [son of the  founding  d e r of the Zhou], the king remembered the one to whom he was indebted and had Duke  Kang   

> This term

is  translated  eisewhere  as the  Nine  Distinctions  when  they  are  conferreci  on Wang  Man& 

the usurper of the Former Han.  See  Homer  Dubs,  tr.  The  History  ofthe  Fumer  Han  Dynasty,vol. 3  

> (Baltimore: Waverly

Press,  1955),  202.  There  is  also  the term  "Nine  Confements"  (jiuming  R.  48.)  that 

refers  to  the  rewards  given  by  the Son of Heaven, as  f h t  mentioned  in the Book  ofodes  (ibid., 202, n. 2 1.2).  Thus,  Dubs translates the phrase jia  jiuming  zhi  xi  h jL  2s  as  "We]  add  [to  your  honorsl  the distinctions for the  nine  conferments." (ibid.,  208). As for the term Jiu  Xi  itself,  it is  translateci  as  "Niue 

Bestowalsn  in Richard  Mather,  tr.,  Shih-shuo  Hsin-yt&  A New  Account  of T&s  of the  World 

(Minneapolis:  University of Minnesota Press,  1975),  644.  Since  the  edict  that  praises  Cao Cao uses the 

Chinese  word xi as  both  a noun  and a verb,  the  closest  dual  equivalent  in  English  is  "honour".  In  terms             

> of the context, Nine Bestowals, Nine Conferrais or Nine Gifts would also

seem  to  be  appropriate translations. of Shao [Zhao]  "k'  invest the Grand Duke of Qi  a l; 2 with shoes that he  might 

travel  east  to the  sea,  West  to the Yellow River,  south  to  Muling  & and  north  to  Wudi 

&*in order  to draw together the  vassals  and  regional  !ords  to  assist  him  henceforth in his role as Grand Preceptor  (taishi  h 6 ) in  awing  [the  rebels  ofl  the east. In the  tirne  of 

King  Xiang  # 3 , the people of Chu  @ refbsed  to send  tribute  to the king. He thereupon elevated  his  vassal of Jin  above  al1  others and  conferred  on  him  the  distinctionsl05  of  two 

imperial  carnages,  a contigent of bold  waniors,  an axe and hatchet  Vjr  #,  to execute by 

cleavlng  at the  waist,  and  yue  a, to execute by decapitation], yellow millet and aromatic 

tumenc  for  ritual  libation, and bows and  arrows  so that he  rnight  forge a  great  alliance  at 

Nanyang  &J  e.  The  House  of Zhou was able to endure  because  of  these  two  States  [the 

duly  honoured and  empowered  Qi and Jin vassals] .....I  am  asharned  that your 

accomplishment  is so  much  greater  than  Yi Yin or the Duke of Zhou and your  reward  so 

much  less  than  [that of the dukes  of]  of  Qi  and Jin." On the  bais  of  this  histoncal 

precedent, the Han emperor chose to create the grand fief  (guo)  of Wei  nom  ten commanderies  (iun)  which he bestowed on the newly appointed Duke of Wei (the number ten  correspondhg  to the ten  previously  enumerated contributions). As part of the  ritual, 

the emperor presented black  earih  wrapped  in a white reed as  well  as a stylus  and shell for the ceremony of divination so that the  ducal  household and temple  rnight  be properly 

established.  In addition, the Duchy of Wei was to have its full roster of  oficials,  in the 

manner  of a  kingdom  and  foliowing  the pattern of the  enfeoffed  princes at the  beginning  of the Han.Further, just as the prince of Jin had been  awarded  @s,  so was Cao Cao to be 

granted  the  Nine  Bestowals  (Jiu Xi).  These  were more important as symbols  than  as  actual 

objects and are described in the  following  fashion: 

[il  one  imperial  chariot and one  war  chariot, as  well  as  two  teams  of 

four black  horses,  for your  mastery  of  rules  and  rituais  and your establishment of the proper pattern for the people,  making  them constant        

> lo5 The Chinese tem is xi (SGZ/IB8112), rather

chaa  ci (used  in  line  10  of the  same  page in the                         

> same sense but another context), thereby indicating tbat these giRs are in the tradition fiom which Wang
> Mang's Nine Distinctions were to evolve, as discussed in Dubs.

and content in their appointed stations; [ii]  ceremonial  robe and cap and 

vermillion  shoes, for your  cornmitment  to  prosperity  built  on agriculture, the major and proper  priority  of government;  [ila set of suspended 

chimes  and gongs and six rows of  dancers  [as appropnate for  those  of ducal  r d ] ,  for your encouragement of deference and  humility,  attention to correct behaviour, courtesy between the generations and  harmony  between the classes; [iv] a vermiilion  door,  for your promotion of the  true  and proper ways  throughout  the realm, causing  those  in distant places to be reformed and  those  in the  Chinese  world  to find  fùlfillrnent  in the  kingiy 

way; [v] an  inner  staircase,  for your clear understanding of the emperor's 

diflictilt  task  and your unconditional and  regular  appointment of  only  the able and  Wtuous;  [vil  three  hundred  stalwart  warriors, for your strict and impartial management of  goverment  and your intolerance of even the 

most  minor  wrong-doing;  [vii]  a hatchet and axe, for your clear and  strict 

observance of law and punishrnent;  [viii]  one red bow and one hundred red 

arrows  together with ten black bows and one thousand black arrows, for your  alert  vigilance over the realm and your quick  hstration  of  al1  rebels 

within  the four  seas;  [*il  a ceremonial  container of yeliow millet blended with aromatic tumenc and a jade-handled spoon for  pouring  libations, for your kindness,  respectfilness,  sincenty,  filial devotion and your  ability  to understand the  mind  of the emperor. [O6 

(5) declaration of  pre-eminent  rank: In 2 14, the emperor placed Cao Cao, as  Duke 

of Wei,  above  the princes of the realm  (zhuhou  Wang  %@ 3 ) and bestowed on  him  the 

metal  seai  and red  sash  appropnate to  his  ducal  rank as  well  as the  yuanym  $ hat 

normaily wom by brothers and sons of the emperor upon being  enfeoffed  as  princes.lo7 (6) elevation to  princely  rank: In 2 16, Cao Cao was appointed Prince of Wei  X . In  order 

lo6  Full  edict  in  SGZll137f 5 - 391 13.  Nine  Bestowais  component in  SGZ/ 113913-1 1.  Accordhg  to  Dubs, 

there  are five  ancient  lists  of  what  he  refers  to as the  nhe  distinctions,  dating  between the second  cennuy 

B.C. (in the  Hanshi  Waizhuan  9f-#) and in a mernorial  to  Emperor Wu in 5 A.D. (usurpation of the Former Han throne  by Wang  Mang  3 ).  See  Dubs.  p. 2 11, n.  23.3.  Cao Cao  expandeci  the  Nine 

Bestowals  h m  a simple  list  to an  elegantly  worded  enconomium,  with  each  bestowal  representing  some 

ment of the  person  being  honoured.  It  is this  which,  in  combination  with  the  introductory  description of the ten contributions to the realm, is  induded  in the  sixth-century  W e m a n  A aas a Iiterary  mode1  in the ce  acategory.  The  Wenxuan  was  compiled  during  the Liang by Xiao Tong, son of  Xiao  Yan,  a

usurper who  dso  incIudÊd  the  Nine  Bestowals  in  his  progress  to the  throne.  However,  Xiao Tong and  

> many

members  of the royai  family  were  noted  for  their  literary  talent.  Hence,  its  inclusion  was  iinlikely  a 

> political

statement.  Rather,  it  indicated  its  status  as  both  a disthguished  literary  creation  and an 

honourable  historical  document.  Furthermore,  the  author,  Pan Xu  j$ a, was  much  respected  for  his 

intelligence and talent and held court  appointments  under  the Han as  Secretarial  Court Gentleman (shmgshu  fang  & @ ),  Right  Assistant  Director  of the  Imperia1  Secrtariat  (shangshu youcheng  & t &

& ) anci,  just  More  his  death,  Lefl  Assistant  Director  of the  Imperia1  secretariat  (shmgshu  zuocheng  &j   

> $&)

(SGZJ316 13In.  1).  Although  he  was  serving  in the Han court, it  was  in  e f k t  Cao Cao's court, 

and Pan  may  have  been  a true  supporter. In  any  case, he  could  not have  considered  himseif,  or  been 

considered,  as a back-mm  henchman  cranking  out  propaganda  to  embellish  a rogue's actions. 

lo7  SGZJ1/43/9 to  establish  the  altars  of  his  principality,  he was formally  granted  ceremonial  black  soi1 

wrapped  in a white reed. In addition, he received the  left  halves of the  first  to  £ifth  golden tiger  tallies  (given to  commandery  generals  or local officials to  validate  their  right  to 

marshall  forces or  act  in a military  capacity) and the  left  halves of the  first  to  tenth  bamboo 

tallies (given to  validate  the  right  to  adrninister  commanderies). log  (7)  special  honours 

(shuli) of the  imperial  level:  In 2 17 Cao Cao was  commanded  by the emperor to fly the 

imperid  bamers  and, in the  imperid  manner,  have the way  cleared  of  al1  persons wherever 

his  carriage  passed.  Later  in the year the emperor  further  commanded Cao Cao to  Wear 

the ceremonial cap with  twelve  jade pendants, the number  only  the emperor could  Wear, 

and to ride in the golden-pole carriage  (jin  'gen  che  & && +),  drawn  by six  horses  and accompanied by  five  paired  sets of  variously  coloured  camages  (wushifuche  X U]  +). 

In addition,  his  son and heir was given the imperial heir's title of  taizi  +. 109  (7) 

abdication:  Although  Cao Cao died at the  beginning  of 220 at the age of 66  ~ i , ~ l Ohis  son (Cao Pei  35 ) took the throne in the  fa11  of that  same  year  &er  the Han emperor abdicated. The emperor  was  demoted  to a  bisyllabic  ducal title  (Shanyang  Gong  & 'k'  ) but placed 

above  those  of princely  (wang)  rank  and allowed to  maintain  the  ntuals  of worship as  well 

as the  insignia,  clothing  and  vehicles  of the  defùnct  irnperial  House  of  Han.'  l

Upon  cornparison  with  Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Yan,  Cao Cao's "honour  path" 

appears  somewhat abridged,  dserently  sequenced and of  greater  simplicity.  This  may  be more a matter  of  archival  methodology.  in fact, although Cao Cao's  mode1  is held as the   

> HHS/2/390/2&7-9. Not

detailed  above  is the  measured  pace  at which the  abdication  was  reached  

> Reports

of  omens  and  portents  that were  understood  to  reflect  Heaven's  desire  for a reassignment  of the   

> der's mandate

were  circulateci  both  to test and to guide public opinion, and the  retiring  emperor's 

earnest  appeals  to Heaven's  newly  appointecl  replacement  to  take  the throne  had  to  be  refiised  three  times  

> to avoîd

the  appearance  of  conspiratorid  haste. See the  anaiysis  of Cao Pei's accession to the Wei throne in  Carl  Leban,  "Managing  Heaven's Mandate:  Coâed  Communications in the Accession of Ts'ao P'ei, 

AD. 220," in  Ancient  Chim:  Studies  in  Eariy  Civilization,  ed.  D.T. Roy and  T.H,  Tsien  (Hong Kong: 

Chinese  University Press, 1978)'  3 3 5-33 9. earliest  "historicai"  example,  the unspoken archetype  is  that of the  earlier  usurper, Wang 

M=g,  who  never  gained  recognition as a legitimate  d e r  in the  histoncal  record.  I l 2 

(ii) Wei to Jin: 

Only  one aspect of the  traxition  frorn  Cao Wei to Jin  is  examined  here, and it was 

regarded  as  fundamentai  by the  remnant  of the Jin that fled southward over  fifty  years  later 

and sought to  c l a h  legitimacy  as the  regime's  rightful  heirs  in  Jiankang.  This was the acquisition of a monosyllabic princely title with the  accompanying  implication of  imperid 

privileges.  As  shown  above,  this  was  the last part of Cao Cao's route to the throne and the essential last step for  any  usurper. What the founder of the Western Jin did in imitation of Cao Cao became the  model  by which the Eastern Jin's new  d e r  established  his  nght  to 

mount  the throne in  Jiankang. 

Sima Zhao  6J .&  Ber,  whose son (Sima  Yan  ) was to accept the abdication of the Wei and become the  first  emperor of the (Western) Jin  dynasty,  was elevated  fiom  the 

rank  of Duke of Jin  Q "k'  to Prince of Jin  Q 3. in 264 by  command  of the Wei emperor. The lower-level title of Duke of Jin had been  granted  about  two  yean  earlier. Sima Zhao 

had  achially  been a duke  since  256 but the ducal title given  at  the time had been a 

bisyllabic  one (Gaodu  Gong)I13 which,  as  seen  in the case of Cao Cao earlier, could not be used in the  naming  of a dynastic  house.  In Cao Cao's model, the  transfer  to a 

monosyliabic  title was  absosluteiy  necessary  for this  purpose. 

This  elevation  to a monosyllabic  princely  title was understood to be the last stage 

in the recognition of the  rise  of a  dynastic  house.  Like Cao Cao before  him,  Sima Zhao 

was  at this point  tacitly  understood to be an emperor-in-waiting.  Hence,  he received the  

> l2

Wang  Mang  seems  to  have set the  paradigm  for future  usurpers,  and  his  use of the  Nine  Bestowals 

was  continueci  by  future  usurpers,  Born  Cao Cao on  through  to the  Iast  of the  southern  miers.  Cao Cao  

> was

in  fact  the  next  usurper to foiiow Wang  Mang  in the  historicai  record  but,  unlike  Wang  Man&  who  is    

> relegated to the

back  of the officiai record of the Han  Dynasty,  Cao Cao  has  honoured  standing.  

> l3

Sima Zhao's  fim  title  was  Marquis of  Xincheng  Prefecture  4$  a& .W  in 238  (JS/lB2/ 1). His  second  

> title

was  Marquis of Gaodu  & a (JS/1/33/3),  and this  was  followed  by  his  elevation  to Duke of Gaodu 

& S in 256  (JS/1/33/8). Sima Zhao  died  More  he  codd  accept the abdication of the Wei in the        

> appropriate progression of tities and edicts but

his  eldest  son, Sima  Yan,  continueâ  the  usurpation  process 

and  became  the  founding  emperor of the Jin in 265  (JS/1/44/14). right  to title  his  children  in the imperial  manner.  His  son  was  given  the title of heir apparent (tain'),while  his  daughters took titles on the  irnperiai  mode1  (Sima Zhao's  d e , 

however,  could  be  named  only prince's consort  (wanghou  3. ) as opposed to imperial consort  (huanghm  & )). In addition, Sima Zhao was authorized to establish a  s d

officialdom  on royal  lines.'l4  As with Cao Cao, the  granting  of royal prerogatives  implied 

that full  impenal  status  was  soon to be obtained.  

> (iii)

Founding of the Eastern Jin:  

> As

indicated  above,  the crucial  legitimating  factor in the establishment of the Eastern Jin was the title  carried  by its founder, Sima  Rui  -6 AI+. This royal prince was 

ensconced  in  Jiankang  as Prince of Langye  @ 3.when it was learned that  his  cousin, Emperor Min,had been  taken  as a captive to  Pingyang  @ .  The general who  arrived 

with the news at the end of  March  3 17,  aiso  brought  a royal  edict  (zhao)  cornmanding 

Sima Rui to act as regent and  prepare  to regain the lost capital and  erase  this  shame.l15 

Although  Sima  Rui  was urged by  his  officials  to  take  the title of emperor, he declined, 

saying  that he was only the Prince of Langye and  must  retum  to  his  fief in the  failen  north. 

His  officiais, however, "persuaded"  him  to  follow  the precedent of  his  forbear,  Sima Zhao, 

diswding  the  princely  title associated with the single  commandery  of Langye and  taking 

the title of Prince of Jin. Hence, he was legitimately positioned to be a kind  of  emperor-in-

waiting  but avoided the problem of  actuaily  taking  the  imperial  title and thereby  creating 

the  possibility  of  two  mlers  of a realm  (since  Emperor Min's  fate  was  stiii  unknown). However, he did exercise  imperid  power in fact if not in  narne.  Thus,  in the foliowing 

month,  having  changed  his  titie  to Prince of Jin, he was understood to have  royal 

prerogatives,  just  as Sima Zhao had before  hi- and let this be  known  by  proclaiming  anew imperial  reign  name  (iiamvu & & ),  declaring  a general  amnesty,  preparing  the  

> l
> )

of the imperial bureaucracy and  establishing  the "hundred officials"  (baigum  3dynastic ancestral temple  (zongmiao  1a ) and the state  aitars  (SM  a). l l6  When the death of Emperor Min was reported in 3 18, he could  nghtfùlly  ascend the throne as emperor. The  taking  of the  princely  title  with  its implications of  royal  prerogratives would be 

"re-enacted"  by Xiao Daocheng when he was  preparing  to usurp the Song and by Xiao 

Yan  when he  was  ploning  to usurp the Qi. In the case of Xiao  Luan,  however, it was sufficient to keep the  bisyllabic  princely title, for a new dynastic  house  could not be founded by  someone  within  the  five-generation 

relationship.  This princely title would be the last of the titles and honours  identmg  him 

as the worthy  inhentor  of an abdicated throne. It was the last honour he required to be in a

legitimate  position to  take  the throne. In fact, Xiao  Luan's  "honour path" had consisted of 

civilian  and  military  titles  which  reflected  his  actual  grip  on power.  Although  there were the accompanying prestige trappings of canopies, flute and  dmm  bands and honour 

guards,  the types of  "special  honours7' bestowed on dynastic usurpers  never  played a part in Xiao  Luan's  rise.  The attention to titles, however, was  common  to Xiao  Luan  and the other usurpers. Xiao  Luan  had been promoted  fiom  Marquis of  Xichang  8 B)  to Duke of Xuancheng  9&, it"r:  when  his  young  Puppet  emperor took the  throne*17 and was promoted  again  to the  rank  of Prince of Xuancheng  @ &&  3 in the tenth  month  of the 

same  year  (494),  just  before  usurping  the throne.  118  A princely title  was  required, of course, of  any  heir to the throne, and Xiao  Luan  claimed  to be  among  the natural heirs by 

emphasiring  that he  was  the  third,  and hence eldest, of Xiao  Daocheng's  surviving  sons 

@y  virtue  of  his  having  been adopted at one point by  his  uncle).  Thus,  he presented 

himseifas  being  in the  natural  iine  of succession and having the appropriate  pnncely  title 

for an heir to the throne. Once  Xiao  Luan  was on the throne, his direct descendants could lay  clairn  to  being 

in the new royal  line  of succession. When  Luan's  second son took the throne in the capital of  Jiankang,  however, a younger son was  declared  to be a kind of  emperor-in-waiting  in 

Jiangling.  This  was  done  under  the auspices of Xiao  Yan  who was  plotting  to create the 

dynastic  house  of Liang that would  eventually  usurp  the Qi throne.  His  action  was 

legitimized  by an  order  ( h g ) from  the Empress Dowager in Jiankang  which  declared the younger son in  Jiangling  to be the most fitting heir for the throne and  naming  him  Prince of  Xuancheng  d &,Li,  with a fief of ten In  view  of the  fact  that Xiao Yan's "protégé"  already  held the title of  Prince  of 

Nankang  & & 3, he  clearly  received  this  new title  because  it  had been held by  his  father, Xiao  Lum.  By  taking  his  father's title  while  he was a kind  of  emperor-in-waiting  in exile, he was following the precedent set by the founder of the southern throne, Sima  Rui, 

whose title had been  changed  from  Pnnce of  Langye  to  Pnnce  of Jin when he was  aiso 

being  recognized  as an emperor-in-waiting  preparing  to continue the  dynasty  in exile. 

Although  the original title of Prince of Jin was a monosyllabic title that  indicated  its holder was on the verge of  inaugurating  a new  dynasty  and had been held not by Sima  Rui's 

father but rather by  his  ancestor who had founded the Jin dynastic  house  almost  fifty  years 

earlier,  the situation was still  similar  in one important respect. Sima Rui took his 

ancestor's  title before the throne in  Chang'an  was  known  to be vacant but  d e r  it had 

become  apparent that the  imperid  iine  could  only  be continued in the new capital-in-exile of  Jiankang.  By  having  Xiao  Luan's  eighth son  take  the title  his  father had held  just  before 

becoming  emperor,  Xiao  Yan  was trying to create a parailel  situation that would cover  his 

plot with a veneer of  legitimacy.  However, the title of Prince of Xuancheng seems to have been  understood  as strictly a  symbol  of  Xiao  Baorong's  right  to  "inhent"  the  throne.  In fact,  the  p ~ c e d o m of Nankang continued to  exist  by  order  of the Empress Dowager, and 

this  mry  explain  why he  still  continued to be  called  Prince of  Nankang.lZ0 

One other point that becomes apparent here  is  that  these  titles were not hereditary; they were not  titles  of a noble  class;  instead, they were "bestowed" on a particular 

individual  to  iiidicate  that  person's  right  to the throne. When titles were  revived,  as in the case of Sima Rui and Xiao  Luan's  young son, they were  given  by  special  edict to 

recognize  the  title-bearer's  right  to occupy the throne that had been  first  established  by 

their  father or ancestor but  was  now in  crisis.  This is  seen  again  at the end of the Liang, when Emperor Wu's  remaining  sons  al1  grabbed  the title of Prince of Liang in the  wake  of Hou Jing's attempted destruction of the Liang throne. Each son wanted to position  himseif 

as the  rightfbl  successor with this non-heritable title,  just  as Sima Rui had  done  long before with  his  ancestor's title of "Prince of Jin". (c)  Dynastic  Loyalty 

Despite  the procedures of  legitimation,  officials  of the  supplanted  dynasties did not 

necessarily  consider  the new regimes to be  truly  legitimate. The most extreme  example  of the  loyal  official  is that of  Yan  Jianyuan  J&  who  starved  himself  to death in  protest 

against  Xiao  Yan's  destruction of the Qi  dynasty. 121  A much  lesser  example  is that of Xie Fei  $# At:, a member of one of the  great  aristocratie  families  who held the title of Palace Attendant  (shizhong  *)  at the end of the Song. By the demands of protocol, it was the 

shizhong who should  take  the  seal  of  imperial  office (xi  j%  ) frorn  the  abdicating  emperor and  deliver  it  to the new recipient of the  Heavenly  Mandate, in this case, Xiao  Daocheag, 

Prince of Qi. Xie  refùsed,  disdainfûliy  saying  that the Qi could find its  own  shizhong to 

perform  the  task.  After  uiforming  his  colieagues  at court that he  would  not  feign  iIlness,  he                               

> 120 This merof Xiao tuads princely titie appean not to have ovemden his son'songinai princely
> title of Nankang. Both the Liang Shu and the Nan Shi refer to

hUn  by  his  earlier  titie  of Prince of  Nankaag 

when he  takes  the  throne  (LS/1/9/14;  NS11/150/3),  and  even  the  manifesto  to the  realm  that  preceâed  the                          

> campaign agahm Jiankang refers only to the Nankang title (NQSIU669I10).
> 121 LS/3/727/34; NS/6/1785/1-2. There is no mention of him in the Nan Qi Shu. His grandson, Yan
> Zhitui

## Iff  aa, is the  author  of Yanshi  J i m n  (Family  Instructions  for the Yan Clan). shply  retumed  home,  leaving  it to another  shizhong,  Wang  Jian,  a scion of another  great 

aristocratic  farniiy  (whose case is discussed  further  below), to  remove  the  impenal  seal. 

Though  angered  at this act of defiance, Xiao did not execute Xie, for  fear  of the political 

corisequences  of  making  a martyr of  him,  but  he did bar  him  fiom office for five  years. 

Fei's  refusal  to cooperate was  unusual,  for the histories indicate that  exarnples  of  such 

s e ~ c e were  legion  arnong the great aristocratic  f h l i e s  (the  Wangs  of  Langye,  in 

particular)  who were ready to participate in the  inau yrai  ceremonies of the  usurpers  and hold office  under  the new  regirne.  One of the reasons for this cooperation  is  made  clear 

fiom the  fact  that Xie  himself  asked the new Qi emperor to be  dlowed  to hold office, albeit in a  cornrnandery  where he would be  free  from some of the  moral  dilemmas  at court. The reason, as stated  quite  clearly  by the  historian,  was that he was poor and had no source of income other  than  that denved  from  an  official  app~intrnent.'~~ 

Financial  decline resulting  from  a lack of independent wealth based on land rather 

than  official  emolurnent  seems to have been a  growing  problem  arnong  the  aristocracy. 

Each  family  line  was forced to fend for  itself  rather  than  draw upon the largesse of the clan. From the  later  part of the  Southern  Qi  comes  the  example  of Wang  Yan  X 41,  amember of the  Langye  Wang  family  that had  dorninated  society  and the court at the 

beginning  of the Eastern Jin. Rebuked by Emperor Wu (Xiao Ze) of the  Qi  for  various 

failings,  Wang chose to withdraw  from  court on the  pretext  of  illness.  Despite  his 

aristocratic station, he had no independent wealth, and when  his  situation  bewne  known 

to the emperor, he  was  generously reappointed to office in  order  to  provide  hirn  with  an income.  His  placement as  libu  shmigshu  2 %,  (Minister  of Personnel), however, seems to have  reafnmied  a traditional recognition of aristocratic  dominance  over personnel  appointrnents. lu This  fact  of econornic dependence may have  determined  the  general  "will  to 

compromise"  among  the most  highly  ranked.  This was still the situation at the end of the Qi,  for  after  Xia0  Yan  had  arriveci  ir,  Jiankang  with his western  army  and  was  preparing  to 

u s q  the  'hone,  one of his  advisors  is quoted as  saying  to  hm, '"The  gentry  (shidazfu  +

## A ) play  up  to people of power and influence.  AI1  hope to lay  clairn  to some iota of service [to you] in  order  to protect  their  rank  and weaith  (fidu  #iS  a) ."  124 

Dependant as they  might  be, members of  great  aristocratic  families  in this  highly 

class-conscious society would not have been "crawling" to the emperor,  especially  when the royal  f d y  was  always  of a lesser social  stratum.  They would have  maintained  some 

sense  of aristocratic supenority that took the edge off their need for  imperial  support. There is a  sense  of this  dual  sense  of  supenority  and dependance in the behaviour of Wang Sengda  3 f#  i& (son of Wang Hong, discussed  fùrther  below) who,  during  an audience with Emperor  Xiaowu  of the Song in which he was  refused  the offices he desired (a mark of  his  dependance),  glared  at  him  long and  hard  in a defiant  "above-the-law"  display  of contempt ( his  sense  of  superiorty). 125 

Despite  the general mood of compromise, the  exarnples  of  Yan  and Xie are the most visible indications that there was also a  current  of thought in the  cornrnunity  that  it 

was  wrong  for an  official  of one  regime  to serve  another.  The  idea  that the  rituai  of abdication in itself could  justify  a new  dynasty  had  already  been explicitly denied  during 

the Eastern Jin in a 54-jz1an  work by Xi  Zuochi  a & , (? -384) son of a  wealthy  and 

prominent  farnily  of the  rnilitarily  sensitive western  commandery  of  Xiangyang  @ (in present-day  Xian@  #$ , province of Hebei). 

Xi, who had a solid  reputation as a writer  and  brilliant  public servant,  realized  that 

Hum  Wen,  the  Inspecter  (cishi) of  Jingzhou  Region  (capital at  Jianghng,  Hebei)  under 

> 124 NS/5/1411/4-5.

The  words  are  spoken  by Shen Yue, a noted  poet  and  calligapher  who  believed  ia             

> maintaining the aristocratic boudaries. He served three regirnes over his lifetime (44 1-5 13).
> 125 NS/2/573/15.

In faR  in the end, the emperor  decided  he  could  no longer  tolerate  his  many  acts  of                   

> defiance and finslly had hirn imprisoned and executed on the charge that he was invoIved in afaded
> attack on the palace (NS/2/575/4).

whom he served, was intending to  usurp  the throne. In an  unsuccessfbl  effort to check 

Hum  through  the  lessons  of  history,  Xi  wrote  the  H m  Jin  Chr~nqiu a % @c  ( Annals  of the Han and  Ji  Dynasties)  which  covered the penod  h m  Emperor  Guangwu  &,  $of the Eastern Han to Emperor Min  8 , last  d e r  of the  Western  Jin. According to the Tang 

historian's  brief synopsis of Xi's  thesis,  the royal  farnily  of Shu  during  the  Three 

Kingdoms  Period  was  alone  legitimate,  and Cao's acceptance of the abdication of the Han and the Wei's  later  abdication to the Jin did not make Cao's action  any  less a usurpation or  his  regime  any  more a  tnie  dynasty.  Only  when Sima Zhao pacified Shu did the Han end and the Jin  begin.  Military  might  alone  could not determine a course of  events  as  those 

who understood the  mind  of Heaven  (lianxin  % ) well  knew.  Heaven's design  was 

etched in the  very  names  of the protagonists. The last  ruler  of the Shu  (Han)  bore the 

name  Shan  # meaning "abdication",  while  Sima Zhao's son had been  given  the  narne  Yan 

## & meaning  "flame"  or  "£ire"  and  signifjmg  the Jin's  rise  out of the  weakened  element of fire,  syrnbol  of the Han. The Wei regime founded by the Caos played no part in  any  of this. Pnor to  his  death, Xi  subrnitted  a memonal  to the throne in  which  he went through 

his  thesis  of  several  years  earlier,  beginning  with the basic question, "People  Say,  'Emperor Wu of the Wei [Cao Cao]  rendered  great  service to the  entire  Chinese  realm  and Emperor Wen [Cao Pei] accepted the abdication of the Han throne', but you  Say  that when the Han

ended it  was  folIowed  by the Jin. How  does  this make  any  sense?  When the Wei  was  done 

away with, the Jin did not observe the proper  order  of  things  [in  continuing  to  recognize  it  

> as

its predecessor]. How could a servant of the Jin concur with  such  a statement?' According to  Xi,  the Wei was not a  true  dynasty. The Cao dynastic  family  did not have 

true  mastery  of the  "kingly  way".  It  existed  as  only  one in a tnumvirate  that  ïncluded  the 

kingdoms  of Wu  and  Shu.  Since  the Wei  never  dominated  the  times  or the  realm  (tirnia), 

none  of the Caos could ever be considered a  tnie  d e r  (wang). In  fact,  it  was  the Sima 

f d y  [the  J i  dynastic  fdy-to-bel  that  united  the  realm,  bringing  an end to the power 

stniggles  that  began  at the end of the Han and  removing  the scourge of the  three competing  realms.  The Sima members who  later  founded the Jin had  never  been true and 

willing  servants of the Wei, and the  ntual  transfer of the Wei to the Jin was never  a true abdication to be included in the  histoncal  record. Sima Yi may have been an  official  under 

Cao Cao, but  his  actions were  taken  in the distemper of the times. There  was  no place yet for this  unrecognized  king in the  disorder  of the  realm.  As  his  hour  had not yet  corne,  he could  only  keep a low profile and act as  necessity  dictated.  Such  expediency did not  lessen 

his  honour or  integrity,  especially  since  Cao Cao so conspicuously lacked the  virtue  and justice of a true  d e r ,  and the Wei was only the  shell  of a dynasty. Posterity would understand  the  morality  of Sima's actions. In fact, Sima Zhao did  his  best  to check the chaos of the  kingdoms  and this was continued by  his  descendants until  his  grandson,  Sima 

Yan,  overcame the Wu and reunited the realm. In the  fifiy  to  sixty  years  of chaos at the end of the Han, the  kingdoms  of Wei and Wu becarne strong by doing evil  while  the 

kingdom  of Shu followed what  was  right  and stayed  weak.  Since  the choice was  between 

evil and  weakness,  none  of the three could ever  win  support as the  d e r  of  dl.  Thus,  in the accomplishrnents of the Sima  farnily  in  making  the  realm  whole  again,  it  was clearly the Jin that succeeded the Han. There was  historical  precedent for this conclusion, including Emperor Gao who, as founder of the Han,received the mandate through Prince Huai of 

ZhouN  3, not  through  the Qin  which  had  just  disintegrated.  Just  as jumping over the 

two  false  rulers  of the Qin was accepted today in  recognizing  the Han as the true successor of the Zhou, so should  leaping  over the Wei and  recogninng  the Jin as the successor of the Han be accepted.  Rihial  abdication was  clearly  an insufficient cntenon of                

> 126 Xi's biography and the tex& describeci above are found in SI712 152-2 1%. Another motivation for Xi's thesis

appears  in  Siku  @anshu  Zongmu  Tiyao.  Since  the Eastern Jin  had  taken  its  capital in the                     

> south and was holding on to only amodicwn of its former territory, it was inasimilar position to that of
> Shu and therefore

ascnkd  to it the  same  legitimacy  it  hoped  to  clah  for  itself.  Xi's  interpretation  was  in            

> contrast to that of the originai compiler of the Sanguo Zhi. Chen Shou was

an  official  of the Western     

> J i the direct successor

to the Wei, and he  therefore  considerd  the Wei to  be the  legitimate  niliag  house   

> of aii

China. Similarly,  in the  Northem  Song (960-1  126),  the  h t emperor  toak  the  throne  under  

> circuIllStances

similar  to  those  of the Wei.  Hence,  Confucians  of the  time  did  not  dare  to  assess  the Wei Xi's argument  was  apparently unconvincing, for Cao Wei continued to be 

recognized  as the  dynasty  to which the Han abdicated and which abdicated in  tum  to the Jin. However, Xi's  text  does  remind  the reader of the  dilemmas  faced by  those  who  must 

decide  who  was  worthy  of one's loyalty  during  dpastic  upheavals  and how a personal 

sense  of  integrity  could be  rnaintained  when compromises were required for  survival. 

Below are  exarnples  of how some  officials  made their  personal  decisions  regarding  loyalty to which  d e r . 

Loyalties  Transferred  (1): The  Examples  of Chu Yuan and Wang Jian 

If we look  specifically  at the transition  from  the Song to the Qi, we find  two 

exarnples that illustrate how  dynastic  loyalty seems to have been understood. The  two  men 

involved  are Chu Yuan  $&  a and Wang Jian  3 & .

Chu Yuan worked  closely  with Xiao Daocheng  dunng  the Song, even requesting Xiao that he be  allowed  to serve in  his  newly formed Duchy of Qi, and  Xiao  consulted  him 

fiequently  on  matters  of state and treated  him  with great respect. Wang Jian, too, chose to serve  under  Xiao Daocheng  from  the time the latter  became  Capital Commandant 

(zhonglingiun  9 ) during  the Song. In fact, Chu  wrote  the  edict  of abdication of the  last  Song emperor and Wang produced  al1  the  edias  and pronouncements  related  to 

procedure,  rihial,  and tradition for the new Qi fief and  dynasty.l29  One  might  argue that 

despite  their  being  members of the Song royal  house  they came  into  the Qi as Xiao 

"loyalist s"  rather  than  Song "trait ors".  130 

negatively.  With  the Southern Song, however, the  dynasty  was  reduced  in temtory to the  south  of the 

Yangzi.  Hence,  its  position  was  like  that of Shu  since  the  old  temtory  of Cao Wei in the central plain  

> (zhongyuan)

was in the  han&  of the Jin  &.  Hence,  scholars  of the  southem  Song,  notably  Zhu Xi  ;IC=,                    

> vilined Wei and m e d Shu the legitimate ruling house. That view has prevailed to this day. See Yong
> Rong I j t isg

et al.,  Siku  Quanshu  Zongrnu  Tiyao  El  # & $ P # (n p.,  nad, Wanyou  Wenku  ft  ;/i 

aed.), juan  10, 16-17.       

> 12'NQS/2/428/14 &429/6
> 12* NQS/2/434/3, and

n 33 for  eqlanation  regarding  corruption of  text   

> lzg NQS/2/434/5
> 130

Chu Yuan's father  had  married  two  daughten  of Liu  Yu, founding  empemr  of the Song (the second 

> af€er

the  k t  had  died),  though  Chu Yuan  himseff  was  the son  of  a concubine. He was a much-respectai  

> son,

however,  and a match  was  made for  him  with a daughter  of Liu  Yilong  (Emperor Wen)  

> (NQS/2/432/7-8).

Wang Jian  was  a great-grandson  of Emperor Wu of the Song, for  his  father, Wang However, Xiao Daocheng, now ernperor, once broached the question with  thern  at a banquet,  saying  t ! ! t  since  they had been high  officiais  (gongqing  2 ) of the Song, they should  never  have looked on  him  as the "son of Heaven"  (fi&  fi  ), a statement 

which  runs  counter  to the  essential  argument of the edicts of abdication and  acceptance.13l 

This would  suggest  that the content of  these  edicts did not  truly  reflect  an  intemalied 

beiief system.  Othenvise,  Xiao would  never  have broached the question and Wang and 

Chu would not have responded with embarrassed silence. This silence betrayed an  inner 

sense  that they had  compromised  themselves. It was  only  Chu's  gift  of  repartee  that 

salvaged  the situation. On  behalf  of  his  nonplussed colleagues, he  quickly  replied  that the emperor should not be  implying  that they were  unable  to  recognize  in the countenance of Xiao a future  emperor  (shi  ion- #&  & ) even as  early  as the Song. He was in effect 

playing  with the concept of a unique  imperial  physiognorny that Heaven bestowed  fiom 

birth  on its new choice of  d e r .  Xiao was delighted with Chu's quick response, and  it 

prompted  him  to to draw an  histoncal  andogy  between  himself  as Liu  Xiu  s , the  first 

emperor of the Eastern Han,and Chu Yuan as Zhu You  #k  &,  a loyal confidante of Liu 

Xiu.132  Zhu You had declared to Liu that in  view  of the latter's  impenal  physiognomy (the presence of a  rijiao  É1  f i ,  a globe-like bulge in the middle of the  forehead)  it would 

appear  that  his  part in subduing the chaos of the capital was  ordained  by Heaven, the implication being that Liu Xiu  was  Heaven's  Mure  "appointee" to the  throne.133  Even if neither Xiao nor  his  rninisters  believed this idea  intrinsically,  it  still  lent a  kind  of  legitïmacy 

just  by being a the-honoured  precedent sanctioned by the  histoncal  canons.           

> Sengchuo Z(NQS/2/43 316-7), had married the eldest daughter of Emperor

Wen  (SSl6/1850/5).            

> He himseifwas m a n i d to the daughter of Emperor Ming of the Song (NQS/2/433/8). Since

Wang  was           

> afraid of his brother-in-law who had ascended the throne in 473 (NQSl2/434/1)

and  had  lost  his  fàther  to a royal  great-uncle  (SS/6/1851/9-11),  he  may  have felt  alienated  fkom  the royal Song  house  to which he  

> was

related.    

> lNQW429/6-7
> 32 NQS/2/429/6-8
> l3 HHS/31769/3

It  would  appear  that  the people of the day, and even Chu's  farnily,  never  believed 

t k t  Chu Yuan  was  serving  a rightful  d e r .  Fnr  example,  although  Chu Yuan's oldest son  

> also

served  Xao  Daocheng  h positions of  rank,  he did so only until  his  father's death. This  suggests  that he  acted  solely to  fulfil  his  filial obligations to this father.  After  his 

father died, he declined ail honours, and in 488,  clairning  il1  heaith, requested that Xiao  Ze, 

who  was  then  emperor,  allow  him  to divest himself of the title of duke ('g) and his duchy and have it  transferred  to  his  younger brother.  Since  he died a  year  later,  his 

sickness  must  have been  real,  but the  historian  states that the opinion of the time  was  that 

his  action  was  a moral statement, that he in fact had hated his father for  failing  to  remain 

loyal to the  House  of Song. 134  In fact, Chu Yuan is  criticized  as being only interested in 

protecting  himselfand his  fa~nilyl~~ and  is  said  to  have been scomed for his questionable 

sense  of  loyalty.136  On one occasion he was  derisively  asked how he could face Emperor 

Ming of the Song in the other world,  since  he had betrayed the  imperiai  trust by becoming a loyal  officia1  to another  rnaster,  Xiao Daocheng, the usurper of the  Song137 

It is  useful  to note that Chu Yuan is described as being of  "noble"  (giriwmg  ) 

> ongin

and not averse to  judging  others for their lesser family  backgro~nd.1~~ This  birth-

right  status may have  given  him  a certain  sense  of inherent  supenority  that could not be 

undermined  by  any  seeming  compromises  with  imperid  rulers,  for they were in  effect 

inferior  in  farnily  status and dependent upon others for  creating  the  texts  and instruments of their  legitimacy. 

The attitude of Wang Jian may also reflect some of  this  mentality,  since  he came 

fiom  the  ranks  of a great  aristocratie  family  and seems to have looked on  his  position and the new  regime  fkom  a broader perspective of time and tradition. He is described as being totally  conversant in traditions of the court over the  many  dynastic  periods.  13g  When 

drawing  up procedures and  rituals  for the Qi, Wang may have felt he was drawing upon a continuum in what he  recommended  and that dynasties were  only  superficial  divisions  cast 

over a  wrnmon  background. The  sanctity  of the  throne  was  not destroyed by forced abdication, and he would be  willing  to serve  any  incumbent  who  suited the  irnpenal  role. 

The  reaction  of  his  great-uncle, Wang Hong  Z S .  half  a century  earlier  suggests the  sarne  attitude  while  being couched in the  terms  used by Chu Yuan one  dynasty  later. 

Shortly  &er  establishing  the Song  throne,  Liu Yu  rernarked  to the  various  dukes whom he had gathered  around  him  at a banquet,  "1  never  expected to see  this  in my days as ahumble subject".  While  ail his other officials were  preparing  paeons of  praise,  Wang Hong 

said  quite  simply,  "This  is the  Will  of Heaven;  it  can  be neither sought nor  refused7'.140 

This statement drew on a long tradition that  legitimized  the usurper  while 

vindicating  aIl  those  who had once served the preceding  regime.  It  is perhaps  signincant 

that it was also spoken by a member of the aristocratic Wang family of  Langye  which had been the  architect  of the Eastern Jin and continued to  provide  numerous  officials  in the 

foliowing  regimes,  as  any  glance  through  the  officia1  histories  will reveal. As suggested 

earlier,  their actions may have combined a  sense  of aristocratic  superiority  with a sense  of resignation about the options  available  to  them.  Thus,  they  could  tolerate compromises with new  regimes,  deigning  to  proffer  their services in  order  to  rnaintain  officia1  rank and 

wealth  but  knowing  at the  same  tirne  that  every  new  imperial  family  needed the sanction of aristocratic  suppon  for public  legitimacy. 

Loyaities  Transfemed  (2): The  Examples  of Xiao  Zixian  and Xiao  Cheo 

The attitude of  members  of the Xiao  family  who served the  usurpers  within  their 

own  royal  famiy  suggests a similar  willingness  to compromise and puts the issue of  loyalty in sornewhat the  same  perspective. Two representative  examples  are  Xiao  Zixian  # +a

and Xiao  Chen  0. 

The  historian,  Xiao  Zixian,  author  of the  Nan  Qi  Shu,  would have  b e a  iery 

conscious of  this  question of  ioyalties,  being a  grandson  of the first Qi emperor and now a 

faitffil  servant of the successor Liang regime. He  begins  his  analysis of  this  question by 

looking  at  two  officials: Chu Yuan, the "renegade" discussed  above,  and Yuan Can  B;Al  ,

the  loyalist  aristocrat who had been entrusted by Emperor Ming of the Song to be part of the regency and  was  killed  after  a failed  coup  against  Xiao Daocheng who  was  preparing 

to  usurp  the Song  dynastic  house. 

Both Chu Yuan and Yuan  Can  were entrusted by Emperor  Ming  of the Song to  act  as regents for his young successor, but Yuan Can remained 

unswewingly  loyal to the Song while Chu Yuan accepted the  rise  of a new regime. Many were  those  who faulted Chu Yuan for this. However, let me present my  own  opinion on this  matter.  The actions of King Tangof the Shang  dynasty  X and Prince Wu of the Zhou  &, E dEered  from 

those  of Yao  6 and Shun ,while the  thinking  of Yi Yin .$i. i and Lü Shang  # was  not that of Hou Ji  W [an  official  of Shun in charge of agriculture] and Xie  Jse  [officiai  under  Yu  & in charge of public works]. Hence, former customs and practices  will  not  be able to  support  one's point. From the  great  Jin and Zhang  families  [those  of Jin Midi  & O JJ?  and Zhang  Anshi  f se] to  such  powerful  officials  as Yang Zhen  # and 

Yuan An  ai,  al1  gave their complete loyalty to the Han and served it to their  utmost,  and their prosperity and  influence  fiowed  fiom  this  fact. The [subsequent]  House  of Wei, however, governed the  realm  for so short a 

time  that  those  who were just about to  begin  their career  under  it ended up as officials  under  the succeeding dynasty [the lin].  M e r  the  House  of  Jin 

[the Sima  f d y ]  came to  dorninate  the  P e i ]  court,  those  who  sewed 

them were officials of the Wei in  name  but in  reality  were servants of the 

Jin. Hence, even  though  the  ruling  house  was to change  [from  the Wei to the Jin],  miniaers  continued in their  onginal  positions. From this point on, the  wealth  of high office became the ultimate  cnterion  while  the  trappings 

of  rank  were the  object  of  longing.  The  principled  loyalty of a  minister  to 

his  king  became  nothing  more  than  an empty notion.  Exalted  position and lowly office were  detennined  by  f d y  standing.  While  the  ordinary  person 

had to  strive  for success, the  privileged  would  nse  effortlessly  to the 

highest  ranks.  Hence, no-one felt  any  reason to sacrifice  himselffor  a fded 

regime,  and  protecting  [the  statu  and  interests  ofj  one's  own  family  was 

the  most  pressing  goal.  The changes in regirne were  swift  and brought  with 

them  opportunities  to be favoured for  high  position.  Though  rulers changed, they  stdi  bestowed  gracious  consideration on  those  of  rank.  In today's world,  Zhonghang  + fiand  Zhibo  @ iQ,  even  though  they had been  among  the Six  Ministers  of the  fdlen  Jin, would not have received 

different  treatment .

Chu Yuan began to enjoy  imperid  favour  and prominence as an 

official  in the  taishi  a.# years of Emperor Ming of the Song and  feared 

no loss of place for  several  years.  His  standing  among  the people brought 

him  weighty  rank and the loss of that standing brought  his  removal. Rank 

and  official  emolument do not  cany  much  weight, for a regime  has  its established standards for  choosing,  and impenai favour is not  restricted  to 

just  one  person.  Expecting a  person  to sacrifice  himself  for a failed regime is a shared misconception in the  rninds  of  rulers  and an  error  in the court of public opinion (shzqing  zhi  pocha  a +# & i@  & ).  141 

Aithough  the line of reasoning may be  subject  to interpretation, there  seems  to be 

an acceptance of decisions made in the face of a series  of short-lived regimes. With dynasties changing so  quickly  and  abruptly,  what  can  one reasonably  ask  of people? 

Although  he was  only  about  twelve  years of age when the Qi fell, Xiao  Zixian  did serve the Liang which had  overthrown  his  grandfather's  dynastic  house,  and an older  brother  did 

likewise  d e r  holding office  bnefly  during  the Qi. Even if they felt the  dynastic  houses  of Qi and Liang to be part of the larger  imperid  Xiao  family,  they were  stili  on some of the 

same  ambiguous  moral  ground  shared by Chu Yuan. 

Perhaps  Xiao's  view reflects the  ancient  dichotomy of  principle  and compromise embodied in the  tems  li  S a n d  quon  S a n d  enunciated in  Mencius  in the  famous 

discussion on the  extent  to which one must adhere to a moral principle. For males and  females  not to allow their  hands  to touch in  givhg  and receiving is the  general  rule  (11);  when a sister-in-law is  drownhg,  to rescue her 

with  the hand  is  a peculiar exigency  ( p a n ) . 142 

Extended to the context of  swifily  changing  regimes,  Xiao  Zixian's  view may be that  loyalty  to the  d e r  is what would be expected as the basic  principle  or  'general  d e " 

(li) but acceptance of new dynasties  under  the  peculiar  circumstances  of the  tirne  would be   

> l4 NQS/2/438/7

# - 43912     

> 142 Mencius, IV.i. l7.i. Translation by

James  Legge,  The  Chinese  Classics,  VOL  Ii, The  Works  of Mencius           

> ( r e p ~ t e d h m last editions of Oxford University Press; Hong Kong: Hong

Kong University Press,  1960),

> 307.

the "peculiar  exigency"  (pan).  This is a deeply embedded  view  that  also  h d s  expression in Buddhist doctrine, to  which  members of the  Xiao  family  were devoted adherents,  under 

the concept of fmgbim  t (upqya),  the adoption of an alternative method when strict adherence to the  d e s  of  Suddhism  would work against the  true  purpose  of Buddhism. This concept of  upaya  or "expediency" was one of the  d o c t ~ e s of Mahayana Buddhism introduced  into  China in the  late  third century. The Buddhist dichotomy of 

upaya  and  prajna  (imer  wisdom)  merged  with the traditional  Chinese  distinction  between 

the  imrnutable  inner  rnind  of the Sage and his  ever-varying  precepts and teachings. One of the consequences of  this  merger was that  Confucian  teachings were no longer viewed as a

k e d ,  etemally  valid  canon, as had been the case  during  the Han, but as a set of ad hoc 

mles  dictated by the needs of the moment, or "expediency".  Thus  Confucius the Sage was "still" and "empty", in keeping with the Way,  never  acting consciously in  order  to improve the world but merely  reacting  to the needs of the moment. Hence, Confucius established the Rites and defined the basic  principles  of  altruisrn  and righteousness  only  as a specific 

response to the  disintegrating  society  of  his  times. Other times and other conditions would have resulted in other responses.  143 

Even without the influence of Buddhist  thinking,  it  might  well be  argued  that the 

Confùcian  tradition  never  demanded a rigidly  universal  mode of action. For instance, Mencius says, "The great man  does  not insist that his words should always be sincere and 

trustworthy,  or that  his  action  always  be quick and decisive. He oniy  speaks  and  acts 

according  to what is  right."14  Before Mencius, Confucius had  aiready  used the  same   

> 143 See

E.  Ziircher,  The Buddhist  Conquesi  of China  (Leiden:  E.J.Brill,  1959),  73, 125,  266-267.          

> 144 Mencius, W.Ü. 11. The English translation is fiom

Lien-sheng Yang,  The  Concept of  Tao'  as a

Basis  for Social Relations in  China,"  in ibid., Excursions in  Sinology  (Cambridge: Harvard University 

Press, 1969),  18, onginally  published  in  Chinese  Thought  and Institutions,  ed. John K.  Fairbank 

(Chicago: University of Chicago Press,  1957),  291-309  & 395-397.  Legge's translation is "The  great  man 

does  not  think  beforehand  of  his  words  that they  may  be  sincere.  nor  of  his  actions that  they  may  be

resolute;  -he  simply  speaks  and  does  what is  rightn  (ji; A 9 3 T & fl  fi  ;j; .iL=  8 9 fi  .&  .)

Legge's  translation  impiies  that the  cultivateci,  disciplineci  man  will  be  sincere  and  resoIute  without 

thinking  about  it,  whereas  Yang's  wording  suggests  that the  greater  good  my have to  override  smaller 

principles.  See  James  Legge,  The  Works  of Mencius, 32  1-322 vocabulary  (ym  6i  xin,  xing  di  g u o a  *il: a 9 fi  t) to label as "obstinate  little  men" 

(kengkengrmt  xiuoren  4 1 .  A) those  who "are  determined  to be sincere in  what 

they  Say,  and to  carry  out what they Even Xi  Zuochi's  argument about  legitirnate  rulers  and dynasties,  discuued  above, 

speaks  about Sima Zhao as being a man of  integrity  despite  his seeming service to the unworthy Cao Cao.  His heart  remained pure as he worked within the limitations of the times and adopted an  inferior  role to protect himself and  secure  the interests of the turbulent  realni.  146  Thus,  the  great  man  had  room for  "righteous"  compromises within 

Confucian  thinking. 

The  flexibility  of Xiao  ZWan  is  therefore not  foreign  to the  intellectual  tradition.  It 

appears  again  in  another  royal scion, Xiao  Chen,  a member of the  huanaiu  h e  of  Xiaos. 

Xiao  Chen  was  bom at the  very  end of the Song and would have been in  his  twenties in the penod dunng  which  the Qi was being subverted by  his  clansman,  Xiao  Yan.  He  was 

not  without  ambition, for as a young man he strove to  make  himself  known  to W a n g  Jian, 

then  a powerfùl  Qi  minister,  and was an  intimate  with Xiao  Yan,  accepting  his  overthrow 

of the Qi, cooperating in  his  newly established Liang  regime  and accepting  his 

compliments as a revered  elder  (zongiao)  of the Xiao  clan.147 

While  holding office  d u ~ g the Qi, he  submitted  a memorial  to the emperor which seems to  reflect  the  same  thinking  s h o w  by the  aristocratie  official  Wang  Jian.  In  asking 

that  those  of the  rank  of  fang  in  his  department not be  punished  by  caning,  he notes that the  practice  was  halted  in the  taishi  *fi  years  of the Song and not  reinstituted  even in the   

> 145 Lunyu, Xm.20.iii.;

James  Legge,  Confician  Analecfs,  27  1-272.  Discusseû  in  ibid.  (pp. 20-2 1)  where 

Yang  aiso  notes that the  later  Confiician  insistence  on  unswerving  loyaity  to  d e r  and parent  was  a       

> modification that would probably have stnick Confucius and

Mencius  as  strange.  Mencius  permitteci      

> retaüation against abad ruler

by  desertion,  disloyaity  or  men  rebeiiion  and tyrannicide. He  aIso  permitted 

a nlial  son to  protest  against  his  parents. Confucius  also  allowed  a son to  remonstrate  gentiy  with  his 

parents. He  had  to  hide  the  glory  of the emperor  within  (JS/7/2  155n)  and protect  himself  by  restraining  his 

Iofty  goals  (JSI712 156110). Qi  until  Emperor Wu (of the Qi)  brought  it  back.148  Since  he  speaks  here of the  reign 

penods  taishi  and jimyuan  & ji  as though they were  "under  one roof', rather  than 

pertaining  to  rhe  Song  a?. Southem  Qi dynasties respectively, this may  suggest  that 

although  the tradition covered the  two  dynasties  Xiûo  considered it to be part of a 

continuum,  arching  over whatever  imperial  court may be in place at the capital. Loyal identification with  any  one  regirne  may very well have been a secondary concem to  hirn. 

Whatever  analysis  one applies to  society  as a whole, however, the most flagrant 

examples  of  disloydty  to a regime are found  among  the royal  families  themselves, for they produced  usurpers  from  their  own  ranks  and saw their members  exploiting  the chaos of the  tirnes  to  further  their individuai ambitions rather  than  assuring  the cohesion, strength and honour of the  dynastic  family  as a whole. (5) The  Status  of the Xiao  Familv  in the  Societv  of their Times (a) Domination by  Those  of Northem  Origin:  The  southern  dynasties are  generally 

seen  to have been  dominated  by northem  ernigre  families  which arrived with  military 

forces that assured their  dominance  in the  south.  The "men of Wu"  ( w r e n  *A)  or southerners  ( m e n  & h) of the  larger  Yangzi  delta  area  in which the  refugee  Jin  regime 

fmt  established its capital were considered  overall  as less inclined to the  military  arts and seem to have been treated with a certain  arnount  of  disdain  as less competent for  political 

0ffice.1~~ The  Xiaos  were  aiso  a northern  ernigre  family  and, in keeping with the  mentality  

> 149

Liu Yu  (founder  of the Song)  had  cornmented  on  the  men of Wu as  king  unaccustomed  to the  arts  of 

war  (Wuren bu xi zhan  & h ;f  % ,SS/112/15).  Another  northemer  is  quoted  as  saying  to a well-placed 

official,  himself  a mao  of the  south  ,that  southerners  were  too  cowardly to attempt  an  uprising     

> (qingnanren qienuo, qi ban zuozei

& A& a 9 gt  %$+  & , SS/7/2079/12).  In  a conversation with 

Xiao  Ze  (second  emperor  of the Qi), who  had  remarked  on the  fact  that no  southemer  had  occupied  the office of Vice-Director  inrye  #) of the  Department  of  State  Mairs  (shangshu  f ) for  many  years, 

Shen  Wenji  ik  k P, a southemer  who  did  receive  rnilitary  and  civilian  tities,  used  a quotation  f b n  the  

> Zuozhuan

A # (end of  1 8 ~ year  of  Duke  of  Xiang  s'r: ) deScnbing  the  weakness  of an  ancient  southern  

> army

and  tunied  it  in  such  a manner  to say that  this  seeming  decline  of the  south  had  its  long-standing 

reasons,  implying  perhaps  that the  arrivai  of the  refbgee  population  was  a large  factor  (nanfeng  bu jing,   

> fèifu yiri

6 ;F; a 9 # - El ,NQSl31778115). that govemed society, consciously  maintained  their northern status by largely  contracting 

marriages  with  women of northem  descent.  This northern identity was aiso important in 

establishing  their  legitimacy  of place, for,  u rulers, they were in  fact  outsiders  dominating 

a local  region  even as they  claimed  to be emperors of the larger  redm  temporarily  residing 

in the  south  until the north could be recovered and the empire restored.  Intemarriage 

would  imply  that the  emigres  had decided to stay put as a "colonial" power and renounced the goal of reunification  under  the old northem capital. 15* 

@)  Elite,  Lower Gentry and  Cornmoner:  In addition to this distinction in  status 

between  those  of northem and southem background, however, was an even more important  social  division  between  those  who had been bom into the aristocratic  estate 

(largely of northern  emigre  origin) and  those  who had not. When the Eastern Jin was 

fomed  in the shelter of the  Yangzi  River  barrier  following  the northem  "barbarian" 

invasions, it  became  a unique  example  in  Chinese  history  of a  regime  in  which  the power of aristocratic  families  predominated over that of the royal family. 1 5 1  The  aristocracy  was not to  enjoy  this  sarne  exceptional power dunng the  following  southem  regimes,  but the prestige of status remained a powemil  social force. The  Xiaos,  like the other founders of new dynasties in this penod of  disunion  who were not of upper aristocratic background, felt it  paramount  to have representatives of this elite participate in the inaugural ceremonies as a legitimating  prop. 

15*  The  northern  origin  of  Xiao  wives  and  mothers  is  asserted  in  Wan  Shengnan,  ed.  Chen  Yinke  Wei Jin Nanbeichao Shi  ~imgymh (Hefei:  Huangshan  Shushe,  1987),  182. The  few  biographies of empresses 

found  in the  official  histories largely (but not completely)  confrrm  this  statement.  For Qi empresses  h m  

> the

Liu  family,  northern origin  included  Guangling  # & and Pengcheng  k3  3& which were north of the 

Yangzi  River but  remained  under  the  control  of  Jiankang  for  much  of this  period.  In the case of Xiao    

> Zhaoye, one of the

quickiy  deposed  Qi  rulers,  his consort  was  a He  Rfiom  Lujiang  & iz,  north of the 

Yangzi  but  within  southern  temtory  (the family  is  describecf  as  king  "prominent"  (mingiia  ;&  s), and He  Changyu  .fif  8 was  a Minister  of  P e r s o ~ e l (libu  shangshu)  during  the Qi  &S/WS3  1/2-31).  One of the  wives  of the  fmtLiang  emperor  is  identifiai  as  being  fiom  the  wiuthern  district  of  Kuaiji  f ff  in    

> presentdiiy Zhejiang. See

NQSIU390-394  for the Qi and  LSllll56-163  for the Liang. For a discussion of 

marrîage  between  northerners  and  southerners,  see  Richard  Mather,  "Intermaniage  as a Gauge  of  Family 

> S t a t ~ , ~

in State  and Society in  Emly  Medieval  China,  ed.  Albert E.  Dien  (Stanford:  Stanford  University Press,  1990), 226-227. 

151  See  Tian  Yuqing,  Dong Jin  Menfo  Zhengzhi  (Beijing: Beijing  Daxue  Chubanshe,  1989),  336-337. 

This  prernise  undergirds  his  discussion of the Eastern lin. As discussed  earlier,  the  particular  nature of the southem  aristocracy  had been 

detennined  by the  development  of the  Nine  Ranks  system first introduced by Cao Cao upon the  recornmendation  of  his  Minister  of Personnel  (libu  s h g s h  C 6 $ ),  Chen 

Qun  8 w,  as a new  means  of finding men of talent in a  society  that  was  coming  asunder 

at the end of the Eastern Han. According to that system, offices were  ranked  from  one to 

nine  according  to the talent required for  them.  This  becarne  known  as the  panpiin  t Sor 

"Official  Rank". At the  same  time, a  "just  and impartial"  (zhongzheng  &)  local officiai was to  measure  the talent of the local men and  assign  a zipzn  X W or "Personal Rank" 

from  one to  nine,  indicating the level of  personal  qualification. Theoretically, it would 

then  be possible to match the talent of the would-be  official  with the level of  talent 

required for a particular office. Following the Han tradition of testing new  officiais  by 

assigning  entry-level  positions  three  degrees below the assignee's assessed level of competence, the Cao Wei  regirne  maintained  the  sarne  three-level gap between officiai and 

personal  rank.  Since  Rank One was traditionally associated with the qualifications of asage,  personal  rankings  actuaily  began  at level  two.  Thus,  the highest  official  position at 

which  a man of  Personal  Rank Two (the highest ranking) could enter public life was Rank 

Five. The goal of  finding  and  assigning  talent was soon subverted, however, by  powemil 

local  families  who monopolized the position  ofzhongzheng  and  assigned  the highest  ranks 

to their  own  members,  thus  entrenching their  existing  power and  creating  a system based not on  personal  talent but rather on  family  pedigree and prestige.  Thus,  the designation of 

Personal  Rank Two became associated with and  restncted  to  men  frorn  the most  powerfùl 

farnilies  and evolved  fiom  a personal  ranking  of  individual  talent  into  a social  ranking  of the candidates'  families,  with  erpin  ;W being now more accurately  translated  as  Social 

Rank Two,  since  it  had  corne  to designate members of a social  stratum  composed of  elite 

families  with power and prestige  (shiru  # a). With the stress on pedigree and  status, 

those  left  outside  this  privileged  Rank Two level were considered as  "cold"  families 

(hanmen  P'J  ) or  "lower  gentry", and  this  is  the  category  to  which  the Xiao  family belonged. This division of the aristocracy  (shim  +& ) into an elite level and a lower gentry level  (cimen  , which  included men of  hanmen  status holding middle and upper positions)  was  M y in place by the Eastern Jin. Members of "cold  families"  who held office were  known  as  hanshi  f &,  a term  used  interchangeably  in the  historical  texts  with 

h- a *. However, they were in principle distinct  from  the even lower  category  of "cold men" (hanren  X A)  or "cornrnoners"  (shuren  & 8,A  shuru  & & or  h s h  a &) 

who stood completely  outside  the  aiistocratic  or gentry  categories  and held lower  official 

rank or no  rank  at  d l .  The distinction between  hmshi  and  hanren  rnarked  the  divide 

between  shi  and  shu,  gentry and cornmoner. 

Because  of the  fixed  association of  official  rank with social rank, it is possible to 

determine  the  social  level of a  farnily  frorn  the  posts  they held. There was  actually  a faKly 

nmow  range of  official  and  personal  (or social) ranks  within  the  Nine  Ranks  system.  h

the  beginning,  only  personal  (or social) ranks  two  to six were considered for office,  and 

they were matched with  official  ranks  five to  nine  respectively.  During  the Western Jin, the 

entry-level  position  was  lowered to  Official  Rank Six in  order  to  deal  with the  growing 

number  of candidates for office.  Starting  one level lower gave more  oppominity  for advancement, but it  meant  that the five  personal  (or social) ranks of Two to Six now had to be matched with only four  official  ranks, Six to  Nine,  and this was resolved by allowing a person  of Rank Five to be  assigned  either to  Official  Rank  Eight  (therefore  sharing  the officiai  rank  with people of Rank Four) or to  Official  Rank  Nine  (sharing the  official  rank with Social Rank Six,  still  the lowest  personal  or social rank to be considered for 

office).l52  Since  Xiao  Zheng  s, the  common  ancestor  of both Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  

> 15*

A detaiied  explanation  of the  Nine  Ranks  system  and the  various  divisions of the  aristocracy  appears in  Chen  Changqi,  Lianjin  Nanchao  Zhengzhishi  Gao (Kaifeng: Henan  Daxue  Chubanshe,  1992),  16  1- 184,  

> 185-191,202.

A M e r  discussion of the distinction between  hanshi  and hanren appears in Zhou  Yiliang,        

> Wei Jin Nanbeichaoshi Lunji Xubian (Beijing: Beijing Dame

Chubanshe,  199 I),  36.  h o t h e r  set of  terms 

that appears  is  suzli  # ,sumen  f t j  and  suxing  -& +k.  Though  meaning  'plain  families",  the  reference 

is to  non-imperial  rather  than  "coldm (han)  status.  Thus,  Emperor  Gao of the  Qi Qüao  Daocheng)  speaErs 

of  never  imapining  when he  was  just  "a  commoner  horn  a plain  family"  (buyi  sum  $;R  6 #)  that  he   

> would see

himseif  becorne  emperor  WQS/  l/38/9).  See  Chen  Changqi,  ibid.,  188, for  this  interpretation.  In 

another  instance, the father of Liu  Yu,founder  of the Song, is  said  to have  k e n  buried  in a m e r 

befitting  a "plain  farnily"  (sumen)  since  he  died  More  his  son  estabLished  the Song  throne  (SS/4/1281/9). Yan,  was  a magistrate  ( h g +) of  Huaiyin  ifk  & , he would have been of Social Rank 

Four or Five,  far  below the elite Rank Two status, for a ccünty magistrate  was  classed  as 

Official  Rank  Eight.  In  the  humaizi  branch,  Xiao  Wenehou's  father was the magistrate 

( h g ) of  Taoyang  @ and would therefore have been of the  same  social  levei.  Thus,  the Xiao farnily  was  of lower gentry  origin. 

Even when the  Xiaos  gained  royal status, this could not erase the  stigma  of  being 

fiom  the lower gentry "cold" stratum of society. As  early  as the Song, it  was  apparent that the  irnpend  farnily felt vulnerable to aristocratic scom. Emperor  Xiaowu  (Liu Jun)  is  said 

to have  always  felt that Yuan  Can,  an  official  fiom  an  elite  farnily, considered  him 

disdainfully  as a h m . The perception must have  rankled  in  his  mind,  for on one occasion he publicly  upbraided  Yuan for addressing another  official  at  a banquet as though he were a lowly  h h i . 153 

Obviously, accession to the  throne  did not elevate a farnily to  pre-eminent 

aristocratic  status.  Royal  families  were powerless to receive or bestow  aistocratic  rank. This  is  apparent in the  example  of Ji  Sengzhen  &,  f#  JI,  a southemer whose  bearing  and speech outmatched  those  of aristocratic status in the opinion of as  powefil  an admirer as Xiao Ze, second emperor of the Qi, but who was treated with the  greatest  disdain  when he 

sought  to have  his  status  changed  fiom  comrnoner  (hanren  tA or  shu  ) to that of 

shida~fu .f.  A .  Xiao  Ze  had  dready  explained  to Ji that the emperor  was  powerless in 

Alîhough  this  codkms  the  non-imperid  interpretation,  it  could  still  embrace  the notion of a "cold" 

f d y .  However, the  interpretation  of  suxing  as a reference  to  non-imperial  families  seems  appropriate  in

the  biography  of Xiao  Zicao  a +*, grandson  of Xiao Daocheng,  founder  of the Qi.  There  it  is  stated 

that  since  the  first  eldest  son of a  suxing  official  of  sangong  5 "k'  (Three  Dukes)  rank  began  public  Me  at the  yuamuiZang  f i  fi  dp  (supernumerary  gentleman attendant) level, the  imperid  princes and  dukes 

(wanggong  3 "k'  )should  bave jishizhong  7 Q (palace steward) level, one rank  higher)  as  their 

stepping-stone  into  public  life.  This  was  maintained  as the  practice  throughout  the Southern Qi   

> (NQSRI4 19/14-15).
> lS3 NS/3/ï02/ll-13.

Ironically,  Yuan  Can's  attitude  may  have been one of  over-compensating,  for  

> dthough

he  was  of elite status,  his  family  had  fidien  on  hard  days  after  the  early  loss  of  his  father, and  his 

uncle  treated  him  as of  lesser  rank  than  himseif.  This was  seen  in the  uncle's  response  to a marhge 

inquiry  h m  a farnily he  considered  beneath  his  dignity.  Not  wanting  to  deal  with  the  family's  proposai, 

he  suggested  that  they  consider  Yuan  Can  instead.  See  Chen  Changqi,  Lianjin  Nanchao  Urengzhishi  Gao 

@Meng:  Henan  Dame  Chubanshe,  1992),  190. Yuan  Can's  predicament  after  losing  his  father  also  

> suggests

the  same  lack  of independent  wealth  or  clan support that  was  faced  by other  rnembers  of the 

> aristocfacy.

such  matters and sent  hirn  to see one of  two  aristocratic  officials  who could  rule  in  this 

matter.  Ji visited Jiang Xiao  tt  e, but the latter  disdainfully  ordered  his  servants to  mîve 

his  seat  away  eom  Ji who had already  taken  his  place.  Since  Jiang  was  weU  aware  that Ji was a favourite  of Xiao  Ze  and had received many appointments,  his  disdain  could  only 

prompt Ji to  exclaim  that the  granting  of  aristocratic  rank  was  not in the power of the 

"Son  of  Hea~en"?~ The fact that Ji had already received the title of Baron of  Xinyang 

County  (R @ I!& R ), with  three  hundred households,  afler  Xiao Daocheng  became 

emperor indicates that even  lower-level  titles did not  automatically  gain one  entry  into the The  Xiaos'  awareness of their lower  family  origin  was reflected in their  marriage 

alliances.  On one occasion Xiao  Yan,  founder of the Liang, rebuked the northemer Hou Jing for  aspiring  beyond  his  rank in  asking  to  many  into the  great  aristocratic Wang or Xie 

families  and  said  he should  settle  for a Zhu or Zhang. Xiao Yan's father had  married  aZhang of  Fanyang  ,156  and Xiao Yan's  first  wife  was a Xi  # whose father was 

mamied  to a Song  princess  (Princess of Xunyang  4 .'k'  f ) but, in  his  short lifetime, held only the position of  Secretary  to  the Heir Apparent  (taizf sheren  +Q A).15' The 

father of Xiao Daocheng, founder of the Southem Qi, had  mamied  a Chen  woman whose 

irnpoverished  father had received  from  the  cornrnandery  he inhabited the  modestly 

prestigious  title of  xiaolirm  4 t (filial and upright),  while  Daocheng's first  wife,  who died before he founded the Qi, was a Liu  fiom  Guanglmg  whose father had married a  Huan 

(the once  powerful  family  had  basically  been decirnated in the Jin) and only rose to the rank of  yuc~~yailang fi  9b  f.~\ C.  However, once the new dynasties were  established, 

manîages  for  their  royal  offspring  were contracted with aristocratic  f a d e s ,  especiaily       

> 154 NQSl3197419; NS/3/943/4-8 (shidor/u gufii liami suorning

fk A aH R -f  ff  +)

> lJS

Ji's  biography  is  found  in the  xingchen  .a  or "court  favourites''  section of biographies for  those  in the  hanguan  Scategory  who  had  no social  ranking  to accord with even a lowly  official  rank   

> (NQS/3/974/6).
> 156 Xiao

Yan's  mother  was  the  daughter  of  Zhang  Mwhi  Q i) z t  who  hirnseif  had  married  a Xiao 

woman  who  seerns  to have been the cousin of Xiao Yan's grandfather,  Xiao  Daoci  (LS/I/156/1-2).  

> 157 LS/1/157/3-7

daughters of the great Langye Wang  family.158  The Wang  family  did not  consider  their 

status demeaned by  marriage  into  the Xiao and other southem royal  farnilies,  just  as they did not feel demeaned by  giving  aristocratic sanction to the  various  usurpers  through  theh 

participation in cerernonies of abdication.  Marriage  with royalty, even of less  prestigious 

family  origin,  was  definitely  not  fiowned  upon. 

As vulnerable as the "cold  families"  and even more  lowly  "cold men" or 

"cornmoners"  may have felt in the face of aristocratic scorn in this intensely status-conscious society, it  appears  that even  those  of elite  status  could find themselves  bearing 

this  sarne  h m  designation should they suffer a  reversal  of  fortune.'j9  Such  appears to be the case with Xie Chaozong  S .  His  grandfather, Xie  Lingyun  t(f s, a famed 

writer  f?om  one of the great  aristocratic  farnilies, had been  exiled  to Guangzhou on charges of  rebellion  and executed there upon orders of the Song emperor in 433. Xie's 

farnily  seems to have suffered a downgrading of status  because  of  his  execution. On one occasion, when Xie's  grandson  was  greatly  amused  at an  undigmfied  accident that  befell 

several  officials he  was  accompanying,  Chu Yuan berated  him  as a h h i  who was 

speaking  out of  tum.  Xie responded by  saying  that officials should not pride themselves too  much  on the riches and honour of prominent  status  mi), for they themselves could 

## fd on  evil  days and end up as  hanshz.    

> lS8 During the Southem Qi,

Wang  daughters  were  marricd  to  three  Xiao hein: Xiao  Ze's  oldest  son and       

> prematurely deceased heir, Xiao Changmao (NQS/2/392/3-6),

Xiao  Zhaowen,  second son of Xiao   

> Changmao who

was  kiiied  at the  age  of  fourteen  (NQS/2/393/6-7)  and Xiao Baorong,  eighth  son of  Xîao 

Luan  and  last  emperor of the Qi who  was  only  fourteen  when  kiiled  (NQSl2139413-4).  Under  the Liang,  

> Xiao

Gang, who  succeeded  Emperor  Wu on the  throne,  was  rnarried  to a Langye  Wang  (LSl1115815).  The     

> preponderance of the Langye

Wang  family  had  to do  with  the  fact  that they,  Iike  the  Xies,  escapecl  the        

> concerteci attacks that befeli other eiite famities

during  the Eastern Jin.  Thus,  they were the  ody  great    

> families mailable to

grant  the  aristmtic  imprimatur of  legitimacy  on the  usurpers'  new dynasties. This 

was  a muîuaiiy  bendcial  arrangement, and the  Langye  Wangs  produced  officials  abundantly  for the  Iater 

regixnes.  See  Tian  Yuqing,  Donain  Menfa  Zhengzhi  (Beijing: Beijing  Dawe  Chubanshe,  1989),  287.   

> lS9 Even

in the great  arisîocratic  families,  there were  various  leveis.  See  Lü  Simian,  Xijn  Nmbeichoo 

Shi ( Shanghai: Shanghai Guji Chubanshe,  1983),  97 1.    

> 160 NS/îl543/9-10. There

is  no mention  of  this  in  his  biography in the  Nan  Qi  Shu  (NQSlU63511  -

> 63915).

This would indicate that  econornic  and political  decline  could cause an aristocratic line to be  downgraded  to a  han  designation. The  fact  that Xie  Lingyun  was  executed by Emperor Wen of the Song (Liu  Yulong)  and  his  grandson  was  ordered executed by 

Emperor Wu of the Qi (Xiao  Ze)161  does  show that  although  aristocratic status could not be  assigned  by  imperial  mandate, an aristocrat could be executed by  irnpenal  comrnand, 

and  such  a punishment  could  affect  the status of the  person's  line. (c) The  Military  Role: Men  like  Xiao Daocheng and Xiao Yan were able to 

transform  themselves  into  founders of royal dynasties on the basis of their  being  frorn 

rnilitary  families.  Their  family would have been considered ajiangmen  ;14  f"j  (commander's family), the social position of which  is  mirrored in the reaction of Shen  Wenji,  a southem 

rnilitary  man  much  favoured by the Xiaos, to the  very  mention of the term jiangmen. He was obviously  embarrassed  by his status to the point of deliberately avoiding the  term 

itself and was  angered  on one occassion when Chu Yuan, an aristocratic  (guiwung  # )

official, alluded to  his  military  origin  in what he considered to be a  judgmental  reference to 

his  farnily  status. 162  In  view  of the  militas,  comection  and the Xiaos' lower social status, one commentator  sums  up the  Xiao  farnily as  belonging  to the category of local  strongrnen 

who occupied the  bottorn  ranks  of the gentry.  163 

During  the Eastem Jin, when the  refugee  regirne  was  consolidating  its position in the  south  and protecting  itseif  fiom  the north, many of the great aristocratic  families 

produced  military  figures. However, the aristocratic officer corps  gradually  declined  and their places were  taken  by men of lesser  farnily  background. The Eastern Jin's great 

victory  over the northem invaders at the Battle of Fei Shui  Ife  in 383  highiighted  the 

extent  to which the power and influence of non-aristocratie  officers  had  grown.  During  the 

foliowing  Song  regime,  suppression of  mountain  tribes  (Man  P ) in the  West  or  Daoist  

> NS/2/543/15

# - 5 W l .     

> 16* NQS13/776/4&7
> L63 See Wan Shengnan,

ed.,Chen  Yinke  W e i Jin  Nanbeichao  Shi  Jimgyanh  (Hefei:  Huangshan  Shushe),     

> 182. (hanwei shizuzhongde haojia jimgrhong

&+i& Q 83  $ ;31)  a ). protest  movements in the east as weli as  imperid  calls  for expeditions to recover the sacred land of the  north  provided many  personal  opportunities  for ambitious and talented men  like  those  of the Xiao  family  who came  From  lower-placed  rnilitary  families. 

The  military  mood of the age lent itself to many ambitions. Dunng the Song, when Xiao Daocheng and  his  father first became active, this mood  is  encapsulated in a proclamation  from  the second Song ernperor at a  review  of troops in the  spring  of  461. 

Within  the  text,  the emperor declared that "in  ancient  times, when men considered what came first in  human  flairs,  the  military  was at the  forefront;  even if there were penods when  armies  could be  left  idle,  forgetting their importance was  to  court  disaster."*64 

Although  the statement was  chosen  to suit the occasion rather  than  analyze  the age,  it 

does  seem to reflect a fact of the times. The  military  demands  of the age seem to have opened career opportunities for  al1  levels of  society. 165 

Xiao Daocheng, founder of the Southem Qi, and Xiao  Yan,  founder of the following Liang regime,  certainly  owed part of their success to their  rnilitary  skills. 

However, as  t h e  progressed,  there seems to have been a  shifi  in attitude  towards  asoldier's  skills,  particularly  during  the Liang as a result of the long period of relative peace. For  example,  Xiao Que  a e, a grandson  of the founder of the Liang, is descnbed   

> 165 A

specinc  example  is  Wang  Yua  I &,  the  nephew  of the consort of Emperor Ming of the Song (she 

produced  only  daughters  for the future emperor  [SS/J/1295/3-4]) and a member of the great  Langye  Wang 

f d y  which  had  so  distinguished  itself  during  the Eastern Jin  dynasîy  (he  was  a direct descendant of 

Wang Dao). Wang  Yun  is  describeci  as  king  a physically  courageou  person  who  was  cornfortable  with

weapons  and  decided  to  came  out  his  own  future in the  military  after  seeing  his  father  fnistrated  in an 

official  civil  career  (NQS/1/11/15 - 12/1).  He  may  have  had  some  of the  failings  of  his  own  father, however, for the latter  is  descn'bed  elsewhere  as  king  of  mediocre  talent, and Wang  Yun  was 

consequently  treated  with  disrespect  by  his  own  cousins  (SS/8/2  l84/lI).  It  is  likely  that  within  his  clan he  

> was

looked  upon as  having  lower  "cold"  (han)  statu.  As a lowly,  impoverished  magistrate  ( h g  +) of 

Guangde  fi  a, Wang  Yun  saw  the  unrest  and many  uprisings  that  arose  around  Emperor  Ming's 

ascension to the  throne  as a perfect  opportunity  to  make  something  of  himself  as a general  in the  seMœ 

of Liu  Xiuren  a#$$=. Wang Yun's choice  indicates  that  aristocratie  background in  itseifcould  not  

> assure

everyone  of  desired  career  opportunities. Wang Yun's choice, however,  unnerved  his  famous  uncle, 

Wang  Jingwen  f # %,  who  feared  for the danger  this  might  bring  upon the  famiiy.  in  fact,  he  was  to survive many  calarnities  and  advance  in his amer,  though  the dangers  anticipated  by  his  uncle  were 

eventually  to  destroy  him.  He  was  killed  by Xiao Daocheng  d e r  taking  part in a failed  coup  led  by  Yuan 

Can  in  conjunction  with Shen  Youzhi  in the  west  (SSl812 l84/  11-13  & 2 18516). as displaying martial prowess (in addition to a talent for  literature  which  sems  to have been a  halimark  of  many  Xiao men). However, he was considered  "crazy"  (kuang 8) and 

people even  reprimanded  him  for  his  practice of  horsemanship  and archery and  his  intense 

study  of the Art of W m  @in&  /F  Sf;).  His  response was to say that they would see the point of what he was doing when the  realm  needed someone to  corne  to  its  defense.166 

This would suggest a decline in the  status  or importance of  rnilitary  training. This seems to be  confirmed  again  in the  example  of  two  other grandsons of the Liang founder (sons of 

Xiao Gang,  designated  by  Xiao  Yan as second heir to the  throne)  who, when  fust  asked 

by  their  grandfather if they  could  ride a horse, answered that they had  never  received  his 

command  to do so and would  never  dare  to proceed without  his  express  order.167  They apparently  pleased  their grandfather by being able to  master  saddle  riding  so  quickly  in a one-day trial, but it would  appear  that the traditional  equestnan  and archery  skilis,  which had  immediate  application to  war,  were no longer considered  mandatory.  On one occasion  

> just

pnor to Hou Jing's rebellion at the end of the Liang, an  official  even questioned the 

ability  of  Xiao  Gang, the heir apparent, to  take  on a  rnilitary  role in  view  of  his  general 

neglect  of the  &all.s  of  men.168 

Tnus,  an  interest  in  rnilitary  training in the  ruling  family  seems to have been 

declining  even  though  military  titles  continued  to be  given  to the  various  princes. Even 

Xiao Yi  # Jb  (another son of  Xiao  Yan  known  to  history  as Emperor Yuan),  despite 

being able to  mount  a horse,  said  that he did not feel competent enough to ride a horse at 

night  through  the  lhe  of  siege  around  Jiangling  in  order  to seek  h e l ~ . ' ~ ~ Fitness  for 

military  tasks  was not necessarily expected or cultivated, as  cm  be  M e r  seen  in the case of Xiao  Dachun  a &,  a son of  Xiao  Gang and  grandson  of Xiao  Yan,  who 

participated  in a failed  attack  on Hou  Jing  and  was  quickly  captured  when  his  obesity made even  walking  impossible. By the time of Hou Jing's rebeliion, the  military  families 

had lost their  abiiity  to  fight,  and the  regime  needed to  cal1  on  northemers  who  hac!  newly surrendered to the the  south  to fi!! the  ranks  of  general.  In fact, Emperor Yuan, mentioned 

above,  had been reduced to  taking  generals whom he had  imprisoned  for fighting on Hou Jing's  side  in an attempt to  defend  hirnself  against the north. (d) Cultural  Life:  The  rnilitary  skills of the Xiaos  may  have declined in  pardel  with 

the  shift  in society, but the Xiao members of the  Houses  of Qi and Liang were also  known 

for  their  cultivation. In fact, there  never  was a contradiction between the  two.  Xiao  Yan, 

for  example,  was a formidable soldier, as  his  success in  overthrowing  the  Southem  Qi shows. Even before this, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northem Wei,  after  leaming  of  Xiao's 

victories  against  his  generals,  felt awed enough to  declare  that capturing Xiao  was  the key to  winning  the  area  south  of the  Yangzi  and ordered  his  men not to  take  action against Xiao  untii  he  hirnself  had amved at the front.  l7' At the  same  time, Xiao was  known  as one of the  "Eight  Friends"  (bayar  ha) of  literary  luminaries  who gathered  regularly  at the residence of  his  cousin Xiao  Ziliang  and included  such  distinguished  men of  letters  as Shen Yue  *& 8 and Ren Fang  f @$. l n 

Quite  early  on, the Xiaos seem to have felt that  ciimbing  to prestige and power depended not  just  on  military  prowess but also on  evidence  of education and  high  culture. A self-conscious effort at cultural sophistication must have prompted their attention to the basic  matter  of  language,  of mastenng  "the  King's English", as  can  be  seen  in the attempt by Xiao  Ze  (Emperor Wu of the Qi) to correct the speech of a favoured officiai so  that  he 

wuld  arrange a mamiage  for  him  with an elevated  family  (guizu).  Obviously,  the Xiao 

famiiy  felt that accent and educated speech counted towards status. However, this  was 

more  than  just  a superficial  veneer, for the  family  also produced  t d y  fled  members. Many  displayed  a talent for  writing  and calligraphy and  left  b e h d  a body of 

writings.  Xiao  Zixian,  a grandson  of the first  Qi  emperor, authored the  N m  Qi Shu  which 

is  part of the  extant  corpus of  officiai histories. Xiao Tong, the  prairiahirely  deceased  heir 

of  Xiao  Yan,  compiled a vast literary compendium, the  W e m a n  2 a, which  is  still 

highly  regardeci  and consulted, and Xiao Gang, the second Liang emperor, was an important influence in the literary salon culture of his day. 174 

Not  ali members of the Xiao  family  were as distinguished, however. One of Xiao 

Gang's sons is described as being  skilled  in  archery  and  horsemanship  but this is not complemented by literary talent and he  is  said  to have been  wild,  going about at  Nght  in 

full  amour  in  Jiangling  and being himself attacked on one occasion by someone who suspected  him  of  robbery. 175  Xia0  Zhengde 3& ,a nephew of Xiao  Yan,  is  said  to have been part of a gang,  one of  many  which were a scourge of the time. Composed of scions of the wealthy and  powerful  families, they would rob, rape and  murder.  Father and 

family  elders had no control over them and even police patrols were  said  to be helpless against  them.  l 76 

In  terms  of  individual  performance  in  govemment,  the record  is  not  always 

consistent.  Some  Xiao men are praised for their good  govemment  during  their  various 

appointments  while  others are  seen  as  simply  avaricious and self-serving, whatever their 

174 Xiao  2, son of  Daocheng  and second Qi emperor,  appreciated  literature  and the  ar&  and  undemood 

the  bdance  that  needed  to  be  maintaineci  between  the  scholar  with  literiuy  talent and the  d e r  with 

military  sküls  (NQS/3/710/1). The biographies of  two  of  his  younger  brolhers  also  exemplify  this bal-

between  the  two:  one  broîher  (Xiao Ye # iilf  ) was noted for  his  love of  literaîure  and  his  unmatched  ski11 

in  archery  while  the other  (Xiao  Feng  # *) was  famous  for his  musicianship  (he  was  a master  of the qin) and  calligraphy  as well as  his  martial  prowess.  This  dual  interest  was  also  reflecîed  in his  oldest  son, Xiao 

Changmao,  who  was  known  for  attracting  around  him  talented  and  leamed  men of  letters  as weil as  bold 

and  distinguished  men of  arms,  but he  died  before  king  able to  succeed  to  his  father's  throne.  Two more of Xiao  Ze's  sous  pleased  their father  immensely  for their  literaq  talent, and he  praised  one of them, Xiao 

Zilong  .jr  T R ,as  his  family's  Cao  Zhi  (son of Cao Cao and  fmed  as a writer).  Xiao  Zike  a T #& ,an 

older  brother  of Xiao  Zixian  j(i  I]C  ,was  also  noted for  his  literary talent and  recognized  this as a

characteristic  of  himself  and  his  various  brothers,  though he  destroyed  all his  own  writings  prior  to  his 

death,  

> 175

These  are  almost  the  only  detaiis  we bave about Xiao  Dacheng  jlt  &,, ,the  eighth  son of Xiao Gang 

> (NS/5/1341/11-12).

reputations as men of  learning  might be  (Xiao  Lun might be  taken  as  just  such  an 

examplel").  There are  also  examples  in the  historical  record of the  enonnous  gap between the intentions of the  d e r  and the expectations of  his  subjects.  Orle  particularly  ironic 

example  occurred  in the  year  539, when Xiao Yan, who was  promoting  Buddhism and 

issuhg  edicts  caiiing  for the use of non-meat offerings  at  state  ntuals,  was  rumoured  to be kidnapping people in  order  to feed their livers to the "Dog of Heaven"  (tiangou  a). 

The  rumour  persisted  several  months and caused  such  panic  that people  locked  their  doors 

and kept weapons to  defend  themselves.178 

(e)  The  Imperia1  "Ideology": In  view  of the  above,  one might  wonder  if the  various 

members of the Xiao brought  any  visible and coherent  sense  of  purpose  to their tenure in power. In the  early  stages at least, both Xiao Daocheng, who founded the Qi, and Xiao Ze,  his  heu who succeeded  him  three  years  later,  were conscious of the importance of keeping  individual  interests subordinate to  those  of the  larger  royal  farnily  and  maintaking 

a proper balance  between  pnvate cultivation and the business of the  realm.  Therefore, Xiao Daocheng  wamed  his  sons against  letting  personal  ambition  decimate  the  family  and Xiao  Ze  advised  one of  his  sons whom he  much  admired  for  his  literary  talent  never  to 

ailow  the  personal  practice and  study  of  poetry,  prose and  calligraphy,  however admirable 

these  were in themselves, to  interfere  with  flairs  of state, for govemance was  b a ~ i c . 1 ~ ~ 

Under  the long  mle  of Emperor Wu of the Liang, however, there was cnticism that Xiao  Yan  had  become preocupied with the practice and discussion of  Buddhism  rather 

than  with  affairs  of state.  Superfïciaily,  at least, Xiao Yan  was  conscious of the importance                                

> 177 As ayouth, he is d e s c r i i as intelligent and l m e d and having adent for writing. However, when he had controf over the affairs of Southern Xuzho yhe terrorized the population and

men  forced a       

> fishmonger to choke himself to death on

a fish afier he  had  voiced  critickm against  the  Regional  Inspecter     

> (cishi). As cishi of

Yangzhou (the  seat  of  which  was  Jiankang),  Xiao  L m  is  said  to have forced  merchants    

> to provide him

with so  much  clothing and  omaments  on  credit  that  they  were forced to  dose  down  theù 

shops,  precipitating  a penury  of  cloth  for the palace  (NS/5/1322/9-13 & 1323/5-7).    

> 17* NS/1/2 l4/1 1
> 179 NQS/JfilO/l

of  maintainhg  a baiance  between  flairs  of state and the demands of  religious  practice.  On one occasion,  &er  three of  his  sons  had  petitioned  him  to preach in the temple on a 

Buddhia  classic,  the emperor responded by  saying  that this  was  not  the appropnate  tirne, 

for the problems of state, the dangers facing the land and the woes of the people were 

always  of foremost importance and at this  particular  moment needed to be placed  ahead  of temple sermons. Nonetheless, the  officia1  history  of the Xiao notes  several  occasions on which the emperor went to Tongtai Temple  (O  +) to speak on  various  scriptures, 

perhaps  with  some  view  of  himseif  as the boddhisatva emperor  (hmgdipupusa  f +#

# g), the emperor who seeks the  salvation  of  d l ,  and there were  three  major occasions on which he resided in the Tongtai Temple for "bodily  sacrifice"  (sheshen  Y a )until  he  was 

released  £tom  his  vow by a  ransom  of  several  million qian. 180 

In addition, the historical record voices criticism of Xiao Gang, the heir designate to Xiao Yan's throne, for emphasizing the study and  teaching  of the Daoist  texts  of Laozi and Zhuangzi at the  expense  of the basic business of  govemment.  This  is  a cnticism voiced 

just  before Hou Jing's rebellion by He  Jingrong  g , a high  official  who  complained 

that the heir  was  fouowing  in the tradition of the Western Jin  dynasty  which had collapsed in  war  and chaos  because  those  in  govenunent  had  given  precedence to  metaphysical 

speculation over the  real  affairs  of the  realm.  He even doubted the  heir's  ability  to  take  on a military  role if the Liang were to face the sarne  fate  as the Jin.  I8l 

One issue which  stemrned  £tom  the social and  political  structure of the times and faced the  Xiao  rulers of both the Southern  Qi  and the Liang was  irnpenal  control over the 

registration  of  arîstocratic  rank  (to  ensure  the integrity of the  tax  and corvee base) and the     

> The petition fiom Xiao

Gang and  two  other sons of Emperor Wu as  weli  as Xiao  Yan's reply  c m  be               

> found in Dao Xuan, Guang Hongming Ji, juan 19. This particularly salient example probably

occurred  in 53 1,  af€er the  death  of the  £ k t heir to the  throne.  Despite  his  protestations, Xiao  Yan  in the end  accepted  

> his

sons'  request  and went to the  Tongui  Temple to preach.  See  Zhou  Yiliang,  Xubian, 41-42. The  three 

major occasions on which he went to Tongtai Temple for  "bodily  sacrifice" (sheshen) were in 527  (April      

> 24 to 28) (LSI1î7 ID),

in 529  (November  1 to  November  17),  which  required  an  astronornicai  redemption   

> payment (qim yiynUm

# -a # ) More  he  would  return  to the  palace  (LS/l/73/9-1  l),  and in 547  ( h m        

> April8 to May 15), which again required

the  sarne  huge  redemptioo  payment  (LSl119Ul-3). 

He Jingmng's  comments  appear  within  his  biography in the Liang Shu  (LSlU533112-15). participation of men  fiom  "cold or  "secondaIy"  status in  govenunent  The  Nine  Ranks 

system, with its  "just  and  impa-tial"  adjudicators  (iiupzn  zhongzheng  % 9 t.),  had been  criticized  when it  was  first introciuced, but the most  farnous  denunciation  of the system  is  contained  in a third-century  memonal  written  by Liu Yi  during  the Western Jin in  which  he  called  for the abolition of the system, listing  eight  defects,  the  fist  being  the 

failure  to  assign  rank by talent, with the result that  lower-ranking  families  of "cold" background were excluded  f?om  the  highest  ranks  while  members of  elite  families  could 

never  be found  arnong  lower  official  ranks. l a  This had obviously become an entrenched 

systemic  problem  over the centuries. The  decision  to carry out an impenal review of the registers of social status  was 

ktended  to ascertain that people were  claiming  nghtfbl  rank and not  falsif'jmg  their records to improve their social status and  remove  the burdens of  corvee  and taxes. Xiao Daocheng was  advised  to  undertake  such  an  examination  shortly  after the Southem Qi 

throne  was  created, and it was repeated over the years. Examination of the records  also 

provided  an  opportunity  for the court to  imply  that anstocratic rank was subject to 

imperial  arbitration and not  just  to self-regulation by the  aristocracy  itseK  In  fact,  the 

ability  ofhunren  to bribe the record-keepers to accept unsubstantiated  proof  of aristocratic rank suggests the  difficulty  the aristocracy  was  having  in  rnaintaining  its 

"borders".  More important, however,  this  review of the records was  intended  to  restore 

the government's  tax  and labour base by uncovering  those  who were  falsely  representing themselves or  sirnply  hiding  fiom  the  officia1  registrars. The efforts do not  seem  to have 

brought  the  desired  results, for the examination of the  aristocratic  registers was repeated 

often  and  finally  resulted  in open  rebeliion  in 485 when an  imperial  edict  threatened  exiie 

to a border  garrison  for  anyone  found to have  deiiberately  misrepresented  his  status. The              

> ln The memoriai is found in Liu Yi's biography inthe Jin Shu vuan 45) (JSl411273/9

# - 127711 1). The                    

> oftquoted iine about the lack of coId families inthe upper official ranks is "shangpin wu hanmen, xiapin
> wu shizun

# +. ,% # 7;  S # 9liti  (JS/4/1274/9). This Liu Yi 4 &should  not  be  confiued  with the Liu Yi fi  &of  the Eastern  Jin  who  was  eradicated  in a power  stmggle  by Liu  Yu,founder  of the Song. rebeliion  actually  began  as a protest  by peasantry and  craftsmen  who were  sutferhg  fiom 

the burdens of corvee and  tax  exactions and was led bv Tang  Yuzhi  )&  W 2, a lowly artisan. He  gathered  together a band of four hundred men, but  his  rebellion  also  attracted 

the support of  wealthy  hanren  who had Veen, or risked being, deregistered  md  punished. 

Within  a few months, Tang had succeeded  in  declaring  himself emperor in  Qiantang 

(present-day  Hangzhou  in Zhejiang).  Although  the rebel kindgom was suppressed the 

foliowing  year,  the problem of proper aristocratic registration continued  throughout  the Southern Qi, and into the Liang,  despite  renewed attempts to check  it.'a3 

Another issue that  reflected  the tension  between  ruler  and  aristocrat  was the  ruler's 

right to appoint and promote  without  regard to  family  ongin.While  the  Xiaos  needed the moral  backing  of the aristocracy to  give  the  veneer  of  legitimacy  to their presence on the 

throne,  they were  Limited  by the aristocratic  dominance  over court appointments. The 

mind-set  of  aristocrats  in office was also  influenced  by an aspect of the  Nine  Ranks  system of  bureaucratie  appointment which had evolved  through  the Wei and Jin and become 

thoroughly  entrenched: the distinction between posts that were  " pure" (qing  *) and 

those  which  were "impure" or "sullied"  ( z h o  s). Pure posts were reserved for  those  of 

elite  or lesser aristocratic background who could enjoy  their  appointments as sinecures, being  well  remunerated but not  besrnirching  themselves with the everday duties of office. 

These  were relegated to the lesser men of  %old"  family  background. No posts were 

designated  in  writing  as pure or impure, but the system  functioned  on  this  basis. The presence of a large  group  of inactive  officials  upset the proper  functioning  of  governent 

wMe  at the  sarne  tirne  opening  up  greater  opportunities  for men of lower  status  to  acquire 

real  power.lS4  In  fact,  the  irnbalance  could be  seen  in the Southem Qi in the remark of the 

aristocratic  Wang  Jian  who commented that although he held  high  rank  (y0-u  da  wei  ;Sj                  

> Adescription of the participants in the refxiiion and their motivation is found in the biographies of Shen Wenji &

A $ (NQS/3/776/14  - 7771 14)  and Ru  Faliang  -& 6 (NS/6/1928/  10- 12).  See  Tang  

> Changm,

WeiJin  Nanbeichuo  Shiluncong  Xubian  (Beijing:  Sanlian  Shudian,  19S6),  110- 117.  

> See

Tang  Changru,  WeiJin  Nunbeichao  Shiluncong  Xubian  (Beijing:  Sanlian  Shudian,  1959),  98-   

> 10 1. Tang

makes  derence  to the  interpretations  of Zhou  Yiliang. ), his power  was  nowhere  near  that of people like Ru  Faliang  ?ag  & or Lü Wendu 

g Jir  & who were in fact of  hanren  background. lg5  

> A

prominent  example  of the detached  aristocrat  cornes  from  the Song  regime. 

Yuan  Can,  in keeping  with  his high status, was  disdainfùl  of "cold-plain"  ( h m )  men (he 

was  cenainly  suspected  of this by the ernperor, Liu  Jun)lS6 and  never  deigned  to  involve 

himself  in the duties or  cares  of the high offices he  held.187 In this, he kept himself detached and pure. However,  this  disdain  for the  practical  responsibilities of office did not 

necessady  mean  detachment  from  politics  itself,  for Yuan  Can  was in the end  killed 

because  of  his  involvement in a failed  coup against Xiao Daocheng  towards  the end of the Song. 

This attitude was  maintained  through  the Song,  Southern  Qi  and Liang, as  can  be 

seen  at the end of the Liang in the aristocratic assessment of He  Jingong,  who came  from 

a famly  of  rank  in  Lujiang.  His  father was  Minister  of Personnel  ( M u  shangsh  dp  ir, 

f ),  a post that traditionally went to the aristocracy, and he was bethrothed  from  an  early 

age to a daughter of Xiao  Yan.  He became  known  as an exception  among  the  group  of 

high-ranking  impenal  rninisters  known  generally  as  zaixiang  or Grand Councillors, for he kept abreast of  &airs  of state, had a firm grasp  of issues and worked day and night. This 

only  won  him  scom,  for, as the  historian  States,  high-ranking  officiais would not  deign  to occupy themselves with  anything  other  than  detached and leisurely discussions of 

literature,  a situation  which  He  Jingrong  recognized  had originated  during  the Jin and 

lamentably  continued  into  the  following  regirnes. lg8 

Since  this  general  aristocratic  disdain  for the work of office  remained  constant, the defects in the aristocratic system of  appointments  became more apparent.  While  preparing 

to  usurp  the Qi  throne,  Xiao Yan was  already  moving  to  assert  some  imperhl  control  

> 185

NS/611929/1.  OBnciais  of  hmren  background who are  depicteci  as  poor  servants  of the  throne  by  the           

> hiistorians fïnd their biographies placeci under the categov of enxing

,!& f#  or  xingchen  # E .    

> 186 NS/3nOWl2
> 18' NS/3/ï04/1 &

70513-4   

> 188 LS/2/53

1/2-3 & 532/3-4  & 533/lO-15 over the  seriously  corrupted  system of  bureaucratie  st&ng  and have the talent of  feilow 

"cold"  families  properly  recognized  and used. However,  unlike  his  predecessors in the Song and Southem Qi, Xiao  Yan  did not look to men of the  hanren  tA o r  h ~ h t &

category  who were completeiy  outside  the  shi  flevel of  society  but rather to the  those 

fkom  "colâ"  or  "secondary"  or "rear"  (huumen  #& f l ) families.  Thus,  his  "cold" men were to be  those  of the lower gentry rather  than  of the even lower "commoner"  (shu  k ) estate. 

The  chef  evidence of Xiao  Yan's  "lower gentry" orientation  within  the  official  histones  is 

that  there  is no place in the biographies section of the Liang  Shu  for "court favountes", the  inglonous  back section of the biographies  which  describes men of  common 

background who held non-gentry "cold posts"  (hanpan  8 $?  ).  Such  men could be of 

great  learning and talent but they were  often  villified  for their close association  with  a

"'tyrannical"  or "unworthy" incumbent on the  throne.  These  men are referred to as 

xingchen  .1$  a in the  N m  Qi  S h  and  enring  .!&  f#  in the  Song  Shu.189 

In a memonal  to the empress dowager, Xiao  Yan  noted that appointment of 

officials  had now detenorated to the point that  those  in charge of placement were besieged by men who may have  corne  fiom  fonnerly  hi*-ranking  farnilies  but  had  none  of the 

abilities  by which their ancestors had become noted or who claimed  disthguished  family 

status  by  falsmg  their  farnily  records  @udie  # $$  ) on so large a  scaie  that  these  were to be repudiated as evidence of either  family  rank  or  officia1  service. Hence,  ranking  for position  was  no longer based on an objective assessrnent of  character  and talent but on the 

effectiveness  of  personal  visits  to the Appointments Bureau. Even the modest and good were forced to become sly if they hoped to have  any  opportunity  at  dl.  Hence, appointment  critena  needed to be  rectined,  and Xiao  Yan  called  for a return  to the tradition of  maintaining  registers  Cyi jiu  fi  bu  Q @ ) which would assure an  honest 

and  fachial  record of  familes.  With  the  extent  of one's talent clearly recorded, the  reliance                                                 

> lW Sec Zhou Yiiiang, Xhian, 36-37. Zhou observes that the Non Shi uses the term hanmen at one point
> where the context obviously refers to hanshu (those completely outside the aristocratie or gentq category), for the hisîory says that oniy two officiais of such "cold" statu ever received r a d during the Liang.

on connections and  personal  appeals  that  marked  the  times  would  corne  to an end. 

Although  Xiao  Yan's  recommendation  on  restoring the use of  registers  may be cited as 

acceptance  of aristocratic  control  over appointments,  since  that was  their  original  purpose 

when  instituted  during  the Wei, the  same  mernorial  decries  an  earlier  mling  that  those 

from  the  highest  families  (jie-u  7 & ) could be assigned to office at the age of  twenty 

while  those  nom  families  of lesser rank (hou men  & $1) had to  wait  until  they  were  thuty 

just  to be considered for a probationary  appointment. Xiao Yan criticized  this  system for 

failing  to  recognize  talent as the basic cnterion of office. Instead, the  system  removed incentives for generations of aristocratic  families  and alienated the  Iesser-boni  who either resorted to deception or wasted their lives in the face of  denied  opportunity.  19O 

In 505, as part of Xiao Yan's  effort  to  reform  the selection system  afier  creating 

the Liang  throne,  he  eaablished  schools  for training in the  classical  texts which  fomed  the 

bais  for  special  examinations  that had to be passed  before  a candidate  was  thirty  if he hoped to be considered for office. This was intended to undermine the role of status itself and assure a supply of able and  cornrnitted  officials. l g l 

This measure in  itself  is proof  that the  zhongzheng  9 P(the  "lust  and  Impartial 

[Adjudicator]") system of  nominating  officials,  which had been at the centre of the  Nine 

Ranks  system of  bureaucratie  appointment, was no longer  functioning.  The office  rnay  

> actuaiiy

have disappeared  by  the end of the Southem Qi, for if office were assigned on the 

basis  of  family  rank and prestige, as estabiished  during  the Eastern Jin, the  function  of the 

zhongzheng  as an arbiter of  individual  talent  was  no longer  needed.192 

The  coilapse  of the  zhongzheng  system may  explain  why in 506, four years  after 

the founding of the Liang, an  order  was issued that one  person  fiom  an old aristocratic 

family  (ih) should represent the  coun  in each  commandery  (jun)?  A year  later  new   

> 190 LS/1/2u11

# - 23/14           

> lgl LS/Wl/I 1
> See Wan Shengnaa, Wei Jin Nanbeichao Shi Lungao, 233.
> lg3 LS/1/43/14

officials were to be put in place in the  regions  (zhou), commanderies  (@PZ)  and counties  

> (xim)

to  make  recommendations for men of  tdmt.  lg4  This  would  suggest  that Xiao  Yan 

was  reinst&i.tiiig  the  pre-eminent  aristocratic  role  in  measuring  talent, a  reflection  of  his 

need to  find  support  fiorn  the elite aristocracy. However, a 509  order  emphasized  that talent needed to be  sought  even  fiom  those  of Iower "cold"  families  (hanpin  hmmen  f ,%

f7)195,  and  this  was  partly  effected by the  cornmanci  in 5 10 that clerks  (lingshi  4 k) of the five  departments  of the Department of State  AfFairs  ( s h g s h u  & f ) were to be  fiom 

cold  families  (hmliu)196.  This was an implicit  denial  that the aristocratic  families  had a monopoly on  talent  and education. It  also  suggests that the emperor needed officials of a 

practical  bent  with  whom he could discuss issues of  govemance  rather  than  high  officials 

steeped  in the  il1  effects  of the  qingran  tradition that had  prevailed  since  the Jin (the tradition criticized by He  Jingrong  above).l97  Twenty-five  years  later,  however, the emperor  was  once  again  asking  that talent be the basis of  civilian  and  military  positions.19" 

Although  Xiao  Yan  may have been disiiked by the aristocracy for  his  push to  bring 

the "cold" (as opposed to commoner) stratum of society into  govement,  his  attempts to 

emphasize  talent and  cornmitment  do not seem to have been effective in the face of a generai  decline  of society as documented by  Yan  Zhitui  in his  Famiiy  Instructions for  the 

## Y m  Clan.  According  to  Yan  Zhitui's  observations, there were members of noble  families 

who had not  learned  to read or  write  while  those  of lesser  families  had vaiued education. 

Furthemore,  Yan  asserts  that there was a solid  basis to the  current  proverb in the Liang that positions of compiler and  secretary  went to  those  least suited for the  skills  required. 

Scions of  aristocratic  stock were  usually  unleamed.  There was a  young  segment  of  well-

placed society that  hired  others to  take  the  minahg  4%examinations and used others' talents to compose poems for them at state banquets.  After  the  mid-6th  century  chaos of Hou Jing's  rebeliion,  the  old  society  collapsed,  leaving  these  people  strandec!  without  their 

patrons in office. l9  There  was  a certain  symbolism  in  this  fcriiily ruin,  for the social and 

political  collapse  of the old  order  lefi  the  Xiao  royal  farnily  equally  stranded,  unable  to recover the  political  and  moral  authority  which  had once buttressed the Liang over the long  reign  of Emperor Wu. 

lg9  See  Teng  Ssu-YU, tr. Farniiy  Instructiomfi  the  Yen  Clon  (Leiden:  E. J.  B d l ,  1968),  5344.  For  the 

Chinese  text,  see  Wang  Liqi  f 44  %,  ed.,  Yonshi Jimun  Jijie  & R. f #k  6 , rev.  (Beijing:  Zhonghua 

Shuju,  1993),  148 (inMianxue  Diba  311). THE  DECLINE  OF THE SONG  REGIME 

AND  THE  RISE  OF THE QI 

Xiao Daocheng's  eventuaf  success in  taking  the Song throne  was  due not  just  to 

his  own  abilities and ambition but also to the  failure  of the Liu family to  think  of  itself  in larger terms as a cohesive royal  family  and to  produce  enough  individuals  of talent,  despite 

its  size,  to  advise  and  proted  the throne. What follows,  then,  is  a history  of the Liu  farnily 

and Xiao Daocheng's increasingly dangerous insertions into the process of  determining  the line of royal succession. It  outlines  the history of the  House  of Song  fiom  the time of its foundation by Liu Yu and discusses the  circurnstances  allowing  Xiao Daocheng to 

succeed  in  usurping  the  throne  for  his  new  House  of Qi. Liu Yu died in 422  at  the  age  of 59, and  his  death was followed by that of  his 

stepbrother,  Daolian,  in the  following  mont h. The other stepbrother, Daogui, had preceded both of them in 4 12.2  Thus,  Liu Yu's death marked the  disappearance  of the founding generation. The Song  throne  was not passed on  through  the generations in a peaceful,  orderly way. Each accession to the throne  began  or ended in deposition or  murder  (see Table 3 for the line of  rulers).  The  pattern  was set in the failure of the  first  heir  to occupy the  throne 

as had been  intended  by  his  father.          

> The lack of talent in the larger Liu family

is alleged  by the  writer  of the Song Shu  (SS15/1468/8). 

# * Liu Yu died on  day  guihai  41 f in the  fifth  month  of the  third  year of  yongchu  a, or  June  26,422 

> (SS/1/63/4).

He was  60 sui at the  time  of  his  death  (SS/1/59/15). Liu  Daoiian  died on  day  Mczi  &,+of  the  

> sixth

month,  or  July  2 1,422  (SS/1/63/5). Liu  Daogui  died at the age of 43 (sui)in the  intercalary  (fi)       

> month of the eighth year ofyixz

la  of the Jin, or  between  July 25 and  August  22,4 12 (SS/5/1474/11). Table 3 Rulers of the  House  of Song (the Liu  Family)   

> ( 1 ) Liu Yu

# a#&, Emperor  Wu&%  & _ S *   

> r. 420422
> (2)

4k  R  

> I
> (3) Yilong

# a, Emperor W e n  ft  &

dep0=3(9#)  r.  424453 

r.  422-424  1  

> I1

1    

> (4) Shao $b (5)

Jun  a, Emperor  Xiaowu  (7)  Yuh  a, Ernperor  Ming 

(iciiled father)  -1-%*&$d+  k*f!m#      

> r. 453 r. 453464 r. 466-472 (6)

Ziye  (7a)  Z i m  (8)yuhh  % (9)  q 

> deposed

CfM  deposed  Emperor  Shun   

> r. 464-465

(in  Xunyang)  r.  472-477  la&+  

> 466 r. 477479

(1)  Failure  of the  First  Succession 

Liu Yu's oldest son,  Yifù  @j  f i ,  took the throne in  his  sixteenth  y e x 3  Since  he 

was  still a  rninor,  power had been delegated to Fu Liang  # f i ,  who had served on Liu

Yu's  personal  staff  during  the Jin and had helped  him  be  invited  to court in 408 to participate in the  governance  of the  realm,  Xu  Xianzhi  @ & a, another of Liu Yu's 

comrades-in-arrns  whose now deceased nephew had been  married  to Liu's eldest daughter,  General  Xie Hui  # Lf  ,a scion of the  great  ariaocratic  Xie  f a d y  of the J i 

who  had been on Liu Yu's  personai  staff  during  the Jin and now held the title of General of the Palace  Guard  (lzngjun jiangiun  a 7 # T.  ), and Tan  Daoji  tf  @,  who had had long  rnilitary  seMce  under  Liu Yu and now held the title of Protector Generai  (hujun 

jzongiun  a 9 ;(lf  ).4  These  four men, in addition to Yu's one  s u ~ v i n g older brother, had attended to  him  regularly  in  his  last  days. However, Xu, Fu and Xie were the  three 

men who held  real  power as  imperial  regents.5 

He  was  bom  in the second year of  yixi  & *. of the Jin, or 406,  assuming  the  month  was  not  so  late  in the 

Chinese  year  that  it  would  have  fallen  in  eariy  407 of the Western  calendar  (SS/116311).  

> For

Fu Liang,  see  SSl5113 3611  1 - i 337/3.  For  Xu  Xianzhi  's  nephew,  see  SS/61 l8JY2.  For Xie Hui,see  

> SS/5/1347/1

# - 1348110. For Tan,  see  SS/5/1331/1  - 1342/11.    

> SS/1/59/3 &631 5

Liu Yu  must  baye  been conscious of the  fiagility  of a succession.  Although 

basically  confident about the  group  of men who would be  assisting  his  heir, he  did  give 

deathbed  advice  to  h;s  soli  thd  Tan was weak and Xie  rnight  be a danger but  could  be handled by an attractive appointment to  Kuaiji  in the east or  Jiangzhou  in the  west.6 

Possibly  remembe~g how he had been able to  manipulate  the throne, he  also  put  into 

writing  certain changes  which  would  protect  it against  ambitious  ministers  or  generals. 

"Those  who serve at court do not require a  separate  garrison  headquarters  &). Chief 

ministers  (zuixzang  #)  who  also  held the inspectorship of  Yangzhou  [of which the capital was  Iiankang]  [should not have a  separate  Yangzhou  garrison  but]  shall  be provided with a  guard  of a thousand soldiers. Where  high  officials  (dachen  %)  in important positions (renyao  +&  R )  need a band of attendants  (zhaoya  A 4 ) to  guard 

against men of  il1  intent,  soldiers  can  be given to them  fiom  the Palace Guard  (tazxiandzii 

.f  /!$  ). Should the Palace Guard be sent out to participate in actions against an enemy, they  shail  retum to  their  old  fùnctions once the  carnpaign  is over. If an heir  comes  to the throne  while  still  a minor,  ali  affairs  of  court  shall be delegated to the  chef  minister 

(zaixiang  $ # ), and the ernpress dowager  (muhm  8% ) shall not be  troubled  with govemrnent  flairs.  Honour  guards  shall not be  permitted  to enter the  palace  gates, but due consideration  may  be  given  to granting the  ceremonid  sword  guard  to important 

pe~ple."~ The  aihg  emperor  appears  to have been  waniing  his  hein  not to  d o w  the 

same  things to happen that had permitted  him  to  usurp  the Jin throne. 

His  fears  came  tme  earlier  thm  he had ever anticipated, however, for in 424 the regents  engineered  a palace coup,  having  the empress dowager issue the traditional decree denouncing the emperor as an  unworthy  heir to the throne and  declaing  his  removal,  in 

keeping  with Han and Jin precedents, and  his  demotion  to the  titie  of Prince of  Ymgyang fi  3 . 8  He  was  arrested, sent to Wu  Commandes,  and murdered  almost  a month  later 

on Xu's  ~ r d e r s . ~ At some point  during  the following  month  his  imperial  title and  reign 

year were  officidy  abdished.  l0 

The second son, Yizhen, who would have been  next  in  line  to the  throne,  had 

already  been made a commoner  (shuren) in  early  424, following the issue of an edict recounting  his  incornpetence and possible  disloydty  and citing precedents for  such  action. 

Xu, in preparation for engineering a change of incumbent on the  throne,  had conspired to 

remove  Yizhen  fiom  the Iine of succession  since  he  appears  to have been  afiaid  of  those 

whom this heir  might  appoint as  powerful  rninisters  or  include  in his  inner  circle.  l l

Xu had some room to manoeuvre here  because  the emperor was not fond of  this 

brother.12  Yizhen,  now a commoner,  was sent to  Xin'an  8 Cornmandery,  far  south  of the capital, where he  was  murdered on Xu's orders  irnmediately  d e r  the assassination of the deposed  emperor.13  Hence,  Yilong,  the  third  brother, who had been declared as the 

most  suitable  heir to the throne in the empress dowager's edict of dismissal, could now be 

legitirnately  c d e d  to the imperial title. Yiong, now seventeen, was  finally  placed on the throne more  than  two  months 

after  the empress dowager's edict  disrnissing  his  brother had been  issued  (in 424) and one 

On day yiyou  e 8 of the  fifth  month  of the second year of jingping  +9, or  Iuly  7.424  (SSIII  6 9 6 ) . 

However,  the  formal  abolition of  his  imperial  title  and reign  name  did  not  take  place  until  the  seventh 

month  (SSl117Ul).  The  precedents  for rernovai which are  cited  are  those  of Prince of  Changyi  8 &

during  the  Han and Prince of  Haixi  29 during  the lin  (SSll/66/1).  The dowager (huang taihou) at the   

> t h e was

the  mother  of the  deposed  emperor. She went  with  her son to  his  place of  exiie  and  died  in 426, a little  over  two  years  &er  his  murder  (SS/4/1282/7,  10-1 1). 

Xu  Xianzhi  sent an envoy to  murder  him  on  day  guichou  *-Bof  the  sixth  month,  or  August  5,424   

> (ZZTJIU2280127).
> l0 The

histories  simply  state  that  this  occurred  during  the  seventh  rnonth,  the  fïrst  day  of which would have been  August  11, which  was  the  Cuth day  foiiowing  his  murder  and  just  a little  over a month 

following the empress dowager's edict of  dismissai  (SS/1/72/1).    

> l 1 SSl6 163611-3,607.

He  was  made a commoner on  day  guisi  C of the  second  month  of the second year of jingping  9, or  March  17,424  (SS/1/65/3).     

> l2 SS/6/1636/+7
> l3 SSI 611638112

and  27TJl2/2280/37.  The administrative  headquarters  of  Xin'an were at  Shinn  **, which  was  northwest  of  present-day  Chun'an  i# a County  in Zhejiang  ( Z D C ,  917). day  after  his  arriva1  nom  Jiangiing  where he had been  serving  as inspector  (cishi).l4

Known  to  history  as Emperor Wen, Yilong was to  enjoy  the  longest  reign  of ail the Song 

rulers  (dmost  thiriy  years  fiom  424  ta  453),  but the final  years  were to see a disastrous decimation of  much  of the Liu  farnily  by  its  own  members. Even before  taking  the throne, Yilong was  wary  of the regents, for what had 

befallen  his  hapless  brothen  could happen to  him.  When  called  to the capital to  take  the throne,  he  was  &aid  to leave his western inspectorate and had  to  be encouraged by his 

adrninistrator  (rhangshi  & .bt  ),  Wang Tanshou  Z a # ,a man in whom  his  father had had the utmost confidence. For added  security,  however,  Yilong insisted that he be preceded  by  an army  under  Dao  Yanzhi  fi]  # t, one of his father's  trusted  cornrade-in-

m s who was  with  him  in the  west.15 Wang's older brother, Hong  3.%, was  already 

serving at court, having been called  From  his inspectorate of  Jiangzhou  by the regents 

shortly  before the previous  emperor  was deposed. l 6  Being a grandson  of Wang Dao, the first prime  minister  of the Eastern Jin, and a member of the elite who had served Liu Yu towards the end of the lin, Hong may have been called to court to  give  an  appearance  of 

balanced  elite  interests. l7  The regents were  anxious  to assure a long tenure in power for themselves and  designed  a quadrumvirate  which  they felt would protect their political power.  While  Xu and Fu occupied the top  two  political positions as Overseer of the 

Department  of State  Mairs  (lu  shangshr  shi) and  Director  of the Department of State 

Affairs  (shangshu  hg)  respectively  and ensured their  rnilitary  domination of the capital 

through  Xu's  concomitant title of inspector (cishi) of Yangzhou, Xie controlled  the 

strat egic  western  regions  as  inspector  (cishi) of  Jingzhou  and Commander-in-C  hief  (&du) 

of seven major western garrisons,  while  Tan was stationed at Guangiing as inspector  

> l4

On  &y  dinaou  T â of the  eighth  month,  or  September  17,124 (SSll/72/14).          

> l5 The zhangshi was the chief executive official in

a princedom  (wangguo).  See  Hucker,  Oflciaf  Titles, 

> #185.

For Liu's fear  of the regents and Dao's role,  see  NS/3/671/ 13 - 6Wl. For Wang's  d e ,  see    

> NS/2/5 8717.
> l6 SS/l/65/6
> l7

For  his  genealogy, see  SS/5/13  1 113. (cishi) of Southem  Yanzhou  and  Commander-in-Chief  of  several  regions  north  of the 

Yangzi  and Southem Xuzhou  (Jingkou)  on the southem  shore.18 

However, no-one's position could be  secure  when the  outer  court (as represented by the regents) and the emperor's  imer  circle  fûnctioned  like  two  conflicting  power camps. Wang  Tanshou  was a key figure in encouraging the emperor to resolve the situation by  removing  Xu, Fu and Xie.  l9  In 425, when  Yilong  reached the age of  eighteen, 

the regency  formally  ended, with Xu and Fu  submitting  mernorials  retuming  the reins of 

govenunent  to the  emper0r.2~ The  following  year, the emperor ordered the execution of Xu, Fu and Xie's  son.21 In response, Xie issued a cal1  for a punitive expedition against the capital, but  his  forces scattered in the face of an  imperial  army  strengthened by Tan's 

decision  to  join  the imperial  side  and help  lead  the  campaign  against  Xie.22 The  rebellion 

was suppressed, and Xie was executed  dong  with members of  his  family  and  clique.23 

Tan, who  was  never  considered a real threat to the new emperor and his  imer 

circle,  was rewarded with the inspectorate of  Jiangzhou  and made commander-in-chief 

(&)  of four  military  regions,  including part of  J i n g ~ h o u . ~ ~ The emperor's brother, 

Yikang,  was  made  inspector  of  lingzhou  to replace the  rebel  Xie,  while  Wang Hong succeeded Xu as Overseer of the Department of State  Anairs  (h shmgshu  shi) and 

inspector  (cishi)  of Yangzhou, using  his  power and position to execute  policies  which  are  

> l8

Their  plan is  descnbed  in Xie Hui's biography  (SS/5/1358/10-11).  For the  titles  of Xu and Fu,  see    

> SSIl/7312-3 &10.

Xie's titles  appear  in  SSl51 l 3 ~ 8 I l l -12.  For the  scope  of Tan's  powers,  see   

> ss/5/134u12.
> l9 SSl6/1679/9
> 20

On day  bingyin  O sin the  month  of the second year ofyuanjia  Yt,  ,& ,or  Febnÿuy  13,425  

> (SS/1/73/10)
> 21

On day bingyin  fi  sof the  £bst  month  of the  third  year  ofyuanjia  % a, or  February  8,426  

> (SS/1/7415).

The  fate  of the son  is  told  in SSI  5/  13501 3.  Accorâing  to  SSl5/  133411 1,  Xu  Xianzhi  managed 

to escape  arrest  and  cornmitted  suicide. The charge  was  regicide  p i s h i  M ) (SS/5/13  14/8).       

> 22 SSIll 741 6; SSl5/1353/1J
> 23 SSl5/1361/12-14
> 24 SS/5/1343/7-8

said  to have helped restore the state of the  realm  d e r  the power  struggie  had been decided. 25 

In 429, the  basis  for a similx  type of  confiict  between the emperor and  his  court 

was  set in place  with  Wang Hong's  petition  that Liu Yikang  .pl  & a, the emperor's  next 

younger brother,  corne  from  Jingzhou  to assist in the  govemance  of the  realm.  While 

explaining  his  choice as based on the need to have a member of the royal line participate in 

such  a key  role,  Wang may have been  under  some pressure  from  this brother, even if in fact he  was  also  truly  il1  and wanted to  retire.26 Yikang therefore  shared  the  powemil 

position of Overseer of the Department of State  Affairs  (Iu  shangsh  shi)  and,  although  he 

maintained  his  military  strength  through  his  position as inspector  (cishi)  of Southern Xuzhou, he had  his  eyes on control of the capital as inspector of  Y a n g ~ h o u . ~ ~ Wang 

Tanshou  died the  following  year, in 430, at the age of 37 sui, and Wang Hong died about 

three  years  later  at the age of  fifty-three,  leaving  Yikang in charge of the court and in 

rnilitary  control of the capital as inspector (cishi) of  Yangzhou.28  Though  the  relationship 

of Yikang to the emperor should have  reinforced  the royal  family,  his  power was to  make 

the emperor uneasy. Yikang  is  descnbed as a man of  prodigious  memory  and  inteliigence,  with a

naturd  talent for administration and an  unusual  ability to keep  himself  thoroughly 

informed  on  ali  issues and  actively  involved in final decisions. This ability to stay at the  

> 25

His positions are  described  in  SS/lI7417-8.  Since  Wang Hong held the position of  ûverseer  of the 

Department  of State  M ' (lushangshu  idt  & f ), he  also  held the  post  of  Inspecter  of Yangzhou  #  

> #j ((the

seat  of  which  was  in the capital Jiankang), as  was  c u s t o q  for  those  in this  pre-minent 

ministerial  position  (SSl5113  14/9-10).  His  cornpetence in  setting  poîicy  was  recognized  by Liu Yilong   

> (SSl5113 13/14).
> 26

Wang Hong's biography  States  tbat  he  recommended  Liu on  another's  advice  but that he  was  wishing 

to retire  f?om  office  (SSl5/  13  15/11  & 13 1614).  While  the biography of Liu Yikang  suggests  that Wang

Hong  acted  freely  in  inviting  Yikang to  court  (SSl6/1790/1),  the biography of Wang  Tanshou  sugests  

> that

"poiitics"  was  invoIved  and the  Wangs  felt  vulnerable  (SS/6/1680/3-6).   

> 27 SS/6/1790/1.

His  interest  în  controllhg  Yangzhou  is  stated  in Wang  Tanshou's  biography    

> (S S/6/ l68OI4).
> 28

For the date of Wang Tanshou's  death,  see  NSIU58913.  Wang Hong died  at  the age of 54  (assumed  to 

be  sui) in the  ainth  year  ofyumjia  %,&,  or 432  (SS1511321115  & 132211). centre of  administrative  affairs,  coupled with a tireless  interest  in  speaking  with  men of talent of whatever class,  meant  that he quickly  became  the  focus  of power. 

Another  factor in his  growing  influence  may have been the state of  health  of the emperor, who seems to have  suEered  from  at  least sporadic bouts of  illness  that  left  him

bed-ridden and in  great  pain.29 It even appeared at one point that he would be  dead  before 

his  heir was old enough to  rule  without  a regency.'O  Yikang  is  said  to have been  very 

attentive to his brother  during  this  period,  staying by his bedside and  seMng  him  medicine, tasting it first to prove that it had not been  poi~oned.~l Despite  his  great  talent, Yikang 

rnay  have lacked a certain  amount  of  guile,  for he is  described  as being  oblivious  to the 

traditional  precept of  maintaining  a correct relationship between  minister  and  d e r ,  even 

arnong  brothers, and this must have accounted for the tension that  was  to develop between  himseîf  and  his  brother, the  ernper0r.3~ This tension was an  outgrowth  of  his 

powefil  position and was most visibly  manifested  in the creation of  two  cliques "sponsored" by the emperor (the  inner  court) and  his  brother (the  outer  coun) 

respectively .

At the centre of  Yikang's  clique was Liu Zhan  @j -& ,a person  of some ambition who had been the  administrator  (zhangshi)  of Yuzhou when Yikang was sent there at a tender age and had won the young prince's  f a ~ o u r . ~ ~ Yikang  was  detennined  to  further  the 

interests  of  his  protég6,  Liu  Zhan,  over  those  of the emperor's favourite, Yin  Jmgren  &

## 6 , a former  colleague  of  Zhan.34  Liu Zhan was sufficiently  resentful  of the  imperid 

favour received by  his  former  colleague  to  think  of  eliminating  For five  years,  f?om 

435 to 439, Yin withdrew  fiom court,  aware  that there was no room for  him  in face of the                            

> 29 SSl61 WIOll2. He rnay have fden il1 in the thirteenth year of his reign or 136 (SSI 11 84ll).
> 30 SSl61179116
> 31 SSl611790113
> 32 SS/6/1790/7-1 l&15
> 33 SSl61179013
> 34 SS/6/1817/1 l
> 35 SS/6/1683/4

ovemding power of Yikang and  his  clique, but  explaining  his  withdrawal  on grounds of 

illness.  His absence  from  COU^  did not stop  him  fiom  niaintainhg  communication in 

witing  with the emperor on  al1  flairs  of  g o ~ e r n m e n t . ~ ~ This period  partly  overlaps with a bout of  illness  that the emperor  succumbed  to at the  beginning  of  436.37 By the  auhimn  of 439, however, the emperor must have already recovered, for he  is  said  to have stopped visiting the Eastern  Citadel,  the residence of the  chef  minister,  Yikang.  Although  this 

suggests  that the emperor  was  no longer bed-ridden, it indicates more  importantly  that the rift  between  the  two  brothers was now  firmly  established and a showdown was By  late  440, Emperor Wen had won the power  st~uggle.~~ Liu  Zhan  and  his  clique were executed, and Yin  retumed  to power but  only  for a few months, succumbing a few months  later  to a  form  of dementia  at  the age of  50."  Yikang,  realizing  the  weakness  of 

his  own  position,  subrnitted  a very  apologetic and humble  resignation,  acknowledging  that he  had  presumed  upon the emperor's indulgence and overstepped his bounds as a brother, and  was  sent off to  Yuzhang  f@  f in the  Region  of  Jiang~hou.~' As mentioned  earlier, 

Xiao  Daocheng's father, who was  then  about 56, was sent to  Yuzhang  at  this time to help watch over  Yikang.4*  The position of Overseer of the Department of State  AfFairs  (lu 

s h g s h u  shi) was passed on to the emperor's  next  younger brother, Yigong, but not the 

traditionally  concomitant  title  of  inspector  (cishi)  of  Yang~hou.~3 This  was  perhaps a first 

step  in  restricting  the power of  princes  in the  outer  court. In 445, an extensive conspiracy,  led  by Fan Ye  ;& s),Head of the  Heir 

Apparent's Household  (taizz  zhmshi  f +& f ), was uncovered, and Yikang was        

> 36 From the twelfth year ofyuanjia %

## 8, or  435  (SS/6/1683/  1 )    

> 37 SS/1/84/1
> 38 SS/6/1791/14
> 39

in the  tenth  month  o f the  seventeenth  year of  yumjia  (SS/6/179  11 15). 

He was  5 1,  presumably  a sui  calculation  (SS/6/  1683/  12)        

> 41 SS/6/179U6-10
> 42 He was 64 (sui) when he died

in the  twenty-founh  year  o f p m j i a  (447)  (NQS/1/3/11).  

> 43 SSI 1/87/8-9

implicated."  There seems to have been good evidence.  While  Yikang still  controlied  the court, Liu  Zhan's  clique had wanted  him  to take the  throne  when it appeared the emperor would not  sunive  his  iilness  and  his  sons were still  min or^.^^  M e r  being sent to Jiangzhou,  Yikang  received support for  such  a move and was  given  divine  conbnation  by an  officia1  conversant  with  heavenly signs who  said,  "Emperor Wen will  meet  a violent death  at  the  hands  of  his  own  flesh and blood; Jiangzhou  will  produce  a Son of  Heaven."M 

Even royal relatives  such  as Xu  Zhanzhi  .I%-8 i (a nephew of both the emperor and Liu 

Yikang43,  Zang  Zhi  #,  X (whose  aunt  was the empress consort of Liu  Yu49,  and Xiao 

Sihua  # & & (nephew of Liu Yu's stepmother) are  said  to have been  interested  but escaped being  punished  as  cons pi rat or^.^^  Yikang himself was  not  executed, but he and  his 

eldest son and four daughters were made  commoners  and  exiled  to a remote 

comrnandery.50  However, in  view  of the possibility of  his  being the  rallying  point for rebels 

against  Emperor  Wen,  he was sent poison in  early  45 1. As a good Buddhist, he  refused  to commit suicide,  saying  that  this  would prevent him  from  being  reincamated  as a  human 

being, and let himself be smothered instead He was 42  years  of  age.51 

By  45 1, the  pre-eminent  court  officiais  were the emperor's nephew, Xu Zhanzhi 

(Xu  Xianthi's  grand-nephew),  and Jiang  Zhan  S -a, the brother of  his  fourth  son's 

~ i f e . ~ ~ They had  corne  to hold the levers of power more as an  accidentai  result  of the 

disappearance,  by  dismissal,  execution or death, of  many  of the emperor's  persona1 

appointees."  The emperor must have had to  contend  again  with  debilitating  bouts of       

> 44 SSl6/1795/11
> 45 SSl6/179 ln-9
> 46 SSl61182 11 11(

..Jiangzhou  ying chu  fianri  ;r  a & X 3)        

> 47 SSl6 184312
> 48 SSl4/1282/1 &6
> 49 SS/6/1822/1& 8-12
> 50 SSI 61 l 7 W l O

# " He  was  luiled  in the  fini month  of the 28th  year  ofyuanjia . AS in  al1  other  cases,  his  age of 43 is   

> assumai to

be  a sui calculation  (SS/6/1796/15  & 179711-2).     

> j2 SS/6/1848/2
> 53 SSl6/1847/9 &13-15

illness,  for Xu is descnbed as waiting on the emperor to serve  him  his  medicine,  much  as 

Yikang  had  done  before  him.54  As emperor, however, Yilong seems to have been in  secure 

control of the throne.  What  he failed to accomplish was a stable transition to the next 

generation,  and his reign was terminated by an event that was to set off a course of events 

which  ultimately  undermined  the royal  House  of Song. 

(2)  Regicide  and the  "War  of Succession" 

In 453, Liu Shao  #f  $b  , the eldest son of Emperor Wen, murdered  his  father and took the throne. Shao,  known  to  history  as  yuanxiong  ~9 (the  "Heinous",  actualiy  more a genenc  tenn  for the worst  level  of  villainy),  was bom in 424,  just  afler  his father  had 

become  emperor.55  Although  his  status as eldest son should have placed  him  first  in line to the throne, he had angered  his  father who began considering the appointment of another son as  official  heir. In  order  to protect his place in the line of succession, Shao conspired with  his  next younger brother,  JUM @J  $#,  to  take  pre-emptive action  against  their father. 56 

The  two  brothers had established a close  relationship  earlier  on, pnncipdly at the behest of  Junn,  who  realized  he needed to  curry  favour with Shao  &er  his  own  mother became the  emperor's  favounte and Shao's  jealous  and  resentful  mother died in a fit of apoplexy. The  two  became involved in undefined behaviour that earned them the  forgivhg 

reprimands  of their father.  However,  they were  fearful  of what he  might  eventudy  do, and 

sorcery  (wgu  ik  j) was  looked  upon by  JUM as a way of  using  the powers of the other world to  deceive  their  father and protect themselves  fiom  his  anger and  punishment.57     

> 54 SSl6 l848/l
> 55 Since his

M e r  was  nill in  rnouming,  the  announcement  of the  birth  was  delayed  untii  Februaxy  28, 426  (day  bingmr  W &of  the  intercalary  rnonth  of the  third  year  of  yuanjia),  atter  the  period  of  mourning  

> was

over  (SSlU74110  & SS/8/2423/1).    

> 56 This spelling

is king  used  to  disti&uish  him  nom  the  third  son, Liu  Jun  #a, who  was  to  become 

the next emperor  (Xiaowu  # & ). 

> "SSl812436111-12

Their  activities  were  eventually  exposed. Emperor Wen was shocked by  his  heir's secret  involvenient  in  sorcery  and the occult,  which  included the use of "voodoo dolls" in the shape of rhe emperor.  Although  described as stunned by what he thought occurred 

only  in fiction, the emperor  still  felt his son had the ability to  rule  and accepted  his  pleas for  forgivene~s.~~ However, on  hearing  that the Daoist sorceress who had been at the centre of the  scanda1  was  now being spirited back into the Eastern Palace by  his  second son, Junn, Emperor Wen declared to  JuM's  mother that he would  depose  Shao and have 

Junn executed should what he heard prove to be  true.5' 

The emperor found  hirnself  in a difficult dilernma when considering what he should do about  his  heir.  If  Shao were deposed and Junn were executed, the next in line would be 

Jun  81a, who  was  not a favourite  of  his  Father.  He considered  making  his  fourth  son, Shuo  # 91,  the heir, largely on the  advice  of Jiang Zhan, whose younger  sister  was  his 

consort  Vei  fi). However, he  tumed  against this option  shortly  after  Shuo was  called 

back to the capital to be  installed  as heir. He  then  proposed jumping to  his  seventh son, Hong  # 2, but hesitated at the risk of going so  far  out of sequence. The emperor debated 

his  choice  with  Xu  Zhanthi  and Jiang  Zhi,  his  closest  counsellors, but could not  corne  to a 

decision.60  His hesitation created a vacuum that proved to be disastrous for the royal 

famil y. 

When  Shao was  informed  what was in store, he  began  plotting.  On the  twenty-fist 

day of the second  month  of the  thirtieth  year  of  yuanjia  (March  16,453),  he forged an 

irnperial  edict  calling  on  him  to  lead  his  soldiers  from  the  Heir  Apparent's Palace into court at  dawn  to  suppress  a conspiracy61  On  this  pretext  they  were able to enter the 

imperial  court the next  morning  and  kill  the emperor and  Xu  Zhanzhi,  who were in a

private  discussion at the  tirne,  and Jiang Zhan, who was  also  in the palace. (Shao  arrived  in the  room  where  his  father  was  after  he had been  m ~ r d e r e d . ~ ~ ) Xu and Jiang  were  blamed 

as the regicides in the edict by  which  Shao justified  his  taking  the  throne  and  changing  the reign  name  to  tcrich  f (the "great  beginning").  The  reign  name  was  chosen  by the Daoist sorceress on whose account Shao had faced the prospect of  losing  his  nght  to the 

throne.63  A bloody purge of the Xu-Jiang clique followed. As the  originally  legitimate heir, Shao was able to  rally  several  of  his  family, 

including  his  brothers  JUM, Shuo and  Hong,64 his  uncle, Yigong  814 %,  and a cousin, Yiqi  @J  & g .65  Ironically,  another cousin, Xiao  Bin  1ié:,  who had been a favourite of the murdered emperor,  was  brought into the conspiracy the  night  before and entered the palace in the  sarne  carriage  with  Shao on the  moming  of the  assassinations.66  It  was he who  was  put in charge of  al1  govemmental  affairs  and  later  appointed to  lead  the  infantry 

against  Jun, the brother who was to  unravel  Shao's  con~piracy.~~ 

At the time that Shao murdered their father, Jun was stationed at Wuzhou  3 i.jy 

where he been sent by  his  father to put  down  Man tribe  dis turban ce^.^^  He issued asummons to  arms  and was joined by  his  uncle,  Yixlian  @j 4 & , then  inspector  of 

J i n g ~ h o u , ~ ~ and a cousin,  Zang  Zhi,  then  inspector  of  Y o n g z h ~ u . ~ ~ The  military  might  of 

these  neighbouring  western  regions  had  historically  played a crucial  role  in  deterrnining  the 

fate  of the  govemment  in  Jiankang  and was  crucial  to Jun. He also had the support of  his 

cousin, General Xiao  S i h ~ a . ~ l Another brother, Dan  8. .W  , Inspecter  of  Huizhou  f l ,       

> 62 SSl8/2427/2-5
> 63 SS/8/2427/8-11
> SS18/2432/10-11

(for Shuo,  see  also  SS/6/  1858/2;  for Hong,  see  also  SS/6/  185912           

> 65 SSI 8/2427/6 &14
> 66 SS18/2426/15
> 67 SS/8/243 I l 4 &2432115
> SSIl/11014The

a m  of the  Yangzi  b e ~ nthe  mouths  of the Xi  # and Ba  t nvers  below  presentday 

Huanggang  k in Hubei  (ZLDC,  100  & 284).  

> 69

Liu  Yixuan  was  fint appointed  to the position of  inpsector  (cishi) of  Jingzhou  in  444, about  nine  yean 

d e r  (SS/6/1798/10).   

> 'O SS/1/110/5
> SSI 8/2430/7

helped  provide  the  eastem  part of the pincer action on the  capital.72 In the  third  month  of the year, an  attack  on  Jiankang  spearheaded by  Generd  Liu  Yuanjing  #p  % fdeah  a

serious  blow  to the  capital?  Two  of  Shao's  generals  tled  south,  foilowd  a few days  later 

by  Liü Yigong, whose defection resulted in the execution of  twelve  of  his  sons as an  act  of 

re~enge.'~ On the third day of the  fourth  month  (April26,453),  Xiao  Bin,  reaiizing  the 

city  would  fall,  surrendered and was executed by  Jun's  a r m ~ . ~ ' Those  generals who had not  already  escaped and  gone  over to the other  side,  as Liu Yigong had, now surrendered. Shao  was  seized  hiding  in a well in the palace  a r r n ~ u r y . ~ ~ JUM, as he  fied  south, 

encountered Yigong who compelled  him  to retum to the capital but beheaded  him  before 

reaching  their  destination?'  Shao was executed  dong  with  his  four sons and the sons of 

JUM.  Their heads were  held  up on pikes and their bodies exposed in the market-place? The "rebellion" had been suppressed, and Jun, the "filial descendant", as  his  posthumous title of  xiaowu  if, described  him,  was to ascend the throne in the  fourth  month  of that 

year (453).  79 

(3) The Reign of Emperor Xiaowu 

Less  than  a year  after  his  accession, the emperor's uncle,  Yixuan,  who had been a

rnuch  honoured supporter  only  a few months earlier, was calling for a punitive expedition 

f?om  his  base in  Jinglingso  His  belief that he might have  some  chance for the throne  is  

> 72

Huùhou  was  formed  out of  five jun  in the  region  of Yangzhou  east  of the  Zhe  Jiang  (SSl7/2026/4).  

> SS/8/2433/2
> 74

Although  the figure 12  is  used,  ody  eleven  sons are  named  in the Song Shu  (SSl61165316).    

> 75 SS/8/2434/ 8
> 76 SS J812434114

For the  exmtion,  see  SS181243513.  The execution  was  camied  out  by  the  authority  of  his  title of 

Defender-in-Chief  (taiwei  k H), presumably  granted  to  him  by Liu Jun  (SSl81242518). 

# '*  SS/W  243911.3    

> 79 On day jisi

t C,  of the  fourth  month  of the  thinieth  year  ofyuonjia,  or May 20,453  (SS/I/110/8).     

> 80 On the 26th

day  of the second  month  of the  fïrs? year of xiaojian  f a , or  April9,454,  he  hurriedly 

issued  a letter  to the  emperor  saying that he  was  leading  an  army  in a righteous  campaign  to  rid  the  palace 

of  evil  men who  had  gathemi  around  the throne  (SS/6/1800/10).  The haste in  issuing  this  letter  was  

> caused

when one of the  conspirators,  in a dninken  state,  bungled  the plans and initiated the coup 

immediately  instead  of  waiting  until  the  f a  or  winter  of that  year,  Hence,  the  others  were  for&  to  act 

rapidly  or  lose  everything  (S  S/6/  180018-9). probably another  refleaion  of the phenornenon, discussed in the previous chapter, that once the  line  of succession  was  moved  Erom  the "line of the eldest" to the "most senior",  it 

could be contested by  any  number of  competing  relatives. He was  eiicouraged  by  bis 

relative, Zang  Zhi,81  now  inspector  of the neighbounng  region  of  Jiangzhou,82  who flattered  hirn  into  thinking  he had the respect and  reai  support of the court. In addition, 

Yixuan is  said  to have been  angered  by Emperor  Xiaowu's  treatment  of  his  daughters at the  Jiankang  court.83  Zang  Zhi  had  his  own  ambitions and  realized  he had a  weak  and 

malleable  person  in the emperor's uncle. However, the group of generals that Zang  tried 

to  build  up  never  had the power or talent to topple the capital. Yixuan  himselflacked 

leadership  skills.  His  father had  never  considered  hirn  ~ompetent~~and he could not even manage to remember the  lines  fed to  him  to rally  his  own  troops.85  Even the naval 

campaign  launched on  Jiankang  fiom  Jingzhou failed. Defeat, however, could not have been easily predicted.  Al1  the  weight  of the 

military  resources of Jingzhou,  Jiangzhou,  Yanzhou  and  Yuzhou  bearing  d o m  on the capital had  thrown  the  d m into  panic,  and Jun,  only  newly  enthroned,  had even thought he would have no choice but to  yield  his  newly acquired position to  his  uncle.  Only 

deterrnined  opposition to  this  defeatism by  his  brother, Dan (who  dong  with  Yiman  had 

joined  the  future  Emperor  Xiaowu  in leading the "righteous  army"  against  Shao),  a

convinced  him  to  maintain  his  resistance.87  Yixuan  was defeated and  fIed  back to  Jianglmg 

where he was  thrown  into prison by  his  own  generals and  killed.  When  the newly appointed  inspector  (czshi)  of Jingzhou (who had  originaliy  pretended cornpliance with                    

> -
> 81 Zang Zhi's daughter had marrieci Liu's son (SS/7119 L517).In addition, they were "cousios", for Zang
> Zhi's father, Zang Xi

&,  was  a younger  brother of Zang Aiqin  & & a, the  ernpress  consort of Liu Yu  

> (SS/4/1282/6).

In  fàct,  they  would not have been  tme  fktcousins, for Liu  Yixuan's  rnother  was  a woman               

> by the name of Sun and not Zang Aiqin (NS/2/363/10).
> 82 ssn11914/11
> 83 SS/6/1800/6-7
> 84 SS/6/1798/8
> 85 SS/6/1806/3
> SS/8/2428/i4
> 87 SS/7/2026/12,13

Yixuan's  carnpaign  against  the throne when he was  cishi  of the  region  of  Yangzhou,  just 

north  of  Jingzhou,  but  later  tumed to the  side  of the court, being  duly  rewarded  with  the 

inspectorship  of  Jingzhou  g8),  arrived  in  Jiangling,  he executed  twelve  of  his  sofis. Four others,  discovered  in  hiding  in  Jiangning,  east of the capital, were  allowed  to commit suicide. 89 

By the first  year  of Emperor  Xiaowu's  reign,  then,  only  Yigong  remained  of the 

onginai  seven sons in the  first  generation of Liu Yu's descendants, and of the six who had died,  only  Yiji  @j & *, the youngest brother, escaped a "political"  death, for he appears to have succumbed to alcoholism in 447 at the  age  of  XLgO  Yigong  was  very  mindful  of 

his  precarious position, however.  Yixuan's  rebellion had  heightened  the emperor's  desire 

to weaken the power of the princes, and Yigong obliged by  subrnitting  a petition  to abolish the  powerfùl  position of Overseer of the Department of State  Anairs  (lu  shangsh 

shz)  which  he had held  since  his  nephew  became  emperor in 453.  Since  the ovemding power of this position had  also  helped create the rift between  Yikang  and the previous emperor  just  a few  years  earlier,  Yigong wanted to avoid the  same  predicarnent and was 

successfil  in  doing  so by this  tactic? 

As for the second generation of descendants, Jun (Emperor  Xiaowu)  and thirteen of  his  eighteen  brothers were  still  dive,  but Jun  is  descnbed as being suspicious by nature, and four brothers fell  victim  to  his  murderous  do~bts.9~ 

As suggested in the previous chapter, large progeny did  not  guarantee  stability. 

When  each  brother was bom of a different  mother, as was the case with  Jun  and  his    

> 88 SSf71197Off-8
> 89 SS/6/180715
> SS/611654/7-13

and 165512;  his  age is  given  as 33 (sui)  (SS/6/1655/12).    

> 91 For Liu

Yigong's  petition  and  his  understanding  of the  emperor's  mind  on  this  matter,  see      

> SS/6/1647/1-7. The title was abolished

in the  sixth  month  of the  £irst year  of  xiaojian  z$  & (swnmer  of   

> 454), just

pnor  to Liu  YunÜin's  execution  (SS/1/1  I W ) .  Yigong  was  made  ûverseer  (lu  shang  liutiaoshi 

& t A 4&  $) and  ïnspector  (cishi) of  Southem  Xuzhou on the  day  his  nephew  ascended  the  throne    

> (SS/1/11018 &IO).
> 92 SS/7/2026/14

brothers, and princes were sent at an  early  age to  regional  garrisons,  there was lirnited 

familial  contact. Even  though  the princes were appointed to  regional  garrisoas  on a 

rotating  basis  and would be spending some time at the palace, the  opportunity  to "bond" 

was minimal.  Resentment  and nvalry were  much  more likely  than  trust and cooperation. The fragmented state of the  family  can  be  seen  in the emperor's assaults on  his 

> u

brother. One of  them,  Shuo, was poisoned  shonly  after  Jun took the throne for  having 

served  under  Shao and  fading  to express public support for the new  emperor.93  Then,  in 455, another brother,  Hun  @I  g , was demoted to  cornmoner  status  and forced to commit suicide, for  after  being appointed Inspector (cishi) of  Yangzhou,  he  circulated  a sumrnons  

> to

arms,  declareci  himself the Prince of Chu and announced  his  impenal  reign  title.94 

His  actions are described as  having  been made in  jestgs and may  very  well have been 

simply  the  fnvolity  of a wilffil,  irresponsible  sixteen-year-old,  but  his  behaviour and his brother's response do indicate one  fact  that  every  emperor had to  live  with:  any  royal member  might  feel at some time that he could  rnake  a daim  to the throne by whatever 

rneans  lay at  his  disposal. The emperor's suspicions led to the  demise  of  another  brother, Dan S. This brother had  supported  the incumbent emperor  against  Shao and  later  against  Yixuan,  but he was executed in 459, in the  skth  year  of  Xiaowu's  ten-year  reign, for what may have been only  ill-advised  pretensions to grandeur that were  interpreted  as  signs  of treacherous 

imperial  ambition (the  official  histories are  arnbiguous  in  their  descriptions).  Not  only had 

Dan  constmcted  a residence and  estate  that  rivded  ail others for  workmanship  and  beauty 

but he had gathered together men of talent and  colleaed  the  h e s t  of  ~ e a p o n r y . ~ ~ Having 

been appointed as  Inspector  (cishi)  of  Southem  Yanzhou,  Dan took up  his  garrison  in 

Guanghg  but,  sensing  that he was  under  a dangerous  cloud of suspicion, he used the attacks  fiom  the north on the border  regions  as an excuse for building up the defenses of the city. Dan either had to  secure  himseif  in a stronghold and  wait  out the intentions of the emperor or  b d d  up  a base  from  which  to  take  the initiative and destroy the  imperial  threat 

to  his  life.  Whatever he  really  had in  mind,  the populace at large was  assuming  that he  was 

preparing  to  tum  on the  th~one.~' Emperor  Xiaowu's  strategy was first to  downgrade  his 

title to marquis (hou), issue  him  with an  order  to  withdraw  to  his  fieP8  and, before he could  leave,  launch  a surprise attack on  Guangling  with troops which were  allegedly 

taking  up position  under  the new  inspector  (cishi)  of  Yanzhou.  Dan resisted, and the emperor sent one of  his  generals on a  forma1  campaign  against  Dan the  rebe1.99  In the seventh  month  of that  year,  Dan was murdered when the city fell, and his head was delivered to the capital.  His  death  had been preceded by that of  his  son whom he had 

unsuccessfùlly  tried  to  hide  among  the people  safe  fiom  the  clutches  of the  imperial 

forces. IO0 

Another brother, Xiumao  @J  .Ofc  8 , met the  same  fate  two  years  later,  in 46 1. A

headstrong and  unthinking  sixteen-year-old  who was  then  Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Yangzhou, 

he was executed  afler  letting  himself  be inveigled by a favourite  into  killing  two  of his opponents, the  xingshi  whose  duty  was to manage the  minor's  regional  garrison  and the 

ganison's  chief  military  commander  (rhushuai).  These  men had been  thorns  in the  side  of 

Xiumao as  well.  Far  fiom  the capital, Xiumao and  his  favourite's  clique could  easily 

bunker  down,  circulate  a cal1  to arms to  justi@  what they had  done  and, if their action 

failed,  flee  to the  Northern  Wei where Xiumao could be assured of a fief and  princely  title and perhaps  backing  for an invasion  which  would  set him on the  throne.lol  In the end, however, he  was  executed by one of  his  military  aides  outside  the city  gate.Io2 The risk of regional  rebellions that involved manipulation of  young,  inexperienced and less  than  astute 

royal sons always existed, and the  risk  may have been  greater  when there  was  a means  of escape in  fleekg  to the  othw  side,  the  Northem  Wei. But it also  reflects  one of the 

inherent  problems of sending princes of  any  age to the  regional  garrisons.  These  princes 

Brothers  or sons of the emperor) were  ofien  not old  enough  to  exercize  mature judgement or  act  independentiy of  those  who were either appointed to  act  on their  behalf 

or were their  personal  attendants  and  confidants.  In addition,  those  who were sent as the 

emperor's  representatives to keep watch on the young charges were  often  so strict that they created resentment that was  transferred  to the emperor  himself  This may  very  well have been a factor in this and other cases. 

One brother, Hong  Pij  2, who had been favoured by  his  father  above  al1  others,l03 

was not  treated  with  envy  or suspicion by Jun but rather with respect, and  lun  is  said  to have relied on  his  astute  political judgment.  lo4  However, this brother had been  sickly  as ayouth and was therefore  probably  never  viewed as a threat.  He died in 458, half-way 

through  Emperor  Xiaowu's  reign. In this volatile period,  Xiao  Daocheng seems to have enjoyed a series  of  rnilitary 

appointments  as  adjutant  (cmjun)  in  garrison  establishments of the  royal  famiiy.  M e r 

Yigong  becarne  Commander-in-Chief (da  sima)  in 453  foliowing  lun's  enthronement, Daocheng was appointed  military  adjutant  (cm>jln)  within  the  princely  establishment  (fu) 

and  continued  as  such  when Yigong received even more  prestigious  titles.lo5  He was  then 

given  minor  court  titles  and appointed  military  adjutant  (canjun)  in the establishment  fi)

of  Zishang  @J  + ifS  ,the seven-year-old son of the emperor. lo6  This  was  followed by appointment as  magistrate  (fing) of  Jiankang  [County],  a minor  position but important 

because  of its location in the capital  region.  When  the emperor  was  searching  for people                    

> 'O3SS/6/1858/12-13
> 'O4 SS/6/1859/5
> 'O5 SS/l/I 1914.For the time of Liu Yigong's title, see SSIllI 1116.
> lo6 For his age, see SS/712058/10 and NQS/l125/n. 9.

to  staffthe  establishment of  his  favourite  son,  Ziluan  # 3!- ,who had been  born  only  a

few  years  earlier  in 456 and whorn  his  father was now  making  a geneid  and  inspector 

(cishi)  of  Southem  Xuzhoü  (an  inspector  required the  title  of  general),  Daocheng  was 

appointed to  this  son's  estabiishment.107 Mer  Daocheng came out of  officia1  mouming  for 

his  mother,  he  retumed to  his  service  with  Ziluan  and  his  position as  magistrate  of Jiankang.  These  appointments, though relatively  minor,  would suggest that  Xiao  was  held in  some  favour by the  royal  family.lo8 However, his  official  life did not change his  family's 

status  as a relatively poor  family .log 

(4) The Deposition and  Murder  of Emperor  Xiaowu's  Successor By the time of the emperor's death in 464 (in  his  thirty-fourth  year),  l l0  five of his brothers had died  natural  deaths and six had been executed, but seven, most of whom ranged  between  the ages of  sixteen  and  twenty-five,  stiil  survived. When the emperor's eldest son, Ziye  jn  -f  s, ascended the throne at the  age  of  fifieen,  another disastrous transfer of power was in the  making.lll 

Vice-regal control  was  supposed to reside in the hands of  his  great-uncle, Yigong, and General Liu Yuanjing. The  former  had  seen  to the re-institution of the position of Overseer of the Department of State  Mairs  (lu  shangshu  shi),  with  al1  the attendant power  it  carried,  whiie  the latter was appointed  Director  of the Department of State 

Affairs  (shangsh  hg). l l 2  However,  flairs  of  state  were  being  decided by an  irnperial 

favourite, Dai  Faxing  #,  -& R,  a lower-status southemer of some  learning  and  ability  who had  corne  to  dominate  the court at the  expense  of  higher  officiais  (ciachen  J,  a ) under  

> lo7

For  his  age,  see  SS/71206314.  

> los

For  his  appointments  during  the  reign  of Emperor  Xiaowu,  see  NQS/1/4/9- 1 1.     

> log NQS/2/3 9016
> ll0

He  was  born  on  &y  gengwu  +, in the  eighth  month  of the  seventh  year of yuanjia, or September 19,430  (SS111109/1)  and  died  on  day  gengshen  9 in the  intercaiary  tifth  month  of the  eighth  year of  

> daming

g , or  Juiy  12,464  (SSl1114115).      

> llLiu Ziye was

born  on  day jiashen  7 9 in the  month  of the  twenty-sixth  year of yuanjia ,or 

Febniary  25,449  (SSl1/141/1).   

> ll2

For the  re-instatement  of the  Overseer  position,  ree  SSIlIl4  116. Liu  Yuanjing  is  referred  to  by  his  

> director's

title  in  SS/l/  143114  but  m u t  have been appointed at the  same  time  as Liu Yigong. Emperor  Xiaowu's  reign, and people  like  Yigong and Liu  Yuanjing  timidly  submitted  to 

his  de ci si on^.^^^  However, Dai had been attempting to keep some check on the new 

emperor, who had no comprehension of what a  ruler's  duties were,  waniing  him  he  couid 

face the  same  fate  as  his  great-uncle,  YifÙ,  who had been deposed over  forty  years  earlier. 

In fact, Ziye  began  to  fear  that he would be  forcibly  removed  fiom  the throne  after  he learned that Dai  was  considered by the people to be the  real  iianzi  who  was  working closely  with  a few officiais,  including  his  great-uncle. l l4  In fact, the histories state that Yigong and Liu  Yuanjing  planned  to  dethrone  him,  so tentative alliances among 

dissatisfied  officials were probably beginning to form at the time. It is unclear to what  extent  Ziye acted on  his  own, but he was not  known  as a 

gentle  and docile  person,  and in 465, when he would have been  only  sixteen,  he 

cornrnanded  Dai to commit suicide at home and almost two weeks  later  led the  imperial 

bodyguard to seize and execute Yigong, Liu  Yuanjing  and two other officials. I l 6  Yigong's 

last  four sons were  also  killed  at  this  tirne.ll7  The fact that there was an  interval  of  almost 

two  weeks between the  two  actions may  mean  that Dai and the other group had no concerted plan to  depose  Ziye at the  tirne  (or at least the emperor was not aware of one) or that Dai's  death  prompted  the other group to  consider  getting  rid  of the young emperor but were  unable  to keep their plot secret. The eradication of  these  possible  threats  to  his 

retention of the throne was marked by a change of the reign  name  to  jinghe  or 

"Glonous  Harmony".  l8  

> Il3

Dai's biography  appears  at the end of the Song  Shu  in the section  resemed  for  enring  or "court 

favourites",  those  lower-ranking  courtiers,  ofien  of  southern  background, who  became  part of the  

> emperor's

inner  circIe  or the  inner  court in  contrast  to the  distinguished  officials of the  outer  court. For 

Dai's specinc  relationship  to the former emperor,  see  SSl81230219  & 230411-4. 

# 'l4  SS/8/2304/4-8     

> ll5 SS/6/l65 I/8
> Il6

Dai was  ordered  to commit suicide on  day  xinyou  9B of the  eighth  month  of yongguang  fi,  or 

September  6,465  (SSl8f230419-IO;  SSl1114412).  The four  ofncials  were  kiiled  on  day  guiyou  & i$ of the 

eighth  month  of  yongguang,  or September 18,465  (SSI  l/ lW2-3) 

# '"SS/6/165  1/8-9 

# "*  SS/1/144/4 In view  of  his  young age, one  might  wonder  if the emperor's actions were  taken  at the instigation or at least tacit  approval  of  three  of  his  uncles  who had been  given 

important  military  titles  within  the capital. Liu Yuh  @J  &, held the  titie  ef  General of the 

Guards  (wei jimgiun  #J#  ) and was stationed at Gushu  +&a, West  of  Jiankang,  as 

inspecter  (cishi) of Southem Yuzhou, a position which he lost  temporarily  to Liu 

Yuanjing  and  then  recovered  after  General Liu's execution.  l l 9  Liu Xiuren  @J #c  += was 

General of the Palace  Guard  (fingiun jiangiun  'f  ;(4  $ ) and Liu  Xiufan  @J  # was Capital Protector  (zhonghujun  9 -iJt  T ). 120  Following  events, however, show that Ziye could well act on  his  own. 

Suspecthg  that another uccle, Liu Chang  @1 k, had been  plotting  with  Yigong,  he led troops  nonhward  to Xuzhou, of which Chang was  Inspector(cishi).  Forewamed, Chang rose in rebellion but was  unable  to  rally  the  various  commanderies  (iun)  in his 

jurisdiction  and fled  north  to seek asylum with the Wei  regime. I 2 l 

Ziye  was  &aid  of  his  remaining  uncles  and gathered them into the palace,  making 

them  lis  personal  prisoners and  behaving  sadistically to  them.122 It  was  only  through  clever humoring and  flattering  by Xiuren, one of the  uncles,  that saved them on  severai  occasions 

fiom  being  murdered. At one  particularly  critical  juncture, if  it  had not been for  Xiuren's 

cairn  wit, Liu Yuh, the future Emperor Ming, would have been  slaughtered  like a  pig  after 

he remonstrated  against  Ziye for wanting to  declare  as  heir  apparent the  future  child  of Liu Meng  @J  110,  the Chamberlain for Law  Enforcement  (lingwei  # BQ  ) whose concubine had been forced into the palace  harem.123  The  uncles  were not the only  ones  at  risk.  Ziye  had 

been murdering or beating  various  ministers  who  displeased  him,  and people in and out of court  feared  for  their  safety. lZ4                      

> ll9 The sequence of posthgs for Liu Yuh can be gathered from SSI11lWl4; lW5; l5U 1-3.
> 120 SS/1/143/8-9
> l2 SS/6/1869/6-9
> 122 SS/1/147/14 and SS/6/1871/12
> l23 SS/6/ l8W6
> 124 SS/1/147/10

ITZiye  was  actuaiiy  as unpredictably violent and  murderous  as the  historieal 

evidence suggests,  his  very  personality  could be  blamed  as a  destabilizing  factor for the throne. It  invited  a conspiracy to be rid of  him,  but  finding  an heir to  supplant  him  could prompt intense jockeying for  control  of the court and the throne. The descriptions of the way in  which  he treated  his  uncles  suggest  a brutal  component  to  his  personality.  12' He even forced a great-aunt, the mother of  his  uncle  Xiuren,  to be raped in the presence of her son by imperial  officiais,  most of whom had no choice but to  submit  to the emperor's 

command.126  It  is  difficult  to assess what was happening here. As a very young  child,  he 

was  locked in the palace as a  hostage  d e r  his  father had  taken  up  arms  against  Liu Shao, and  this  may have  affected  his psyche.  lZ7  However, he  seerns  to have had a good  rnind,  for 

he is descnbed as  having  been  studious  when  young,  very  knowledgeable  and capable of producing  various  writings,  including a  eulogy  to  his  father to whom he had been considered  ~ n f i l i a l . ~ ~ ~ In  view  of  his  age  (fifieen  when he took the throne), one  might 

wonder  ifhe was being used in a power  stmggle.  A list  of  his  murders,  though,  suggests that more  than  calculating  strategy  was involved.  Jealousy  and  spite  also played a role. Ayounger brother,  Ziluan  # + , although  only  about  nine  at the time, was demoted to the  status  of  cornmoner  and  then  murdered, for he had been favoured  above  al  other sons when  his  mother had  corne  to  hold  &st  place in the emperor's affections. A £ive-year-old 

brother,  Zishi  PiJ  -f  IQ , and a  sister  were  also  murdered. 129  Revenge prompted  him  to 

murder  three of  his  cousins when their mother  refiised  to become one of  his  concubines.130 

Whatever the reasons for his behaviour, it did prompt a  conspiracy  to be nd of 

him.  It came out of an  intricate  set of contacts between Liu  Yuh's  confidants  who wanted   

> 12'SS/6/1871/12

# - 18739  

> 126 SSl61187U5

# '"  ss/1/142/2          

> 12* SS. 1114814
> 129 SS/1/ 14512; SS/7/2065/54 &I O ; SS/7/2069/4
> 130

These  three  sons of  his  uncle,  Shuo,  were  in fact  kiiled  on the  same  day  that  he  himselfwas  murdered 

> (SS/6/1858/6).

to eradicate Liu Ziye and  unhappy  members  of  Ziye's  entourage, one of whom  was  an  old 

associate of  Yrih.  Liu  Xiuren  had been  advised  of this plot but the timing  was  to  depend 

on the  best  opportunity  that  0ccurred.13~ The conspirators decided to act on the  night  of 

> ~ n v u

## & 9in the eleventh  month  ofjinghe  + .u2 This  was  the eve of Ziye's  planned 

expedition to  Jingzhou  and  Xiangzhou,  an expedition undertaken to preclude the 

possibility  that  rumours  of the appearance of a future emperor in  Xiangzhou  might  corne 

trueJ3  It may have been apparent that the  uncles  would be  killed  at this time as  ~ e 1 1 , l ~ ~ 

but this night was  also  advantageous  since  the preparations for the expedition  meant  that fewer  guards  were  available  for the palace  garden  to  which  Ziye had  gone  to "shoot at ghosts"  (sheguz  # &)  with  his  Daoist sorcerer  (wuxi  ^E  a), and even the  three  burly 

generals  who  normally  accornpanied  him  were absent, being involved in the 

preparations. 135  Eleven conspirators marched  into  the Bamboo  Grove  Hall  (Zhulin  Tang 

fl*  #c)  of the  Hualin  Garden  $+  Iate at night and assassinated  hun.136  As soon as 

he  was  dead,  an announcement was sent to the  imperial  guard  that the  "wild"  emperor had been  done  away with by Liu  Yuh,  the Prince of Eastern  Xiangzhou  (a L Z), on instructions  fiom  the Empress Dowager. 

Surprisingly,  the speed of the  murder  seems to have  left  Liu Yuh  unsure  how to 

react.  138  On the night of the  murder,  he had been kept in the Palace  Library  (bishusheng 

## 4% $ a) whereas  his  brothers, including Xiuren, and a sister  had been  called  by the emperor to accompany  him  in the shooting of  g h o ~ t s . ' ~ ~ Realinng  the opportunity had      

> 13' SSl8123 1311-2
> 132 The date

is  equivalent  to  Ianuary  1,466  (SSI  11 14613  & I52/9;  SSl8/23  121 1 1).       

> '33 SS/1/146/1-2
> 134 SSI11146/2
> SSl1/152/7-8 and SSl8123 1312-3
> SSl1/146/3-4

and  SSl8123  1317-8     

> 13' SS/8/23 13/10
> 138 Liu

Yuh  may  not have been as active a participant in the plot as  suggested  in SS111152/6  where he is 

said  to have  plotted  secretly  with  Ruan  Dianfii  E 4ia  and  others,  as  contrastai  with  SS/1/152/10  where  

> he

is  d e s c r î î  as not  knowing  what  happened  or what to do.  

> 13' SS1812312111-12

corne,  Xiuren  rushed  to get  his  brother once the emperor was murdered and pulled  him 

limping  over  to  the  Throne  Hall (Western Hall), with one shoe  missing,  where the  officiais 

were  quickly  called  and Xiuren hastily  arranged  to have an  imperhl  white hat and  impenal 

honour  guard  arranged for  his  brother.14*  It  is  possible that an  edict  from  the empress dowager, Liu Ziye's  grandrnother,  141  denouncing  the emperor's crimes and  declaring  Liu 

Yuh  as the  worthy  successor to the throne, was read that  evening  to the  congregation  of officiais, as required by custom to  legitirnize  such  a dethronement.  142 

The  next  day Xiuren moved into  the  Eastern  Citadel  (Dongfù),  the  chief  rninister's 

residence, an indication of the  political  power he was to  exercise.lq3. Liu Yuh did not 

actually  ascend the throne as emperor  until  eight  days  later.lM Some consolidation of power would have been necessary.  During  this interim period, the three  generals  who had been Ziye's  protectors  and  codidants  were executed for  plotting  rebellion. They were exposed by Shen  Youzhi,  another general who had actually  enjoyed  the  same  kind  of confidence  fiom  Ziye as did  these  three and had  participated  with them in some of the rnurders and beatings. It was the loss of  his  titles when Liu Yuh was  declared  the new heir that prompted  him  to find some way back to power, and the exposure of this plot was 

opportune.145 Also  executed about the  same  time were Liu  Zishang  @J  4 & ,then  fifieen 

years  of age, and  his  sister. 146  The accusation was incest, but this may  also  have been a 

usefûl  way of  eliminating  a legitimate  claimant  to the throne  among  the deposed emperor's brothers, for  Zishang  was Ziye's  immediately  younger brother.  Since  Ziye had no  heu, 

there  was no-one to succeed in the  line  of the  eldest.  Hence, the  legitimacy  of the                     

> 140 SS/1/152/10-11
> 141 She was the mother of Emperor Xiaowu and received the title of Ernpress Dowager (taihuang toihou)
> after her grandson,

Liu Ziye,  took  the throne  (SS/4/1286/8  & l287/1  1).   

> 142 SS/1/146/5

to 14715   

> 143 SS/6/1872/ 11

On  day  bingyin  6 in the  twelfth  month  of the first  year  of  taishi  / *, or  January  9,466   

> (SS/1/153/3).
> 145 ss/7/1927/11-12
> 146 SS/l/l52/12

successor  had  to be  claimed  on the  basis  of  his  being "the most senior". As  suggested  in the first chapter in the discussion on  events  that would occur in the Qi and Liang, the question of  wha  was  the most senior could create controversy and  unleash  al1  the  potential 

forces for  balkanization.  Zixun  was now the murdered emperor's  next  oldest brother but he was safely esconced in the west where the conspirators could not reach  him.  This

brother would have some  clairn  as the legitimate heir by  virtue  of  his  being "the most senior", but Liu Yuh7smoral  claim  to legitimacy would also have been understood to 

derive  fiom  his  status as the  "most  senior" in the older generation. The problem  was 

deciding  which  generation took precedence. There was also a fùrther  problem in that Liu 

## Yuh  actually  had one older  s u ~ v i n g brother who,  because  of  his  mediocre  intelligence, had been  dismissed  out of  rnind  but who could lay  daim  to being the  "most  senior". (Hui had been despised by  his  brothers as a  du11  fool and had been dubbed  Prince  of  Asses  (Lü Wang  a E) by  his  nephew, Ziye, who considered  him  no  threat  at  ail. 143

The  enthronement  of Liu Yuh (Emperor Ming) precipitated a series  of rebellions, centered  largely  around  various  child  princes, brothers of Ziye, who had been appointed as 

inspectors  (cishi) of the  regions  and were now being used as puppets by arnbitious generals. The  earliest  challenge to the  throne  occurred  at the  beginning  of 466 when 

Z&  then  about  ten  years  of age, was declared emperor in  Xunyang  where he  was 

stationed as  inspector  (cishi) of  Jiangzhou.  148  This  was masterminded by  his  Administrator 

( h g s h ) , Deng  Wan  a, who  called  for  Z h n  to be accepted by the  redm  as the 

legitimate  emperor,  claiming  auspicious  signs  as weil as a secret  edict  nom  the dowager (Emperor Wen's  consort).149 He was  irnrnediately  supported by the  inspector  (cishi) of 

Y o n g z h ~ u . ~ ~ ~ There was a  universal  response to Deng's  c d .  Yingzhou,  Jingzhou  and                      

> 14' SS/7/2038/13; SS/6/1872/2
> 14* He was dalareci emperor on the seventh day of the firstmonth of the second year of taishi,

or                  

> February 7,466 (SS//7/2060/10).
> 149 Mother of Emperor Xiaowu and hence full grandmother of Liu Zixm(SS/4/1286/7 &15).

Deng's        

> aiîeged edict is referred to in ZZTJ/2/2346/#3).
> ' 5 O SS/1/155/4

Xiangzhou,  which  were  nominaily  under  the control of  three  other brothers of  Zixun 

(ranghg  in age  fiom  nine  to seven) also responded  under  their respective  administrators. 

in the east, another  nine-year-old  brother,  Zifang  +4, govemor  (taishou)  of  Kuaiji, 

"took up  arms"  in support  cif  Zixun  under  the sponsorship of  his  adrninistrator  ( z h g s h i ) . 

Elsewhere, the inspectors  (cishi)  of  eight  other major  regions  also rose in response. 

This wide  support would  suggest  that Liu Yuh's  claim  to the throne  was  not considered absolutely legitimate. The line of succession  should  not be to an uncle but to a son or, if there were no son, to the deceased  emperor's  brother.  Since  Ziye  had no heirs, the legitimate successor would be  his  next  youngest brother, in this case Zixun. This was 

another  example  of the chaos  created  when the line of succession went fiom the "line of the eldest" to the more  arnbiguous  line of "the most senior".  However,  it  is  certainly  worth 

noting  that Xiao  Huikai  .&  M,  then  inspector  of  Yizhou  if.  JY,  is quoted as  saying  that he could see no  dEerence  between  supporting  Liu Yuh and Liu Zixun, for each was the son of a previous emperor, and he opted for Liu Zixun,  since  the latter's father had treated 

him  weii.  l s i  Thus,  sense  of  personal  debt and one's  own  ambition must have been  guiding 

factors as well. 

(5) A House  Divided and the  Rise  of Xiao Daocheng 

Xiao Daocheng was to  utilize  this  period  of multitudinous revolts by  coming  in on the  side  of Emperor Ming, the royal incumbent in  liankang.  He had some important  

> successes

in the east and  was  rewarded  with  the title of Marquis of  Xiyang  County  8

> $fi

and a fief of six hundred households.  I s 2  This was a step up in the titled  ranks  for Xiao, as he  already  bore the lower  title  of Baron  (non)  Fifth  Class of  .Timing  County  %  

> l 5 ZZTJ/2/2347/#/4
> 152

NQSIlISIl  I                 

> According to the Song Shu, Xiao Daocheng participateci in the suppression of the eastem revolts as
> youjun jiangiun $$

# 7 (SS/11156/10) and in the  expedition  agaiost  the  rebels  of Xuzhou as  figuo  

> jiongiun

# $1 # 9 (SS/1/156/12). $fi L 8 ,with 340 households,  which  he had  inherited  From  his  father at the end of Emperor Wen' s  reign.  lS3 

In the continuing  rebellion,  Xiao was appointed to the  garrison  establishment of Liu  Xiunio  @J  A $$  who, at the age of about eighteen, had been sent to  supenise  the pacification of  Kuaiji  after  the "treacherous" ten-year-old prince,  Zifang,  was  removed and sent back to the capital. In this position, Xiao was  successful  in  driving  back the forces sent in the  narne  of the  child  emperor,  Liu  Z i ~ n . ~ ~ ~ He  was  then  appointed 

governor  (taishou)  of Southem  Donghai  and put in charge of the  &airs  of Southem Xuzhou in  order  to  assist  Liu  Xiufan  who was  officially  cishi  of this  region  but  was  not 

just young and  inexperienced  (he would have been  only  eighteen) but was also considered a dullard  by  his  brother,  Liu  Yuh.155  The capitals of  these  two  junsdictions both lay in the city of  Jingkou  (present-day Zhenjiang), a major  military  base of  strategic  importance 

since  the Eastern Jin when  it  had become the centre to which  northern  "strongmen" 

families  fied  with their  armed  cohorts. 

While  Xiao  was  helping to  secure  the realm in the eastem parts, Liu Xiuren was put in  command  of  dl  the troops suppressing Zixun and the  revolts  in the western  middie 

Yangzi  region.  In the  eighth  month  of 466, Xiuren executed the  cishi  of  Yongzhou  who had been the  first  to respond to the  cal1  to support Zixun, and the  various  rebellions soon collapsed. Zixun and  his  three brothers in this  region  were  executed.lS6  TWO months  later, 

ail  the  remaining  brothers were put to death upon the recornmendation of  Xiuren.157  Thus, 

by 466 the threats  fiom  Emperor  Xiaowu's  line  (Le.  the sons of Liu Jun, brother of Yuh)   

> lS3 NQSI1/318-9
> lj4

NQSl115113 

> lS5

NQS/11611      

> 156 SS/1/158/1-2
> l57 Six brothers

are  iisted  in  SS111158110  ,but the four  youngest  brothers are  also  said  to have been  lrilled  

> by

Emperor Ming  (see  SS/7/2058/5-6 and  SS/7/2069/8) and  therefore  have been  kilîed  at  this  tirne.  It       

> appears that Liu Yuh was originally willing

to spare  the  Lives  of  his  nephews  and is  even  quoted as  saying              

> that the House of Song depended upon their SurYival. However, when Liu Xiuren retunied

h m  his     

> suppression of the Liu

Z i . rebellion  in the  West,  he  advised  Yuh  to be  rid  of  these  nephews  in  order  to  

> secwe

the future  tranquülity  of the  realm.  Yuh  accepteci  this  advice  (SSl712066111  - 206715;  NSl2/415/7). were  gone.  There  was  no  survivor  in the "line of the  e!destm,  and  Yuh  could now  claim  to be the  ody  "most  seniof  relative who could legitimately  take  the  throne  (provided that the one  s u ~ v i n g older brother, Hun, was considered tû have no proper place in the scheme of  things  because  of  his  mentai  deficiencies). Now that the  southem  region  of the  realm  had been pacified,  severai  inspectors  in

the northem Huai River  area  who had  originally  supported Deng  Wan  and Liu  Z h n 

asked  that  their  submission  to Liu  Yuh,  who was now  firmiy  in place as the new emperor, 

be  accepted. Xiao was to  benefit  fiom  Yuh's  mistakes  in  judgement  in  dealing  with  Xue 

Andu  D f  e , Inspector  (cishz) of (Northem) Xuzhou, one of  these  "surrendering" 

generds. 

The emperor, feeling that inspectors in the Huai River  area  were a  little  too independent of the capital, decided to use  this  opportunity  to  send  an instructively  awe-

inspiring  imperid  force. Xiao and others advised the emperor against this, for it could be interpreted as an attack and  lead  to dire consequences. The emperor  ignored  the  advice 

and, at the  very  end of 466, sent a huge force  under  Shen  Youzhi  & & & northward.  As 

Xiao had predicted, the  arriva1  of the army was interpreted as a lack of  tnist.ls8  Xue's doubts about the attitude of the  court  towards  him  may have been aroused  eariier  by the coldly  sparing  terms in  which  the Song emperor  is  said  to have expressed  his  acceptance of Xue's  ~urrender.~59 Feartùl  for  his  life,  Xue sent  his  son to the Wei court as a 

guarantee  of  loyalty  @hi) and begged for troops. The  army  sent by the Wei ovenvhelmed 

General  Shen at Pengcheng (seat of Xue's inspectorate in present-day Xuzhou, Jiangsu).        

> ----
> lj8 NQS/1/6/2-S. It is not nirprising

that Xiao  Daocheng's advice  should  alone  be  quoted in the Non Qi     

> Shu, the official history

of the  Southem  Qi.  However,  another source  quotes  Xiao as  weU  as another            

> official (ZZTJ/2/2352/5 1). Within the imperid biographies in the Song Shu

as  weli  as in  General  Shen's  

> biography,

no-one's  wise  advice  is quoted.  The latter  only  suggests  that the  royal  statement  of  acceptana   

> was too

lean  and  sparing  in content  (SS/7/1929/13).  

> lS9 ssm1929/13

Four  regions  north of the Huai River and part of  Yuzhou  Ji/  West  of the Huai were  lost 

to Song  control. 160 

The  area  south  of the Huai River was now  basically  without  pratection.  Emperor 

Ming  sent Xiao to establish a  ganison  at  Huaiyin  i# &,  on the  south  shore of the River Huai, and put  him  in charge of  al1  military  &airs  for a northem  campaign  (dudu beituo 

q h f e n g  zhujumhi  $$f # +ai  ). As Wei troops moved into the  area  north 

of the Huai and besieged Fort Jiaocheng  & &on  the northem shore, Xiao succeeded in lifting the siege by an attack  fiom  the  river  that avoided direct engagement of the  two 

sides.  Far  this  victory,  he  was  awarded  with  supe~sion of  military  affairs  of Southem Yanzhou and Xuzhou and made the  Inspecter  (cishi)  of Southem  Yanzhou  (whose capital 

was  Guangling  or present-day Yangzhou). Two  years  later  (469),  he  was  put in charge of military  &airs  for  Yanzhou  2 Jil  , Qingzhou  -&  and  Jizhou  $ J(1,  reflecting  the  effort 

to recover the temtory north of the  Huai.l6'  It  was  in this period that Xiao built up  his 

rnilitary  strength,  for  several  northem  generals  surrendered to  him,  and their forces 

becarne  part of  his  rnilitary capital. This rnilitary edge which Xiao acquired  from  his  period of northem pacification may  explain  why he was treated with some  misgivings  by the emperor. The latter apparently suspected that Xiao could not  simply  minister  faithfuîly  to  his  lord and  d e r 

and  was  upset by  aileged  rumours  among  the population that Xiao had the  makings  of an emperor. 162  In  order  to test the  Ioyalty  of this  general,  the emperor sent an envoy 

northward  with  three  thousand troops to present a silver  tankard  of  wine  to Xiao. The record in the  Nan  Qi  Shu  suggests  that Xiao was  astute  enough to respond  irnrnediately  by  

> drinking

it on the spot, an act  which  pleased the emperor, for  whether  it  was  an act of obedience, even  ont0  death, or a show of  trust,  it indicated unquestionable  loyalty.163  The 

## N a  Shi.  however, which was not beholden to  any  dynasty,  States  that  Xiao  assumed  that 

the wine  was  poisoned and  was  prepared to flee.  Only  when the envoy  drank  from  it  h s t 

did Xiao  due  to accept the  wine.164All  that Yuh  was  told, though,  was  that  Xiao  had accepted the wine, and this act of obedience and  trust  pleased  the emperor. Emperor  Ming  was  very  fearful  for the safety of  his  heir  after  his  death.  His  sense 

of  wlnerability  may have been due  partly  to a chronic  illness  which he  seems  to have inherited fiom  his  father, for like  him,  he  is  said  to have had long periods when he  was 

confined  to bed.  1 6 j  His  uncertain health may have accentuated  his  suspicions of others, 

most  notably towards the end of his reign. 

After  taking  the  throne,  Liu Yuh kept around  him  his  three  tmsted conspirators, 

Ruan  Dianfù  & {si A,  Li  Dao'er  4 a (though he was to die in 468, before the end of Emperor Ming's reign) and Wang Daolong  X 3 f&  as  well  as  General  Yang Yunchang 

;Bli  a , a stolid,  cautious but honest and tnisted  ~onfidant.~" Al1  these  men were of   

> 163 NQS/1/6/13.

The  Nan  Qi  Shu,  of course,  is  the record of the  dynasty  which Xiao  Daocheng  founded 

and  wodd  have  good  reason  to  include  a more heroic  account  of the  dynastic  founder's  actions.  

> 16'NS/1/99/3-4

Although  he is  described  as  king  confinecl  to  bed  (SS/6/1874/1),  he  is  du> describeci  as  going  into the 

mountains  on a partridge  hunt  dunng the  last  fidl  year  of  his  reign  (471),  suggesting  that  this  was  an 

iilness  that  flared  up at  different  tinies  (SS/G/1880/7).  His state  of  health  may  have been aggravated by  his 

own  obesity.  He  was  the  heaviest  of his  brothers  and was  nicknamed  Prince of  Pigs  (zhu  Wang  +) by 

his  nephew, Liu  Ziye  (SS/6/1871/13). 

Ruan  came  f?om  a southem  Kuaiji  $#  family  and  fim  served  Liu  Yuh  as  his  valet and  later  as  his 

heir's  instructor.  He  became  extremely  powerful  and  amassed  great  wealth  under  Emperor Ming (Liu 

Yuh),  outrivalhg  Wang  Dalong  for his extravagant  mansions  and  parks  (SS/8/23  12/4  - 23 15/12). Li came  £iom  a Linhuai  L family  (possibly  SE of  present-day  Sihong  County  -& % #$  in Jiangsu  [ZLDC,  

> 6261).

He  had  been Liu  Yuh's tutor  and  was  tater  appointed  Chief  of  instruction  in  his  p ~ c e l y 

establishment  (SS/8/23  1216  & 23  16/90 10).  Wang came from a southem  Wu..Mg  $$  BC  family  and  was 

noted  eariy  on for  his leaming  and  his  talent in  cailigraphy.  He  was  appointed  by Liu  Junn  4 $$as  his 

heir's  instmctor  and  later  served  on Liu Yuh's garrison  staff. He  became  powerful  and  wealthy  as an 

official  under  Emperor Ming (Liu Yuh) (SS18123 1711- 12). Yang came  fkom  a Xuancheng  Lq  family 

@ment-day  Xuancheng  County  in Anhui [ZLDC, 678l)and  first  had  contact  with  Liu Yuh as  his  archery 

instnictor.  Although  holding great power  under  Emperor Ming, he  is said  to have  had  no  interest  in 

acqwring  a personal  fortune or  building  ostentatious  mansions  for  hllnself  (SS/8/23  17/13  - 23  IW8). Like 

Dai  Faxhg  who  acquired  great  innuence  by  king  within  Emperor  Xiaowu's  huer  circle,  these  four men 

appear  within  the  enxing  or "court  favourites"  section of biographies  near  the end of the Song  Shu.  The men were  generaily  southemers  of  lower  stritus  whose  appointments  made  them  personal  attendants  of the 

emperor  rather  than  officiais  of the  outer  court. humble  status,  rnostly of southem background, and  chosen  by the emperor  because  of  his 

confidence in them, not  because  of their distinguished  rank.  The histones signal this by 

placing  their  biographies  within  the less  than  prestigious  "Court Favountes"  ( e m g  ,!&

.I$)  section. 

Towards  the end of Emperor  Ming's  reign,  Ruan,  Wang and Yang (Li had already 

died  in 468) were to be second  only  to the emperor  himself  in the power they  held,16'  and the emperor was to consult Yang in  particular  about  his  fears  for  his  heu,  stiii  young  and 

weak,  if he  should  soon die. The emperor's brothers were strong and could  easily  displace 

his  own  line. Yang, too,  realized  that he and the others would lose power to Liu Xiuren and encouraged the emperor to  think  of  these  brothers as a  threat. 168 

The three brothers whom Liu Yuh  regarded  as the greatest menace were Xiuyou 

## % # , Xiuren  A +and  Xiumo  U; 8. An older brother, Hui  #,  already mentioned as 

having  been  ignored  for  his  stupidity,  had  actually  participated in a plot to  overthrow  the throne in 469,  two  years  before  these  three other brothers were to be  done  away with. Hui was used by a  general  who needed to  legitimize  his  own  ambitions by  claiming  to be 

putting  a rightfùl  heir on the throne. Hui, apparently pleased with the prospect, sent bribes to generals who were being  asked  to participate, and one of them reported this to the 

throne. 169  Although  not  taken  very  senously, he was made a  comrnoner  and forced to commit suicide to  eliminate  the danger of  his  being used  again.  In the case of the other three brothers, there were more  serious  considerations. The  fkst  among  these  three to be killed was Xiuyou. He is described as being of 

mediocre  talent but  overbearing  and had offended  his  brother by not responding to  his  

> 167 SS/8/23 14/7. WhiIe

Li was  stiil  dive,  the four were  considered  to  be in  contra1  of the  government            

> (SS/8/23 1811.2).
> 168 SS/6/1873/11
> 16' SS/7/2O3 9/2-4
> 170 Either in469 or the following year. He

was  demoted in  469  (SS/l/  13) or in 470  (SS/7/2042/2).   

> Accordhg to

this  latter  source, he  was  ordered  to commit suicide in the  same  month  as he  was  demoted    

> Since the fint

source  states  that he  was  demoted in 469, there could  be  an  error  in the year  in the second 

> source.

imperid  commands.17'  As  Inspector  (cishi) of Jingzhou, he had been a rapacious plunderer,  exploiting  the people to the point of  risking  rebeliion.  Jingzhou,  however,  was  a

seriiitive  region,  and many generais and princes had  found  it a  rich  iegion  easily  built  up as a militq  base  fiom  which  to  launch  attacks on the capital. In  view  of this and the fact that 

Xiuyou  was  not an easily controllable  person,  the emperor restricted  hirn  to the  capital.172 

RealUjng  that he was on  his  last  legs and  fearing  that this brother would not serve  his 

nephew  afker  his  death,  Emperor  Ming  arranged to have  him  killed  during  a partridge  hunt in the second  month  of the seventh  year  (471). l n 

In this  sarne  state of  feu,  Emperor Ming tumed against Xiuren, the brother who had in effect established  his  power base. The emperor, who was  showing  violent and 

erratic  behaviour, seems to have  realized  that people were  turning  against  hirn  and  looking 

towards Xiuren, but this  ody  intensified  his  fear  that  his  own  line would be displaced, as 

his  son  was  too  young to  nile  on  his  own. In 471 he  called  Xiuren to the  palace  and poisoned  him. 

In the  wake  of  these  murders, the emperor  seemed  to  realize  that he had to  calrn 

the  realm  and avert  any  backlash.  Hence, he sent a  lengthy  proclamation  (zhao)  to the 

various  court officiais and the  regions  of the realm,  outlining  the  "true"  version of events and the  rasons  for their  punishrnent  and expressing  his  most  profound grief  at  the loss of Xiuren  above  ail.  "4 

His  paranoia  did  not  abate, however. He was  beginning  to feel that  his  youngest 

brother,  Xiuruo,  was not treating  him  with  the respect that their older brother, Emperor 

Xiaowu,  or their father, Emperor Wen, would have  in~pired.1~~ He  aiso  reaiized  that 

Xiuruo  was  popular  and  couid  build  up a loyal  group  of supporters who would  ovenvheh his  own  young  heir.  1'6 Resolving, therefore, to have this brother murdered,  Einperor 

Ming  called  him  to court to receive new titles and positions to mark the festival of the Herdsboy and  Spinning  Girl.  Although  Xiuruo  was  warned of the danger and  advised  by 

his  aides and  generals  to stay in the  region  of  Jingzhou  and hold  it  militarily  against  the court, he  did  not listen and, upon  arriving  in  Jiankang  on the day of the festival (seventh day of the seventh  month)  in  471,  was ordered to commit suicide. "7  Only  Xiufan,  who 

was considered too  incompetent  to threaten anyone, was  left  among  the emperor's brothers. Emperor Ming  also  feared  his  own  in-laws.  His  empress came from the  prestigious 

Langye  Wang  family,  being a great-great  granddaughter  of Wang Dao, the  powerful 

founding  prime  minister  of the Eastern Jin. At the  outset  of  his  reign,  the emperor had 

wanted  the  suppon  of  aristocratie  officials who  enjoyed  high  prestige, and this included 

Wang  Jhgwen  3 A ,  the older brother of  his  empress.  178  However, as  his  illness 

became more  senous,  one of  his  great  fears  was that  because  of the prestige and power of the Wang  family,  this  brother-in-law would exploit his relationship to the empress  d e r  his 

death, for she was invested by tradition  with  the  authority  to place the imprimatur of 

legitimacy  on  any  action he  might  take  upon the emperor's death. Wang,  he  feared, would 

make  himselfchief  minister  ( z a i m g )  and use this power to  usurp  and  eliminate  his  own 

line.  His  solution was to send poison  ( t h  being understood as an  irnperial  command  to 

commit  suicide).  1 7 ~Ironically,  although the emperor was desperately  trying  to  eliminate  ail 

possible threats to the  security  of  his  own line, he overlooked the most  signifiant  one of 

alI.     

> --
> 176 SS/6/1884/3
> ln SS/6/1884/2 &6
> 178

For the  relationship  between  the  two,  see  SS/4/1295/7.  For  his  interest  in  coopting  court  officials  of    

> status (chaowang @O #)

,see  SS/8/2  179/  1 1.      

> 179 The means of death

is d e s c r i i  in  SS/8/2184/6.  According  to  SS/1/169/6,  this  happenecl  in 472, in the  third  month  of the  first year  of  taiyu  .f9c,  very  shortly  before  Emperor  Ming's  own  death. Between the  tirne  of  his  brothers' murders and the execution of his  own  brother-in-

law,  Emperor Ming seems  to  have been casting about for support elsewhere. In 471, he 

called  Xiao Daocheng to the capital. Although  Xiao's  advisors  were nervous about  this 

irnperial  call,  he  realized  the advantage at  hand  and explained to them that the emperor 

was  looking  for a  military  buttress for his young heir now that he had  killed  off  his  own 

brothers.  Any  delay in  setting  out for the capital would be an even  greater  risk  as it would once  again  c d  his loyalty into question. The murders of  kith  and  ! c h  would  only 

undermine  the  regime  and  lead  inevitably  to  disorder  in the  realm.  That would be the time to cooperate  with  his men, the connotation being that that would be the  time  to see what advantage they could  came  out for themselves. 180 

The emperor died in 472, at the age of 33, and was succeeded by  Yuhh,i81  his 

nine-year-old  son, on the  following  day.la2  Ruan  Dianfù  and  his  group  initially  held considerable power and  infi~ence,'~~ although  the regency itseifwas in the hands of  (outer 

court)  officials  of aristocratic background: Yuan Can,  Director  of the Department of State 

AfEairs  (shangshu  h g ) ,  and Chu Yuan, Protecting  General  (hujun jimgjun). 184 

Yuan came  f?om  a distinguished aristocratic family,  his  mother most notably 

belonging  to the  great  Langye  Wang clan but  enduring  straitened circumstances  after  her husband's  death.lM Yuan  began  his  career  under  Liu  lun  before the latter became 

emperor,1s6 and a  family  relationship existed in the fact that Jun's empress,  also  a Langye 

Wang, was a cousin of Yuan, her father and  his  mother being  fist  cousins.187   

> '*O NQSl116114

# - 711  

> I8l

This  spelhg  is  being  used  to  distinguish  him  from  his  father,  Liu  Yuh,  and  his  grandfather,  Liu Yu. 

Ail three  characters  are  written  differently  but have the  sane  pronunciation in modern  Chinese.  

> Is2

The emperor  died  on  day jihai  t h of the  founh  month  of the  fim  year  of  iaip  f a , or May 10, 472  (SS/  1/169/8),  at the age of 34 sui  (SS/11169/13).  His son  took  the  throne  on  &y  gengzi  a i.,or May    

> 11,472 (SSl1117715). The

young emperor  was  boni  on  day  xinchou  *of  the  fïrst  month  of the  seventh 

year  of  daming  J;;  g , or  March  1,463  (SS/1/177/1).      

> '83 SSl8123 1512-3
> 84 SS/l/177/54; NQSI
> 18'

NS/3/702/1-2    

> lS6 SS/8/2229/1-6
> 187 SS/4/1289/12; SSl81222912

Chu Yuan was  also  related to the royal  house,  even more directly so, for his father had  married  two  daughters  of Liu Yu (the second  after  the first had died),  though  he 

himself  was  the son of a concubine.lg8 He was a  much-respected  son, however, and a match was made for him with  a daughter  of Liu  Yilong  (Emperor  Wen)? 

As regents, Yuan and Chu complernented each other, for they  embodied  the  qhg-

zhuo  ("pure"- "impure") dichotomy of the times. Yuan  Can,  in keeping with  his  hi&-bom 

status,  was  disdainhl  of  those  of "cold-plain"  (hansu)  status (he was  certainly  suspected of  this  by the emperor, Liu  Jun)lgo and  never  deigned to  involve  himself in the duties or 

cares  of the  high  offices he held.  19'  In this, he kept himself detached and pure  (qing) 

whereas Chu,  despite  his  aristocratic  status, occupied the  zhuo  role of one who defiled himself in the  practical  work of  g0veming.19~ He was a trusted  advisor  to Emperor Ming 

and was  known  as a conscientious and able administrator who  abhorred  luxury  and extravagance. lg3 

It  seems,  fiom  arnbiguities  in the sources, that Emperor Ming had  entrusted  Yuan and Chu as regents in  his  will  but that there was really a sort of  quadrumvirate  which included  Xiao  Daocheng as well as Liu  Mian  iad.  lg4  The latter was not a member of  

> lg4

~here is  some  diffidty  in  detemiining  the nature of the  regency  fiom  the  various  historical  sources. 

In the biography of Liu  Yuhh,  oniy  Yuan  Can  and Chu Yuan are mentioned as  regents  (SS/1/177/5-6). 

However, in  his  father's  biography  (Emperor  Ming), Yuan  Can,  Chu Yuan, Liu  Mian  and  two  others  are mentioned as  hearing  Liu  Yuh's  last  will  and testament  (SS/1/169/12-13).  in Sima Biao's  history,  these  

> two

are  describeci  as  king  in charge of  political  a£Fairs  at court  after  Liu Yuhh  took  the  throne.  However, this  statement  is  preceded  by  a description of the  emperor's  deathbed  edict  which  callecl  on not  just  these 

two  but  several  others,  including  Xiao Daocheng (who  was  brought in at the  request  of Chu Yuan, with whom  he  had  close  ties)  to take  personal  responsibility  for  his  young  heir  in  their  various  civilian  and 

milîtaty  capacities.  The  emperor's  will,  therefore,  appears  to have  asked  Xiao Daocheng to  participate  in the  anairs  of  state  dong  with Yuan  Can  and Chu Yuan  (ZZTJl2/2360/46  to 236113). In the  biography  of Xiao Daocheng in the  Nan  Qi  Shu  there  is  a quadnimvirate  in charge of  affairs  of state, and this  consists 

of Xiao,  Yuan  Can,  Chu Yuan and Liu  Mian  (NQSlll7/3  4). in the biography of Liu Bing in the Song  

> Shu,

Bing  seems  to have  taken  the place of Liu  Man,  and the group of four (Liu Bing, Xiao Daocheng, 

Yuan  Can  and Chu Yuan)  take  hims  prcsiding  over the  affairs  of state  ( S M /  1468114- 15).  Liu Bing the  royal  house  but he had  served  weii  under  Song generals and  was  invited by Emperor 

Mingf  towards the end of  his  rule,  to have some part in the  running  of the  civilian  and 

military  apparatas  of the  capital.lg5  Xiao's  place in the  regency  and  his  various 

appointmentsjust before and  afler  the death of Emperor Ming seem  to  have  stemmed 

directly  from  his  close relationship to Chu who  is  said  to have felt that Xiao had the air of an exceptionai man destined for a future  of  unknown  h e i g h t ~ . ' ~ ~ Since  that  view  appears in the  N m  Qi  Shu,  the officiai  history  of the  dynasty  founded by Xiao, it probably  is  more the voice of the  apologist  historian  slanting  the account of the nse of the  House  of Qi. Chu's support may have been more a  hard  assessment of where things were headed and whose  side  would  provide  better  chances of  s u ~ v a l . At one point, Chu  is  dismissively described as being  simply  interested in protecting himself and his  family  and devoid of  any 

special  scruples or talents.  '97 

Yuhh was  nine  when he took the throne and  fourteen  when  rnurdered.  Actually,  he 

does  not  seem to have been considered the son of the emperor, for  his  mother was  given 

to one of  his  otticials,  Li  Dao'er,  after  falling  out of favour  with  Emperor Ming and gave 

birth  to Yuhh  d e r  being  recdled  to the  imperial  harem. There must have been some doubts about  his  patemity,  for  Yuhh  is even  said  to have referred to himselfas  General  Li 

(presumably  on the  prompting  of  others,  for  his  age would preclude  his  making  a comment on the  matter).19*  Nevertheless,  as the one who  became  heir to the throne, he  was  in asituation that was in  rnany  respects  sirnilar  to that of  his  cousin,  Ziye.  Too young to be a  

> --
> appears

to have been  invited  into the  group  afler  the death of Liu  Mian  in 474 (in a battle  against  the   

> troops of

the  rebel  Liu  Xiufan)  because  he  had  the prestige of  king  a royal relative  (he  was  a grand-son of Liu  Daolian,  the  stepbrother  of Liu Yu) but  posed  a threat  to  noone  because  of  his  gentle  nature and  lack       

> of abiliîy (2ZTJ/2/2361/23). In the biography

of Yuan  Can  in the Song Shu, the  historian  States  that  Yuan  

> Can,

Xiao  Daocheng,  Chu Yuan and Liu  Bing  s h e d  in the  decisions  of  state  and were  known  as the Tour Great  Offïcialsn  (sigui  W f ) (SS/8/2232/56).  The  same  situation  is  descnbed  in the  Non  Qi Shu 

but  ody  after Liu  Xiuf'an's  rebeiiion  is put  d o m  (NQS/1/9/13-14).     

> lg5 NS/4/100U5
> 196 NQS/2/426/15
> lg7 NS/3/75U2
> 19' SS/4/1296/6-8

d e r ,  he placed the throne in a vulnerable  state,  leaving  it  subject to the  varh?is  intrigues of the  unscrupulous  and ambitious. Even if there had been no question of  doubtful 

loyalties,  his  behaviour itselfbecame a factor in  determinhg  the  stability  of the throne. As a child,  he seems to have been  spoiled,  but on  entering  his  eariy  teens,  he behaved in an even more selfish and undisciplined  manner,  unable  to brook  any  hstration 

of  his  will  and  prone  to venting  his  anger  in aggressive and violent ways. He  is  said  to have  taken  a sadistic  delight  in  seeing  people beaten or murdered. At  any  time of  night  or day he would suddenly leave the  palace  and gallop through the  city  and out into the countryside, throwing the  life  of the people into chaos as they fled for shelter,  trying  to avoid the impiety of beholding the emperor and obstmcting  his  way.Ig9 As  his  behaviour worsened and  officials  of the court became more  fearfûl  for their  lives,  the likelihood of the  realm  being  thrown  into chaos by plots to eradicate the emperor  became  even  greater. 

The  opportunity  was  to prove  ideal  for the ambitions of  Xiao  Daocheng. The  first  challenge  to  this  boy emperor came in 474, about a  year  d e r  he had 

taken  the throne but before  his  behaviour itself could have  justified  his  being deposed. 

Almost  as a syrnbol of how  fiactionalized  the royal  family  was, Liu  Xiufan,  the  last 

s u ~ v i n g brother of Emperor Ming, launched a rebellion  against  the new incumbent  fiom 

his  base in  Jiangzhou  where he was  lnspector  (cishi). Xiufan  had been despised by  his 

brothers for  his  lack of  intelligence  and in fact owed  his  survival  to their low  assessrnent  of 

his  ability.200 Angry  at  being excluded  from  the  circle  of  those  exercising  power on  behalf 

of the boy emperor, he was encouraged by his  dianqian,  the  "document  clerk"  in de facto charge of each  regional  garnison,  to  establish  a broad  network  of alliances  while  he 

enlarged  his  army  and increased  his  supply of  weaponry  in preparation for an attack on the capital  fiom  the  Yangzi  River.  The court had become  wary  of  Xiufan,  and when an 

opportunity  arose  to send a new  inspecter  to  Yingzhou,  the  next  major  region  to  his  weSt, the court decided to send a large contingent of  soldiers  and a good supply of  weaponry 

with  the new appointee and use a satèr  route that avoided going  thmugh  his  capital  of Xunyang on the  Yangzi  River.  Xiufan's  aides perhaps foresaw that  they  would be  subject 

to attack  after  the new  inspecter  had established  himseifand  strengihened  their 

fortifications. In the  fifth  month,  about  three  months  after  learning  of the court's plan, Xiufan  was  in open  rebelli0n.2~1 From Xunyang  4 R he launched a  flotilla  of  rnerchant 

ships as  his  attacking  navy.  When Fort  Dalei  a & , near  the starting-point, and Fort Quetou  a a, close to the half-way point, threw in their support, the  court  was in a

panic. 

It was at this point that Xiao took the  lead  in  advising  on appropriate defense strategy. He  already  had the greatest  military  resources  under  his  control as a result of  his 

being  on the northem  fiontier,  and the contribution of northern archers to the defense of the city  confirrns  this  fact.  Anticipating that Xiufan had  learned  the  lessons  of the past and would therefore  launch  a sudden  attack on  Jiankang  to catch  them  unprepared, Xiao recornmended that a  heavy  well-disciplined  guard  be placed around the capital. Their major  role  would be to  wait  for the attacking  army  to collapse for lack of  reinforcements 

and  logistic  support, as the  m y  was  far  fiom  its base in  Jiangzhou.  Xiao  committed  his 

generals and  officiais  in  writing  to  his  plan, and he took up position in  Xinting  # q, 

southwest of the  city,  in  preparation  for  taking  the  brunt  of the attack. There Xiao 

directed  a water attack on Xiufan's  flotilla,  overwhelrning  the enemy and  succeeding  in 

setting  their ships on  fie.  Those  of the enemy who  rnanaged  to land were fended off by northem archers, and by that  aftemoon,  one of  Xiao's  generals had beheaded Xiufan who 

was  rather unconventionaily  directhg  his  troops  fiom  a sedan chair, perhaps  because  of 

his  great  guth  and  his  inability  to  ride  a horse.202        

> 201 The motivation is discussed in SS/7/2046/6-15.
> 'O2 NQS/2/465B-8

Despite  this  quick  end to Xiufan,  two  rebel  generals succeeded in leading an attack which momentarily  overwhelrned  the  imperial  defenses, and a  defecting  general  opened the gates to them into the Eastern  Citadel  (Don&).  M e r  two more of  Jiankang's  fortresses 

feu,  Xiufan's  garrison  clerk  (dimqim  .IC  &),  the  "brains"  behind the  whole  operation, 

was  able to  spread  the  rumour  that Xiao had been routed and that  Xiuf'an  was now in 

Xinting.  The population,  aistocrat  and  comrnoner  alike,  desperate to protect themselves 

fiom  reprisals  by the  victor,  hurried  there to present their cards to  proclaim  loyalty  to the new  d e r .  The next day, however, Xiao  led  his  army  back to  Xinting,  mounted the  wall, 

announced  that Xiufan and his sons were  dead  and bumed  al1  the cards,  promising  that no-one need  fear  reprisals.  When  the last of the enemy was defeated, the people  proclaimed 

Xiao as the saviour of the nation  (pan  guojimhe  & $ $f  ).*O3 The  entire  rebeiiion  had 

lasted  only  fifieen  days.204 

In a geshire  of  humility,  the members of the  quadrumvirate,  which now included Liu  Bing  to replace Liu  Mian,  who had been  killed  in  battle,205  offered  their  resignations, but their  ceremonial  ofFer  was  refùsed  and the members continued to  rule  the  realm,  taking 

tums  on different days to exercise their power in  c0un.2~6 

By 476, the quadrumvirate was effectively split into  two  camps,  with  Yuan and Liu on one  side  and Chu and Xiao on the other. Yuan and Liu were not in favour of Xiao, but Chu served as  his  spokesman. The most important point of division  was  to arise when Xiao spoke about  removing  Yuhh  fiom  the throne. Yuan and Liu were opposed but Chu accepted Xiao's  proposa1  to do  ~ 0 . ~ ~ ~The  removd  required a process of some  complexity.      

> ----
> 203 The

event  is  reaunted  in  NQS/l/7/5  - 9/11. The phrase about Xiao's  saving  the  r e a h  appears  in  

> NQS/1/9/

1 1. 

> Z04

Liu Xiufan  declared  rebeîiion  on  day  renwu  +of the  hfth  month  of the second  year  of  yumhui  X. 

# a, or June 12,474. The court  declared  martial  Iaw on  day  gengyin  fi  or June 20. The  flotiiia  arrivai  

> on

day  renchen  .fi a, or June 22, and the enemy  was  defeated  on  day  bingshen  fi  f ,or June 26 

> (SS/1/181/13

and  182/1  & 4)     

> 205 NQS/l/9/1 &12
> 206 NQS/1/9/15
> *O5 NQS/2/428/9

(6) Xiao Daocheng Prepares to  Usurp  the  Throne 

In the seventh  month  of 476 a royal relative, Liu Jingsu  a f B, took up  amis  at 

Jingkou  (present-day  Zhenjiang), where he was stationed as  Inspecter  (cishi) of  Southem 

Xuzhou.208  Jingsu,  then  twenty-four, was the oldest of Emperor  Wen's  grandsons  (Le.  the generation of  Ziye  and  Yuhh,  now on the throne).  209  He had established a reputation as being  vimious,  dignined  and  respecthl  of talent, and there was a feeling that the  wild  and vicious boy emperor now on the throne could be  rightfùily  replaced by  him.2'0  The  bais 

for this would seem to be  his  place as the "most senior".  Although  the histones  claim  that the  only  determined opposition came  from  the  Chen  family  (the emperor's mother was a 

Chen)  which  wanted to  maintain  its position, and  from  Emperor Ming's old  associates, 

Ruan  Dianfu  and  Generai  Yang Yunchang, who probably felt  it  was  easier to manipulate a

child  than  an adult, there could not possibly have been so easy a consensus. In 475, Jingsu was accused of  plotting  rebellion  by  one of  his  generals who had 

fdlen  out of favour, and  Ruan  and Yang  tried  to use the  opporîunity  to send troops 

immediately  to  ded  with  him.  Xiao, however, probably  sensing  the need to  maintain  apower balance, and Yuan  Can,  probably for the  same  reasons, held them back. Jingsu sent 

his  young  son as a gesture  of  trust  and  loyalty,  and a face-saving compromise was aiiowed. However, as the emperor  becarne  more unpopular,  Jingsu  seems to have  redized 

he needed to  act  soon to seize this  oppominity  or end up  being  done  away with by the 

Chen  family  and  Generd  Yang. Hence, he plotted with a large  group  of people and sent them to the capital to  win  support by bnbery if necessary. A large number of  generals, 

many of them  hstrated  in  their  careers, responded. It  is  reported that Jingsu secretly  "proclaimed  his  sincerity"  towards Xiao; that is, Liu  asked  to serve  under  him  and receive  his  protection. The  real  meaning  was  probably                   

> 208 SS/1/186/2
> 209 He was 25 sui (henœ, 24) at the t h e of his execution in476 (SS/6/1863/6).
> 2'o SS/6/186 1/9-10

that he realized he had a following  in the court and  among  the people and  wanted  Xiao to help  hirn  oust the emperor.  Obviously,  the implication was  thzt  Jingsu  would  then  take  the throne, but Xiao probably had no  desire  to find  his  own  ambitions  permanently  thwarted. 

Xiao  therefore  refùsed  to  act  as  his  sponsor.211  In the seventh  month,  the  s u p e ~ s o r of the palace  guard  led  several  hundred men to Jingkou and  "infomed"  Jingsu that the capital was in turmoil, thereby  giving  hirn  the moral justification to  march  on  Jiankang 

with  several  thousand  men?  When  General  Yang realized what  had  happened, he put the capital on  alen.  Xiao was placed in charge of  al1  amies  in  order  to  deal  with the revoit, and  his  son  also  took part in the  eff01-t.~" The  erstwhile  conspirators had no choice but to join the defense. A combined land and  naval  expedition was launched  against  Jingsu in Jingkou.  His  initial success against the naval force soon collapsed, and  his  generals 

deserted  him.  Jingsu was  captured  in the city and beheaded  dong  with his  three  sons,  just 

seven  days  d e r  the revolt  began.214  Two other royal  victirns  at this time were the sons of Liu Xiuren who were  killed  on orders of Yang  Yunchang  who  feared  these  royal relatives could become pretenders to the throne and eventually  displace  his  own  p o ~ e r . ~ l ~ Many 

generals  hvolved  in the original conspiracy were exposed,  t u t  Xiao gave  amnesty  to some of  those  whose  loyalties  might  be tempted but  whose  pnvate ambitions were  not  so  great 

that they could not be made to serve  hirn  in his quest for power. As made  clear  in the demand for  Jingsu's  rehabilitation  after  his death, this was a period  rife  with plots, and no single  person  could be accused of being the sole  vilIain.216 

In the  fourth  month  of 477,  Ruan  Dianfu  plotted  to  depose  the emperor and replace  him  with a younger brother,  Zhun  Pi]  q, but the conspiracy was exposed and the      

> 21 lNQS1111011-2
> 212 NQSIlIIOI2
> 213 NQSll/lO/3

and  SS/1/18613.  The  rest  of the narrative  conceniing  the Liu  Jingni  afbh follows  the Song  Shu  account  (SSl6/1860-1868)  

> 214

Liu  Jingsu  revolted  on  day  wwi  ifi  -f  ,of the  seventh  month  of the  founh  year  ofyuonhuiR&,  or      

> August 6,476, and was executed

on  &y  yiwei  2 *, or  August  13  (SS/1/186/2  & 5).   

> 215 SS/6/1878/15
> 216 SS/6/1866-1867

emperor personally oversaw his  executi0n.2~~ This execution conveniently removed one more  impedhent  in the way of  Xiao's  advance,  and  only  three  months  later,  Xiao  was  to accomplish what  Ruan  had  failed  to achieve. Xiao used an aide, Wang  Jingze  3 a Ji'],  as  his  intermediary  inside  the palace to accomplish  his  goal.  Wang had  served  with Xiao in the defense  against  Xiufan  and  was 

ready to  tum  to  him  because  of  his  growing  prestige as  Yuhh  became  increasingly 

unpopular.  Behg  on Zhun's  staff,  he had  inside  access to the court and was  instructed  to report regularly on the young emperor's whereabouts and watch for  opportunities  in the palace to act. Wang colluded with  twenty-five  of  the  emperor's attendant  officiais,  the 

chef  of whom murdered the emperor as he  slept  off too  much  festive wine  dunng  the celebrations for the festival of the Herdsboy and  Spinning  Maiden  (seventh day of the seventh  month).  He  Unmediately  sent the head to Wang who  left  the palace to deliver it to Xiao. In the  early  morning Xiao  led  several  dozen  people to the palace gate which the emperor normally used.  Since  the  guardians  were accustomed to seeing the emperor 

return  at  any  time  through  this  particular  gate and  dared  not  insult  the emperor by 

stopping  or  checking  him,  Xiao and  his  retinue were able to enter the palace 

unchallenged.218 

Once  inside,  an  order  (hg) from  the empress dowager  was  read, as required by tradition,  calling  Liu  Zhun  to the  t h r ~ n e . ~ ' ~ The  order,  foilowing  the standard rhetoric,      

> 217 SS/1/187/2; SS/8/23 1519; SS/l/189/9
> 2n

This  is  the description in the Song Shu  (SS11/190/8).  However, in the Nan  Qi  Shu, one of the  guards 

realizes  that it is Xiao and  quieîly  says  to  his  assistant that if  they  refuse to open the gate, the  realm  will 

be  in chaos  (NQSl2148 113). The implication  seems  to  be  that Xiao is  acknowledged  here  as the  1 s t  hope 

in  keeping  the  kingdom  together.  The  contrast  in the  historical  record  refîects  the  histonography  of the 

period.  Apparently,  the Southern Qi  History  rec0unts"facts"  which are more  flattering  to the  Mctor.  The Song Shu  was  officially  produced  during  the Liang by Shen Yue, but the royal  annals  and biographies  had 

aiready  been  written  and  presented  during  the Southern Qi when one  might  expect  Shen to have been     

> directeci to embeliish Xiao's

role.  Innead,  Shen  appears  to have been  fiee  of  such  pressure and  maintains 

îhe Song  viewpoint  of the  orighai  records.   

> 219 The

edict  is  said  to have been  issued  on  day jichou  t 8, which  was  the  day  foliowing  mi.fi  -f  . On      

> the evening of day mi,which

was  the seventh  day  of the seventh  month,  the  t h e  of the Festival of the      

> Heaveniy Reunion of the Herdsboy

and the  Spinning  Girl and  hence  a time  of  festMty  in the court, one of the  conspiraton  kiued  Liu Yuhh while  he  was  sleeping off  t w  much  festive  wine  (SS/11187/8). was  addressed to Yuan  Can,  Xiao Daocheng, Chu Yuan (identified by their titles, not by 

their  names)  and  all  high  officiais  (ba-uo  A ): 

Yuhh  was the eldest heir and  succeeded  to the throne.  It  was hoped that he would  grow  in wisdom and in stature and that the land would  h d 

> in

him  its strength. W h o  couid  have anticipated that he would be  wild  and perverse to the  extreme?  As he grew  towards  manhood,  there was no goodness so smail that he would not  offend  against  it  and no  evil  so  great 

that he would not strive to do  it.  Again  and  again  he would be instructed 

and  encouraged  but he only sought to  conceal  his  actions.  His  vicious  and violent ways would not change and grew only worse with time. He 

discarded  the proper attire of  rank  and office and dressed  himselfinstead 

in a  wamior's  costume. His cornpanions were hounds and  horses,  and he took pleasure in hawks and  falcons.  Feeding troughs and pens stood in the hallways and rooms of the palace, while leather sleevelets and  leashes  lay by the  throne.  He thought  nothing  of riding out beyond the  city 

unaccompanied and  passing  the  night  alone  deep in the  wildemess. 

Brandishg  a saber,  he would slash and wound. A sharp  blade was as a toy to  him,  and there was no end to the  victims  of  his  fell strokes.  Slipping 

away  f?om  his  guards  and  giving  no thought to  imperial  protocol, he would 

run  about the market-place and indulge in  drunken  memment  in cheap tavems.  Unwilling  to  retum  from  his  nocturnal  adventures, he would end 

his  late  nights  in  way-side  lodgings. He kidnapped  children  and seized others'  wealth  and  property.  Nothing of the like appears in recorded 

histoiy.  Nothing  of the sort  is  known  fiom  ancient times. The  Confucian 

scholar, Shen Bo  *Sl; #,  the devoted public servant, Sun Chao  a& , and the  two  You brothers had all given  good and  mentorious  s e ~ c e to  the 

realrn.  None  of the four was  guilty  of  any  crime, but they were murdered together. No  child  was  spared  the piercing  dart  or resonant sword. To disembowel a  person  would give  him  a perverse  pleasure,  while  throwing 

the body  hto  the river would  make  him  laugh  with glee.  His luxury  and extravagance had no  limits,  and the treasury was  drained.  River and road tolls were  recklessly  imposed  to  fil1  his  coffers. The people  groaned  in 

misery,  for they were  left  with  neither  home nor  livelihood.  1and his mother attempted to be stem and  just  with him, but he plotted to poison us in a fit of venomous  anger.  1 feared for our safety and wondered  ifwe 

would  live  out  Our  natural  days. To compare him to the vicious  lie  # and Zhou  W ,  the  last  rulers  of the  ancient  Xia and Shang dynasties, or to the 

tyrants  King You  & X and King Li  a 5 of the more recent Western Zhou,  is  to  suggest  only a fiaction  of  his  depravity..  .. 

To  depose  the perverse and  install  the  eniightened  lfei  hun  li  ming) 

is a worthy  mode1  fiom  earlier  dynasties.. ..I  therefore secretly  instructed 

Xiao Daocheng to  quietly  devise a  wise  strategy that would  bring  worthy men to the fore,  assist  in the re-establishment of law, and  bring  prosperity to the  entire  realm.  The Prince of  Ancheng  [Liu Zhun]  is  the  flesh  and blood of Emperor Ming.. .and  has  al1  the characteristics of an emperor in 

Our  midst..  ..[I]t  is  now  his  time  in the  imperid  cycle..  .and  the people are placing  their  hope in  hirn.  It  is  appropnate  for  him  to  bnng  glory  to  his 

ancestors by  taking  charge of the ten  thousand  kingdoms  (wmguo  a). 

The  ancient  canons  shall  be followed, as is appropnate for the  times.. ..

In a separate  edict  ( h g ) , Liu  Yuhh  was demoted to the title of Prince of  Cangwu 

Commandery  (*  E ).221 

## Liu Zhun was  almost  eight  years  of age when he took the  throne  four days  after  his 

brother  was  murdered, and Xiao occupied the Eastern  Citadel  as  minister  and regent  two 

days  later.222 Although  the quadrumvirate continued to exist, Xiao now seems to have been the dominant member. He was instrumentai in restonng the  powefil  title of Overseer of the Department of State  mairs  (lu  shangshu  shi) which he took for  himselfin 

order  to  dominate  the court. Although he did not have military control over the capital 

region  as inspector (cishi) of Yangzhou, he  was  already  Capital  Commandant  ( h g 

iingyiun),  which gave  him  some military  clout  within  the capital. In addition, he  was 

elevated in status with the prestige title of  Cavalry  General-in-Chief  @iaoji  &jiangjun) 

and moved  fkom  his  position as inspector (cishi) of Southem  Yanzhou,  north  of the 

Yangzi  River, to inspector (cishi) of Southem Xuzhou, the  garnison  immediately  to the 

east  of the  capital.2" 

Xiao's domination of the court depended to an important  extent  on the superior 

military  strength  he had at  his  command,  but the  writer  of the Song  Shu  also  suggests     

> 220 SS/1/187/9 to 18818
> 221 SS/1/188/9-10
> 222

Liu Zhun  was  born  on  day  guichou  **in  the  seventh  month  of the  fifth  year  of  taishi*  # .or  

> August 8,469, (SS11119311)

and  twk  the throne  on  &y  renchen  d &of  the  seventh  month,  or  August  5of 477  (SS/ll19315).  Xiao Daocheng  took up  residence  in the  Eastern  Citadel  (Don@  Cheng) on  day  

> jiawu

T +, or August 7 (SS/1/193/6). 

> SS11119414,6,10, 15

another  factor in the  general  lack of talent  arnong  members of the royal  family.  Few were there to  outwit  or  contest  him.224 

(7) The Final  Steps  to Usurpation 

Although  Xiao was  continuing  to build up power, he was not  totaiiy  unconteded. 

Within  a few  months  after  he had succeeded in putting Zhun on the throne, he  was 

challenged  by Shen  Youzhi  -& Q t, Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Jingzhou.  Since  his 

appointment there in the  fa11  of  472,  Shen had  gradually  made  Jingzhou  a power base  nom 

which to  contest  the power of  Jiankang  and  launch  an invasion  against  the capital.  226  By the time he declared  rebeilion,  he had had five  years  to build up  his  rnilitary  strength to the level of a hundred thousand men and  two  thousand  horses,  and he had an abundance of 

armour,  weapons and food  sto~ks.22~ Over the years he not  only  held back  arms  and men requisitioned by the central  governent  on the  grounds  that he needed them to control the 

mountain-dwehg  Man tnbespeople but he  also  built  several  hundred boats which he  hid 

~nderwater.2~~ The court was  partially  aware of what was happening but was  unable  to 

act,  principally  because  Shen was the father-in-law of Xiao's  oldest  daughter.  During 

Ziye's  reign  (464-465)  the  two  had  corne  to  know  each other  because  of their military 

responsibilities  at court and were on good  t e r ~ n s . ~ ~ ~ Xiao,  however,  became  aware of Shen's  growing  ambition in  his  western postings but  realized  he needed to  act  with 

subtlety.230   

> 224 SSl51146818. This

may  be  considered  a raîher  frank  appraisal  within  the Song  Shu,  the  official  hisîory 

of the  House  of Liu.  However,  it  was  compileci  during  the  Southern  Qi and Liang, when a more objective 

view  might  prevail.     

> 225 Accordhg to SSl71193319,

he  launched  his  military  rebellion  in the  eleventh  mont. of the  fïrst  year  of  

> shengming

JF  (477),  but the date is  given  as  day  dingsi  7 f!, in the  tweifth  month,  or  December  28, 

477, in SS/1/195/8.   

> 226 For

the  tirne  of  his  appointment,  ree  SS/ 111 78/15.        

> 227 SS/7/1933/9-10
> 228 NQS/I/11/7
> 229 For their relationship, see NQSI

II 1 114. 

> Shen

is  said  to bave  been  barbouring  secret ambitions  while  in  his  previous  inspatorate  at  Yingzhou 

> (NQSl1/11/5).

h fact,  immediately  after  the new emperor (Emperor Shun) had been placed on the  thmne,  Xiao sent Shen's eldest son to show the instruments of  torture  of the  previous 

emperor.231  Shen  realized  that he could not justify a rebellion in the face of  this  public 

testimony  to the  righteousness  of  those  who  had removed the  child  emperor. In addition, there  was  no longer an  "evil"  incumbent on the throne who could  justifi  a nghteous usurpation. Consequently, he had no choice but to congratulate Xiao on what he had  done 

and bide  his  time.  232 

Five  months  later  he revolted,  claiming  to be acting upon the  written  cornmand  of the empress dowager  (tathm  h g )  which  he had kept tucked away in  his  vest?  Even if 

such  a cornmand  were spurious, it reveals at  least  the moral  weight  of  any  order  alleged  to be  fiom  the dowager. Xiao  moved  into the palace to  avert  a sympathetic coup  within  the 

court and  maintain  his  control of the throne and therefore had his second son, Yi  &, 

take  over the Eastern  Citadel  (Dong&)  while  his older son and heir, Ze, was  garrisoned  at Pencheng  f &,  near  Xunyang  (in  Jiangzhou). 234 

## Two weeks  after  Shen had raised the  banner  of rebellion, Yuan  Can,  who had been put in charge of Fort Shitou  ;6  on the  West  side  of  Jiankang  four months  earlier,  took up  arms  in  r e v ~ l t . ~ ~ ~ In fact, Yuan  Can  and Liu  Bing,  both loyal to the Song and  afkaid  of Xiao, had  already  arranged  with sympathetic  generals  to cooperate in an  upnsing   

> 23 l

The  oldest  son of Shen  Youzhi  (SS/7/1933/7-8).  Xiao's  son-in-law. however,  was  Shen's  third  son   

> (NQS/1/11/4-5).
> 232 NQSll/l1/12
> 233

On  day  dingsi  T €!, of the  twelfth  month  of  shengming  ,or  December  28,477  (SS/1/195/8).  For 

some  time  More  this, Shen is  said  to have kept a letter  tucked  inside  his  vest,  claiming  that the  dozen 

lines  of  writing  on it were a pledge he  had  made  with  Emperor Ming.  However,  when  he  launched  this 

rebellion  and  his  concubines  rebuked  him  for  jeopardizing  his  family  in  his  old  age, Shen  pointed  to the   

> vest whefe

he kept this leîter and  asserted  that it  was  in fact an  order  fiom  the empress to descend on the   

> capitai (NQSl~l11/12-13).
> 234

On  day  dingmao  T JP  of the  tweifth  month  of that  year  or  Ianuary  7,478, Xiao  Daocheng  took 

militaq  control  of the court  (rushou  chaotang  h 9]  ) (SS/  11195/9).  The  terminology  is  ruju   

> chaotang h

IJc  in  NQSl1/11/14.  The latter source  also  gives  the date as  yimao  2 @,  or  December  

> 26,477.

This  is  unlikely,  since  Shen  is  said  elsewhere  to have  begun  his  revolt  two  days  later.  For Xiao Yi's role,  see  SS/1/195/9.  For Xiao  Ze's  role,  see  SS/  l/l95/12. 

> u5

On  day  renshen  l, of the  twelfth  month,  or  Ianuary  12,478  (SS/1/195/13). supported  by Liu Yun  Na, cousin of Bing and head of the  impenal  bodyguard.a6  Now 

that Shen  was  launching  an attack  fiom  the west, Yuan  mastemllnded  a plan to attack 

Xao  in the palace and create an edict  from  the empress düwager which could be produced to  jus*  the attack. The plan was bungled, however, when Bing,  fearful  for the outcorne, decided to  hurry  over to Fort Shitou on the  aftemoon  of the day on which the coup was to 

take  place.  Amving  with  his  family  and  several  hundred troops at the gates of the fort 

several  hours before the secret plan was to be set into motion, Bing made  it  publicly  clear 

that a conspiracy  was  afoot.*7  Xiao  sent loyal  soldiers  against  Yun, who was  onginally  to have launched a palace coup timed with Yuan's action. Having executed the  palace 

conspirators, Xiao  then  ordered  several  generals  to attack Fort Shitou. Song-loyalist support now seems to have been centred around Wang Yun  5 a, ageneral with  personai  ambitions who was also a nephew of Wang  Zhenfeng  Z A 1, the consort of the  late  Emperor Ming and now empress dowager  ( t c ~ i h o u ) . ~ ~ Yun led troops to Fort Shitou but  arrived  when the gates were shut and as the  imperial  troops were 

approaching.  In the face of  this,  his  own  troops  ~cattered.2~~ That  night,  Yuan  Can,  Liu 

Bing and Wang Yun were  al1  seized  and executed. 

Xiao's  success in the east  meant  that when he sent  imperiai  forces  westward,  he had the support of major  regions  or at least the  wait-and-see  inaction of potential Shen supporters. Shen was  never  able to get beyond Yingcheng (present-day Wuhan) which he 

vainly  attempted  to besiege, and support in the east was  limited  to  two  short-lived revolts by the brothers of Liu Bing and Shen  Youzhi  respectively. By  March  8, Shen was forced to  flee  fiom  Yingcheng when the  general  he had sent six days  earlier  to hold a fortress 

farther  east on the  Yangzi  River, was defeated. Shen either  cornrnitted  suicide or was        

> 236 NQS/lIlU6
> ~ 3 ' SSl51146912-5
> Her biography appears in SS/4/

129SB. Her father  was  Wang  Sengiang  3 # & (SS/4/  l296/2),  who                  

> was also the father of Jingwen S%(SS/8/2 l77/ 11&177812). Since Wang Yun f

is said  to  be  one of  Jingwen's  nephews,  Yun  would  also  be  the nephew of the empress  (SS/8/2  18411  1).  

> 239 NQS/I/lUlO

beheaded  after  being  seized  by people of  the  area  he was  fleeing  t h r o ~ g h . 2 ~ Within  four days, an attack  was  made on  Jiangling  which was being held by Shen's son and the  area 

was pacified. By March 17,478,  two  and a half months  &er  the  rebeihon  had  begun,  the state of emergency was  lifted,  and  Xiao  returned  to the Eastern  Citadel  (Dongfb)  in  his 

role as  chief  regent.24 l

Althougb  the court was now  essentially  under  his  control, attempts to stop or compete for  his  growing  power were  still  a risk but do not seem to have been  strongly 

organized.  In the eleventh  month  (December  29, 478) Liu Huang  81a, a great-grandson 

of  Daolian  (step-brother of Liu Yu), and fellow conspirators atternpted an uprising but were discovered and executed. About half a year  later  another great-grandson, Liu Chuo 

# f l  q , plotted  an upnsing but met with the  same  fate.242 The  insignificance  of the opposition seems to be reflected in the  spare  historical  record. Nor did  these  plots seem to have  derailed  Xiao's  gradua1  accumulation of honours and  titles  which would  lead  inexorably to the throne if no impediments were to  arise.  In the new year (479) Xiao was  again  on the honour path to the throne but  still  at the point where the honours emphasized  his  prestige as an  individuai.  He had  already  been elevated to the title of Grand Mentor  (tu@  f;  #)  and was  granted  the prestige  title  of 

Metropolitan  Govemor (mu ) of Yangzhou, seat of the capital. Now he  was  being pressed once  again  to accept the  three  "special  honoun"  (shuli  a ) aliowing  him  to        

> 240 Accordhg to NQS/ 1113/11, Shen committed suicide

wlien  his  forces  collapsed  afler  an  unsuccesdul   

> assault on Yingcheng.

In  NQS/2/472/14-15,  he  is  said  to have  committed  suicide in a village  whose 

inhabitants  sent  his  head  to  Jingzhou,  fiom  which it  was  sent on to the capital.       

> 241 Shen laid siege to Yingcheng on

day  guisi  a C of the  intercalary  month  of the  fini  year of  shengming  

> $1,

or  February  2,478, and  fled  on  day  dingrnoo  T !JP of the  first  month  of the second year of 

shengming, or March 8,478. He  was  kiIied  on  day  jisi  Z G of that  month,  or March 10,478. Shen's son 

was  killed  and  Jingzhou  pacified  on  day  xinwei  *of  that  month,  or March 12,478. Xiao  ended  the 

state  of emergency and  retumed  to the Eastern  Citadel  on  day  bingzi  fi  +of the  first  month,  or March 17,478  (SS/1/196/3-13).    

> 242 The k i t

revolt  oawred  on  day  guihai  & S of  the  eleventh  month  (SSI 11 198/9).  The  second  began 

occurred  on  &y  gengxu  fi  & of the  third  month,  or  April  15,479  (SSlI/199/7).  For  their  relationship  to Liu Yu,  see  SS/5/1464/10  & 146711  & 6 & 1480/7. enter the court with  sword  and shoes, to approach the  palace  at an  unhumed  Pace  and to enter into an  imperial  audience without  formal  announcement  of  his  narne.243 

(8) The  Rituals  of Usurpation 

Whether  this  command,  which had been issued and modestly  refused  a year  earlier, 

was  fomally  accepted or not is  unclear,  but  it  signalled that the groundwork for the next 

level  of honours was complete. The next major  advance  would be  to  give  him  irnperial-like 

privileges and  status.  It  began  with the  issuance  by the emperor of a royal decree  (zhao) 

proclairning  that Xiao should be raised to the title of Counselor-in-Chief  (xiangguo  #EI a ), 

with supervision over  al1  officialdom  (baihi  3 #$),  and given the green  sash  of office. 

Additiondy,  he was to be  enfeoffed  as Duke of Qi  (* "k'  ), with a  domain  of ten commanderies, and  given  the ducal  seal  and  cord  as well as  theyuanyou  hat which  was 

normally  bestowed on the royal princes. Most  irnportantly,  he was  commanded  to receive the  Nine  Bestowals  ( J i u i ) .  Xiao declined three times but  finally  accepted upon the  urging 

of the  high  ministers  and  officials  of the  courtt4  A detailed  statement of appointment (ce) was issued ten days  later  (April  19)  explaining  the royal  reasoning  for the preceding proclamation (zhao) of  these  honours.245  Speaking  tO Xiao as  xiungguo,  the emperor 

declared: 

Of the  shifts  and changes in heaven and earth,  none  are  greater  than 

heat  and cold. Of the  luminous  objects  suspended in the  firmament,  none 

are more  imposing  than  the  Sun  and moon. Cold winter  unleashes  its  harsh 

breath, but the  stalwart  pine  stands  ta11  and  strong.  The bnght  light  of day fades to  dusk,  but the "flower of sunset" blooms more visibly. So, too, 

does  the  wise  man stand unshaken in the  rnidst  of chaos,  while  the upright man holds fast to  principle  in the face of danger.  Beginning  with the cruel and  inept  mle  of the jinghe  reign  penod [of Liu  Ziye],  the  kingly  principles were  rent  asunder.  Emperor Ming  then  received the mandate, and the 

throne  was regenerated. But the  times  were beset by  disorder  and 

difnculty,  and  armies  were encamped in the four corners of the  realm.      

> 243 This was issueci on day ~ i o w u

7 Q which  has  to  be  in the second  month  (NQS/lII4/11).           

> 244 NQS/1/14/12-14; SSI2/507/3. The zhao was issued on day jiachen

7 fiof  the third  month,  or  April9,      

> 479 (NQS/1/14/12).
> 24J On &y day jioyin

7 of the third  month  of the  third  year  (NQSI 11 14/14) General  Xiao  stmck  awe into the  hearts  of  Chinese  and  barbarian  alike 

because  of  his  righteous and decisive actions.  Through  him,  the land was 

restored  and the people saved.  1 had been  lefi  orphaned  and  b~reaved at a tender age. The  [first]  heir [of our  father,  Emperor Ming] acted without  

> Wtue,

in a manner  unrnatched in the  annals  of  history  ... . But  Heaven  saw 

fit to  preserve  the Song and provided an  enligkened  assistant for the throne. In  my  ignorance and  weakness,  1 ascended the throne to continue the royal  line.  That the ancestral foundation could be restored and the throne  remade  was  the result of feats and  virtue  unmatched in history. In the  past,  [Yi Yin @+  p] the Defender assisted the Yin while [Huo Guang 

f X , Marquis  ofl  Bo Lu  f#  f&  helped the Han, but what they did  was  as 

nothing  in  comparison.  Today  shall  be the ceremony of ducal  enfeofient. 

Respectfully  heed my  command. 2M 

Irnmediately  following  is a description of  Xiao's  nine  great  "feats"  or  "meritorious 

contributions" (gong  sh)  (ten would have been expected, according to the tradition established by Cao Cao). This  provides  an  opportunity  to depict Xiao as the hero of the age and to  give  an  imperialiy  sanctioned  "officiai" version of political events that place 

Xiao  on the  side  of the just. 

When Yuan [Yi  f ]and  Deng  [Wan  S$ I] fomented rebellion [in support of Liu  Zimn  to supplant Liu Yuh as emperor], many were their 

followers.  [The royal prince, Liu]  Zifang,  refused  to be a loyal  subject  and led an army in response that trarnpled across the eastem Wu  region..  ..The sound of  war  drums  shook the capital, while  arrows  crossed and swords clashed in the  imperial  centre.. ..At  this  time, when the people were not of 

h e d  mind,  you  rushed  into the  fray.. .and  the rebel  groups  melted away. 

This set in place your domination of the  rnilitary  contenders (baye  as) 

and marked the  beginning  of your protective support to the  d e r .  When Xue  Andu  $$  @,  [Inspecter  (cishi) of  (Northern)  Xuzhou,] tumed against the throne and  dared  to  Iead  hordes of sheep-herders,  running 

roughshod over the land  dong  the Huai,  [his  nephew,]  Suo'er  eR, in his perverse ignorance,  joined  the havoc.. ..The  comrnon  people in the border 

regions  feil  into  hardship  and distress. They abandoned their occupations 

while  the border  cornmanders  cried an  emergency.  You accepted the 

[imperid]  command, . ..and  with  the  victos,  at  Pofù  Pt  % . .. and the  battle 

at  Shiliang  ;6  8 , you  seized  their leaders.. .and  brought  order  to the land 

north  of the Huai River. This  is  your  [fïrst]  feat. 

Zhang  Yan  9 # ,in  his  blindness  and ignorance,  turned  against  Our 

throne.. ..[Sent by Deng  Wan  to  provide  military  support for Liu  Z h ' s 

side],  he infiltrated into the eastern  regions  with  his  army, intending to  take advantage of any  opportunity.  At that  tirne,  the [western]  Yangzi  region 

was  not yet pacified, and the throne was in difficulty.  You  were loyal and 

daring.. ..You  faced a force of  much  greater  nurnbers,  and they fell as grass before the  wind.  The court was relieved of a  threat  fiom  the  east.. ..This 

was  your [second] feat. When the ambitious  Xiongnu  $ 4 ~[of the North] invaded and pillaged the borderlands . ..Our  impenal army fell  apart.  Blood flowed  Wte 

rivers,  and bodies were strewn for a thousand  li..  . .They  pressed  forward 

until  they were in sight of the capital.. ..You  accepted  Our  order  to  lead  a

carnpaign.. . .You  saved the  region  of the Huai and Fei  rivers  and let it bask once  again  in the  true  culture. This is your [third] feat. Following  this,  the  [barbarian]  Xianyun  t[people of the  north] 

became a force that  dared  to  roam  unchecked and eyed  Our  capital. Incidents were  common,  and  armies  were stationed for long penods in distant regions.  Soldiers  had no  desire  to go into  battle  and troops thought 

only  of home.  Thus,  the finely  armed  troops at  Xiapei  T 1panicked  at sight of the  oncoming  force, and the great Fort Jiaocheng  & feu  within 

the day. You put  al1  your attention to this situation,  ignoring  food and 

never  changing  out of  battle  dress.. . .In the end, you  delineated  the  borders, 

markhg  out  Qingzhou  f fi  and  Yanzhou  a for  Our  realm.  This  is  your 

[fourth]  f a t .  

> At

the end of the  taishi  & U reign period [of Emperor Ming, 465-

4711,  you..  .took  on  civilian  and  military  duties and  then  continued to serve 

according  to the  [dying]  emperor's Iast  will.  When the Prince of Guiyang [Liu  Xiufan]  prided  himself  on the support of many and thought to 

appropriate  the throne for  himself,. . .he brought his  army  to the capital and 

carnped  below its gates.  Roaring  flarnes  billowed  from  the palace and  flying 

arrows  swept in both directions over the impenal chambers.. . .The  officiais 

were temfied and the armies lacked leadership. You meditated on a plan..  .and  when you took your place at the head of the armies, the  feadUl 

becarne  courageous.  Within  a morning,  the great  victory  at  Xinting  was 

announced..  ..The clouds were dispelled and the  kingdom  made whole. This is your  [fifth]  feat. The  impenal  family  was  beset by many  dficulties  because  of the 

enfeofient  of the princes. . ..The  Prince  of  Jianping  & 9[Liu  Jingsu, 

grandson  of Emperor Wen]. .. raised  troops  against  the throne. You 

directed  the  impenal  army, and the  justness  of your action  was  reflected in your countenance. The army had not  lefi  the capital and the Zhu  region 

became  tranquil.  This is your  [sixth]  feat. The  P ~ c e of  Cangwu  [Liu  Yuhh]  behaved with brutal  savagery, 

and the land  was  in  turmoil.. ..The people  grieved  with one  another,  never 

knowing  how they  would  fare  between the  beginning  and end of each day. 

## The creation of the founding  ancestor,  [Liu Yu, Emperor Wu]  was  in 

disarray,  and the hentage of Emperors Wen and Ming  was  uncertain.  You 

looked at the  ancient  examples  of the Yin and Han dynasties and  followed the more recent models of the Wei and Jin. Though  only  a small  child,  I

assumed  the role of  s e h g  the ancestors. The seven  imperid  temples were cleansed and  restored,  and the  nine  regions  of the  realm  rcturned  to normal. This is your [seventh] feat. 

Yuan  Can  fi  lacked  character  and Liu  Bing  # wûs  faithiess. 

Liu Yun  # Pand Liu  Shu  urged them on and laid the foundation for disorder. They secretly  devised  their ugly plan and waited for the opportune moment. They  seized  Fort Shitou but their intentions did not accord with the proper  order  of  things.  From  within  the court you devised 

masterfiil  plans, and in the city weapons were brandished against  them.  The 

evil-doers  were  struck  down,  and the land was put at peace. This is your 

[eighth]  feat. Shen  Youhi  -a  & harboured  thoughts of  disorder  that  became 

more evident with  tirne..  . .He maintained  solid  forces in  his  temtory  and was unchecked in  his  cruelty.  Alas  for the people of  Jingzhou  and the Han River! They  alone  suffered inhumanely. When we cast  Our  eyes  towards  the west, it  seemed  like  alien  territory  At the  beginning  of our  nile,  we attempted  carnpaigns  that were  al1  unsuccessful.  He continued in  his  evil 

ways and  began  to show  his  intentions against the throne. He gathered together malevolent hordes, and their  rnight  was  greater  than  [fierce  packs 

of]  howling tigers.  Officiais  and people  alike  were  &id,  and the  anny  was 

demoralized.  You took the  [imperial]  axe  [authorizing  a mighty  campaign] 

and rnoved westward.. . .. With the  first  rolls of the battle drums, Xiashou  a

# a was  pacified.  Before the  scaling-ladders  could be placed against the 

ramparts,  Lushan  r4  fell. In one  moming,  those  who had escaped 

punishment  for  years  were  al1  executed. The  rivers  now  flowed  through  aland bathed in peace, and the  regionai  capital returned to the realm. This is 

your  [ninth]  feat. Your ment  is  in  having  assisted the vast realm  (tirnia  ff 

1;).. . .You  laboured on  behalf  of the royal  family,  and now,  fiom  east  to 

west,  nowhere is there a place not at peace.  Multitudinous  were the dangers and  difnculties  you faced! . . . .

You have chased away the  threatening  clouds and caused the  light 

to  sbine  in the  farthest  recesses of the world. You have assisted the royal 

person  in  b ~ g i n g etemal  peace to the four  seas.  So now the scent of the 

sacred  millet  wafts  over the ancestral graves and the star of peace  shines  in the  h a m e n t .  Envoys  corne  fiom  far  places to express  their  admiration and  fiom  distant reaches  to  show their  loyalty  to the court.. ..

> 1

have  heard  that  rulers  of old  rewarded  service and  extolled  virtue 

with  ceremonies of great pomp and  circumstance.  They were  ennobled  and 

enfeoffed  with land.. ..Your  ment surpasses the  great  accomplishments  of the  past,  but your  rewards  are not  those  described  in the  ancient  records. 

How  can  there  be  such  a difference  in the practices of today and 

yesteryear?  ... Hence, we appoint you  Counselior-in-Chief  (xiangguo) and 

enfeoff  you as  Duke  of Qi, with a fief  @O)  of ten commanderies,  including Qi  Cornmandery  in  Qingzhou.. ., and  gant  you a  piece  of black  earth 

wrapped in white reeds so that you may establish the  altars  of your  domain. 

This is indeed the  ancient  fief of  Shangfb  %>  X [=Lü Wang  k $ ] who  was 

enfeoffed in Qi [for  his  seMce  to the Zhou princes Wen and Wu in 

overcoming  the Yin and  establishuig  the Zhou], and who for generations stood at the forefiont in forming alliances [for the  purpose  of  staving  off 

the predators upon royal  p o ~ e r ] . ~ ~ ~ 

In view  of this histoncai reference, it is possible that the  name  Qi  was  chosen  for 

Xiao's  fief  @O)  and  friture  dynasty  because  it  was the  kingdom  of Qi which destroyed the 

kingdom  of Song  during  the  Warring  States  period.  However, the  historical  record states that Xiao decided upon  this  after  one of his  northem  staff  presented a quotation  from  the 

Book of  Prophecies  (chenshu  $& f ) - "The  iron sword and  sharp  blade are broken by Qi" 

# - and  argued  that his adoption of the  name  Qi would be in accord  with  the  will  of Heaven Chu Yuan was to bestow the  seal  and cord of the office of  Counsellor-in-chief  and the ducal  seal  and cord  while  Wang  Sengqian  (one of  Xiao's  "men" and uncle of the aforementioned Wang  Jian)  was appointed to bestow the sacred  e ~ t h . 2 ~ ~ In addition, the 

fist  to  fifth  golden-tiger  taliies  of the  left,  symbol  of  military  power, and the  first  to tenth 

bamboo  tallies,  syrnbol  of  his  power to send envoys, were  granted.  Inasmuch  as  his  title of 

counselIor-in-chief  placed  him  above  al1  officialdom  and  his  emolument was to exceed that of the  highest  honorary  rank  in the  Three  Dukes  category,  he was to renounce ail lesser officiai titles and  retum  the  seals,  insignia and  apparel  of  these  offices. He would continue, however, as Pastoral Govemor (mu, a prestige title) of Yangzhou (the  region  in which the capital lay) and  inspecter  (cishi)  of  Southern  Xuzhou. 

Finally, he  was  to receive the  Nine  Bestowals  (Jiu Xi),  which  were of  significance 

for  their  historicdy  conditioned  signal that the receiver was being groomed by  heaven  as a

worthy  recipient of an  exhausted  royal throne. The  @s  were important for what  they    

> 247 NQS/l/l6/ 8

# - 18/2           

> 248 The adquotation isjindao liren Qi yi zhi

# n $4  NI è(NQS/2/5  17/6-7).        

> 249 For their reiationship, see NQS/2/595/ 13

represented and were probably  never  given.  Sorne of the traditional vocabulary that enveloped them  was  obscure even  then,  but their  rnetaphorical  value  continued  to be accepted. The  Nine  Bestowals were described in the following  manner:  

> [l]

one  imperid  chariot and one war chariot,  drawn  by  two  teams 

of four black  horses,  for your maintenance of civil  ritual  and the application of law  which  you employ throughout the realm to  transform  the people 

near  and  far  into one body engaged in its proper  activities;  [2] a ceremonial 

robe and cap and a pair of  impervious,  double-soled  verniilion  shoes, for your attention to the cultivation of fields and your understanding that the 

miits  of the land are a  realm's  true  treasure, as  seen  in the prospenty of the people and the  abundant  stores of grain; [3] suspended  chimes  and gongs and six rows of  dancers,  for your modesty and justice and your ability to guide and mould the peopie into a harmonious  whole;  [4] a  vermilion  gate to  d w d  within,  for your assistance in  furthering  the  kingly  enterprise and spreading the prestige of the  ruler  and his teachings to  far  places, so that they are  delighted  and  yearn  to dwell as subjects  within  the realm; [5] an 

inner  staircase,  for your  clear  understanding of the merits of people, your uncompromising demarcation of good and bad, and your  insistence  on choosing able and  worthy  men for public  office;  [6] three hundred  stalwart 

warriors,  for your protection of the  throne  against  those  who would have 

evil  designs  upon  it  and for the  transforming  exarnple  you set for the people; [7] a hatchet and axe, for your use of  punishrnent  in the face of 

disorder  and your  example  of  virtue  in the face of  wrong-doing,  for your faiffilness as a  subject  and your  cornmitment  to executing the treacherous;  [8]  one red bow and one hundred red  arrows  as well as ten black bows and one thousand black  arrows,  for your  dl-encompassing 

presence,  like  the phoenix that  wings  its way to the four points of the realm or the dragon that  sous  to the  fùrthemost  reaches of the  domains,  and your ability to awe the world and  unite  it into one culture;  [9] a ceremonial container of black  millet  blended  with  yellow aromatic  turmeric  and a jade-handled libation spoon, for your  imer  contemplation, your reverent worship, your deep filial respect and your  sincenty  that moves the  gods.230 

Xiao is  said  to have  refbsed  this statement of  appointment  (ce) three  times  but 

f'maily accepted after  being  pressed by the  ministers  and  officiais  of the  court.251 

His  becoming  Duke of Qi  was  probably of greatest importance  at  this point. Xiao 

had  in effect held the title of  duke  (gong) since  474 as Duke of  Xyang  and  was  elevated to Duke of  Jingling  in 477.252 The latter was a  comrnandery  (jun)  rather  than  a county 

(xian).  The importance of being Duke of Qi was that he now commanded a fief of ten commanderies gathered  into  a guo  with the one-syllable  narne  of Qi and  from  this  position could be elevated to Prince of Qi. As necessitated by the precedents of  dynastic 

abdication, Xiao needed to be a  "one-syllable"  prince controlling not a fief of  simply  one county or  commandery,  but a number of commanderies  (twenty  for a  prince,  ten for a 

duke)  grouped into a  guo  with a monosyllabic  name  before he could  legitimately  found  adynastic  house. 

The occasion of  Xiao's  ducal entitlement and  Nine  Bestowals was  marked  by aspecial  amnesty  and a special  gant  of grain to  those  unable  to  care  for thernselves, and in 

order  to create the ducal fief of Qi, the  emperor  decreed that Xiao  should  be  given  five million cash  (qian  a), five thousand bolts  @i  E ) of cloth and five thousand bolts  (pi  E )

of silk  (juan  ).253 

A little  over  two  weeks  later  the fief of Qi was increased by another ten commanderies  (iun),  and Xiao was elevated to the  rank  of Prince  ( ~ a n g ) . ~ ~ ~ Chu Yuan 

was  appointed  to present the  princely  seal  and  cord,  as  well  as the  first  to  fifth  golden tiger tallies of the  lefi,  appropnate for a  general,  the first to tenth  barnboo  envoy  tailies  of the 

left,  appropnate for an  imperial  envoy, and the  ceremonid  black  earth  wrapped  in a white reed to estabiish the  altan  of a p ~ c e ' s fief He continued with  his  titles  of  Counsellor-in-

Chief  (ximgguo),  Pastoral Govemor (mu) of Yangzhou and  Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Southem 

About  two  weeks  later,  Xiao, as Prince of  Q i  was  granted royal prerogatives 

which  by precedent  symbolized  the substantive  royal  power in  his  hands and presaged the  

> 2S2

The record  mggests  that he  was  elevated  fiom  Marquis (hou)  to  Duke of  Xiyang  in 474  (NQS/1/9/13) 

and  then  to  Duke of  Jingiing  * & S$  "k'  (NQS/1/1111).  

> 2fl

On day dingsi  T t5 ,or  April22.479  (NQS/1/19/6)  

> 254

011  day  guiyou  & of the  f d month,  or May 8,479,  accordùig  to  NQS/1/19/7.  However, the date 

is  given  as day renshen  r)r  of  îhe  fourth  month,  or  May  7, in  SSf1119919.  

> 255 NQS/1/19/7-9

royal  mandate to be received. As in the  previous  cases,  his  heir  (shizi)  took the title of 

hpenal  heir apparent  (taizi) and  all  his  other children were given  titles  on the royal model, as prescnbed by  this  histoncal  pre~edent.~'6 In addition,  he  was  allowed  a new set of special  honaurs  (shuli) that could only be received at the princely  Ievel  but reflected 

imperial  privileges  and status.  These  special honours included the  right  to  Wear  the 

ceremonid  cap  with  twelve  jade pendants (the number only the emperor could  wear),  the nght to fly the  imperial  flags,  to have the way  cleared  of  al1  persons wherever  his  carriage passed, to ride in the  jingen  ("golden-pole") carriage  drawn  by six  horses  and 

accompanied  by the  five-season  carriage  (wzcshiche), to set up the  ox-tail  pemant  poles, 

and to enjoy the eight-row troupe of  dancers  and the imperial arrangement of suspended 

chirnes.  In the  last  two, he  was  surpassing some of the honours of the  Nine  Bestowals where  these  same  things  were offered in their lesser, non-imperid numbers (six rows of 

dancers  and the lesser arrangement of suspended  chimes,  as befitted dukes). Five days  later,  the  Nne-year-old  emperor "issued" a  declaration  (rhao)  whereby he  proclaimed  to the reaim that the  House  of Song was abdicating in favour of the  House 

of  Qi.2"  In reference to  Xiao,  the emperor stated: The people  tum  to one who displays divine  wisdom  and understands the  etemal  pattem  of change, who  cm  maintain  the ordained 

order  of heaven and  earth,  promote the realm and  protect  the people.  Just 

as  darkness  and  light  are clasped in an endless cycle, so too, in the  affairs  of men, good  rulers  and bad succeed each other in an age-old pattern.  Hence, 

Liu  Ziye  and Liu  Yuhh  brought the  realrn  close to disaster,  destroying  the foundations laid  by  the  earlier  emperors Wen and  Xiaowu.  Though they were deposed  Dy  the efforts of Xiao Daocheng],  I tremble at the  thought 

of the  disorder  they brought . Xiao  stands like a  mighty colossus,  bringing 

peace  and good  order  to  near  and  far,  spreading the benefits of the  true  and basic  principles,  awing  evil-doers  into  submission,  and  allowing  the good to 

flourish.  Greater  is  he even  than  Shun or Yu.  H e a ~ g of  his  good works, 

chieftains  and leaders  from  distant temtones have brought  gdls  and sought to be  subjects  under  this  beneficent government. Auspicious  signs  of a  true         

> 2s6 These honours were granteci on day bingxu i%

& of the  fourth  month,  or May 2 1 (NQSIlII WlO-1 1) 

> 2fl

On  day  xinmao  9 W or May 26,479  (NQS/l/  191 13) d e r  are constantly  appearing,  and the indications that there  is  a passing  of old to new, a succession of the  House  of Song to the  House  of Qi are 

manifest.  In the past, the empowering element of  metal  lost its  strength  and 

was  followed  by rne element of  water,  in a clear  sign  of the  Heaven-

ordained  changes in the succession of  things.  1 am ignorant but  I

understand the  rise  and  f d  of  things.  How  cm  I ignore the  examples  of the past and the  wishes  of gods and men? Hence, I abdicate,  yielding  the throne to the  House  of Qi,  just  as Yao gave the  throne  to Shun and the 

House  of Wei yielded to the  House  of  Jin.*S8 

## This declaration  of abdication had  actually  been  written  by Chu Yuan, and the 

fraudulence  of  it  is  revealed  by the  histonan  in one  very  small  and pathetic moment. As the ex-emperor was preparing to ride out of the palace, vacating it as the  zhao  had  declared  he 

would  do, he ingenuously asked why there was  none  of the  usual  accompaniment  of drums and bugles. An  embarrassed  silence was the  only  response.  2S9 

The  following  day the  order  of appointment (ce)  was  is~ued.2~~ Addressed to Xiao, it  argued  the reasons for announcing the abdication in the  zhao.  The instruction to Xiao was as follows: Just as the sun was placed in the heavens to  give  light  to  al1 

creation,  so the son of heaven was established on earth to  enlighten  and govem the people. No  rulers  are more esteemed  from  the ancient past  than 

Yao and Shun, both of whom yielded their  thrones  to  worthy  successors, 

recognizing  that the power and  vigour  of their  houses  had corne to an end and new  beginnings  were needed. In deference to  this  ancient  tradition, the Han yielded to the Wei and the Wei yielded to the Jin. Our founders were 

wise  luminaries  who were able to  hold  the reins of  Wtuous  govemment, 

but their descendants  displayed  less and less of that former strength. The 

House  of Song has  lost  its power,  like  the  Sun  that has  gone  into  eclipse  or a river that  has  gone  dry or a mountain that has broken  apart.  Only  you, Xiao Daocheng, had sufficient wisdom and  judgment  to impose your presence and give help to the  suEenng  realm  when it was needed. Your 

ski11  in the arts of  war  has  enabled you to  exterminate  the  evil  men  fiom 

around  the throne and in the distant  temtories  of the  realrn.  AU  the  signs  of a new  beginning  are now apparent. Both gods and men are  looking  to you.   

> 258 NQS/1/19/12

# - 20/11  (abridged)   

> 259 For

Chu's participation,  see  NQS/2/434/5.  According  to  the  Nan  Qi  Shu,  he  withdrew  to the Eastern    

> Residence (Dong Di

## 6 &$ ) immediately  after  issuing  the  edict  (zhao) of abdication on  day  xinmao, or              

> May 26,479 (NQS/ 1/20/11). However, in the Song Shu, he did not retire to the

Eastern  Resdence  util                      

> the following &y, renshen, or May 27 (SS/1/199/12). The awkward exit is d e s c r i i in NQSI1/20/11.
> 260 ûn day renchen, or May 27,479 (NQS/1/20/12)

Heaven's  wnstancy  is  towards  virtue,  and you are the  person  through 

whom Heaven has restored the proper  order  of  things.  Following  the 

desires  of Heaven and the  hopes  of men,  1 respectfùlly  yield the sacred 

vesselç  and render the  throne  to you.  I ask  you to follow the precedents of the  past.  accept  the  wishes  of the people and Heaven's  will  and  take  the position of emperor so that the role of the throne may be  preserved.261 

This was followed by the Wnt of the  Imperia1  Seal  (xishu  f f ),  the  third  and final abdication document,  justifjmg  the  granting  of the impenal  seal  in  rnuch  the  sarne 

language  employed  in the preceding  zhao  and ce.  Again,  the emperor  stated: 

Though  1am ignorant,  1 understand the Great Way, as  manifested 

in past ages, and seek to follow the ancient pattern.  Just  as the seasons change, so is there a rise  and  faIl  in the  &airs  of men.  Thus,  in ancient times,  Yao  realized  that only Shun could  maintain  the role of the throne, and in more recent imitation of this act, the  failing  House  of Han abdicated to the ascendant  House  of Wei. The founder of our dynasty was  wise  and 

vixtuous,  enjoying  the favour of Heaven and men, but  his  Wtue  has not lasted. The  House  of Song has  fallen  on  evil  times, buffeted by the disturbances of  war  and the depravations of succeeding  rulers.  We have 

relied  on your greatness to save us. By your  glonous  feats in battle, you have defended  Our  territory  fiom the enemies without and saved  Our  House 

fiom  the enemies  within.  You have succoured the people, so that wherever the dew  falls  or the stars  shine,  the people have felt your beneficence.  Thus, 

even  those  fiom  regions  beyond the pale of  Our  civilization  have  corne 

seeking  to become  Our  subjects. The Royal Astrologer  has  observed the 

heavenly  signs that point to a new imperial presence. You are the one in whom the signs are to be  fulfiIled,  and your  very  countenance  vedies  this 

fact,  for it is shaped and  fonned  as  only  an imperial face could be. Heaven is constant towards  v h e  only,  and the  ailegiance  of men is oniy to goodness.  1 have continued to hold onto the  symbols  of power only to 

ensure  that  they  would be handed on to you, in accordance  with  the  will  of Heaven and men. In the past, when the power of  metal  faded, the  House  of Jin yielded the throne to the  House  of Song. Today we repeat the  act,  for the power of water  has  faded, and we pass the throne  ont0  your  House  of Qi. Chu Yuan and W a n g  Sengqian  are  commanded  to present the imperial 

seal  and  cord  to you. The ceremony of transition  will  foliow the  pattern  of 

Yao to Shun. Accept the throne, for this  is  the  command  of Heaven.  262  

> 261

NQSl1120112  - 2 1/13  (abridged)    

> 262 NQSIIR 1/14

# - 2313 (abridged) The  history  states  that  Xiao  refused  three  t i r n e ~ . ~ ~ 3 The emperor and  high 

ministers  and officials are  said  to have implored  him  to accept  after  what  must have been 

his  first  outright  "refusal".  Thereupon,  the Grand  .hstrologer  presented an  explanation  of 

signs  that the Song's time was past and Qi's time had  corne.  2M  The  Astrologer  also 

presented  many  auspicious signs to  confirm  his  argument that a new  imperid  mandate  was 

to  take  effect.  With this  support,  the  officials  of the Song as weil as of the  principality  of Qi implored Xiao to accept. Presumably he refùsed once  again.  Finally,  Wang  Jian  wrote 

that the  edict  of abdication had been received and discussed by  al1  officials, and they had decided to accept the abdication and had recorded it as an established fact. Xiao  finally 

Xiao ascended the throne  two  days  later  in  the southem  s~burbs.26~ There he erected an  altar  and made bumt offerings of black oxen, so  thar  he could address  himself 

to the Emperor of Heaven  (huanghang  houdi  f f W + ),  explaining  both to Heaven and to the  realm  of men how he had received the throne: The emperor of Song understood the  will  of Heaven and rendered the  heavenly  mandate to me, your servant, Xiao Daocheng.  Since  the 

creation  of  humanity,  there have been  rulers  and elders, and the  impenal 

throne exists to  filfill  the  ordained  order  of things. The  throne  is  a public 

trust,  and there  is  no permanence in the mandate to  d e .  Thus,  the 

historical  canons  speak  of Shun and Yu who, in  ancient  times,  were  cded 

upon to receive the throne  because  of their great  virtue,  and of the  houses 

of Han and Wei that followed  this  same  example  [so that the latter received the throne  fiom  the former by abdication and not by line of inheritance]. The  House  of Song, as represented in the  element  of water, was in  deche   

> 264 The

essence of the argument  was  that the  number  six  represented  greatness  and  high  position, and  this    

> number had figured

in  all  preceding  abdications and successions.  Thus,  the  Later  Han had  abdicated  to   

> the Wei

after  196  years in power, the Wei  had  abdicated  to  the Jin  &er  16  years, the  lin  had  abdicated  to the Song after 156 years in  power,  and the Song  had  now  reached  its  sixtieth  year.  In  al1  cases in the  pas&      

> one dynasty had abdicated and

a new one  had  mcceeded  when the  number  6 was  involved.  Hence,  the Qi   

> should accept the

abdication of the Song,  M c e  the  cycle  of time  had  again  reached  "6",  the  symbol  of the 

imperiai  position  (NQS/1/23/4-7).      

> 265 NQSl23R-9
> 266 On &y j i m

'P  +of  the  fourth  month,  or May 29,479  (NQSIlI3  1/1) and looked to me, your servant, to  Save  it. The realm  was  rescued  f?om  the 

brink  of  disaster  and  restored  to wholeness, so that benevolence and 

righteousness  and the proper practice of rites and  l~.v flourished once 

again.  This was  an  unparalleled  enterprise that joined the actions of Heaven and man, and was  attested  to by many  aùspicious  signs  both  on  earth  and in the heavens. However,  despite  the  abundant  signs of Heaven that the 

imperial  nile  was  being  given  to me,  1 declined, for  1 lack  vimie  and am not a true  d e r .  Nonetheless, the many  ministers  and  officiais  and  disthguished 

worthies  pressed me,  saying  that the will of Heaven cannot be avoided and the realm of gods and men  cannot  be  lefi  without  a d e r .  Standing in awe of Heaven,  I could not brook its will and therefore chose this auspicious day to accept the abdication and address myself to Heaven with this sacrifice. 267 

M e r  this ceremony, Xiao  retumed  by imperial  carriage  to the palace and entered the Fore-Temple of the  Ultimate  (Taiji  Qiandian  h &i % IXL  ) to  present  to the ultimate source of creation an imperial statement  (zhao). Speaking  in the royal first  person,  he reiterated the principle of change by  which  the  House  of Song,  realizing  its force was spent, had abdicated to the Qi in deference to the will of Heaven as manifested in 

multitudinous  signs and indications.  "Because  of the manifestations of decline and the evidence that it had  mn  its course, the  House  of Song wished to  enhance  the throne and 

willingly  passed  it  on [to me].  Knowing  that  al1  things  corne  to an end, they saw that 

heaven's  [new]  blessing  was  now gathered in my  person.  My  desire  was a humble station in  Me but my  refusal  was  not received.  1therefore complied with Heaven and man and obeyed the  great  command  (izngming  3 48).  Thus,  1 have  taken  the throne in the ancestral temple and offered a sacrifice to the supreme  d e r  of Heaven  (shangdiil+  )." 

Whiie  declaring  that he trembled  at  his  lack of  virtue,  Xiao  announced  that he wished to benefit the people in  ail  corners of the  realm  and mark this inauguration as a moment to 

make  d things new. He therefore declared an  amnesty,  changed  the reign  name  to 

> jiany~m

# & % ("establishing  the  beginning"),  granted  a general  promotion in  rank  to     

> 267 NQSI 113 111-8 (abrïdged)

civilian  and  military  officials,  raised  the level of  aristocratic  titles,  distributed  grain to widows and  orphans,  and  forgave  certain  d e b t ~ . ~ ~ ~ 

The last Song emperor was demoted to the  rank  of  Pince  of  Ruyin  ik  & Z but 

he  was  to  maintain  the traditions of the Song in terms of its  calendar  and its use of 

carriages,  robes, flags and  colours,  and he was not to be treated as a  subject  in  written 

communications  with  the Qi emperor. The  remaining  princes  of the Song, the younger 

brothers  of the  nine-year-old  ex-emperor were demoted to the level of  duke  (gong), and 

those  of lesser titles were reduced one level in  rank  again.  Demotion, as stated in an 

imperiai  edict  (zhao), was not to be  arbitrary  but rather to follow the traditions of old. In 

fact,  many  aristocratic titles were to be  maintained  as a  means  of  showing  respect, for there were  those  of the  previous  regime  whose great  virtue  and devotion to  duty  wouid 

ment mention not just at their ancestral graves and  villages  but  throughout  the  land.269 

Less  than  a month  d e r  abdicating, the last emperor of Song "died at the age of 

nine  and was  given  the honourary posthumous title of Emperor Shun  (M  ,"the 

0bliging7', presumably  because  he had abdicated in  willing  submission to Heaven's 

command)  and buried a month  later  according  to the  ntual  of the last emperors of the Wei and  Jin270  Because  the Song  impenal  line  was now ended,  Xiao  appointed Liu Yin  &,  ,

of  unidentified  relationship,  as the  next  Prince of  Ruyin  t& 3 to serve as heir to the Song  emperors.nl   

> 268 NQS/1/32/1-9
> 269 NQS/1/32/10-15

no He died on  day jiwei  t *of  the  hfth  month,  or  June  23.479  (NQS/1/3412).  One of a group  of  m e d 

men broke  past  the  guards  at the ex-emperor's  residence  and  killed  the boy  (ZZTJl21'2373/#2  1).  Although  

> said

to have  k e n  13 sui at the  t h e  (SSI  1/  l99/  1J),  he  could  not have yet  reached  his  tenth  birthday,  for he 

was  bom  on  day  guichou  * B o f  the  seventh  month  of the  fiAh  year  of  taishi  4b  ,or  August  8,469  

> (SS111193/1).

The  f k t  that  the histories  give  his  age as 13 sui  suggests  that  there  might  have  k e n  some 

shame  involveci  in  manipulating  a chiid  who  had  not  even  reached  the  official  capping  age of 12 sui For 

his  posthumous  titie,  see  SS/  If1 99/11 - 14  and  NQSI  113412.  He was  buried  on  day  yiyou  2 of the  sixth 

month,  or  July  19,479  (NQS/1/34/12).  The  precedents  of the Wei and J i n are  cited  in  NQS/1/34/2.  

> 271

The  appointment  was  made  three  months  late,  on  day  bingzi  O -f  of the  tenth  month,  or  November  7, 479  (NQS/1/35/6) Two days  afler  the  1st  emperor's  death,  his  five  rernaining  brothers, who  had 

already  been  demoted to the  rank  of duke, were executed "for treason"  (moufan),  an 

unlikely  charge  since  they were  only  about  eight  years  of  age."  However,  it  did  clear  the field of  imperial  reiatives who  could  be used to  contest  Xiao's  position. At  this  tirne,  Xiao also honoured  his  brothers and parents posthumously  with 

princely  titles  for the former and  imperial  titles (Emperor  Xuan  & and Empress Xiao 

$ W ) for the  latter.273 This was a filial  act  which  also  created the image of an  irnperial 

line  with  roots and branches beyond  himself  alone.     

> 272 They were executed

on  day  xinyou  9 iB  of the  hfth  month  of jimyuan  12.  ,or  June  25,479  

> (NQS/1/34/2-3).

The charge of  treason  (moufan  %&)  is  mentioned  in  SS/8/2238-2239  

> 273 NQSllB413

FROM  THE  SOUTHERN  QI TO THE LIANG (479  - 502) 

(1) The  EarIy  Years  of the Southem Qi Xiao Daocheng launched the new dynasty  under  somewhat the  same  familial 

circumstances  as Liu Yu, the founder of the Song. He was one of  ody  three  brothers, the older  two,  Daodu  a and Daosheng  j#  & ,being  his  half-br0thers.I  Both died 

durhg  the Song. Daodu, the oldest brother, had no sons but Daosheng had  t h e ,  the second of  whom,  Xiao  Luan,  was  eventually  to be the undoing of the royal line. See Table 4 for the line of Qi  rulers. 

Table 4 Rulers  of the  House  of  Qi  (the Xiao  Family) 

Xiao  Chengzhi  a 2

> I

Daosheng  a &

# I

(5)  Luan  g,  Emperor Ming  # $ +r.  494-498 

# 4

(6) Baojuan  * (7) Baorong Marquis of  Donghun  Emperor  He*  #

MM  r.  50  1-502 

r.  398-50  1( 1 )  ~ a o c h e n ~ a&, ~rn~ernr  ka&  &+ 

r. 479-482 

I

(2)  Ze  @,  Emperor  Wu r.  482-493 

I

Changmao  a

the  wenhui  crown  prince  rt  ,&  @osthumous  title)   

> d. 493

(prior  to  his  father)   

> I
> IL
> (3)

Zhaoye  # (4)  Zhaowen  fS 2

Prince of  YuIin  # #i 5 Prince of  Hailing  it) & 3

r.  493494 r. 494 

As in the case of Liu Yu, the  reign  of the  imperial  founder  was  short. Xiao Daocheng died  in  482, the  fourth  year of  his  new dynasty, at the age of  55.2  From the 

deathbed  advice  given  by Xiao to  his  heir,  it  is  clear  that  his  success  against  the Song had 

taught  him  early  on that  his  own  dynasty could  s u ~ v e only if the members of the royal 

# ' NQSl2139012-3 

The  historical  record  states  that Xiao Daocheng  was  bom  in the  fourth  year of the  yumjia  areign 

period,  or 427.  There  is  no mention of  month  or  day  (NQS/1/3/12).  He died on  day  r e m  &of  the  third 

month  of the  fourth  year of jianyuan  ji;  ,or  April  1 1,482.  His  age  is  stated  as 56, but  this  is the sui 

calcuiation,  as  is generally  the case  throughout  the histories  (NQS/1/38/12). house  remained  at  peacz  with  each other. If the  House  of Song had not  murdered  their 

own  flesh and blood, he deciared, no other family could have moved into the vacuum they 

created.  This was a  lesson  to be  taken  to  heart3  In the end, though, the  Xiao  family  was 

to  destroy  itself  much  as the Liu family had. This  wish  to  maintain  the stability of the  royal  line may have deterred Daocheng 

fiom  replacing  Ze  # E& as heir apparent, even though he was  enraged  upon  leamhg  that 

his  son, now in  his  late  thirties  and feeling to be  his  father's equai for  his  work in 

establishing  the throne, was not  just  acting beyond his proper prerogatives but had aiso 

aiiowed  his  favounte to quietly acquire the accoutrements of an  ernper~r.~ Still,  he chose in the end not to  displace  him.  His  preferred choice would have been Yi  # &,  the second of  his  fifteen  living sons, although the officiai  history  indicates this indirectly by stating that when Daocheng was considenng Ze's  removal  fiom  the line of succession, Yi continued to be a faitffil  and  respecthl  brother, thereby  eaming  his  older brother's  trust 

and love.  5

Ze  and Yi were in  fact  full brothers, fairly close in age and fifteen to twenty  years 

older  than  the  next  set of  brothers?  This may have helped  nurture  their close relationship, one that was to assure the secunty of the  first  generation of Daocheng's descendants in one important instance  two  years  after  Ze  took the throne. Huang  j# a, the  fourth  son of Daocheng,  angered  Ze  for  arriving  in the capital  from  his  inspecter's  (cishi) posting  at 

Southem Xuzhou  (Jingkou  or present-day Zhenjiang)  with  severai  hundred  armed  guards. 

Ze  had  already  decreed a  limit  of  forty  official  bodyguards  on princes in the  capital  and had forbidden the princes  fiom  having  private  militias  and stocks of  weapons.'  Since                    

> NQS/2/624/3
> The Nan Qi Shu states only vaguely that Xiao Ze failed to meet the expectatiom of the emperor in wbat

he  did  (Yi  shi  shizi  vX  f @)  (NQS/2!409/2).  One  m u t  look to the Zizhi  Tongiiun  for an  explation    

> (ZZTJ/2/2377/#10; juan 135, year 483).
> NQS/2/409/2-3
> NQS/U621/14

# 'NQS/2/624/1-2 irnperial  sons and brothers, however young they  might  be, were traditionally appointed to the  various  regional  garrisons as generals and  cornmanders-in-chief  (dudu 8 +) of 

several  adjacent regions, this restriction implied some  rnisgivings  about  his  own  family. 

Although the  princes  should have been natural bulwarks of the  reigning  family,  they were often too young to  act  on their  own  or  with  mature  wisdom,  and the emperor could  ody 

hope for the best by appointing an acting administrator  (xing  /&hu]shi  fi  [ & JY  ] q) 

to exercize  military  authority  "in trust" when the son was too young and a g h s o n  clerk 

> (dianqian)

to keep a restraining  eye on older sons' behaviour.  Often,  the strict  restraints 

placed on them in the  name  of the emperor by the  xingshi,  and especially the  dimqian, 

created  resentment and  rebellion.  Although the  historical  account seems to imply that Huang,  then  about  twenty-four,  was  simply  a man of the  army  who  loved  military  pomp and ceremony and  meant  no  h m ,  the fact that  Ze  was enraged and considered executing this brother  suggests  he did not  take  sibling loyalty for  granted. 

This is not  udikely  in  view  of the difficulty of  forming  close bonds among a large number of  half-brothers.  Xiao Daocheng had had  his  fifieen  (su~ving) sons by eleven consorts, and the  rivalries  and tensions that must have developed arnong  these  separate 

"families"  in addition to the probable lack of a uniformly  close relationship  between  the sons and their father  would  have engendered a lack of  famly  unity  and  trust.8  The appointment of young sons and brothers to  regional  garrisons probably exacerbated the problem by  limiting  the  opportunity  for sibling affection to develop. A sense  of 

wlnerability  would have been  only  natural  in the one holding the most favoured position, especially the position of emperor or  hekg  Despite  Ze's  anger, however, Yi  successfûiiy    

> There were four different

sets of  full  brothers: (1)  sons  1 and 2 (Zeand Yi); (2) sons 7 and 18; (3) sons                            

> 10 and 16; and (4) sons 12 and 19 (NQS/2/62 111-4). See also the appropriate geneaiogical tables. No speafic &te is given for Xiao Huang's mival in the capital. However,

the histories  state  that  he  was            

> nrst appointed cishi of Southern Xuzhou in 483 (NQSI l/46/ 13).

in the  tenth  month  of the  foiîuwing  year,  

> however,

a younger  brother  was  appointed  to  this  position  (NQS/1/49/9).  Since  Huang  does  not  seem  to have been  reappointed  to Southern Xuzhou but  was  later  made governor of  Danyang  (NQSIU624/6),     

> where he could likely

be  kept  under  closer  surveillance (the  seat  of  Danyang  Commandery  was  Jiankang pleaded  on their brother's  behalf,  reminding  Ze  of their father's love for this brother and 

repeating  their father's warning  against  destroying itself as the Liu  family  had  done  before 

them.1°  Though  spared the  fury  of the  enperor,  this brother was to die in 490, at the age of  30, before the close of  Ze's  reign.  l l

It  would appear that  despite  the occasional reference to beloved brothers and sons, 

Ze's  basic relationship  with  his  family  was one of  wariness.  Two of  his  own  sons were to 

arouse  the  same  fear and anger as had his brother in 484. Zixiang  a + 4,  his  fourth  scn 

who loved the  military  arts and was an  exceptionally  bold and  fearless  soldier, had been made inspector  (cishi)  of  Jingzhou  and commander-in-chief  (dudu)  of seven  regions. 

Based  in Jingzhou, he proceeded to build up  his  military  strength by buying arms  fiom 

Man tribespeople. When  ZWang  discovered that some of  his  officiais  had exposed  these 

illicit purchases to  his  father (the emperor), he had them  killed.  The emperor,  fùrious,  sent 

several  hundred  armed  men to  arrest  his  son's "unworthy" attendants who had led  him 

astray and promised to  spare  his son's  life  if he acknowledged his  guilt  and  retumed  to the capital. Zixiang, however, attacked the  imperid  army which  was  forced to retreat. 

Another  force,  under  Xiao Shunzhi,  then  govemor  (yin)  of  Danyang  and the father of Xiao  Yan,  the  future  founding  emperor of the Liang, was  then  sent. Zixiang  was  afkaid 

and  his  army  fled,  leaving  him  no choice but to  surrender. l2 

Although  the  Nan  Qi  Shu,  the  official  history of the Qi,  States  that Zixiang,  then 

twenty-one,  received the  imperial  death sentence, other sources state that when Xiao 

Shunzhi  led  the army  westward,  he went with secret instructions  fiom  Xiao  Changmao, 

the  heir  apparent, not to let  his  brother retum dive.  l3  This secret  comrnand  itself reflects the  fact  that fear and suspicion had settled in the  next  generation of  mlers  and  heirs.  It also                              

> and the position of govemor would have k e n less "dangerous" than that of inspector of Yangzhou
> Region, the seat of which was also in Jiankang), this ment must have occurred towards the end of 484.
> Io NQSl21624lI-5

# " NQSIU624/7   

> l2 NQS/3/703/7

# - 70715  

> l3

This information  appears  in the  biography  of  Xiao  ZWang  in the  Non  Shi  (NSl411  10912). suggests  that Shunzhi  felt  that he was  safer  obeying  the  person  who may have  appeared  to 

him  to be on the verge of  Uiiienting  the throne. In  any  case, Shunzhi  prevented  Zixiang 

fiom  taking  a simple, unarmed boat to  Jiankang  to  explain  himself  to his father and forced 

him  to commit suicide  instead.  This occurred in the  eighth  month  of  490.14  Although  the emperor (Ze) grieved for  his  son to the point that Shunzhi  fell  ill  from  anxiety  for  his  own 

safety  and soon died, he  never  fully  forgave  his son for  his  actions  either.15 

The other  offender  was  Ziqing  j&  -3- *, third  of Ze's sons. He had disobeyed  his 

father's edict against ostentation by decorating  his  carnages  lavishly  when he  was 

stationed in  Jiangling  as  inspector  (cishi)  of  Jingzhou,  and commander-in-chief  (hudu)  of seven  regions  in 483 (when he would have been a  swaggering  adolescent of about  1 9 , 

and  later,  in 492 (when he would have been 24 and  making  more  deliberate  choices), by 

using  his troops to stage a mock  naval  battle on his way to  take  up  his  position as 

inspector  (cishi) of Southern  Yuhou.  Upon  discoverhg  what had happened,  Ze  angrily 

ordered  this  son back to  his  residence and  never  allowed him into  his  sight  again.l6 His 

offense  seems to have been more one of  reckiess  disobedience  than  of lèse-majesté, but the emperor's  reaction  reflects an underlying  fear  that even the  closest  family  members could not be trusted to  defend  the royal heritage. The most  cntical  palace event for the future of the Qi, however, occurred  towards 

the end of Ze's  reign,  with  the premature death of the heir apparent.  Anlicted  for  some 

time by  Uness,  compounded perhaps by obesity,  Changmao  died at the  beginning  of 493 at the age of  35."  M e r  some  delay,  Ze  appointed  Zhaoyes  fii3  f ,then  about  twenty  years     

> l4 NQSl1/58/8
> l5 NSI4/110911-11
> l6 NQS/3/703/9

# - 70414      

> l7 NQS/2/401/12. That the heir

had  been  iil  for a Long  time  is  indicated  as weii in Xiao Ze's proclamation 

foliowing  the son's death  (NQSI 115814).  His  age  is  given  as 3 6 sui  (NQSl2140U2).  He died on  day  yihui 

t in the  first  month  of the  eleventh  year  ofyongming  Ijc  9 ,or  Febniary  25,493  (NS/lll25/1).  in the      

> Nun Qi Shu, the &y

is  given  as  bingzia  4 , or  Febniary  26  (NQSl1/6016),  but the  editor  argues  that  &y  

> yihai

has  to  be  correct  (NQS/1/167ln.  29). of age and the oldest son of  Changmao,  to be the  legal  heir.  l 8  The delay may have been caused by hesitation about whether he should  make  his  grandson  heir  ("line  of the  eldest") 

or have  his  second son (in the "line of the most senior")  declared  the  official  successor.19 

One factor may have been  his  own  misgivings  about  this  eldest son (and  hence  of  his 

grandson),  for  despite  Changmao's  proven  ability,  Ze  had been angered upon discovering 

d e r  his  son's death that he had accumulated large  quantities  of the  clothes,  camiages, 

omaments and  trappings  of an emperor, a  sign  perhaps of impatience to  take  the  throne.20 

Though  these  things  may have alienated  his  trust, the most crucial question  must 

have been whether to let a relatively young and  vulnerable  grandson  continue the "line of the eldest" and possibly be destroyed by a usurper or have a more mature royal member, 

specifically  his  thirty-three-old  second son, Ziliang  & , assure the stability of the throne by diverting the succession to the "most senior" in the deceased heir's generation, not  his  own. 

This was  clearly  a matter  that  troubled  the court as well, for when the emperor suddenly  became  senously  il1  that year, a movement was  afoot  to put Ziliang on the throne. The strategy seems to have been masterminded by Wang  Rong  X , another scion of the  great  Langye  Wang  farnily  who  served  on  Ziliang's  staff.  In the preceding 

year  (492),  Ziliang  had  first  been  appointed  Director  of the Department of State  Affairs  

> (shangshu

ling  or  "prime  minister")  but  then  took the  "secondary"  position of  Secretariat 

SupeMsor  (shongshu jian).  However,  since  he was  also  put into the  strategic  position of 

inspecter  (cishi)  of Yangzhou (crucial to the protection and control of Jiankang), he                 

> l8 Xia0 Zhaoye was installai as heir, with the title of ''imperid grandson" (hgtaisun), on day jiw<

7 9of the  fourth  month,  or May 15,493,  ahost  three  months  afler  his  father's  death  and more  than          

> three months More his granchther's demise (NQS/1/60/11).
> l9 His age

is  based  on the  statement  tbat  Xiao  Zhaoye  was  22 sui when  he  was  killed  in 494  (NQS/1/74/9-                   

> 10). This wodd mean that his father was 15 at the tirne of his birth. If the historical record

is correct, however, Xiao Daocheng  would  have been  ody  13 when  Xîao  Ze was  bom!     

> 'O NQS/2/40 1/9-11 &402/4

enjoyed  some  power.21  A forged edict  declaring  Ziliang heir to the throne  had  reportedly 

already  been  drawn  up, and  rumours  were circulating that there would be a  serious  tum  of events. At one point  during  the deathbed watch, the emperor seemed to have  expird 

before  his  grandson  had arrived. Obviously, this was a  crucial  moment and it seems to have been at  this  point that Ye  j#  #,  the  oldest  of  Ze's  s u ~ v i n g brothers, played a role in the court's ultimate acceptance of Zhaoye as the proper heir, for Ye  is  said  to have 

declared  loudly to  those  present that if the line of succession were to go to the "most senior"  (li  zhmig),  he was the  only  legitimate choice (not, by implication, Ziliang) but if the succession were to be in the "line of the eldest"  (li  di), Zhaoye was the proper candidate. He  himself  opted for the latter choice. Obviously, he  was  interpreting  "senior" in a generational  sense,  for he was  actually  younger  than  his  nephew, Ziliang, but as abrother of the emperor he belonged to the senior generation.  His  point was simply to end 

any  movement to support  Ziliang,  thereby  stabilizing  the throne by keeping the succession 

within  the "line of the  eldest". 

The emperor, however,  regained  consciousness long enough to  cal1  for  his 

grandson  who,  dong  with  his  guards,  could no longer be  barred  by Wang without  making 

his motives obvious. He had apparently hoped to keep them away long enough that a forged  edict  placing Ziliang on the throne could be issued  after  the emperor expired.  When 

news of the emperor's death was received, Wang  then  ordered  Ziliang's  troops to block the palace gates,  evidently  in preparation for a coup that  wodd  place Ziliang on the throne. However,  Xiao  Luan,  a beloved and trusted nephew of the emperor who had been 

entrusted  with the  flairs  of court  (chushi  $j  ) by the emperor in his  last  moments of 

lucidity  just  &er  calling  for  his  grandson,  realized  something  was  amiss  and  rushed  to the 

inner  palace gates, forced  his  way past the  soldiers  by  claiming  to be  carrying  an  imperial                               

> 21 The imperid biographies speak of his appointment as shongshu ling and inspecter of Yangzhou
> (NQS/1/59/8-9 &13), but we find inhis biography that he was quicWy re-appointeci as Secreîariat
> Supervisor (zhongshu jian) (NQS/3 /7OO/6).

order  and  hastened  to escort Zhaoye to the  throne.22  Any  "legitimate" attempt to place 

Ziliang  on the throne was now impossible, and  Luan's  ability  to  dorninate  the situation that day presaged the role he would play over the  next  few  vears. 

z2  This  whole  episode  provides  an  example  of the  di£iïculty  in  rcconstructing  events  from  the  official 

histories. Neither the  Non  Qi  Shu  nor the  Nan  Shi  actually  mentions  the  naine  of Wang Rong in their 

accounts  of the last  ciays  of  Xia0  Ze  within  either  thc  impenal  annals  or the biographies of Xiao Ziliang. This  discovery  is  made  only  if one  happens  to  stumble  upon  Wang Rong 's  biography  within  the  Nan  Qi  

> Shu

or the Nan Shi or if one  decides  to  refer  to the Zizhi  Tongjian  for a  more  coherent  narration  of events   

> (ZZTJ/2/2392/#17; juan 138).

Aithough  the biographies of Wang Rong in the Nan Qi Shu and  the  Nan  

> Shi

do not  hide  his role, their descriptions of  wcnts  are not  hlly  consistent. In the former, Wang Rong is 

said  to have  blocked  the Heir Apparent's  guard  from  entering  the palace where the  unconscious  emperor 

was  lying,  surrounded  by  various  relatives and  officiais,  including  Xiao Ziliang. Wang's intention  was  to  

> see

that  Xiao Ziliang  was  installeci  on the  throne.  However, when  thc  emperor  suddenly  regained 

consciousness,  ail  we  learn  is  that  the  grandson  entered  the palace and the emperor  entrusted  his  nephew, Xiao  Luan,  with  all  court  af!fâirs.  Presumably, the emperor  called  for  his  grandson  in  his  last moments of 

lucidity,  and Wang  had  no choice but to let the heir and his  guard  p a s  through.  To do  otherwise  would 

have  been  an open  attack  on the throne  (NQSl3182319-14).  In the  Nan  Shi, Wang is  desnibed  as  taking 

the  same  action for the  same  reasons,  but he is  also  said  to have had a  forged  edict  (zhao) in  readiness  that would  cal1  for Xiao Ziliang to  tdce  the throne.  Presumably,  when the emperor  regained  consciousness, events  uafolded  as  descnbed  in the  Nan  Qi Shu,  but ail we are told  is  that the  dying  emperor  entrusteci  al1 

court  affairs  to Xiao  Luan.  Nothing  is  mentioned  about  the  grandson.  However, when  the  emperor  die& 

Wang  had  al1  of Xiao  Ziliang's  troops  placed  at the palace  gates  to keep Xiao  Luan  out (where  was  he?). However,  Luan  challengeci  them  to stop someone who had an  order  for an  imperid  audience.  Having 

forced  his way in, he  immediately  led  the  grandson  to the throne and  called  for Xiao Ziliang to  appear.  So 

imposing  was  his  manner  and  presence  that  no-one  dared  not to  follow  his  orders  (NS/2/577/1-8). The 

account  in the Zizhi  Tongjian  follows  that in the  Nan  Shi, escept  for the  eqlanation  ( a h  found  in the    

> Nan Qi Shu)

tbat  when the emperor  regained  rnomentaq  consciousness, he  called  for the heir, and  ordy 

then  did  the  grandson  and  his  body-guard  succeed  in  getting  past  Wang.  Unfortunately,  none  of the  three 

histories  ever  explains  the  extent  to  which  Xiao  Ziliang  actually  supported  this move. Ail of  them  state 

that he  was  a deeply  committed  Buddhist  who  had  no  interest  in  politics  and  apparently  wanted  Xiao 

Luan  to participate in the  a.€f"at court. Hence, it  seems  unlikely  that he would have been at the centre of this  flair.  The fact that neither the  imperial  annais  nor the biographies of Xiao  ZLliang  in the  Nan  Qi Shu and the  Nan  Shi  make  any  reference  to Wang Rong's plot  suggests  that their  historical  judgement  is that Xiao  Ziliang  should not  be  held  accountabfe. The biographies of Wang Rong do not  e.xplicitly  state 

Xiao  Ziliang's  involvement but  quote  Wang Rong as feeling  betrayed  by Xiao Ziliang when his plan 

collapsed.  Another  point of confusion is the timing of Xiao Ye's  declaration.  One source  speaks  about the  great  fear  at the  thne  of  Xiao  Ze's  last  illness  and the  anxious  discussion about who would  s u c c d 

him  prior  to  his  regahhg  consciousness and  caliing  for  his  grandson  (NS/411104/1). However,  another 

history  suggests  that  this  discussion  occuffed  right  after Xiao  Ze  breathed  his  last,  and Xiao Ye  ody  spoke 

at this  t h e  (NQS/2/626/7). M y conclusion here is that Xiao Ye probably made  his  decIaration  just  prior  to the  grandson's  arriva1  at the  bedside  of  his  gandfather.  However, no mention of this  declaration  is  made in the  imperid  annais  or the biographies of Xiao Ziliang.  Although  the Zizhi  Tongjian  quotes  Xiao  Ye's 

statement,  it  does  not  insert  it  specincally  into  the events  swrounding  the  emperor's  death,  Rather, it notes that Xiao Ye  was  speaking  at a tirne  when people  suspected  that Xiao Ziliang  was  going  to  be 

installeci  as  successor  to the  thfone  (ZZTJ/2/2393/#  17; juan 138 ). (2) The  Era  of Xiao  Luan 

Xiao  Ze  was  53 when  he  died (in  493).23 According to  his  last will and testament, Xiao Ziliang was to  as&  the new emperor in the govemance of the  reaim,  but  all  matters 

oîthe  realm,  large or  small,  were to be  subject  to the participation of  his  first  cousin, Xiao 

Luan.24  The management of the central court was to be in the hands of Wang  Yan  If  i, 

another  of the scions of the  great  Langye  Wang  family  that had served  through  the generations  under  various  dynasties, and Xu  Xiaosi  -& f W ,  a royal Song relative who had been esteemed by Xiao  Ze,  25  while  the protection of the  various  regions  and border 

areas  was to be in the hands of Wang  Jingze,  Chen  Xianda and other generals who had 

begun  their  seMce  to the Qi  under  Xiao Daocheng before  his  accession to the throne. There  is  good  reason why the emperor  should  have placed so  much  power in the hands of  his  nephew.  His  son, Ziliang,  is  descnbed as  having  no  real  interest  in  flairs  of state, and the part of the  edict  that  called  for  Luan  to  take  a hand  in  al1  matters of state, 

great  or small, was  allegedly  of  Ziliang's  doingt6  Luan  was the most senior in age of the royal  family,  being about  forty  at the time of  Ze's  death, and the most politically expenenced. He had served  outside  the court in increasingly responsible positions as county  administrator  ( h g ) , commandery  govemor and  regional  inspecter  and  within  the court as Vice-Director of the  Right  of the  Department  of State  Mairs  and  then  as  Vice-

Director  of the  Lefi.  Not  only  did  his  uncle appear to have appreciated  his  sirnplicity  and  

> He

died  on  day  wuyin  fi  of the  seventh  month  of the  eleventh  year  of  yongming  91  ,or  August  27, 493, at the age of 54 sui  (NQS/l/6  1/10  & 62/10).   

> 24 According

to the biography of Xiao  Ze  (Empemr  Wu),  various  edicts  (zhao)  seem  to have been  issued   

> on the day

of  his  death,  coafirming  his  choice of  regents  for  his  successor  and  his  wishes  for  his  beral         

> and gravesite (NQSIII6 1/10). However, in the biography of the

next  emperor (Xiao Zhaoye), the  imperial  

> will

is  said  to have been  proclaùned  four  days  later,  on  day  rernvu  of the  eighth  month,  or  August  3 1,493       

> (NQS/1/69/5). The power-shahg arrangements between Ziliang

and  Luan  are  d e s c r i i  as nei wai zhongshi  wu  daxiao,  xi yu  Luan  canhuai  gong xia yi  fi  %:  f D J\  9 X P @ 7;   

> (NQS/l/6 1/12).
> 25 He

was  a grandson  of Xu  Zhanzhi  i& tand hence a great-grandson  of Liu  Yu., the Song  founder.   

> Just More

his  bïrth,  his  father  and  grandfather  were  victixns  of the coup  led  by  Liu  Shao  against  Emperor    

> Wen (Liu Shao's

own  m e r )  whom Liu  murdered  before  taking  the Song  throne  in 453  (NQS/3/771/1).    

> 26 NQS/3/700/ 12-13

good  judgement  but the people too seem to have had confidence in  him  as a good and competent  0fficial.2~ 

According  to the  ernperor's  last  will,  Luan  was made  simultaneously  Director  of the Department of State  Anairs  (shmgsh  h g )  and  Palace  Attendant  (shizhong),  acombination of titles  bestowing  power as both  chief  govemmental  minister  and  personal 

policy-making  advisor  to the emperor, therefore placing  their  holder  at  the  pimacle  of the 

executive.28  Ziliang, for his part, while  retaining  his  previous  post,  was  elevated to the 

prestigious  title of Grand Mentor  (tu@),  signifjmg  eminence  rather  than  power.29  Ziliang 

suffered no consequences for his possible role in the plot to put him on the throne. 

Although  he  was  not  allowed  to keep vigil by  his  father's  coffin in the palace, presumably for  fear  that this would be the  opportunity  for a coup, only Wang Rong was  arrested  and executed.  Luan  was  shrewd  enough to see that Wang was only an incompetent nuisance 

who  would be better eliminated  while  Ziliang would  never  pose a threat by actions  taken 

on  his  own  initiative. Ziliang was to pass  korn  the scene  very  quickly,  for he died in 494, at the age of 34, less  than  a year  after  his  nephew took the  t h r ~ n e . ~ ~ The emperor was  delighted  at the news of  his  death,  for,  although  he had been raised by  Ziliang's  concubine, this could not compensate for the  rnisgivings  he had about his uncle as a result of the Wang Rong 

affair. 32    

> 27 NQS/1/83/6-8; NSllll34M.
> 28

Xia0  Luan's  various  positions are  outlinai  in  his  imperial  biography  (NQS1118311  - 84B).  It  conflicts 

with  infannation  in the  imperial  biography of Xiao  Zhaoye  (the  new  boy emperor) in  mentioning  only the      

> titie of shangshu ling (NQS/1/69/6).

For the  significance  of the  two  titles  in  combination,  see  the 

comments  by  Chen  Changqi,  Liangiin  Nanchao  Zhengzhishi  Gao  OCaifeng:  Henan  Dame  Chubanshe,     

> 1992), 94, 110.
> 29 NQS/1/69/7
> 30

The  various  precautions  at this  time  are  describeci  in  NQS/31700/  1 3 - 15.  in the  Nun  Qi Shu, the 

precautions  are  descrï'bed  as king  taken  at the  behest  of the  young  emperor. Xiao  Luan's  role in Wang's 

role  is  more  explicit  in the  Non  Shi  (NSl2157816).  The  Nan  Qi  Shu,  which  is  more  Xiao  Luan's  apologist,  

> states

only that Xiao Ziliang  was  afraid  to  speak  on Wang  Rong's  behaif  (NQS/3/825/1). 

Xiao  Z W g  died  on  day  w i & +of  the  fourth  month  of  longchmg  f& 8 ,or May 3,494    

> (NQSIlîWlO), at the

age of 35 sui  (NQSl3170  li3).  

> 32

NQSf  WOO/  13 The emperor  seems  to have  been  almost  as  distrustful  of  Luan.  Despite  Luan's  role in  ushering  hirn  to the  throne,  the new emperor's father may have  instilled  this suspicion in 

km, for  Chaqpao  is  said  tu  have  expressed  his  misgivings  about  Luan  on at  least  one occasion to the emperor's uncle,  Z i l i a ~ ~ g . ~ ~ One relative he  did  trust, of course, was  his 

great-uncle Ye, who had spoken so  vocally  in  his  favour when court opinion was  w a v e ~ g 

in favour of Ziliang. However, Ye  was  to die  two  weeks before  Ziliang,  at the age of  

> 27.34

This death depnved  him  of a source of  advice  and support in the  growing  power 

stniggle  with  Luan,  one that  was  to end in his deposition and  murder. 

(i) The  First  Dethronement 

The  enormous  power held by  Luan  invited conflict. The emperor had  his  own 

clique of favourites about  hirn  and was unwilling to  act  at  Luan's  bidding, accept  his 

lectures or answer  his  calls  for an  audiencee3j Since  the new emperor lacked  experience 

and  maturity  and may very well have had little inclination to  rule,  as the reference to instructions and  reprimands  (kuan&~ian B *) suggests, the tension  between  the two would have been considerable.  Since  the competition would require some  kind  of solution, the emperor felt  threatened,  for  his  cousin would  want  to resolve the issue to his  own 

advant age. 

When  Zhaoye sounded out  his  great-uncle  Qiang  a I I ) ,  then  twenty-five  and the 

eldest  of the  remaining  brothers  of the  former  emperor, Qiang  dismissed  his  misgivings 

about  Luan,  arguing  that  it  was  no surprise that  Luan  should  be  taking  the  predominant 

role in the court, for he had in  fact  been  entrusted  by the previous emperor to do so,  ali

other  members of the royal  family  were very  much  younger and less experienced, and           

> -
> 33 ZZTJ/2/23 91/#4
> 34 Xia0 Ye died on day xinsf

6 of the  fourth  month  of  longchang  8 ,or  April27,494          

> (NQS/1/7 1/1 O), at the age of 28 sui (NQS/2/626/8).
> 35

Some of  this  can  be  gathered  h m  his  habit of  sencihg  out two of  his  tnisted  confïdants  to  deal  with  

> Xiao

Luan  whenever  the latter  caiied  for  him  about some  maner  in  which  the emperor  needed 

> "instructionn

or  reprimands  (NQS/3/745/  12). Luan  was  the sole  pillar  of the court.  36  This in itself appears to be an indirect 

acknowledgement  that the emperor needed guidance  fiom  someone  like  Luan  in the art of 

govername. 

Zhaoye was disappointed that  his  great-uncle had not responded to  what  was  a

veiled  suggestion to  overthrow  Xiao  Luan.  He may have felt that  Qiang's  status  and prestige as eldest of the founding emperor's  surviving  sons and  his  title  of General of the Palace  Guard  made  him  a vital ally in  any  kind  of  future  military  coup. The emperor 

complained  pnvately about this to a trusted  eunuch,  one of a  group  of  powerful  aides about the young emperor who must have been an impediment to  Luan's  direct manipulation of the  throne.  Luan  repeatedly advised the emperor against them and  finally 

ordered their  execution.37  The  first  of the eunuchs to be executed  is  depicted as a vile 

oppominist,  encouraging the emperor to spend  his  tirne  in the depths of the palace in an 

incestuous  relationship  with  his  father's  concubine.38  If the  historian's  scom reflected the 

general  mood of the people, there may have been some  sympathy  for  these  executions, but in the long  mn  they were to benefit  Luan  rather  than  the  realm. 

S o m  afterwards,  Zhaoye sought out He Yin  f i , the great-uncle of  his  consort and one of  his  favountes, and  trkd  to draw  him  into a plot to  kill  Luan  before the latter could  act  against  the  throne  itself Yin was  afkaid  to go  ahead  with  such  a plan and  h a l l y 

encouraged  the emperor to  give  up the  ides?  At this point, the emperor decided the  next 

best  alternative would be to have  Luan  sent to Fort  Xizhou  & where,  being  in  

> 36

fis  advia  appears  in  NQS/21627/11-12.  This i n t e ~ e w probably  took  place  two  to  three  months  before    

> Zhaoye was dethroned.

This  is  a conjecture  based  on the fact that Xiao Ye, whom Zhaoye  trusted,  died  in the  fourth  month  of 494 and Zhaoye  was  deposed  in the  seventh  month  of that  year.  It would  seem  natural     

> that Xiao Zhaoye would

be  turning  to  both  uncles  for  advice  about  his  fean.  Since  Xiao Qiang  is  the  only 

one mentioned,  thoiigh,  it  seems  quite  possible that Xiao Ye  was  no longer  alive  at this  t h e .  There  is  also         

> the possibility, however, bat the support Xiao Qiang

is  said  to have  had  among  the people  

> (NQS/2/627/10)

and the fact that he  had  been  appointai  General  of the  Palace  Guard  (lingjun jianaun)  

> (NQS/l/60/5),

would have  prompted  Zhaoye to  seek  out  Qiang  even  while  Xiao Ye  was  stiii  alive.      

> 37 NQSf 1/73/1415
> 38 NQS/lff3/11-13
> 39 NQS/1/74/ 1-2

charge of the metropolitan  region  of Yangzhou, he would not be depnved of  all  prestige or power but could no longer  claim  a right  to participate in the  affairs  of the centrai 

govemment."  To avoid  such  an ouster,  Luan  engineered the dethronement of the 

emperor.41 

In the seventh  month  of 494, an edict purportedly issued by the empress dowager, whose traditional moral  authority  Luan  needed,  declared  the emperor to be  unworthy, 

unfilial  (he had  failed  to mourn properly for  his  father), debauched and  neglectful  of  duty 

by  failing  to  meet  with  his  rninisters  at court and letting power  fa11  into the  hands  of eunuchs and courtiers  unfit  for office. The  worthy  replacement would be  his  brother, Zhaowen  j# IA ,  at that point the fourteen-year-old  Prince  of  Xin'an  $f  3 . 4 2 

Although  the edict provided the requisite public  legitimacy  for the emperor' s

removal,  Luan  followed  this  by a  practical  measure that would  remove  any  loyalist action. He sent a  small  contingent into the palace, led by Xiao  Chen  # and Xiao  Tanzhi  # )e 

5 , to  kill  the emperor. There was a  very  good reason for  having  them  lead  the attack. 

These  men were related to each other as well as to the royal Xiao line.  Durhg  the Song, 

Chen  had served  his  clansman, Daocheng, in a position of trust,  relaying  sensitive 

idormation  fiom  the father in the capital to the son,  Ze,  in  Yingzhou.  Chen  was  kept on by  Ze  as a trusted  subordinate  in charge of  his  personal  weapons and  aii  pnvate matters. 

## This same  confidence was extended to  Chen  by Zhaoye,  allegedly  to the point that Zhaoye could not sleep when  Chen  was  away  f?om  the  palace.43 

Zhaoye displayed a  similar  trusting  dependence on Tanzhi,wanting  him  constantly 

by  his  side.  This trust  arose  fkom  the  fact  that Tanzhi had been in the entourage of  his                             

> --JO Xizhou Cheng (Fort Xizhou or the Xizhou Citadel) was traditionally the &den= of the inspecter
> (cîshl) of Yangzhou (ZLDC, 284). The emperor's younger brother had k e n appointeci to Yangzhou

in      

> early 494 (NQS/1/71/14).
> 41 NQS/1/74/2-3
> 42 This ocnirred

on  day  guisi  f5 (the  twenty-urst  day)  of the  seventh  month,  or  September  6,494 

(NQS/ 1/7 2/2).  

> 43 NQS/3/745/11

father, Changmao, and  Tanrhi's  father had rendered  great  s e ~ c e to  Changmao's  father, 

Xia0  Ze? 

When Zhaoye was on the  throne,  he would respond to  Luan's  cails  by staying in the recesses of the palace and promptly sending  these  two  confidants  to act as his 

intermediaries.  Both  Chen  and Tanzhi must have felt that there  was  more to be gained in 

serving  Luan  than  the young emperor and plotted with  him  to have the emperor removed. One of the important considerations was the role of the princes who, as was the practice in the Song and Qi, were  installed  in  various  garrisons  to act as  bulwarks  for the throne. As mentioned  earlier,  they were not always perceived as  such  by the incumbent on the throne. However, for anyone conspiring against the throne, they posed a danger 

because  of their control over  rnilitary  forces with the  nght  to act in defense of the throne. 

Xiao  Chen  secretly  cailed  the gamson clerks  (dianqian  ), the  tutelary  officiais  of the young princes, and ordered the princes not to have contact with anyone.  Since  Chen  had been an  imperial  favounte  for so long, people were  afiaid  to  protest  and quietly colluded in the conspiracy.  Luan  knew,  however, there was a risk  from  generals  who had been part of the power clique  around  Zhaoye and he acted before they could stage a coup  against 

him.  The emperor only  heard  about an intended palace coup on the day  it  occurred but, completely  unaware  of the  betrayal  by  those  he most  trusted,  sent a note in  his  own  hand to  Chen  calling  for  him  to come to his  aid.  When the latter entered the emperor's  private 

quarters  at  the  head  of his  small  force, the imperiai  bodyguards  did  nothing,  for they had  

> all

been  under  Chen's  command.  Their complicity was  fùrther  assured  when  Chen 

promised the  guards  that only one  person  (understood  clearly  as a reference to the emperor) would be  killed  and they would come to no  h m if they opened the way. The emperor, unprotected,  tried  to  fiee  but was pursued and  strangled  in the  Street.  This  was 

followed  by the  elimination  of  his  entire  entourage and clique. The  erstwhile  emperor  was buried  according  to  the rites for a prince rather  than  an emperor and titled posthurnously as Prince of  Yulin  # 3 . 4 5 

(ii)  Usurping  the Line of Succession 

Xiao Zhaowen  was  fourteen  when he took the throne four days  d e r  the removal of  his  "unworthy"  b r ~ t h e r . ~ ~ Xiao  Luan  moved to the Eastern  Citadel,  the  officia1 

residence of the  chief  rninister,  and exercized  full  power as regent, so that  ali  imperiai 

actions and decisions were  taken  only  after  "consultation" with  Luan.  The young emperor 

was  kept on a  tight  leash, even being restricted to a  diet  decreed by  his  cousin? 

Although  there  was opposition to Xiao  Luan,  it  never  succeeded in combining the 

requisite  military  force with an  imperial  figure of sufficient prestige and influence who could  legitirnize  the  overthrow  of  this  "fdse"  regent and potential usurper. Xiao  Qiang, 

the  oldest  s u ~ v i n g brother of  Emperor  Wu (Xiao Ze), to whom Zhaoye had  vainly 

appealed  for help before being  manoeuvred  off the throne, was  still  the  most  promising 

royal figure around whom a  legitimate  military  opposition rnight  form.  He was the  elder 

member of the legitimate Qi  line,  old enough (25  years  of age) not to be considered a

Puppet,  and  enjoyed  the favour of the people and the court. However, he seemed to lack either the foresight or the  will  to  a ~ t . ~ * 

At the  tirne,  there were people in court who wanted Qiang to  lead  troops into the court and  take  over the  regency,  and a concrete plan was suggested by Xie  Can  t & ,the 

Supe~tendant of the Bureau of Manufactures  (zhiju jian  #.  4 L ), to Qiang and  his  

> 45

NQS/ l/74/4- 10 

His  age  was  15 sui when he  "died"  in the  eleventh  month  of the  fint  year  o f j i m  (494),  in the  month  

> foliowing

his  three-month  tenue  on the throne  (NQS/1/80/9,10,12). He  had  been  enthroned  on  day              

> dingyou T$of the seventh month of the first and only year (yanxing

# sa) of  his  teign  (September  10, 494).  

> 47 NQSI ln91 15

When  Zhaoye  was  removed  nom  the throne, Qiang is  said  to have been  taken  completely  by  suprise 

> (NQS/21627113),

and  after  Zhaowen  was  put on the throne, he  does  not  seem  to have  becorne  any  more    

> cunning. Visiting Xiao

Luan  in the Eastern  Citadel,  Qiang  would  be  welcomed  humbly  by  Luan  who 

spoke  with  distress  about the  state  of the  realm,  so that  Qang  was  deceived  into  Inisting  and  supporting   

> him (NQS/2/628/ 1-2).

twenty-year-old  nephew, Zilong  3 8 , the  eigliîh  son of Xiao Ze. The  two  pnnces were to ride together into the palace in a carriage  normally  used by women of the  palace 

and  take  the emperor  fiom  there into the court where they would issue the  order  of regency. Xie would  ensure  that the gates were closed and  manned  with loyal troops to 

avert  any  militas,  action. At the  same  time,  complicit  officers in the Eastern  Citadel  would seize  Luan  and  bring  him  as a bound prisoner to court. 

Zilong was  eager  to accept the plan but Qiang was  &aid  that victory  was  far  fiom 

certain, as  Luan's  military resources were greater  than  those  available to them in the stronghold of the palace. When a  former  confidant  of Emperor Wu (Xiao Ze) pleaded with Qiang to follow  through,  he ordered the carriage to be readied to enter the palace but 

then  asked to  retum  first  to  Say  farewell to  his  mother.49  Several  days of  inactioii  elapsed, and in  this  period  Luan  must have  learned  enough to  realize  that he had to act. A little 

over six  weeks  d e r  having  had Zhaowen  declared  the new emperor,  Luan  sent troops to 

destroy  this  fkst  rnilitary  threat to  his  regency.  j0  Qiang was rnurdered  afler  two  thousand 

soldiers  surrounded  his  residence, and Zilong was  killed  the  same  night?  Xie and  al1  the other conspirators were executed as  well. 

Luan  was  again  concemed about the pnnces stationed in the  regions.  They were a

political  threat  if a concerted move  against  hirn  were to evoke the principle of the "most senior". The deposed Zhaoye had no issue. Hence, when his  next  younger brother  was 

chosen  to succeed  him  (even the  wording  of the  edict  suggests  that it was a choice and  not 

an automatic succession), the choice could presumably have been  argued  on the  basis  of 

his  being  the "most senior". However, as was made  clear  while Emperor Wu  (Xiao  Ze) lay on  his  deathbed  and  his  brother Ye was  arguing  the merits of the  %ne  of the  eldest"  over the "most senior", once the element of "the most  senior"  came into play, a  much  broader   

> 49 NQSIW62813-7
> 'O

On  day  guiwei  &*of  the  ointb  month,  or  ûctober  26,494  (NQS/1/79/1)                             

> j1 Xiao Luan issaid to have felt threatened by Zilong because of his intelligence and abiiity which are
> describeci as surpassing that of a i i the princes (NQS/3/7 1O/ 13).

range of generations and heirs could dispute their  right  to be the proper candidate  within 

the category of  "the  most  senioi".  Should the princes now present one of their  own  as the 

legitimate  candidate, they would  quickly  become a militaq  threat if they were to  bring 

their collective weight upon the capital. The most  likely  prince to  claim  this position was the  twenty-two-year-old  Xiao Zijing  -f  a, fifth  and  oldest  s u ~ v i n g son of Ze, who  was  stationed at Southem 

Yanzhou  (Guangling  or present-day Yangzhou). In  order  to prevent this prince  from 

becoming  a legitimate  focus  of  rnilitary  resistance,  Luan  sent one of his generals to  kill  him 

This  triggered  a revolt  by  twenty-two-year-old  Zimao  # -7- a, the next younger brother who was  then  inspector  (cishi)  of  Jiang~hou.~* 

Zimao had been  aware  for  some  time  of the danger that  Luan  presented. At the 

tirne  that Zhaoye was made emperor, Zimao was inspector  (cishi)  of  Yongzhou.  Seeing 

Luan's  growing  power, he  realized  that he needed to plan for  his  own  safety  and saw to 

his  own  rniiitary  build-up by  ordering  the manufacture of weapons. At the time,  General 

Chen  Xianda,  who had  supported  Xiao Daocheng at the foundation of the Qi, was  seMng 

under  Zimao and reported to  Luan  what was happening.  Luan  sought to resolve the problem by  making  Zimao the inspector of  Jiangzhou  and  ordering  him  to  lave  all  his 

troops in  Xiangyang  (the seat of  Yongzhou  Region).  When  Chen  came to  Say  farewell, Zimao  tested  the possibilities of cooperating  with  him  by  watching  Chen's  reaction  to  his 

observation that as a royal prince he should have  two  to three thousand troops accompanying  him.  Chen  oniy replied that this would be  against  imperid  orders and  these 

soldiers  were not  easiiy  controlîed.  Lacking  this  military  aiiy,  Zimao  had no choice but to go to  Xunyang,  the capital of  his  new inspectorate of  Jiangzhou.  Once  Luan  had put Zhaoye on the throne and murdered the  three  royal princes (Qiang,  Zilong  and  Zijing), 

Zimao had moral  justification  for  leading  an  army  against the capital.  Hïs  planning and                    

> 52 NQSllf79f2. However, in NQSI3/708/15, the uprising by Xiao Zimao isprompted by the murders of
> Xia0 Qiang and Xiao Zilong ody.

intelligence  assessment were in part  influenced  by his mother who sent a  letter  secretly 

calling  hirn  to the capital where he would  certainly  have enough support to attempt a coup 

against  Luan. s3 

However, her brother, Yu Yaozhi  -f  A*,  whose  lcyaities  appear  to have been more  towards  Luan  than  his  nephew,  reported  Zimao's plan to  Luan  who responded by 

declaring  martial law and sending Pei Shuye  8 ;kr  f and Yu to attack  Xunyang.34 

Although  Zimao had sent  three  hundred men to protect the  advance  fort of Pencheng, the force  was  insignificant  and did not stop the gates  From  being opened to Pei's troops. Pei 

was  acnially  afkaid  of Zimao's troops, for they were men  fkom  Yongzhou  (whom he had brought  despite  Luan's  cornmand)  and eager for battle, but Zimao simply chose to  hunker 

down  with  his  troops and  ships  in Jiangzhou (Xunyang), and  his  inaction  is  said  to have 

drained  fighting  spirit and morale  arnong  the troops. In  order  to avoid a direct battle, Pei had sent Yu to persuade  his  nephew to  return 

to the capital where he would be rewarded with  rank  and  wealth.  Zimao neither accepted the  proposal  nor launched an attack. As the  period  of inaction continued and morale declined, Yu  Linzhi  ;f  #L, a brother of  Yaozhi  who was  seMng  under  Zimao, suggested that he  try  to  bribe  Pei. Yu was sent off for  this  task  but betrayed  Z h a o  by convincing Pei to use  hirn  to seize Zimao. A force of four hundred men  returned  with Yu. Zimao's entourage  fled  in the face of this force, and he was  killed  by the attackers. Pei's troops  then  advanced to  Xiangzhou  where  another  prince, the  eighteen-year-

old Xiao Rui  $&, Meenth  son of Xiao Daocheng, was stationed as  inspecter  (cishi). 

Rui  felt  militady  ilyenor,  took no  action  to  resist  and was  killed?  Two  other  royal           

> 53 The role of his mother is discussed in NQS/3/708/15

# - 70911.          

> j4 This may have been on day yiyou 2

## B of the  ninîh  month,  or  October  28,494  (NQS11/8l/n.  1)  

> 55 NQS/U630/10

princes, younger brothers of Xiao  Ze,  were also  killed  at  this time in  their  respective 

regions. j6 

With  the suppression of  Zhao's  revolt and the  elimination  of the  regiondy  based princes,  Luan  l i e d  martial  law  and  began  eliminating  the other  princes.57 Three  of the  last 

four  remaining  brothers of Xiao  Ze  were executed at this  t h e .  Only  the  1st  brother, the 

then  fourteen-year-old  Xuan  # 4 (the nineteenth and youngest son of Xiao Daocheng), 

was  spared,  for  Luan  looked on  him  as too immature and  weak-minded  ever to pose athreat to  him.j8  Luan  aiso  continued  to attack the generation of Xiao  Ze's  sons, eradicating three more at this  tirne? 

## This massacre of 494 took seven of the last eight  s u ~ v i n g brothers of Xiao  Ze 

and five of Ze's sons (six, if Zimao is included). One of Ze's grandsons had  already  been 

elirninated  from  the throne, and the second of the  remaining  three  very  young grandsons 

was  on the throne effectively at  Luan's  pleasure.  Xiao Daocheng's "direct" line  was 

contracting  numencally  as power  shifted  to  Luan.  Since  Luan  was  to  decide  that 

eliminating  princes with  any  possible  claim  to the line of succession  was  the only way to 

make  his  line the only heirs of the  House  of Qi, this destruction of the royal princes,  first  in 

These  other  two  princes were the  seventeen-yeardd  Xiao  Jian  a 6, sixteenth  son of Daocheng  (he 

was  18 sui when  killed  in 494  N S / 2 1 6 3  1/41) who  was  inspector  (cishi) of  SOuthern  Yuzhou   

> (NQS/l/79/4) (located

in  present-day  Dangtu,  west of Nanjing), and the  fiReen-year-old  Xiao Qiu  #, 

eighteenth  son of Daocheng (he  was  16 sui when  murdered  in 494  PQSIU63  1/61) who  was  inspector  

> (cishi)

of  Yingzhou  (NQSl1/79/3),  located  nefi  to  lingzhou  and  Xiangzhou,  whose  royal  inspectors  had 

dready  been  murdered.     

> 57 NQS/1/79/IO
> j8 NQSl2163 118 &

1 1  

> 59

Xiao  Ziqing  a +e, then  twenty-six,  was  now  executed  (NQS/31704/6).  Also  viciims  were the 

eighteen-year-old  Xiao Zhen  JC  ,the  ainth  son of Xiao  Ze  (NQS/3/7  1 1/61, and the  nfteen-year4d  Xiao 

Zilun  a +*, the  thirteenth  son who, in  view  of the  presence  of mind he  displayed  when he  was 

presented  with  the  edict  authorizing  his  execution,  may  have been  feared  by Xiao  Luan  as a potentiai  

> threat

because  of  his  intelligence  if not for  his  age  (NQS/3/7  l u 1  1). Two other brothers of the  same  age were left  unharmed,  as were eight younger brothers who  ranged  in age  fiom  tbirteen  to  two  years  of age and were  therefore  not  considered  a threat, Jiankang  and  then  in the distant  regions,  were  the  first  and second of what the histones record as the  "three  massacres of the princes" carried out by  Luan  between  494 and 498.60 

Although  Luan  may not have been plotting to  make  hirnself  emperor when he 

rushed  Empcror  Wu's  grandson  to the  throne,  the deposition of  his  "protégé" and the 

ensuing  murders  of the royal  princes  made  it  clear  that the  dynastic  throne, not just 

powerfùl  office, had very  quickly  become his ultimate  goal.  Luan  had demonstrated that he was  shrewd,  arnbitious and  mthless.  No moral quaims  deterred  him  from  playing  the role of the  "butcher  of  fiankang"  when the quest for power required it. The  subse~ent 

role of a Duke of Zhou, no  matter  how gloriously  portrayed  in the  annals  of  history,  was 

not what he sought to emulate. He may very  well  have felt that as the oldest, most mature and perhaps most competent of the royal  farnily  remaining  after  Emperor Wu's  death  in

493, the throne should  nghtfblly  belong to  him.  However, he was not in the legitimate  line 

of succession. In  order  to  insert  himself into that line, he would have to  follow  the 

"tradition"  of  displacing  the incumbent with a more  malleable  Puppet  and eradicating  al1 

legitirnate  hein  until  it  became  possible to prove that Heaven was bestowing a new mandate on  him.  By the latter  haif  of 494, he had succeeded in  his  quest. A vulnerable 

adolescent was on the throne,  al1  the  royal  princes who could challenge  him  with  military 

force or moral authority had been  eliminated,  and he was  gradually  accumulating  the  titles 

and honours  which  would  identify  him as the  wonhy  inhentor of an abdicated  throne. 

Even though  Luan  was out of the  regular  line of succession, he did have the advantage of being able to  claim  some some moral authority by  virtue  of  being  a foster son of Xiao Daocheng.  Luan's  father, the second of Daocheng's  two  older brothers,  had 

died  premahirely  during  the Song,  leaving  his  son an  "orphan".  Although  said  to have   

> Referred to

as son  zhu  zhuwang  l P fduring  the  yanring  aA and j i o m  R & reign  periods           

> (NQS/3/713/5). The tem zhu might be more Literally tramlated as "executedn.

Since  there  were  actually                 

> only two major attacks on the princes, the one d e s c r i i here in 494 and alater one

in 498, the  last  year  of               

> his reign, it is likely that the hist0Ra.u is counting the events of 494

as  two  separate  mass;tcres.  Howcver,            

> in 495, three other princes were "executedn for their alleged involvement in

a plot  by  Xiao  Chen  (see       

> below), and it is unclear how

tbis  fits  into  the  " t h e  massacres". been  favoured  over  his  cousins,  he  was not a  true  son and consequently received the lesser title of marquis (hm) (Marquis of  Xichang  i!9  8 @)  rather  than  of prince  (wmg)  after 

his  uncle  established  the  Qi?l  However,  Luan  could play on  his  status  as "foster son" to 

describe  himself  as the third son and hence eldest and  "most  senior"  s u ~ v i n g heir of Xiao Daocheng as he  plotted  how to  explain  to the  realm  his  rightfbl  place  within  the  line  of 

s~ccession.~~ 

When Zhaowen was placed on the throne,  Luan  took the additional title of Overseer of the  Department  of State  Affairs  (lu  shnngshu  shi  & i)i  f 9 ), placing  hirn  at the  peak  of the administrative system and in the  very  centre of power. This title had not been bestowed  during  the Southem Qi on anyone  after  Chu Yuan's  death  and had been 

largely  unused dunng the previous Song  dynasty  because  of the emperor's  unhappiness 

over the  ability  it  gave the holder to encroach on royal prerogative. The title bestowed both  militas,  and  civilian  power that could  undermine  impenal  control. When a young and malleable emperor occupied the throne, there was no countenveight to the lu  s h g s h 

shi,  and the power of this title  allowed  its  holder to play an  ovenveaning  role unchallenged. As  explained  in the previous chapter, it was for that  reason  that the title  had 

been  resurrected  at the end of the Song by Xiao Daocheng for  himselfas  he  was  preparing 

to usurp the Song throne and establish the Qi. It was  clearly  the motive  behind  Luan's 

taking  of this title, as it would be for Xiao  Yan  as  well  at the end of the  Southern  Qi as he prepared to  usurp  the Qi throne and establish the  Liang.63 

ûther  honours were bestowed on the occasion of Zhaowen's enthronement. For 

fuli  status  and power, the position of Overseer of the Department of State  Affairs  came    

> 6L NQS/1/83/1 &4
> 62

X h  Daocheng's  fîrst  two  sons were  bom  in  4-10  and  444  reqxdvely  and  his  "realn  third son  was  bom 

in 458.  Since  Xiao Luan  was  born  in 452, he could  justifiably  be  calied  the third son This  claim  receives                     

> moral sanction when the empress dowager declares Xiao Luan to be the third son and heir to Xiao Daocheng (NQS/ l/84/9).
> 63 For

a disnission  of the  fiindon  of  this  title,  see  Chen  Changqi,  Lionjin  Nonehao  Zhengzhishi  Gao       

> (Kai€eng: Henan Daxue Chubanshe, 1FU), 83, 1IO.

with the title of  inspecter  (cishi) of Yangzhou, the prestige title of  Cwalry  Generd-in-

Chief  @zaoji  dajiangiun  4 # i)), and the title of  s u p e ~ s o r (dudu)  of  miiitary 

affairs  for Yangzhou and Southem Xuzhou (the capital  region  and its  w t e m  flank).  As 

chief  rninister,  he  again  took up residence in the Eastern  Citadel  (Don&  Cheng) and was provided with a force of five thousand  soldiers  and appropnate  hancial  rewards.  Of  most 

importance for the usurper of a throne was the elevation in rank towards the final title of prince  (wmg). Since  Luan  had been  enfeoffed  as a marquis (hou) by  his  uncle at the 

beginning  of the Qi, he  was  now elevated one degree to the rank of duke (gong) as Duke of Xuanchang  Commandery  j&,  fflr  2 with  two  thousand households. If  Luan  had been 

preparing  to found a new dynasty, tradition would have required  hirn  to go one  fùrther 

stage to a monosyllabic ducal title that would  provide  the  name  for  his  own  dynasty. But, 

unlike  Xiao Daocheng before  hirn  or Xiao  Yan  afler  him,  Luan  was too  closely  related to the royal  family  to do more  than  usurp the  line  of succession  within  the Qi  dynasty.  Thus, 

there  was  no second  enfeofhent  to the duchy of "A', as had occurred with Xiao 

Da~cheng!~ 

Following the suppression of Xiao  Zimao's  revolt in  Jiangzhou,  Luan  was 

awarded  with more titles and marks of prestige and power. As with the usurper, Xiao Daocheng, before  him,  his title as  Inspecter  (cishi)  of Yangzhou  Region  was elevated to that of  Pastoral  Governor (mu) of Yangzhou  Region,  and he was accorded the  three 

honours  (shuli) pemiining  hirn  to arrive in court with sword and shoes, to enter the palace 

unhumedly  and to be received without  formal  announcement. But the  last  honour  which 

he required before  being  in a position to  take  the throne was elevation to the rank of 

prince  (wang),  and promotion to the rank of  Prince  of Xuancheng  3&,  3.took place in the tenth  month  of that  year  (494).65                     

> The iist of titles is found in NQS/1/77/6-7
> NQS/l/79/10. The day is given as dingwu fi$ ,but the tenth month

bas  no  nich  day.  ifday  dingwei 

T is intended,  this  would  be  November  19, or four  days  More  the  emperor's  dethronement. Elevation to the rank of prince was the signal that  all was in place, and four days 

later,  the empress dowager issued an  order  ( h g ) removhg  the incumbent emperor and 

c a b g  on  Luan,  as the  third  son of Xiao  Llaocheng,  to continue the  imperial  line.  66 

Light  alternates with darkness, as peace  follows  upon  disorder, in accordance with the  person  on whorn Heaven bestows its favour and to whom the people tum  their  hearts..  . . In the  longchmg  8 reign  period, [Zhaoye]  ruled  without  virtue  and  threw  the worlds of men and spirits  into 

confusion.  Not  only did the land  within  the four  seas  risk being tom  apart 

but the  nine  tnpods [of imperial authority] were on the verge of being borne away. Heaven bestowed an enlightened assistant [Xiao  Luan]  who 

repaired  the altars of the  realm,  rebuilt the  crumbled  foundation and restored the  neglected  laws and canons.  p u t ]  the [new] heir  is  young and immature and  does  not understand the  flairs  of  govement.  Furthemore, 

he  has  been sickly  since  childhood and cannot bear the  heavy  burden of  his 

position. Consequently, office-holding princes have treated him with 

contempt  while royal members stationed in the  regions  have dared to revolt.  Thus,  ad  ponder the signs of heaven and the state of the land and 

consider  only their  own  ambitions. Although people remember the  virtue  of 

Our  ancestor,  the seven temples [of the emperor] are in a precarious state. 

I f a  mature d e r  (zhangjun  W )  is not installed to keep a  firm  hand  on the instruments of  mle  and  fulfill  the expectations of heaven and man, how 

can  the schemes of  evil-doers  be quelled? The Grand Mentor  (fazfi  f +#) 

and Prince of Xuancheng  3 [Xiao  Luan]  is  descended  from  Emperor 

Xuan  IQ  f [ father of Xiao Daocheng] and was  much  beloved of Emperor Gao  w a o  Daocheng] . ...It is  meet  and  right  that he should  carry  on the precious mandate  (cheng  baoming  #k  a:  9) and bnng  tranquility  to the 

irnpenal  temple. The emperor shall be reduced in rank to  P ~ c e of  Hailing  

> i1)

@ ,while  1,  being old, shall retire to a  separate  residence. Just as in former  tirnes  Emperor Xuan  # restored the  House  of Han and Emperor 

Jianwen  prolonged  the  imperid  line  of the [Western] Jin, so do we hope that now our throne  shall  be  forever  secure..  ..6' 

Xiao  Luan  was pressed  three  times  by the  great  host of  officials  and  h a i l y 

accepted.68  However,  he did not  take  the throne  until  the  eleventh  day  foliowing  the  order  

> 66

On  day  xinhai  .Q  * in the  tenth  month,  or November 23,494  (NQS/l/79/15 & 8011)  

> 67

The edict  appears  in NQSl1/80/1-8. In NQSIl18419, there  is  spectfic  mention of Xiao  Luan  being      

> considered as the third son of Xiao Daocheng.
> "NQS/1/84/9-10

191 

of  removal.69  On  this  day, an edict  (zhao) by  which  he  justified  his  presence on the throne 

was  issued to the  realrn. 

The  House  of  Qi  received the throne  from  the previous  failing 

dynasty  and established its imperial authority .. . .It  was created to endure and its foundation  was  firm.  But in the course of time, the  d e r  stumbled 

the practice of  kingly  govemment,  and the  imperial  position  was 

encumbered with difficulties. The one who  inherited  the mandate 

committed  myriad  offenses  while  those  in the  regions  sparked  strife  and disorder. The  [throne]  was on the verge of  tumbling  into the abyss. But the Empress Dowager  Xuandes  & 'O,  foreseeing  disaster, referred the  ancient  codes and traditions, sought counsel with the most  eminent 

officials  to  determine  the  wisest  policy  and  concluded that the precious mandate (baoming  f +) [of the throne] should be placed in my  person. 

am  fiai1  and  weak  as  1inherit  the  kingly  enterprise.. .. I  think  of what was 

first  put in place and am as  fearful  as if  1 were  walking  on spnng ice. Womes beset me day and  night,  for  I know not how to accomplish my task.. . .71 

Luan  also declared this to be a time for renewal and, in that spirit, issued an 

amnesty  for certain types of debts and  punishments,  proclaimed a change of  reign  name  to 

jiamvu  & ("the establishment of  succe~sion")~~ and ordered a general promotion of rank for  civilian  and  military  officers. In  another  edict  (zhao),  Luan  stated that the former emperor was to be treated in the  manner  of Liu  Qiang  #$ a, Prince of  Donghai  $L 5 (of the Han  dynasty)."  This 

appeal  to precedent  was  likely  intended  to  give  moral sanction to  othehse  very 

questionable procedures. However,  Luan,  as the newly  installed  emperor, had no  wish  to   

> 69 XiaO

Luan  took the  throne  on  day  guihai  Il  of the  tenth  month  of  year  jiamvu  J&  &, ,or  December  5, 494  (NQS/l/W/ll).   

> 7Q A

daughter  of the  great  aristocratie  Wang  family,  she  was  first  chosen  by  Xiao Daocheng  as a wife  for the heir,  Changmao,  but  never  won the latter's affection.  Upon  his  death  in 493 and the devolution of the title of heir to her  husband's  son, her  title  was  changed  ftom fei ("concubine") of the imperial  hek  to  

> taifei

("concubine  mother")  of the  Mperial  grandson,  Zhaoye.  When  the  latter  took the  throne  and 

elevated  his  consort to the  rank  of  empress,  she  was  given  the  title  of  empress  dowager (huang taihou) and  

> the

prestige  name  of  Xuande  ("manifestation of  virtuen).  She  died  in  5 12,  ten  years  after  the  founding  of the Liang, at the age of  58  sui  (NQS/Z3 92/3- 10).  

> 71

NQS/1184/11- 8512  

> 72

Although  the  character  wu  & has  the  meaning  of  "maniai",  it  is  also  defineci  as "successionn. A double 

meaning  of  "martial  (and  legitimate)  succession" is  perhaps  intended.   

> 73 NQSI l/8O/9

maintain  the presence of  this  potential seed of  discord.  In the eleventh  month,  it  was 

reported  that the former emperor was  ill.  Luan  sent his doctor on  several  visits,  but the royal patient died. He was likely  murdered, for a  monk  who resided in the Eastern Palace observed blood dripping  from  the  corpse  of the deposed emperor as he  was  being  carried 

through  one of the  gates.74  Xiao  Luan,  in a final appeal to precedent, ordered that the deposed emperor, now "honoured" as Prince of  Hailing  i@ & 3, be buned in the  manner 

of the Prince of  Donghai  and receive the posthumous title of "the  Respectfui"  (gong  af)?

(fi)  Consolidation of the New  Imperia1  Line Xiao  Luan  (known  posthumously as Emperor Ming) was to reign for less  than  four 

years  in a state  of  seerningly  constant  insecurity . He had  already  proven that he  was 

shrewd  and  ruthless  in acquiring power, but a few high-profile executions and another mass  murder  of royal princes  reflect  a deep-seated fear that his  right  to the throne, and the nght of his  heirs,  would  never  be a settled  issue. The best he could do was  remove 

strategically  important  enernies  (thereby avoiding an unnecessary  backlash  by casting the net too  far  and  wide),  but  there  would  always  be a  cloud  of  illegitimacy  that could work to a challenger's advantage. The fact that  most  of the people he worked with had a  much 

longer  personai  relationship with the first  two  emperors  than  with  him  may have made  him 

cautious about  their  loyalty,  for he was only a nephew and cousin rather  than  a son or 

grandson.  Furthermore,  if they could  transfer  their  loyalty  to  him,  they could tum  again  to another  person.  Finally, with only an adolescent son to  take  the  royal  mantle  upon  his 

death,  he  knew  that  his  impenal  iine  would be as  vulnerable  as the one he had so 

successfully  destroyed. As the dowager's  cornmand  (hg) of removal indicates,  Luan  had played the  "maturity"  card,  claiming  his  age as a  stabilizing  factor in the face of a court headed by a child,  but  Luan's  heir  could face the  same  situation  should  he  corne  to the throne too  early. The  &st  challenge  to  Luan  (Emperor Ming) was  actually  from  the Northem Wei 

which  may have felt that the Southem Qi was more vulnerable  because  of the rapid changes of  d e r .  In the first  month  of the following  year  (499,  they  launched  attacks on four border  regions  and advanced towards the  Yangzi  River."  Their action was 

announced  as a campaign  against  the  regicide,  Xiao  Luan,  but  it  ended somewhat quickly, with the northem troops being  recalled  the following  rnonth  because  of the situation at 

court." 

It  was  against  the background of  this  incursion that Emperor Ming  dealt  with the 

kst  of  his  former  allies whom he suspected of  disaffection.  The "suspect" was Xiao  Chen 

# s, former aide of the first  two  emperors (Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Ze  respectively) and 

tnisted  companion  of the young Zhaoye whom he  willingly  murdered as part of  Luan's 

conspiracy  to  acquire  the  throne.  Upon  Luan's  enthronement,  Chen  was made  General  of the Palace  Guard  (finaun  jiangiun)  and  inspector  (cishi)  of Southem Xuzhou. However, he  is  said  to have tned to interfere in  govemment  affairs and the choice of appointments, and  Luan  became  waiy  of  him.  Although  he and  his  brothers  had  been honoured with  rank 

and  titles,  Chen  gave the impression of being dissatisfied, and  Luan  foresaw the  possibility 

of  betrayal. 

The timing of  his  elimination  was  influenced  by the fact that  Chen's  two  brothers were  serving  in the  north  fending  off the first attacks from the Wei. In  order  to avoid the nsk of having them  coilude  with the Wei in an act of revenge,  Luan  waited sixty days  d e r 

the northem troops retreated before  having  Chen  killed in the palace following a banquet. In deference to the necessities of  fom,  an edict  was  issued after the  fact,  denouncing  his                     

> 76 NQS/ 11861 11&87/6 &87/7 &8719; WS/ 1/ l76/ 12. The account in the imperid anoals

of the Wei Shu is  extremely  brief  and mentions the  r d of the troops  d e r  the  death  of Feng Dan  ;Bb  # (WS/ l/176/8-13).  The  e-tion  occurred  not long  after  the         

> teorginkation of the Wei state under Emperor Xiaowen

# 2 +,  with  the  rnoving  of the  capital  fiom           

> Pingcheng to Luoyang in 493-494 and the forced sinicization of the Tuoba aristocrats.

crimes and  stating  that he should be  tumed  over to the  Chamberlaifi  of Law Enforcement 

(tingwei)  for capital  p~nishrnent.~~ 

The new  erzperor  was  quick  to  deal  with  Chen's  brothers,  sending  Xiao  Yan,  the future founder of the Liang,  northward  to  kill  one of them, and  having  the other executed upon  his  return  to the  ~apital.7~ Three  sons of Xiao  Ze  were accused of  collaborathg  with 

Chen  and executed at the  same  time.  Luan  may have feared that they were now old enough to be used by an  arnbitious  Chen  to replace  hirn  on the  throne.80 

At  this  point,  ody  seven princes,  ranging  in age  fiom  three  to ten,  s u ~ v e d from Xiao Ze's progeny.  Luan  considered thern  harmless,  just  as he considered Xuan  j#  Y,  the 

last  son of Emperor Gao (Xiao Daocheng), to be too young and  weali-minded  to ever be a 

threat.81  It was  around  this son, however, that a coup  against  Luan  was  allegedly  devised 

by  Wang  Yan,  his  Director  of the  Department  of State  Anairs  (shangsh  h g )  and a

seemingly  firm  supporter in  his  scheme to  take  the throne.  Luan  had therefore kept  hirn  in office  dong  with  Xu  Xiaosi  who was  Deputy-Director  of the  Left  (zuopuye),  immediately 

below  Wang. Both  ofthese  men had been with the Qi  from  the  beginning  and were 

entrusted  in 493 by the  dyhg  Emperor Wu (Xiao Ze) to  administer  affairs  at court  under 

Luan's  direction. 

Luan  believed that Wang intended to cooperate with some of Emperor Wu's old generals to  kill  hirn  and place the  then  seventeen-year-old Xiao Xuan on the throne. 

Because  of  Xuan's  mental deficiency,  such  a move  would  d o w  Wang not  just  to  control 

the throne but  eventudy  to  usurp  it. There was possibly more  than  personal  ambition involved. Wang was of the old aristocratic Langye Wang stock and was  veiy  conscious of   

> -
> 78 NQS/3/746/8

# - 74714     

> 79 NQS/3/747/10-13
> These î h e

sons were the  sixteen-year4d  Ziming  -f  4 and  Zihan  'f  P (tenth  and  eleventh  sons 

of Xiao  Ze  respectively)  and the  fourteen-year-old  Zizhen  % Jf  fi  (Xiao Ze's  fourteenth  son)                   

> (NQSf 11871 12).
> 81 He is said to have been spared because of his young age and feeble-mindedness ( n i m shao cai n o

# +9    

> $Jij )(NQSlU63 118).

his  statuq  so  that he may have  wanted  more  Say  in  imperial  decisions. In  fact,  Wang had 

aroused  suspicions for having been once deeply loyal  to  Xiao  Ze  and  then  suddenly 

speaking  of Xiao  Luan's  rise  to  power as a  renewal  of the  dynasty  and  criticking  al1  that Xiao  Ze  had  done  before. The many  edicts  fiom  Ze  on  afFairs  of state that were discovered to have been  drafted  by Wang as well as Wang's  interest  in having  his  future told (the  prediction  was that he would  rise  to great heights)  disturbed  Xiao  Luan.  #en 

evidence of a plot was presented to  Luan,  he decided to  ad."  Wang was  killed  in the first 

month  of  497,83  following  the emperor's New  Year's  levee,"  and replaced by  Xu 

X i a ~ s i . ~ ~ Xiao  Xuan,  for the time being was  left  unharrned. 

This last son was caught up in the most  drarnatic  of  Luan's  moves against  his  royal relatives.  Almost  one year  later,  d e r  falling  seriously  ill,  Xiao  Luan  undertook  the last of the  "three  massacres of the princes" (the first being in  494),  killing  those  whom he probably  feared  could be used by ambitious  generals  or  rnight  attempt to  take  back the 

"legitimate"  line  when they  became  adults?  His  executions included not  only  Xuan, 

thereby eliminating the last of the sons of the founding emperor (Xiao Daocheng), but 

also  the last "seven princes'' of Emperor Wu (Xiao Ze), thereby elirninating the last of the second emperor's sons.  * In addition, the  fifieen-year-old  Zhaoxiu  j#  IRand  the seven-

year-old  Zhaocan  j#B  &(whose  two  older brothers had been emperors  under  Xiao 

Luan's  tutelage) were also killed, thereby  elirninating  the last of the sons of  Changmao, 

# "NQSl3174 1-7M  

> 83

n i e  date is given as  day  bingchen  A &of  the  fint  month  of the  fourth  year  ofjiamvu,  or  March  17, 497  (NQS/  118914).     

> 84 NQSl31743112
> 85 NQSI 119011
> 86

The  execuîions  took  place on  day  dingwei  7 of the  fim  rnonth  of year yongtai  & à, or  March  3, 498  (NQS/1/90/11-12).  One source  implies  that the  executions  were  ordered  just  after he  recovered   

> (NQS/3/7 1315)

while  another  suggests  that the  decision  was  pushed  by Xiao  Yaoguang  a if  fi,  his 

nephew  and close  confidant  who  was  watching  by  his  side  during  his  worsening  Unes  (NQS/3/789/10). 

in  any  case, he would have  had  to  be  well  enough  to  follow  the  ritual  weeping  and  burning  of  incense 

which  he is  said  to have  foî.lowed  prior  to  each  of the  three  m a s  murders  of the Xiao princes.  By  this 

ritual,  it  was  known  that a mas  execution  would  occur  that  night  (NQSl317 1316).  

> si

These  included the  thirteen-year-old  Ziyue-f  9, Ziwen  -f  -Q  ,Zijun  +e, Zilin  + and  Zimin  -f 

# a, îhe  twelve-year-old  Zjian  +*, and the  six-year-old  Zixia  +;1L. the prematurely  deceased  heir apparent of the second emperor. The  %ne  of the eldest" (the line  descending  through  Xiao  Ze)  was now completely  eliminated,  and  all  those  who 

couid  claim  to be the "rnost senior" by  h u e  of being the next younger brother of  Ze 

(Emperor Wu),  Changmao  (the prematurely deceused eldest son of Emperor Wu) or 

Zhaoye  (eldest son of Changmao) were out of  Luan's  way. 

Unfortunately,  removal of  those  who were  obvious  candidates for consideration as the  %ne  of the eldest" or the "most senior" opened up possibilities for  these  categories  to be applied to some of the  survivors.  This may be what  almost  precipitated another mass 

murder  just  three  months Iater. At that  tirne,  Wang  linge,  govemor (taishou) of  Kuaiji, 

took up  arms  on the pretext of heeding the  command  of  Xiao  Zike  +&,  the  then 

twenty-seven-year-old  son of Xiao Yi  &(Emperor  Wu's next younger brother) who 

was  govemor  (tazshm)  of Wu  C~mrnandery.~~ As Zike was the eldest  s u ~ v i n g son of Yi, the deaths of so  many  other princes now put  him  in the position of being the most senior of  Xiao  Daocheng's  Line.  Thus,  it could be  argued  that he  was  in fact a step  ahead 

of Xiao  Luan,  who was  just  a nephew of Xiao Daocheng.  Only  by  emphasizing  that  Luan 

was the  "third  (foster) son" of Daocheng could  Luan  still lay claim to being the most senior in that generation.  Othenvise,  Zike could make that  claim  and therefore have the mantle of moral  legitimacy  should he  lead  an attack against the emperor. Wang  was  an old  soldier  in  his  sixties,  more of an  "elder  statesman"  figure who had served  under  the Song, switched  allegiance  to the Qi and supported  Luan  in  his       

> The uprising began on day dingmao

T $p  of the  fourth  month  of  yongfai*  /,  or May 22,498  

> (NQSIlI91M).

For Zike's position,  see  NQSl214  19/15,  This is another  eauample of the  difficulty  in  trying  

> to

use the  official  histories to  reconstnict  events.  The biographies of Wang  Jingze  in the  A h Qi  Shu  and         

> Nan Shi make no mention of Xiao Zike. The only biographical information about Xiao

Zike in the  Nan  Qi Shu is  found  in  his  father 's biography and  States  simply  that he  was  governor of Wu and  fled  because  of Wang's  uprising  (NQSl214 1911 5).  His  biographies in the  Nan  Shi  (NS/4/1068/7-12)  and Liang  Shu             

> (LSl2150713-5) add the details about the threat to poison the royal relatives, with the former saying

over    

> sixty people, includùig

Xiao  Zhaozhou  a # ,were  swept  up in the  affair.  if one  goes  to  the latter's biography,  containeci  within  thaî  of  his  father, Xiao  Ziiiang,  in the  Nan  Qi  Shu, it  appears  that ail of the 

survMng  descendants of the  fùst  two  emperors  as  weii  as  Luan's  eldest  son and a nephew  were  called  into             

> the court (NQS/3/7OW4-9). The Liang Shu simply says there were over seventy people affected,

and  these 

were  Zike's  siblings  and  their  retinues. elimination  of the young emperors  (since  he had been one of the generals who murdered the  fiflh  Song emperor,  such  things  would have  hardly  made  him  squeamish).  Despite  his 

age, he felt that the emperor  siispected  he could  never  be  truly  loyal to a person  who  had 

murderered the  offspring  of emperors with whom he had worked closely for so  many 

years.  Lest the emperor  take  pre-emptive action, Wang decided to  act  first. The emperor,  naturally,  was  afraid  for  his  position on the throne and  immediately 

ordered  Zike's  siblings and other Xiao princes and dukes as well as their  families  and 

retinues  (about  seventy  people) to the palace where they were  to  be  killed  by the  third 

watch  (san  geng).  As they waited out their  fate,  the palace physician  prepared  the poison and the  royal  carpenters  assembled  the coffins. Zike, however,  does  not seem to have wanted to be part of a conspiracy against the emperor and fled before the  rebels  could seize  hirn  in  his  commandery.  Hence, he is  said  to have  managed  to reach the palace in 

Jiankang  by the second watch, with the  result  that in the  moming  the emperor  permitted 

everyone to  retum  to their  homes.89 

Even without  his  focus  of  legitimacy  (Xiao Zike), Wang marched  westward  with an army that  continued  to swell in  numbers  as the revolt expanded to  embroil  at  least 

seven commanderies in the  Kuaiji  area.  However, they did not get  very  fm  beyond  Wujin. 

An  impenal force was sent  against  them  which  soon succeeded in dispersing  this  rabble 

army  and  killing  Wang. With Wang  gone  and no other  person  able or  willing  to  capitalize 

on the  turmoil,  the revolt  coUapsed.gO 

Within  two  rnonths  of  this  last direct assault on  his  power, the emperor  died  at  the age of  46  and was succeeded by  his  second son,  Baojuan  fiii  8, who had been made heir apparent in the  month  following  Luan's  accession to the  t h r ~ n e . ~ ' This  decision  was             

> ----
> ~9 NQS/3/ 70U4-9
> Wang's head was sent to the capital on &y yiyou

t X ,  or  June  9,498  (NQS/1/91/8).  Wang's age  is  

> given

as 64 sui in the  N m  Shi and  over  70 in the  Nan  Qi  Shu.   

> 91 Xiao

Luan  died  on  day  jiyou  C f of the  seventh  month.  or  September  1,498, at the age of 47 sui 

> (NQS1119

1/12). His  son  was  made heir on  &y  wuzr  /ft  +of  the  eleventh  month  of the  nrst  year  of jiamvu 

& ,or  December  30,494  (NQS/1/86/2). taken  because  the oldest of  Luan's  ten  living  sons was  afflicted  by a crippling  aiiment 

which marked  him  as being an  "incomplete"  person  and hence  unfit  for the  throne? 

Baojuan  would have been about  fifteen  when he took the  tiirone  in 498, and about  nine 

months  later  (in 499) he had a son,  named  Song  s, who  was  made  his  official  heir.93 

(3) The Failure of Xiao  Luan's  Line of Succession 

By posthumous  edict,  Xiao  Luan  called  on  officials  and  generals  whose  loyalty  had 

been tested or who were close farnily members to  provide  a kind  of regency for  his  son. The preminent  civil  oficial  was  to be Xu Xiaosi  @ z$  H, who had replaced the executed Wang Yan. Chen  Xianda  @ 3, who had served  under  Xiao Daocheng and had  corne  in

on the  side  of Xiao  Luan,  was to be responsible for major  military  affairs.  AU flairs  of the 

reah  great  and  small  (nez  wai  zhongshi  wu  k i a o  &J  9b  8 f k 4'1.  ), were to be decided by a quadrumvirate  of Xu Xiaosi,  XiaoYaoguang  # i& & , Xiao  Tanzhi  fek 

and Jiang Shi  ir  a , with  participation in major  matters  (&hi  )by Shen  Wenji  -&, 2

f ,Jiang Si  ir  R and Liu  Xuan  @j I@  .94 

The final arrangement was an unwieldly one, and it  eventually  played into the 

hands  of Xiao Yan,  then  a thuty-four-year-old  rnilitary  commander  in charge of the western  region  of  Yong~hou.~~ This was the usurper who would meddle  in the  Qi  line of succession,  just  as Xiao  Luan  had, to create a new Liang dynasty.  

> 92

The  Chinese  terni  isjeiji  fi  which is  translatecl  as "crippling  ailment"  in Richard  Mather,  tr., Shi- 

> shuo

Hsin-yu:  A New  Account  of Tales of the World (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,  1976),  

> 22

1:  #30.  His condition  prevented  him  fiom  going  among  the people  (NQS/3/863/2)  and  may  have been  

> the

result  of polio. He  died  during  the Liang,  presumably  of  natural  causes,  since  his  physical  condition 

depriveci  hirn  of the moral  authority  which would have made  him  dangerous  to Xiao  Yan,  founding 

emperor of the Liang  dynasty.  

> 93

Xia0  Baojuan is  said  to have been  nineteen  sui when he  was  killed  on  day  bingyin  ft  ft  of the  tweU3.h 

month  of the  third  year of  yongyuan  a a. or  December  3 l,5O  1 WQSI  1/102/12).  Since  he  had  the 

capping  ceremony  on  day  wuyin  /fi  of the  intercalary  twelfth  month  of the  third  year  ofjiamvu  & & ,

or  Febniary  7,497, the ceremony  must  have  b e n  carried  out at the age of  fiiieen  sui  (NQS/  l/89/8).  His  

> son,

Song ,was  appointeci  heir  apparent (and  perhaps  born)  on day jisi  L 6 of the  fourth  month  of the  

> fj.rst

year of  yongyua.,  or May  19,199  (NQSI  l/98/5).  

> 94

NQS/1/9  1/12-14  

> 95

Xia0  Yan  is  quoted  as  saying  that  the  regency  of  altemating  officials,  a practice  seen  before  in  history, 

wodd  be  a source of  confision  to the  r e a h  (LS/1/3/6-8). For the present, however, control of the  realm  was in the  hands  of  those  to whom 

authority  had been  assigned  by the  just-deceased  Emperor  Ming.  Jiang Shi, Jiang Si, Liu Xuan,  Xiao  Yaoguang, Xu  Xiaosi  and Xiao  Tanzhi,  in that  order  of importance,  became 

known  as the Six Notables  (Iiu  gui  f ) and took  tums  attending court,  studying  the 

matters  of importance for that day and issuing their instructions.  96 

These  men  had  been  chosen  for their  ties  by blood or  marriage  to  Xiao  Luan.  The 

two  Jiang brothers were  first  cousins with whom he was  very  close and to whom he  felt 

most  cornfortable  about  entmsting  p~wer,~' while  Liu Xuan was a brother-in-law,  being 

the younger brother of  Luan's  consort who had died in  489.98 

Xiao Yaoguang was Luan's  nephew and had played an important  advisory  role  for some  years,  for  Luan  is  said  to have had few  confidants.  Yaoguang had encouraged  his 

uncle  in his  desire  to be  rid  of the sons and grandsons of the  first  two  emperors  (Xiao 

Daocheng and Xiao Ze) and  planned  with him how to do it,  recommending  that  it  be  done 

in stages. Future events were to suggest he rnay have  aiready  been  calculating  how  this 

would serve  his  own  imperid  ambitions, but the  fact  that he had been bom cnppled and 

could  therefore not  take  his  place in court may have  also  harshened  his  temperament. He would arrive by  carriage  through  a separate  gate to discuss matters with  his  uncle,  and it became  known  that  these  visits  would aiways be followed by  execution~.~~ Since  Luan  had loved Yaoguang and  his  brothers as though they were  his  own  sons, he had  given  them 

important inspectorates.  'O0  Just  after  taking  the  throne  in 494, he appointed Yaoguang, 

despite  his  physical  handicap, as inspector of Yangzhou,  giving  him  de  facto  rniiitat-y 

control over the capital  region,  whileYaoxin  if  M:  was made inspector of  fingzhou,   

> 96 NQSI3175

# ln        

> 97 Xia0 Luan's mother was Ernpress Jing

f f i ,  the  aunt  (gu  *or  father's  sister)  of the Jiang  brothers                     

> (NQS/3/750/3 &78817-8; &NQS/3/). Luan's feelings towards his cousins are mentiontxi in
> NQS/3/7S 115.
> 98 The relationship isstated in NQS/3/75

M. Her  biography  gives  her Ume of  death  as the  seventh  year  of     

> yongming jjc rg] (NQS/2/3 9319).

# "NQSl3/789/3,8-9  

> ' O 0 NQS/3/794/5

histoncaliy  the most strategic  region  for  those  rebelling against the  capitai,  and Yaochang 

# R was made  inspector  of  Yuthou. l o l  Because  of their  military  control over 

Jiankang  and  Jingzhou,  Yaoguang and  Yaoxin  are  described  as holding  pre-erninent  power and influence between them at the time of their uncle's  death.lo2  This  does  jar somewhat with the  histonan's  description of the importance of the Jiang brothers, but in fact Yaoguang is described as first  trying  to  win  over Jiang Shi before proceeding in  his  own 

manner  in the many plots that were to  ensue.  Furthermore, both of  his  brothers died in 499, not many months  &er  Baojuan  inherited the  throne,  and  their  deaths  weakened  his 

power and  mistrated  many  plans.lo3 

Xu Xiaosi was a relative by  marriage,  being the father-in-law of  Luan's  third  son, 

Xuan.  More important, however, was the fact that he was a  kind  of "senior  statesman"'04 

who had made  his  mark as a rninister  of the state or, more correctly perhaps, a loyal 

servant of power who  protected  himself  by  never  overstepping  his  position. los  He had been consulted by  Luan  at the  tirne  he was planning to  remove  Zhaoye  from  the throne and is  said  to have on  his  own  prepared the  empress's  decree of dethronement  which  he pulled  fiom  his  sleeve at the  cntical  moment following the  murder  of the young emperor. [O6 

Xiao  Tanzhi,  as  stated  earlier,  belonged to the Southem  Lanling  clan, although the precise relationship is  unclear.  He had provided  faitffil  seMce  by being part of the 

military  party  that  kiiied  Zhaoye, whose  removal  opened the way for  Luan's  eventual       

> 'O1 NQS/1/85/10 &8611
> lo2 NQS/3î79îi4
> 'O3 A

cornparison  of the biographies of Jiang Shi and Xiao  Yaoyang  provides  a typical  example  of the    

> difnculty in ascertaining

an  accurate  pi- of  events.  in the Jiang biography, the Jiang brothers  seem  to 

be  the most  powerfiil  royal relatives and close  confidants  of Xiao  Luan.  The Xiao biography, however,   

> descn'bes Yaoguang

as the most important  confidant  of  Luan  and the  true  force  behind  Luan's  mass   

> murders of

his  clan.  Mer  Luan's  death,  Yaoguang and his brother are  depicteci  as holding the  reai  power of the  realm.  

> lo4

He would  have  been  about  45 at the  tirne,  since  his  mother  was  pregnant  with  him  at the the of the   

> murder of

his  father  and  wdfather  by Liu  Shao  during  the Song (353)  (NQSl3/77 111-2).    

> los NQS13l77313
> 'O6 NQS/3/772113-14

accession to the  throne.  However, being a suspicious and abrasive  person  who wounded others' feelings, he  was  not a force for  unity.  lo7 

This group of regents was dissatisfied with the new emperor, ostensibly for his wild and reclacitrant ways, and Jiang Shi was the  firmest  in holding out  against  the young emperor's positions, thereby rousing the ire of  this  ad~lescent.~** It  is  not  surprishg  that the regents would be strict with the emperor as they attempted to mould  him  to their  will. 

A well-tutored  emperor would  bring  stability to the  realm  without  threatening  their  own 

power. Neither is it  surpnsing  that this adolescent would balk at their restraints and 

reprimands  and find  cornfort  and support in a whole other set of  personal  attendants and 

favourites,  sorne  of whom would be clever enough to gain  great  power by  playing  on his 

whims  and  mistrations.  A bevy  of over  thirty  courtiers and attendants, including the grand astrologer  (tazshiling  R &)  and grand sorcerer  (&wu  ft  a), as well as another group of ten eunuchs,  formed  a clique about  km  led  by Ru  Fazhen  t & 4 and Mei Chong'er 

# a, both of whom were superintendants of the Royal Manufactory  (zhiju jian  #]  4 

> g).l09

As southemers of  lowly  status, they were  already  in  confiict  with the  officiais  of the  outer  court, and no-one in the  two  groups  could act as a go-between in establishing a 

modus  vivendi. 

A somewhat  disorganized  intrigue  arnong  the regents  began  as they sought to resolve the problem. The new emperor  was  himself  womed  about  becorning  a victirn.  He must have been  aware  of what  his  father had  done  to an  earlier  adolescent emperor, Zhaoye.  In  fact,  on  his  deathbed Emperor Ming had  rerninded  his  son to  think  of that, for to be forewarned was to be  forearmed.  This prompted the new emperor to seek out  his                 

> lo7 Reputedly, the analysis of Xiao Yan, as spoken in the words of his great-uncle (LS1113/14).
> lo8 NQSl3/75 1/8
> NS/611933/10

# - 193519. The  Non  Qi Shu  does  not  contain  biographies of Ru and Mei.  They  are  fouaQ               

> however, in the Nan Shi which places them in the "Court Favourîtesn (enxing $##) sectioa.

This                     

> category generally consists of low-status southemers who h d favour with the emperor, ofien in
> cornpetition with the outer-court offitials of higher social standing.

The  Non  Qi Shu  has  a comparable section but uses the  tenu  xingchen  .f8  E and  does  not  include  auy  of the  "4 men about the  thtonen 

> executed

by  XiaoYa.  after  aniving  with the  troops  of  righteousness  (,vishi  & @ ) h m  the  West. own  circle  of courtiers and trusted aides and be quick about ridding  himself  of troublesome  officiais.  1 I o 

Jiang Shi wanted to put  Baoxuan  jf  *, the emperor's  next  younger brother on the  throne.  Yaoguang felt that he should be the one to  take  the throne, being the most senior royal member (he  was  a linle  over  thirty),  and tned to  hint  at this to Jiang  Shi.111 

Although  Yaoguang's  larneness was  never  publicly mentioned as an issue, the  view  existed that  such  a disability  was not part of the normal  order  of things for a claimant  to the 

throne.1l2  Nonetheless, Yaoguang was supported by Jiang Shi's brother who felt that 

putting  too young a  person  on the throne would be  risky.  Liu  Xuan,  however, did  not 

want to lose  his  position of imperial  uncie  and  refused  to  confirm  his support for Yaoguang as a candidate. Instead, he seenis to have opted for Baoyin, an even younger brother of the present emperor. l l 3  Tanzhi  opposed  any  action, for he felt that there  was 

already  unrest  because  of  Luan's  manipulation of the proper line of succession and a repeat of this sort of  thing  could  only  cause the  realm  to  corne  apart.lt4 Xu  Xiaosi  tned to avoid  taking  a position, but he was the father of Baoxuan's consort and could draw some advantage  from  seeing  him  on the throne.  * l 5  The  group  manifested  several  competing 

goals and could  form  no  cornmon  plan. 

Yaoguang  was perhaps the most ambitious, for he had already  secured  the  support 

of  his  brother in  Jingzhou  who was to  launch  a rapid attack  from  his  western base as soon 

as Yaoguang gave the signal by  nsing  up with  his  garrison  in the Eastern  Citadel.  Yaoxin 

died,  however,  before the plan could be  executed.l16  Jiang Shi had hesitated for so long    

> "O NQSllllOU14-15
> n1 The historiéin

asserts  that Xiao Yaoguang felt the throne  was  righdully  his  because  of  his  age      

> (NQSI31751/11-12). He was 32 sui

when  killed  in  499  (NQS/3/79  1/6).         

> l L 2 Xao Yan, thtough the words of his matemal

uncle  (his  great-uncle),  felt of Yaoguang  that  -the  lame do not  reach  heaven"  (LS/113112).  Xiao  Daocheng  had  originally  wanted  to  remove  Yaoguang as  heir  to Xiao Feng  because  of  his  lamenes  but  was  dissuadeci  From  this action by Xiao  Ze.  

> "3 NQS/3/751/11-12

# 'l4  NQS/3/749/7-8  

> l5

His attempt to avoid  stating  a preference  appears  in  NQS/31773/10-1 1.   

> ll6 NQSl3/789/ 13

about the candidate he would support that Yaoguang sent one of  his  men to assassinate Liu Xuan and be rid of that impediment, for  Jiang's  hesistation seerns to have been a result of Liu's position. The attempt  failed,  and Liu exposed Jiang's plot to the emperor. The emperor responded by  having  the  two  Jiang brothers  executed. lI7  Yaoguang  was  afhid  of the  same  fate  should he appear at court and feigned  illness.  An  order  to appear, however, made hirn  realize  that the emperor wanted to be  rid  of  him,  so in the eighth  month  of 499 he  plotted  a pre-emptive  uprising  which would be  legitimized  as a punitive expedition against Liu Xuan.  l l8 

At the time, he had available to  hirn  Yaoxin's  troops which had accompanied  his 

brother's body  fiom  Jingzhou  as  well  as  those  of Yaochanç who had died at Shouchun defending the northem  fiontier,  and  al1  of  these  troops were massed at the gates of the Eastem  Citadel.119  Insteading of  using  this force irnmediately, however, he sent a few hundred men  during  the  night  to the Eastem  Mint  to  release  prisoners  for  his  campaign 

and  steal  arms  fiom the  Imperia1  Manufactories.  His  collaborators advised hirn to attack the palace  irnmediately  with  al1  his  forces but he hesitated, hoping that a palace coup would occur spontaneously in response to his  cal1  to arms.  120  By the  next  day the  imperîal 

forces had the upper  hand,  and the Eastem  Citadel  was surrounded. One of the generals sent against  them  was  Xiao  Tanzhi  who had  narrowly  avoided  being  seized by  Yaoguang's 

men on the  night  of the  uprising  and succeeded in fleeing to the palace in  disguise.121 

Yaoguang's  chief  general  had sorne initiai success in forays  against  the  goverment 

troops  fiom  the Eastern  Citadel  base but was probably  demoralized  by the  growing 

strength  of the  irnperial  forces and surrendered to one of the  generals  on the second day.      

> ll7 NQSl3175212
> ll8 In

one place,  this  is  said  to have  occurred  on  day  bingchen  O &k of the  eighîh  month  of the  fïrst  year of  

> yongyuan

& X ,  ,or  September  3,499  (NQS/1/98/12).  In  another,  it is  referreâ  to  as the  twelfth  day  of the     

> eighth month or September 1(NQS/3/790/3).

# 'l9  NQS/3/790/1-3   

> ''O NQS/3790/4-7
> l2' NQU3I74918-9

Yaoguang  was  essentiaiiy  left  unprotected.  When the palace troops  entexd  the Eastern 

Citadel,  they found him hiding  under  a bed and beheaded The upnsing was over in a matter  of  days.'" 

Twenty-odd  days  aftenvards,  the emperor sent a force to the residence of Xiao 

Tanzhi  and had  hirn  and  his  son killed.  Although  he had supported the emperor, he is  said 

to have been of a harsh  and  tyrannical  nature and  was  feared and hated by the emperor's 

retinue.124  XU Xiaosi  had fled to the palace at the time of Yaoguang's revolt to show that he  was  not part of the conspiracy.  IZ5  However, Xu was  just  one of  many  officiais and generals feared by the emperor's retinue, and a decision  was made about  two  months  later 

to  cal1  hini  to court and present  hirn  with  poison.  126  Thus,  Xu too  becarne  a victim  of Yaoguang's  failed  plot.  lZ7  Liu  Xuan  was  also  killed  that year  although  the circurnstances and time are not  detailed.  128  The six men who had  ruled  since  Emperor Ming's death were now  gone.  This now allowed the emperor's clique, led by Ru  Zhenfa  and Mei Chong'er, to  dominate  the  outer  court. The wave of executions  marked  the  beginning  of an  attack  on the "old  guard"  and on the  regionai  garrisons not headed by appointees whom the  "new"  court could trust. The  ongoing  state of  insecurity,  if not terror, prompted a succession of pre-emptive  strikes 

fiom  old generals in  regional  bases  who  presented their action as a  campaign  sanctioned 

by Heaven  against  the  evii  incumbent on the  throne. 

In the eleventh  month  of 499,  Chen  Xianda  took up  m s in  Xunyang,  the capital of the  Region  of  Jïangzhou  and prepared to  march  on the  capital.lZ9 His  appointment as   

> 122 NQS/31790/15

to 79  116  

> l"

His head  was  sent to court on  day  wuwu,  or September 5,499  (NQS/  KJ8/ 1.1  & 79 112  & 6).      

> '24 NQS/31749111-12
> 125 NQS/3/774/7
> 126 This o c c d

on  da/  yiwei  t $k of the  tenth  month,  or  December  11,499  (NQS/1/9914).                 

> 12' NQS/3/7741 11
> 128 NQS/3/752/9
> 129 On day bingchen fi fiof the eleventh month of the first

year of yongyuan  R ,or  December  3 1,499 

> (NQSI 119916)

inspector  (czshi) of that  region  had been made a few days before Emperor Ming's 

death.130  Chen  was an old and respected general who had been  entrusted  in the emperor's posthumous  wiil  of  498  with major  military  affairs.  His  reputûtion  had been  stabiished  in the  transitionai  period between the Song and Qi regimes, and he had won a firm place for 

himself  in the  h a r t  of the  dynastic  founder. He had continued to be a  military  piliar  of the 

regime  in his many  successfil  campaigns  against the  northem  incursions by the Wei 

armies,  though  his  last confrontation with the Wei  just  afler  Baojuan  carne to the throne 

resulted  in a rout and  decimation  of the Qi forces. In  view  of  his  age and prestige, the court did  not  punish or humiliate  hirn  but rather  allowed  hirn  to retum to Jiangzhou.  Chen 

was pleased with  this,  since  it meant that he could be away  from  the greater dangers of the capital, now that  Baojuan  was  on the throne. Though he had helped Xiao  Luan  remove 

Zhaoye  ffom  the throne, he was  afiaid  of  Luan  and  equally  so of  his  son.  His  fears  were 

confirmed  when he  heard  about the murders in the capital and the  demise  of Xu  Xiaosi 

and so many other men of note.  It  was also  rumoured  that an  impenal  force was to be sent to attack  hirn  in  Jiangzhou. 

This  was  what prompted  his  carnpaign  against the  capital.  To  legitimize  his  action, he  first  issued a  letter  addressed to the  erninent  officials  of the court  outlining  the terrible 

things  that had happened  under  the emperor and how they had engendered the  anger  of Heaven and the people and implying that  powerful  generals  Mth  armies  in the major 

regional  garrisons,  both  near  to and distant  fiom  Jiankang,  were ready to press  down  on the  capital.131  Though he  does  not seem to have really had the  commitment  of other 

generals,  his  cal1  caused the  same  sort of  panic  in the palace as had Wang  Jingze's  uprising at the end of Emperor Ming's  reign,  and  Baojuan  ordered the royal princes and dukes 

(those  who were  still  stmiving)  into  the palace to avoid the  possibility  of  any  one of  them                    

> 130 Both were appointai on day guimao of the seventh month of the l a s year of Xiao Luan's reiga or

AU- 26,498  (NQSI1/91111-12).             

> l3 lNQS/2/488/10-13 &49018-10 &190113 &49 1/4-15 &49215-9. His lener appears inNQSI2/492110 to
> 49412.

being  spirited away and  proclaimed  as the  fitting  replacement for the incumbent on the throne. 132 

Within  a month  Chen  had reached the capital which was stoutly  defended  by the 

irnperial  amies.  Though he had been  victorious  on the route to the capital, he  was 

basically  on  his  own  and was  unable  to  cope  with the  imperial  army  and its  reinforcements 

which were loyal to the powers-that-be.  Chen  was  killed  the  next  day and  his  head  was 

delivered to the  pala~e.13~ He is  said  to have been 71 at the time of  his  death.134 

Only  one and a half  months  later,  the court was sending an expedition against Pei Shuye, in what  was  almost  a repetition of the action against  Chen  Xianda.135  Pei was another senior generai who had served Xiao Daocheng at the end of the Song as he was preparing  to  usurp  the throne and had  supponed  Xiao  Luan  (Emperor  Ming) in  his  taking 

of the throne, being a key participant in the suppression of the  Zimao  "upnsing" of 494. He  did  not have the confidence of Xiao  Luan's  son or  his  entourage, however. Pei had  also  been a rnilitary  pillar  in  his  many  expeditions against Wei incursions, though at the end of  498  and in  early  499 he sustained the  same  type of defeat as  Chen 

Xianda  after  pressing into Wei temtory. In both cases their prestige and power were  still 

too strong for  these  rnilitary reverses to be used against  them.  Instead, they were suspected of  preparing  rnilitary  coups, perhaps even in cooperation with the Wei. Obviously, the  throne  considered the vital  threats  to be  intemal  at  this  point. As long as Qi 

generals  did  not  collude  with the enemy, the Wei regime was  only  a nuisance. As Pei 

himselfis  quoted as  saying  in a memorial to Emperor Ming, "The  northemers  take  no 

interest  in long expeditions, only in incursions  dong  the border of their  own  territory  The bandits who  strike  into  Yongzhou  and  Sizhou  can  be easily scattered. There  is  no need to        

> lS2 NQS/3/702/10
> lS3 He reached the capital on day jiarhen

I of the  twelfth  month  of the  fim  year  of  yongvum  jk  ii.  ,or                

> J a n q 29,500 and was beheaded on day yiyou 2i$ ,or January 30,500 (NQS/i/99/8-9).
> 134 His age

is @en  as 72 sui  (NQS/2/491/10).     

> 13s On &y gengmi

& Q of the  first  month  of the second  year  of  yongyuan  & IC  ,or  March  15,500 

> (NQS/1/99/10).

mobilize  the people for a distant  ~ a r n p a i g n . " ~ ~ ~ Border  regions  might  come and go in asee-saw  battle,  but the court at  Jiankang  seems  to have  felt  itselfto  be  secure.  Pei was garrisoned in Shouchun as the  inspector  of Yuzhou,  directly  on the border  with  the Wei. In  view  of  Baojuan's  executions of  officiais,  he was  &aid  to be  near  the capital but needed  to  appear  above  suspicion,  especially  when the court was  preparing  to assign  hirn 

to Southem  Yanzhou,  much  doser  to the court, and sent a Pei relative to  order  him  to 

give  up  his  inpsectorship.  Pei sent  his  son to the capital as a pledge of loyalty, but the son fled back to Shouchun in  fear  for  his  life. The court took  this  as a  signal  that Pei was preparing a coup and sent an expedition against  him.  Since  Pei was  il1  at the time,  his 

nephew  called  on the Wei for  military  assistance and sent Pei's son to the Wei capital as a 

guarantee  this  was not a trap. Pei died  shonly  d e r ,  but the Wei  still  sent a  cavalry  force of  two  thousand to Shouchen.  13'  This  temtoly  was now in Wei  hands,  and Pei's relatives  

> ail

went to the Wei capital. The leader of the joint naval and army expedition sent  against  Pei was Cui  Huijing 

.%,  f.  Since  the emperor had entrusted  him  with suppressing the  earlier  rebellion  by 

Chen  Xianda,  it  was not  surprising  that he would tum  again  to one of the  Qi's  great 

soldiers. Like  Chen  and Pei, Cui had  served  under  Xiao Daocheng  during  the Song and had therefore come into the Qi as one of Daocheng's men.  During  the period when  Luan 

was  eradicating  the  nghtful  heirs  in  order  to position  himself  on the  throne,  Cui was able to  convince  Luan  of  his  loyalty and was  narned  in the emperor's posthumous  edict  as a 

pillar  of trust who could be  appointed  to important  positi0ns.13~       

> 136 NQS/3/870/11
> 13' He died on day jichou

2, B o f the  sefond  month  of the second  year  of  y o n v n  ijc  ii.  .or  April3,500   

> (NQS/1/99/12).
> 8e

inspector  of  Yuzhou,  on the  nonhem  border  with  the Wei, Cui was  thought  to  have  saretly                   

> contacteci the enemy after Zhaoye had come to the throne and Xiao Luan was preparing to manipulate
> himseif into the line of

succession.  Luan  sent Xiao  Yan  (füture  founder  of the Liang) to Shouchun on amission to assure  his  loyalty. and  was  consequently  convinceci  of  his  dependability  (NQS/3/873/6-8).  The        

> posthumous command appears in NQS/ 119 1/ 15.

Cui, however, took the  assigrnent  with  great  trepidation,  suspecting  that in the end he would be swept up in what appeared to be a systematic  elhination  of the "old 

guard"  d e r  the  young emperor,  Baojuan,  and  his  palace  clique. 139  Pre-emptive  action that would put the throne into  friendlier  or more  malleable  hands  was necessary.  His 

decision  was  to sponsor a new ernperor, the seventeen-year-old Baoxuan, the  next 

younger brother of the incumbent.  Since  Baoxuan was stationed in Jingkou  (present-day 

Zhenjiang) as  inspector  (cishi)  of both  Southem  Xuzhou (centred at Jingkou) and of Southem  Yanzhou  (the seat of  which  was  Guangling,  or present-day Yangzhou), Cui sent an envoy to  hùn  to  indicate  his  willingness  to serve him as emperor. Baoxuan may have been flattered at the  thought  of  becoming  emperor, but he was  also  angry  at  his  brother for  having  compelled  him  to divorce his consort  after  her father, Xu Xiaosi, was 

executed.1'  Cui had  already  used the occasion of  his  being head of the anti-Pei expedition to  se&  Guangling and was  preparing  to cross the  Yangzi  River to  take  Jingkou.  Although 

Baoxuan had been forced to execute the envoy, he secretly contacted Cui that he welcomed  his  arriva1  and would open the  city  to  him.  1 4 1  Cui led the forces of the  two 

garrisons  and  marched  on the  capital  in the  name  of Baoxuan who followed  behind, 

holding the  "imperial"  red  banners  with  his  own  hands  as he was  carried  by  eight  men in an open  litter.  They occupied the Eastern  Citadel,  laid seige to  Jiankang  and  proclaimed  a

bogus  command  ( h g )  from  the  Empress Dowager Xuande which dismissed the incumbent and gave  him  the title of  Prince  of Wu  & Z.  People poured in to  submit 

their  name  cards  as a token of  aiiegiance  to  this  new  emperor.143 

The situation was complicated, however, by the  amival  of  Xiao  Zhaozhou  #

on the scene. He and his younger brother, Zhaoying  j#  188,  were sons of  Ziliang,  the  

> 139

He was  63  sui  when  killed  in 500  (NQS/3/877/1).            

> NQSl31863114
> 141 On day remi *?of the third month, or Apri126, 500 (NQS/l1100/1).

# '"  NQSl31863114  & 86411-2  & 876/5     

> 143 As implied in NQSB/864/4.

second son of Xiao Ze (Emperor Wu, the son of Xiao  Da~cheng). They had  fled  the court and  gone  into  hiding  when  Baojuan  called  the  various  royal  princes to court at the  tirne  of 

Chen's  rcMion.  Now  that  Cui had launched  his  rebellion, the brothers  turned  to  him.144 

Cui now seems to have favoured Zhaozhou for the throne, perhaps  since  he had a more 

legitimate  comection  as a direct descendant of Daocheng, but  was  unable  to  make  up  his 

In the meantime, Xiao Yi  j@ #&  (brother  of Xiao  Yan),  who  was  newly  appointed 

inspecter  (cishi)  of  Ywhou,  took up  arms  in support of the court and led  several  thousand 

men  towards  the capital. Cui's son was sent to hold them off but failed and some of Cui's supporters  sumendered.  Cui was forced to flee and  his  abandoned troops completely disintegrated. He is  said  to have been  seized  by an  old  fisherman who beheaded  him.  The 

amival  of  his  head at the capital marked the end of  this  short-lived rebellion.  L46 Baojuan  in effect  declared  a kind  of  amnesty  by  burning  the  names  of ail  those  who had been in Cui's  

> anny

and the  name  cards  of  those  who had  tlocked  to the Eastern  Citadel  to  declare  their 

allegiance  to yet another emperor sponsored by another  strongman.147 A month  later, 

Baoxuan,  in whose  name  the rebellion had  begun,  was  executed.14* 

The other  ciaimant,  Zhaozhou,  dong  with  his  brother,  Zhaoying,  fled.  Fearful  of consequences yet to corne, however, they schemed how to  protect  themselves. A piot by some sympathetic  generals,  including one who had  served  under  their father was  devised 

to put Zhaozhou on the throne.  Origindy,  they were to seize the palace and close the gates  against  the emperor  &er  he had  lefi  on an excursion, but the plan  was  hstrated  for over a month  while  the emperor  remained  within,  either to enjoy the  delights  of a newly       

> 144 NQS/3/702/ 12
> 145 NQS/3 /876/6
> He was kîiled

on  day  guiyou  S V of the  founh  month,  or May 17,500 (NQS/1/100/4). One  source 

states  thai  he  reached  Jiankang  on  day jiazi  $ T of the  third  month,  or May 9, 500  @iQS/1/100/3), but another  states  that  the siege  lasted  twelve  d a y s  in  al1  (NQS/3/876/15).   

> 14'NQS/31864/4
> 148

On  day  jiyou  C,  a of the  nfth  month,  or  Iune  22,500  (NQS/11100/7) constructed  garden (according to the  N'  Qi  Shu,  which implied that he  was  ignoring 

affairs  of state, thereby conveying a negative image of the emperor to  justify  his  eventual 

dethronement) or to  stay  within  the  safety  of the palace  after  being  wmed  of a possible coup (according to the  Nan  Shi whose  author  did not have to reflect the officiai  Qi 

version). Their alternative  plan  to send over one hundred  strong  men  into  the palace in a surprise attack on the emperor in  his  garden was  refused  by Zhaozhou. One of the conspirators was  afiaid  the plot  would  be exposed if action were delayed and decided to 

Save  himseifby  being the one to  reveal  the intended coup. He was murdered by another 

plotter  before he  could  speak,  but an officiai discovered the secret plan  from  information contained in a musk sachet on  his  body, and Zhaozhou,  his  brother and the conspirators were  al1  executed. 

(4) Xiao Yan and the Dissolution of the Qi Line 

While  al1  these  revolts  were  taking  place in the  aftermath  of Emperor Ming's death and the  unstable  regency and succession, Xiao  Yan  was  biding  his time in  Yongzhou,  to 

which he had been appointed as  inspector  (cishi) just before Xiao  Luan's  death and  fiom 

which he also exercized the concurrent  role  of  Commander-in-Chief  (dudu)  of  all  or parts of six  regions.lS1 This  area  had  been  under  pressure  from  the Wei  since  the previous year when the Wei emperor  personally  led troops  against  Yongzhou,  seizing  five commanderies north of the  Man  R River.  lS2  Xiao  was sent north at that time  dong  with the high-profile generais Cui  HUjing,  under  whom he  served,  and  Chen  Xianda.  Although  Cui and  Chen   

> 149 This

discrepancy  in the emperor's motivations is another  reflection  of the  histonography  of the  pend     

> In both cases, the

reasons  are  stated  within  the  biography  of Xiao  Zhaozhou.  The  k t description  appears 

in  the  official  history  of the  Southern  Qi and  would  therefore  be  more  likely  to accord  with  the image of a 

> d e r

unmindful  of  affairs  of  state.  This  was  to  be  one of the  official  justifications  for  deposing  him  and 

withholding  a posthumous  imperial  title  (NQS/3/703/1).  The second  reason  is  contained  within  the  bistory    

> of the southeni

dynasties, a work not  under  the  same  "officiai"  constraixits  and  therefore  able to  present  amore  complete  explanation  (NS/4/1106/34). This  is  one more instance of the  difnculties  in  piecing  

> together

an  ment  £rom  these  historical  sources. 

> 'jO NQS/3/702/13

# - 703/3 

He  was  appointed  on  day  guimao  R of the  seventh  month  of the  Iast  year of Xiao  Luan's  ~ i g n , or   

> August 26,498 (NQS/1/91/11-12).

His  position is  described  in  LS/1/3/4-5.  

> '52 NQS/1/2/14-15; NQS/2/491/4

suffered  massive defeats, Xiao  was  able to resist well  enough  to retreat with his  fcrces 

intact and  was  rewarded with the inspectorate of  Yongzhou.lS3  The  Wei emperor 

withdrew  his  army  upon the death of Emperor  Ming  and he  himself  died the  foliowhg 

year  (499). 154 

The emperor (Xiao  Luan)  must have felt he could rely on  Yan,  for in 493, before he had  taken  the  throne  but when it was  obvious  that he was planning to  remove  the young incumbent, he sent  Yan  on the delicate mission of  securing  the  loyaity  of Cui 

Huijing,  who was  then  stationed at Shouchun, on the border with the Wei, and  was 

nimoured  to be conspiring with the enemy to attack the capital.  "5  This was the  first 

major  advance  for the  then  thirty-year-old  XiaoYan.  He had  begun  his  career  under 

Emperor Wu as  adjutant  (canjun)  for  two  of the emperor's younger sons and was  fiiendly 

with the emperor's brother,  Ziliang.156 Since  Xiao Yan's father  was  under  a cloud for  his 

part in the death of one of Emperor Wu's sons,  his  own  career  rnight  have been  afEected  if Emperor Wu had  lived  longer. Xiao  Luan's  control of the court  after  the emperor's death seems to have worked to Yan's  advantage. 

M e r  returning  from  his  assignment  in Shouchun, Yan was  brought  into court in the  entry-level  positions of Cadet of the Heir Apparent  (taizi  shuzi  a -f  & ),  one of 

many  cornpanions  and  bodyguards  of the  imperial  heir'and  Gentleman Attendant of the Palace Gate  (iishi  huunprn  shziang  $&  +a f'J  @ t p  ), a position as  irnperial  attendant that was  becoming  increasingly  Uitluential  dunng the  Qi  as  it  involved  handling  edicts  and orders  ( h o l i n g )  and  advising  the  emperor.157 At the  same  t h e ,  he  was  enfeoffed  at the   

> 153 LS/1/2/14

# - 3/3.                               

> lS4 WS/1/184/8 &185114
> 155 This is the description in Cui's biography in the Non Qi Shu (NQSl3187316-8). in Xiao Yan's imperid
> biography in the Liang Shu, Xiao was sent to take charge of the Shouchen

garrison  (LS/1/2/7).  This is   

> another example

of the  very  confusing  faauai  inconsistencies  within  the  historical  sources. For the sons,  see  LS111213  & 6.  The  two  Xiaos  were  a group  of eight  Literary  luminaries  known  as  the                              

> Eight Friends (bayou )who met regularly at Ziliang's residence (LS/1/2/4-5).
> lS7 For the latter position, see Hucker, Ofleial Titles (#589) and Shen Qiwei et al., Zhongguo Lidai
> Zhiguan Cidian (Shanghai: Shanghai Cishu Chubanshe, I992), 277.

first level of Baron  (nm)  of  Jianyang  County  & % &fi X ,with  three  hundred 

households.~5* Pnor to his appointment to  Yongzhou,  Yan  was elevated one notch to the position of Palace Cadet of the Heir Apparent  (tuizt  zhongshuzi  h+  if;), making 

him  one of the senior  cornpanions  and  bodyguards  of Emperor Ming's young  heir.  lJ9 

At the  time  that the Regency of Six first formed following Emperor Ming's  death, 

Yan  asked  his  uncle to  convince  his older brother, who was  then  in charge of  flairs  for 

Yingzhou,  that an  opportunity  was now  available  for  al1  the brothers to act before suspicions  arose.  Anticipating  that the present situation could  lead  to the  same 

catastrophic  conclusion as did the cornpetition  among  the Sima princes at the end of the Western  J i  Yan  felt they should  esconce  themselves at a  safe  distance in a strongly 

garrisoned  temtory  while  they  still  had time. In  his  view,  Yi  #&  was well placed in 

Yingzhou,  for  from  this  region  he could control  Jingzhou  and  Xiangzhou  and have access to the strategic tnbutaries of the Han and  Mian  rivers,  while  Yan's  base of  Yongzhou  had 

soldiers  and  horses,  tens of thousands of  which  could be requisitioned on a moment's notice. Yi  refused  to go  dong,  but  Yan  secretly proceeded to manufacture weapons and 

fell  timber  which was submerged in the river  until  it  could be manufactured into  boats.16* 

Shortly  aftenvards,  General Pei Shuye led  Yuzhou  in open  rebellion  against the 

throne,  and Yi  was  called  upon to  lead  the attack against  him  in concert with General Cui 

Huijing.  M e r  Pei  fled  into  Wei temtory, Yi  was  appointed the new  Inspecter  (cishi)  of 

Yuzhou.  At the  tirne,  Yi  was  encouraged by  his  brother to use the  opportunity  to  march 

on the capital and rid the throne of the  "evil  men  surrounding  it"  (zhu junce  zhi  mi  *s 

.W  i W ). Yi made no response to this suggestion to stage a  rniiitary  coup.  Later,  when 

General  Cui surrounded  the  imperial  city with the intention of replacing the incumbent on the throne, the court sent an urgent  letter  to Yi who succeeded in  putting  down  this revolt.                                   

> 'j8 LS/l/2f7-8
> 159 Since this isthe titie by which he is referred in the Nan Qi Shu prior to receiving theYongrhou
> inspectorate, it may have been considered the more signincant of the court tities (NQS/1/9 1/10).
> 160 LS/ 1/4/34

Again,  Yàn  sent an envoy  f?om  his  base in Yongzhou,  wanllng  him  that,  in view of hi; 

great  service  in protecting  the  Qi  throne,  he would now  be  feared by the ernperor's clique of "parvenu" power-brokers and  nsked  being elirninated, especially if he were to accept 

high  civilian  honours and let go of  his  army. Therefore, he should either  lead  troops into the palace and  remove  the  unpopular  emperor and  his  clique, using  legendary  and 

historical  precedent as justification, or request the emperor for gracious  permission  to withdraw with  his  army  to  Liyang  )@  f&  (the garrison capital of Southem  Yuzhou)  from 

which he could  still  dominate  the capital and hold sway over the  realm.  Yi  again  rejected 

his brother's  advice.  Appointed  Director  of the Department of State  AfEairs  (shangshu 

h g )  in recognition of  his  service, he was feared by the emperor's  advisors  who tned to 

convince  the emperor that Yi was preparing to  remove  him  in the  same  way that Zhaoye had been removed. Yi was urged to flee for  his  life  by  his  supporters but  argued  that a

person  in  his  prime  ministerial  position could not behave in  such  an ignoble  rnanner.  He was  seized  dong with a brother and forced to  take  poison.  16'

Two other brothers, Wei  @and  Dan , had been given  imperid  permission  to go to Yongzhou in 498,  after  Yan  requested the emperor that they be allowed to  join  him  as his assistants, and were therefore  safe  frorn  the ernperor's murderous suspicions. 162 

The emperor and  his  clique were  wary  of Yi's brother in Yongzhou and wanted to 

bring  the  region  under  more certain control. The  neighbouring  region  of  Jingzhou,  which 

codd  act  as a check on Yongzhou, was put into the  hands  of the younger brother of the present emperor in 499. This was in keeping  with  the  principle  of  appointing  as  many  of the royal princes (sons and brothers of the emperor) as possible to the  regional 

inspectorates.  However, as the brother, Baorong  # f:  kt,  was about eleven  years  of age  

> NSl4lL265111

# - 126715. He  was  k i k i  on  day jimao  2 W of the  tenth  month  of the  sgand  year  of            

> yongytran, or November 19,500 (NQSI 1/100/ 13). He and his brother

Chang  #,  who  held  the  pst  of    

> Chambertain for the

Paiace  Garrison  (weiwei &*),  were  rnurdered  together  accordhg  to  NQSl2/666/11-  

> 12. Another

source, however,  States  that the  only  brother  murdered  dong  with Yi  was  Rong  &k  

> (Ns/4/1274/2-3).
> 162 LSlll4/3

when  appointed  regional  inspector  (cishi),  management both of  Jingzhou  as a  military 

region  and of the prince's establishment  @)  in  Jiangling  were in the  hands  of a xingshi 

who  acted  on the  child's  behaK  163  In this case, the  role  was filled by Xiao Yingzhou  Iff 

## 811  il, a distant cousin of both the emperor and Xiao  Yan.  A brother, Yingda  A a, was also a member of  Baorong's  staff. 

The court now intended to use some  guile  in eradicating  Yan  through its control of Jingzhou.  It  was  decided to  take  advantage of the  imperial  appointment of a new 

governor  (taishou)  of the double  commandery  of  Baxi  E B and Zitong  #$ jf in  Yizhou 

(in present-day Sichuan, west of Jingzhou and Yongzhou). The appointee was a man by the  name  of Liu  Shanyang  3,  i#  , about whom we  know  little  more  than  how he 

functioned  as a tool of the court on this occasion. He set out  from  Jiankang for  his  posting 

with  three  thousand crack troops. On passing through Jingzhou, he  was  to combine forces there with  Xiao Yingzhou, who would  already  have received  imperial  notification, to attack Yan whose  gmison  lay directly north in Yongzhou. 164 

When Xiao  Yan  heard  of the death of  his  two  brothers and  realized  what the emperor was planning, he  knew  he had to prevent Jingzhou  from  being  mobilized  against 

him.  Yan  surmised  that Xiao Yingzhou, who was in effective control at Jingzhou, was not adept at  deaihg  with crises. 165  He therefore sent one of  his  aides, Wang  Tianhu  X f f  a, 

a relative of Yingzhou, with letters for  al1  the  officiais  on the  staffs  of the  Jingzhou 

garrison and the prince's establishment,  stating  his belief that Liu would be  coming  west to attack both the  regions  of Jingzhou and Yingzhou. 166  Yan is  said  to have felt that  despite   

> 163 The

chüd's  age  is calculateci  on the  basis  that he  was  15 sui at the time of  his  death  in 502  

> (NQS/l/114/12)~
> 164

The secret  instruction  (michi  fi) is  mentioned  in  LSI  1/187/3.  The other  Uiformation  appears  in  

> LS/1/4/11-12

and  NQSIU666112-13.  

> 165

NQS/2/666/13 

# TG N m  Qi Shu  states  that Wang  was  sent  to  Jianghg  to  announce  that Liu  was  coming  wes[ward  to 

attack both Jingzhou and Yongzhou. Wang  also  carried  a letter  encouraging  Xiao Yingzhou to  join  Xiao 

Yan  in  righteous  rebellion  against  the court at  Jiankang.  Yingzhou  was  afiaid  to  cooperate.  

> (NQS/2/666/13-14).

The Liang  Shu  states  that Wang  Tianhu  and  another  aide were sent to  Jianghg  to 

circulate  a letter  to ail the officiais on the staff of the Jingzhou  garrison  and the prince's establishment Jingzhou's  fear  of Yongzhou,  those  in charge  knew  they would be  very  alone  and 

vulnerable  if Yongzhou were to  disappear;  hence, Jingzhou would  side  with Yongzhou out of  seKinterest.  Yan  likely  also foresaw that he could  tum  this  circumstance  to  his 

favour  and gain joint control of the  amies  of Jingzhou and Yongzhou which could  then 

sweep  down  upon the eastem capital with  overwhelming  force. When Liu  arrived  in Baling, at the eastem end of Lake Dongting, where he 

lingered  in hesitation for about ten days,  Yan  ordered Wang to go  again  to  J i g h g  with 

two  letters for the  two  Xiao brothers there. The letters, intended just for  them,  simply 

said,  " ~ a n g ] Tianhu  will  be  bringing  a verbal message"  (fianha  k m  ju  K & 0 s). 16' 

Wang, of course, had no message. The Xiao brothers therefore had  nothing  to report to their  officiais  to  explain  Wang's  arrivd  from  Yongzhou. Yan had anticipated that the unexplained  visit  by Wang would  make  people suspect that Wang and Xiao Yingzhou were in collusion.  M e r  dl,  they were  known  to be on  intimate  tems.  They,  in  tuni,  would 

begin  to suspect each  other's  intentions, and Yingzhou would feel compelled to do 

something  desperate to prove himself  above  suspicion on  al1  sides.  When Liu reached 

Jiang'an  â, about 40 km  south  of  Jiangling  on the  Yangzi,  he hesitated  again. 

Yingzhou  was  in a desperate situation. Liu's hesitation was a sign  of  distrust.  He had probably  heard  of Wang's  arrivai  and suspected that Wang was a go-between for Xiao Yingzhou in  Jiangiing  and Xiao  Yan  in  Xiangyang,  both of whom must be  plotting  against 

him.  Liu's lack of movement, however, also made Yingzhou  womy  about  appearing  to 

Yan  as  though  he were conspiring with Liu.  Yingzhou  decided the only  thing  he could do 

was  allay  Liu's  fears  by  k i h g  Wang (a  sign  that he was not in collusion with  Yan)  and sending  his  head  to Liu  dong  with the message that he was  drafting  an  army  to  march  on 

Xiangyang.  This action seems to have  assured  Liu, for he advanced with a few  dozen                         

> (LS/1/4/ 12). According to the Zizhi Tongjian (ZZTJ/2/ 1974) the letter stated that when Liu Shanyang
> carne W e s t he wouid be attacking both Jingzhou and Yongzhou.
> 16'LS/1/5/2

attendants  to Fort  Iiangjin  i~ J* &,  ,a river fortress southeast of  Jiangling,  to  meet  with 

Yingzhou.  168  The latter, however,  had  troops  lying  in  arnbush  within  the fort, and Liu  was 

beheaded as soon as he  entered  the  gaies.  His  head  was sent to Yan and offered in the 

narne  of Baorong as a repudiation of this envoy and a signal they were working in 

cornmon  cause.L69 Yan  had  now  elirninated  the possibility of a  joint  attack and succeeded in  CO-opting Yingzhou whose control of a royal prince could be used as the  rallying  point for a legitimate  expedition against the  throne  in  Jiankang. 

An  aside  on the  historian's  perspective  might  be in  order  here.  Xiao  Yan's  strategy 

has  been discussed  above  mostly  within  the  framework  of Xiao Yan's biography in the 

Liang  Shu.  Because  this account  is  contained in the  official  biography of the first emperor of the Liang, the  historian  may have had an  interest  here in  extolling  Yan  as a  wily 

strategist  cast  in the best tradition of the ancient  military  thinkers  who served the state by 

practising  the art of  outwitting  its  opponents. The  cmx  of Yan's strategy, as described 

above  and as stated by  himself,  was the  deft  crafting  of  two  letters by which he won a 

territory  through  setting  in motion an inexorable  chah  of events,  every  part of which he foresaw, while  those  whose actions he set out to control failed to  realize  they were  being 

adroitly  manipulated.  170  His  method was not force of  arms  but psychology. As Xiao  Yan 

allegedly  asserted,  psychological  wdare  would  always  win  greater  victones  than  the 

battle-field.  17'

However, if we look at the biography of  XiaoYingzhou  in the  Nan  Qi  Shu,  we 

have a  slightly  different  perspective on the Xiao brothers  simply  because  the letters seem here to have a  Werent  content and  fùnction.  Hence, while the biography of Yingzhou  

> Iti8

They  arrived  on the  eigliteenth  day  of the  elwenth  month  which  was  day j i q i n  7 , or  December  

> 24,500 (NQSlW66712).

The  fort,  also  known  as  Fengcheng  *a, is  located  SE of  presentday  S M i;)z         

> in Hubei (ZLDC, 337).
> lti9 LSl1118812
> I7O "Through hvo empty letîers,

a region  is  won  (liang  konghan  ding  yizhou  $XI >é  a - )I(  )"  

> (LSI 11514-5).
> 17' LSI1/5/1

does  state that  Yan  believed  Yinghou  to be little adept at  dealing  with crises, it  does  not 

portray  him  as  highly  vulnerable to manipulation by  crafty  letters. The biography  does  not 

speak  of  two  deviously worded letters to the Xiao broihers which  finaiiy  eliminated Liu and put  Jingzhou  in Yan's  hands  but  does  describe  the two occasions on which letters were sent to Yingzhou.  Thus,  the biography  explains  that on the first occasion Yan's  letter 

was  delivered by Wang before Liu's  arrival  and asked for Yingzhou's cooperation in 

launching  a "righteous  expedition" against the capital. This  letter  was  given  after Wang had  explained  Yan's  view  that Liu intended to attack both Jingzhou  (Xiao  Yingzhou) and 

Yongzhou  (Xiao  Yan).  Ymgzhou  reportedly could not  make  up  his  mind.172 

On the second occasion, the  letter  was delivered by Wang after Liu's  arrival  in the 

region.  The  letter  is  said  to have been the  means  by which  Yan  "put  his  stratagem in place"  (chenrhe  qi  iüe  # b.-tB  & *), but the  actcal  content  is  not described. l n  This could 

very  well have been the  letter,  discussed earlier, that was intended to entrap Yingzhou by saying  nothing  more  than  Wang would be  bringing  a verbal message  (Tianhu  kou  ju  & 

> P

## JL).  This  can  be  confirmed  by  looking  at the biography of Xiao Yingda  (Yingzhou's 

brother) in the  Liang  Shu,  for here it  is  stated that  Yan  sent Wang with "a  letter  to  arouse 

suspicions"  (yi  shu  yi  thi  KX  f & &),  and  such  a wording accords with Yan's  own 

statement about  his  crafty  letters, as discussed in the imperial biographies in the Liang  

> Shu.174

It  would appear,  then,  that in the  Nan  Qi Shu,  the  historian  has  kept the record vague enough to avoid the impression that Yingzhou could be  manipulated  by a  clever 

letter.  The  historian  then  reports that  because  people at the time were saying Liu would 

try  to  kill  Yingzhou in  order  to make an alliance with  Yan,  Yingzhou decided to make a 

pact  (ding  qi  2 a ) with  Yan.  L75  This  wording, too,  suggeas  that  Ymgzhou  had some 

control  of the situation. However, if we go back to the biography of  his  brother in the                 

> ln NQSlU666113-14
> ln NQSl2/667/1
> 174 For the demiption of this letter in Xiao Yingda's biograp hy, see LSI 1118714.
> 175 NQS12/66711

Liang  Shu,  we  find  that  because  the  letter  succeeded in  making  Liu  afiaid  to  advance  any 

further,  Yingzhou  was  at a loss as to how to cope and  frantically  called  for the  advice  of 

two  tmsted  counsellors. This  is  in keeping with Yan's assessment, as discussed  eariier  in the  Limg  Shu, of Yingzhou as being  unable  to  cope  with crises.  Their  advicc  was  to  kiii 

Wang to  deceive  Liu and  then  murder  Liu. In the  impenal  biographies of the Liang  Shu, 

this is  precisely  what Yan predicted would be the result of  his  crafty  letter.  However, 

within  the  Nan  Qi  Shu, the  historian  leaves the reader to  infer  that  Yan's  letter  was 

premised on  his  desire  to negotiate some  form  of cooperation. This is more  flattering  to the image of Yingzhou who  is  described within the  Nan  Qi  Shu  as an able and  open-

minded  per~0n.l'~ Thus,  in accordance with this pact, Yingzhou beheaded Yan's envoy (Wang  Tianhu)  in  order  to  deceive  Liu into  thinking  that the  two  Xiaos  of  Iingzhou  and 

Yongzhou  were not in collusion against  him,  and  then  murdering  the  unsuspecting  Liu as he entered one of  Yingzhou's  forts. Liu's head was delivered to  Yan,  and Yingzhou prepared for a  campaign  (in cooperation with  Yan).  l n 

The  above  example  not  oniy  reflects a less  than  disinterested editing of  archival 

materiai  by  historians  of the  tirne  but proves  again  how difficult it is to  son  out events 

nom  the officiai histones.  Since  the Liang  Shu  is the  official  history  of the  regime  founded by  Xiao  Yém,  it  is  not  surpnsing  that the historians emphasized Yan's role.  Similarly,  as the  victims  of  Yan's  cunning,  the  historians  of the Qi  regime  deemed it appropnate to cornpress information to the point that it would  reflect  less positively on the one who brought the Qi to an end.  Lfone  hopes  to go beyond the  confkting  points of  view  of the 

two  dynastic  histones and  fmd  an objective portrayal  within  the  "generalist"  N m  Shi, the biography of Xiao  Ymgzhou  there  shows some of the compression of information in the 

## Nmr  Qi  Shu  but is  closer  to the  Limg  S h  in its portrayal of Yan's role. The  tüvo  dynastic  histones show other discrepancies in  their  account  of this event. In the Liang  Shu,  Yingzhou  appean  in a passive position. As one of  his  advisors  said, 

Jingzhou  was  no match for  Yongzhou,  for  Yan  had  b d t  UF  s massive  army.  Even  E

Yigzhou  were  victorious  over  Yan,  the  region  would be difficult to control and the court would  ail1 be suspicious of the victor's intentions. The  best  poiicy would be to  kiil  Liu when he came with  his  force  from  the east and  join  with  Yan  in installing their prince at 

Jiangling  as the new emperor in  order  to  rally  the forces of the  land.178 By  contrast,  the 

Nan  Qz  S h  irnplies  that  Yan  may actually have  felt  dependent on Yingzhou to some 

extent,  for he had charge of Baorong, the  potential  new emperor. Yan  also  knew  that if Yingzhou  pushed  for something he could  easily  win  the support of the people  because  of 

his  character  and personality, for he was considered humble and unassuming and had the reputation of being open and capable. 179  The possibility that  Yan  looked on  him  as an impediment  despite  his  temporary  usefulness  is  reflected in the statement that  his  death in 50 1 was  considered one of the  three  blessings of the year.  180  Despite  the inconsistencies, however, Yan appears to be the one  taking  the initiative and pushing the course of events. The date upon which Xiao  Yan  actually  took up  arms  against the  throne  is 

somewhat  garbled in the  histoncal  record.  While  one source  states  that it occurred in the 

twem  month  of that year, which would have been  after  Liu's head  was  delivered to 

Yan,lsl  another describes it as  occumng  about ten days before Liu  was  killed.182  Liu is 

said  to have hesitated  in Baling  C &for  over ten  d a y ~ , ~ ~ ~ and  it  may have been about  this 

tirne  that  Yan,  having  gained  the cooperation of Yingzhou, probably  through  his  cunning 

use of the  two  "empty" letters he sent to each of the Xiao brothers, decided that he could safely  act.  Yan's  imperid  biography  states  that, on that day, he gathered  a i i  the  officials   

> '78LS/1/187/5-8
> 179 NQS/u667/7
> NS/5/1307/4
> NQS/1/101/1

On  &y yisi  2 C of the  eleventh  month,  or  December  15,500 CS/ l/4/7)  

> 183 NQS/S/666/15

and  officers  in  his  seMce  and  declared  that, just as King Wu of Zhou  P]  &,  3.  had gathered the princes at  Mengjin  f;$ to  overthrow  the last evil  mler  of the Shang, he too 

was  calling  them  together to  make  common  cause in  û righteous  asrzdt  against the evil d e r in  Jiankang  who was murdenng  worfhy  officiais  and oppressing the people.  Having 

thrown  out the challenge,  dong  with promises of rewards, he drew together over ten thousand men in  amour,  assembled a thousand  horses  and  constructed  three  thousand boats  from  the timber which he had kept  hidden  in the Tan River  a ,184  Although  there may have been a  limited  number of historical allusions  Yan  could  c d  on as a precedent for 

his  action, it is  significant  that he compared himself to  Prince  Wu, for the latter did not  just 

remove  an evil incumbent  £tom  the throne; he made  himself  the first emperor of the new Zhou  dynasty.  This may have been a signal  from  Yan that he too would be founding a new 

dynasty  once the evil men on and about the throne were exterminated. 

After  Liu's head was sent to  Yan,  Xiao  Yingzhou put  Jingzhou  on a  war  footing, accepting the surrender of Liu's troops and  drafting  an  amiy  in preparation for an expedition against the  capital.l*S  However,  this  had not been  his  first  instinct.  Yhgzhou 

had sent an envoy to  Yan  to argue that the time was not ripe for  launching  forces against the capital and they should  wait  until  the second  month  of the  following  year  before  taking 

action.  Yan  was opposed,  saying  that an  army  of a hundred thousand was ready to move and  having  them sit  idle  would use up food stocks and destroy the determination and cohesiveness of the  troops.186  TWO days  later,  then,  Yan  was appointed  (presumably  by the  authority  of the boy "emperor-in-waitingl')General of the  Left  ( m o jiangun  .&  +)

and  Commander-in-Chief  of the  Vanguard  Armies  (duau  qzanfng  zhujun  shi  $$f

d& + ),  commissioned  with extraordinary powers  (shi  chijie  &# #fi ). l n  The      

> lS4 LS/1/4/6-IO
> lg5 Yiigzhou is d e s c r i i

as  raising yibing or  troops  of  righteousness  on  day jiayin  68  R of the  elmenth      

> month, or Decernber 24,500, in NQS/1/100/14-15.

This was  the  day  on which Liu  Shanyang  was  Wed.        

> lS6 LS/1/5/6-9; NQSI2167 1/8
> On day bingchen A

f i ,  or  Decernber  26,500  (NQSI  II  1 1 i/7-8). following day Yingzhou was made  General  of the  Right  and put in charge of the  stationary 

armies.188  Some of  Yan's  advisors  felt that he should  irnmediately  bring  the  young  prince 

fiom  Jianglhg  to  Xiangyang  to be  installed  as emperor before  launchhg  an  expedition. 

Not to do so would  leave  Yan at the mercy of Yingzhou who controlled the prince and 

future  emperor in  his  own  temtory.  Yan  argued,  however, that once the  expedition  was 

launched and  advancing  with  overwhelrning  force, no-one would  dare  not to go over to 

his  side.189  Obviously,  he  did not  want  to  destroy  an image of  legitimacy  by  overtly 

forcing the  hand  of Heaven. The following day  Yan  began  the process of  creating  a new emperor,  under  whose 

aegis  an expedition  against  the capital could be launched, by presenting a memorial  (biao) 

urging  Xiao Baorong to take the  throne.lgO This was declined, and  two  weeks  later  asecond request by  various  officiais  that he take the throne was  likewise  refùsed.  '91  In another  two  weeks a  general  allegedly  arrived  from  the capital with an  order  (hg) from 

the Dowager Xuande  announcing  that Xiao Baorong was a fitting heir  for the throne and 

declaring  him  Prince of Xuancheng, with a fief of ten commanderies. As discussed in the 

first  chapter, tradition gave to the dowager the right of being final  arbiter  in  matters 

relating  to  dethronement  and succession.  Thus,  the dowager's  written  command  was 

essential for presenting an image of legitimacy at this time. In  view  of the  fact  that the  royal  prince  already  held the title of Prince of  Nankang, 

this  new title  rnay  have been  viewed  as a  legitirnizing  instrument, for it had been held by 

his  father, Xiao  Luan.  Thus,  they were following the precedent set  almost  two  centuries 

earlier  by the  very  founder of the  first  southem  dynasty,  Sima  Rui, in preparation for  his 

taking  the throne in a divided  realrn.  His  title had been changed to that held  by  his         

> 188 NQS/1/111/8
> lg9 LS/1/5/10-12
> lgO This occurred on day wuwtr r f i

# +, or  December  28,500  (NQS/1/112/1).            

> l9 lThiS second request was made on day yihai 2

# *of the  twelfth  month  of that  year,  or  Januaq  14.50  1

> ~QS/11112/1)~

foundhg  ancestor,  before the throne in  Chang'an  was  known  for sure to be vacant but 

after  it had become apparent that the  imperial  line could  oniy  be continued by Sima  Rui  in the new capital-in-exile of Jiankang. 

Thus  Baorong  waj  being  cast  in a  similar  light,  having  the authority of  his  fathar's 

title so that he could  inhent  the throne in this westem "capital-in-exile" of Jiangling. The title of Prince of Xuancheng was understood as  strictly  a symbol  of Baorong's  right  to 

"inherit" the throne, for the  p ~ c e d o m of  Nankang  continued to  exist  by  order  of the Empress Dowager, and he continued to be addressed by  his  title of  Prince  of  Nankang 

both in the  manifesto  to the realm and when he took the  throne.lg2 

The dowager's  order  also declared that Baorong was to  carry  the  titles  of 

Counsellor-in-chief  (xiangguo), a prestigious prime  ministerial  title traditionally required of  those  who were to take the throne by a "transfer" of the Heaveniy mandate, and Pastoral Govemor (mu) of  Jingzhou,  significant  in that it paralleled the title of mu of Yangzhou,  given  to  those  on their way to the throne by a change of  Heavenly  mandate. 

Iust  as Yangzhou was the  region  in  which  the capital Jiankang  was  sited, Jingzhou was the 

region  in which the provisional westem capital of  Jiangling  was located. The young prince 

was  also  granted  the  imperial  axe, indicating impenal authority to  launch  expeditions in the 

name  of the  dynastic  house,  and  authorized  to establish not  only  his  own  personal  staff 

(liaoshu  a ) but also the  officialdom  of the  realm  (baipan  3 f ),  as would befit 

emperor-in-waiting  status. 193  These  were  al1  legitimizing  signs,  as important to a member of the  royal  house  taking  the throne in an  irregular  succession as to an  outside  usurper. As he  was  to take  his  rightfùl  place on the throne  at  Jiankang, an  imperhl  carriage  would be 

sent in due  time.lg4  Baorong  formaily  accepted this third request about  two  weeks  later 

and, as a sign  that they were the new legitimate power, a general  amnesty  was  extended  to   

> lg2 LS/1/9/14; NS/1/150/3; NQS/2/669/10
> Ig3

The dowager's ling appears  in NQS1112R-5        

> 194 The general arrived on day renchen

1of the  oveifth  month,  or  January  3 1,50 i (NQS/1/112/34). the  kingdom,  with  the exception of  Mei  Chong'er and Ru  Fazhen  and  tlieir  clique who were labelled as the  evil  men about the  throne.195 

Mao Baoyou  a, probably about  twelve  years  of  age,  was made the new 

inspector  (cishi) of Jingzhou to replace  his  older  brother who had now  "agreed"  to take the  throne,  and Xiao  Yan  was  made  General  of the Eastern Expedition  (zhengdong 

jian@un  @ t # +).  196  Three  days  later  Xiao  Yan  left  Xiangyang,  entrusthg  the defense of the  city  and the management of  al1  afbirs  of the  region  to a younger brother, Wei, and the defense of Leicheng ,the nearby  fortress,  to  another  brother,  Dan.197 

The expedition had to be preceded by the issuing of a  manifesto  and  call  to arms 

(xi  l#) which would  justify  their action to the  realm.lg8  Yan's dependence on Yingzhou to  launch  this  "righteous  war"  is  evident in the  very  fact that  it  was issued  under  the  names 

of Xiao Yingzhou and  his  next-in-comrnand,  Xiahou  Xiang  X f&  #,  on  whom  Yingzhou 

relied  heavily  for  advice  in major  affairs.~g9 These  were the two  highest-ranking  men 

assigned  to the  region  where the  "emperor-in-waiting"  was in residence, and  Yingzhou's 

prestige,  status  and royal  comection  could  only  add weight to a document  directed  to the 

officials  of the capital and the  governors  of the  regions  and  commanderies  of the  entire 

realm.  The  call  to arms drew on traditional  themes  to  justie  their action. Fortune  (yun  4 ) i s  not constant; in  time  it  fails.  Fate  (shu  a) is  not 

forever  unkind;  when  evil  has  done  its worst, good  d l  take its  turn..  .. In 

> l g 5

This  happened  on  day  yisi  t C of the  first  rnonth  of the  third  year  of  yongyuan  k % ,or  Febniary  13,    

> 50 1(NQS/1/112/5).
> 196 NQS/1/112/5-6
> 19'

On  day  w h e n  /à  i, ,or  Febniary  16,  50  1 (LS11/5/15  to  6/2)  

> Ig8

The  &te  on which it  was  isued  is  stated  simply  as the  twelf3.h  month  but, as the  fint  line  of the 

manifésto  indicates,  Xiao Yingzhou  had  already  k e n  given  the  title  of  General  of the  Army  of the  Right, 

etc.  Those  titles  were  bestowed  on the  @valent  of  December  27, 500  (stiii  the  eIeventh  month  in the 

Chinese  calendar).  if the  nvelfth  month  is correct,  then,  the  cal1  to arms  was  not  issued  earlier  than  the 

e q d e n t  of  January  5,50  1, the  first &y  of the  twelfth  month  (NQS/2/667/12).  The date on which Xiao 

Yan  took  up arms  against  Jiankang  is  indicated  as the  twelftIi  month  in at  least  one source  (NQS/1/101/1) 

although  the Liang Shu  gives  day yisi of the eleventh  month,  or  December  15,500, as the date  (LS/1/4/6,  

> 7,9).

This may  be  a resuît  of confusion  between  Xiao Yan's calling  his  own  men to arms in the  eleventh 

month  and the  united  forces of  Yongzhou  and  Jingzhou  calling  ttie  whole  realm  to arms in the  tweifth 

month. 

Ig9~S/ 1/191/10,  11, 15 earlier  times,  the grand progenitor  (tuzm  f a ) of the Qi, Emperor Gao [Xiao Daocheng], encornpassed  al1  the people with  his  virtue  and  afTected 

heaven and  earth  by  his  accomplishments.. ..Emperor  Wu [Xiao Ze]  was 

heir to this  flounshing  realm  and  enhanced  the  g!ory  of past 

achievernmts.  ...But the Prince of  Yulin  # [Xiao Zhaoye]  was  perverse and ignorant and  overtumed  the proper  order  of  things  bnnging  the Qi throne close to extinction. Emperor Ming  [Xao  Luan]  estzblished  again 

the august standards of  virtue  and  tmth  (daode  a a), passing  down  the high models of  benevolence  and justice  (renyi  + ), restoring the  rnighty 

foundation of the  two  ancestors [Xiao Daocheng and Xiao Ze], and re-

establishing  the  kingly  way . . . .Yet  his  heir [Xiao  Baojuan  jl*  ] was 

wayward  (bugang  m),  indulging  hirnself in brutal and wanton acts.. ..While  others mourned [the death of  his  father, Emperor Ming], he showed no  grieE  In this time of sorrow,  his  was a happy face. He abandoned  himseif'to  wine  and  song,  and no reprimand could check his indecencies.  His  circle of cornpanions were the sycophantic and disreputable. He ordered the honoured and revered to be  cruelly  executed, 

while  the  chef  ministen  were dispatched like meat on a chopping block. 

Jiang  [Shi  & & 1,  Deputy  Director  of the Right  (lyou]  paye  A # i#j) of the Department of State  Mairs,  Xiao  [Tanzhi  )o 21,  Generd  of the 

Paiace  Guard  (finaun  4fl7), Xu  [Xiaosi  #&  1,  pirector  of the 

Department  of State  Anairs,  with the prestige title  of]  Minister  of Works    

> (sikong SJ ),

Liu  [Xuan  @l@] , General of the Palace  Guard  (finglun 

# 7 ), Shen  [Wenji  -& 2 1;9  1, Deputy  Director  [of the  Lefi  of the Department of State  Affairs]  ([mol  puye  a), and Cao  p u  a ] , 

General of the Guards of the  Right  (yowei  & @),  were either respected relatives of the  royai  family  by blood or marriage, or members of  prominent 

and esteemed  families,  or  valiant  officers  of the court, and they  al1 

contnbuted to  restoring  the realm [dunng the reign of Emperor Ming] and were appointed in the  irnpenal  will  to serve  under  his  heir. But they were 

viewed  with suspicion by  him  because  of their  great  renown  and were sent 

abruptly  to their deaths.. ..Cui  Huijing  @ ,&  f ,pressured  by the court's 

erratic  punishrnents  and  realizing  he was unequd to  his  generai's responsibilites, devised a plan to escape death by  tuming  his  sword  against 

the throne.  Since  the city was without a  soiid  defense and  loyaities  were 

uncertain,  the court  tumed  to Xiao [Yi  j#  #&,  brother of Xiao  Yan], 

Director  [of the Department of State  -airs  rJj  91 who saved the royal 

dtars  and rescued the  myriad  people.. ..As an  elder  clan relative  ( m z h g 

& ft  ) and a high  coun  official  related to the throne,  Director  Xiao gave 

sincere  and insistent counsel and went to the emperor  moming  and  night  to present  his  advice.  However, the sycophantic rogues  surroundhg  the emperor  conspired  against  hm, and he saw  hirnself  gradually  isolated and 

under  suspicion.. .. 

When [Xiao Yi]  was  executed,  crafly  and  petty  men competed with

each  other  for  imperid  appointments.  Mei  Chong'er  2 and Ru Fazhen  t M [ in the  emperor's  imer  circle  ] were  brutish  louts who tolerated every  kind  of  impropriety.  They capitalized on their access to the throne to  build  up their  persona1  power. They kept the young ruler 

uninformed  and indulged  his  debzuched  and  vicious  whims.. .. 

Liu Shanyang  @J  # received secret instructions for a  wicked 

scheme [to destroy Xiao  Yan],  but Heaven exposed  these  furtive plans, and Liu  finished  with  his  head on a pike. When Heaven created the  human  race,  it  established  rulers  to govem the people and officiais to shepherd them, lest they  depart  from 

their original nature.  How  can  the ruler preside over the  realm  and  innict 

s u f f e ~ g upon the people or ignore ties of  blood  and  marriage  or  neglect 

the proper  relationship  between a king and  his  ministers?  Now  those  who contributed the most to the reaim have been the first to be executed and 

those  who received the  highest  honours have been  quickly  destroyed. . ..The 

treasury  is  empty  and the people are exhausted, but  Our  d e r  shows no compassion or  worry..  .. The seven imperial temples [the throne] are on the verge of collapse and the  three  powers [heaven,  earth  and man] are in a

state  of  disunity.  There is every reason to fear that the mandate to  rule  over 

al1  within  the four  seas  will  be  Iost  forever. 

The Prince of  Nankang  çh  [ Xiao  Baorong  &lis  a son of Emperor Ming [Xiao  Luan]  and  is  distinguished  by great intelligence and 

virtue..  ..Signs  that he was destined for the throne appeared when he  was  a

child,  and portents that he would hold the imperial jade  seal  were evident when he became a youth. The people hold  hirn  in their  hearts  and wish to serve  hirn  [as their emperor].  Furthemore,  he occupies the  strategic  upper reaches of the  Yangzi  River and  holds  authority  over the  regionai 

cornmanders. This,  then,  is the appropriate centre  from  which  to  pacify  the beleaguered  realm.  The  garrison  establishment  (mufi  #j ) is  under  aprince of the  impenal  family  entrusted  with an imperial commission. Deep is  his  fear and  weighty  is  his  mission, but he  has  swom to sweep away the troubles that beset the times. Today he orders Generals Yang  a, Wang 

## X, Pang  f i , Zong  8 and Yue  #$  ... .to  lead  an army of  thirty  thousand to sweep  d o m  on Fort  M ~ l i n g , ~ ~ ~ Generals  Cai  s, Xi  @,  Ren  t,Han  $#  ,

Zhu  $L,  Zong  $,  Zhu  *, Yu  dgand  Yu dg.. . to  lead  an armed force of 

twenty  thousand  on  Jianye  @ a [the original  name  of  Jiankang],  and Generals Wu  A ,  Deng  4@ and Wang  3 . . . to direct a  cavalry  force of ten thousand  against  Fort  Baixia  6 T . Generais Xia  x ,  Liu  $p  Liu  @..and 

Jiang  i~  .. .cornmand  another  M y  thousand to be sent in stages as 

reinforcements  .. .. The prince  persondy  controls 150,000  vaiiant 

soldiers.. .General  Xiao  Yingda  # i&  .. .leads a brave  battalion  of  thirty 

thousand  to[protect  Jingzhou].  Xiao [Yan  f# $fin  the  Region  of] 

Yongzhou  ff.  H,  who dominates the age with his  great  feats and  his  subtle and  shinning  strategies,  grieves  over the  murder  of  his  brothers and is       

> South of the southern Zhonghua Gate

## 9 * f l  of Nanjing,  near  the former Bao'en Temple  41  !& + 

> (ZLDC, 722)

angered  by the troubles of the  realm.  . .. Swearing  to avenge the injustice, he  has  gathered an  army  of a hundred thousand of the  finest  soldiers  which are  already  movhg  out into the Han River.  Regions  far  and  near, 

Yingzhou.. .,Jiangzhou..  ., Xiangzhou.. . and  Sizhou..  .have  all  come 

together in  common  cause.. .. The army of  righteousness  (shengde zhi  shi

## 2 @ ) is  saving  a land on the  bnnk  of disaster.  What  battle  will it not 

win?  What execution [of evil men] will it  fail  to  carry  out? Today the sword  is  pointed at  two  men solely: Mei  Chong'er  and Ru  Fazhen.. .Anyone  who  can  present the  heads  of Mei and Ru on the day that this call to arms  is  received will be accorded the title of Founding Marquis  (kaiguo xianhou  Aif  6 fi  ) with  a county-level  fief of  two 

thousand  households.  Those  deluded and  recalcitrant  cliques who  dare 

oppose the  approaching  force will be  punished  without mercy, and  al1  the members of their clans will be executed. . . .201 

This is the call to arms that appears within the  Nan  Qi Shu,  the  official  history  of the dynasty  being  "saved by  this  righteous action. What looks like a second  manifesto 

and call to arms  appears  in the Liang  Shu,  the  official record of the dynasty that  Xiao  Yan 

founded to supplant the Southem Qi, and  it  seems to have been sent to the capital the 

following  month  when Xiao  Yan  actually  left  Xiangyang.2OZ  This version, as it appears in the Liang  Shu,  is  constructed in the saine  manner  as the  previous  manifesto,  having  the 

sarne  overall progression of  themes  but  lacking  the initial  paragraph  i d e n t m g  Xiao Yingzhou and  Xiahou  Xiang  as the  ones  who are issuing it.  Instead,  the  two  are mentioned within the context of the manifesto, just as Xiao  Yan  was mentioned  within  the context of  theirs,  and the descriptions are equally  flattering.  In  view  of the  two  versions, it may be correct to  deduce  that they were produced in  Xiangyang  (Xiao  Yan's  territov) 

and  Jianghg  (Xiao  Yingzhou's  temtory)  respectively,  using  a commonly  agreed-to 

pattem  but  reserving  the  nght  to  name  the  person  in whose  area  the  cd to arms  was 

issued as the sponsor of that call to arms. However, in this second version, which we  can 

perhaps refer to as the  Xiangyang  manifesto,  Xiao  Yan  does  not  predominate,  and Xiao Yingzhou  still  appears  as the sponsor of  this  enormous  "righteous  expedition",  for he is  

> 201 NQS/2/667113

to 67 112                               

> 202 ReSumably on Qy denJ%, of the fïrst month (second month inthe text is likely an error) of the
> îhird year of yongyuan li(%,or Febniary 16,50 1

(LS/ 1/5/15  & 612).  The  text  of the manifesto  nins  k m  

> LSl11613

# - 911.the one in whose temtory the  "new"  emperor is found and  is  acting  degedly  at the 

emperor's  command.  This  Xiangyang  manSesto  reads in  part: 

The way of things (dan  a) is  not fixed,  while  time  and its  seasons 

(shi  ej are  imperrnanent.  Danger and  tranquillity  follow  upon one another, and  neither  darkness  nor light holds constant sway.  Misfortune  and troubles are foliowed by peace and prosperity,  wMe  adversity  brings  forth 

wise  and  enlightened  men. In former  times,  the Prince of  Changyi  a

acted  unvirtuously,  and the throne was restored by Ernperor  Xiaoxuan 

[during  the Han]. When the Prince of  Haixi  i& 6 threw  the government into  disorder  [during  the Eastern Jin], he was replaced by Emperor  Jianwen 

pl  Jir  .... 

The present emperor has lost  al1  support, for he  has  upset the 

ordained  order  of things and  done  away with the  Whie  required of a  ruler. 

His  dissipation and debauchery  grow  worse with  tirne.  He  was  urinily  in  his 

childhood  years  and  unmanageable  as a youth. Suspicious and cruel by nature, he  gives  ample evidence of it in  his  encounters with others. Violent and irrational, he  can  be easily aroused. When the emperor  [his  father, Xiao 

Luan]  died, he bore a happy countenance. When the impenal coffin  was  set in the  great  hall, there was no expression of grief  His  amusements and banquets are even more  fiequent  than  before, and his exotic costumes and 

strange  dress are  lavish  to the  extreme..  ..He robs, pillages and kidnaps in 

dayiight  or  darkness.  He lies low dunng the day and  roams  fieely  at  night 

in an unbroken round of  activity.  He indulges in dnnking  sprees  in disreputable tavems and  wild  merriment  in wretched  ims.  He indulges  his 

favourite courtiers who  only  delude  him  and sow  disorder  in the court. Mei 

Chong'er  Jg.  2 and Ru  Fazhen  Ig  -& .$ are  petty,  repugnant  men who 

alone  control the levers of power. They have executed the good and the loyal and murdered  ministers  and  high  officials  - [such  men as] Liu  [Xuan 

# 1@],  General of the  Garrison  Guard  (zhenjun  + [should  read  fingun 

# a $ ] ), a distinguished brother of the empress who served the  realm  with the utmost  loyalty,  Jiang [Shi  2~  & 1,  Deputy  Director  of the  Right  ( m l  

> puye

# tIff  a) of the  Department  of State  Mairs,  an  iduential  relative of the empress who served the throne with the  greatest  sincerity, Xiao 

[Tanzhi  f S t1, General of the Palace  Guard  (lingiun  ), a distant royal relative who was constant in his determination to be a  pillar  of the state, as  well  as  Xu  [Xaosi  .i% 8 1 1 ,  [Director of the  Department  of State 

Affairs,  with the prestige  title  of]  Minister  of Works  (sikong  6J  ) and Shen  [Wenji  -a à;  1, Deputy  Duector  [of the  Left  of the Department of State  AfFairs]  ([mol  puye  .& @ #-),  both of whom were  officials  of  high 

standing who  enjoyed  the confidence and respect of the people.. ..Al1  had 

attended on the  previous  emperor [Xiao  Luan,  father of the  incumbent]  and had been  entnisted  in the impenal  will  with  responsibilities  of  govenunent. 

Thus  they  paid  their  respects to the deceased emperor and  turned  to serve his  heir with al! their  heart  and  al1  their strength.. . . Xiao [Yi  # #,  brother of Xiao Yan],Director  [of the Department of State  Affairs  & +], iook 

up  the sword to  defend  the public  weal,  and his sincerity was apparent  in all 

his  actions. When bandits marauded  through  the land and pressed  hard 

upon the capital,  w a o ]  raised  his  sword and  alone  maintained  the  deferse 

of the beleaguered city. When  mediocre  men tumed  from  their  duty  to the 

throne  md  smugly  dominated  the imperial court,  w a o ]  devised a strategy 

from  within  the palace and gave instructions to the  military  officers, so that the  e d  men were destroyed and the govemment was cleansed. Cui  Huijing 

## ,&  a suddenly  threw  the  realm  into  panic  when he raised an  army  that marched on the gates of the imperial city. The defenders were temfied . ..

and the  anxious  population streamed to  his  side,  . . . as both the  wise  and the foolish  vied  to be  ahead  of one  another  in presenting the  speediest  proof  of 

allegiance.  Once  again,  [Xiao] vowed.. .to act with no regard for  himself 

Encouraging the imperial  armies  of righteousness, he led them in a 

lightning  assault on the  powerfùl  enemy,  annihilating  the  evil-doers  and 

securing  the throne.  His  achievement was greater  than  that of Duke  Hum 

of Qi  ( R &i 2 ) or Duke Wen of Jin  (Q  ri:  "k'  ), and  his  ment  surpassed 

that of Yi Yin  8 or Lü Shang  X . . . . M e n  his work was accomplished, he modestly withdrew and made no  demand  for the 

conferral  of  high  honours. Rather  than  news of reward and recognition came the  sudden  report of his execution.. ..Who  could not  grieve  over  such 

an injustice? But the  cluster  of  evil  officiais  [about the throne] gave  free 

rein to their  whhs.  . . .and sent Liu Shanyang  @]  A rft  at the head of ahorde of  villains  and outlaws in a secret plot to  launch  a surprise  attack  [on Xiao  Yan].  Xiao  Yingzhou  a fl  , General of the  Right,  and Xiahou 

Xiang  X @ q, Generai of the  Carnpaign  against  the Enemy  (zhenglu 

jiangun  & # ), were loyal and took quick action, . . . working  out a 

clever  scheme that got the  better  of Liu, who  finished  with  his  head on a pike.. ..As  for [the present  incumbent  on the throne], he  offends  against  the 

ancient  rites and  teachings  and injures both man and nature.. .. Though  al1 

the bamboo in the land were to be used, it would not be enough to record his faults. Though every  rabbit  in  marsh  and  mountain  were to be found, 

there  would  stili  not be enough to  make  the pens to  write  ail his 

sins..  ..From  the  beginning  of time,  nothing  in the  historical  record  speaks 

of a ruler  as ignorant or brutal as  this  one. The world of men and spirits is now  without  a ruler, and the imperial  altars  are on the verge of collapse. The land is in chaos and the people in  turmoil.  . ..The  garrison  establishment  (mufi  E $f  ) [of Xiao Baorong  f a] thinks  longingly  of the  regime  of the previous emperor [father of Baorong] . .. .How  could  he lie unconcemed as [the  house]  takes 

fire  or watch idly by  while  [the  kingdom]  tumbles?  His most  worthy 

personage  is  a son of Emperor Ming and  was  much  beloved by  him..  ..The 

portents  give  proof  that he is to hold the  irnperial  position.. ..Xia0 

Ymigzhou,  General  of the  Right,  and  Xiahou  Xiang,  General of the Campaign  Against  the Enemy, are of one  mind  in  their  assistance and support.  Since  the imperial  governrnent  is now placed in the old land of Chu, the  three  forces  [heaven,  earth  and man] have been  reinvigorated  and the  nine  regions  of the realm have found new life.  Now  the cycle  is  turning 

to a time of  great  peace.  Greatness begins on  this  day! However,  although 

the  sign  of imperiai  virtue  is evident, the realm has not yet been  pacified. 

The  evii  men have not been destroyed and the imperial capital  has  not been 

fieed  tiom  their  caiamitous  grip.  Having  received the  imperial  order,  [we] are  setting  out to  lead  the way. Today, [the emperor]  commands  twenty 

anny  cornmanders ... , headed by General Cao  9 , to  lead  fifly  thousand 

soldiers  armed  with  long swords.. . to  march  from  Hengjiang  # iI  to Zhuque  *&,  [the Vermilion  Sparrow  (Pontoon) Bridge at the  south  of 

Jiankang  over the  Qinhuai  River];zo3 thirty  cornmanders.. . ,headed by 

General Wang  3 , to  lead  a naval force of seventy thousand.. .directly to 

Fort  Baicheng  @ &&;204  thirty-nine  commanders.. ., headed by Xiao Wei 

# # [Xiao Yan's brother], to  take  eighty  thousand men in  warships..  . in an attack on Fort  Shitou  & H; 205  and  forty-two  cornmanders.. . ,headed by Xiao Dan j#  $#  [Xiao Yan's brother], to  lead  one hundred  thousand  solidly armed and  fierce  soldiers.. . in a frontal assault on  Xinting  @ * ? O 6  In addition, inspectors (cishi) of the adjacent  regions  of  Yizhou  H, 

Liangzhou  8 JY  and  Sizhou  SJ  JEi  . . . ,as well as the governors  (laishou)  of the western commanderies of  Weixing  a#, Shangyong  I and 

Xincheng  8 . . .,have  dl  respectfully  accepted the imperial  edict  (zhao) to  carry  out the punishment of heaven  (rianfa fi  ).  The brave and well-armed troops of the [western] Shu  qj  region  and Han River  area  are 

descendhg  the river,  while  the crack troops of the Huai and Ru  ;*  areas 

await  their speedy  arrival.  The garrison establishment  (mufu)  commands  

> ..

.a  rniliion  brave warriors.. . .[and has  horses,  ships  and  weaponry  in massive  supply].  Xiao  Yingzhou,  General of the  Riçht,  is  the  finest 

strategist  and  is  @ed  in  both  the civil and  rnilitary  arts.. ..He controls the 

armies  of  Jingzhou  (Jingnan  #J PJ  ))and  supervises the  armies  of the  four 

directions. He  proclaims  the  acts  of  government  and serves and protects the  irnpenal  person.  Where the  army  moves,  nothing  will  stand in  its  way. 

With  the ferocity of dragons and tigers, the generals and  soldiers  are 

converging  towards [the capital]  Jianye.  The  inept  and  perfldious  [men about the  throne]  wiU  be  dismissed;  the incumbent  will  be removed as  was 

[the Marquis  of]  Haihun  f$  [ ] [during  the Han]; and the  sacred 

capital  will  be  cleansed  and made  secure  once  again.  [The righteous armies] 

wîN  be  like  the weight of Mount Tai coiiapsing on an ant  hill  or the force of     

> --
> 203 Z I D C , 310
> 204

Also  d e d  Baixia  C 7:.  A fortres  on the  Yang5  River,  north  of Nanjing  outside  Jinchuan  Gate 

J i l  at the  southem  fwt  of  M h  Mt  s$f JI  (ZLDC, 230).      

> 205 On present-day Qingliang Mt.

% 2#! 3i  on the  West  side  of Nanjing  (ZLDC,  190)  

> 206

Fortress  south  of the  city  on the  edge  of  the  Yangzi  River and  against  a hi11  (ZLDC, 9 13) water  breaking  through  a dike into a pile of ashes. How  can  anyone escape being  eliminated! 

Today the  ;var  axe  is  pointed at Mei Chong'er and Ru  Fazhen 

alone.. ..If anyone [in the capital]  can  render  seMce  in  this  time  of change and  tum  their former affliction into a blessing  b y  eliminating  Mei or Ru], we  swear  by the [Yellow] River  ;i and [Mount]  Yue  that he  will  be rewarded with  high  office. But if there are  those  who hold  shibbordy  to their  delusion  and  resist  the  imperial  forces, they shall be  punished  at once without  mercy  . . . .'O7 

Despite  the  glorious  descriptions of the  call  to  amis,  there  was  determined 

resistance  from  Yingzhou and  Jiangzhou,  two  major  regions  lying  between  the  "punitive" 

armies  and the  capitai.  Yingzhou was the first  barrîer,  and it  was  particularly  important 

since  its capital was situated on the  south  side  of the  Yangzi,*08 at the confluence of the Han  (also  referred  to as the  Mian)  and  Yangzi  rivers  (the  Wuchang  part of present-day Wuhan). In tandem with it was the Lu Shan  a&  3i  fortress located on the north  side  facing the Han River (in the  Hanyang  section of present-day Wuhan). They  functioned  as a vice 

which  could strangle the  advance  of the water-borne troops descending  fiom  both 

Xiangyang  and  Jiangling  as well as  any  troops out of  Xiangzhou,  located to the  south  of Yingzhou. Xiao  Yan's  troops, as indicated in the first  call  to  m s , relied on the Han 

(Mian)  River as their route out to the east. 

While  they were still  dealing  with this blockage point, Baorong  formally  took the 

throne  in  Jingling.  At this point, the  campaign  against  the capital was  already  into its second  month  but  still  another eight months away  fiorn  ultimate  victory.  Since  it was apparent that  military  events prevented  his  being crowned in  Jiankang,  the  various  oEcials 

formdiy  presented Baorong with a request that he accept the  august  irnpenal  title  here. In preparation for the formai ceremony, an  impenal  ancestral temple was to be erected and the altars to Heaven and Earth were  established  to the  south  and  north  of the  city.2O9  Xiao 

Ymgzhou,  who  was  left  in charge of  aii  flairs  at  Jiangiing,  had  ensured  that the proper   

> 207 LS/1/6/3

# - 911          

> 208 They had to cross the Yangtze after reaching

Hankou  (LS/ 11913).               

> 209 This Oaurred on day jisi C, Gof the second month, or Mach 9, 50 1(NQSI

III  12/8). ritual  and  ceremony  would be observed. About  five  weeks  later,  in  the third  month, 

Baorong  fomally  took the  thrme,  and the reign  name  of  zhongxing  rf.  R("Restoration" 

or "Renewal") was  declared.210  The  following  day, the emperor in Jiankang  was  ordered 

deposed  as the Prince of  Fuling  i& & X . 2 1 1  00th  in the structure of the court and the design of the  irnperial  palace,  Jiangling  modelled  itself  on  Jiankang212 

Within a week, the capital had sent out an expeditionary  army  to  eliminate  the competing court at  Jiangling.213  Imperia1  troops had already been sent to shore up the strategic defenses at Yingzhou, but the court  reaiized  a greater force  was  now needed. By the  fifth  month  Jiankang felt compelled to send  thirteen  arrnies to  ensure  that the Yingzhou  garrison  did not  fall  to  Yan's  a r r n i e ~ . ~ l ~ In the seventh  month  a strategic  victory 

just below Yingzhou made the defenders of the fortresses of Lu Shan and Yingzhou 

realize  they had no  alternative  but to  s ~ r r e n d e r , ~ ~ ~ and in the following  month  the general sent  fiom  Jiankang to hold Jiangzhou at  its  capital Xunyang (present-day  Jiujiang)  was 

defeated.216 

Despite  the  clarion  call  from  Jiangling  to support the  righteous  cause, the capital seems to have  remained  relatively stable. Xiao  Yingfù  j@  +, a younger brother of 

Yingzhou  who had issued the first  call  to arms, was in the  capital  at the time but  does  not seem to have had the  military  power or connections or  intluence  to  launch  a coup in 

response.  Instead,  he  fled the capital and launched an uprising in  L u h g  $ &,  acornmandery in Jiangzhou, one of the  regions  Yan's troops would have to pass  through  on 

He took the  throne  on  day  yisi  2 €L of the  third  month,  or  April  14,50  1 (NQSIIII  12/10).  in the  

> biography

of Xiao  Baojuan,  the  emperor  in Jiankang,  howwer,  the day is given  as  dingwei  7 *, or  April   

> 16 (NQS/1/101/9).

This may  actualiy  have  been  the  day  on  which  the  news  reached  the capital  fiom   

> Jiangling.
> 21 l

NQS/1/112/13     

> 212 NQS/2/671/11
> 213 It was

sent on  day  guichou  *of  the  third  month,  or  Apnl22,  50 1 (NQS/1/10  119).    

> 214 LS/1/1014
> 215 LS/1/11/1-5.

The  defender  of Yingcheng  3F Y (Yingzhou  f o m )  surrenderai  on  day jiwei  C *of 

the  seventh  month,  or  August  26,50  1 (NQS/ 1/10 1/14).   

> 216 LS/l/ll/l5

# - lu1 their way to the  capital.217  However, he was  unable  to  maintain  any  military  control over the temtory and  was  forced to flee  westward  towards  Changsha and into  mountain 

ranges, where he ran out cf supplies and died.  218 

There  seemç  to have been  only  one attempted coup in  this  period  while  the western troops were  still  stalled  at  Yingzhou,  and  it  does  not appear to have been a  response  to the 

manifesto  fiom  Jiangling so  much  as an  act  of  opportunism,  for  this  cabai  of conspirators supported their  own  emperor.  Ifthey  were  aware  that the enthronement of another emperor in  Jiangling  had been  done  at  the  alleged  cornmand  of the empress dowager, their flagrant  disregard  of her  "wiil"  suggests a high  degree  of  cynicism  surroundhg 

legitimation  rituals.  Had they been better  organized,  they would  very  likely have been able to  produce  their  own  dowager's  command  (lit@. 

In the seventh  rnonth  this  group  of over a  dozen  generds  sent assassins to  murder 

a general and  his  entourage  during  a formal  send-off ceremony  from  the  capitaL219  The generai had been comrnissioned to  sail  to Yingzhou to  reinforce  the  irnperial  defense 

against  Yan's  forces  from  the  West.  The send-off  party  included Ru  Fazhen  and Mei Chong'er who, as the  manifesto  ftom  JingIing  declared,  were the  two  compting  powers about the  throne  and were therefore major  targets  of the righteous expedition  under  Yan. 

It had been the conspirators' intention for one  generai  to  rush  to the palace  with  his  troops and, in the vacuum created by the absence of the  aii-powefil  Ru and  Mei  seize control so that another general could  escort  a younger brother of the emperor into the palace and 

enthrone  him.  Xiao  Baoyin,  who would have been in  his  early  teens at the  tirne,  was the 

only  brother of the emperor  still  in the capital who could be  legitimately  claimed  as the 

next  in  line.220 He  was  placed  at  the head of a procession of  several  hundred  rnilitw  

> 217

The  uprising  ocnirred  in the  Ndh  month.  Since  an  imperid  amnesty  for the  region  was  announced  on &y  ~ u i & -f  ,or  July  26.50 1, the  uprising  must  have  preceded  this date  (NQSI 1110 1110).      

> 2'8 LS/1/188/11-15
> 219 On &y j i m

7 9of the  menth  month,  or  Augusî  1.50  L (NQSIlI10 111 3).   

> 220 His age

is based  on the fàct that  his  older brother,  Baojuan,  was  19 sui when he  was  killed  at the end of  501  while  his  younger brother, Baorong,  was  15 sui when he  died  in the  nrst  half  of 502 officers  and  civilian  officials  fiom  his  own  garrison  at  Fort  Shitou as well as  several 

thousand  unarmed  citLzens.221  The show of strength was  irnpressive  but when they arrived at the gates close to dusk and found them closed and guarded by archers  with  drawn 

bows, the crowd broke away in  panic.  Apparently the other general  hrd  been  unable  to reach the palace in time, thereby enabling Ru  Fazhen,  who had  survived  the  assassination 

attempt unscathed, to  rehuri  to the palace in time to  order  the gates closed and  guarded. 

Baoyin went into  hiding  for  three  days before  finally  presenting  himself,  still  in 

military  uniform,  to the commandant of the market enclave  outside  the  walls  of Jiankang. When  his  brother questioned  him  about what had happened, Baoyin  tearfûlly  said  that he had no idea who forced  him  into the  carriage  or how to stop what was happening. 

Obviously,  he  was  vexy  Young,  and  his  brother  realized  there was no danger  fiom  him  at that  tirne.  The emperor simply  Iaughed  and pardoned  him,  but the leaders of the coup 

attempt  were  e x e c ~ t e d . ~ ~ ~ 

M e r the  breakthrough  of the troops of the Eastern Expedition at  Yingzhou  and 

Jingzhou,  the greatest source of  vulnerability  for the capital now  was  not  intemal  coups but the  relentless  progress  of the Xiao forces. By the ninth  month  they  had  reached  Gushu, 

less  than  one hundred  kilometres  southwest of Jiankang on the  Yangzi,  which  fell to Xiao when the defending force of  twenty  thousand fled back to Jiankang in  panic.223  Mer  this 

victory,  Xiao  Yan  secretly contacted the  eastern  garrisons  of  Jingkou  (present-day 

Zhenjiang),  Guangling  (present-day Yangzhou  north  of the Yangzi),  Guabu  (origindy  on  

> -
> (NQS/1/114/12).

Hence,  he  was  somewhere  between 13 and 16 at the t h e . He  is  said  to have  been  15 

@resumably sui) when he fled to the Wei in 502  (WS/4/13  13/12). Baoyin  was  the  sixth  of Xiao  Luan's 

eteven  sons. The  only  other brother  between  him  and  Baojuan,  the  then-emperor,  was  Baoyuan  who,  king  

> stationed

in the  east  as  Governor  (taishou) of  Kuaiji,  was  not  "available"  (NQS/3/864/9,  10). The figure of  several  hundred  officers and  officiais comes  From  NQS/3/88?17  while  the figure of 

several  thousand  citizem  cornes  from  NQS/3/865N.  It  is  uncertain  whether the figures are  supposed  to  be  

> wmplementary

or whether the  sources  are simply  contradictory  in  their  statistics.   

> 222 Two

amunts  of the  unsucadid  coup are  fouod  in the biographies of  Zbaog  Xintai  s& 

> (NQS/3/884/4-9)

and Xiao Baoyin  (NQSI31  86513-7). On  Qy  jicichen  'P  &of  the  ninth  month,  or  Weber  lO,50  1 (NQS/l/102/5). a sandbar  in the  Yangzi  south  of Yangzhou)  224  and Podun (southeast of present-day Jurong, about 50 km  east  of  Nanjing),225 since  control of them would permit Xiao  Yan's 

western forces to  join  with  the eastem  amies  h a phcer  action on Jiankang. The  garrisons 

agreed  to cooperate, and Yan appointed  his  brothers  Xiu  and Hui  # to Jingkou and Podun respectively and  his  cousin, Jing  %,  to  G ~ a n g l i n g . ~ ~ ~ 

In less  than  two  weeks  d e r  the rout at Gushu, Xiao  Yan  had won a partial  victory 

at Xinting, a fortress on the southwest  side  of the  ~ i t y . ~ ~ ~ In another eighteen days they had  taken  Zhuque  Hengy*28  the southern pontoon bridge across the  Qinhuai  River. The Eastern  Citadel  @on@  Cheng) surrendered in less  than  a ~ e e k . ~ " The  next  day Fort Shitou, on the northwest  side  of  Jiankang,  was abandoned, and  Yan  made  this  his 

headquarters.uO Forts  Xinting  and  Langye,  the latter being on the northwest  side  of Jiankang, surrendered the  following  day.231 The defending forces were now reduced to the  palace  which  was  placed  under  siege.  Baojuan  had been  under  the illusion that  Yan's 

forces would be as  easy  to defeat as  those  of  Chen  and Cui, and he had put away  only  ahundred days of emergency supplies. As the days passed and encounters ended in defeat, the emperor  refùsed  al1  counsel that he  take  gold  and  silver  fiom  the  treasury  to  reward 

and encourage troops or use lumber  from  the imperial storerooms to strengthen the 

d e f e n ~ e s . ~ ~ ~ Finally,  in face of the impending disaster, a  small  group  of  generds  and 

irnperial  bodyguards  conspired to  kill  the emperor and  Save  themselves. Over six weeks          

> 224 ZLDC, 239
> 225 ZLDC, 712
> 226 LS/1/13/1-3
> 227 Avictory was

won  here  on day bingchen  O a, or  October  22,50  1 (NQS/l/lO2/7).    

> 228 On day jimu

7 &of  the tenth  month,  or November  9,50  1 (NQSIlIlO2/8).     

> 229 On day wuyin

& of the tenth  month,  or November 13,  50  1 (NQS/l/lO2/8). 

> Po

Oll  day ~ i m a o 5 @ ,  or November 14,501  (NQS/11102/9).     

> "l On day gengchen

k a o f  the tenth  month,  or November  15,50  1 (NQSIl/lOY  Il). Fort  Langye  might  

> actually

be  a reference  to Fort  Bahia.  

> 212 NQS/1/106/4-10

after  the siege of the palace  began,  the emperor  was  murdered and  his  head delivered to Xiao  Yan.233 

During  the period in which the  expeditisnary  forces  had  been still focusing on 

Yingzhou  in  order  to  move  out into the  Ymgzi  and  eastward  towards the capital, 

Jiangling  was  beginning  to be threatened by an  army  partly  led by a member of the 

huangiinr  branch  of the Xiao  farnily.  Xiao  Huixun  % ,&  -Pi( was  then  the govemor (taishou) of Badong  C,  Commandeiy,  situated on the  Y a n g  in the western part of  Jingzhou.  In the  fifth  month  he ordered  his  son, Gui  e, to  join  with  the governor  (sumarned  L u  Q )

of  Baxi  t 6 , farther to the west in Yizhou, in a concerted attack on  Ji11gling.23~ By the 

eighth  month  they had defeated the govemor  (taishou) defending  Xiakou  * O , the 

"mouth  of the gorges" at present-day Yichang  f 8 in Hubei, and were advancing towards  Shangrning  +.  flfi  (about seventy kilometres to the  West  of  Jingling)  which  was  to 

fd into  their  hands  as  ~ e 1 1 . ~ ~ 5 By the eleventh  month,  Xiao Yingzhou, as top  general 

responsible for defeating Gui, was desperate, and the stress of the continuing  military 

failures  probably led to  his  sickness  and death  later  that  month.236  His  death was secretly reported to  Yan  who had by that time  taken  up position in Fort Shitou and was  laying 

siege to the  palace,237 but orders continued to be issued in Xiao  Yingzhou's  name  while 

rnilitary  affairs  were in effect  handled  by  Yan's  brother,  Dan.238  About  two  weeks  after 

his  death,  however,  Gui and L u surrendered. Their troops had  begun  to disperse out of 

fear  upon  hearing  that  Jiankang  had  fdlen  to the "righteous  armies",  and they obviously  

> U3

This ocnirred  on  day  bingyin  fi  ff  of the  twelAh  month,  or  December  3 1,  50 1 (NQS/l/  102/ 12)   

> 234 LS/1/188/7.

The attack  is  said  to have  begun  on day  yimm  t $F  of the  £ifth month,  or  June  23,501    

> (NQS/1/113/4).
> u5 NQS/2/673/2,3
> a6 On day renyin

of the  elevenîh  month,  or December 7, 501  (NQS/l/113/10).  Elsewhere    

> (NQS/2/673/8), his time

of death  is given  as  day  renyin of the  hveifth  month  but  there  is no  day  renyin in      

> the twelfth month.
> 237 NQS/2/674/2
> u8 NQS/l/1 13/11

felt that  surrender  was their only option.  Only  after  Jiankang  had been completely pacified by  Yan,  though,  was Xiao  Yingzhou's  death  officially  announced."g 

At best, Huixun's actions could be interpreted as  û loyalist  action by a Qi  official. 

His  must have been a house  divided,  for Huixun's other son,  Chen  G , although  a Qi 

official  as  well,  was  already a  close  associate of Xiao  Yan.**  Their attitudes may have been  basically  apolitical,  however, for in the end,  Huixun  was forgiven by  Yan,  and both 

father  and son ended up holding positions  under  Yan once  he  had  overthrown  the Qi and 

established the Liang. Events had now put both Jiankang and  Jiangling  fully  under  the control of Xiao 

Yan.  On the day that the emperor's head was delivered to  him,  two  orders  (ling)  nom  the Dowager Xuande were issued, obviously  crafted  ahead  of time  at  Xiao  Yan's  command, for she was the only  legitirnately  recognized  figure who could "sponsor" a change to the throne.  According  to the first  order  (ling), 

When the former  dynasty  had exhausted  its  mandate and the  House 

[of Qi] received the throne, our  founding  ancestors were sage and holy men. Emperor Gao [Xiao Daocheng] laid the foundation,  firm  in his mandate as  impenai  d e r ;  Emperor Wu  [his  son, Xiao  Ze]  was an 

enlightened  d e r  who  followed  in  his  father's  footsteps;  and Emperor Ming 

pmperor  Gao's nephew, Xiao  Luan],  brought the throne back to its former  glory.  No man is  immortal,  yet the tranquility of the  realm  depended upon their presence. Now the  weighty  responsibility  of the throne resides 

with  the heir,  who  is ignorant and  brutal  in nature, as  was  apparent even in his childhood.. .. Emperor Ming, conscious of the place of the proper  heir, 

This is  a compromise  melding  of  two  accounts.  One source  states  that they  mndered  on  day  dingsi

T C of the  elevenîh  month,  or  December  22,501  (NQS/1/113/11). Another  source  says  that  they 

surrendered  after  hearing  that Jiankang had  fallen  (LS/1/188/10). Since  the palace only  feii  to Xiao  Yan     

> ailer Xiao Baojuan had

been  beheaded  on  &y  bingyin  fi  of the  twelfth  month,  or  Decernber  3 1,5O  1, it  

> is

unclear  whether  there  is  a slight  historical  contradiction  between  the  two  histones as to the date of              

> sunender or whether the news of the defeat of the various fortresses of Jiankang

and the  encirclement  of the  last  centre of  resistance  in the  palace  as early as the  tenth  month  had  already  convinced  them  that the 

coUapse  of the  regime  in Jiankang  was  a foregone  collusion.  Hence,  knowing  that the  palace  remained  as the  last  hold-out  agaiast  Xiao  Yan  could have been  equivalent  in their  mincis  to the  fall  of Jiankang.  

> 2N

Xiao  Chen  was  on close  terms  with  Xiao  Yan,  king  one of the  "Eight  Friendsn(bayou),  a prominent    

> iiterary coterie which

also  inchdeci  Xiao  Ziliang  of the royal Qi  house.  He  was  to serve  under  Yan  after the latter  had  taken  control  of Jiankang. Xiao  Chen  had been a Left  Aide  (zuochengA  a) within  the       

> Depariment of State Affairs (shangshu) of the Qi (NS/2/505/13).

confirmed  his eldest son as heir apparent and  appointed  officiais  of talent, 

al1  worthy men of royal affiliation, to assist the young heir and keep a firm 

hand on the capital and the regions, so that no  unrest  should  arise.  But before a  year  had  gone  by, he  began  his  butchery. Exterminations of whole 

families,  whether close royal relatives by birth or  mariage,  or  elder 

statesrnen and  upright  ufficials,  would occur every  few  weeks.  Those  the heir kept about  him  would engage in every  kind  of  evil  crime.  AU  of  them 

are the  likes  of  fighting  men,  butchers  and  small  merchants, with a mean 

and  thuggish  look. They  dominate  the court and control the  government. 

They execute the innocent and seize their  wealth.  Should they  sense  an 

&ont,  they will destroy whole  households.  The heir  regnant  occupies the 

highest  position but  takes  delight in the  basest  things. He  never  changes 

eom  his  [outiandish]  dress of  high  hat and short cloak. He routinely leaves [the palace] in the  rnorning,  only  to return  late  at night. He forces the people to flee their homes, so that the neighbourhoods are empty.  Old  and young flee in  panic  and find no place to lay their head. He rushes in  from 

the east and they escape to the  West.  He  comes  out of the north and they are  pushed  to the  south.  City streets and country paths are crowded with people  carrying  the sick or  pulling  carts  with  dead  bodies. Day and night new structures are put up, but what  is  erected in the  moming  is  tom down at night. The clothes he puts on in the  moniing  are  thown  away by evening.. ..Barnboos  are moved and  h i t  trees  shified  either day or  night, 

so that before the roots  can  take  hold, the leaves have withered.. . . Having 

exhausted  the  impenal  treasury,  he now taxes and  plunders  the markets and public roads,  beggaring  tradesmen and merchants who weep in anguish [at their  impoverishment].  . ..Though  the last  barnboo  of Chu and Yue were to be used, there would  still  not be enough on  which  to record  [his  sins]. 

Though  he were to be  likened  to [the last two  rulers  of the Xia and the Shang], how would  such  a cornparison ever  suffice?  Faitffil  to the imperial 

past,  [>Cao  YanJ  General of the Eastern  Campaign  & )L  #$  took quick, decisive action in  his  distant  region,  pledging  his  loyalty to the  true 

emperor  and  assisting  in the restoration of the  realm.  Sweeping away  all 

before  him  in  his  victorious  march,  he will cleanse the  irnpenal  capital. 

Petty  men with no understanding have put up a stubbom resistance,  hoping 

to stave off their  just  execution. A month  has sped  by,  and it is  fitting  that they be speedily repressed so that the land may be made  tranquil  again.  An envoy  s h d  be  quietly  sent to  make  secretly  known  the contents of  this 

cornmand.  Let the brave and loyal  rise  together and  quickly  . ..drive away the  biind  and  wicked  men.. ..It  has been  rny  misfortune  that  these  myriad 

calamities  should have  corne  in my  tirne.  As  1 reflect  upon  those  who have been  stmck  down and  those  who have  survived,  my  heart  is tom  apart. 

What  is to be  done?!Z4l In a  separate  order  (ling), the dowager decreed that the emperor  (already  dead)  be deposed as Marquis (hou) of Donghun  )! -&, following the  histoncai  precedent of the Marquis of  Haihun  i)  of the Han d y n a ~ t y . ~ ~ ~ Althüugh  the  name  Donghun may 

appear  simply to be a denigrating  epithet (Eastern  Bemuddlement),  it  was in  fact  the  name 

of a  place?" 

Three  days  later,  another  comrnand  ( h g ) from  the Empress Dowager  Xuande 

began  the  official  consolidation of Xiao  Yan's  military  and  civilian  power in Jiankang.  Like 

the  usurpers  Xiao Daocheng and Xiao  Luan  before  him,  he was appointed Overseer of the Department of State  Affairs  (h shangshu  shi),  which assured  him  pre-erninent power  at 

court, and made  Inspecter  (cishi)  of Yangzhou, necessitating the concurrent prestige title of  Cavalry  General-in-chief  (piaoji  dajiangiun),  while  also  being  named Overseer  (dudu) 

of  military  affairs  for Yangzhou and Southem Xuzhou (the capital's "protective"  gmison 

to the east).  Since  the new emperor was too young to  mle  on  his  own  and had not yet 

arrîved  fiom  Jiangling,  Yan  was the  real  emperor, and the dowager's ling lent the necessary  legitimacy  to this  function  by  entrusting  him as  regent  "following the precedent of Sima  Zun  during  the Jin  D y n a ~ t y " . ~ ~ ~ Since  this was also the appropnate stage for a usurper to be elevated to ducal  rank,  the dowager's ling also  cornrnanded  that  Yan  be made Duke (gong ) of  Jian'an  Commandery  (jun)  @ t2, with ten thousand households. This placed Yan  three  steps below the one-syllabic  princely  title required by tradition at the  time  of abdication.  245  Five days  later  he was awarded with  twenty  m o n 

cash and five thousand bolts of  cloth  and  sik  to accord with his new  status  and  prestige?   

> -
> 242 NQS/1/107/15

# - 108/1 

243~ccording to  ZLDJ  (vol.4,  map  46-47),  there  is  a Fort Donghun  @3&about  70 km  CO the  east  of Kaifeng in the then-barbarian temtory of the Wei.  

> 244

Sima  Zun,  a grandson  of Emperor Yuan  (JS/6/1728/6),  had  been  appoiated  to  exercix  the  powers  of emperor at the  Jiankang  court  after  an  edict  coming  ailegedly  From  the  mentally  hcompetent  emperor, 

still  in  Jingling  commanded  îhat  this  be  done  (JS/  l/256/9  - 12).  

> 245

This ling  was  issueci  on  day j i s i t  €5  of the  twelRh  month,  or  Ianuary  3,502  (NQS/1/113/12).  The  

> positions

are  enumerated  in  LS/1/13/5-8  and  NQS/l/l13/12-13.  The position of lu  shongshu  shi  origWy 

was  a concomitant one, and Xiao  Yan  was  îherefore  also  appointed  Secretariat  Supervisor  (zhongshu jian) As regent, Xiao  Yan  presented a seïies of five orders  ( h g )  to the realm by  which 

he  explained  the necessity and legitimacy of  his  actions and present role and spoke in 

terrns  of  â.  general  reconciliation. The first of  these  embodies  the main themes: 

The imperial  house  lost its strong  d e r  and the succession fell to an addled rniscreant. He spread  his  bane  to the realm of plants and  animals  and brought woe to the world of men and spirits. The  altars  and  temples of the land were as  precdous  as though  hanging  on a string.  1 am of the imperial 

family  (wu shen ji huatgzong  a 10  8 ) and  was  gaciously  appointed to the border  regions  by the former emperor.. . Although  the  throne  was 

restored and the mandate  (mingming  flA  48  ) continued, the [preceding] 

incumbent  let  evil  reign  and  threw  the capital  into  chaos.  1 quickly took up 

arms  to  bring  an end to  these  afflictions.  His  abusive  nxle  had lasted for aconsiderable  length  of time, and  those  who abetted in  his  evil are  surely  not just of one  small  family.  I received the royal command  (chaoming  $J  +) 

and  was  appointed to  lead  a punitive  campaign.  My thought was oniy to spread the  imperial  beneficence  over the  land  and its people.  Thus,  let  dl 

those  who  bear  some  blame  be allowed to  make  a new  start.  A grand 

arnnesty  is  declared  over the whole  realm.  Only  the group of forty-one headed by Wang  Xuanzhi  E .9 Lare  e ~ c l u d e d . ~ ~ ~ 

A second ling reiterated the  theme  that no precedent could be found in  history  for the  unjust  and vicious ways of the previous emperor. The people had been uprooted; 

disease  and starvation had stalked the land; and in the  capital  itseif  fire  and other disasters had destroyed  palaces,  temples and  government  offices,  leaving  a scene of desolation. Aquickly  following  third  h g  also  lamented the fact that offices had been  Beely  bought  and sold and power had  fden  into the  hands  of lesser officiais whose  only  motivation was 

personal  gain. Hence, both of  these  ling commanded  that  judgments  of courts be reviewed 

as  weîi.  Xiao  Luan,  for  his  part,  was  already  Director  of the Department of  State  Mhhs (shangshu  ling)   

> when he

was  made lu shangshu shi.  

> 246

On  day jimu  # ,or  Januaq  8, 502  (NQS/l/113/14).    

> 247 The text

is found in  LS/1113/9-13.  The  villaios  had  been  executed  about  hvo  weeks  eariier.  The  group   

> of forty-one

is  headed  by  Mei Chong'er and Ru  Fazhen  in the  c d  to  arms  and  al1  other  previous       

> commandds. At best, Wang is listeci

as  number  three  after  Mei  and Ru.  It  is  unclear  why he  floated  to  "top spot" at  this  point. Wang  was  the one who  controlled  govenunent  documents and put into  writing  all the          

> orciers given orally by Mei and Ru (NS/6/193W5-6). None of

these  'Wains"  was  aiiowed  a place in  even      

> the ignominious "Court Favourites" (xingchen

.f9  L ) section of biographies of the Nan Qi Shu, the            

> official dynasS of the Southern Qi. This biographical task is left

to the  NaB  Shi, the  general  history  of the 

southem  dynasties, which  includes  these  men in  its  "Court  Favourites"  (enxing  ,!& f # )  section and reversed or  adjusted  where they were  unreasonable  or  unfair,  and  al1  unjust  rules, 

taxes and punishments  imposed  during  his  evil  reign  be  overturned  and their  victims  given 

fidl  arniiesty.  In a fourth  h g , soldiers  who had died in the  campaigns  were to be properly 

buried  by the  state  and pensions were to be given to their  survivors.  Finally,  as a gesture 

of reconciliation, another  h g  ordered that the  sarne  benefits be accorded to  those  who had been on the enemy  ~ide.24~ 

Although  Xiao  Yan  emphasized  that he had  served  the  tnie  throne as a member of the royal  family,  honours bestowed on  him  alone  were insufficient and had to be extended to his forebears to  raise  the profile and  dignity  of  his  own  Iine. Hence, the emperor, who had still not  h v e d  fkom  Jiangling,  issued  "from  afar'  the command that Xiao  Yan's 

father and grandfather be honoured with  distinguished  posthumous  titIes.249 

This  was  also  the occasion for another public  order  (hg) that reiterated  his  own 

position of  legitimacy  in the way events had  taken  their course.  Again,  in a  text  crafled  in the best  literary  style and  studded  with  classical  allusions, Xiao Yan denounced the  unvirtuous  ways of the former emperor (Xiao  Baojuan). 

Those  above  affect  those  below. As the  wind  blows, so the  grass 

bends. The ascendancy of vice or  virtue  has  dways  corne  about in  this 

marner.  In  theyongyuan  rje  ii; reign  penod,  nothing  in  history  could  match the emperor's  fall  fiom  virtue.  No words were  enough  to convey his 

enormous  depravity . ...The  ru1 er  above  was  careless  and  haughty,  and  those 

below were  harsh  and cruel.. ..The authority of the  throne  and the power of the court fell  into  the hands of the ruler's minions and favourites. Offices were sold and  titles  bought, and bribes passed openly.  They  erected 

magnificent  mansions  dong  the main  thoroughfares,  with grand  terraces 

and vaulted rooms. Their  personal  troupes of musicians and  dancers  were on a par with  those  granted to [Wei Jiang  #f9,  of the  Spring  and  Auturnn 

Period  ] as a reward for  negotiathg  peace with the barbarians,  while  their rare and exotic foods and precious  objects  rivailed  those  of the  great             

> 248 These five h g may have al1 been issued together on day jimao

t fi  of the  twelRh  month,  or  Iaauary                                        

> 13,502 (LSl111319). For the texts, seLS/1/13/11-1416 for the second h g , LSlt11416-10 for the third,
> and LS/1114/11-13 for thefinaltwo.
> 249 These titles were bestowed in the fïrst month of the second year, or sornetime between January 13 and
> Febniary 1,502 (LS/1/14114-15).

families.  The ignorant  imitated  them, and  it  became the mores of the times.. .. m e n  dusk  feU,  [the young  d e r ]  would leave the confines of the palace,  never  returning  before  midnight.  As  d a m  approached, the  officiais 

of the court  vaidy  waited  for the  emperor's  morning  levee to begin.. ..  1

have been  graciously  favoured, and my task  is  to cleanse the court. My concem is to  explain  the  h g a l  intentions of the  first  emperors and promote the rightness of  restraint  in my  own  person.  The tradition of  simplicity  wiiî 

be restored and expanded. The omate  shall  be eradicated in favour of the simple and unadomed.. .. There are  those  arnong you who  can  lead  the way 

arnong  ministers  and  oficials  and  act  as  modeis  for the  cornmon  people in 

fiugality  of food and  clothing,  but let me be the one to begin.. ..If people 

practise  moderation in food and  hospitality  and strive for  hgality  and restraint, habits  will  change, and we  can  hope for a transformation  within  a

rnonth.  ...250 

It is  clear  from  the wording that Xiao  Yan  was putting himself in the position of one who  was  not  just  filling  an administrative  function  of regent but was  also  fulfiling  arole of moral leadership. 

Although  the historical precedent of Sima  Zun  fiom the Eastern Jin had been cited to  legitimize  Xiao  Yan's  role as regent (the emperor was young and had  still  not  arrived  in the capital fiom Jiangling),  251  Xiao  Yan  gave up the position a  month  later  to the Dowager Xuande,  though  he continued to be accorded the  right  of deference due a regent fiom  al1  officiaidom,  an indication that Yan was not modestly retiring  fiom  a position of power.  252  In  faa,  havhg  established the  legitimacy  of  his  holding  such  power, he could now  withdraw  in  order  to receive a new round of imperial honours  "freely  granted"  by the emperor  through  the new regent, Dowager Xuande. For  Xiao  Yan  to have received  such 

honours  nom  the emperor  while  acting on  his  behalf as regent would have been a clumsy 

admission that he  was  "calling  the shots". Four days  later,  then,  the  crown  commanded  Yan  to be superintendant of  military 

affairs  for the capital and  al1  the  regions  (dudu  rhongwai  rInrju11~hi) and accorded  him  the       

> 2s0 LS/l/lS/l-12
> 251 NQS/1/114/8-9
> 252 On day muu

## Ift  &of  the  first  month,  or  Febniaiy  1, 502  (NQSIlIIlW 1). For  his  withdrawai  fiom vice-regal  duty  vie  chengzhi  @ ili) ),  see  ais0  LS/ 1/  I S/  13. three  special  honours  (shuli).253  The  military  position was of course a substantive one, 

c o n f k g  hlln  in  his  military  control of the  Qi  regirne,  while  the  speciai  hmours,  though 

ceremonid  in essence, underlined the fact of  his  special access to the  throne.  These 

allowed  him  to enter the  palace  with sword and shoes, to arrive at an  unhumed  Pace  for 

impenal  audiences and  to  be exempt fiom  having  his  narne  chanted  out in the  preliminary 

formalities  of an audience with the emperor. Twelve days  later  an  irnperial  edict  (rhao)  was issued which  was  absolutely 

essential for Xiao  Yan  if he were eventually to establish  his  own  dynasty  in the  historically 

legitimated tradition of abdication and a transfer of  mandate.254 The edict  was 

accompanied by a statement of  appointment  (ce) which  explained  and justified in  greater 

detail  the new honours and titles to be bestowed on Xiao  Yan  as first outlined in the edict. The ce  begins  with a description of Xiao Yan as the instrument of heaven and man 

in  restoring  the realm to its present position and  then,  in what arnounts to an  official 

review of  Xiao's  place in the history of the Qi,  lists  fourteen  meritorious  contributions or 

f a t s  (gong), fiom  his  defense of the  realm  against  the Wei dunng the  reigns  of Xiao  Ze 

and Xiao  Luan  to the turning-point  victories  of the eastem  campaign  which  culrninated  in the destruction of Xiao  Baojuan,  the  villainous  emperor. It is through the  agency  of heat and cold that Heaven and Earth quietly  undergo  their  transitions.  It  is through the  pre-eminent  position of 

man that the powers of Heaven, Earth and Man work together.  Thus,  in 

creating  objects  and  foms,  man  acts  on behalf of heaven.  Now  we have the presence of a grand regent  (yuanfi  2 f % )  w a o  Yan],  a leader of  our 

tirnes,  through  whom the work of Heaven and Earth  is  accomplished and the power of the spirits is focused. You have ended the  turmoil  and restored us to the proper path. You have saved the realm and  brought 

peace  to the people.. ..Although  history  speaks  of how Yi  [Yi 8 P]

defended the  royal  [Shang]  house  and the Duke [of Zhou] gave  wise 

counsel  [to the young Zhou heir], they pale by comparison. Today, we     

> 253 0 n day renyinh

## g ,or  Febniary  5,502 (NQS/1/114/2). The content of  îhese  honours  is stated  in    

> LS/1/15/14.
> 254 On &yjiayin

7 of the  month,  or  February  17,502 (NQSI  II1  14/3) issue this staternent of appointment (ce).  Respectfùlly  heed  Our  royal command: 

Heaven  did not  spare  us,  dthough  it  had bestowed its favour upon the  royal  house.  Emperor Gao  [Xiao  Daocheng]  was  a good and 

enlightened  mler,  but he  died  early.  Emperor Wu [Xiao Ze]  was  Mrtuous 

and  humane  but was followed by an  unworthy  s u c c e s ~ o r . ~ ~ ~ Emperor Ming 

[Xiao  Luan]  restored the  line  of succession, but  his  tirne  upon the throne 

was  short. Though he  toiled  day and  night,  the land did not enjoy supreme peace.  His  heir  was  stupid  and violent, to a degree  unknown  in the historical records. The power of the court and of the throne  was  handed over to  vile  men who struck  d o m  loyal and worthy officiais and executed 

ministers  of the  crown..  ..You  came  forth  in this  tirne  of  darkness  and responded to the  will  of the people. Leading the  army  of  [disaffectedl 

people and officiais, you were instrumental in  restoring  the  realm.  The once precarious ancestral temples are now  secure,  and the  hopes  of heaven and men have been met. You were the one to restore the rent  fabric  of our heritage and  refurbish  the  imperial  house! 

In the  last  years  ofyongming  ijc  jc  [the  reign  penod of Emperor Wu], there were  rnilitary  eruptions  in the border  regions..  . and the  Yangzi 

and Huai  Rivers  were  under  pressure  fiom  [northem] invaders.. . .Y ou accepted the court's command and led a  smdl  force to counter the attacks.. ..You  pacified  the  area  and  returned  the  region  to the realm. This 

was  your [first] feat. In  Xiao  Zhaoye's reign  penod  of  longchmg  f&  8 ,

the throne was in  decline,  and Xiao  Luan  was considering the  fate  of the realm and how to force a succession. You  devised  a principled  strategy to 

displace  the incumbent and enthrone the prince  [Xiao  Luan].  . ..This  is your [second] feat. When Emperor Ming was upon the throne, the  northern 

barbarians harassed the  borders,  and  Sizhou  Region  nsked  fdling  into enemy  hands  at  any  moment. You trained an  army  and led them off against the enemy.. ..Their  captured  soldiers  were  brought  to the  city  gates, and the number of sliced-off  left  ears  [the  victor's  trophy  from  the 

battleground]  were piled as deep as the  sea.  Their weapons were bumed and  their  tents destroyed, so that they pleaded in  tears  to be  aliowed  to 

retum.  This  is  your  [third]  feat. The  area  of  Fan[xiang  $#  a ] and the Kan River was in danger, and  pleas  for reinforcements arrived one  after  the other. You promptly  mobilized  a force and accepted the command to  lead 

them  against  the enemy. But leadership of the  campaign  was not in your 

hands,  and your good plans and sound strategy were  rejected.  In the  baîtle 

at Dengcheng  %&,,  the barbarian  cavairy  suddenly appeared.. ..The 

soldiers  threw  down  their  weapons and the  officers  abandoned  their  men. But you  rallied  the troops who had scattered to the  south..  .,  whipping                                                               

> 255 The translation has omitted the generationai designations which the origiaal uses to d e r to the
> emperoa. These designations do not seem to be correct in this text. Since no Qi emperor is known as
> shUong $,it is ïikely that shizu +Fais intendeci at this point to indicate Emperor Wu, while the
> preoeding shizu isused in error for faim f9, the desigrmion of Emperor Gao.

them into a disciplined  army, and set out on a rapid march back to the 

baîtle-ground.  Thus  you saved the beleaguered  region  and brought  peace 

to the border. This is  vour  [fourth]  feat. The area  south  of the Han  River  

> was

weak  and remote  £+rom Our  capital  but close to a  strong  enemy.  Ihere 

had  always been a shortage of provisions for the  army  and a lack of weapons. When you became  [inspecter  (cishi) of  Yongzhou],  you had 

nothing  to work with, so you trained the soldiers,  making  of them a real 

army, and maintained  order  and discipline in  foraging  and hunting operations.  Thus  you transformed one of our  vulnerable  garrisons  into a

regional  stronghold. This is your  [fifth]  feat . In the  yor~gyuan Ije  iG  reign 

penod  [of Xiao  Baojuan],  the  realm  was  thrown  into disorder. Although the  removal  of  felonious  rulers  is sanctionead in the  historical  canon, people hesitated to play the role of Yi [Yin  -6P  P of the Shang] or Huo [Guang  ip  fi  of the Han, lest they be accused of ambition]. You took the 

lead  with your  visionary  plan and placed a good and enlightened  d e r  upon the  throne..  . .This  is  your  [sixth]  feat. Although the culture of our  ancient 

kings  held  sway in the  Yangzi  and Han river  regions  [under  your control], the capital had fallen into  anarchy.. . .You  quickly launched an expedition of ten thousand  li  to save the  drowning  state. Where the voice of 

righteousness  was  heard,  no man dared transgress against the  kingly  way. This is your [seventh] feat. At Fort  Lu[shan]  *&  & *and  Xia[kou  X 

> O

## 1, in the  rniddle  reaches of the  Yangzi,  there was stubbom 

resistance.. .. You took the masses of troops in hand and  tumed  the lay of the land to your advantage.. ..Our troops were on the march for a long 

time,  but there was no  desire  to turn back. You gave them a plan for the long  term  and a strategy for the long haul. You expended justly on the  nght 

armaments  and were  never  short of weapons in battle. You marched  boldly 

against the mountain stronghold of Hua  O and were victonous  against  the enemy. This is your  [eighth]  feat. The  recalcitrant  knaves worked in collusion.  Using  the  natural  defenses of the  Yangzi,  they  swarmed  around 

Jiahu  a [east of Fort  Lushan].  Land and naval forces [of the  wrongfûl 

emperor] had  entrenched  themselves and intended to  provide  assistance at Xiashou  X X [south  of  Fort  Lushan].  But as the  banners  were  unfirled 

and the  wardrums  &st  sounded, they broke in  confusion.  This is your 

[ninth]  feat.  These  treacherous rogues were consumed with  fear  and once 

again  took up their weapons.. .. But with  just  a small  force, you brought the  region  to its  knees.  This is your [tenth] feat. Gushu  +#% is a  strategic 

stronghold close to the capital, and the rebels  gathered  there,  arrogantly 

blocking  all  approaches by land and water. You led a detachment that you placed in one  battle  formation  after  another. Cowed by your  mi&  they torched  their  boats and abandoned  their  fort.. ..This is your [eleventh] feat. The Little men about the emperor were  defiant  and  ready  to  fight  to the  last. 

They  scunied  around the  banks  of the  Qinhuai  [that  flows  through  the 

imperhl  capital],  p u t h g  in place a huge army of footsoldiers and 

cavahymen.  But you,  displaying  great courage,  rushed  to the attack. Greater  was the fighting spirit of your forces  than  [even that displayed by the  contendhg  armies  of the Yellow  j@= +and  Yan  & ernperors at the battle  of]  Zanquan  & a. More indomitable  was  the force of your army 

than  [that of King Wu  t:when he attacked the tyrant Zhou  JY  at] River  Huan  S *. ...  .[A mountain of weapons was  seized  from  the battle-field when Emperor  Guangwu  of the Eastem Han defeated the Yellow Turban hordes at the  battie  ofl  Xiong'er  ,&  Mountain,  but even to compare  his  triumph with yours would not  suffice  to  depict  the magnitude of your  victory.  In the battle at River Sui  i#k  *, [where  Xiang  Yu  JR  a

destroyed the army of Liu Bang  @J  e, the  river  was  so choked with 

corpses  that] the water stopped flowing, but how could even that compare to your decimation of the enemy? This is your  [twelfih]  feat. Forts  Langye 

and Shitou [on the western  side  of the capital] were protected by  natural 

features while Forts Xinting [to the southwest] and the Eastern  Citadel  [on the southeastem  side]  were invulnerable  strongholds.  With ample  soldiers 

and supplies, they hunkered  down  in their defensive positions. However, you launched your  lightning-swift  attacks  upon thern and they  yielded  in 

feu.  The restoration of the defenses of the  city  lay in this. This  is  your [thirteenth] feat. The unpopular emperor, of a stupid and brutal  nature, 

thought  himself  secure  in  his  palace. When the roll of the wardrums was 

heard,  he  was  smug and cornplacent.. . .You  secretly devised a  remarkable 

and  farsighted  plan that was  carried  out by bold and loyal followers. 

Although  King Wu led the righteous army  under  the white flag and  stnick 

down the tyrant Zhou in the  Chamber  of Pronouncements  (Xuan  Shi  &

# r), his  action pales in cornparison. This  is  your [fourteenth] feat. You distinguished yourself in  saving  the people, holding  fim  to 

enlightenrnent  and  Wtue.  In the  beginning  you were  detedned  to follow in the  Confician  way  ( m e n  aI l  ). You came to public office pure and detached and  brought  light  to your times with your  high  and  lofty  thinking. 

The  realm  fel  upon difficult times and the ancestral altars were in danger.. . . You drove away the  wild  beasts, and  under  the thundering 

rnight  of your army you suppressed the evil and elevated the good. Your nghteousness  was  equd  [to that of Chengtang  &,  who  exiled  the tyrant Jie  *, the last emperor of the Xia to] Nanchao  $J R,  and your feat matched [that of King Wu  fi  &, Z who battled the tyrant Zhou  &f,  the last 

evil  emperor of the Shang, at] Muye  ;14r  4.  .. . -256 

Continuing  in this  vein,  the emperor laments that  Xiao  Yan's service had  surpassed 

that of  ancient  heroes  while  his  rewards  were less  than  those  of  great  men of the past. 

Thus  in recognition of what he had  done,  the  imperial  will  was  to elevate  hirn  to the positions of  Counsellor-in-Chief  (m'angguo), a title  more  prestigious  than  that of prime            

> 256 This portion of the ce is found in LSI 11 1714

# - 191 1 1. minister,  and Pastoral Governor (mu) of Yangzhou, a title more  prestigious  than  that of 

regional  inspecter  (CM) which he already held.  Military  control of Yangzhou was of course crucial  since  this  was  the seat of the capital of  Jiankang  itself.  Most  importantly, 

Xiao  Yan  was  enfeoffed  as Duke of Liang, with ten commanderies  (jm), including that of Liang in  Yuzhou.  Since  Yan  was already Duke of  Jian'an,  the  sigruficance  was  in the expansion of the duchy to a ten-commandery fief  (guo)  with a monosyllabic place  name. 

This  could  only  be  done  at the ducal level and had  historical  precedent as a signal that a new royal  house  was in the  making.  The precedent lay in the actions of Sima Rui  prior  to founding the southem  throne  of Jin about  two  centuries  earlier.  Yan  was  sanctioned  to create a body of  officials  dong  impenal  lines  for  his  ten-commandery guo. This  meant  that he  was  being  aliowed  to  take  on an  imperial  image and to  make  of  his  domain  (guo) of Liang a replica  state-in-waiting2j7 

This ce also announced that in keeping with  historical  tradition, a  symbolic  @ of white  earth  wrapped  in white reeds  was  to be  granted  to  Yan  for the  purpose  of 

establishing  the  altars  of  his  domain  which, in actuality, was the new "state3' that would 

supplant  the present  dynasty.  In keeping with  these  new titles, the ducal  seal  and cord as 

well  as the  seal  and cord of pastoral  governor  (mu)of  Yangzhou  were to be bestowed on 

him.  In addition, the  first  to  £ifth golden tiger  tdlies  of the  lefi,  marking  impeïial  authority to  marshall  forces, and the  fkst  to tenth  bamboo  tallies  of the  left,  marking  imperial 

authority to  administer  commanderies,  were to be  given.  As  xiangguo,  a position 

symbolized  by the green  sash  of office,  Yan  would be in  cornrnand  of  aii officialdom and 

his  position would be  above  that of the princes of the  realm.  Thus,  the  tit1e  of Overseer of  

> 257

The ce  sgms  to  commaad  Xiao  Yan  to  create  a body of  officîals  for  his  domain  of Liang in imitation of the  imperial  court,  starting  at the  Ievel  of chengxiang  (counselor-in-chief) and  moving  dowward   

> (LSt 1/2 1/34). However,

a week  later  (day  bingyin,  or  March  1. 502) a s p e d  edict  (zhao)  was  issued                 

> aliowing Xiao Yan to appoint officials to his domain of Liang (Liang guo) foiiowing the pattern of the
> imperial

court  (LS/1/22/10). the  Department  of State  Mairs  (fushangshu) was ended,  being  no longer necessary. As a

fùrther  honour, he was to  Wear  the  yuarryou  cap, traditionally given to princes  0nly.258 

Xiao  Yan  was  also  commanded  in this ce to receive the  Nine  Bestowals (Jiu  Xi), 

histoncaily  necessary  at  this stage of a  powerful  usurper's quest to  take  the throne  if  he wished to be  cloaked  in  al1  the  legitirnizing  paraphemalia of tradition. The  nine  gifts  were therefore more important in their  symbolic  use. In fact,  since  etiquette would  demand  that the intended recipient modestly decline, there was  never  any need to  produce  the  objects 

since  the recipient would have already proceeded to the  next  stage in the "stations" to the throne. The  Nine  Bestowals  are described in largely the  sarne  eulogistic terms applied to 

Xiao  Daocheng at the  same  point in  his  usurpation process  twenty  years  earlier.  

> [l]

You have given  equal  place to the  rites  and the law, thereby 

combining  the power of  virtue  and of  punishment,  and you have applied compassion and  wisdom  to your  judicial  rulings.  We hereby bestow one 

imperid  chariot and one  war  chariot,  drawn  by  two  teams  of four black 

horses.  [2] You have tirelessly attended to agriculture and the economy of the people,  assuring  the forernost position for this basic task, for you have understood that grain is the nation's basic treasure. We hereby bestow a 

ceremonial  robe and cap and a pair of  impervious,  double-soled  vermillion 

shoes. [3] Your  transforming  influence  has  refined  the practices of the land, 

changing  people and their customs and bringing  harmony  and accord to the 

r&.  We hereby bestow a set of suspended  chimes  and gongs and s u rows of  dancers.  [4] Your  virtuous  govenunent  reaches  far  and  wide  and the voice of  righteousness  is heard into the distant corners of the land, so that even the  far-off  knotted-haired  people sing in your praise and  ask  to be 

under  the govemance of your  officials.  We hereby bestow a  vermillion  gate to  dweIi  within.  [ 5 ]  You have promoted the upnght and suppressed the 

compt,  thereby  bringing  order  to the holding of office. You have  quickly 

appointed new men of  ability  and eiicited widespread praise for the  great 

number of  talented  officials.  We hereby bestow an  imer  staircase by  which 

to  make  your  ascent.  [6] You have led  amies  wîth a  calm  and irnposing presence and set an  exarnple  for others to follow. You have overcome 

unexpected  crises and driven the enemy to  oblivion.  We hereby bestow 

three  hundred  stalwart  warriors.  [7] Your power  can  be  likened  to the 

blazing  sun.  Your  intent  was to rid the  realm  of  evil  men, and you have                        

> 258 The cap and green sash are mentioned only in NQSIlIl14I3 4. Ail other information from the ce is
> taken h m LS/1/17/2 to 2IlS.

destroyed the clans of the  tramgressors  and  udinchingly  meted out their due  punishment.  We hereby bestow a hatchet and axe.  [8]  You have crossed the  high  and  misty peaks  of Mount Song and  advanced  to the 

farthest  borders.  you  embrace  dl,  like  the  Sun  and the moon whose  light 

penetrates everywhere. We hereby bestow one red bow with one hundred 

r d  arrows  and ten black bows with one thousand black  arrows.  [9]  Your deep filial respect is  such  as to move the gods. Your reverent observance of the  rites  of  worship  does  not  exhaust  your  sacred  devotion. We hereby bestow a  ceremonid  container of black millet blended with yellow aromatic 

hirmeric  and a  jade-handled  libationary  spoon.259 

As tradition required  three  requests, Xiao  Yan  began by  refusing  al1  the  above 

honours. He  refused  a second time when pressed by  his  officials.  Only when implored 

again  by  his  officials one week  after  the impenal announcement did he finally agree to accept the titles of  Counsellor-in-Chief  (xiangguo  ) and Duke of  Liang.260 

At  this  point there may have been one  Iast  spurt  of opposition  from  the  royal  line he  was  in the process of  supplanting,  for Xiao Baozhi  f a, the oldest son of  Luan's 

younger brother (he may have been in his  early  twenties)  and  his  brothers are  said  to have been executed for plotting treason  (moufun). 2h1  What actually happened is unexplained, but there was obviously no power base strong enough to eradicate  Yan  at this point. Up to this point,  Yan  seems to have been  careful  not  to eradicate any of the royal line other 

than  the former emperor. The  foliowing  month,  Yan  felt  he  could take the final step required to "receive" the 

throne  according  to the  historical  legitimation  procedure. An  imperial  edict  (zhao)  was 

issued  bestowing  an additional ten commanderies to Yan's  dornain  and elevating  him  to           

> 259 The Nine Bestowais appear withui the body of the ce (LSIIROIIO

# - 2 11.2).        

> 260 The acceptane was on day xinyou

Q 3$ of the second  month,  or  Febniary  24,502  (LS11/22/5)           

> According to his biography (NQS131795), Baozhi expected that he would

be  installeci  as emperor once 

his  cousin,  Baojuan,  was  deposed.  The record is  very  vague, but he is said  to have felt that he  had  the support of the people and that  after  Xiao Yan'sarmies  had  descended  on  Jimkang,  a royai  carriage  would    

> be sent to him

as he  waited  in the  palace.  Lnstead,  he  çaw  the  emperor's  head  king  sent to  Yan.  Although  

> he

received  a court  appointment,  he  was  afraid  for  his  life  and  tried  to take action  against  Yan.   

> According to one

source, he  was  exmted  on  day  renxu  +& of the second  month,  or  Febnrary  25,502    

> (NQS/1/114/5). Another source

seems  to  give  the date as  day  xinyou  +$ ,or  Febniary  24  (LS11/21/12  &

> 2216).

the level of  ~ r i n c e . 2 ~ ~ The edict  decl-red  that  thic  was  behg  done  since  Yan  had  stiu  not received  suitable  honours for leading the  carnpaign  from  his  tiny bit of land in the  west  and 

restoring  the  realm  to a state of  wholencss.  Thus,  while the  redm  waited for  Yan  to accept 

ail  of the previous honours, the impenal  will  was  to  take  this  opportunity  to  foliow  the 

wishes  of men  near  and  far  and elevate  him  to the  pnncely  rank.263  Yan  declined  the imperial edict,  refùsed  the entreaties of  his  officiais  but accepted the third  request  which 

came in the form of an imperial  order  (ming)  and in the  wake  of  many  auspicious  signs. 

Two days  later,  the dowager regent awarded  him  with five million cash and five  thousand 

bolts of cloth and one thousand of  silk,  as befitted the new  prince?" 

Since  Xiao  Yan  was now so close to  taking  the throne  "legitimately",  he  needed  to rid  himself  of the last of Xiao  Luan's  five  remaining  sons who still posed a threat  as claimants to the throne (the oldest son, being a  cripple  and therefore with no  mord  claim 

to the  heavenly  mandate,  was  considered harmless to  Yan).  In less  than  a week  after 

becorning  Prince of Liang,  Yan  had succeeded in disposing of four of  these  sons.265  The 

three  youngest, Baoyou  t , Baosong  f 8 and Baozhen  f A , al1  of whom would have been  under  the age of fourteen, are  said  to have been executed or ordered to commit suicide for "plotting  treason"  (moufun).  An older brother,  Baoyin  jt  A (ff),  who  was probably in  his  early  to middle teens and had become  imocently  caught  up in a plot to put 

him  on the throne the  year  before,  managed  to flee northward to seek  asylurn  in the 

> Wei.266

His  immediately  older brother,  Baoyuan  g, is  said  simply  to have died one day      

> 262 Xia0 Yan was granted

an  additional  ten commanderies and made  Prince  of Liang either on  day       

> wuchen of the second month, or

March 3,502  (NQSIl/l11/5),  or on  day  bingxu  of the second  month,  or March 2 1,502  (LS11/23115).  in the latter case, it  should  be  noted  that Xiao  Yan  did  not accept the  title  of prince  until  day  guisi,  or March 28  (LS/1/25/5).     

> 263 LSl1/23/15 to 2412
> 2640n day yiwei

2 of the third  month,  or March 30, 502  (NQS/lIll4/6)  

> 265

On  day  xinyou  +B of the  third  month,  or  April5,  502,      

> 266 NQS/l/l Ml6 and WS/4113 13/10-11

after  the  edict  of abdication was produced and four days before it  actually  h v e d  in 

Jiankang .267 

Xiao  Yan  had  already  been  authxized  as a dute  to establish the  govenunent  of h

domain  (guo)  of Liang on the  lines  of the  impenal  court. Tradition also necessitated that he be  granted  another  set of special honours  (shuli) which  corresponded  to  his  newly 

lis 

acquired  princely  level.  Together, they  symbolized  the acquisition of some of the  irnperial 

dignity  by the  eventual  occupant of the  throne.  This was a tradition set in place by Sima Zhao as he prepared to end the Wei and found the Jin and by Sima Rui as he waited to become a new emperor of the lin  &er  it  had  been reduced to the  temtory  south  of the 

Yangzi  and the  fate  of the  northem  Jin emperor was  still  in  doubt .268 

The  nine  "special  honours"  that Xiao  Yan  was  commanded  to receive  almost 

immediatedly  after  becorning  Prince of Liang were the  ceremonid  cap  with  twelve jade pendants, the number  ody  the emperor could  Wear,  the  nght  to fly the emperor's  fIag,  to have the way  cleared  of  al1  persons  wherever  his  camiage  passed, to ride in the jingen 

("golden- pole")  camage,  drawn  by six  horses  and  accornpanied  by five  paired  sets of 

variously  coloured  carriages  of imperial  camiages  in five different  colours  (wushifuche  n

## # to fly the imperial yak-head  cloud  pennants, and to  enjoy  the  imperid  eight-row troupe of  dancers  and the exclusively imperial arrangement of suspended  chimes.  269  In the  

> 267

He is  said  to have  died  on  day  dingsi  T E of the  third  month,  or on  Aprii  21,502  (NQS/lIlI4/10)  

> 268

The  term  guo  seems  to  encompass  the concept of  both  fief and the  entire  royal  realm.  Since  the future 

firsî  emperors  of a succeeding  dynasty  were  entitled  to  create an officialdom in  their  guo  that  was 

pattemexi  on the royal court and were  personally  granted  honours  that  only  the emperor could enjoy, this 

would  seem  to  i q l y  that the  guo  was  being  prepared as a microcosm  of the future  reah.  Hence,  the term  

> guo

came to  be  extended  to  embrace  the  state  founded  by the  enfeoffed  family.  This is  ahady  suggested  as 

eariy  as the Jin in the phrase  m a d e  guo  xing  & a a(Sima is the  sumame  of  [those  who hold the]  

> gto

[of  lin])  (JS/1/269/14).  It  couid  weU  be  argueci  that,  since  the Sima  family  was  h d y holding  power 

at the  time  of this  quotation,  the word  guo  had  taken  on a more  general  sense  of the royal  realm  and is  not  

> restricted

at  ail  to the  sense  of the fief of Jin.  

> 269

The  actual  date is  Wear.  According  to  the Liang  Shu,  it  was  on  day  bingwu  6+of the  third  month, 

or  April  10,502, about  twelve  days  after  his  acceptance  of the title of Prince of Liang  &S/1/25/10). 

However,  in the  Nan  Qi  Shu,  this  happened  on  day j i m u  FB  + ,or  March  29,502, the  day  immediately 

following  his  acceptance  of the princely  title  (NQSI 11 1148). 1- two,  he  was  surpassing  the degree of honour of the  Nine  Gifts  where the  dancers  and instruments were offered at the ducal  level. 

Xiao  Yan  had now met  ail  the  historical  and  canonical  conditions  sanctionhg  his 

accession to the  throne.  Hence, in the third  month  the  fourteen-year-old  emperor announced  his  abdication and the passing of the  throne  to the Prince of Liang. The emperor had arrived at Gushu  fiom  Jingling  only  six days earlier, and  Yan  had no  desire  to complicate matters by  having  him  continue to the  capital.270 If' the emperor had abdicated soon  d e r  taking  the throne in  Jiankang,  this  might  have looked more  like  an  unwihg 

dethronement, whereas an announcement  fiom  Gushu would  symbolize  the emperor's humble acknowledgement that the throne in Jiankang had  already  passed  fiom  the Qi into the  rightfùi  hands of the  House  of Liang and there was no moral  right  for  hjs  physical presence there. The edict  (zhao)  explains  the reasons for this abdication. The five forces wax and  wane.  The dynasties nse and  fall.  A d e r 

must be a man of  wisdom  (xian  R ),  and a king  shall  be a sage  (sheng  B). 

This is how the  imperial  giory  is renewed and the  kingly  brilliance  restored. To reject  darkness  and seek the  light  is an  age-old  pnnciple. The  strength 

of Qi  has  declined, and dangers beset the country. In the  Iongchung  a

penod, [the emperor, Xiao Zhaoye] was brutal and despotic and 

transgressed  against heaven and  earth.  In the  yongyum  & reign  period, [the emperor, Xiao  Baojuan]  was of a stupid and violent nature and  threw 

the world of men and spirits into a state of confusion.. . .It  was  clear  for  al1 

to see that the throne of  Our  ancestors, Emperor Gao and Emperor Ming, 

was  on the verge of coilapse.. . .

The Prince of Liang,  Our  Counsellor-in-Chief  (ximgguo),  . .. has ended the chaos of the land and relieved the people of their  suffering.  He 

has  been the prop  under  the  collapsing  building and the rescuer in the 

raging  torrent.. ..The  entire  world is imbued  with  his  teachings,  and the whole population  is  ready to accept  his  rule..  . .The  physical  portents..  .

point  to  a change of mandate  (geming)  while  the books of divination  speak 

of the end of an era.. ..In  the past, when the power of water  [governhg  the fortunes of the Song]  languished,  the  element  of wood rose to  take  its place [and  govem  the fortunes of the  Qi].  .. .              

> 270 It wouid seem that the imperial m a g e had reached Gushu by day g e n p

## fi  & ,or  April  14,502   

> (NQS/ 111 149).

The  edict  (zhao) of abdication  was  issued  on  day  bingchen  a of the  third  month,  or  

> April20,502 (NQS/1/114/10).

Though  1 am without  wisdom  or knowledge,  1 understand the basic principle  (ukuho  kir). 1 have  seen  for a long time that the  dynasty  has 

reached its end. How could  I forget the nghteousness of ages past or the 

will  of  meil  and gods? Today,  then,  1 solemnly  relinquish  the throne to the Liang  whde  I retire to  Gushu  [to the  West  of  Jiankang],  following the precedent of  Yaû  [who abdicated to] Shun and the Jin [dynasty which 

abdicated  to the] Song.  271 

Five days  later  Empress  Dowager Xuande issued an  order  (hg) stating that  since 

the edict of abdication had been received and the emperor was following time-honoured historical precedents in  yielding  the holy vessels of the Qi to the Liang,  officials  should  be sent to Xiao  Yan  to confer on  him  the  impenal  seal  while  she herself retired to another palace.  272 

The  next  day the traditionai statement of appointment (ce), a type of  "enabling 

document" for the edict,  was  issued.2'3  It  was important in  restating  long  historical 

precedents for  sudden  dynastic  changes and  proving  Xiao  Yan's  rightful  place in the 

ongoing  cycle of change. To the  Prince  of Liang: .. .From  ancient  times, when  Shemong 

# &,  Xuanyuan  fF  # , Emperor  Yan  ji  and Shao Hao  9 L):first  ruled  and Yao and Shun occupied the throne, not one  failed  to  reign  according to the precepts of the Great Way  (dadao  4) and treat their dominion over the 

eight  directions as an  authority  exercized in  trust  [lit., "public instrument" 

(gongqi  "z:  )]. They took the throne as  gingerly  as they would seize a

rotting  rope and let go of it as gladly as they would a  heavy  burden.. ..

They understood that the  purpose  of being an emperor and  wearing  the jade  seal  of office was not to  display  status  or demand deference and that the  imperial  chariots and  banners  were  only  outward  trappings  to  give  the people a point of  focus.  Thus,  they  forgot  about themselves and  chenshed 

the people. They  ignored  their  own  interests and  pleasures  and  ruled  all 

within  the four  seas..  .. Thus  it was that when the Zhou came to an end 

d e r  four hundred  years,  the Han  [ k t  modestly  sought  to]  decline  [the proffered throne], and when the  vigour  of the  yellow  [eartkthe  force by which the Han  had  r ~ i e d 1 2 ~ ~ declined, the throne was gladly  yielded  to the Wei. The  Jin and Song in  turn  followed  this  tradition. Our  ancestor,   

> 271 LS/l/25/13

# - 2619 

On  &y  xinyou  f Bof  the  fourth  month,  or  April25,502  (LS/1/26/10). 

On  day  r e m  &,  or  A p d  26,502  (LSIlR6I11).        

> 274 Oûviously aliterary anachronism, for the

Han  had  switched  f?om  yeîiow  earth  to the  elelment  of  fire 

as  its  symbol. [Emperor  Gao, Xiao Daocheng] received the throne whose strength had been  exhausted.  The  first  two  generations of  rulers  restored  glory  to the throne, and the  three  sage  rulers  maintained the proper path. However, the 

heir  tumed  against  virtue  and destroyed the  legal  and moral codes.. ..The 

imperial  temples were at  risk,  and men and gods were  lefl  without  a true 

d e r . 

The  tme  king  (wmg  E ) embodies heavenly wisdom and  manifests 

sagely  enlightenment  .. ..In the time of turmoil and distress, you took up 

arms and saved the people  fkom  their  suffenngs.. ..Men and gods have set their  heart  on you, and  al1  their  praises  are for you.. ..In the day, stars are observed that are more  brilliant  than  the sun. At  Nght,  cornets  hurtle 

through  the heavens. Satum fades as the  sky  is  filled  with  light.  The sun is 

eclipsed,  and the stars  tum  dark.  Signs  of the passing of the old are  making 

themselves visible.  Portents  of a change of  dynastic  name  (gengxig  *) 

are  coming  together.. ..The throne  c a ~ o t be held  forever,  and the emperor is not  always  ofthe  same  farnily.  Today, having  looked  above  to the gods of heaven and considered  below  the  wishes  of men,  1 solemniy  abdicate the sacred throne  (shenqi  # a) and  yield  to you the  imperhl  position. The 

blesshg  of the throne has  corne  to an end.  Heaven's  grace is ended  forever. 

Alas!.  .. 275 

The ce was  immediately  followed by the Writ of the  Imperia1  Seal  (xi  shu  +). 

Life is the great  attribute  ( M e  & )of heaven and earth, and 

"man" is the  common  designation for this receptacle of  life.  With a common source and a cornmon  fount, how could there be  any  distinctions? Man is imbued  with  a mind  and  creativity,  but  individuals  differ in wisdom and  stupidity.  His nature  is  based on the five  pnnciples,  but in some they are  strong  and in others  weak,  so that the differences  lead  to  disharmony. 

People have  dserent  power and compete and  contend.  Thus  mlers  and 

elders  were  established  to govem and shepherd the people.  Never  was  the intention to place the proud and  powefil  at the top to treat the world as their  private  preserve.  Ruling  houses  would be replaced, and the power of the five elements would  alternate  in  tum.  . . .In ancient  times  Yao and Shun understood this  principle,  and each  sought  a wise  and  enlightened  man in whom to  entmst  the  d e r ' s  power. Shun presented the  throne  to [Yu, the founder of the] Xia, for  his  heart  was  attentive to the people.  When  the Yin

[which  had succeeded the Xia] was transformed  into  the Zhou, the Zhou was in  fact  receiving  the mandate  (shol(ming) from  heaven  above.  Neither the Han nor the Wei  failed  to  follow  this  example,  and  the  Jin and Song too observed  this  tradition. The reason Emperor Gao [the founder of our 

House  of Qi] took the throne that was presented to  him  was  that he  stood 

in  fear  of heaven and  fdithfully  respected the state of  heaven's  grace upon the  r&.  In the  Qi's  later  years,  though,  strife  and  disorder  rose  again;  the kingiy  way of  nile  was  shattered, and  pemicious  men were doing  their  evil 

in court. . . .

The  tme  king (wang  X ) takes  heaven as its  highest  model, 

s~engthens the principles of govemance,  moulds  the realm and  transfomis 

creation.. ..The  realrn  was  shaken,  and you  proclairned  the  campaign  of the 

righteous  army  ( j d u  *) to save the  troubled  throne  (qimumg  3). 

With  banners  wavhg,  the  amies  set out on their long march.  Reaching  the capital, they destroyed the evil men at the  heart  of the court. Your  virtue  is 

unpardeled  in the past, and your feats  unequailed.You  saved the realm 

from  its troubles and restored the  glory  of the  kingly  way. You  cared  for the people and governed the four directions of the  realm.  You promoted 

just  officials to be  exarnples  to the unjust and applied your  commands 

equally  throughout  the land. You worked as [tirelessly as Cheng Tang  &, 

# s, founder of the Yin, foregoing sleep as]  though  waiting for the  dawn. 

More assiduous were you  than  King Wen  [father  of the founder of the Zhou], who would not eat, even though the  Sun  had long  since  set.  Civility 

and harmony  retumed  to the land, and rites and music  flourished  once 

again.  You gave  amnesty  to the wrongdoers and needed no executions to inspire awe and respect. Your  august  h u e  shines  to the heavens, and your supreme  righteousness  moves the gods.. .. Wherever the  ancient  teachings 

have  spread  and  Our  books and vehicles  can  penetrate, the people have 

changed  their ways and  praise  the blessings of your virtue.. ..The  signs  of a new  aart  are  clear  to see, and the indications of an end to former  things  are 

easily  observed. In addition, you have a royal  visage and  bearing,  Iike  that of Yao or the Yellow Emperor.. .. . ..Ln  the past, when the  nile  of water had weakened, the  vimie  of wood rose to succeed it .. ..In the past, when the element of water was exhausted, our  impenal  ancestor  (taizu ;k a) [Xiao Daocheng] received the  cornmand  (ming  4fr)  to replace that  which  had ended. Today, the 

blessing  of heaven  (tianiu  ) is  lost  to us, and we too, with the  spent 

power of wood, pass on the throne to the Liang.  1 have enquired  into  the ancient canons and  examined  the precedents of recent times. Let  none  of the officials of the realm, either  near  or  far,  disobey my  wiii.  Today  1

send. .. [the  high  officials] Wang Liang  Z 8 and. . .Wang  Zhi  Z ,& to 

present  the  impenal  seal  and  cord.  The ceremony of abdication  shall  foilow 

the precedent set by Yao and Shun. . ..May you ascend the throne. .. in 

accordance  wit h Heaven'  s most  excellent  command.276 

As tradition required that Xiao  Yan  not accept before the  third  request,  he 

subrnitted  a petition  (biao)  refusing  the  throne.  The  abdicating  emperor  refbsed  to accept 

this  and 819 Qi  officers  and 117 officials  fkom  the Liang  domain  presented Xiao  Yan  with 

a petition  imploring  hlln  to accept.  >Gao  Yan  protested a second  tirne.  Finaily,  af'ter  the Grand  Astrologer  presented  sixty-four  clear  and obvious signs of  Heaven's  will, the 

officiais  pressed  him  once  again.  On  this  third  occasion, Xiao Yan did accept the Five days  later,  Xiao  Yan  fomally  took the throne in a ceremony in the southem 

suburb.278  Sacnficing  black oxen on an  altar  of fire, he humbly addressed  hirnself  to the Emperor of Heaven  (f X W ) as "your  imperid  servant Yan  @zmngdi  chen  Y m 

% .Hi)",  in a report (lei ) that  was  just as  much  a sermon  to the  reaim  as a  declaration 

to heaven, for  his  chief argument  is  that he had acted legitimately and in good conscience, in accordance with the will of Heaven and the  desires  of men. 

. . . The  House  of Qi had  come  to the end of its time..  .and  passed on the mandate  (ming)  to me. . . .Heaven7s mandate ( t i m i n g )  is  not for eternity, and emperors  cannot  be  always  of the  sarne  family  (yim  -&). 

When Yao renounced his throne, it was accepted by Shun. When the Han 

declined,  the Wei rose in its  wake.  The Jin and Song in  turn  took their 

mode1  fiom  the  past.  In  ali  cases, they dominated the land  within  the four 

seas  by their  virtue  as  rulers  and served the realm by  numiring  the people.. ..The Qi dynasty  fell  on evil times, for its  d e r  appointed the unworthy and depraved into  high  positions,  allowing  them to to commit  al1 

maner of  evil  and violence, so that  suffering  was  inflicted  on every part of the land, the people were  crying  out in pain, and the throne  was  on the verge of tottenng into a deep ravine.. . .I  quickly  launched a  ten-thousand-li 

expedition,  spumng  rnyself  to forget a life  fiee  from  public  cares  and 

thinking  with  concem about  saving  the people.. ..The enemy was overcome, a new  d e r  was put in place, and the time of chaos and confusion  was  ended. However, with the passing of time,  I played a  real 

part in  goveniing  the land and  aiding  the people.  Furthemore,  auspicious signs appeared in remote  regions  at  any time of day or  night  while  heavenly 

portents  were observed in the capital and its environs every day of the 

month.  The  symbols  of an end to the dynasty and a new replacement were 

evident..  ..Thereupon,  the  officials  and  wonhies  of the  realm  stated  their 

loyal  adherence to me. With the signs of heaven's  bestowal  of the mandate as  weii,  it  was  diflicult  for me to refuse. The Qi emperor discarded the realm as  willingly  as an old shoe and passed to me the sacred throne 

(shenqi  ).  1 was  aware  of my  lack  of  virtue  but my protestations were not accepted. Heaven and man continued to press me.  Reaiizing  that a             

> LS/1/29/ 15
> 278 On day bingyin 3of the fourth month, or April30, 502 (LS/l/33/1).

throne  cannot  be  left  empty  and the world of men and spirits cannot be 

without  a d e r ,  1 had no choice but to accept.. . Therefore  this auspicious day  has  been  chosen  for a solemn  ceremony. An  altar  kas  been  built  by which to accept the abdication and report to the god of heaven  (gao  lei 

s h g d i  8 ), ...May heaven  give  its constant protection to the 

House  of Liang. .. .279 

After  the ceremony, Xiao  Yan  went by imperial  carriage  to the Fore-Temple of the 

Ultirnate  (Taiji  Qiandian) in the  Jiankang  palace to present to the ultimate source of creation an imperial statement  (h) reiterating  his  recognition of the  principle  of change by which the  House  of  Qi  had abdicated to the Liang in deference to the  will  of Heaven as 

manifested  in  multitudinous  signs and indications. The  narne  year  was  changed  to  timjim 

(the  s u p e ~ s i o n of Heaven) which by itself was probably intended to imply that 

human  machinations had no part in the establishment of the new  order.  In recognition of the new  beginning,  an  arnnesty  was  declared,  civilian  and  military  ranks were raised, grain  

> was

to be  distributed  to  widows  and  orphans,  and debts were  foregiven.280 

The  next  day the former emperor was granted the title of Prince of  Baling  C!, & 3, 

with  al1  the resources of this one  commandery  at  his  disposal, and permitted to reside at the palace  at  Gushu,  preserving  the Qi rites and music, its  calendar,  and the Qi imperial flags,  carriages  and  i n ~ i g n i a ~ ~ l Al1  aristocratie  ranks granted by the  Qi  were reduced, with the exception of that of Prince of  Ruyin  I.  whose line  was  the appointed  heir  of the 

House  of  Song.282  In  order  to honour the new Liang imperial  line,  Yan  gave the title of Emperor Wen  ft  f +,  the Grand  Progenitor  (tazm  a) to  his  father.283  The  following 

day, in what must have been  seen  as a syrnbolic close to the royal  House  of Qi, the last Qi emperor "died" in Gushu  at  the age of  fourteen  and was  given  the posthumous title of Emperor He  f 9(''the  Conciliatory").2"  Three  days  later,  the title of Prince of  Baling   

> 279 LSl113311

# - 3415       

> 280 The zhao appears in LSl1/34/6

# -13     

> 281 On day dingmuo

7@ ,or May 1, 502  (NQS/ 11 1 l=t/  12)   

> 282 LS/1/3512.

This  had  been the title  given  to the  last  Song emperor  aiter  Xiao  Daocheng  became          

> emperor of the Qi (SS/11199112). See also NQS/1/35/6.
> 283 LS/1/35/5
> 284

On  &y  wchen  fil$  ,or May 2, 502, at the  age  of  15  sui  (NQS/1/1  14/12 and  LS/1/36/3). was transferred  to Xiao Baoyi, the oldest son of  Luan  who had  suMved  because  of  his 

crippling  ailment  which excluded  him  fiom  any  mord  daim  to the throne. Baoyi,  then,  was 

made  heir  to the  House  of Qi,  thus  becoming  the  first  in  this  iine  of  princes  to serve the Qi 

a n c e ~ t o r s . ~ ~ ~ 

Xiao  Yan  was now securely on the throne.  Known  by his posthumous title of 

Emperor  Wu (or Liang  Wudi  4ft &, +), he was to reign for more  than  forty-five years. 

M e r  his  death  amidst  the chaos of the Hou Jing  rebellion,  the royal  family  was  never  able to  re-assert  its control over the central government and  within  a few short years  was 

swept  away b y anot her  regime .            

> 285 The appointment was made on day ximveiQ ,or May 5' 502 (LS/L/37/5).

CHAPTER  IV 

THE  XIA0  F A i Y  AND  THE LIANG  DYNASTY  (502 - 557) 

As  can  be observed  from  Table 5, the  history  of the Liang  is  largely  the  history  of 

its founder, Emperor Wu.  His  death,  after  forty-sevm  years  on the throne,  was  directly 

caused by the rebel Hou Jing, whose  rebellion  not  only  ruined  the land but  hastened  the destruction of the  royal  Xiao  family. 

Table  5 Rulers of the  House  of Liang (the  Xiao  Family) 

Emperors  Excluded  fiom  Annals  Historically  Accepted  Historically  Excoriated 

(benji)  M o n  of Liang Shu  Legitimate  Line  Usurper 

# 4 .1  3.  

> (1)

yan  4fr

Emperor Wu  &i & & #

d. June 12,549 

Zhengde  iï  a

Dec.  17,548  - Apr. 27,549  

> (2)

Gang  m

Emperor Jianwen 

h$rnrt&* 

r.  Iuiy  7,549 - Oct.  2, 55  1

killed  Nov. 9, 55  1

Dong  ;Qit 

55  1-552  

> appointed

by  Hou Jing to  take 

throne  at  Jiankang 

Ji  4~ 

deciared  himself  emperor in Chengdu May 16,552  - Aug. 5,553 

y-g  a  

> Aug. 30,555

# - W. 27,555 at  Jiankang 

Hou Jing  3

Emperor of the Han 

Jan. 1, 552  - Apr. 28, 552 

(3)  Yi ra(c 

Emperor Yuan 

# **#a** 

r.  Dec. 23, 552 - Jan. 27, 555 at  Jiangling  & &

(4) Fan@  * 8

Emperor  Jing  &

r.  Oct.  21  (Nov.  21),  555  -

Nov. 22,557  

> at Jiankang

(1) Xiao  Yan's  Claim  to the Throne 

Yan's  own  justification for establishing the new Liang  throne  appears in the record of a conversation he had  with  grandsons of the Qi founder  whom  he was  welcorning  into 

the  fold  of the new  regirne.  In it he absolved  himself  of  any  responsibiiity  fer  engineering an end to the Qi. The fact that he now occupied the throne as the founder of a new 

dynasty  was attributable to the play of circumstances, the  will  of Heaven, and no man could work against destiny. The action he had  taken  against members of the  royal  family 

was  solely  a righteous  desire  to avenge the deaths of  his  brothers. The text of  his 

discussion, as it appears in the Liang  S h ,  follows: 

There is a matter  1 wish  to  speak  about to ail of you. The  most 

precious treasure  under  Heaven  is  the instrument of authority, but this  is 

not something  which  can  be gained by  striving.  If the time is not ordained, even one as  mighty  as  Xiang  Ji  a ;a)  [=Xiang  Yu  4% ] can  oniy  fail  in the end. Hence, Ban Biao  $E  &,  in  his  "On the  Destiny  of  Kings"  (Wangming 

Lun  X 48  $&  )says,  "Their  desires  go no  nirther  than  a few coins, and yet they die and end  tumbled  in a ditch."'  You  must  certainly  have read this work. Emperor  Xiaowu  à &of  the Song [Liu Jun  # J & ]  was of a suspicious and jealous temperarnent. Should one of  his  brothers enjoy the 

slightest  honour or attention in society, he would be ordered poisoned on some  pretext.  Only  p i u  Ziye  @J  -f  X ] survived. As for the  officiais  of the court, one  after  another was murdered, out of suspicion that the mandate of Heaven  rnight  be  theirs.  Yet there are  those  who escape being put to death  though  they are suspected of being Heaven's appointed, and  those 

whom one  does  not even suspect of being the recipient of the  heavenly 

mandate  (tianrnzng  48).  Even if your grandfather [Xiao Daocheng] had been suspected at the  tirne,  nothing  could have been  done  about it. This is what  1mean  by suspicions  that  miss their  target.  Then,  too, there are  those 

who are not suspected,  such  as Emperor Ming of the Song  p i u  Yuh  #J  a] 

who, being of  only  mediocre  ability,  escaped death. Ifhe  had  been 

The point of the sentence is  clarified  by  referrhg  to  what  foîiows  in the original text:  "Sin  tbis  way   

> even poverty

and  misery  are  meted  out by  destiny,  how  much  more  so  the honor of the  h n e ,  the  riches                   

> of aii within the four seas, and the blessing of the gods. How could one recklessly try to arrogate to oneself

such  a position?  Tme,  there are some who, happening  upon  an age of trouble and  perii,  by  bmery,  Like 

Han  Hsin  and Chi Pu;  by  their  powerfiil  situation,  iike  Hsiang  YU  and  his  uncle,  Hsiang  Liang; or  by  luck.  

> like

Wang  Mang  manage to seize  authority  for a  tirne.  Yet  aii  rnust  end  cast  into  the  caulhn  or  bowed               

> beneath the stroke of the ax, boiled alive, or struck down and quartered" From

W m  Theodore  De  Bary,     

> Wing-Tsit Chan, and Chester

Tan, eds.,  Sources  of Chinese  Tradition (New York: Columbia University           

> Press, 196û), vol. 1, 178. The Chinese t e s appears in HS/12/42074209.

suspected, how could he have survived? At the time  I was only  two  years 

old. How could he have  known  where  1 would be today? If a person  is 

known  to hold the mandate of  Heaven,  he  ~annot be destroyed by the  hand 

of man, and even if he is destroyed, no-one  elss  can  obtain  it.  When  I fvst 

subdued  Jiankang,  1 was advised by people both  within  and  without  thc 

court who  said,  "A new era is  beginning  and the  loyalties  of the people need to be focused, so  it  is  proper to  order  executions."  K I  had followed 

their  words at the time, who could have objected?  Since  the  throne  first moved to the  region  south  of the  Yangzi,  the cycle of change  has  occurred 

only  by men  murdering  one other. This  has  injured the  spirit  of  harmony 

and caused the dynasties to be short-lived. "The Yin  & need not look  far 

for a waming; it lies in its precedessor, the Xia  % ."  This  is  the first point  1

wish to  make. 

The second point is that even though we  Say  that there  has  been a change of dynasties  from  the  Qi  to the Liang,  it  differs  in  significance  fiom 

the past.  Although  we are  two  generations removed  from  a common 

relative for whom we would go into  official  mourning,  Our  blood relationship is  really  not so distant. Do not  Say  that only brothers are close, for there are brothers who have close dealings and others who have  none. 

1s  this not as  much  the case  among  those  within  the five degrees of  official 

mourning  relationship? At the  beginning  of the Qi,  I shared in both the 

hardships  and rewards and was treated as an intimate. You were young 

then  and would of course not have been  aware  of this.  1 feel as close to you as though we were of the  same  family. How could  1 fail  to  think  back to this and treat you as passing strangers? This  is  my second point. 

> 1

am not here today  because  1 deliberately  sought  to  achieve  this. In the  jiamvu  $&, era,  [Emperor Ming  (Xiao  Luan)]  wiped  out your  line, 

plunging  you into  adversity.  When  1 raised  troops in righteous  rebeliion,  it was not just to eradicate the shame upon the  family  but also to take vengeance for your sakes.  If,  in the j i m  and  yongyuan  Q R eras [of emperor Ming], you had been able to restore  order,  then  even though  1 had 

taken  up  arms  in  Fan[xiang]  111. Il  and  Deng[cheng]  %$  ,how could  1

have  done  other  than  to lay  down  my  weapons and advocate my support for you? Even if  I had had no wish to abandon my plans,  1 would  stiil  have had no moral justification for the  military  expedition. Today  1 have avenged you, and the times have revolved.  1 expect you to serve me in complete 

loyalty.  1 should  Say  too that, by acting in the chaos of the  time,  1 replaced Emperor Ming's family in  ruling  the realm. In no way did  1take the realm away  fiom  your  family.  In  ancient  times,  when Liu  Ziyu  fiJ  -f  Rclairned  to be the son of Emperor Cheng  & Q [of the Western Han], Emperor 

Guangwu  &, [est  emperor of the succeeding Eastern Han]  said,  "Even 

ifEmperor  Cheng were to  corne  back to  Me,  the  realm  could not be  his 

again.  How  much  more so for Ziyu!"  When  the  [principality  ofl  Liang  was 

first  established,  I was  advised  to execute you, but  1answered that  today's 

situation  was  just  Wre  what we saw at the  tirne  of Emperor  Xiaowu.  If another  person  holds the mandate of  Heaven,  1 will  not be able to destroy 

hirn,  and  ifthe  throne  is  not ordained for  him,  why do  1 need to commit this 

act  and oniy show that  1 have no generosity or  liberality  of  spirit.  Cao  Ziii 

# # ,& was  the direct  grandson  of Emperor Wu of Wei and the son of Prince Si of  Chen  , but he  served  Emperor Wu of Jin [Sima  Yan  6 5 ]

and  was  a loyal  minister  to the  House  of Jin. This  is  an  example  for you. You are of the  imperiai  family,  so  my  feelings towards you differ  from 

those  1 hold towards others. That is why  1 am stating  rny  expectations of you so  fiankly.  You no longer need to  think  of yourselves as outsiders. 

Wait  a little  and you  will  understand my  mind  on  t h i ~ . ~ 

It  is on the basis of  his  protection of  these  grandsons of the  Qi  founder that Xiao 

Yan  is credited in the  histoncal  record for  showing  greater vision and tolerance  than  the founders of any of the previous southem dynasties. The assertion is made and defended in an  assessrnent  by Yao Cha, the  histotian  who  began  the  writing  of the Liang history. 

These  grandsons are identified as Zike  +& and  his  younger brothers whose father, Yi 

## &,  was the second son of Xiao Daocheng. 

History  shows that the Han regime was destroyed by the Wei 

through  force of  arms  while the Wei in  tum  was displaced by the Jin through the manoeuvres of  rninisterial  officials.  In this they did not  foliow 

the  ancient  practice of  freely  yielding  the throne to a worthy successor and 

passing  on power to men of  virtue.  Thus  they suppressed the royal descendants of the  earlier  regime  so  that the people would have no-one in whom to hope for a restoration. Nonetheless, [the Han  official,]Liu  Ye# 

# #,  and [the Wei  official,]  Cao  Zhi  $) ,&  , still  enjoyed  prorninence in the Wei and  Ji  courts respectively.  Under  the Song, however, their  families 

were  neglected,  while  under  the Qi the  members  of the  imperial  Song 

f d y  were completely destroyed. Perhaps the shortness of the Qi  regime 

was caused by this. The Liang did not  follow  this  practice in  establishing  its new dynasty. Hence, [Xiao] Zike  I f f  Q P and  his  brothers as well as  al1 

their entourage, were appointed to office according to their  abilities.  Their 

careers  were as  successfbl  as when their  family  was in power and they could be found in positions  throughout  the court. In what way could one  

> say

this  was  nothing  more  than  if the Jin were to have promoted to prominence someone who had been in obscurity  under  the  preceding  Wei regime?  Thus,  the worthy man  sees  that the generosity of  spirit  of Emperor Wu [Xiao  Yan]  exceeded that of  al1  preceding  regimesm3 

Yao Cha,  however,  may have been  tailoring  facts to create a  sobering  and  edifying 

lesson  of history for  insecure  mlers  with  a bent for  murder  who  rnight  consult  his  history 

for knowledge and guidance. In  actual  fact,  Yan's "generosity of spirit"  was  premised  on the  "loyalty"  of the recipients.  Thus,  these  sons of Yi  a &,  the second son of the Qi founder  (Xiao  Daocheng), prospered  while  the  nine  sons of  Ying  # &,  the  third  son, were executed  afler  the oldest  two  were considered to have  acted  trea~onously.~ Even 

loyalty,  though, was not necessarily enough.  Al1  the members of the  last  generation of 

rulers  of the Qi (the  rernaining  sons of Xiao  Luan,  many  of whom were  still  very young 

children)  were  killed,  allegedly to avenge the death of Yan's brothers at the hands of the adolescent emperor,  Baojuan  (Xiao  Luan's  second son). The argument that he  was  "avenging the injustice  against  his  farnily"  was Yan's 

own  justification  and seems to have become the officially accepted line, as  cm  be  seen 

almost  fi* years  later  when Hou Jing, the usurper of the Liang, used the  sarne  tems 

when listing Emperor Wu's  various  acts  of  faitffil  service to and ultimate betrayai of the 

Qi.5  Theû  deaths,  however, conveniently  eliminated  aii  risk of legitimate  claimants  to the 

throne  who could be used by a troublesome  adventurer. Yan's  alleged  magnanimity  towards Zike and  his  siblings  loses  credibility  again 

when one  recds  that  these  very sarne royal relatives had been  spared  by an even more important "enemy", Xiao  Luan,  dunng the  Qi.These  relatives had  never  been on  Luan's 

"hit  kt"when he was  murdering  royal princes who could  interfere  with  his  legitimate 

See  the  commentary  of the  hinorian,  Yao  Cha  a#&, in the  Liang  Shu  (LS/2/5  1615-8).  Yao  began  îhe compilation of  this  history as  Minister  for Personnel  (libu  shangshu)  during  the  Chen  dynasty.  His  son, 

Silian  #, ,!& a, completed  the history  during  the Tang.  

> NQS/U622/15

# - 623/4.  It  is  specificaily  stated  that  aii  nine  sons were  murdered.  The oldest son seems to have  taken  action  d e r  a brother  was  disciplined  for  criminal  behaviour.  Histories  sometimes  attniute    

> actions to those who are

far  too  young  to  be  the  true  originators.  En  this case, however, the oldest son 

seems  to have been old enough to  make  deliberate  plans to  revolt.  This  is  based  on the  fàct  tbat  his  faîher           

> was 32 sui when he died in early 489, meaning that

the father  must  have been  born  in 458.  if he were 18 when  his  oldest son  was  born,  that son  would  have been 25 in 50 1. The  specifïc  wording  of  his  motive  is  ke  xue  jioyuon  f @ (LS/3/846/ 12- 13). claim  to the throne just  prior  to and  during  his  reign.  As discussed in the previous chapter, 

Luan  did  cal1  Zike's  siblings  to the palace  after  Wang  Jingze  revolted in the  east  and claimed to be  sponsorin_e Zike as emperor. However, when the  imperial  "candidate" managed to escape back  to  Jiankang  and  explain  Ms innocence,  Luan  revoked the  order  to have the brothers poisoned and, having fira feted  them,  sent them back to their homes. 

This was  no  srna11  event, and  Yan  would have  known  about it. Even if Zike could lay some 

claim  to being an heir to the Qi throne,  his  position was somewhat remote at  this  point (it was even considered rernote by  Luan,  who  only  thought about  it  after  Wang's revolt), and 

his  refusal  to be used by Wang must have been  proof  to Yan that he and  his  brothers posed no risk to  him. 

Yao Cha's praise has been echoed in more recent  times?  However, Yan's basic motive may have been to  provide  himself with a veneer of compassion  against  a backdrop of shrewdly vicious and violent power-plays.  Yan  was a usurper in need of some  irnage-

making. 

(2) The Role of the Royal Princes The assurance of loyalty  within  the Xiao clan  was  crucial. Xiao Yan had acquired the throne, but as with other imperial  families  before  him,  it was not a  foregone  conclusion that the  individual  members would protect and  advance  the interests of the  family  regime 

over their  own  persona1  ambitions. The disintegration of the Liang  regime  after  Hou Jing's 

rebeiüon  is  in  many  respects the disintegration of the Xiao family, for each of the  princes  

> saw

the chaos of the  tirne  as an  oppominity  to  build  up  his  own  power-base,  a chance to jockey for the throne. In fact, their  mentality  was probably  much  like that of their  father 

when he  was  planning to "seize the  hou?:  "in  thne  of peace,  give  your  utmost  loyalty  to the regime; in  time  of  tum~oil, eliminate  the tyrants for the  sake  of the  kingdom;  act  in 

S a  Zbao  Yi,  Nian  'ershi  Zhaji, ed Du  Weiyun  (Taipei:  Huashi  Chubanshe,  1977),  255.  Zhao  h e d  h m                 

> 1725 to 1814. Some twentieîh-century commentators have foliowed suit in their recognition of Xiao Yan's
> generosity and compassion.

accordance with the  timeç;  this  is  the most  perfect  p01icy."~ Hou Jing's  rebeilion, 

however, was almost a golden  jubilec  away  fiom  Xiao  Yan's establishment of the new 

dynasty.  One might  therefure  assume  a certain  amount  of social  stability  and  family 

cohesiveness that  allowed  him to  reign  securely for  almost  half  a century. 

Emperor Wu foliowed the practice of sending the royal princes (his brothers and sons) out to the  garrisoned  regions  to  take  up office as inspectors  (cishi).  He seems to have been  carefùl  in when and how he chose the princes. Even in  his  last  years, he was placing  various  grandsons in small  commanderies  (jun)  near  the capital to test their abilities in preparation for sending them out to  govern  border  regions.8  In the  early  years 

he  had  a policy  of keeping the eldest son of the princes in the capital as a "guarantor" 

(zhrshou  jp  ) when he sent  these  princes to distant regions, though he did  make  an 

exception for  his  youngest  son.9  As the years passed,  Yan  must have become more  liberal, 

for at the time that the regime was about to  faIl  to Hou Jing the eldest sons of  his  princes were being recaiied to the capital  from  the regions.  l 0 

Yan  was  also  carefbl  not to let  his  princes  hold  powerful  court  positions.  Though 

there  were some appointrnents as  Secretariat  Supervisor  (zhongshu jian) or  Director 

(zhongshu  hg), no prince  was  ever elevated to the more  powefil  office of  Director  of the Department of State  Mairs  (shangshu  h g  ) in Yan's  lifetime,  and the extremely 

powemil  position of Overseer of the Department of State  Mairs  (lu  shangshu  shi)  was 

never  conferred  during  the Liang. This was intended to avoid the problem of  parallel 

power  structures  under  the control of princes who  might  begin  seeing  themselves in an 

imperial  role.  Overali,  Yan  seems to have tned to keep a disciplined  watch over the                 

> LS/l/4/2. This muid cenainly be interpreted in the most opportunistic terms. Acting "in accordance
> with the times"

has  somewhat  the  same  ring as Yan's  later  words  about  ordained  tirne  when he is       

> jusufying his eiimination of the Qi regime:

"If' the  time  is  not  ordained,  even  one as  mi&  as  Xiang  Yu 

can  only  fail  in the endn  (LS/2/507/8). if one  succeeds,  then,  that  victory  will  vindicate  whatever  actions have been  taken  "in  accordance  with the  times",  for that  victory  will  have  been  ordained.        

> II NS/4/1299/6
> 9NS/5/133 1/ 12-13
> l0 LS/3/6 l9/8; NS/5/1345/ 1

behaviour of his  p ~ c e s in the garrisons, and  overall  was well served by  his  choices, 

particularly  his brothers  Xiu  , Hui and Dan who  brought  order  to the western and capital 

regions  after  the Liang was  faunded.  This,  in addition to  his  guarding  against  too  much 

power at court, must have provided a basis of  security  for  his  kingd~rn.~' 

Towards the end of  his  reign,  however, there are  hints  in the  historical  record that the emperor was not  aiways  able to  take  decisive action against  his  sons whose  growing 

n v w  was  becomhg  a source of ridicule  among  the  people.12 In  fact,  one  historical 

assessrnent  is  that, in the face of this  fractured  House,  the emperor owed  much  to Wei, a younger brother who,  until  his death in 533 at the age of 58 sui , had had an effective 

restraining  mord  influence on the  emperor's  sons and nephews.  His  death, therefore, marked the loss of a major  pillar  for the  House  of Liang and is described as  having 

precipitated the decline of the Liang  regirne.  l 3 

Despite  Wei's  alleged  influence, he could not  avert  the  earliest  "family"  conspiracy 

which  involved Hong, a younger  half-brother  to the emperor but a full brother to Wei.  14 

In 5 18 this brother  was  suspected of  involvement  in an  ambush  that  was  foiled  when Yan suddenly switched routes to a temple beyond the palace.  Al1  that  Yan  could  bring  himself 

to do  was  temporarily  relieve  him  of  his  rank.  l 5  Hong, however, had been  conducting  an incestuous  &air  with  P ~ c e s s Yongxing  A 2 , one of the  impenal  daughters,  and had promised to  make  her empress if she were to help  murder  her father.  It  was  the custom for the princesses to  wait  in the temple as  their  father completed a  three-day  fast.  Princess 

Yongxing  used  this  opportunity  to  disguise  two  assassins as her maid-servants, but an 

ungainly  step  through  an entrance-way on the part of one of the  "maidens"  aroused  the suspicions of a senior  guard.  He secretly  arranged  to  have  eight  men in  female  attire            

> For adiscussion of the power held by the princes (zongwng

2 3 ) during  the Liang,  see  Chen           

> Changqi, Liangjin Nanchao Zhengzhishi Gao (Kaifeng: Henan Dame Chubanshe, 1992), 94

# - 96.     

> l2 wei tiunxicz xiao

& A T X (NS/5/1326/8)     

> I3 NSl4l129W5-6
> l4 LS/2/3 3911-4
> l5 NS/4/1277/5

hidden  behind  the emperor in  tirne  for the audience with  his  daughten.  As the  "maid-

servant" assassins moved  towards  Yan,  the quickly assernbled  body-guards  rushed  out  and 

seized  û5e  two men. The  &air  was  hushcd  up,  and no mention of  these  events  is  found  in the Liang  Shu,  the  official  history  of the  dynasty.  Although expunged  from  the  official 

record, the information  appears  in the  Nmz  Shi, whose  writer  was  not beholden to  any  one 

dynasty.I6  The princess was quickly  banished  fiorn  the palace and died  later  in a "fit  of 

ange?  (hisi  fi  ), a standard historian's phrase used to  describe  the  demise  of the foiled and  mistrated.17  Hong seems not to have lost  any  of  his  brother's favour, perhaps 

because  Yan  basically considered him not to be clever enough to harm  mis and died in 526  a e r  a period of  iliness  at the age of 54 sui. l9 

In 522. Hong's son deserted to the Northern Wei,  seeking  support there for  his 

claim as  rightfùl  heir to the  throne.  20  This son, Zhengde, had  onginaily  been adopted as Xiao Yan's  heir  but  was  "demoted" to  his  original position upon the birth of Yan's first son  shortly  after  the  taking  of  Iiankang  in 50 1. Zhengde  never  quite  forgave  his  uncle. 

Instead,  he made it apparent that he still looked upon himself as the  rightful  heir and hoped that the Wei court  would  accept  his  claim  as the  rejected  heir and sponsor  his  ~ a u s e . ~ l He 

arrived  in Luoyang in 522 but was denounced by Xiao Baoyin (the brother of the  last  Qi

emperor who had  sought  refuge in the  north  and been honoured at court as the  Prince  of  

> l6

The  biography  of Xiao Hong in the Liang  Shu  (LS/2/339  - 34 1)  does  not  suggest  that  anything  was  ever  

> amis.

It is  unclear  when  this  took  place, but the senior  guard  appealed  to the  good  offices of Lady  Ding 

T *4#  for help, and she  died  in the  same  year as Xiao Hong (her date of  death  is  day  gengchen  fi *of 

the  elwenth  month  of the  swenth  year of putong ,or  January  3,527)  (LSI  11 16  1111).  

> "NS/4/1278/10-15
> l

Perhaps  the implication in  NS141127716    

> l9 LSl2134 114-5
> 20

The date  is  either 522 or 525,  depending  on  which  historical  source is  consuited.  The  fhst  date is given as the  thhd  year of  zhengguang  in the  northem  histories  (BSl4/ 1058/8-9  and  WS/4/13  2619)  and as the 

third  year of  pulong  in the  Non  Shi  (NSl4/12279/11- 12).  in the Liang Shu,  however,  the date  is  given  as the  sixth  year of  putong,  or 525  (lLS/3182819).  However,  the Nan Shi  States  that Zhengde  accompanied 

Xiao  Zong  on the  northem  expedition  of 525 but,  after  abandoning  his  troops,  was  reprimanded  by  Xiao 

Yan  who  stripped  him  of  rank  and office for  two  years  and  sentenceci  him  into  exiie,  a sentence he 

revoked  even  More  Zhengde  had  reached  his  destination  (NSfJI  l28Ol9  & 128 111-2).  

> 21 NS/4/1279/11

Qi and hence a  legitimate  claimant  to the Qi  throne)  in a  letter  to the Wei emperor  arguing 

that a nephew of the emperor and son of the governor of the capital  region  who  tumed 

against  his  own  kin  was  only  fit to be  e x e c ~ t e d . ~ ~ More important, however, the Wei considered  him  too  mediocre  to be of  any  advantage to  thern?  Sensing  his  precarious position, he  fled  the north and was forgiven by the emperor who, while  obviously  not 

reinstating  his  position as heir, compassionately  restored  his  royal  status  and  rank. 

In 525, the emperor's second son, Zong, deserted to the north with the  same 

ambition as  his  cousin, Zhengde. Zong  also  hoped to make contact with  Xiao  Baoyin and be sponsored by  him  as a Qi heir on the basis of what he  feh  to be a provable  uncle-

nephew relationship. Zong's mother had been  taken  by Xiao  Yan  from  the  imer  palace of 

Xiao  Baojuan,  the second  last  emperor of the Qi, and she had made it sufficiently  clear  to 

him  that he  was  born  seven months  &er  her  arriva1  in  Yan's  palace. Hence, his father  was 

a former Qi emperor, and he was the nephew of Baoyin (the brother of  Baojuan)." 

His opportunity  to make contact with the Wei came in 525 when he used  his 

participation in the emperor's northern expedition to  sumender  to a Wei  general.  Though 

sent to Luoyang and  honoured  by the Wei court, the political  turmoil  in the north  hindered 

his  cause. In 528,  after  Baoyin took up arms in  Chang'an,  Zong  was  captured and 

executed.25  His  coiTh,  however, was  retumed  secretly to  Jiankang  where the emperor 

buried  him  with ail the honours due a true  son.26                 

> 22 in the lhird year of zhengguang iE jt of the Northem Wei, or 522 (WS/4/1326/9).
> 23 BS/4/1058/9
> 24 Xia0

Zong is  raid  to have  conihmed  his  relationship in  his  own  mind  by  employing  a black-art technique that  proved  a fàther-son relationship if one's  own  blood  penetrated  the  bones  of the  d e c d 

Zong  secretiy  dug  up  Baojuan's  grave  to  carry  out  this  expriment.  The  results  were  positive, but in  order               

> to substantiate the validity of the test he murdered his second son, then aLittle over amonth

014 and  after 

an appropriate  interval  exhumeû  the  baby's  body and  performed  the  same  test with the  same  results.  This 

was  dficient  midence  that he  was  not Xiao  Yan's  son.  From  this  time on he  is  ck-scrii a s  treating  his                  

> "brothers" with some contempt and harbouring disloyal intentions against the throne (NS/5/13 16/10-12;
> LS/3/824/4).
> 25 One source says he died

h m  i h e s s  at the age of 3 1 sui  as he attempted to  flee  danger  (WS/4/1326/2).  

> 26 LS/3/824/11

Though  the actions of Zhengde and Zong were not direct  threats  against  his  life, 

they  probably  afTected  how the emperor  dealt  with  a major blow to the  Xiao  line in 53 1. That  year,  Tong,  his  oldest son and  k i r  to the throne, died  after  a boating accident in the royal  park.  Tong's eldest son  was  only  about  thirteen  at the and the emperor  felt 

that he was too young for the  t h r ~ n e . ~ ~ In  view  of the ambitions of  his  family  members, the emperor probably did not  want  to place the throne in so vulnerable a position. However, in  finally  choosing  Gang,  his  next  suMving  son, as the heir to the  throne,  the emperor aroused considerable controversy for deliberately displacing the  rightful  line of successian  widi  lishu).  In  fact,  he was sufficiently conscious that he was  breaking  atradition of succession  through  the line of the eldest that he enfeoffed  ad  of Tong's sons as princes of large and important  commanderies  to  provide  a kind  of moral compensation.29 The emperor had hesitated for the better part of two months before reaching  his 

decision."  Though he had been magnanimous to his emng  family,  it  is  possible that an 

earlier  event had poisoned  his  thinking  about the line of succession. About four  years 

before,  following  the  death  of Lady Ding  (Xiao  Tong's  mother),  Tong had been entrusted to  purchase  a piece  of land for  his  mother's grave.  His  choice, however, was  ovemimed 

by  his  father  after  a court  eunuch,  who had a direct  pecuniary  interest  in another site, persuaded the emperor that this other  piece  of land was an auspicious site and would have a protective  innuence  on  him.  A Daoist  priest,  however, quietly inforrned Tong that this 

particular  site would have a baiehl  effect on the eldest son. To counter this  infiuence, 

Tong secretly ordered that a wax  goose  and other "de-witching"  objects  be  buried  by the 

side  of Lady  Ding's  grave next to the  burial  site for the eldest son. The emperor             

> 27 No precise dates are given in the hisioncal records. However, Xiao

Tong's  third  son,  Cha  is  said  to have been 44 (sui) when he died in 562  (ZS/3/862/12).  Hence,  he  was  probably  bom  in 519 or  520.  

> H u a n s

#k,  as the  oldest  of the sons,  may  have  ben  born  about 5 17 or 5 18.                

> 28 NS/5/13 13/8
> 29 NS/5/13 l u 1 1&13 1317.
> 30 Xiao Tong died on day yisi

t C of the  fourth  month  of  zhongdatong  <e  ,or May  7,53  1                

> (LS/1/168/8 &169/6), and Xiao Yan took until the twenty-first day of the fifth month, or

June  21    

> (NS/5/13 W8), or

a week  later  on  day  bingshen  t3 q ,  or  June  27(LS/l/  lO4/3),  to corne to  his  decision. discovered this when one of Tong's palace  supervisors,  finding  hirnseif  no longer favoured by another  supervisor,  accused this colleague of using black  magic  to  assist  the heir apparent. The implication, in the emperor's  mind,  was that  his  heir was  attempting  to place a curse on  him  in  order  to succeed to the throne earlier. The immediate  effect  was 

that  Yan  had  no  desire  to make Huan the  official  royal  grandson  and  confirm  the  line  of succession  through  Tong. One source, in fact,  gives  this as the  primary  reason  for the emperor's final  decision  to move the line of succession to  his  second  ~0n.31 

In  view  of the fact that the emperor's choice of heir  was  considered somewhat 

inegular,  it seems to have provided his other sons and grandsons with moral justification for  thinking  they had as  much  right  to the throne as anyone  else.  This  is  in keeping with the  analysis  of the  two  lines  of succession presented in the first chapter. 

It  was perhaps Lun, the troublesome but  much  forgiven  sixth  son of the emperor, in whom the  murderously  competitive drive was most conspicuously  unleashed.  When 

Gang was made heir apparent  d e r  Tong's death, he was so  &aid  of this brother (Lun) who  domhated  the capital first as Metropolitan Govemor  (Danyang  yin)  and  then,  very 

briefly, as  Inspecter  (cishi)  of the Yangzhou  RegionJ2 that he placed a body of crack troops in the Heir's  Palace?  In the  iast  few  years  preceding their father's  demise  ,Lun, 

in the capital  again  as Metropolitan Govemor  (Danyang  yin), became  emboldened  to make    

> 31 NS/5/13 1313
> 32

Xiao  Lun  held the  fïrst  p s t  fkom  529  to 532 and the latter  post  for a  smail  part of  532  (IN2143  111-5). 

That  year he  was  stripped  of  ali  titles  and position for  wreaking  havoc  in the  economy  of the capital  

> (LS/1/7617).

Although  hîs  rank  was  restored  shortly  aFter  (NS/5/1323/12),  hîs brother Xiao  Ji  replaced 

him  as  lnspector  of Yangzhou in 532  (LSI  1176/7)? a post  he  scems  to have held  until  537  (NS/5/1328/7),  

> the

same  year  in  which  Lun  was  appointed  Iospector  of  Iiangzhou  (LS/l/8  LIS).  Since  he  was  already 

holding the  title  of  Secretariat  Director  (zhongshu  h g )  in 537, the emperor  must  have  chosen  to  more  

> his

son's  royal  starus  in 532. In 540  Lun  was  made  lnspector  (cishi) of  Yîngrhou  (JLS/l/ü4/2;  if we look at  

> LSl2143214,

the date  is  541).  However,  in 546, when Xiao  Lun  was  appointed  lnspector  of  Southem 

Xuzhou, he  is  referred  to once  again  as Metropolitan Governor  (Danyang  yin)  (LSI119  ID).  It  is  unclear 

when this position  was  restored  to  him,  but it  suggests  that  his  father  had not  banished  him  fiom  office 

cornple tely . 

> 33 NS/4/1296/11-12

attempts  on  his  father's  life.34  On one occasion he set an arnbush for the  irnperiai  chariot and on another he sent  poisond  wine to the court. The arnbush  was  uncovered in  tirne, 

and the wine was found to be poisoned after court  attendants  died  fiom  drinking  it.  AU 

messengers to the court  became  suspect and the royal  guard  was  strengthened." 

Although Lun may have been physicaily dangerous in the capital  region,  the emperor's  other  sons and nephews were in effect building up power bases in the  regions. 

In one  high-profle  case, Xiao Fan, a nephew of Ernperor Wu,  was  denounced by one of the emperor's sons as  intending  to  exploit  his  appointment to the western  region  of 

Yongzhou  (fiom  which  Xiao  Yan  had launched  his  attack on the Qi) as an  oppominity  to rebel  against  central authority. Fan  quickly  explained  himself and was forgiven by  his 

uncle.36  The generai feeling at the time, however, was that the princes were  waiting  for the 

aging  emperor to die, whereupon the realm would be thrown into chaos as they strove 

among  themselves for the  throne.37 

This tendency to  splinter  was  probably  exacerbated by the fact that,  with  one exception, there was no tie of  full  brotherhood to  unite  the brothers. This one exception was the  full-brother  relationship of Gang and Xu (Tong, the  original  heir to the throne who died in 53 1, had  also  been a  full  brother to Gang and Xu), but Xu died in 547 before Hou  Jiig's  rebelion,  when a brotherly alliance  might  have been  useful.38  Yan  was not 

unaware  of the danger to the  unity  of the  House  after  his death. In preparation for the Northem Expedition of 547, the emperor was  reminded  by one of  his  generals, who disapproved of a nephew's nomination as leader of the expedition, that he had once before                 

> ---
> 34 The historians state that these attempts were made d e r the death of ayounger brother,

Xu  a I]t  ,in                

> 547 (NS/5/1326/5).
> 35 NS/S/ 13 26/6-7
> 36 NS/4/1296/8-10
> 37 NS/4/1296/13-14
> 38 The eight brothers and their motbers are Listeci inLS/2/127/ 1-3.

sensed a mood of rebellion and suspected  thrt  his  own  flesh and blood would be at the forefiont. 39 

(3) Hou Jing and the Disintegration of the  House  of Liang 

It  was  this  cornpetition  arnong  the royal princes that was to cause the  House  of Liang to  corne  completely  asunder  under  the brutal testing of Hou Jing's rebellion  between 

548 and 552. Hou Jing was a northern general who  first  made  his  mark as a  military  leader  under 

Erzhu  Rong  & (493-530),  the Northern Wei general who  organized  the suppression of a number of rebellions and finally came to  dominate  the Wei court before being murdered in 530 by the  very  emperor whom he had placed on the throne in a violent coup 

two  years  earlier.4  Another general who came to the fore  under  the  same  circumstances as Hou Jing was Gao  Huan  & # (496-547) with whom Hou came to be on  fnendly  terms 

and to whom he pledged  himself  and  his  troops  after  Gao went on the  attack  against  the 

Erzhu  succe~sors~~ and forced a new emperor on the throne,  declaring  himself  prime 

minister  (53 1) and ultimately creating the Eastem Wei with the establishment of a rival 

throne  at the city of Ye (534).  When  Gao was on  his  deathbed, Hou Jing received a

summons  which he suspected had been  forged  by Gao's son, Cheng  W .  Fearing  for  his 

me,  he accepted the  advice  of  his  closest  advisor,  Wang Wei  Z q , and sent an envoy to the Liang court  early  in 547 with a  letter  offering  his  allegiance  to the Liang court and 

prornising  to  bring  the northern  temtory  over to Emperor Wu  Wao  Yar1).~2 Since  the Eastern Wei had been  sending  envoys to  maintain  a peacefùl  relationship  with  the Liang,   

> 39 NS141129712-3. Xiao

Fan  was  the nephew in question and  had  earlier  b e n  nispected  of  imperial   

> ambitions.
> 40 Hou

Jing  is  relegated  to the end of the Liang Shu to mark  his  place of  obloquy  in the  annals  of  history         

> (28131833-863). He receives the same historical reprimand in the

Nnn  Shi  which  pIaces  his  biography  in the  iast  chapter  under  the  category  of "bandit  officiais"  (zeichen  & E) (NS/6/1993-2017). Hou is             

> descn'bed as strong on stratagem and cunning but weak on the practical skilis

of  archery  and       

> horsemanship and even physically handicapped by

a short  right  leg  (NSl61199412).   

> 41 NSl61199313
> 42 NS1611994f 5

Yan's  officials  counselled  him  against acceptance, but the emperor  ignored  their  judgment. 

Since  Emperor Wu is  said  to have pressed for acceptance of Hou upon  discovering  that the latter's  decision  to  corne  south  had been  taken  the  sarne  night  in which he had  dreamed 

that peace had been brought to the world  (tiamia  taipingA  T h ),  it  would  appear 

that he  was  tempted by an image of  himself  as the  d e r  of a single  united  realm.  M e r bestowing the title of Prince of Henan  ;3& E on Hou Jing, who had brought the  thirteen 

regions  (zhou) of the Henan temtory into the Liang sphere, and investing  him  with  rnilitary 

and vice-regal  powers  for the Wei  realm,"  Yan  launched  another  of  his  northem 

expeditions to  speed  dong  the heaven-ordained unification." Gao Cheng, who dominated the Eastem Wei court, had already  realized  that Hou Jing, now stationed at  Changshe  

> #k,

south  of Luoyang, would be a  threat  to  him  if he made an alliance with  both  the Western Wei and  Liang.45 Fortunately for him, the Liang expedition was led  disastrously 

by  Xia0  Yuanming  4, one of the  emperor's  nephews.  Within  three  months the Liang  amies  suffered  a major defeat and were  taken  prisoner  by the  Wei?  Hou, for  his 

part, soon lost  much  of  his  40,000-strong  army  of hungry and  disaffected  northemers by 

desertion and  mass  surrenders and was  forced  to cross the Huai.  After  reassembling  eight 

hundred  infantry  and  cavalry,  he encamped at Shouchun  +6(also  known  as Shouyang and located in  County  Shou in Anhui)  which  he made  his  ~tronghold?~ The Eastern Wei, however, was not in a position to  take  advantage of its gains and retumed Yuanming to the  south  as  proof  of the Wei's  desire  to restore their  peacefùi  relationship.48  Against 

Hou's remonstrances, Emperor Wu responded in the seventh  month  of 548 by sending an 

envoy  to  make  p e a ~ e . ~ ~ Hou Jing was  aîarmed.  He  already  dimsted  the emperor,  havhg 

# * It  was  lauoched  on  &y  yichou  2 8 of the  eighth  month,  or  August  3 1,547  (NSllI9UlO).                 

> 45 LS/3/83 51 1 1
> 46 This major deféat occurred in the eleventh month at Han Mountain fJI ,

SE of  present-day  Xuzhou in Jiangsu  (LS/1/92/15).   

> 47 NS/611995/8

# - 199612        

> 48 NS/6/ l996/lS
> 49 NSI 1/220/10; NS/6/ l!W/ 1

discovered by  his  response to a letter  he had forged in the  name  of the Wei court that  Yan 

would have been ready to  exchange  him  for  Yuanming  if  nece~sary.~~ Even before  this,  he had been deeply offended by the emperor's  refusa1  to  provide  hirn  a wife  from  the Wang or Xie  families  on the  grounds  that  their  status was too elevated for  hirn  and he would have to  settle  for a member of the more  lowly  Zhu or Zhang  fam1ies.H  Anaid  for  his  Me, 

Hou decided on pre-emptive action  against  the Liang, first  conducting  the sacred blood ceremony  with  his  generals and  then  putting  a cover of  legitimacy  over  his  intended attack by  asserthg  that  his  intention was to destroy four  powerfùl  but  unworthy  generais and 

officiais  who were  throwing  the governrnent of the land into disarray.  52 

Though  Emperor Wu  is  said  to have  laughed  on  hearing  of Hou Jing's first  s m d 

victones,  a major expedition was  fomally  launched six days  later  under  the  overall 

direction of  Lun,  the emperor's  sixth  son whose character and  loyalty  have already been 

described.53  By that time, the ernperor was  warning  hirn  that Hou  was  a devious  and 

formidable  enemy whose destruction would require a long, protracted  s t r ~ g g l e . ~ ~ 

This  counter-offensive  was  largely  under  Xiao direction. Two nephews, Xiao Zhengbiao  ï€ ;A  and Xiao Fan  g , led the  armies  of the  north  and the  south  respe~tively,~~ 

while the  army  of the east was  under  General  Pei, now in  his  sixties,  whose relatives had  

> j0 NSl61199616-7

# ' NS/6/  19961% 10  

> j2

This ocnirred  on  day  wu- & # of the eight  month  of the second year of  taiqing  fC  *, or  September   

> 27,548 (LS/1/94/2).

The ceremony is  said  to have  taken  place in Yuzhou  (NS/6/1997/11).  This  city  seems 

to have  carrieci  three  names,  for, as the capital of the Yu  Region  (zhou), it  was  referred to as Yuzhou; as the capital of the  commandery  w), the  nex?  lower administrative  level,  it was  known  as Liang  Jua;  and 

as a local  town,  it  !vas  known  as Shouchun. Hou Jing is  described  laier  as  setting  out  Erom  Shouchun  

> (NSl611998/4).

Shouchun  is  identined  as  k i n g  the site of  presentday  Shou  County  (also  knom  as 

Shouyang)  in the province of Anhui.  Hence,  Yuzhou and Shouchun are one and the  sarne  place. In 547, 

about a year  More  these  events,  however, Xiao  Yan  made  name  changes in recognition of a former 

northem  general's  arriva1  in  Xuanhu  f& s, located  in  present-day  Runan  I$J  in  southem  Henan 

(ZLDC,  798).  Xuanhu  was  to  be  calleci  Yuzhou  .Ae  +tl  (the  name  it  had  under  northem  mie),  while 

Shouchun  was  to  be  calleci  Southern  Yuzhou and Hefei  -4. Re,  the former  Southern  Yuzhou,  was  to  be  

> calleci

Hezhou  + ( L S f  119218).  His  justincation  is  stated  in  NS/6/1997/11-12.  

> 53

His  original  scom  is  descn'bed  in  NSl6/  L 997/  13. The  e x i t i o n  was  announced  on  day jiuchen  A of the  eighth  month,  or  October  3,  548  (LSl1/94/3).    

> 54 NS/S/1324/1
> 55 NSl61 1997/

15 served the Xiao  family  as  early  as the  Qi,S6 and  the army of the  West  was  under  General 

Liu  #,  whose father  had  served as a  s u p e ~ s o r in the household of the heir  apparents7 

Hou encountered no  real  resistance in  his  mach  towards the  Yangzi  River. Some of this lack of  resistance  was a result  of  local  alienation  against  a member  of the  House  of Liang who held local  control.  Hou Jing's  first  vidory  f i e r  leaving  Shouchun  was  at 

Qiaozhou  f i ,  where  Xiao  Tai  *, an  imperial  nephew, was stationed as  regional 

inspecter  (cishi).  Though it was the assistant defender of the  city  who opened the gates to 

Hou,J8  Tai  was  responsible for aiienating the upper  levels  of society by imposing corvee 

duty  on the noble as well as the base  (shishu  f & )and  exacting  onerous remission payrnents. They were ready to revolt when the  opportunity  presented  itself  Jg 

Although  Tai may have played a role in Hou's  advance,  it  was  another  disgmntled scion of the royal  family  whose  relationship  with Hou Jing marked the first stage in the disintegration of the Xiao  dynasty.  Xiao  Zhengde, the  impenal  nephew who had once been made Yan's heir and resented  his  later  displacement  fiom  the line of succession, is in fact accused in the  Nan  Shi  of  being  responsible for the  eventual  downfall  of the  House  of Liang." 

In  548, Hou Jing,  knowing  of Zhengde's questionable  loyalty,  sent a letter  with 

one of  his  officers  to  Jiankang  to play on  his  resentment and  hstrated  ambition. This

envoy had met Zhengde in the north  years  earlier and  was  therefore no stranger to  him.  In

his  letter,  Hou offered to work on  behalf  of this  "rightful"  heir  to the  throne,  flattering  his 

ego by  recogninng  that  he  had been shamelessly put  aside  to the dismay of men of honour    

> 56 Pei Zhigao

Y 2 & (NSl61 l998I 1). His  age and  family  background are  determuied  fiom  his  biography   

> in LS/2/416.
> fl NS16/ l998/l.

The father of Liu  Zhongli  4+ ais  descxibed  in  LS1316  1 118.   

> 58 LS/3/841/15
> 59 The

N m  Shi  d e m i  the people  north  of the  Yan@  as  king  far  from  docile in nature  (gumgqimg 

# a ) and  needing  to  be  pacifieci,  but the background to this  statement  may  be  the  presence  of  strong  

> f-es

who were able to  resist the  imperial  representative (NS141 l3OOlll-13). 

> 60 NS/4/1282/10

and justice but was now needed and wanted in this time of  upheavd  to  deal  with treacherous officiais who were  throwing  the realm into chaos  under  an  aghg  emper~r.~' 

Zhengde  was  only too glad to see in the tone of this  letter  a s i p  of  fieaven's 

support for  his  cause.62 Thus,  when Hou set out  fiom  Shouchun (Southem  Yuzhou)  in the 

ninth  month  on the  pretext  that he was  departing  on a hunting  expeditioq63 his  intention 

was  actuaüy  to move in on  Jiankang  as quickly and directly as possible, as counselled by 

his  advisor,  Wang Wei,  confident  that Zhengde's betrayal  from  within  would  successfully 

complement their  attack  fiom  w i t h o ~ t . ~ ~ When Hou's troops reached the  Yangzi  River, the  great  natural  barrier  that should have brought them to a standstiil, Zhengde had aiready sent  severai  dozen  boats, purportedly to gather a  winter's  supply  of reeds for 

fuel.65  The Liang court,  apparently  assuminç  that Hou did not  really  intend  to cross, withdrew Wang Zhi  E who had been sent to  guard  the southem  shore?  Thus,  Hou, 

after  sending a spy across the river to assure himself that he had not been set up for an 

ambush,  crossed  fkom  Hengjiang  # i~  to  Caishi  + Z, about seventy kilometres  from  the 

capital,67 in the boats provided by Zhengde, with a thousand men and a hundred  horses.68 

Hou was soon at the edge of the capital, held back only by the  Qinhuai  River and the 

Vermilion  Sparrow  Bridge  (Zhuque  Hang)  which, by the placement or removal of pontoons, served the  same  function  as a  dra~bridge!~ At  this  point, Zhengde, who was the general in charge of the  amies  defending the  capital,7o surrendered  his  troops to Hou  

> 68

One  source  refers  to 8,000 men  aod  sevem  98/12) but  another  source  gives   

> the figure

as 1,000  soldiers  and 100  horses  (LSl3/842/4).  In an "audience" with  Emperor  Wu in 549, Hou Jing  tek the emperor that he  had  a thouand  men with  him  when he  crossed  the  Yangzi  (NS/6/2007/3).    

> Since his army

is said  to  have set out on a scale  compatible with a hunting  expedition,  men  the  figure  of         

> 1,000 men sounds enormous.
> 69 He aniveci on day xinhai

d of the  tenth  month  ,or  December  9,548  &S/1/94/7). 

> LS/1/94/6

and, in a not explicitly the  Xuanyang  Gate  B

stated sequence of events, made the  bridge  passable71 and opened 

f'J into the  city  of  Jiankang? 

A week  later,  even though the inner Palace  City  had still not  k e n  taken,  Hcn  made 

Zhengde  emperor and changed the reign  name  to  zhengping  ET  ("upright  peaceyy), 

appointed  himself  Counselor-in-Chief  (xiangguo; the prestige  chief  ministerial  title) and 

married  the new emperor's  da~ghter.~) Xiao  Yan,  still  titular  emperor but trapped  within 

his  palace, had  withdrawn  cornpletely  from  decision-making. In fact, as Hou's troops were approaching the capital, Gang, the heir to the  throne,  had asked  his  father to be  allowed  to govem for  hi- and  Yan  had  simply  put  everything  into  his  son's  hands.74 

Over  two  weeks  later,  Xiao Lun  #$  organized  a massive expedition of  thirty 

thousand  infantry  and  cavalry  from  Jingkou, the stronghold to the east of the capital, where he  was  stationed as  inspector  of Southern  Although  the Eastern  Citadel 

had  fden,  the Palace City was still holding  These  loyalist forces had a few  early 

successes but were thrown into  panic  just as an opportune moment for an  assault  seemed to  appear.  Lun fled back to  Jingkoun  only  five  days  after  the assault  begm7g 

A month  later  another major attempt was made  under  General  Liu.79 Aithough 

unable  to defeat Hou's forces, he did keep them  from  crossing to the southem shore of the 

Qinhuai  River where  loyalist  forces were  rallyinggO By  this  time Lun was once  again 

organinng  forces  south  of the  Qinhuai,  with  participation by other members of the Xiao         

> 71 NS/6/1999/10; LSl31829/4 &84218
> NSl4/1281/13
> LS/3/843/2-3. He was made

emperor  (tianli) on  day jiwei  C *of  the eleventh  month,  or  December  17, 548  (NS/1/22  111).   

> 74 NS/6/1998114
> 75

He had  been  appointed  inspector  in 546  (LS/1/91/3).  They  set out on  day  gengchen  a d o f  the  eleventh 

monîh,  or  Januaxy  6,549  (although  technicaiiy  it  was  ni11  the second  year  of taiqing  aor 548)  

> (LS/1/94/9).

The  d e of  the  attack  is  stated in  NS/6/2002/2.   

> 76 The

Eastern  Citadel  feu  on  day  xinyou  B of the eleventh  month,  or  December  13,548  (LS/1/94/8)   

> T7 NSl61200217
> 78

His defeat  ocurreû  on  day  yiyou  t of the eleventh  month,  or  January  L 1,549  (LSl1/94/9;  )    

> 79 On day bingchen

A #i of the  twelfth  month,  or February 12,549  (LS/1/94/11). 

> NSl6/2003/11

royal  family.  Although  this was a huge effort,  with  a composite force of  three  hundred 

thousand,*l  the leaders were suspicious of each other and  several,  including  members of the royal  family,  could not work together at  alP2  Their effort  dso  tumed  out to be  largely 

dependant on what was available in the  eastem  area,  for they  never  received the expected naval support of 100,000  fiom  the western base of  Jingzhou  which  was  under  the control of Xiao Yi If, the emperor's seventh son and younger brother of  Lun83  Yi, though, did send a land force of 10,000  infantry  and  cavalry  under  his  eidest  son and a naval force of another 10,000  under  General Wang Sengbian  3 # #f  84  which arrived the following 

month  in  Jiankang  (549).85  Once the  many  forces had crossed to the  northem  side  of the 

Qinhuai  River, they  failed  to  take  advantage of the support of the populace and the shortage of food among Hou Jing's army. Basically they squatted in their  various  camps, for there was no  will  to fight in  common  cause for the Liang regime, even among the  Xiao 

generals, and  military  inactivity  led to the inevitable robbery and pillaging of  undisciplined 

troops. The loyalist forces soon alienated the  city  and failed to  win  any surrenders fiom

Hou's  weakened  t r ~ o p s . ~ ~ 

When  the loyalist forces  first  cut  off Hou  Jing's  food supply and a naval  attack 

fiom  the western base of  Jiangling  was  still  anticipated, Hou Jing chose to sue for peace. 

His  goal was to keep  his  force intact by negotiating a withdrawal  across the  Yangzi  before any of  his  troops discovered there was  less  than  a month's  supply of food  lefl  and before the lengthy  siege  and loyalist  encirclement  demoralized  them  c~mpletely.~~ An envoy  was 

sent  into  the besieged palace. The  heir,  Gang,  argued  for acceptance  since  their  own 

situation  was  desperate and no massive loyalist  rnilitary  assault had  materialized.  The           

> 81 The figures Vary behveen more than 300,000 (NS/1/222/2) and

a miilion  strong  (NS/6/2004/1).                  

> 82 NS/6/2004/2
> The figure of 100,000 and the reluctance of Xiao Yi to send this force are mentioned in NS/6/2006/2.

# "ZZTJ/2520/#2  1/27  (juan  16 1)    

> 85 Xao Fangdeng

# 1++and  Wang  Sengbian  are  said  to have  arrived  on  &y  jimi  7 $. of the  fim   

> month of

the  third  year  of taiqing, or  February  20,549  (ZZTJ/2/252  ll#l/lO;  juan 162).      

> 86 NS/6/2003/15 to 200413
> 87 NS/6/2004/ 13

# - 15 emperor  argueci  that  death  was  better  than  such  an ignoble tmce but  eventually  yielded, 

letting  his  son  decide  on how to act but  warning  hirn  against  the nsk of  becorning  the 

laughuig-stock  of  history.88  It  was  agreed that four  regions  (zhou)  north  of the  Yangzi 

would be  given  to  Hou and that he would be  escorted  there by Daqi, the eldest son of 

Gang. However,  since  Daqi  a was  next  to  his  father in the royal  line  of succession, a 

hasty  decision  was made to replace him by  Dakuan  a, the  third  son,  to avoid the  rkk 

this posed to the stability of the  throne.  In tum,  two  of Hou's aides, including  his  advisor, 

Wang Wei, would  stay  in  Jiankang  to  guarantee  the peace. This pact for peace  was 

solemnized  in a  formal  ceremony before an  altar  erected  outside  the western  gate.89 

The  immediate  benefit to Hou was the ability to feed his troops. He  hastily  took over provisions in the Eastern  Citadel  which  was held by Hou's supporters but had been inaccessible to  hirn  because  of the loyalist  b l o ~ k a d e . ~ ~ However, there  does  not seem to have been  any  true  lifting of the siege in the short time the truce was in  effèct,  and the palace continued to suffer  fiom  the  effects  of starvation and disease. As Hou came to 

realize  that the loyalist  reinforcements  were deeply  divided  and the situation  within  the Palace City was desperate and the hoped-for expedition led by  Xiao  Yi, the  emperor's 

own  son, had evaporated once the peace pact had been  formali~ed,~~ Hou decided not to 

l i .  the siege and  withdraw  as promised. However, as Hou was in  fact  the one  breaking  the   

> 88 NS/6/2004/

1-4  

> NS/6/2005/5-9.

The ceremony  is  said  to have  taken  place on  day jihai  t in the second  month,  or 

March  27,549  (ZZTJlî/2522/#5/  12; juan 162).  

> 90

Hou Jing had been  relying  on the  granaries  in Fort Shitou  during  the siege.  M e r  these  stocks were depleted, he  had  plundered  from the stores of nce  among  the population,  with  the  result  that the  pnce  of grain  &y-rocketed  and the people were  reduced  to  cannibalism  (NS/6/200  116-8).  With  the  dechration  of 

peace, Hou Jing  was  able to move  grain  from  the  welI-stocked  Eastern  Citadel.  Even  though  this  fortress 

had  been  under  the  control  of  his  own  generais,  one of whom  was  the son of  his  newly  installed  emperor   

> (NS/6/2000/10-1 l),

loyalist  forces  had  cut  off  his  access  to it  during  the siege  (NS/6/2004/13).  

> 91

Hou Jing's  advisor,  Wang Wei, is  said  to have heard that the forces from  Jingzhou  had  tunieci  back 

afler  the peace pact  had  been  solemnly  conhned.  This pact gave Hou Jing's  side  the  opportunity  to move 

nce  stocks  into  their  fortress  (ZZTJ/2/2522/#7/1; juan 162).  Restocked  and  safe  from a western  attack, 

Hou Jing  decided  to break the pact and  reiaunch  the siege. However, the  same  source  states  that the naval force  reîumed  afler  the palace had  fallen  and  ail  the  leaders  were  returning  to  their  on@  stations  

> (ZZTJ/2/2523/#10/3; juan 162).

pact, he  was  advised  by Wang Wei that he needed to  provide  a public demonstration that he  was  more  than  just a  traitor  and rebel who had defiled the royal  family.  Hence, Hou issued a ten-point  den-nciation  of Xiao  Yan  to  justify  not  only  his  attack on the capital and the "hundred-day" siege but  his  decision  to continue  this  siege in  defiance  of the recent pact. 92 

Imrnediately  the Palace City raised the  aiarm  with smoke  signais  and drums and prepared an  altar  before the  Taiji  Temple to  announce  to the gods of Heaven and Earth that Hou had unjustly broken the  allian~e.~3 The  two  main loyalist leaders,  Xiao  Lun and Liu  Zhongli,  who were at  l~ggerheads,~~ refused  to  take  action even when other generals presented  strategies.95  Some loyalist  generals  who did  try  to respond were  quickly 

defeated and Hou  calied  again  for  p e a ~ e . ~ ~ Angered by the court's envoy who accused  him 

of  having  no intention of  departing  from  Jiankang,  Hou ordered the city flooded and an 

all-out  attack be  renewed."  By the  next  day the City had  fi~llen.~* Ironically,  the  fdl  of the palace was indirectly abetted by  another  royal  member, a son of Xiao Lun, who by  his 

neglect  of the troops and  officers  under  him,  had so  alienated  them that  two  of  his  officers, 

under  cover of  darkness,  let  down  a rope to  enable  some  of the enemy to  enter? 

At the  beginning  of the siege, there had been over 100,000 men and women, and 30,000 men in  anns  within  the  Inner  City. By the end, only  two  to  three  thousand 

dispirited  and emaciated  soldiers  were  left  guarding  the  wails.  lo0  Hou, in  his  interview  with        

> 92 NS/6/2006/5-7
> 93 This Occumd on &y bingchen

6&of  the  third  month  of the  thkd  year  of  taiqing  , or  April23,549                         

> (NS/6/2006/7)
> 94 ZZTJ/î/Zî 1/#3/9-10 (juan 162)
> 95 ZZTJ/2/2523/#7/4-7 (juan 162))
> 96 NS/6/2006/ 10-11
> 97 NS/6/2006/ 12
> 98 On &y dingmao 7!@of the third month, or A p d 24,549 (LS/1/95/6).
> LS/U438/6
> 'O0 NS/6/2006/9

Emperor Wu  after  the City  fell,  said  that he had a force of 100,000 when he  first  laid siege, and now  al1  the people of the  reairn  were  his  [in  allegiance]. l o l 

Having  cai;tared  the  Imer  City, Hou issued a  false  edict  ordering  Xiao  Dakuan, 

the  emperor's  grandson  who  was  originally  to have escorted  him  out of  Jiankang,  to 

disband  al1  the  supporting  troops  from  the  outside  areas,  and  within  two  days, they had  all 

retreated. IO2  This quick disappearance of troops in part  might  seem to substantiate Hou's 

claim  to universal support. In  fact,  though, the  various  generals had gathered to discuss their response but were  unable  to  unite  under  a recognized  leader and  strategy.103 

Although Zhengde  was  expecting  to be  confirmed  the  true  emperor once the palace fell, Hou forced him to stand by the gates once they were opened. When he finally found Emperor Wu and  dutifully  knelt down to  him  in  tears,  his  uncle's  uncomprehending 

response made  him  reaiize  he had been tncked. Hou reinstated the  reign  name  of  iaiqing 

and  sirnply  gave Zhengde  two  honorary  titles  while  bestowing upon himself al1  the titles required for  full  civilian and  military  control. Like the Xiao usurpers before  him,  Hou made  himself  both Overseer of the Department of State  M ' s  (lu  shangsh),  which  he coupled  with  the titles of Palace Attendant  (shizhong  ++ q ) and Grand  Counselor-in-

Chief  (da  chenp*uttg  & # ), and Commander-in-Chief of  AU  Centrai and  Regional 

Forces  (dudu  zhongwai  zhujumhi  ;CP  ç 9b  $&  + f ). lo4  The discarded  "ernperor"  could 

only  nurse a vengefùl  resentment and  was  finaily  executed about  three  months  later, 

shortly  after  Xiao Gang took the  throne,  when a  letter  addressed to a cousin  calling  on 

him  to  bring  troops to the capital was  intercepted. 105    

> 'O1 NSl61200714
> 'O2 The

edict  was  issued  on  day jisi  t 6 of the  third  month,  or  April26,  549  (LSl119516).  By  day  xinwei 

&,  or  April28,  they  had  di retreated  (LSI  119517).      

> 'O3 ~JIî/25231#7129-3 1(juan 162)
> lo4 XiaO

Zhengde's  demotion  is  descxibed  in  NS/W1282/2-2.  His demotion  m m  have  ocnirrwl  the  same 

day  (gengwu  fi  9. or  April27,549)  on which Hou  Jing  installeci  himseif  in vital  chdian  and  military 

positions  (LSl1/95/6-7).  A slightly  Ionger  list  of  titles  appears  in  NS/6/2007/12  and  LS/3/850/10.   

> lo5 NS/4/128U4.

He  was  executed  in the  sixth  month  (NSI612008/8),  speciticdy  on  dayguichou  4P80f  

> the

sixth  month,  or  August  8,549  (ZZTJlU2525/#30/1). Xiao  Yan,  while  continuing  to  cany  the  title  of emperor, was  essentially  a prisoner of Hou Jing. A little  over a  month  after  the  Inner  City  fell, Emperor Wu died in  his  85th year. He had  survived  the  efferts  of physical deprivation and mental  hardship  during  the siege but  finaUy  succumbed to a starvation  diet  imposed by  Hou.lo6 The  death  was  kept secret for  almost  three  weeks. lo7  Only  then  did Hou finally  decide  to place Xiao Gang, the 

official  heir,  on the throne.  lo8 

The  withdrawal  of  loyalist  troops after the palace  feu  did not  actually  mean  an end to  military  activities.  Over the  next  few  months  there was a succession of short-lived revolts  in  the present-day Jiangsu-Zhejiang  region,  and some of  these  involved members of the royal  family.  For a period of about six months  after  Xiao Gang was put on the throne, Hou's range of power was  restricted  to the  area  west of Wu  Commandery  (present-day Suzhou) and  north  of  Naniing  &J  & (near present-day  Guichi  -& hh  in Anhui)  after  asuccession of local Liang  cornanders,  beginning  with  Xiao Dalian  # 3, jl, one of the new emperor's young sons who was  Regional  Inspecter  (cishi)  in  Kuaiji,  refused  to accept 

rule  fi-om the capital. lo9  Though  Hou's  heavy  exactions in  this  nch and prosperous  region 

had  alienated the people, Dalian was  never  able to  provide  the leadership needed and 

simply  fled  the  city  when  Kuaiji  was  finally  attacked  by Hou's forces as they gradually reclaimed the  eastern  area. 'l0  

> lo6

HOU Jing  was  apparently  u, indignant on  hearîng  that Emperor Wu  had  gone  into  a rage when an attendant  referred  to Hou  by  his  tiîie  of  chengxiang  or  Counseiior-Ui-Chief  that  he  took  vengeance  by 

withholding  food and  drink  (ZZTJIU2524/# 1814; juan 162). Xiao  Yan  is  said  to  have  fallen  gravely  il1  on 

day jiyou  5 a of the  fourth  month,  or June 5,539, in a fit of  anger  and  Ehstration  when  things  he  asked 

for  were  not  provided  to  him  and  died  on  day  bingchen  a fiof  the  nfth  month,  or June 12,549, at the age of 86 sui  (LS/1/95/9  &l  1).  Since  he  was  born  in the  eighth  year  of  daming  M ,or 464, it is passible he  was  still84,  since  his  month  of  birth  is  left  unstated  (LS/1/1/8).  

> 'O7

LS/3/852/2  

> los

He  was  made emperor on  day  xinsi  Q 6 of the  fifth  month,  or  July  7,549  (LS/ l/lO4/9). 

# * O9  NS/6/2008/6-7; LS/3/852/7-8  

> Ilo

He abandoned  Kuaiji in the  hveifth  month  of the  third  year of taiqing  which  would  mean  the vexy end of 549 or vexy  early  in 550  according  io  the western  caiendar  (LS/3/853/7). The  alienation  of the people and  Dalian's  lack of leadership are  discussed  in  NS/5/134  1/2. One of  his  cousins, Huili, who had hoped to undermine Hou  from  his  vantage point in the palace, was in the end  equally  unsuccessful.  In  early  550 he was  simply  unable 

to  initiate  a court coup in coordination  with  a planned  uprising  in  Guangiing  that had 

origindly  received promise of support  from  the Eastern Wei (this, however, was the  year 

that the Eastern Wei  was  supplanted  by the Northem Qi). A massive land and naval attack  brought  a quick end to this  rebellion,  and Huili was  simply  demoted to  commoner 

status, an indication that Hou  never  viewed  him  as a  real  threat. There may have been good grounds for  this  assessment, for Huili is  said  to have been so incompetent and  fearfiil 

when put in charge of Emperor Wu's  northem  expedition of 547 that he had had to be replaced.  l l2  However, a coup that Huili hoped to  launch  later  that year  after  Hou had set out on a westward  campaign,  leaving  a force of  only  a thousand  soldiers  in the palace (possibly an indication now of Hou's confidence in  his  position in the eastem  region), 

never  succeeded. '13  It was exposed by Xiao Bi  R , the nephew of Hou Jing's disposable emperor, Zhengde, and Xiao  Ziyong  -f  & , a grand-nephew of Emperor Wu, who  had 

obviously  felt there was more to be gained by  supporting  Hou Jing  than  attempting  to destroy  hirn.114 Several  conspirators  fiom  the Xiao  family  were executed.  Again,  the Xiao 

family  was  totally  ineffectual  in  organizing  any  concened  rnilitary  action, even when the mood of the people was  turning  against  Hou.  l

Although  Hou  regained  control of the east, he was  never  in  cornmand  of the western  reaches.  Conversely,  these  regions,  though  in the  hands  of the Xiao  farnily,  never 

launched the forces that  might  have  overwhelrned  Hou  much  earlier.  They were too busy 

# "'LS/3/853/14-15;  LS/2/429/3-5  

> NS/4/1297/4
> l3

Mer  day  dingmoo  7 P of the  eleventh  rnonth,  or  December  15,550  (ZZTJ/2/2532/#73).  At this point Xiao  Lun  had  fled  to  Runan  and  Generai  Ren Yue  # ivas  facing  difnculties  in the  west.  This is not the major  campai@  of 55  1 which  was  iaunched  in  the  same  month  that the Northern Qi  formaliy  rem@        

> Xia0 Yi (ZZTJ/2/2533/# 17&19).
> I4 LS/3/856/6-7
> Il5

The  Limg  Shu  States  that  fiom  Danyang  to  Jingkou  the people  hated  Hou Jing and were  ready  to  offer       

> thek lives to be rid of

his  gang  (LS/2/429/9). protecting  their  own  power bases, feuding with their  own  kin, and  waiting  to see how Hou's  rebellion  would create an  opportunity  to gain the throne. They were  continuhg  in the spirit of Zhengde and, like  hm, ended up  gaining  nothing but their  own  destruction and  underminhg  the  survival  of the Liang  regime. 

At the  time  that Hou's  uprising  began  in 548,  al1  the major  regions  of the  West 

were in the  hands  of Xiao princes, in accord with the  pnnciple  of assigning  royal  princes to the  regional  inspectorates. In  geographic  sequence,  Jiangzhou  (capital at present-day 

Jiujiang)  was  under  Daxin  a, second son of Xiao Gang and  grandson  of Xiao Yan (he had  been  appointed  inspecter  (cishi)  in 547 when he was about  24).'l6 Yingzhou  (capital at present-day Wuhan) was  under  Xiao  Ke  a#&,  Prince of  Nanping  ifi  9, and nephew of Xiao  Yan.  117  Xiangzhou  (capital at present-day Changsha) was  under  Xiao  Yu  *, 

Prince of Hedong  Z,  grandson  of Xiao Yan and son of the the  prematurely 

deceased heir, Xiao Tong. Jingzhou (capital at present-day  Jiangling)  was  under  Xiao  Yi 

# #,  Prince of  Xiangdong  3. and seventh son of Xiao  Yan.l18 Yongzhou  (capital at present-day  Xiangfan)  was  under  Xiao Cha  %: Prince of Yueyang  6 f#  3, grandson  of Emperor Wu, son of  Xiao  Tong and brother of Xiao  Yu.119 Xinzhou  i$ Jll  (capital at present-day Baidicheng in Sichuan) was  under  Xiao Zao  4 @ ,  Prince of Guiyang  #& IfA  I. 

and a grand-nephew of  Xiao  Yan.lzo Yizhou (capital at present-day Chengdu) was  under 

Xiao  Ji  R ,Prince of  Wuling  &, & 3.and the youngest son of Emperor  Wu.12' 

There  was  Little  cohesiveness  among  these  many  relatives of the Liang  house, 

although  the main  rivatry  was  between  Jingzhou,  under  Xiao Yi, and  Yongzhou,  under  his 

nephew,  Xiao  Cha.  Jingzhou  was  historically  the power-centre  fkom  which rebels  Iaunched   

> ll6

His appointment  is  describai  in NS/5/1339/1. It  is  assumeci  he  was  sti.li  there  at the  time  in question on the  b a i s  of  LSl1/106/13.  

> Il7

LSl1110619  & 11418 

LSIllI  1315 

> II9

LS/1191/4  

> 12*

NSl4/ 127418. His  title cornes  fiom  the  fact  that  his  father  was  made the heir of Xiao  Rong  and 

therefore  inhented  this  title  (NSl4/1274/3 &7).  

> l2 l

He  had  been  regional  inspeaor  (cishi) of  Yizhou  since  53 7 (lis15113 28n). their  naval  attacks  on  Jiankang,  and the  person  who controlled Yongzhou would 

historically  either  have to be defeated by Jingzhou before Jingzhou would have  full 

fieedorn  of action or defeat Jingzhou himselfso that he  could  dorninate  the western base. Yongzhou  had  of course been  Xiao  Yan's  own  base, and  Yan  had  had  to  win  control over Jingzhou before  being  able to  launch  his  expedition  against  the Southem Qi. Xiao Cha had been in Yongzhou  since  546 and had  taken  deliberate  measures  to build  it  into a  strong  and prosperous base  from  which to  launch  out in a  time  of  t~rrnoil.12~ 

He therefore had no  desire  to leave when  his  grandfather issued an  imperial  decree 

appointing  another  imperial  relative to the  inspectorship  in 548. The appointee  was  Zhang 

Zuan  ft  , Inspecter  of Xiangzhou  since  543 and Yan's cousin and son-in-law and hence both a blood cousin and uncle by marriage to Cha, whom he was supposed to replace in Yongzhou, and to Yu,  who  took over  from  him  in  Xiangzhou. 123 

Zhang had been  inspecter  of Xiangzhou  since  543 and was contemptuous of  his 

young inexpenenced nephews,  Cha  (in Yongzhou) and Yu  (his  successor in 

Xiangzhou). 124  Yu  was  deeply  aggrieved  by this constantly  haughty  and  demeaning 

attitude of  his  relative and, upon  amiving  in  Xiangzhou,  refùsed  to see Zhang on the pretext of  illness.  In  fact,  he seems to have  taken  up  his  duties of office in Xiangzhou and 

deîiberately  detained  Zhang there,  refùsing  to let  him  proceed to  Yongzho~.l~~ With the 

breakdown  in control  fiom  the centre as a result of Hou's march on the capital in 548, Zhang  began  to  fear  reprisais  from  his  resentfùl  nephew and knew that  his  other  nephew in      

> IZ2 ZS/3857/10
> IU Zbang Zuan was

a cousin  of Xiao  Yan  since  his  father's  sister  was  the  mother  of  Yan  fiS/1/156/7&1  l  

> &157/1-2).

He  was  also  Yan's son-in-law for he  had  k e n  m a n i d  at the age of  eleven  to Yan's fourth               

> daughter (LSl2f49312). Zuan was much younger tlian Yan, king 51[sui jat

the  time  of his  death  in 549    

> (LS/2/503/4-5).
> lZ4 The appointment of

Zhang Zuan as  inspecîor  of Xiangzhou  was  made in the  ninth  year  of  datong  

> FJ

,or 543  (LS/2/493/14  & 494/8).  Xiao Yu's appointment  was  made on  day  wuyin  fi  of the  fourth 

month  of the second  year  of  taiqing  ft  i& ,or May 10, 548  (LSI l/W/  10).  Although  this  was  three  to  four   

> months before

Hou Jing  began  his  march  on the capital, Yu  does  not  seem  to have  arrived  in Xiangzhou 

und  very  close to this  t h e .   

> 125 NS/5/1387/12; LSIU502111

Yongzhou  would not accept the  imperial  order  to  cede  the post of  Inspector.  Being on good  terms  with  his  brother-in-law (and cousin) Yi, in Jingzhou, he attempted to use Yi to rid  himselfof  these  two  "dangerous"  nephews. The conflict  between  Yi (in Jingzhou) and Cha (in Yongzhou) about  sending  an expedition to assist the emperor (their father  and 

grandfather  respectively)  before the  inner  City had  fallen  to Hou  provided  Zhang  with the 

opportunXty  he needed. Yi was in  overall  control of the combined  military  forces, for at the  same  time as he had been made Inspector of Jingzhou he had  also  been made General for Western 

Control  and  given  supeMsory  responsibility for military  flairs  in  nine  western  regions.126 

Cha  had originally not wanted to  provide  any  troops lest Yi  take  advantage of their absence fiom  Xiangyang  (the capital of Yongzhou) to destroy  him.127  Yi  was  equally 

suspicious and originally demanded that Cha  lead  his  own Yongzhou forces personally to 

ensure  that they would be away fiom their  regions  at the  sarne  tirne.  128  By the time Yi had reached  Yingzhou  (present-day Wuhan) and Yu was at  Baling  (present-day Yueyang)  with 

his  forces, Hou  was  suing  for peace and an imperial edict was issued  asking  that  al1  loyalist forces tum  back.1zg  Even with a combined force of a hundred thousand men  under  his  

> 126

LS/1/113/6  

> 12'

ZS/3/868/9  

> 128

ZS/3/857/6  

> lz9

ZS/3/856/15  and  NS/6/2006/1.  Hou Jing's  advisor,  Wang Wei,  is  said  to have  heard  that the forces 

f?om  Iingzhou  had  turned  back  after  the peace pact  had  been  solernnly  connmied  and they were  moving 

ricc  stocks  into  their  fortress  (ZZTJ/2/2522/#711; juan 162). This  vas  one of Hou's  reasons  for  breaking 

the pact and  relaunching  the  siege.  However,  the  same  source  states  that they returned  after  the  palace  had 

Men  and  aU  the leaders were  returning  to their original stations  (ZTTJ/2/2523/#10/3; juan 162). This is 

just  one  exaxnple  of how  difficult  it is to sort out a sequence  of  events  in  any  of the  official  histories. in addition to  aimost  contiguous  contradictions, one  ment  may  be  described  in  several  sources  (usually 

biographies of  different  people) fiom  unrelated  points of  view  and with  ody  a vague  reference  to when it 

occurred.  One  other  point to  malce  here  is  that,  although  the  annies  Ied  by Xiao Yi's  oldest  son and  his 

General Wang  Sengbian  are  said  to have  arrived  on  day j i d  of the  first  month  of the  third  year  of 

taiqing, or  February  20, 549  (ZZTJ/2/252 Il#  1/10; juan  l62),  it  is  assumed  that the  reference  here  is not to 

them but  rather  to the  naval  expedition  fiom the  West  since  hth  the son and General Wang were  stiîi 

there  when the  finai  edict  of  demobilization  was  made  foiiowing  the  fa11  of the  Inner  City 

(ZZTJJ/Y2523/#7/3 1-32; juan  162).  One source  states  that the force of 10,000  b t i y  and  cavalry  which 

was  led  by  Wang Sengbian and Xiao Fangdeng (Xiao Yi's  oIdest  son)  had  been sent  only  as a token force when Fangdeng  iasisted  on  staying  to  defend  Jiankang  against  Hou and not  returning  to  Jiangling  at  his 

Mer's  request  (NS/5/1345/2-3). command,13*  Yi had no  desire  to descend on Jiankang and neither did Yu who had brought 

his  forces to  Baling  (present-day Yueyang) or Zao who was  waiting  west of  Jiangling.13' 

At  this  point,  Zhang  exploited Yi's  insecurity  by sending a letter  alleging  that Yu had set 

sail  upnver and  was  intending to  join  forces with  his  brother, Cha, to attack Jiangling. At the  same  time,  another  generai  sent a letter  stating that Zao  was  making  no attempt to 

retum  because  he was  waiting  to  join  forces with Yu and  Cha.132  In a panic,  Yi humed overland back to Jiangling,  imprisoned  Zao and finally executed  h i m . l 3 3 

By the  tirne  Yi (in  Jiangzhou)  was ready to  deal  with Cha (in  Yangzhou)  and Yu (in  Xiangzhou),  a new set of circurnstances  was  in place. Soon  after  the palace  feu,  Xiao 

Shao  a, a grand-nephew  of Emperor Wu, arrived in Jiangling with a secret edict  from  the emperor  givhg  Yi vice-regal powers and the  authority  of the  yellow  axe, the  symbol  of the 

imperial  prerogative to  launch  an expedition, and placing  him  in control of  al1  military 

aEhin  for the  entire  realm,  his title being Grand Commander-in-Chief of  AU  Central and 

Regional  Amies  (&dudu  zhongwai  zhujunshi  k ;Ck  t.k  t) T.  ).134  Vice-regal powers and the authority of the yellow axe were also bestowed on Ji, the brother who had been stationed farther  west,  but  his  military  title was commander of  all  expeditionary 

armies  for the suppression of Hou's rebellion,  his  title being  Commander-in-chief  of the Expeditionary  Army  (chrahr  rhengtao junshi  ç & .3.f  + ),which  would seem to have 

irnpiied  a subsidiary  role  to that of  Yi.i35  This secret edict also bestowed titles on other 

impenal  sons in the  West  confirming  the  imperial  wiil  to  take  action, and Shao  informed 

each  prince  as he travelled  westward  through  each of the  regions.136   

> 130 The figure

should  not  necessarily  be  taken  literally  (NS/6/2006/2).              

> 13' NS/6/2005/15 &200611
> 132 ZS/3/857/1-3; NS/5/2387/14-15
> 133 NS/4/1274/9-11. According to the Zizhi Tonaiun, he

sank  his  ships,  dumped  his  rice  and  took  a mpid  

> overland

route  back  to Jiangling  (ZZTJ/2/2524/#10/2;  juan 162)      

> 134 LS/1/113/7
> '35 NS/5/1328/11-12
> 136 ZZTJ/2/2525/#28/2 (iuun 162)

This could have been  seen  as a second chance for the  imperial  scions to  Save  t!!e 

House  of Liang  after  having  been so  dilatory  and  divided  before the palace  fell.  LI fact, 

though,  the effect of this "secret edict" was to  confirm  the cleavage between the  Xiao 

family's  eastern  and western  "power  centres" and mark the  beginning  of a new and 

catastrophic jockeying  for position  among  the western  princes  who  vied  for support  f?om 

the  rival  northem  kingdoms  of the Western Wei and Northem Qi to  enhance  their positions. The  irnmediate  stmggle  between Yi and  his  nephews, Yu and Cha,  was  a first 

exarnple  of this. 

Since  Zhang was already in  Jiar~gling,~~~ Yi exercized his authority to  comrnand 

Zhang to proceed to  Yongzhou  and  take  up  his  post there. This  would  have  assured  a

friendly  power in  Xiangyang.  However, Cha,  knowing  that no single  legitimate  authority was in place in  Jiankang,  simply put Zhang  under  the equivalent of respecffil  house  arrest and  continued  to exercize total control,  refbsing  even to authorize  his  retum  to Jiangling at the request of  his  uncle, Yi.  Afiaid  for his  life,  Zhang fled in disguise,  abetted  by 

generals  who deceived  him  into  believing  that he had  support  on the  outside  but  raised  the 

alam  instead when he fied. He  was  quickly captured and kept as  Cha's  personal 

prisoner.  138 

On the  c'southem"  fiont,  Yi immediately used the authority of the edict to 

requisition  troops  fkom  Yu in Xiangzhou who, not unexpectedly,  refused.  This conveniently justified  an attack  led  by  his  oldest son,  Fangdeng  (who was about 2 1 at the 

tirne),  which ended in  defeat  and the son's death.  139  Another force was sent, but Cha launched a surprise attack against Jiangling to help  relieve  his  brother in  Xiangzhou. 

Unfortunately,  flood waters  fiom  a sudden  rainstorm  hampered  their  movement and   

> 13' One

source  implies  that he fled  hst  to Jiangling and  wmte  his  letter  fkom  there  (ZS/3/856/11-14.) A                   

> slighîiy dinerent sequena of events appears inthe Nan Shi and Liang Shu which state that Zhang fled to
> Jiangling immediately

after  sending  the  letter  to Yi in Yigzhou  (NS/5/1387/15 & 1388/3; LS/2/502/12-  

> 13).
> '38 ZS/Y857/1O-l5
> 139

He is  said  to have  died  at the age of 22 (probably sui)  (LS/3/620/2). dernoralized  the troops who fled  in disarray  back to  Xiangyang  after  two  generals 

swrendered  with  their  soldiers. I4O 

in the face of  this  defeat and  realizing  he  was  under  threat of attack  from  his  uncle in  Jimgling  and  from  ambitious  generais  in collusion with Jiangling, Cha decided  his  only 

hope  was  to gain the  backing  of the power to the  norih.  He therefore sent an envoy to the Westem Wei court  pledging  liege  (cheng fari  1 ) and requesting to be accepted as a

vassal  fiyong  lY+  #). This was accepted, and when Yi sent an army against Cha, the Wei sent troops in response to  his  cal1  for assistance. In addition, they bestowed on Cha the title of  Prince  of Liang, indicating their support of  him  as the  legitimate  pretender to the southern  throne. 

Yi  realized  he needed to offset the Wei threat on  his  northem  Bank  and in  early 

550, in an attempt to stop Westem Wei troops  from  pushing  on to  his  base at Jiangling, made a  pact  of brotherhood with the Westem Wei emperor.  14'  At the  same  time, he sent The requisition  was  made in the  fourth  month,  aHer  Xiao  Shao  arrived  in  Jiangling  with the  imperid 

edict  ( LSIllI  1317-8).  One source  gives  a slighiiy  differcnt  explanation  of this  requisition  and the  implied 

time-frame,  stating  that envoys  were  sent  three  times to  take  oversight  of Xiao Yu's army and stocks of grain  (NSl5113  1419). The  expedition  against  Xiangzhou  cither  set out or  was  defeated  in the  sixth  month. 

The latter is more  ükely,  and the  reference  to  day  bingwu  fi  +of  the  sixth  month  (or  August  1,549) 

probably  &ers  to the  day  on  which Xiao  Fangdeng  was  drowned  during  battie  (LS/1/113/8  & 11411). 

Another  force  was  sent  against  Xiangzhou  in the  seventh  month  (between  August  9 and  September  7 in the Western  calendar)  (LS/l/l14/1).  Xiao  Cba  launched  an attack against  Jiangling  on  day  yimao  t @ of 

the  ninth  month,  or  October  9, 549  (LS/1/114/  1-2)'  and fled on  day  bingyin 6 ,or  October  20,549 

(LSI  1/  1 1413).  The  f l d n g  and  ensuing  defections  are  described  in  ZS/3185816-8.  It  was  during  this rout that  Zhang  Zuan  was  murdered,  for  Zhang  was  always  forced  to  accompany the  troops  as  Xao  Cha's 

personai  prisoner  and  his  guards  feared  that he  would  fa11  into  the  han&  of Xiao Yi's  pursuing  troops 

(LS/2/503/4).  

> 141

Attempting  to  sort  out the train of  events  from the  various  histones  is  an  arduous  and oniy  panially  

> sucçessflll

task.  The Zhou  Shu  states  that Xiao  Cha  sent an envoy  to  the Western Wei court  pledging  iiege 

during  the  fifieenth  year of  dotong  a, or some point  during  549  (ZSI3/858113).  When  Xiao Yi 

iaunched  an attack  against  him  Iater that year, Xiao  Cha  asked  for  rnikuy  support and sent  his  wife  and 

oldest  son to the Western Wei court as  guarantors  (%hi) (ZS/3/858114-15).  In the  sixteenth  year, or at some 

point  during  550, Xiao  Cha  was  given  the title of Prince of Liang  8 S by the  authority  of the Western Wei  emperor  (ZSf3185912).  However, the Bei Shi states that  Cha  was  given  the title of Prince of Liang 

earlier  than  that, in the  twelfth  month  of the  meenth  year, or some point  behveen  January  4 and  Febniary 

1, 550  in the Western  calendar  @SA/  18 112). A much  later  date  is  given in the  Nan  Shi which  states  that 

Cha  declared  aiiegiance  to the Western Wei as the  seifdeclared  Prince of Liang in the  fourth  month  of the  

> Grst

year  of  dabao  k j l ,  or  between  May 2 and May 30,550  (NS/1/235/5  & 7).  This  was  foiiowed, howwer,  by  what  is  descrîbed  as an attack on  Xiangyang  by  the Western Wei  ~S111235/7)!! Tbere  are 

two  interpretations  for the use of this word "attack" (fa  & ). One is that the  Chinese  word for  "attack"  is aan envoy to the  newly  established  Northem Qi (successor to the Eastern Wei which  it  had 

overthrown  towards  the  middle  of  550)  to explore the possibility of  using  the  same  type of client  status  with  the Northem Qi that Cha  enjoyed  with  the Westem  Wei.142 

Meanwhile,  Yi had laid  siege  to Changsha in an  attempt  to destroy  his  other nephew, Yu. This time Yu  appealed  for help  from  another uncle, Lun, who was now in 

Yingzhou,  having  fled  westward  foUowing  Hou's  victorious  siege of  Jiankang  a year 

earlier.  143  Lun had  his  own  imperial  ambitions which necessitated a  weakened  Yi, but he  

> --

misprint  for  "defense"  Wang  ): the Western Wei, now that it recognized Cha, was  sending  W p s  to bolster  his  defenses.  The  other  is that a  skeptical  historian  is  viewing  these  troops  as  nothing  more  than  an occupation force; hence,  their  arriva1  was  an  attack  on  the  independence of  Cha  rather  than  a boost  to  his  

> security.

In  the  Zizhi  Tongjian,  Xiao  Cha  is  said  to  havc  been  asked  by  the  Western Wei to  accept  the title of Prince of Liang in the  sixth  month  of 550,  after  the  death  of  his  brother,  Yu,  at Changsha 

(ZZTJIU2530/#38; juan 163).  Despite  thc  discrepancics  in  circumstances  and time, the  majority  opinion 

seems  to be that the Western Wei  recognized  Xiao Cha as Prince of Liang in 550 and sent  troops  to bolster  his  defenses. This  opens  up the other question of  determining  at  what  point Xiao Yi was  rnaking 

the  same  overtures  to the  same  Western Wei ernperor in cornpetition with  his  nephew. At the  beginning  of 

550 (the  first  month  of the  first  year of dabao) Yi is  said  to have intended to send  his  young  son,  Fanggui 

% & to  the Wei court to prove  his  desire  to establish a cordial  relationship  with this  power.  However,  the ernperor  refused  this pledge and made a more  "generous"  pact with Yi as  brothers  instead  (NS/1/23516). 

h view  of the fact that another young son, Fanglüe  S 6, was  sent by Yi to the Western Wei  capital  of 

Chang'an  but  retunied  soon  afterwards  (NS/5/1347/4-6),  there  is the  possibility  that  one  ment  has  becorne 

confused  as  two  (and  Fanggui  is not another son but a rnisprint  for Fanglüe). This  is premised  on the 

assumption  that the son  was  able to  r e m  fkom  Chang'an  not  because  the  Westem  Wei  had  broken relations with Yi but  because  the Wei  was  offering  a pact of  brotherhood  between  the  two  rulers.  Another 

source states that in the second  month  of 550 Yi  agred  to send his son,  Fangiüe,  to the Western Wei court  

> as

a guamntor  (zhi)  in  order  to  secure  peace  after  victorious  Western Wei  troops,  which  had  come  to the 

defense  of  Xiangyang  at  Cha's  request,  seemed  bent  on  pushing  on to  Jimgling  (ZZTJl2/2528/#7;  juan 163) (Yi  had  launched an attack  against  Xiangyang  at the end of 549, as noted  above).  in 55 1 (day  jihai 

C of the  second  month  of the second year of dabao, or  March  17,55  1) the Western Wei sent an envoy 

to  Yi in  Jianglmg  (LS/1/116/9).  This was  in the  same  month  during  which the Western Wei  eliminated 

Xiao  Lun  (LSIlI107M)  who  had  been  given  the  title  of  Prince  of Liang by the  rivai  Northem Qi in 550 

(BQSl115412).  The  Northem  Qi  transferred  the title to Yi in the  month  following  L u ' s  death 

(BQS/1/55/1&4).  The fact that the Western Wei sent an envoy to  Jiangiing  a month  before  the Northern 

QI  transferred  the title of Prince of Liang to Yi  suggests  that the Westem Wei  was  attempting  to stop Yi 

h m  becoming  a client of  its  Northern Qi  rival  or at  least  defusing  the  nsks  of  such  client  statu.  

> 142

M e r  sending  two  delegations  to the  Nonhem  Qi to  pledge  ailegiance  and  offer  giAs  (chaogong  I)  f )

in the  eleventh  month  of  550  and the  first  month  of 55  1 (BQSl1/54/8  & 1 l),  Yi  was  W y recognized  as 

Prince of Liang on  day jiwei  5 jti  of the  third  month,  or  April6,  55 1 (BQS/1/55/I-2  & 4). He  had  in  fàct 

already  made an alliance with the Northem Qi at the  same  time that this  regime  recogmzed  Xia0  Lun  as 

Prince of Liang  (ZZTJl21253  1/#60/4).  Lun  was  acknowledged  as Prince of Liang by the Northem  Qi  on 

day  guichou  e a o f  the  ninth  month  of the first year of  tianbao  R q , or  October  2, 550  (BQS/1/53/15  -

5411-2).  

> 143

After  the palace fell to Hou  Jing,  Xiao  Lun  fim  fled to  Kuaiji  which  was  under  Xiao Dalian  ka, one of the sons of Gang  (Lun's  older brother and the  heir  apparent). Gang  had  aiways  considered  Lun  a

physical  threat,  and  his  sons  shared  the  same  uaease.  Lun  sensed  that  his  nephew  was  M d of  him  and was  unsure  that he could  guarantee  unbroken supplies and  sÿfficient trocps  for a direct attack on  his  brother. He therefore  tried  to  lift  the  siege  by a written  appeal,  arguing  that 

the brothers must cooperate  militarily,  for the only reason  Xou  had been  unable  to penetrate  westward  was that the  various  regions  were stoutly defended by the Xiao  family. 

Yi rejected the appeal and continued the  s i e p  despite  temble  losses  on both  sides. '44 

Since  the relationship he had negotiated  with  the Western Wei had  already  defused  the  risk 

of another attack  from  Yangzhou,  Yi was not  afiaid  to continue  his  attack on his nephew. 

Finally,  in the  fourth  month,  one of  Yu's  generals  opened the  city  to Wang Sengbian who was in charge of the  siege.145  Yu was executed and his head sent to  Jiangling  as  proof 

before his body was  returned  for proper  b~ria.l.1~~ 

Although  Lun claimed that his  only  goal was to  ovenhrow  Hou Jing, Yi feared that  his  brother's  continuing  buiid-up  in Yingzhou could be a double-edged sword, 

directed  first  at  him  and only  later  against Hou Jing. He therefore ordered Wang Sengbian to  lead  a naval force of 10,000 against Yingzhou  later  that  fal1.l"  He was  forced  to  flee 

Yingzhou  under  this assault and led his troops  eastward  to Qichang (SW of  present-

day Qichun  & ;8.  , Hubei) in  search  of a safe  base. At this point Lun sought the  same 

endorsement  fiom  the Northem  Qi  that Cha  already  enjoyed fiom the Western Wei. In this way he could have the acknowledgement of  his  vice-regal powers and  his  position as Prince of Liang  while  playing  the  two  kingdoms  off  agaùist  each other, a strategy   

> decideci to

flee  before  he  rnight  decide  to  murder  him.  He  aed  first  to  Xunyang  (Jiangzhou)  but  another   

> nephew, Xiao

Daxh  ji;  e ,was  stationed  here,  and  Lun  seems  to have felt that  this  was  not a power-base for  him.  He  then  rnoved  on to the  next  major  region,  Yingzhou,  whose  commander  was  a cousin, Ke  +&,  

> who

asked  Lun  to  take  on the  tities  of Commander-in-Chiefof Central and  Regional  Armies  (dudu    

> zhongwai zhujunshi rf,

fi  *q) and holder of the golden axe,  authorizing  him  to  lead  an            

> expedition against Hou Jing (NS/Yl324/9-12).
> NS/5/1324/14 to 1325/5. The iosufnciency of

his  uoops  is  stated  in  ZZTJ/2/2528/#10/1.      

> 145 XiangLhou feu either in

the  fourth  month  (NS/1/235/7) or the  nfth  month  (LS/1/114/6)  of  550.  Those 

two  months  m e r  the  period  between  May 2 and  June  29 in the Western  calendar.    

> 14'NS/5/13 14/13

# - 13  IYl   

> 14'NS/5/1325/5-7.

The date  is  given  as  day j i m  'B  9of the  eighth  month,  or  September  13,550 

> (LS/1/106/15).

employed  by  more  than  one Xiao  prince.148  Since  the Northem Qi had  just  replaced the Eastern Wei  regime  in the  nfth  month  of that year, it may have been even more  receptive 

to requests for sponsorship. Perhaps that  explains  why Yi had  ûko  succeeded  h making  an 

alliance  with  the  Northem  Qi.  Because  of Yi's control of  Jiangzhou,  the  Qi  may have 

considered  him  of more  strategic  value  than  Lun. As a result, the Northern Qi troops that had  finaiiy  been put at Lun's disposition  did  notbing  to help Lun when he was attacked by one of Hou Jing's generals, Ren Yue, whose actions against Lun were understood to be in Yi's  immediate  interests.  149 

Forced to flee  again,  Lun  finally  found  a welcome in  Runan,  a city  which  was 

govemed by one of  his  former  officials  who had been placed there by the Wei court. (This in itself dernonstrates the complete loss of control of the western  regions  by  Jiankang  and the  baikanization  of  these  western regions.) This city lay  within  the Western Wei's sphere of influence and  although  the Wei  permitted  Lun to build up the defenses of  this  city, they sent an  army  against  him  when  it  becarne  known  that he was  preparing  to  launch  an expedition against another city in what they rnay have  anticipated  was a move against  their 

own  Prince of Liang (Xiao  Cha).150  A force was sent to lay siege to Runan. The govemor was  killed  in  battle  and Lun  was  captured  and executed in the second  month  of 55  1.151 

Yi  was  therefore relieved of one more  rivai  and was able to  inherit  the Northern  Qi's 

sponsorship of Xiao Lun as  P ~ c e of  Liang.152 (Elevation to the title of  ruler  ( z h )  of the 

Liang  8 I.  was  to  corne  the  following  year.)l"  

> 148

Lun  was  acicnowledged  as Prince of Liang by the Northem Qi on  day  guichou  #*of  the  ninth  month  

> of

the  nrst  year  of  tianbao  R jt  , or  October  2, 550  (BQS/1/53/15  - 5411-2).  Western Wei  troops  set out 

£iom Chang'an  on  day  dingsi  T C of the  ninth  month,  or October 6,550, to  attack  the Northem  Qi            

> (ZZTJl2/253 Il#%; juan 163).
> 149 ZZTJl21253 1/#60 (iuan 163)
> ''ONS/5/1325/10-12
> lS1 LS111107/7; ZZTJlî/2532/#7 (juan 163)
> l x

The  edict  was  issued  in the  month  foilowing  Xiao  Lun's  death,  on  day jiwei  t *of  the  third  month, 

or  April6,  551  (BQS/1/55/1-2  & 4).    

> l53 BQSI 1156n

At about this  same  tirne,  Hou Jing launched a massive  flotilla  fiom  Jiankang  to 

meet  up with  General  Ren Yue in  Xiyang  @ (near  present-day  Huanggang  in Hubei)Y 

The  eastem  area  must have seemed  sufficiently  secure  to permit Hou to engage in  such  amassive operation on the  Xiao  power-centres of the west. He was also  preparing  to  usurp 

the  throne  and wanted to  eliminate  the western Xiao  princes  who could  undermine  his 

legitirnacy  and pose a  military  threat. The  campaign  began  successfully  with the  taking  of Jiangzhou, whose govemor  was  Yi's adolescent son,  Fangzhu,  but ended in  failure  a little over  two  months  later  with  the recapture of Jiangzhou and Hou's  abandonment  of the siege of  Baling  (present-day Yueyang at the  mouth  of Lake Dongting), the  next  major fortification  upriver.  l s5 

Despite  this  setback, Hou decided to press  ahead  with his strategy for  declaring 

himseifemperor.  As to how he should go about this, he had been  following  his  advisor, 

Wang Wei, who told  him  that  from  tirne  immemorial  a throne was  taken  over by the process of fei-fi  ("disposing and establishing"),  156  as part of the path of  legitimation 

discussed in the  e s t  chapter. As  seen  in the case of the  Xiao  usurpers,  this was preceded by a standard path of honours and titles that Hou Jing also needed to acquire before he 

was  properly  (legitirnately)  positioned to accept an abdication.  By  the latter part of 550, at the  sarne  tirne  that Wang Sengbian was advancing on Xiao Lun in Jiangzhou, Hou  was 

enfeoffing  hirnself  as Prince of Han, with  twenty  commanderies, and  retaking  the title of Counselor-in-chief  (m'angguo). Likewise, in  keeping  with the  manner  in which the  great   

> 154 The

number  of ships is  said  to have  been  so  great  that  they  covered  the distance  between  forts  Shitou  

> and

Xinlin  $i*,  a distance  of probably over 10  kms.  The  flotilla  set out on day dingwei  7 *of  the  third       

> month, or Mach 25, 551 (LS/1/107/8).
> 155 Dates

are  often  incoosistent  and  u&liable  in the  historical  sources, as  seen  in this  one  example.  Was 

Xiao  Fangzhu  captured  on  day  bingzi  O -f  of the  intercalary  third  month  (there  is no  day  bingzi in the 

fourth  month),  or  April23,55  1 (LS/1/107/9),  or on  day  bingwu  O +of  îhe  fourth  month,  or May  23,55  1  

> (LSllll16/11)? Hou Jing

lifted  the  siege  of  Baiing  on  day  yisi  2 C of the  sixth  month,  or  July  2 1,551  

> (LS/11107/13)

and  reached  Jiankang  on day  dinghai  T d of the  seventh  month,  or September  1,55  1   

> (LSllllW2). Jimgzhou was

retaken  by General Wang Sengbian on  day  xlnyou  9 '6  of the  sixth  month, 

or  August  6,55  1 (LS/l/107/14).   

> 156 NS/6/2011/6.

In a slightly  expanded  form,  this  terni  becomesjêi  hun  li  ming  (disposhg  of the 

pemenelignorant  and  establishing  the  enlightenednumuious/sagacio~~) (NQS/3/793/2). architect of the  early  Han, Xiao He, had had been honoured, Hou  was  also  granted  the 

three  honours of being  pennitted  to enter the court at an  unhumed  pace, being received 

without  declamation  of  his  name,  and being  allowed  to enter the palace  with  sword and 

shoes.157  r?U  of  these  honours were  bestowed  upon  previous  usurpers  at the appropriate 

tirne.  There is no mention of first  passing  through a ducal stage or  moving  from  a

bisyilabic  p ~ c e l y title to a  monosyllabic  one. However, upon the  bestowal  of the monosyilabic pnncipality and the title of  Prince  of Han  3 3, Hou was understood to be 

prince  over a "kingdom-in-waiting"  (i.e.  one step away  from  the throne). However,  since 

over a  year  elapsed  before the took the throne, Hou probably wanted to be sure of  his 

eastern  stronghold  before  taking  this last step. One  month  after  retuming  to  Jiankang,  Hou sent  soldiers  into the palace to  arrest 

the emperor  (Xao  Gang) and compelled  him  to issue an edict in  his  own  hand, abdicating the throne to  his  grand-nephew, Dong, eldest  grandson  of Xiao  Yan's  prematurely deceased  heir.Is8  The edict justified this abdication by  saying  that the nght of succession was being restored to the line of the eldest son, an argument that  canied  some weight as indicated in the  first  chapter. According to the wording of the edict, Gang, as a younger brother, was a "collateral non-inheriting sonyy (zhishu  ) rather  than  a "direct royal 

heir"  (zhengdi  3- %$j ) . Since  Gang and Tong (the prematurely deceased heir whom Gang 

replaced) had been full brothers, both having the  same  mother,  this  dxerentiation  of  shu 

and di  could  not be  interpreted  as describing the Me-concubine  distinction  but rather the distinction between  inheriting  (di) and  non-inhenting  (shu)  status.  It  was  rooted in the 

widely-held  notion that the  h e  of succession should go  through  the eldest son, and Gang had  not  been the eldest son. This was  such  a strong  tradition that even Emperor Wu had felt pangs of  guilt  when he  fia  diverted the succession from  his  deceased  heir's  eldest son   

> ---
> lS7

LS/ 11 1061 15;  LS/3/854/ 1 1.  When  Xiao Zhengde  was  declareci  emperor, one of the  titles  taken  by  Hou                 

> at the time was that of xiangguo.
> 158 Xia0 Gang was removed nom the throne on day wuwu

& +of  the  eighth  month  or  October  2 , 5 5  1

> (LS/1/108/3-4).

to the  heir's  next  eldest  brother. The supremacy of  this  concept may have been  carried 

into the choice of  narne  for Dong's  reign  period:  tianzheng  X 3.or  " heavenly 

rectification".  Hoivever,  to be sure of  elirninating  any  legitimate  argument for succession by the deposed emperor's sons (or their  ambitious  patrons), Hou had as many of the sons and grandsons murdered as possible. At the  tirne,  many of  them  were  regional  inspectors 

(cishi), since  Hou had  maintained  the tradition of  assigning  royal princes to  regional 

inspectorates, whatever their age. Gang  hirnself  was  spared,  at  least  for the moment, and 

given  the title of Prince of  Jin'an  Q Z .159  His  demise  came a  month  later  in one of the standard execution procedures. The emperor was first  allowed  to  drink  hirnself into a 

stupour,  whereupon  his  executioner placed a bag of  sand  over  his  face and sat upon it  until 

he suffocated. Two months  later,  at the end of 55 1, an imperial edict  (zhao)  honoured Hou with the  Nine  Bestowals (Jiu Xi) and  permitted  him  to assign officiais  along  royai  lines  to  his 

pnncipality.  Since  these  Nine  Bestowals  nomially  came in  conjunction  with elevation to ducal  rank,  there must have been some confusion about the usurper's proper sequence of procedures. The  following  edict  (zhao)  was  closer  to the correct sequence, for  it  assigned the  traditional  nine  honours associated with elevation to the monosyllabic  princely  title, even  though  Hou had aiready held the title of  Prince  of Han for about a year.  These  nine 

honours were the  ceremonid  cap with  twelve  jade pendants, the nurnber  only  the emperor 

could  Wear,  the  right  to fly the emperor's flag, to have the way  cleared  of  ail  persons wherever  his  carriage  passed, to ride in the jingen  ("golden- pole")  carriage,  drawn  by six 

horses  and  acwmpanied  by five paired sets of variously coloured carriages of imperial carriages  in five  difKerent  colours  (wushifuche  a ü+  Ti]  9), to fly the  imperial  yak-head cloud  pennants,  and to  enjoy  the  impenal  eight-row  troupe of  dancers  and the exclusively            

> ' j 9 The circumstances of his removal are described inLS/1/108/6 and NSl1123 1/13

# - 232/4. The  teference                        

> to the zhishu and zhengdi distinction ismade inNS/1/232/2.
> He was kilied on day renyin of the tenth month, or November 9, 55 1(LS/11108/8).

irnperial  arrangement of suspended  chimes.  Since  these  honotirs  marked  Hou as an "emperor-in-waiting", the proper time had  corne  for a final edict  fiom  the emperor (Xiao Dong)  yieldkg  the  throne  tc  Hou. As with the other  usurpers,  a ceremony was held in the southern suburbs where, before  altar  and  flarne,  the abdication was  formally  received  with an announcement to heaven.  161  Hou Jing inaugurated  his  dynasty  with the auspicious 

reign  narne  of  taishi  f ak  ("the  great  beginning").162  Aithough  the  previous  emperor (Dong) had been honoured as Prince of  Huaiyin  $ # I.,  he was imprisoned  with  his  two 

brothers. '63 

With Hou's overthrow of the royal  farnily,  Xiao Yi was now in the  unarnbiguous 

position of being able to  try  for the throne not by  attacking  a brother, nephew or cousin but by  destroying  a known  usurper and,  &er  judiciously  eliminating  a few royal members not  aiready  murdered by the usurper,  clairning  to be the restorer of the broken  line.1"  As discussed in Chapter One, the title of Prince of Liang  legitimated  this  function  as restorer of the throne  because  of the tradition established by the first emperor of the Eastern Jin. 

As Prince of Liang, he was one step  removed  from  rightfùlly  mounting the ancestral throne. In the second  month  of 552, Yi issued a  cal1  to arms to the  entire  realm  fiom 

Jiangling  and put the  amies  of chastisement  under  the  command  of Wang  Sengbian.165 

Wang  was  hspector  (cishi)  of  Jiangzhou,  having  won back the  fortress  fkom  Hou's  amies  

> 16'

NSl6120 11110-14  

> 16' HOU

Jing made  himself  Prince of Han, the  last  requisite  title for accession to the throne, either in the   

> seventh month

(NSl6120 1012) or the  eighth  month  (LS/1/ lO6/l5 - 10711) of  550. Hou Jing  took  the throne on the  nineteenth  &y  of the  elwenth  month  of  year  ximvei  Q *, or  January  1,552  (NS16120 16n-8).  

> 163

NSIW  13131 14; NS/6/20 1214-5  

> lti4

II1  ElCf  in a discussion with Wang Sengbian,  who  was  leading  the  expedition  against  Hou Jing and 

asking  for  iastnictions  on how to  deal  with Gang or  any  other Xiao  heir  who  might  still  be  a h e ,  Yi told  

> him

to cany  the  power  of  arms  to  their  ulümate  within  the palace. The implication of  regicide  was  clear,

and Wang told  him  that  some  other  generai  would  have to  be  given  that  ta& for he  could  not  bear  to  take 

the  role  of  General  Cheng Ji  &, 8who,  almost  three  centuries  earlier,  had  rnurdered  Cao Mao  g , then 

the  incumbent  on the Wei throne, to help Sima Zhao  Sj  & BFt  in  his  plot to  estabüsh  the Jin  throne.  Yi  

> thereupon

asked  another  general  to  proceed  with the  task  of  kiîiing  his  grand-nephew,  Dong and Dong's   

> brothers (Xiao

Gang  had  a h d y  k e n  kilied  by Hou at the  tirne)  (NS/5/13 14/24).  

> 165

LSl1112 1/14 about seven months  earlier,  and set out  fiom  here with a massive force of a hundred thousand troops.  166  Jiangzhou  had in a sense  marked the  divide  betwetn  the  rival  power centres of  east  (Jiankang)  a d  west (Jiangling). Hou had been  unable  to penetrate this 

divide  and now the western forces, dorninated by Yi, were  moving  into  the  eastem  zone. Hou  was  unable  to  maintain  a defense and was defeated 120 days  after  taking  the 

throne.167  Hou attempted to flee in a boat  eastwards  with a few  confidants  who betrayed 

his  tmst  and  killed  hirn.168  His corpse was sent to  General  Wang who proceeded with the 

usual  indignities:  Hou's two  hands  were sent to Yi's "patron", the  Northem  Qi  emperor; 

his  head was sent to  Jiangling  where Yi had  it  boiled and lacquered  after  displaying  it in the market square for  three  days; and  his  body,  heavily  salted  for preservation, was sent to Jiankang where  it  was  exposed in the market-place and  finally  boiled into a soup that  was 

eaten by a  resentfùl  populace, including the Princess Liyang  $ f#  .'k'  A ,  a daughter  of 

Xiao  Gang who had been  manied  to Hou  Jing? 

Although  Hou had been defeated, Yi was impeded in  his  imperial  ambitions by the 

continuing  presence of  his  grand-nephew, Dong, who could  daim  a right to reinstatement on the throne,  especially  since  he belonged to the most legitimate "line of the  eldest".  Xiao Yi therefore  arranged  with one of  his  generals  in  Jiankang  to invite Dong and  his  two 

brothers to an  on-ship  drinking  party in the course of  which  the brothers conveniently  feli 

overboard and  drowned.170     

> 166 LS/1/122/6 &125/1
> lti7

On the  nineteenth  day  of the third  month  of  year  renshen  & 9 or  April28,552  (NS/6/2016/8).  The  

> same

souroe  says that 120 days  passed  between  his  taking  the  throne  and  his  defeat.  He  was  killed  in the third  month  according  to the Liang  Shu  (LSI1/125/11)  but in the  fourth  month  according to the  Zizhi  

> Tongjian.

The Liang  Shu  has  probably  confused  the time of  his  defeat with the time of  his  death.  See  

> following note.

According  to the  Zizhi  Tongjim,  this  occurred  on  day jimao  L JP  of the  fourth  month,  but no  day  

> jimao

seems  to  be  possible in the  fourth  month  (ZZTJ/2/2537/# 1.115; juan  164).  Hence,  the exact date of 

his  demise  is  unclear.  However,  since  martial law  was  lifted  on day  dingsi  T t2,of the  fourth  month,  or May 28, 552, he  must  have been  killed  just prior  to this date  (ZZTJ/2/2536/#  14/13  ;juan  164).     

> 169 LSl3186Ul-3; NSl6120 161 15

# - 20  1712.  For the  princes's  relationship  with  Hou,  see  NSI  l/233/lO.    

> lm NSI5113 14/2-4.

This  occurred  on  day  xinmao  9 @ of the third  month,  or May 2,552  (LS/11127/11- 

> 121,

tbtee  &ys  fier  the  victory  celebration  on  ciay  wuzi  /fi  T,  or  April29,552  (LS/1/125/lI).  At the time 

of  their  murder,  Hou  was  still  at large. Yi gave no posthumous imperial title to Dong but he bestowed the title of Emperor  Jianwen  ifA  on  his  brother,  Gang.  171  Gang's  imperial  rols  was that of a Puppet 

for Hou Jing but he had legitimacy as Emperor Wu's designated  heir.  There  appears  to be a contradiction in Yi's acknowledging Gang as the  late  emperor  while  never  accepting  his 

imperial  reign  narne  of  dzbao  ("the great treasure") even after the death of Hou.  Instead, 

he  continued  to use Emperor Wu's  r e i p  title of  taiqing  . This did not  just  symbolize  arepudiation of  his  brother's reign  because  of his  s u b s e ~ e n c e to Hou Jing.  It  also  implied 

that, in  terms  of  legitimacy,  they were still in the impenal era  which  had established the operative principle of  transferring  the  line  to the next  surviving  (i.e."the  "most senior") son of Emperor Wu  (Xia0  Yan).  After  the death of Gang and the  dernise  of Lun, Yi would be the next  s u ~ v i n g son. He  was  the "most senior" both by age and generation. However, Yi  waited  almost  eight  months before  declaring  himself emperor in Jiangling and using  t!!e 

reign  name  of  chengsheng  ifc  ("continuing  the sacred [throne]"),  implying  the restoration of the Liang throne handed  down  fiom  his  father.17* Earlier  that  year  the Northem Qi had officially  granted  him  the title of  d e r  (zhu)  of the  Liang?  indicating its continued support of  him.173  However, by  taking  the throne in  Jiangling,  he  was 

acknowledging that he  still  felt too  insecure  to leave. Hou's  revolt  and the client  status  of the  various  princes  with the  rivai  northern  regimes  had  left  the Liang  realm  permanently 

divided  between  east  and  West  and  baikanized  within  these  divisions. Yi had avoided 

showing  precipitous haste and had preceded  his  enthronement with the mandatory  three 

pressing petitions  fiom  the people, the first led by  his  general Wang Sengbian in the  third 

month,  marking  the end of Hou Jing's regime  and the  desire  to  re-establish  the Liang throne in  Jiankang,  the second by  Xiao  Ke, the  "elder  statesman", accompanied by other                 

> 171 The title was bestowed on day jichou &B o f the third month, or Aprii 30,552 (NSll/232/6-7).
> ln

On  day  bingzi  W -f  of the  eleventh  month,  or  December  23,552  (LSI111 3 111 2). 

> 173 BQSl1/56/î

imperial  relatives, and the third in the tenth  month,  led  by princes and  officials  in the court 

Although  Yu and  Lun  had long been  eliminated  as  threats  in the western  region,  Yi 

stiii  had  Cha on  his  northern  flank.  In addition, there was his youngest brother, Ji, to  his 

west  in Sichuan, the land of Shu which  historically  had been the  seat  of independent 

kingdoms.  Ji had spent seventeen  years  in the land of Shu as the  Inspector  General  (cishi) 

of  Yizhou  and had  built  up its wealth and  military  resources. 175

Like  his  other brothers, Ji had adopted the title of Prince of Liang,  with  the  same 

pretensions to the throne as his older  brothers.176  In 552,  shortly  afier  Hou's defeat, Ji declared  himself  emperor in Yizhou, adopting  iianzheng  ("heavenly  rectification") as his 

reign  narne,  the  sarne  narne  which had been used by  Xiao  Dong.  177 

Ji had  obviousiy  overstepped the vice-regal  authority  (chengrhi  6 ) bestowed 

on  hirn  in the secret edict brought by Xiao Shao in 549. At the time, Ji  is  said  to have sent 

his  eldest son wîth 30,000 crack troops to be put at the  disposal  of Xiao  Yi.178 Ethe 

dating is correct, the  mobilization  took over a year, and this seems to  justim  the  bald      

> 174 LS/1/125/11, 128/3 &13 il4

respectively.   

> 17'ZZTJ/2/2537/#13

ouan  1 6 1 )  8 NS1511332111-12  

> 176

NS/S/  l332R  

> ln

The  hinoncal  sources are  conuadictory  in their dating.  Aceording  to the Liang  Shu,  Xiao Ji took the 

imperial  title on  &y  yisi  2 C of the  fourth  month  of the third year of dabao,  or  May 16,552  

> (LS/1/127/13).

This date  1s confirmeci  in the Zizhi  Tongjian  compileci  by  the Song  historian,  Sima Biao    

> (ZZïJ/2/2537/#13; juan 164).

According to the Nan Shi,  however,  he made  himselfemperor  oa  day  

> yichou

t*of  the  fourth  month  of the second year of dabao, or  June  1 1,55  1 (NSl51132914).  Perhaps  this 

earlier  date is  actuaiiy  the  time  he  declared  himseff  Prince of Liang. The  same  history  also  states  that  he 

had  taken  the  imperid  title  before  Hou Jing  was  killed  (NS/5/1330/9-10).  The Liang Shu  states  that Hou 

Jing  was  defeated  and  killed  in the  third  month  (April28,  552)  whereas  the Zizhi  Tongjian  States  that he  

> was

defeated  in the third  month  and  k i k i  in the  fourth  month  (ZïJ/2/2537/#  l M ) .  Furthennore,  the 

same  history  refers  to the  inauspicious  use of the  reign  name  tianzheng  R i€ by  both  Xiao Dong and Xiao  

> Ji

and  interprets  the  character  tian  as  king  composed  of the  two  characters  meaning  " two  peoplen and 

the  character  zheng  as  k i n g  composed  of the characters  meaning  "one  oniy",  in the  sense  that the  two 

people  had  one year (of  mie)  ody  (NSl51132914).  Xiao Dong  was  on the  throne  for  Iess  than  a year, but if Xiao Ji  was  lcilled  about the  middle  of 553 as is  reportai  in the Liang  Shu,  he  would  have  had  to  take  the throne in 552, not 551, if he  had  oniy one year of  mie.  It would  appear  that Xiao Ji took the  throne  in 552, after the  clear-cut  victory  over Hou Jing's forces but  just  before  Hou  was  killed  during  his  attempted 

-pe- 

> 178 NS/5/1328/13

historical  statement that Ji did not go to the  aid  of  his  father.17g Yi, however,  was  the one who told  his  nephew (Ji's eldest son) not to proceed to  JianKang  once he reached Badong which  lay  about  three  hundred  kilornetres  to the west  of  Jianghg.  This may have been acceptable to Ji,  since  it is  very  likely that he was  caiculating  how Hou's rebeliion could be used to  his  own  advantage.  Certainiy,  Yi was  afraid  upon  hearing  that  his  brother  was 

preparing  to  lead  another  army  out of  Yizhou  (Chengdu) to  join  his  son in Badong and sent a  letter  urging  him to  take  charge of  pacikng  Shu  while  he looked after  putting  down Hou Jing's  rebellion.180  However, after Hou was defeated, Ji must have felt he had an 

equally  legitimate  claim  to the throne and, as emperor, launched a  flotilla  which by the eighth  month  of the year (552) had reached  his  son's encampment.  181  Ji  was  counselled  by 

his  generals  not to stnke out for  giory  away  from  the home base of this Shu  m y .  lS2  By 

surnrner  of the  following  year  (553) Ji's troops were suffering  from  fatigue,  depletion of food supplies, and low  moraie.18?  in addition, the Wei had entered  his  home temtory and were heading  towards  Chengdu which had no  real  defenses. Some of Ji's forces dispersed. Ji  was  seized in  his  boat and  killed  on  his  brother's  orders.lS4  Al1  his  sons were  elifninated 

as well. Yi, however, was not to  last  much  beyond this. In the  balkanization  of the  impenal 

house,  Yi's  reign,  like  that of the other princes in the post-Hou era,  was  to be  extremely 

limited  both  geographically  and temporally. Over a year  later,  a Western Wei army  arrived    

> 17~LS/3/826/4
> '*O

NS/5/1329/1-2  

> I8l

The  entire  sequence  of  events  is  unclear.  in the Liang  Shu  ,Xiao Ji's biography  -tes  that he set out for Ba Commandery in the  fourth  mont& of the  f ï f b  year of  taiqing,  or 55 1,  with  the object  of  helping  to put down Hou Jing  (LS/3/826/10). It would  appear  that the  achance  troops  under  his  son's command  had 

never  moved!  The biography of  Emperor  Yuan (Xiao Yi)  seems  to refer to Ji's  flotilla  as  king  launched 

in the  eighth  month  of the  third  year of  dabao  (552),  after Ji  had  taken  the  throne  ( W U 1 2 1/14 &      

> 128/13).
> lS2 NS/5/1330/11
> lS3 NSl511332115
> 184 XiaO Ji's demise is

dated  as  day  W e i Q *of  the  heenth  month  of the  second  year of  chengsheng,    

> or August 5,553 (LS/1/133/5).

in  Xiangyang,  and  their  client, Xiao Cha, brought  his  troops  under  them.lg5 The Wei 

amies  marched  on  Jiangling  and  withh  twenty-eight  days the city had  surrendered,  even before the troops conscripted  fiom  ail the surrounding  temtary  had  tirne  to  anive  on the  

> scene.186

An  urgent  call  for help had been sent to Wang Sengbian in Jiankang wherc Wang 

was  maintainkg  control of Jiankang for Yi, but he did not succeed in sending an  m y in 

tirne.  l W  Troops sent by Yi's "patron", the  emperor  of the  Northem  Qi,  also  failed  to 

matenalize  before the city fell. Yi's  own  responsibility for the  debacle  varies according to the  historical  sources consulted. 189  The  city's  fortifications had been strengthened considerably  after  Jiankang 

fell to Hou However, Yi is quoted as acknowledging that  his  ski11  was  titerary  and that  his  greatest  weakness  was  on the  military  side.19'  He  did not even have enough 

equestrian  ski11  to  nsk  breaking  through the siege  lines  to reach a general who  rnight  offer 

assistance. That general had  originally  been condemned as Hou's accomplice but had been 

fieed  nom  prison  in  order  to help against Ji and might respond  again  to a personal 

petition. Yi,  knowing  that he could not gallop  through  the  lines,  hid  behind  a moral  facade, 

claiming  that  such  a hitless  gesture  would be more  humiliating  than  actual  surrender.192 

Feeling he could  not  hold out before  outside  help  anived,  Yi sent  his  son and  chief  advisor  

> las

They  anived  on  day  bingyin  O of the  tenth  month  of the  third  year  of chengsheng, or November  13, 

554  (LS/1/134/13).  

> la6

NSI 1124514  

> 18'

LS111134/t4 

BQS/1/59/7-8      

> lg9 The Liang Shu, king the

official  history  of the Xiao  ernperon,  puts  Yi in a more positive  light.  It   

> suggests that

the  ci@ feli  after a  quisling  opened one of the gates to the Wei  (LSl1113517). The more "objective" Nan Shi puts  this  in a different  light.  When one of Yi's  generals  leanied  that Yi  had  sent  his 

son and an  advisor  to  discuss  surender,  he  decided  to  better  his  own  chances of  SUrYiving  by  going  over to the  other  side.  Whîle  still  inside  the city,  he  led  his troops in a rush  on one of the gates,  with  the intention of  opening  it  to the enemy  (NSl11245/3). Whiie  the Liang  Shu  d & b  Xiao Yi as  being  bold  enough to 

inspect  the  defenses  against  the Wei (LS/1/135/6-7), the  Nan  Shi  emphasizes  his  fear  of  riding  horseback 

through the enemy  lines  at  night  in  order  to  appeal  for help and points out  his  rapid  decision  to surrender 

(NSl1/244114 to 24513). 

> lgO

NSI511345/4 

~91~~/11243115  

> Ig2

NSI ll2Wl4-15 to discuss surrender. One of  his  generals, on  leaming  of this,  led  his  troops in a  rush  on one of the gates in  order  to surrender to the enemy and better  his  chances of  being  spared. Yi could do  nothing  more  than  ride out of the East Gate on a white horse and plain 

garments  in a gesture  of surrender. 193  Yi  was  sent to the camp of  Xiao  Cha and murdered over a  month  later  in the traditional  manner  of suffocation  under  a sandbag.194  Only  one of 

his  sons (the  future  Emperor Jing  & +) was to survive. 

lianghg  was  completely destroyed as a power base. The  city  was  sacked, and tens of  thousands  of able-bodied men and women were sent to the Western Wei capital of 

Chang'an  as slaves  while  the young and  weak  were killed.  195  Cha was made  mler  (zhu)  of Liang but was displaced fiom  his  former base of  Xiangyang,  which was now  taken  over by 

the Wei, and  given  the single  region  (zhou)  of Jiangling as  his  kingdom.  Wei troops were stationed in Jiangling,  allegedly  to assist in the defense of the  temtory  but  actuaily  to keep a check on their protégé. Cha was henceforth forced to  iimit  his  ambitions to being an "emperot'  within  the confines of this  small  fief where he took the  reign  name  of  dadng 

# 2 (''the  great  stability").  Though  he called  himself  "emperor"  (hangdi),  he was treated as nothing more  than  a minister  (chen)  of the  true  Wei  throne  and could  only  maintain  the 

bureaucratie  and legal  systems  that were reserved for a vassal prince  (wang),  not a true 

emperor on an  equal  footing  with  the Wei.  lg6 

Imrnediately  after  the  f d  of Jiangling, a general  had  advised  Cha to  murder  the 

chef  of the  occupying  forces at a banquet in honour of the Wei  army  and destroy their 

encampment.  The people were certain to raily  around  him,  for they were southemers who hoped to  return  to the  east  and  feared  for their  fates  under  these  northem invaders. With the  backing  of the people and the  arriva1  of sympathetic generals  Wre  Wang  Sengbian  fiom   

> lg3 NS/1/245/3
> lg4

Thû  was  on  day  ximvei  *of  the  twelfth  month  of the  thrd  year  of  chengsheng,  or  Ianiiiyy  27,555         

> ( ~ s / i / 1 3 s n gi 9).
> lg5 LS/1/135/10; ZS/3/860/15 &861/1
> lg6 ZS/1/859/9 &12

the  east,  the Wei would not  dare  take  any  action. Cha acknowledged the ment of the plan but  refused  to go  along,  saying  that he could not betray the generosity of the Wei towards 

him.  Since  Wang  Sengbian  had been Yi's general and Cha could  not  be sure that  his  c l a h 

as emperor  would  be tenable without Wei support, Cha's  sense  of  loyalty  to the Wei was probably self-interested. The ferocious steps  later  taken  by the Wei, however, soon made 

him  regret  his  decision. lg7 

About a month  &er  Yi was  killed,  the Northem Qi court, which had treated Yi as its client  emperor  in the  south,  issued an edict declaring that Xiao  Yuanming  jk  81 g , ason of Emperor Wu's oldest brother, was the  "new"  Liang  d e r  (Liang  zhu),  198  and 

prepared to send Gao  Huan  & i&, a younger brother of the Northem Qi emperor, to  lead 

an  escorting  army  to  Jiankang.lg9 This Xiao scion had been  caphired  along  with other Liang generals  during  the  calamitous  northem expedition launched in 497 by Emperor Wu to  coincide  with  his  welcoming  of Hou  Jingzo0  Now, in a gesture which suggested its 

desire  to  maintain  a nval  sphere of influence in the  south,  the  Nonhem  Qi was sending 

Yuanmuig  back as the Liang  ruler,  accompanied by a number of other Liang generals 

captured  dunng the  sarne  expedition. This  decision  must have been  affected  by the  fact 

that,  with the  elimination  of Yi, who had been the Northem  Qi's  client in  Jiankang,  the Western Wei had placed the western section of the southem  realrn  completely  within  its sphere of influence. Therefore, by sending a new client to  Jiankang,  the Northem Qi  was 

staking  out  its  counterpart  sphere of influence. Neither of the northem  nval  kingdoms, 

however,  was  strong  enough to support its  rival  southem  rulers  with  rnilitary  carnpaigns 

that  would  put one  mler  on a united throne. In addition, neither  side  could completely  

> lg7 ZS/3/860/3

# - 86111      

> lg8 The edict was issued

on  &y  renyin  ff  of the  fïrst  month  of the  sUnb  year  of  timbao  A Q ,or               

> February 27,555 (BQS/1/59/11-12). Anather source gives the day as xinchou 3, or February 26
> (ZZTJ/U2545/#5).
> lg9 LSlll143rt
> 2oo Placed

in charge  of  land  and naval forces, he  headed  towards  Pengcheng  &but,  iike  other Xiao men in milltary  position, had no  strategy  or plans. When the Wei sent a general  against  him,  he  was  in a       

> dninken stupour and easiiy seized (NS/4/127 119

# - l272/5). control events in the  south.  Only  when a strong united north  was  eventuaiiy  formed  under 

the Sui  was  the  south  finally "dominated". 

M e r  the Western Wei had sacked  Jiangling  and  taken  direct control of  this  region, 

there  was  no concerted  campaign  fiom  the east to  take  it back.  Since  Hou's defeat, the 

eastem  capital of Jiankang had been in the hands of Wang  Sengbian.  His  mandate  was  to govem on  behalf  of Yi while the latter stayed  behind  in  Jiangling  in an ultimately vain 

attempt  to  maintain  control of  his  western power base. Wang, however,  was  not  reaiiy  in sole control.  M e r  he had been  charged  by Yi with leading the forces  against  Hou Jing, another general,  Chen  Baxian  # h, who had intense ambition (he  was  later  to 

overthrow  the Liang and found the  Chen  dynasty)  and a strong  army  of  fi@ thousand, sent an  advance  contingent of  five  thousand to  meet  up with Wang at Penkou (in the modem-day  Jiujiang  area).  This  display  of strength  from  a general  who seemed to be 

overshadowing  him  in  fame  fnghtened  Wang and prompted him to accept an alliance, 

sealed  with a blood pact  between  the  two.201 M e r  Hou's defeat, Wang took control of the capital as cishi of Yangzhou  while  Chen  held the traditional  counterweight  position of 

czshi  of Southem Xuzhou (to the east of the capital in present-day  Zhenjiang).z02 

Mer  the  demise  of Yi in the  West,  Wang and  Chen  had decided to put Xiao 

Fangzh  % % f ,the  ninth  son of Yi, on the  throne  at  Jiankang.  Since  he was probably 

ody  twelve  at the  tirne,  Fangzhi  was conveniently young enough to be  manipulated  by  any 

usurper but he  was  in fact the  only  survivor  of Emperor Yuan  Q (the posthumous  title 

later  given to Xiao  Yi).203  Fan@  had been appointed  inspecter  (cishi) of  Jiangzhou  in 553 and  was  therefore stationed at  Xunyang,  the  regional  capital,  at  the  tirne  of the  sack  of 

Jiangi~ng.~O~ He  was  ddy  granted  vice-regal powers  (chengrhi  i& $1 ) and given the  title  of 

Prince  of Liang to replace  his  present  titie  of Prince of  Jin'an  % 5 , as needed in  order        

> 201 NS/5/1538/6-7
> 202 LS/I/143/2-3
> 203 His age is giwn

as 16 [sui] at the  tirne  of  his  death  in 557  (LS/1/150/4).  

> 204 LS/1/143/2

to  cab  his  legithacy  as the  inheritor  of the royal  mantle.203  Fangzhi  left  for  Jiankang 

in  this  formal  capacity in the second  month  of 55 5.206 

The Northem Qi  decision  to send Xiao Yuanming as the heir was unwelcorne interference for Wang and  Chen.  Wang first  refùsed  to accept  him,  ignoring  Yuanniing's 

letters  explairing  his  rightful  place and  duty  as  heir.207 In response, Gao Huan, the  official 

head  of the  Northern  Qi escort,  attacked a  strategic  fortress well  within  Liang  temtory 

and beheaded the  defender.208  General Wang was  fnghtened  and,  after  considenng  his 

options and advantages,  finally  negotiated a  written  agreement with  Yuanming  who by now  was  waiting  at  Liyang  @ , about 70  kilometres  from  Jiankang close to the northem shore of the  Yangzi.  Wang prornised that he would send one of  his  sons, the son's mother and a nephew to the Northem  Qi  court as  guarantors  before Xiao crossed the  Yangzi.  It 

was  also  agreed that  Fangzhi  would be made the  imperial  heir. In  tum,  Yuanming would cross with a reduced  bodyguard  of a thousand  soldiers  to avoid the  appearance  of a

rnilitary  threat.209  Finally,  by the end of the  surnrner,  Wang met  Yuanming  on the  southern 

side  of the  Yangzi,  having  decided that he was  vulnerable  to the machinations of the Northem Qi and would be  safer  meeting  him  there rather  than  on the northem  side.  Five days  later  Yuanming  took the throne, with the  reign  title of  tiancheng  ff  &,  ("the accomplishment of  heavenn).210 

Two months  later,  Chen  led a surprise attack on Jiankang  fiom  his  base in  Jhgkoy 

east  of the capital. Wang had sent an envoy to tell  Chen  about reports that a large   

> 205 NS11124711.

The Liang Shu,  king  the  history  of the  "Iegitimate" h e  of  ruiers  in the  House  of Liang, 

makes  no mention of the title of Prince of Liang  (LSI  11 14313).   

> 206 He

inherited  the title of Prince of  lin'an  from  his  father  in 552  (LSI 11 14312).  He  left  fiangzhou  on  day  

> guichou

**of  the second  month  of the  fourth  year  of  chengsheng  a ,or  March  10,555    

> (NSI 11247/2).
> 207 NSl51154 l/S
> Gao

Huan  attacked  Dongguan  $k  (NS/J/127  111 1).  This is  southeast  of  present-day  Dongguan  which 

lies  southeast  of Chao  County  (on Lake Chao) in Anhui  (ZLDC, 174).   

> 209 NSl51154 1/6-10
> 210

Wang met  him  on  day  xinchou  +a. of the  seventh  month,  or August 25.555  (LSIl/lQ4/1).  They 

arriveci  in the capital on day jiachen  7 1, or August 28, and Yuanming  took  the  throne  on  &y  bingmc 

# +,or August 30  (NS/1/247/8). Northem  Qi force had arrived at Shouchun just  south  of the Huai  River.211 Chen  detained the envoy and  mobilized  troops for a lightning  attack on Wang that  night,  knowing  that, if 

necessary,  he could use the  pretext  of  leading  troops  tu  iielp  ag&st  the Qi. On  amiving  in 

Jiankang,  he accused Wang of conspiring with the Northem Qi to send troops  south  to 

help  him  elimlliate  Chen.  One of  his  proofs was the ease with  which  they had  taken  the northem gates. Wang was allegedly anticipating the  arriva1  of northem troops and had secretly opened up the  city  in readiness for their entry. The report about the  Qi  tumed  out to be  unfounded  but  not  before  Chen  had exploited it to stage  his  coup and have Wang  ~trangled.~12 Yuanming  was  dismissed  as emperor and replaced by  Fangzhi,  and  Chen  took over Wang's  civilian  and  military  power and  his  position as  inspecter  (cishi)  of  Yangzhou.213 

In an attempt to  secure  his  position with the Northem Qi,  Chen  reported to them that he had killed Wang  because  he showed  signs  of  treachery  and sent Xiao Zhuang  jk 

# 9, the young  grandson  of Yi, to the northem court as a  guarantor  (zhi), declaring  that  the Liang  was  subject  to the  Qi  (chen yu Qi  E ;f  *) and  forever  loyal as a vassal state  

> 211

Alm  known  as  Shouyang,  it  was  located  at  present-day  Shou  County  in Anhui, on a southern  tributary 

of the Huai River  (ZLDC,  p. 382).  

> *12

NS/5/1541/12 - 1542ff  

> 213

Once  again,  there  is  some  confunon  about dates in the  various  historical  sources.  Chen  staged  the coup,  killed  Wang and  dismisseci  Yuanming  on  &y  jiachen of the  ninth  month,  or  October  27, 555 

(LSI 1114412). Both the Liang  Shu  and the  Nan  Shi state that  Fangzhi  was  made emperor on  &y  bingwu  of the  ninth  month,  or  ûctober  29,555 and  issued  an  edict  changing  the  reign  titie and  dedaring  an  amnesty 

on  day jisi  tr  €5 of the tenth  month,  or November 2 1,555  (LW  11 14412-3 and  NS/112471 10). This  Iatter 

date  seems  unlikely!  According  to  the  Zizhi  Tongiian,  Yuanming  abdicatd  on  day  bingwu  (October  29) and  Fangzhi  ascended  the  throne  and declared the  new  reign  titie and a general  amnesty  on  day jiyou  C

is of the tenth  month,  or November  1,555  (ZZTJ/2/25461#25; juan 166).  Chen  then  took on  his  new  titles 

and positions on  àay  rem1  +k +of the tenth  month,  or November 4,555  (LS/  1114r1/7-8).  

> 214

Only  one source  seems  to mention that  Xiao  Zhuang  was  sent to the Northem Qi when  Fan&  as 

made emperor but it  fàils to  be  more  precise  about the  tirne  (NS/5/1345/13). It is  also  difncult  to 

determine  when  Chen  reported  Wang's  ailegedly  treacherous  intentions to the  north  and  declared  vassal  

> statu.

In  view  of the  events  d e s c n i  elsewhere,  what  is  stated  here  may  be  sequentialiy  correct but  is

fatoo  eiiiptical  to  provide  a full  pichue  and  too  vaguely  mted  to  permit  a reader  to  see  how it  meshes 

with events  mentioned  elsewhere  (NS/4/  12731 1-2).Almost  immediately,  Chen  was faced with an  uprising  in the home base of the 

Chen  family  in the  east.  In  his  absence  kom  Jiankang,  two  generals who had served  under 

Hou Jing but were  forgiven  with  inspectorates  beyond the  lungzi  c a p n i d  one of the 

city's  fortresses and pleaded for help  fiom  the  Qi.215  They were routed by the  returning 

Chen,  but the Qi  again  agreed to send troops. At the end of the year the  two  generals fled to  Caishi  Ji  +;6  ii) to  meet  the  army  at  this  strategic crossing-point on the  Yangzi  wea  of 

Jiankang,  but a  flotilla  sent by  Chen  broke the force of the Qi  arrny.  By the  summer  of the 

following  year  (556),  however, Qi troops were  zeroing  in on the capital. They  promised  to retreat if Yuanming were retumed to their  side.  Chen  acceded to their request,  prornising 

once  again  his  faitffil  liege to the Qi, but Yuanming died soon  aflenvards,  apparently before the trade-off could be  arranged.216 The Northem Qi troops were soon at the capital,  having  approached  from  the  south,  but  Chen  successfÙlly  sent massive forces 

against  them and executed  several  of their generals. The state of emergency was  lifted  in the  sixth  month,  and in the  ninth  month  the reign title was changed to  taiping  f;  ("great peace") in recognition of the  victory.217 

Assistance  from  the Northem Qi was insufficient to  overwhelm  Chen,  and the loss of Wang  Sengbian  rneant  that the strongest Xiao support had been  eliminated.  Chen  now 

pressed relentlessly  ahead  towards  usurpation  foflowing  the  same  legitirnizing  path of awards and  tities  as  Xiao  Daocheng and Xiao  Yan  had  followed  in  founding  the Qi and Liang. By the  tenth  month,  he had been  proclaimed  Prince of  Chen  If  3.,the  final  title with  which,  by the  wiU  of  Heaven,  he could  legitimately  accept a throne and  establish  anew  dynasty.  Three  days  afler  this title was bestowed on  Chen,  the boy emperor issued an 

edict  of abdication,  subrnitting  the  throne  to the Prince of  Chen  in  accordance with the    

> lS These were

Ren  Yue  # ,now  inspector  (cishi) of  Southern  Yuthou  and  Xu  Sihui  +i@J a, now            

> inspector (cishi) of Qiaozhou ti$ t)l, and Qinzhou #ti (LS/l/l W12-13).
> l6 The date

of  deaîh  is  also  given  as  day  gu iwei  of the  fif?h month,  or  Iune  2,556  (LS111146/6). The promise of  faithful  liege  is made in  NS/4/1273/2, although  the  time  is not  cleariy  s t a t d  The  ment  is  also  

> d e s c r i i

in ZZTJ/W2548/#12 (juan  166).      

> 217 011 day renyin +& of

the  ninth  month, or  October  19,556  (LS/l/lJ7/1). ancient  tradition of Yao and Shun and the  histoncal  precedent of the Song and the Qi, and 

justifjhg  this  on the  basis  that the Liang was a spent force, with the element of fie, which had  symbolized  its  strength,  having  coticluded  its cycle and  yielding  to  the  element which 

energized  the new  Chen  regime. 21 

The former  child  emperor  was  given  the title of Prince of  Jiangyin  & 3 and  was 

dowed  to survive for a few more  months.219  Chen  fomally  took the throne four days 

foiiowing  abdication by  FangAu  (known  posthumously as Emperor Jing  "the 

respectfiil"),22* and sent  ecvoys  to Qi to piedge liege  (cheng fan  #&  ) to the  northern 

throne.221  The Northem Qi  may  have been  limited  in its  rnilitary  cornmitment (or threat) to the  south,  but acknowledging  vassal  status seems to have been  political  insurance  for the southem  regime. 

The idea of restoring the Xiao  family  was not completely abandoned, however, and an  appeal  was  made to the Northem  Qi  by a loyalist  general to sponsor Xiao  Zhuang, 

grandson  of Yi, as the  nghtfil  heir to the Liang throne. Wang Lin  3 rit.,  a general from asouthem  military  farniIy222 whose  sister  had been a  favourite  of  Yi,223 was  the one who had sent the  six-yearsld  Zhuang to  Jiankang  after  he had been  successfulIy  hidden  during 

the Western Wei attack on  Jia11gling.22~ Wang was now in Changsha, having seized 

Xiangzhou  after  the  fa11 of  Jianghg  with  the intention of restoring the  Liang225  He had made attacks on and been attacked by Xiao Cha but  is  said  to have  finaiiy  decided to  

> 218

He  was  given the  title  of Prince of  Chen  on  day  w c h e n  fi  a, or November 9,557  (LS/1/  lWS).  The 

edict  of abdication  was  issued  on  day  xinwei  of the tenth  month,  or November 12,557  (LS/ l/l49/7).  

> 219

One source  says  he  was  killed  the  same  day  on which he  took  the  throne  (BQS/1/64/10).  Awther  

> source

states  that  he  was  kilIed  on  day  yichou  2 *of  the  fourth  month  of the second  year  of  yongdingk 

,or May 5,558  (ZïJ/2/2554/#  13; juan  167). The  official  Chen  history  gives  the  same  date but  simply  

> states

that he  died  (CS/l/36/  15).  

> 220

On  day  yihai  2 t of the tenth  month,  or November 16, 557  (NS/1/271/6)       

> 221 BQS/1/64/10
> 222 NS/5/ 1S 9 / 9
> 223 NS/S/ t3 W 3
> n4

He is  said  to have been  only  seven  sui when  Jiangling  was  sacked  (NS/5/1345/12).  

> 225 ZS/3/859/13

pledge  allegiance  (chenafan) to Cha in  order  to  win  his  cooperation in  deaiing  with 

Chen.226 

This, however,  did  not  deter  him  from  his  support of Xiao Zhuang as emperor. Zhuang  was  escorted to the  soüth  by the Northem Qi and  installed  as emperor by Wang Lin in the  third  month  of 558 at Yingzhou (present-day Wuhan), with the  reign  name  of 

timqi  4 ("Uiitiated  by  Heaveny'). This was a vassal throne, however, and envoys were sent back to the Qi court with  tribute  (chaogong)  to mark their subordinate  p0sition.22~ It 

may be assumed that the Northem Qi looked on support of this emperor as a means  of 

maintaining  its  rivalry  with the Western Wei. Attacks by  Chen  forces, however, forced the child emperor and Wang to  flee  to Shouyang and  then  into Qi. Xiao Cha,  despite  having  promised  to  assist  Wang, was  unable 

to send  troops  (perhaps for  his  own  strategic reasons). Zhuang was  given  the title of Prince of Liang by the  Northern  Qi,indicating their  sponsorship  of his  nghtful  place to this vassal throne but no  successful  attempt  into the  south  was  made228  and Zhuang is described in a conventional phrase as having died in Ye of  anger  and  hstration  at the age of about  twenty-five.229  

> 226

This  bit of information  may  be  misleading,  for  there  is no mention of when and  how  ( 2813186011).  

> 2n

Some  historical  sources  may  be  wrong  in their  Qting.  Wang Lin is  said  to  have made  his  request  on   

> day dingsi

T €!, of the  eleventh  month  of the  ninth  year of  tianbao  Tc  &,  or  December  23, 558 and it  was 

agreed  to on  day  guiyou  $ of  the  twelfb  month.  or  J a n w y  8,559  (BQS/1/65/11-13).  His 

enthronement  in  Yingzhou  took  place either in the second  month  of the year  foiiowing  abdication,  i.e.  in    

> 558 (NSI51 l345Il3-15)

or the third  month  of the tenth year (559)  @QS/1/66/6).  (Ths  last  source  also 

refers  to the  sending  of  tribute.)  Another  source says that Xiao Zhuang  was  escorted  to the  south  by 

Northern Qi  uwps  and made emperor by Wang Lin in the third  month  of the second year of yongding 

# aor 558  (ZZTJI2/2554/#11; juan  167).  This  same  source  aiso says that Xiao Zhuang  arrived  in  Yingzhou 

in the third  month  of the  third  year ofyongding (559) and sent envoys to  offer  tribute  to the Qi 

> (ZZTJIU25561#9;

juan  167). This  may  be  what  is  king  referred  to in  BQSI  116616.  Despite  the  confusion,  

> it

seems  more  reasonable  to  accept  558 as the year in  which  Xiao  Zhuang  was  made emperor.  

> 228

Ceriainly  as  late  as 562, the  Noahem  Qi made it  clear  that it  had  no  wish  to  launch  an invasion  into 

the  south  despite  Wang Lin's  entreaties,  and  Chen  was  eager  to  be  on  peaceful  terms  with the  north 

> (ZZTJ/Z2564/#9;

juan  168).  

> 229

The phrase  used  is  yinqi  ersi  A C R,  (NS/5/  lM6ll). (4) The Rump Liang (Hou Liang  I f  s) 

Xiao Cha was on the vassal throne  at  Jiangling  for seven years,  until  his  death in 

e d y  562  a! the  Chinese  age of  44.230 One source states that he died  fiom  an ulceration on 

his  back that developed out of  his  pent-up  anger  and resentment. This is a formula that  is 

found scattered  throughout  the  official  histories as a  stereosrpical  description of the cause of  early  deaths of  all  those  hampered  in  their  ambitions and goals. Xiao Cha, although described as suspicious (the  same  fault ascribed to  his  uncle, Yi),  was  noted for  his  good  assessrnent  of people,  his  astute  appointments of competent people,  his  relatively  abstemious  life and  his  literary talent, as evidenced in a small corpus of  writings  which  he  lefi  behind.231 

Cha  was  succeeded by  his  third  son,  Kui  l#,  who adopted the  reign  title of  rzmbao 

## R .Bli ("the protection of  Hea~en")?~ He  would  have been  barely  twenty  at the time and reigned for  twenty-three  years until  his  death in 585 at the age of  43.233  Kui  is  descnbed as an able  adrninistrator  and  d e r ,  quick-witted,  good in  handling  people and endowed 

with  literary  talent." He had very  little  scope for  his  abilities, however, although the Zhou 

emperor (the Zhou had replaced the Western Wei in 557) did expand  his  jurisdiction  very 

slightly  after  receiving  a petition  larnenting  that the Liang, shom of  al1  the  eastem 

commanderies,  was  neither  populous  nor  rich.235  An  attempt  in 566 by  unhappy  Chen 

generals  to seek the assistance of the Liang to  attack  the  Chen  received the support of the Zhou emperor but  his  help was on too  small  a scale  to be  successful  and  Kui  was forced to  

> 230

He  died  in the second  month  of the second year of baoding  8, but  his  length  of time on the throne is  stated  as  eight  years  (ZS/3/862/12).  The second  month  may have  been  the  intercaîaq  fhtmonth  of that 

year  (ZZTJ/2/2564/#  11;juan 168). It  is the  Zizhi  Tonglian  which  uses  this  phrase ju  fabei  er  CU  6

## 6a.   

> 231 ZS/3/862/13

# - 863/3     

> z2 ZS/3/863/5 (the reign

name  is not  mentioned  in the Zhou Shu)    

> 233 He was

on the  throne  for  almost  23 years and  died  in 585 at the age of 44  [sui]  (ZS/3/865/10  & 88011~    

> 20).
> 234 ZS/3/863/6 &865/12
> ZS/3/864/5-9

assign  the  blame  for the defeat to one of the Liang  o f f i ~ i a l s . ~ ~ ~ In 567 and 569 the  Chen 

launched attacks on  Jianghg,  and  dtiiough  the first required an evacuation  fiom  the city, the Lia;,  kingdom  was  able to  defend  itseKu7 

h 58 1 the  north  was  united  under  the Sui, and the emperor Yang Jian  # took one of  Kui's  daughters  as a concubine  ÿei *) and  mamied  one of  his  sons to a Xiao 

daughter.  Foilowing  this  intemarriage,  the Sui emperor  elirninated  the position of govemor  (zongguan  $$ + ) and  ailowed  Kui to  rule  this Sui fief on his  0~n.238 

When Kui  died  in 585, the Sui ordered  his  heir, Cong  1,to succeed  his  father.239 

Cong is described as  being  in the tradition of  those  Xiaos  who were  gifted  both in  literary 

and martial  skills,  for he is  said  to have been  learned,  talented as a writer  and  skilled  in 

archery  and  hor~emanship.2~0 The position of govemor was restored at this  time  in  order 

to keep  closer  surveillance over the  area,  and  Cen  &,  the  eighth  son of Cha and uncle to the new  ruler,  was  called  to the Sui capital in  order  to  guarantee  the  loyalty  of this Sui 

fiefz4'  Cen seems to have  cornmanded  enormous  prestige, and the emperor  was  afkaid  of 

his  innuence  and  intentions.242 In 587, Cong was called by the emperor to the Sui capital and he  departed  for  Chang'an  with over  two  hundred of  his  court  officiais. The Sui  then 

sent forces to occupy  Jiangling.  An  uncle and brother of Cong,  fearing  for  their  lives,  fled 

to the  Chen,243 retuming  later  with  Chen  troops to  anack  Jiangling.2M The Sui thereupon abolished the fief of Liang Guo, incorporating it  directly  into  the Sui  realrn  and  giving 

Cong the  title  of  Duke  (gong) of Ju  $ a 2 . When  Ernperor  Yang took the  throne  in 605, however, he chose to restore the Liang  narne  as a mark of  his  favour but  mainiained 

the  rank  of duke for  C ~ n g . " ~ 

When the  C h a  Dynasty  collapsed in 589, the elders  ofthe  eastem  s m 5 $$ 

region  of Zhejiang and Jiangsu, looked not to the  Chen  family  but to Xiao  Hum  fA  (the brother of Cong) who had fled  dong  with an  uncle  to the  Chen  as Sui forces approached 

Jiangiing.  The  Chen  emperor had appointed Huan as  cishi  of  Wuzhou  qC  JY  (based in present-day Suzhou, Jiangsu) where he is  said  to have won the love and support of the people. Hence, the people of Wu looked to this Liang heir as the  appropriate  d e r  to 

maintain  the southem throne in  defiance  of the  northem  invaders. This was a time of soothsayers and prophets who drew on esoteric pnnciples of  cosmology  and numerology. No longer did anyone  raise  the question of  legitimacy  based on the  line  of the eldest or the most senior. Instead, Huan's  right  seemed  confirmed  by the fact that he was the third son of Xiao Kui,just  as  Kui,  Cha, and the Liang founder  himself,  Xiao  Yan,  had  aii  taken  the throne as  third  sons.  Numerology  was the divine sanction. When a noted  prophet  whose predictions had  come  tme  during  the transition  fiom  the Liang to the  Chen  threw  his 

support to Huan after  the last  Chen  emperor was captured,  Hum  saw an  enormous 

increase  in  popular  support. Treated as the Iegitimate heir to the southem throne, he became the  focus  of a  small  southem movement to resist the Sui, but this movement was 

quickly  crushed  and Huan was seized and sent to  Chang'an  to be executed  dong  with  his 

uncle.246 

The existence of the  Later  Liang,  while  perpetuating  the royal Xiao  family,  also 

strengthened  the  Westem  Wei,  which  was  created in 535 when the Northem Wei  split  into 

two  competing  realms  (known  historically  as the Westem and Eastern Wei).  Their  capture of this temtory gave the  regime  a foothold  in the upper  Yangzi  region  that  was  militarily                       

> 245 The demotion to Duke of Ju is describecl in ZS/31866/6. The nominal restoration to the Liang fief as
> Duke of Liang is descriibed in

BS/ lO/3  09317.  

> 246 BS/10/3095/5-IO

advantageous to it and its successor regime, the Zhou. Hence, the final  victory  of the Zhou over its  eastern  rival (now the  Northem  Qi) and the conquest of the  united  north  under  the Sui  regime  (which had  usurped  the Zhou) over the  south  may be due in some part to the 

Later  Liang and the  kactious  Xiao  family  which created it. CONCLUSION 

Although  the Xiaos did not  suMve  as a royal family, the fact that a part of the 

lineage  remained  in the west as the  Later  Liang probably assured their  entry  hto  the Sui and Tang as a family of  status.  Mamiage  into the Sui  ruling  family  just  before  this new 

regirne  reunited  the  divided  land must have helped the Xiaos  maintain  the prestige acquired  nom  eight  decades  of  irnpenal  rule  during  the Qi and the Liang. In addition, the 

many  generations of Xiaos who had distinguished  themselves  in arts and letters over the 

coune  of the Southem  Qi  and Liang dynasties established the image of a  cultured  and distinguished  family .

In their capacity as  imperial  rulers,  the Xiaos, like other royal  families  of the Southern Dynasties period, appeared more interested in  rnanaging  their individual interests 

than  in  maintaining  a revered institution. The throne  signified  power, and they had no 

cornpunaion  about  rnanipulating  "sacred" traditions and ceremonies to  justify  their  s e h r e 

of this power. There were  longstanding  legitimation  procedures that had to be observed, but  with  such  swift  changes in the  ruling  houses  and the  imperid  incumbents, it was 

ditficult  to create an aura of tradition and stability around the  throne  as an institution. Xiao Yan, who  ruled  the Liang for  almost  forty-seven years, probably came  closest  to  becomhg 

a symbol  of  stability  and moral authority,  especiaily  with  his  sponsorship  of  Buddhism. 

However, in a society where a royal  farnily  was not considered the  equal  of the highest 

elite,  it  was  ditncult  to have a monarchy that stood as a  moral  symbol  for the  entire  realm. 

The most obvious  testimony  to the  greater  weight of  individual  interests over the 

unity  of the family or the  integity  of the  reaim  was  the establishment of  two  dynastic 

houses,  the  Qi and Liang, out of one  family  sumame.  On the surface, at least, this seems to 

fly  in the face of even  those  traditions the Xiao  usurpers  pretended to  maintain  in  order  to 

give  a sense  of  order  and  necessity  to their de facto  usurpations. How  could  Xiao  Yan  feel 

secure  in  using  the  traditional  phrases about heavenly  signs  for ""achange in  suniame" when in  fact  there was no change at  d l ,  and why was  it  never  noticed  histohily  as a problem? The  answer  presented in  this  thesis  is  that Xiao  Yan  was no longer in the  same 

mouming  group as the  founder  of the  Southem  ci  and was therefore understood to  Se 

fiee  to  found  a new and  separate  House.  This may have been considered  selGevident  at the 

tirne,  for  Xiao  Yan  himself  made a point of  saying  that he was  outside  the mourning group to which the preceding  House  of  Qi  belonged  despite  his  being  related  to the royal  house. 

Hence,  despite  the apparent contradiction in the verbal formulation, there must have been an understanding that a new  dynastic  house  could be created fi-om one (Xiao)  f d y  in the 

same  manner  as a new branch of  any  family  could be created  afler  five generations. Throughout the  Southern  Dynasties, the secunty of the throne was  highly 

dependent on the incumbent. The individual was more important  than  the  institutional 

structure,  and each incumbent basically had to assume  his  family  members would not be 

willing  to  provide  support.  Thus,  the Liang lasted for  almost  half  a century  because  Xiao 

Yan,  who  was  only  approaching his  rnid-thirties  when he founded the Liang, was personally present to  maintain  direct control of  "his"  throne for over four decades.  His 

personai  longevity  assured the longevity of the throne. This was in contrast to the founders of the Southem Qi and Song thrones who were  much  older and lived only  three 

or four years  d e r  their dynasties were founded.  Their  short  imperial  tenure contnbuted to the  disintegration  of "their" thrones. However,  although  they did not  live  long enough to oversee the consolidation of their thrones, the  fate  of their heirs was not  redy  much 

ditferent  fiom  that of Xiao  Yan's  sons, even though  Yan  (as Emperor Wu of the Liang) had so  many  more years to assure a  £irm foundation for  his  throne. The problem  was  that there  was  no respected and deeply entrenched  means  of  tramferring  power that would 

give  pause to a challenger,  however strong he  rnight  be. Even the disputes over  "the 

eldest" and the  "most  senior" indicate a lack of  clearly  defined  inheritance  rules  which could have ovemdden  individual  ambitions. Although there  was  a standard  "legitirnation 

path"  for a usurper, there  was  not one  fixed  line  of succession that would accommodate the  inevitable  problems of premature deaths, immature heirs and all the  other  hazards  of the  human  cmdition.  Thus,  the institution was not irnrnutable, and its  inherent  prestige and  authority  were  insufficient  to check an arnbitious and  manipulative  individual. 

Challenges to the throne followed a cornmon  pattern in the penod  studied  here. The  first  requisite  was  a young  incumbent.  Such  a d e r  was always  vulnerable,  for young age  meant  immaturity,  inexpenence and the  inability  to  mle  autonomously. A regency  was 

required  in this sort of political vacuum. The challenger was someone  fkom  the older generation  availing  himselfof this window of  opportunity  to eradicate the young  d e r  and 

al1  his  siblings  who would have precedence by virtue of being either in the direct  line  of succession through the eldest  (primogeniture)  or in the line of the rnost senior  through  a

fiatemal  relationship.  Those  surrounding the new heir in the  imer  court were  often  at odds, socially and  politically,  with members of the  outer  court  making  up the regency, 

while  members of the regency of the  outer  court could prove  amenable  to new loyalties 

especially  if the stability of the  realm  were at  stake.  In this context, the  eventual  usurper had to  dominate  the  outer  court and overwhelm the  incumbent's  inner  clique, but this position  was  predicated on  military  control. Xiao Daocheng accumulated  military  control over the  years  in  which  he was  garrisoned  on the northem border, and Xiao  Yan  fielded 

amies  against  the capital  fiom  his strategic western garrison. However, in this  highly 

militarized  age,  military  power came out of a process of building strategic and  often 

temporary alliances with the  great  number of  %ee-floating"  rnilitary  commanders who had 

their  own  contingents of  various  size  and were ready to work with  anyone  who  could 

appeai  to their  persona1  ambitions or  provide  ample bribes, as the  historical  texts  mention 

so  many  times.  On one occasion before he  became  emperor, Xiao Daocheng is even  said 

to have had ail the  commanders  under  him  sign  contracts  promising  to adhere to  his  plan to  defend  the capital. In the case of Xiao  Luan,  whose  aim  was  not to found a new 

dynasty  but rather to  usurp  the line of succession for  himself,  the  correspondhg  "militaq 

edge"  existed  in the  fact  that  the garrison clerks  ( d i w a n ) , who  dominated  the  regional garrisons  to  which  the young princes were appointed and had  absolute  control over their young charges, were dependent on the  emperor  or  his  regent for their position and responded  swiftly  to  Xiao  Luan's  orders to  murder  ali  his  young cornpetitors for the throne before anyone  else  could  intervene. 

These  rnilitary  alliances or negotiated  allegiances  had to be complemented by the building of  relationships  with  the great aristocratic  families.  This elite layer of  society  had lost the  pre-emuient  military  position  it  once held in the Eastern Jin but retained  both  atype of  political  power in their control of access to  bureaucratic  office (though this control 

became  more fragile with time) and a kind of  social  power through the continuing prestige of  "pedigree"  and the maintenance of their role, first established at the  beginning  of the southem  thrones,  in  placing  the imprimatur of approval on  al1  royal power. For  military 

men  like  the  Xiaos  who came  from  a lower aristocratic background (designated by some as the  haojie  class), the power and prestige of this aristocratic sanction was a necessity.  In  

> tu-

though, the aristocracy was dependent on the throne to  maintain  the economic 

underpinnings  of its  status,  for this southern  refbgee  aristocracy  was  more  economically 

vulnerable  than  their  counterparts  in the  north  or even  those  with  tme  southern roots 

because  of the erosion of their land base as the southern economy evolved  through  the Southem Dynasties penod. Once a usurper was on the throne,  marriage  ties,  especially 

with the great Wang  farnily,  were estabiished with arktocratic  families,  thereby  helping  to cernent  their  dominant position. 

Military  power and aristocratic sanction, however,  still  had to be complemented by edicts  f?om  the Empress Dowager  confinning  Heaven's  blessing  upon the usurper as the proper successor to the  throne.  Her voice provided the  b a l  mord  sanction,  shouid  any 

awkward  questions be  raised,  for the  role  of the  emperor's  widow  as final arbiter in the 

political  process had been  weii  established  since  the Han. The  various  edicts  of abdication and enthronement  sanctioned  by her were couched in a familiar  formulait  pattern  that 

stressed  the  unworthiness  of the  incubent  and  provided  detailed  "evidence"  contrashg the  wicked  last  incumbent  with the  virtuous  new  mler  and providing  canonicai  precedents to  juste  the usurpation. In the types of  edicts  issued and honours bestowed  during  the process of  taking  the throne, the Xiao  usurpers  looked to the  historical  precedent 

established  by the founder of the Wei  regime,  Cao Cao as he prepared to  usurp  the floundering Eastern Han  dynasty.  Cao Cao, however, had modeiied  himself  on an  earlier 

usurper, Wang Mang of the Western Han. He was the one who established the  paradigm 

for the usurpations of the Southem Dynasties period. However, in contrast to  al1  those 

who followed in  his  footsteps, Wang  Mang  has been relegated to a place of dishonour in the officiai histories. The Xiaos, like the other royal  families  on the southem throne at  Jiankang, 

asserted  legitimacy  for their domination of the  south  by  clairning  to be in temporary  exile 

as they awaited the appropnate moment to recover the north and retum to the ancestral capital north of the  Yangzi  River. Although some Xiao emperors, especially Xiao  Yan,  did 

launch  northem expeditions, the lack of  true  cornmitment,  rnilitaîy  resources and leadership doomed them to  failure.  As for the regimes in the north, they were  often  a

threat  to border  areas  but their political divisions  annulled  the possibility of  any  concerted 

attack  on the  south,  and the relatively long era of peace, especiaily dunng the Liang pnor to Hou Jing's  rebeliion,  brought  about a gradua1  deciine  in  rnilitary  aptitude and  interest  in southem society. For  hstrated  members of the Xiao  family,  the north  was  seen  as apossible source of  aid  in their  various  power  stmggles.  This was  especidy  so  after  the death of Emperor Wu of the Liang (Xiao  Yan),  when the competing interests of the 

imperhi  sons and grandsons coincided with the division of the north into western and eastem  regimes  that were each  willing  to  cuve  out spheres of influence in the  south  by 

sponsoring  competing  Xiao  princes for the throne. For the northem regirnes,  this  averted the  possibility  of either one of them  being  able to form a strong  alliance  with the  south 

against  the other northem neighbour, but it  also  exacerbated the  feuding  among the  Xiaos 

and helped to  balkanize  the  south  into  many  hostile  ganison  centres,  resulting  in the permanent loss of the Xiao hold on the  throne  and the final  dernise  of the Xiao as a royal 

farnil y. This is a  narrowly  focused  thesis  which seeks to be the  fullest  existing  accoli2.t  of the  rise  and  declîne  of  onc  of the most illustrious  houses  which  dominated  the  south 

during  the  Period  of Disunion. The choice of the Xiao  family  seems apt, for less attention has been  paid  to  the political  history  of the  south  during  this period and the Xiao clan stands out  fiorn  al1  others in  ruling  the  south  under  not one but two  dynastic  narnes.  The 

focus  has  been on inter-familial relationships and the reasons distrust,  treachery  and violence played  such  a significant  role. The nature and context of their political  acts  have been  surnmarized  above.  

> A

secondary emphasis has been the  historiographical  exercise of  looking  primarily  

> at

the  earliest  extant  sources contained in the  official  histories of the era rather  than 

following  the practice of  many  historians  who  depend  on Sima Guang's  eleventh-century 

encyclopaedic compendium  Zizhi  Tonaian  (Comprehensive  Mirror  for  Aid  in 

Govement).  Although  these  earlier sources are in fact already heavily edited  "onguial" 

archival  material  and leave many contradictions and  arnbiguities,  they are treated here as the  rnost  reliable  source.  Only  as a last  resort  is the  Zithi  Tongiian  used in  order  to  corne 

to a  decision  about the  validity  of  confiicting  accounts in the earlier works.  Various 

contradictions are discussed in footnotes so as not to  intempt  the narrative,  while  the question of histoncal bias is discussed at  those  points where the original histories  give  two 

glaringly  contradictory  perspectives. This look at earlier sources  rerninds  one of how important it is to question the degree to which historians were recording  with  objective precision and  seeking  to present  facts  in a context that  would  not  mislead  later  readers. The  third  emphasis in this  thesis  has been on the translation of the  archival  material 

in the older  official  histones. This  includes  edicts  relating to the usurpation process, 

historians'  commentaries on the question of loyalty or the  legitimacy  of  dynastic  change, and  "quoteci"  speeches or conversations,  such  as  Xiao  Yan's  justification to his young cousins for  overthrowing  their  mutual  relative and  establishing  a new  throne.  These 

extensive translations, many  appearing  for the first time in  English,  will  make  this  whole penod more accessible to the non-Chinese  historian. APPENDICES 

Foliowing  are  varioris  sets of  genealogical  tables and thumbnail biographies of members of the Song,  Qi  and Liang dynasties. If dates of  birth  or  death  are based on sui  calculation,  they  are  indicated  as 

approxirnate.  Thus,  if a person  is  known  to have died in 420 and is  said  to have been 19 sui at the  tirne,  the date of birth  will  be  given  as c. 402. Indentations are used to indicate the generational level.  Thus,  members of the  first 

generation  appear  closest  to the  left  margin  while  their  children  are one indentation in, and their  grandchildren  are  two  indentations in, and so on. Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 

HOUSE  OF SONG  (1) 

(see Table 6 ) 

## LIU  Yu  @J  #$  (363-422; r. 420-422): Liu Yu was bom in 363, a little  less  than 

fifty  years  aîter  the foundation of the Eastern lin  dynasty,  and a M e  more  than  M y years before he  hirnseifwas  to  bring  the Jin  dynasty  to an end. The royal Sima  family  had  never 

enjoyed  a securely independent position of power. In  fact,  in 37 1,  within  a decade  of Liu

Yu's  birth,  the emperor, who was no mere  child,2  was  deposed by a general  from  the 

prominent  Huan  family  (Hum  Wen  &i iP. ) and replaced by the deposed  emperor's  great-

uncle. This  was  not the first time that an  arktocratic  general had  marched  fiom  his  power base in the  West  to impose  his  will  on the  coun.  However, the  real  threat to royal power lay in the structure of the regime, as  sumrnarized  in the popular phrase "the Wangs and 

Simas  together  rule'?  The Eastern lin, according to one  historian,  was a unique and distorted  example  in  Chinese  history  of a regime in which the power of  aristocratie 

families  predominated over that of the royal  fa mil^.^  The need of the royal Sima  family 

He  was  born  either  in the  night  hours  of  day  renyin  of the  third  month  of the  fim  year of xingning 

## q, or  April  15, 363  (SS/  l/l/6),  or on the second  day  of the  fourth  month  of the  first  year of xingning, or May 1,363  (SS/4/1280/2).  Since  his  mother  died  in  childbirth,  his  father  took  a new  wife,  Xiao 

Wenshou  j#  (c.  343323),  by  whom  lie  had  two  other  sons.  It  was  through  her, as  stepmother  to Liu Yu, that her branch of the Xiao  became  members  of the royal family of Song  upon  its  foundation  in 420. 

in keeping  with the  patriarchal  Mewpoint,  however,  this  branch  of  thc  Xiao family  is  identifiai  as that of the  "Mperiai uncle"  (huangjiu),  for her  brothcr,  Yuanzhi  ;A, 2~  (d.  420),  was  step-uncte  to Liu Yu, the 

founding  emperor  of the Song. 

# * Sima Yi  4 & & was 45 [sui  a ] when he died on  day  jimhen  f 9 of the  tenth  month  of the  eleventh 

year of  faiyuan  f ;  &,  or  August  26, 386, about  fifteen  years  aller  his  deposition,  while  k i n g  held  under  a

kind  of  house  arrest  in Wu  % County  (JSI  112 15/  9- 10). 

Wangyu  Ma gong  tionxia  # 21 & # R T ( IS/  8/2554/10).  Or "the  Wangs  and  Simas  share  the 

realm". 

Tian  Yuqing,  Dong Jin  Menfa  Zhengthi  (ï3eijing:  Beijing  Dawe  Chubanshe,  1989). The  predicament  of the Sima family  had  its  mots  in the  pecul~ar circumstances  surrounding  the establishment of the Eastern Jin in 3 17.  The  founding  empcror,  Sima  Rui  3 & (Emperor  Yuan  %),  a

survivor  of the  disastrous  War  of the  P ~ c e s had been  encourageci  to  establish  a ganison  south  of the 

Yangzi  at  Jianye  @ (officidly  renamed  Jiankang  &a in 3 13, to observe the  taboo  on the  given  name 

of the  new  emperor, Sima Ye  & -1IP  ) in the face of  unrelenting  mditary  pressure  fiom  the  noah  on the now  weakened  regime.  In  this  he was  counselIed  by Wang Dao  f 4$,  a close  associate  (JS/6/1745/4) kom 

the  preemînent  Wang  family  of  Langye  @ ,the  area  to  which Sima  Rui  was  enfeoffed  as a royal 

p ~ c e . His  older cousin, Wang Dun  5 $!t (seJS/6/  1%Wî and  JS/8/2553/  1 for  farnily  relationship),  had 

been  appointed  Regional  lnspector  (cishi  #]  ft  ) of Yangzhou  a WI  at about the  same  time  (JS/8/2554/6), 

and Wang Dao  persuadai  Wang Dun to use  his  military  might  and prestige to awe the  southem  Wu 

families  into  acceptance  of Sima Rui as the new  regional  power.  When  the  northem  capital  feu,  Wang 

Dao  became  the  architect  of  what  was  to  be  known  as the Eastern Jin  regime.  Though  onginally  holding Appendk  1:  House  of Song  O: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 322 

both to  protect  itselffiom  usurpers  and  maintain  its independence was to  provide  Liu Yu with an  opportunity  to create  his  own  power base as a protector of the royal  farnily  and an 

aily  in the  playing  off of  families. 

Liu Yu,  known  by his posthumous  title  of Emperor Wu  (gaozu  & t j  &,  a f ), 

first  emperor of the Song, came  fiom  a modest background.  His  great-grandfather  had 

fled  with  his  family  to the Town of  Jingkou  $C  0 (present-day  Zhenjianga  Lr)  in the County  3f  Dantu  & under  the  Commandery  of  Jinling  .%  & during  the southem exodus and held the position of  Magistrate  ( h g  4$)  of  Wuyuan  ili, @ (possibly  present-

day  Haiyan  County  i)  a in Zhejiang).'  f i s  grandfather,  Liu Jing  *, was Govemor 

(taishou  f S ) of  Dong'an  , while  his  father, Liu Qiao , was employed in the 

commandery-level  Personnel Evaluation Section  ÿun  gongcao  1.rh  8 6 ) .  The  h i s t o h l 

record describes Liu Yu as  being  of  "cornmon"  ongin7  and  states  that when he first 

became  a Regional  Inspector  (cishi), he had only  lowly  status  at court and no  military 

contingent of  his  own8  Liu Yu's social status among his contemporaries  is  indicated by the  sneering  contempt with  which  Wang Sui  Z &,  a scion of one of the  great  southern 

families  (jiangzuo  guanzzi  2~  a & ),  treated  him,  and  it  is confhned  in a proclamation issued by a royal  prince,  Sima  Xiuzhi  62, who reviled  him  as a comrnoner  holding  rank 

and power beyond his base social  statu^.^  The record in the  Jiunkang  Shilu states that Liu 

militaq  and  ci- titles  g-g him  hill  control over the Jin  amies  and central  decision-rnaking  organs  

> (JS/6/1747/10),

Wang Dao  divested  himseif  of  military  control in  favour  of Wang Dun who  was  made 

chid  commander of  militaxy  affairs  in the  six  regions  (JS/8/2554/15)  and  stationed  himseif  in the  middle 

Yangzi.  The Wang  famiiy  thereby  shared  control of the court and the army, the capital and the  regions, 

and the  throne  was  dependent on  this  support. In  fa*  when Sima  Rui  ascended  the Eastern Jin  throne,  he 

requested  Wang Dao, in the  presence  of  a i l  the court  officials,  to  take  his  seat  beside  him  (JS/6/1749/1). 

Wang Dao's  remonstrations  were  accepta  but the  requem  symbolized  the  system  that  was  now in place. 

ZLDC,  p. 465. The gongcao  is also  described  as the Labour Section  kom  the  Han  to the  Period  of  Disunion  (Hudcer, 

p. 296).    

> qi zi buyi

A&  ** (SS11/9/15). 

# * wei  weiyu  c h o .  zhong  w y ï  lu  a&$+# 9 %A-àf~ (SS/1/9/10) 

Wang Sui's attitude  is  deScnbed  in  SS/1/9/1S.  Sima's  words  are buyï  piju  *.Fr  E (SSllI3  IliO);  di  

> bei wei

zhong  a @ (SS/1/32/4). Appendix  1: House  of Song  0: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants Yu was a  tiiler  of the land and even kept  his  various  hoes  and  ploughshares  in storage 

after  becoming  emperor.  Io 

Another  source states that Liu Yu came  Srom  one of the  many  northern  families 

that had been local strongrnen  (haom  R ) in the northem  areas  closer  to the  Yangzi 

border. When the  southem  exodus began, Jingkou became the stronghold of  these  families 

and provided the main  core  of  soldiers  for the Northem  Command  (betfi  fi  A), the 

narne  by which the Xuzhou  regional  garrison, stationed at the  regional  capital of Jingkou,  was  known.  Jingkou and the Xuzhou garrison became even more important 

rnidway  through  the Eastem Jin,  afler  Hum  Wen  +ii 8, an ambitious  member  of the  great 

Huan  family  who had oversight of the Eastem Jin  military  and  basically  dominated  the court  fiom  his  base at Gushu  +&  $&  , west of the capital,  greatly  strengthened the resources of this garrison. Jingkou (the Xuzhou  regional  garrison)  also  became the source of the Northem Comrnand Braves  (berfi  bing  it  $j-k ), organized by Xie Xuan  $# &,  a scion of the  great  Xie  family  of the Eastern Jin, to  buttress  the  refbgee  regime  against  the Northem 

Qin  f and defeat their  amies  at  the battle of Fei Shui  31:  rfc  . l  It was  fiorn  the formidable Jingkou soldiery of this  g d s o n  that Liu Yu was  later  to  find  his  patrons and supporters. Liu Yu began  his  career  at some imprecise  tirne  in the Northem  Comrnand  as an 

equerry  (sima  4 4 ) under  Sun  Wwhong  .W  s, General  of the Troops  (giranjun 

# a *).12 The fact that Liu Yu could enter the  officer  corps at this  rank  indicates a change in its make-up, for in the 360's the  aristocratie  Xie  An  #+ e(320-385)  had  begun  his  late   

> I o JKSW294/12
> l 1

For a description of the  northerners  who made Xuzhou their base,  see  Wan  Shengnaq  eâ, Chen  Yinke             

> Wei Jin Nanbeichaoshi Jiangyanlu (Hefei: Huangshan Shushe, 1987), 177-1 81. For a

dennition  of the Northern Command and the  military  signtncance  of Xuzhou in  cornparison  with  other  regionai  garrhns,  

> see

Chen  Changqi,  Liang Jin Nanchao  Zhengzhishi  Gao (Kaifeng: Henan  Daxue  Chubanshe,  1992),  152, 1 157-158.     

> l2 SS/lIl/ 8; Sun was

in charge of  JinluigQ  &,  Ihe  comxnandery  in which Liu Yu  was  living,  and  was 

one of the  "seven  braves"  brought  together by Xie  Xuan  to  form  the  Be@  Bing.  Another  appointe  was 

Liu  Laozhi.  Xie made  h i . his  aidede-camp  (canjun  +) and put him in  cornmand  of the  vaoguard  of   

> crack UOOPS (JS/7/2 188/2-5).

Appendix 1: House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 324 

entry  into public life as a  szma  to Huan  Wen,I3  while  his  son, Xie Yan #j a, became  an equerry  (sima)  to Sima  Daozi  4 .&  a +, Prince of  Kuaiji  ##  3 and head of the Jin forces, while already  bearing  the  title  of general.  l 4  However, tne  Huans  were one of the 

elite  families,  and  Hum  Wen was a grand general (Grand General Subduer of the West, 

zhengxi  &jianaun  16 ft  # )l5 of Rank  two  status,  l6 while Sun  Wuzhong  was  a

"commoner"  general  (&maun)  rather  than  an aristocratic grand general (da jim@n).l7 

Hence, in  terms  of the  social  divisions of the age, the aristocratic Xie An could hold  this 

position  under  the  equally  aristocratic Huan Wen, while the more lowly Liu Yu sought the 

same  position  with  a lower-status  general. A Daoist  uprising  led by the charismatic Sun En  #. .!& between  399 and 402 gave Liu Yu, now in  his  mid-thirties,  the  first  real  opportunity for  significant  advancement, and 

his  crucial  victories  won  him  the  support  of a  grateful  court.  In  fact,  the marauding 

warfare  of  these  years provided the first major training opportunity for a new generation of  non-aristocratic  officers  in the Northem  Command  following  the decisive victory over the northem invaders  at  the Battle of Fei Shui  b * in 383. The  military  demands in the 

preceding  period  had necessitated a  gradua1  expansion of the officer corps to include competent men of  non-aristocratie  background, and the  victory  at Fei Shui made  these 

officers  suddenly conscious of their growing power. At the  same  tirne,  the aristocratic officer corps was in a state  of  decline.  With the death of Xie An  * g i n  385 and of  his 

nephew, Xie  Xuan  t, in 3 88, and  then  of An's son, Xie  Yan  a, in 400  during  the 

carnpaign  to suppress the Daoist upnsing led by Sun  E q L 8 no  other  great aristocratic 

names  seem to have appeared as  powerful  elements of the  military.  General Liu  Laozhi  @J 

$ rt  was now the  leading  figure in the  Northem  Garrison, and he developed a strategic       

> l3 is/7/207315-7
> l4 JSI7/207814
> l5 JS/7/2073/ 5
> 16Pinzhi d i t S

## 3 Z (JS/3/729/1).     

> l7 JS/8/2633/10
> l8 His death

is stated  in SS/ l/U  5. Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  Kis  Descendants relationship with the royal  prince,  Sima  Y u a r ~ a n 4 .&  % a, son of  Daozi.  Now the 

pivot4  figure  behind  the throne, Sima sought  General  Liu's support as he strove to 

dominate  both the royal  farnily  and the  aristocratie  families.  General  Liu  zrid  Liu Yu were not relatives, but  since  the  families  of both had  corne  from  Pengcheng  l# and belonged to the  Jingkou  "camp", Liu Yu served  under  him  as  rnilitary  adjutant  ( c mjunshi  )ff 

f S ) in the first  carnpaigns  against Sun En. This Daoist upnsing served as a pretext for the aforementioned  aristocrat  Huan 

Xuan  & t to move from  his  westem base in 402, occupy  Jiankang  and  finally  make 

himself emperor of a new dynasty.  It  was  this  short-lived usurpation of the throne by Huan 

in 404 that placed Liu Yu in a quite  different position of rnilitary and  civilian  power. Huan 

Xuan (c. 369  - 404) came from a family  that enjoyed  much  power and prestige (he  was  the son of the aforementioned  Hum  Wen), and he had spent many  years  in  Jianghg  % &, 

the western base which  historically  had served as the point from which arnbitious  generals 

launched  campaigns  against  the eastem capital. As Liu Yu himself  is  said  to have observed, the  region  of  Jingzhou  $1 fiJY, of which  Jiangling  was the capital, was a vast 

strategic  area  with the proper terrain for building up strong  agricultural  and  rnilitary 

resources.19  The Huan  farnily  had been stationed for generations in the  West,  aithough  the 

officials  and people they used were  al1  fkom  the  satzwu  5 region,  the delta  area  of southem Jiangsu and northem  Zhejiang.*O When Huan Xuan attacked  in 402, there  was 

some resistance spearheaded by the court, but the forces led by Liu  Laozhi  soon  dissolved. 

Generai  Liu  surrendered  to Huan Xuan and  cornmitted  suicide shortly  alterward,  while 

Sima  Yuanxian  was seized and  killed.  Hum  then  proceeded to  eliminate  many of the  older 

generds  of the Northem  Comrnand.  Liu Yu  suffered  no consequences, however. He  was 

one of a group  of younger  officers  without  a power base, and Huan  Wtely  considered  such 

men would transfer their  loyalty  to  him  for the sake of their careers. Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 326 

At the  beginning  of  404,  Huan took the throne as emperor of Chu  S .  The  great 

~stocratic families  had been  unable  to prevent  this  usurpation.  How  far  they had  fden 

can  be  seen  in their participation in the investiture,  during  which  Wang Mi  3.  a, a

grandson  of Wang Dao,  2 1  and Xie Dan  $# 8 , grandson  o i  Xie  An,  presented to  Hum  the 

manufactured  edict  of abdication  corn  the hapless  emperor,2z  a grossly  retarded  individual 

"incapable of speech,  unable  to distinguish between  winter  and  surnrner,  and  requiring  aid 

for ail physical  movement"  .23 

Huan Xuan  was  unable  to  dominate  the court as he had intended, and the officiai histones  state  that  his  extravagance, disorderly  govemment  and  harsh  exactions on the people and court  officers  alike  lost  hirn  mord  support.24 Despite  the  symbolic  participation of members of the great Wang and Xie  families  in his enthronement, Huan could not have had the support of the  aristocratic  faction in  Jiankang,  for he had destroyed the old aristocratie-imperhl structure of the Jin. Neither did he have the support of  military  men 

like  Liu Yu who were of lower status and did not  wish  to  assist  the  aristocracy  in 

consoiidating  control of the  throne. 

With a group  of  twenty-seven  generals  and the  backing  of another hundred 

sympathizerq25  Liu Yu launched a concerted  attack  on Huan  Xuan  in  early  404.26 Huan was forced to flee the  capital  by ship  westward  to Xunyang  4 (present-day  Iiujiang 

i r )  where he had  exiled  the deposed emperor, and  from  there he escaped back to  his  base in  Jianghng,  taking  with  hirn  the emperor and the emperor's  br~ther.~' By the  third  month    

> 21 SSll/IO/ 3-10.

Liu Yu  had  k e n  befnended  early  on by  Wang  Mi.  DeSccibed  as the  only  member of the    

> elite (shengliu

# a) to  cuitivate  a fiiendship  with Liu Yu at court, he  rnay  have been  aware  that the        

> great f d e s had lost their ability to

balance  each  other  off  militarily  and  needed  to look  among  a lower   

> level of

rnilitary  men for protective alliances. Liu Yu, for  his  part,  was  eager  to  take  advantage  of Wang 

Mi's aristocratic  fiiendship.       

> 22 JS/ 71 20771 9
> JSI l/267/4
> 24 SS/l/ 91 8

# *'  SS/1/5/15  - 611  

> 26

On  &y  yimuo  t of the second  month  of the  third  y w  ofyuanring  as, or  March  25,404  (JS/  

> 1f25613).

Huan  had  taken  the throne on  day  renchen  +&of  the  twelfth  month  of the second  year  of    

> yuanrring, or January 1,404 (JSl1/256/2).

# *'  JSl81259917;  SS/1/9113;  JS/l/267/  3Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 327 

Liu Yu had  killed  some of Huan  Xuan's  most  important  generals and dispersed the main 

force of  his  army.28  Jiankang  was now in the  hands  of supporters of the  House  of  Jin. By the  fifth  month  of  404  Hum  Xuan  was  beheaded by his escort as he  was  escaping  h t o  the temtory of Shu (Sichuan) and in the first  month  of 405  Jiangling  was  conquered by 

loyalist  troops.29  The emperor  was  brought  from  Jiangling and  restored  to  his  throne in the 

third  month  of  405.30  By 407 the Huan  farnily  and the  entire  Huan  rnilitary  clique were 

exter~ninated.~ 1

Liu Yu  was  proffered many honours which he humbly  refùsed.  His  importance to the throne was  clear  but he intended to avoid  overt  signs  of  unseernly  haste or ambition. The throne  was  conveniently occupied by a  mentally  and physically deficient  individual, 

and Liu Yu intended to  maintain  the  weakness  of the royal  family  which had been caused in part by the  removal  or execution of  strategic  individuals  by  Hum  Wen and Huan Xuan. In 406 Liu Yu was made Duke of  Yuzhang  2, the  same  title  @ut  with fewer households) that Huan Xuan had once  elicited  fTom  the court for "elirninating  evil  men 

from  around  the  throne"  prior  to  his  act of  u ~ u r p a t i o n . ~ ~ In the first  month  of  408  he was 

cailed  to court to  assist  in govemance and was çiven the titles of  Regional  Inspecter 

(cishi) of Yangzhou (which assured control of the capital) and Overseer of the 

Department  of State  Anairs  (lu  s h g s h  & & f ), titles which he had  refusad  in 405 in favour of Wang Mi,  his  former  aristocratic  patron who had now  just  ~iied.~' 

In the third  month  of  409  Liu Yu  called  for a  northem  expedition to  deal  with incursions  from  the  Southem  Yan  &J S . The  campaign  had many successes, for  which  he was  amply  rewarded, and by the second  month  of the  following  year  (410),  afler  a long siege, the Jin troops  fùially  succeeded in  sacking  the capital  city,  massacring the royal Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (0: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants princes and dukes and sending the  ruler  to Jiankang for  e x e ~ u t i o n . ~ ~ This was to have been the  platfonn  for a  march  on Luoyang, the  ancient  Chinese  capital, where a  victoq 

would  have placed Liu Yu in a cornrnanding  moral position as the one who had restored the  reaim.  However, before the intended expedition could even  begin,  Liu Yu  was  recalied 

to the capital in the  fourth  month  to counter a rebellion by Lu Xun  $ #,  the brother-in-law of the Daoist charismatic and  rebel  leader, Sun  En.35 In 402 and 403 Liu Yu had 

provided  the  regime  with temporary respite  from  Lu's attacks. However, Lu had retumed to attack  Panyu  .fD  # in the  south  during  the unsteady days  d e r  Hum  Xuan's  overthrow 

and was appointed  lnspector  (cishi)  of Guangzhou in an attempt by the  court  to buy peace there. However, he was persuaded to  take  advantage of Liu Yu's preoccupation in the 

north  to  launch  an expedition on the capital. The control that Liu Yu now held over the 

military  c m  be  seen  not  ody  in Lu Xun's belief that a military  vacuum  existed  in the absence of Liu but  also  in the  great  relief that the court felt when Liu  finally  reached Jiankang in the  fourth  month?  In the  month  following  his  return, however, he  was  unable 

to  stop the collapse of the southern  commanderies  (jun  b) in the face of Lu's  northward 

advance  or prevent a major defeat in a naval  battle  on the  Yangzi.  However, when Lu sent a huge  advance  naval  fleet to the gates of Jiankang but  refused  to nsk  abandoning  his 

ships  and  attacking  the capital before the  fidl  force had  arrived,  Liu Yu had  tirne  to concentrate  his  iderior  number of troops and strengthen the fortifications. In the  sixth 

month,  the enemy  was  dnven back  from  the  city  with a largely  Xianbei  # 4.  (non-chinese 

northem tribesmen)  contingent?  Only  in the second  month  of the seventh  year  (41  1)' 

though,  was  peace  M y restored  foUowing  a succession of  battles  dong  the  Yangzi  as  far 

as  Jiangiing,  in consequence of  which  Lu Xun retumed to  his  base in  Panyu.  There  he  was 

defeated in a massive  attack  by Liu Yu's forces and forced to  flee  south  to Jiaozhou  &Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 329 

(present-day  northem  Vietnam) where he was executed by the  regional  inspecter  who sent 

his  head  !O J i a n k a ~ ~ g . ~ ~ 

In 412, Liu Yu  began  his  break  with  those  military  allies who had helped in the 

overthrow  of Huan Xuan, eliminating  those  with power and prestige who could  very  weii  

> act

against  him  by accusing  him  of treasonous ambition. The most prominent of  those  was Liu Yi  &whose reputation  nvalled  that of Liu Yu as a leader of the  carnpaign  against Huan  Xuan.  Although  he had acquiesced in Liu Yu's acquisition of power, he had  his 

foilowing  at  coun  and harboured  his  own  ambitions.39 When Liu Yi  was  shifted  to the western  region  of  Jingzhou  as  cishi,  it  became  apparent that he was  preparing  to use it as a base  from  which to  challenge  Liu Yu. Accusing  him  of subversive intentions, Liu Yu cailed for a punitive expedition to the west  which  resulted in a  successful  attack on 

Jiangling  and the execution of Liu  Yi4* 

At the  same  time, Liu Yu was  also  attempting  to use the power of  government  to rein in  powemil  families  who were aggrandizing their  estates  and harbounng large nurnbers of  unregistered  families, thereby siphoning off the  tax  and corvee base  available 

to the state. He had  begun  as soon as he was  surnmoned  to court in 408, executing a Yu Liang  6 of  Kuaiji  for  hiding  over one thousand  "iilegals"  and  dismissing  the royal prince, Sima  Xiuzhi,  as  administrator  (netshi  A R ) of  Kuaiji  for  his  duplicityJ1  In  4 13 Liu Yu forbade the  monopolization  of land by the  powerfid  who were  usurping  the role of the  state  in  imposing  taxes on the people for the  right  to fish and  cut  wood."  In the  sarne 

year  he presented a  memonai  calling  for a restoration of the residency  determination   

> (tuhan f.

#f)  process which  Huan  Wen had introduced in  364."  Like Huan, Liu Yu may            

> - -
> 38 SS/1/17/8
> 39 SS/1/28/3 -4
> SS/1/28/7-10
> 41 SS/1/27/ 5-6
> 42 SS/1/29/ 13
> 43 SS/1/29/ 15

# - 3011 3. A transiation  appears  in William G.  Croweii,  "Nonhem  Ernigres  and the  Problems    

> of Census Registration,"

in Albert E.  Dien,  ed.,  Srare  and Society in  Eorly  Medievol  China  (Stanford:   

> Staaford University

Press, 1WO),  196- 198.  Some of  Crowell's  interpretations  are  foîiowed  here. Appendix 1: House  of Song  0: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 330 

have been  looking  forward  already to a northem expedition, though the wording of the document  implies  the  possibility  of some entrenched opposition of former "northemers". 

## AU  "lodged"  commanderies  (jun)  and counties (xian) were  eliminated  by  amalgarnation. 

## Only those  people living in  Jinling  %& who originated  from  Xuzhou  .i%  H, Yanzhou  a

## JY  and  Qingzhou  =# JY  ,regions  which he had retaken in the Northem Expedition of  410, 

were exempted, for reasons  left  unstated but  probably  having  to do with  their  being the ancestral homes of the backbone of  his  forces. The  resulting  elimination  of duplicated and overlapping administrative offices  was  intended to reduce the number of  powerfbi  local notables in  goverment  who may have been too cornfortable in the  south  to support a northem expedition. The  census  registration would also uncover  unregistered  emigres 

sheltered  under  local  magnate  patronage who could now  provide  the state with labour service and taxes. 

In 41 5 Liu Yu  realized  that he had to act against the royal prince Sima  Xiuzhi 

whom he had appointed  inspector  (cishi) of  Jingzhou,  the  histoncaily  strategic  miiitary 

base in the  West,  and who appeared to be building up an  immense  amount  of support dunng the  preceding  year. Sima  wanted  to  rnaintain  the independence of the royal  farnily 

and  was  now in a position to  form  a nucleus of opposition around  him  against Liu Yu. Liu took action by  killing  a son and nephew in  Jiankang  and  leading  Unpenal  forces  westwards 

against  him.  Sima responded with a denunciation in which he  openly  accused Liu Yu of 

wanting  to  usurp  the  throne."  He also accused Liu Yu of murdering  those  who 

commanded  admiration and respect and had the  potential  to  attract  people around  them, 

maintaining  a tight  control over the members of the royal  family;  and  exerting  such 

tyrannical  power that people were  afiaid  to  speak  out. In the third  month  Liu Yu 

overwhelrned  Sima's forces at  Jiangling  and in the  following  month  pushed  northward  to                 

> -
> Huan's census is sometimes known as the gengxu census, since it was introduced on day gengxu

## fi  #, ,             

> the fïrst day of the third month of the second year of xingning

R q  ( 3 6 4 )  (JSl1/208113).    

> 44 SSl1/3 l/9

# - 331 6Appendk  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 33 1

Xiangyang  X I#  where Sima had  taken  refuge, forcing  him  to flee to the  "barbarian"  north and  eliminating  him  as a force in the  south. 

Liu Yu had been preparing to continue the  northem  expedition that had been 

mistrated  by Lu Xun's uprising in  41 0.  A northem expedition  was  probably  just  as important to Liu Yu as the  histonans  state it had been for  Huan  Wen, for a victory  would 

justie  receiving  the honour of the  Nine  Bestowals  k1,45  a prerequisite  on the way to a 

"Iegitimate"  seizure  of the throne. In 41 6 Yao  Xing  1W  A ,  d e r  of the  Later  Qin  & #$ which  controlled the  area  of the  histonc  capitals, Luoyang and Chang'an, died and the resulting intemecine  struggle  for the succession between the  heir,  Yao Hong  fi & , and  his  brothers,  threw  the north  into 

tumoil.  This was a moment for Liu Yu to exploit, for the north would now have no energy to attack the Jin or  hold  off an attack  fiom  the  south.  However, as the  proposa1  on residency  detemination  suggests, there may have been a dichotomy of  wills:  a general 

preference not to  launch  a protracted  war  as opposed to a  vaguely  perceived  desire  to see the empire reunited. Liu Yu  must  have been operating on the assumption that initiating an expedition could be difficult but that any hero regaining the  north  or its former  capitals 

and the  sacrificial  vessels and other  symbols  of imperial  rule  would have the moral authority to  take  the throne. Hence, Liu Yu  started  by  putting  his  forces on  alert  and 

preparing  to  lead  a punitive expedition against the north. This may have been a "trial 

balloon"  to see what  amount  of  domestic  opposition he could  expect  to encounter.  M e r  

> "pleading"

his  case, Liu Yu was  cornrnissioned  by the  Minister  of  War  (da sima  SJ  & ), 

a post  held  by  Sima Dewen  o)  & A,  brother of the emperor, and set out in the  eighth 

rnonW6 

After  the capitulation of  several  northern  generals  and the success of  infantry  and naval forces sent  ahead  by Liu, the joint forces  arrived  at Luoyang  in the tenth  month  and Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants sent the  surrendering  general, a brother of Yao Hong, to  Jiankang  for execution. The 

recovery  of this  northern  capital placed Liu Yu in a unique and  powerful  position  which  he 

exploited  by  assuring  that the appropriate imperial decrees honounng  him  were  issued.47 

For  his  unparaileled defense of the realm and the recovery of the  ancient  capital, Liu Yu was to be made  Counseiior-in-Chief  (xiangguo  & a ) and receive the green  cord  and  seal 

of  this  office,  placing  him  above  al1  princes of the  re~ilm.~~. He was  also  to be appointed 

"Pastor"  (mu  &)  of Yangzhou (a prestige  rank  exceeding that of  cishi)  and Duke of Song 

## ifi  2, ,th  a fief  (guo)  of ten commanderies  (jun).  Not  only  would he receive the ducal  

> seai

but aiso  theyurym  i& 3$  hat  (guan W )  normally  wom by brothers and sons of the emperor upon being  enfeoffed  as pnnces  (wang  3L  ).49  Finally,  Liu Yu  was  to be honoured 

with  the  Nine  Bestowals  (Jiwri). 

This  impenal  declaration  (zhao  fil  ) was  immediately  followed by a ce or "statement of appointments" that authorized the  giving  of new  ranks  and  explained  once 

again  why the emperor (even  though  he was a  mentally  incompetent puppet) so  fieely 

pressed  these  honours upon Liu Yu. As custom required,  this  ce listed ten  merhorious 

contributions (gong  1) made by Liu Yu to the  stability  of the  realm,  and thereby  served 

as a kind  of  official  version of the  historical  record.  It  defined  Liu Yu as the one who had overcome the usurper,  Huan  Xuan,  and defeated the rebels Lu Xun and Qiao Zong  a#, 

and  fûrther  ensured  that Liu Yi, whom he had executed, was  depicted  as a  threat  to the 

throne  rather to Liu Yu's  personal  ambitions, and  finally  praised  hirn  for  his  victory  at Luoyang. As a loyal servant whose  seMce  was unparaileled in history, the emperor sought to  reward  him  as  other  worthies  had been in the  past  for even  lesser  s e ~ c e . It  was this ce that authorized the  ducal  title and the  Nine  Bestowals. The latter are described as  foiiows:  

> -
> 47

On  day  renshen  i of the  îwem month  of the  tweüth  year  of yixi  &,  k ,or  January  4,417   

> (NS/1/16/10).
> 48 SS Jl/38/1-2
> 49 JS/3/766/15

# - 767/2 Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  f i s  Descendants One  imperial  chariot and one  war  chariot, as well as  two  teams  of four black  horses,  as symbols of your  unwavering  commitment  to the maintenance of  laws  and rites as you travel  through  the  realm;  a ceremonial 

robe and cap and  vermilion  shoes, as symbols of your commitment to prosperity built on agriculture; a set of suspended  chimes  and gongs and six rows of  dancers  [the maximum number for  those  of ducal  rank],  as symbols of the  harmony  you bnng by  chuiging  evil  ways to good and  transforming 

the people; a  vermilion  door,  as a  symbol  of your promotion of the  kingly 

way and your  winning  over of  those  both  near  and  far,  Chinese  and 

barbarian;  an  i ~ e r staircase,  as a syrnbol  of your  ability  to choose able 

officials  and  recognize  talent  among  the obscure and the ignored;  three 

hundred  stalwart  warriors, as symbols of your just use of the levers of power to  arrest  enemies and  eliminate  evil-doers;  a hatchet and axe, as symbols of your  clear  and strict observance of law and punishrnent; one red bow and one hundred red arrows together with ten black bows and one thousand black arrows, as symbols of your power that reaches to the four corners of the  earth  and  ovenwhelms  ail  enernies;  a ceremonial  container of black millet, blended to a yellow hue with aromatic  turmeric,  and a jade-

handled spoon for  pouring  libations, as symbols of your  filial  respect and reverence to the  g0ds.5~ 

The new ducal title and the  Nine  Bestowals were the  most  significant  honours, for they were  traditionally  the third and second last milestones on the usurper's way to the 

tbrone.  As Duke of Song, rather  than  Duke of Yuzhang, Liu Yu would have the monosyllabic  name  without  which  he could not create the  House  of Song that would 

eventualiy  accept the abdication of the  House  of Jin. The  Nine  Bestowals were more important as  symbols  than  as  actuai  objects  and were understood to mark the newly enfeoffed duke as an "uncrowned  ruler".  The  mord  significance  of the  imperiai  honours 

was  therefore sufficient, and Liu Yu could safely  demur  at  accepting  them at  this  t h e .  

> In

the  first  month  of  417,  two  months  after  the  victory  at Luoyang, Liu Yu led a naval expedition  northwards."  In the eighth  month,  the  imperhl  troops  h v e d  in Luoyang,  then  travelied up the Yellow River  into  the Wei River and  ont0  Chang'an  where Yao Hong  was  captureci.  Liu Yu arrived in Chang'an in the  ninth  month,  rewarded  his 

troops with the wealth of the treasury and sent Yao Hong to  Jiankang  for  execution.  He Appendix 1: House  of Song  (I): Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 334 

also  sent to  Jiankang  the  ceremonid  bronze vessels of state and the instruments by which the heavens were  observed  and the  impenal  territory  was  measured.'*  This  marked  the end of the  Later  Qin and the recovery of the second great capital of the  no*. 

The  victory  resulted of course in another  imperial  proclamation in the tenth  month, 

in which Liu Yu  was  addressed by the titles of  Counsellor-in-Chief  and Duke of Song." 

Although  Liu Yu had still not accepted  these  titles  (only  in the  sixth  month  of 41 8 did Liu Yu  formally  accept the titles of  Counsellor-in-Chef  (xiangguo)  and Duke of Song in addition to the  Nine  Bestowais),  the  impenal  use of  these  titles indicated for the benefit of the empire that the emperor  already  considered Liu Yu to be the  rightfil  recipient of  such 

honours."  Liu Yu could not be suspected of  grabbing  at what was not  morally  his.  The emperor promoted the still unofficial Duke of Song to the  rank  of Prince of Song  X ,

with  an additionai  enfeofnnent  of another ten commanderies  (iun),  including  many 

northem  ones.  Liu formally  refised  in the first  month  of the fourteenth year (41 8), but  this 

was  preceded by a change in  his  expeditionary  plans. At the end of 4 17 he  learned  of the death of Liu  Muzhi  &,  his  trusted 

advisor  in whose  hands  he had  left  the capital when he first undertook the northem 

expedition?  Liu Yu now needed to be in  person  in the capital and decided to halt  his 

plans,  leaving  Chang'an  in the  tweîfth  month.56  Perhaps he  realized  that the  symbolic 

recovery of the  capitals  was sufficient and there was no  strong  will  for a continued expedition, for on  returning  to Pengcheng in the first  month  of 41 8 he ended the  state  of 

mobilization.  In  fact,  upon Liu Yu's departure  from  Chang'an, the  city  elders are  said  to have wept as they asked  hirn  how he could abandon the ancient tombs and palaces of the 

Chinese  emperors  after  restoring  the  true  culture of  kings  for the  first  tirne  in a hundred              

> 52 SSIlI4U 4
> 53 ss/1/42/11
> 54 NS/1/20/14
> j5 SS/1/36/9
> j6 He issaid to have left on day gengzi

## fi  of the  tweifth  month  of the  thirteenth  year, or  December  26, 417  (SS/l/M/l). Appendk  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 335 

years.  Though  Liu Yu answered that he could  fiot  disobey an  order  to retum to court and 

was  leaving  his  son and  many  able and  Wtuous  aides to  maintain  the  region,  the people 

realized,  with  the  naming  of Liu  Yu's  young  son  as  Inrpector  (cishi)  of the newly established Eastern Qin  Region,  that there was no  commitment  either to push farther  north 

or west to recover more  temtory  nom  the "barbarians" (there was a great number of 

refùgees  fiom  this  region  who had hoped to be able to retum  under  the  rnight  of the southem  amies  but would now have to stay put in this administrative  region  of Eastern Qin) or even to consolidate control over the  greater  guamhong  (Shaanxi)  region? 

By the tenth  month,  some of Liu Yu's northem lustre was  beginning  to fade. The  

> area

around  the capital of Chang'an was in an  uproar  afler  the  murder  of  two  generals 

under  Liu  Yizhen  @J  & & ,his  ten-year-old son who had been  lef€ stationed in the  nonh  as 

"proof'  of Liu Yu's  commitment  to  maintainhg  his  northem  victories.  Liu Yu sent another generai to replace  his  son as  inspector  of  Yangzhou  #E  H, and  his  son almost  lost 

his life  fieeing  back to the  south.  Liu Yu's  generals  were defeated in  battles  against  the north, and the  general  he had sent to replace  his  son bumed the palace of Chang'an and 

fled  to  Tongguan  Pass  $5 W where the  imperial  forces disintegrated and he  was  killed.j8 

Despite  this setback, Liu Yu had  already  accepted the  Nine  Bestowals and had been 

formally  offered  the title of  Prince  of Song, so the route to abdication  was  well  in place. At the end of  41  8 (actually  the  beginning  of 4 19 by Western calculation) Liu had the ernperor  strangled  and his  attendants  poisoned by Wang  Shaozhi  Z a, a member of the great  Langye  Wang  farnily  who  had served in court and  was  admired  by Liu for  his 

leaming  and  Iiterary  ability.59 He was  very  likely the  ghost-writer  for ail of the  efisively 

cornmendatory  zhao,  ce and  lzng,  and the creator of the forged  irnpenal  testament 

commanding  Sima Dewen  165  & 2, the emperor's brother, to succeed his murdered    

> j7 SS/6/1634/3-8
> 58 JS/1/267/ 1
> 59

He was  ordered  strangled  on  day  wuyin  Ifi  R of the  tweifkh  month  of the  fourîeenth  year  of yixi  A,     

> or January 28,419 (JS/1/267/ 3&5).

For Wang  Shaozhi,  see  SS/6/1625/9. Appendix  1: House  of Song  0: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 336 

brother on the  throne?O  One  can  imagine the state of the  literati  ifthis  member faced no moral  dilemma  in  being  simply a servant of power. In the first  month  of  419,  an impenal  proc!mation  was issued that Liu Yu be 

called  to court to help in the  govemance  of the  realrn.61 He  was  also  called  upon  again  to 

take  the title of Prince of Song  $C  Z , with an extended  feoff  of  twenty  commanderies 

ÿun),  an honour first  oEered  by the  previous  emperor in 41 8. In the seventh  month,  Liu Yu accepted the title of prince, having  refused  twice  (at the  beginning  of  419  and  earlier  in  

> 418),

but humbly  refused  the  cal1  to assist the emperor at court and moved to Shouyang 

# +f!#  , making  it the capital of  his  pnncely fief  While  giving  up his  govemorship  of Yangzhou (which controlled the capital) in the ninth  month,  he did so in favour of his son, thereby  maintaining  actuai  control of the capital  region.  62 

By the end of the year, the emperor commanded that traditional symbols of impenal honour be bestowed on Liu Yu.  These  were important as symbols of the  outward 

transfer of  imperial  authority  to the  person  of Liu. They included the  ceremonial  cap with 

twelve  jade pendants, the number  only  the emperor could  Wear,  the  right  to fly the 

irnperial  flags, to have the way cleared of  dl  persons wherever  his  carriage  passed, to  ride 

in the golden-pole  (iingen  & #)  carriage,  drawn by six  horses  and  accompanied  by five 

paired  sets of  variously  coloured  camïages  (wshifuche  X iij  + ), to set up the  ox-tail 

pennant  poles,  and to  enjoy  the  imperial  eight-row  troupe of  dancers  and the exclusively 

'mpenal  arrangement of suspended  chirnes.  In the last  two,  he  was  surpassing  some of the honours of the  Nine  Bestowals  where  these  same  things  were offered in their lesser, non-

imperid  numbers  (six  rows of dancers, as befitted dukes and  imperial  sons, and the lesser 

arrangement  of suspended  chirne~).~3 Append'i  1:  House  of Song  O: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants In the  fourth  month  of  420,  Liu Yu was  again  "cded"  to court to  assist  the emperor. Upon  his  arriva1  fiom Shouyang, he  secretly  informed  Fu Liang  # & ,one of  bis 

power-brokers at court, to have an abdication statement  (zhac),  presumably  drafted  by 

Wang  Shaozhi,  given to the emperor to In the  sixth  month,  therefore, the emperor abdicated, issuing a  declaration  (rhao)  that  since  the heavenly signs now indicated achange in the element  goveming  the  regime's  power, he was  withdrawing  nom  the throne and  yielding  the  House  of Jin to the  House  of Song,  just  as the heroic Yao had abdicated to Shun and the  House  of Han had  yielded  to the  House  of  WeiY  This was followed first by a statement of appointment (ce ), in which the throne was presented to Liu Yu, and 

then  by the Writ of the  Imperia1  Seai  (xishu  1%  f ) in which the  imperial  cord  and  seal 

were passed to Liu, and it was  explained  that the power of  metal  which had governed the 

House  of Jin  was  now  exhausted,  just as the power of  earth  that had govemed the preceding  House  of Wei had faded and given nse to  metal.  Liu refùsed  twice,  irnrnediately 

upon  receiving  this  cornmand  fiom  the emperor and  again  when pressed by  two  hundred and seventy  officials  of both the impenal court and the Song establishment.  Only  when the 

officials  approached a second time,  armed  with  several  dozen  auspicious signs  provided  by the Grand  Astrologer  did Liu  accept.66 

Foilowing  the abdication, Liu Yu erected an  altar  in the  southern  outskirts  of the 

city,  making  a bumt sacrifice and  announcing  to Heaven in a fornial  ce that in  fear  and 

trembling  he accepted the  Heavenly  mandate;  although  he had  never  had  any  personal 

interest  in the throne (had he not  served  the J i and saved it in the  time  of Sun En and of 

Huan  Xuan?),  he  was  accepting the signs of Heaven which were  clear  to  all,  not  least  of  

> aii

to the  House  of  

> 64

JS/ l/269D         

> 65 ss/1/45/ 9
> SS/1/48/12-13
> 67 This was on day dingmao T

JP  of the  sixth  month,  or  July  10,520 (SS/1/5  1/1).Appendk  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 338 

Having  made  his  declaration  to Heaven, he went  by  impenal  chariot to the  palace 

where, in the  Taiji  Qiandian  h 6 (Fore-Palace of the Supreme) he issued a  zhao, 

proclairning  to the  realm  the establishment of a new  dynasty,  a new reign  name  (ymgchu 

Ijc  a , or "the  permanent  beginning"),  and  making  the first step in  consolidating  support 

by  raising  ranks,  offering  aid  to the helpless, providing  tax  relief,  declaring  amnesty  for certain  offences  and  ailowing  reinstatement  of  titles  and offices lost by  legal  process  under 

the old  regime. 

The abdicating emperor was not restored to his former title of Prince of  Langye 

3 but  was  granted  instead  the title of Prince of Lingling  a% X .  The new title was 

necessary,  for the previous one had long histoncal connections  with  the  House  of Jin, being the title held by the  first  emperor of the Eastern Jin.  Banished  to  Moling  a& ,

south  of  Jiankang,  the former emperor realized he was being  permitted  only  in  written 

proclamation, not in practice, to  maintain  the Jin attire and  insignia,  its ceremonies and 

rituals  and its  calendrical  tradition.  Realizing  the danger  this  implied,  his  empress 

constantly  stayed  at  his  side.  Only  when her brother was forced to  cal1  her away was she 

inveigled  into  leaving  him.  In the  ninth  month,  Song  soldiers  took advantage of her absence,  scaled  the  walls  and murdered  him.  The emperor was  thuty-six  by  Chinese 

calculati~n.~~ Though the histories state that Liu Yu  followed  the tradition set by Wei in 

mouming  the death of the  last  Han emperor, there was one  significant  dEerence.  When 

Liu Xie  #j  % abdicated to Cao Pi  a, he was not murdered.  Instead,  he  lived  for another  thirteen  years,  surviving  into the reign of the second Wei  emper0r.~9 

Liu Yu died  two  years  later  at the age of  59.'O  Though he had  secured  the power of  his  farnily,  the succession  was  to be controiled by others.  His  eldest son  did  take  the 

throne,  but the regents, Fu Liang and Xu  Xianzhi  & & -ir,  did not prove to have the              

> 68 The adday is undear, since there is no day dingchou

T a in the  ninth  month  (JS/1/269/10-12).  

> 69

He died in 234  (SGZ/l/lO 1-102) 

He died on  day  guihai  *of the  nAh  month  of the  third  year,  or  June  26,422  (SS/1/59/14-15). Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and His Descendants 

loyalty  that he had expected of  them71  They  engineered  the  demotion  of the second son to the  rank  of  comrnoner  in the second  month  of 423 and  his  murder  in the  sixth  month  at the 

age of 18  suiJ2  the dismissal of the  emperor  (first son) in the  fifth  month  and  his  murder 

in the  same  month  at  the age of 19  sui?  his  formal  removal  from  the royal  line  in the seventh  month74  and the enthronement of the  third  son in the eighth  m~nth.~' 

SS/1/59/11   

> 72 SS/1/65/3;

Xu  Xianzhi  sent a  person  to  murder  him  on  day  guiwei  B $k of the  sixth  month  (probably  

> guichou

# &a, since  there  is no  day  guiwei in the  sivth  month),  or  August  4,424 (SS/6/1638/12).  

> 73

On day  guichou  of the  sixth  mon&,  or  August  4 ,421 (SS/1/66/10)   

> 74 sS/1/72/1
> 7s

On day  dingyou  T 8 of the  eighth  month,  or September 17,424  (SSIl/72/I4-15). Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (I): Liu Yu and  His  Descendants Liu Yu had seven sons,  al1  by different  wives. 

Liu Yifu  @J  8(406-424): Eldest son of Liu Yu, he succeeded to the throne upon the death of  his  father in 422. However,  officiais  put in place by Liu Yu wanted to  maintah 

power for themselves and  masterminded  the removal of this  elder  son as emperor,  using 

the traditional instrument of an edict issued in the  name  of the Empress Dowager  & h fi 

(in this case,  Yifb's  mother), denouncing the emperor as an unworthy successor and 

dismissing  him  fiom  the  throne.  He was murdered in the  following  month  at the age of 19  

> sui.

He  is  known  in  history  as the  Juvenile  Emperor  (shaodi  9 *) .

(SSl1163-66;  NS/1/29/1  - 3 117) 

Liu Yizhen  @j & &,  Prince  Xiaoxian  of Luling  $ & Z (407-424):  Second son of Liu Yu, he  accompanied  his  father  at  the age of about 10 on his  northem  expedition of 41 6-4  17 and, upon Liu Yu's  decision  to  retum  to  Jiankang  at the end of 4 17, was  left  in the  north  as cishi of Eastern Qin  Region  to prove  his  father's (somewhat suspect) 

cornmitment  to the  northemers.  The  murder  of  two  generals, one sanctioned by General 

Wang, a native of the  Chang'an  region,  who had been assigned to  act  as  Yizhen's  advisor 

and assistant, followed by the execution,  allegedly  sanctioned by young Yizhen, of  General 

Wang  hirnseK  threw  the  region  into an uproar, and Yizhen barely escaped to the  south 

with  h i s  Me.  Upon  his  father's death in 422, power  fell  into the  hands  of Fu Liang  # &

and Xu  Xianzhi  & 5 who, in 424,  engineered  the degrading of Yizhen to non-

inerhenting  status  (shren  & A ) and  his  murder,  at  the age of 18 sui. This murder 

occurred on the  same  day as the  murder  of  his  older brother, Y i who had been deposed as emperor  only  a few  months  earlier.  Yizhen had no sons.  (SS/6/1633/5  - 163917; 

NSl2/363/11  - 366/7) 

Liu  Yilong  @j  E, Emperor Wen  (tuizu)  h A & (407-453; r.  424-453):  Third 

son of Liu Yu, he  was  apppointed as  cishi  of  Jingzhou  and  stationed  at the capital, 

Jiangluig,  in 420 upon the foundation of the Song  throne.  He was  then  only  13  years  of Appendix  1:  House  of Song  O: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 

age.  At the age of 17, he was  cdled  to the capitai by the regents of the time who had engineered the deaths  of  his  two  older brothers and  waïïted  to have  him  take the throne. In 425, when  ko  tumed  18, the regency ended, and Yilong ordered the execution of the  two 

major regents  who  had put  him  on the throne. Yilong enjoyed the  longest  reign  of  al1  the Song emperors but was killed in 453 by  his  eldest son who was desperate to protect  his 

right  to the throne.  His  father had already spent  much  time considering  his  removal  as heir apparent  after  discovering  his  involvement in a case of Daoist  sorcery  that appeared to be 

aimed  at the emperor  hirnself.  Yilong had  Nneteen  sons,  al1  by different  wives.  Three  of 

these  sons were to take the throne  after  him,  al1  in  quite  different circumstances. 

( S S 1 1 1 7 1 f l  - 102113;  NSl113711  - 55/1) 

Liu Shao  18, the "Heinous  (yuamiong  )"  (424.453):  Eldest son of Emperor Wen, he is  described  as  showing  an  early  studious  bent, being fond of 

reading  historicai  works, and  having  a special  liking  for  archery  and equestrianship. He and  his  next  younger brother, Liu Junn  @J  s, became  involved in  activities 

which  they did not  want  their father to  know  about and relied on the Daoist "voodoo"  skills  of a woman  who had been quietly brought into the palace. She kept them  sge  fiom  their father by casting  various  spells and  burying  a jade effigy of  him.  In 452, this finaily came to the  knowledge  of their father who  was  lenient 

at  firn  but  hally  considered  dismissing  Shao as heir apparent and executing Junn. 

This  decision  was made  after  the emperor  leamed  that the Daoist sorceress, who 

had  successfÙlly  fled the palace, was probably  being  protected by Junn in  Jingkou 

(present-day  Zhenjiang), not  far  to the east of the capital. In early 453, the  two 

brothers, who had been  warned  of their father's intentions, decided to take preventative action. On the  twenty-first  day of the second  month  of the  thirtieth 

year  ofyuanjiu  ii  & (March  16,453),  Shao forged an  irnperial  edict  that  called  on 

him  to  lead  his  soldiers  fkom  the  Heir  Apparent's Palace into court at  dawn  to 

suppress  a conspiracy.  On this pretext they were able to enter the  imperial  court Appendix 1 : House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 342 and  kill  the emperor. Shao declared himself the new emperor and a bloody purge followed. However, his  third  brother, Jun  # 8, soon  raised  the flag of revolt and 

captured  the capital  city  ci; the third day of the  fourth  month  (April26,453).  Shao 

was  seized  hiding  in a well  in the palace  annoury  and was executed  along  with  his 

four sons. Junn and  his  three  sons met the  same  fate.  Their  heads were held up on pikes and their bodies exposed in the market-place.  Jun,  the "filial descendant" (or  

> m'am

f &,  , the posthumous  irnperial  title  by which he is known), was to ascend the throne in the  fourth  month  of that  year  (453).  (SS181242311  - 243513; 

NSl2138611  - 3Wl2) 

Liu  Junn  *, Prince  of  Shixing  ak  If  (c. 429 -453): Second son of Emperor Wen, he  is  listed  along  with  his  older brother in a joint biography in the Song  Shu 

that repudiates them as the "two murderers  (encimg  = )".  The biography is placed  at  the end of the biographical section, in the position reserved for the disgraced and the  defiled.  The relationship  between  the  two  brothers had begun when  Jum  realized  he needed to curry favour with Shao  after  his  own  mother 

becarne  the  emperor's  favourite and Shao's  jealous  and  resentfùl  mother died in a fit of apoplexy.  Failure  to curry favour could  mean  disaster  once Shao, the heir apparent, took the throne and was in a position to act  against  him.  The  two 

became intimates and  frequently  engaged in behaviour which they  attempted  to keep hidden  nom  their father by sorcery. The result is discussed in the preceding 

biographical  sketch of Shao.  JUM  was in the Western  Garrison  (Xizhou  f i , 

possibly a reference to  Yuzhou  JEl,  also  known  as the  Outlying  Western 

Garrison  [xifan  8 s] in the Eastern Jin) on the day of the  murder.  However, once he received  his  brother's  letîer  indicating  the palace  was  in their  hands,  he went off 

to  join  him.  When their brother, Jun  @]a, ovenvhelmed  the capital, he fled  south 

but encountered Liu  Yigong  4& &who compelied  hirn  to  retum  to the capital Appendk  1: House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 343 and beheaded  him  before  reaching  their destination.  His  three  sons were executed in the capital.  (SS181243 514  - 243912;  NSIU392113  - 39513) Liu Jun  @j s, Prince of  Wuling  & & Z and Emperor  Xiaowu  (shizu)  +k  ;ilt # &,

f (430-464; r.  453-464):  Third  son of Liu  Yilong,  he came to the throne  after 

elirninating  Shao,  his  eldest  brother who had killed  their  father and  declared  himself 

emperor. Jun ascended the throne on day jisi  C C,  of the  fourth  month,  or May 20, 453, and lived to the age of 35 sui,  dying  in 464 on day  gengshen  a of the 

intercalary  fifth  month,  or  JuIy  12, 464. Soon  after  taking  the throne, he had to 

deal  with a rebellion by his uncle, Liu  Yixuan  @j 4 Sb, which was suppressed 

surprîsingly  quickly.  However, he  is  described  as being suspicious by nature, and six of his  own  brothers fell  victim  to his murderous doubts  during  the course of  his 

reign.  He  was  succeeded  peacefully  by  his  own  son, but the  House  of Song  was 

already  quite  unstable, and  his  own  line of  28  sons was completely  exterminated  by 466. 

(SS/11109/1  - 135/5;  NS/1/55/2  - 67/13) 

Liu Ziye  .I- (449-465;  r.  464-465):  Eldest son of Liu Jun, he 

inherited  the throne  immediately  upon the death of  his  father in 464 but was murdered and officially deposed in 465. He  was  accused of being a 

wild  and brutal  person  and of  killing  several  officiais,  including  a great-

uncle  who  was acting as regent, and  three  of  his  own  very  young  siblings. 

He had been brutal to  several  of  his  uncles  whose power he feared, but one of  these  uncles,  Liu Yuh  @J  a, was to  take  his place on the throne  after  a

successfid  conspiracy  which  had the  official  sanction (either  involuntary  or forced) of the Empress Dowager, as  was  required  by long tradition for 

such  displacements of the royal line.  It  is  difficult  to assess  all  the factors 

involved.  Was  he to some  extent  being used in a power  stniggie?  Was  he a sociopath? Ziye,  only  15 when made emperor,  is  not  just  depicted  as Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 344 

murderous and brutal; he is  also  descnbed as having a good  mind,  being 

studious  and learned, and showing a talent for  writing,  having  written 

sewral  literary  pieces  which  were  much  admired.  The  wicked  nicknarnes  he gave to some of his  uncles  also  suggest  that he  was  a very  astute  observer of people. Although the second member of the  House  of Song to be dethroned  (his  uncle, Liu Yifu  was  the first in  424),  he  is  known  in the 

historical  records as "the  first  deposed emperor"  + . Although the 

birth  of an  imperid  son was announced towards the end of  465,  this  child 

was  known  to be the son of another man and was not accepted as a 

legitimate  heir to the throne  &er  Ziye's  murder. 

(SS/1/141/1  - 148/6;  NS/1/68/1  - 71/14) 

Liu Zishang  @J  3- %,  (c.  450-465):  Second son of Liu Jun, he was ordered to commit suicide (the "officiai" death sentence for people of  rank)  for allegedly having an incestuous relationship  with  his  sister.  Since  he and  his 

sister  were  condemned  after  Ziye was murdered but before Liu Yuh had 

formally  taken  the throne, this was very likely an action  masterminded  by Liu Xiuren  81@ @,  brother  and chief  minister  of the about-to-be emperor, Liu Yuh, in  order  to outmanoeuvre anyone  trying  to  make  Zishang  the legitimate successor as the  next  younger brother of Ziye. He was 16 sui  at 

his  death.   

> (SS/1/152/12; SS17/2058/9

# - 2OSg/lO;  NS/2/413/2-10) 

Liu  ZUun  +Ibl  (c. 456-466):  Third  son of Liu  Jun,  he was  first 

appointed  Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Jiangzhou  % in 463, when he  would  have been seven  years  old,  and,  after  a series  of other appointments, was 

rehimed  there when  his  father  died  in 464. In  early  466  (seventh  day of the 

first  month  of the second  year  of  taishi  j&tk,  or  February  7,466), one 

month  after  Liu  Yuh  81a formally  took the throne in  Jiankang,  he  was Appendk  1: House  of Song  O: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 345 

instaiied  as emperor in Xunyang  4 I#  in a  widely  supported  act  of  defiance 

against Liu Yuh.  Traditionaily,  where there  was  no heir, the throne  was  to 

pass  to the  nexi  most senior. Hence, Zixun may have been considered to have more legitimacy  than  Yuh  despite  his being a  child.  (Although  this 

might  prove that the  "next  most senior" was understood to be in the generation of the irnmediately deceased, the question was not  actually  so 

clearly  defined,  and this was even more obvious  during  the  Xiao  regimes 

when the question of which generation the "most senior" should belong to precipitated considerable stnfe.) This was not the  first  attempt  to have Zixun proclaimed the  legitimate  heir.  While  Ziye was  still  on the throne, he had had a married  aunt  (a daughter of Liu Yilong) spirited into  his  imer 

palace  after  alleging her death.  Actually,  he had  killed  a palace  maid  and 

done  her up as  his  deceased aunt. The aggrieved husband, both  angry  and afiaid,  planned  a coup which would have  seen  Zixun placed on the  throne. 

However, the secret was  exposed  and Ziye had the conspirators  kiiied  and issued a  command  that  his  brother in Jiangzhou  take  poison which he was 

delivering  to  hirn.  However, when  Zixun's  aide and  administrator 

(zhangshif  R), Deng  Wan  *&, was  informed  of this by the  imperial 

envoy, he  immediately  rebelled and called for the dethronement of Ziye. 

M e r  Yuh came to the throne,  Deng  refùsed to accept  him  and declared 

Z h n  to be emperor (as stated  above)  and  cailed  for a  campaign  against 

the capital.  Despite  the massive opposition, the  imperial  amies  were  finally 

successful  in suppressing the revolt in both the western and  eastern  parts of the  reah,  and  Z h n  was murdered in Xunyang (the capital of  Jiangzhou). 

He was 11 sui at  his  death. 

(SS/7/2059/11  - 206O/l4;  NS/2/413/I  1 - 4 14/5) Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 346 

Liu  Zisui  pi1  +SfF(?  - 466):  Fourth  son of Liu  Jun,  he  was made  cishi  of 

Yingzhou  q JY  . Like  al1  the other young sons of  Jl?n,  he would have been 

under  the  tutelage  of  his  administrative  aide  (zhangshi)  who  brought 

Yingzhou  over to the  side  of Zixun. He presumably shared the  same  fate 

under  his  uncle, Liu Yuh, as  al1  the other brothers at the end of  Zixun's 

rebeîiion. 

(SS/1/153/2  & 155/6-8;  SS/7/2057/2) 

Liu  Zishen  + : This  fiflh  son died in  infancy. 

(S S/7/205 817) 

Liu Zifang  -f  & (c. 456-466):  Sixth  son of Liu  Jun  by the  same  mother as  Zixun.  He had been appointed as Govemor  ( t a i s h  f ff  ) of  Kuaiji  in 465  while  his  brother was emperor.  When  Zixun was made emperor,  his  

> zhangshi

or administrative  sumogate  took up  arms  in support. He was defeated by  imperial  troops led by Liu  Xiuruo  816S . Zifang  was sent to 

Jiankang  and "forgiven". However,  d e r  Z h n  was killed,  Xiuren  advised 

his  brother, Liu Yuh, that  his  claim  to the throne would be  safer  if  al1  their nephews were killed. When Yuh accepted the  advice,  this nephew was 

e d e d  and  killed  at the age of 1 1 sui. 

(S  SI71206 11 1 - 2062/7;  NS/2/4  1416-9) 

Liu  Zhu  911Q JB  (c. 456-466): Seventh son of Liu Jun, he  was  killed as were  his  other brothers when the revolt built  around  Zixun  was put  down. 

Though  a hapless  child  of 1 1 sui, he  was  otFcially  cishi of  Jingzhou  $1 #ti 

which  had  come  in on the  side  of Zixun.  (SS/712062/8  - 206312; 

NS/2//414/10-11) 

Liu  Ziiuan  @J -f  (c.456-465):  Eighth  son of Liu  Jun,  he  was  favoured over other sons  because  his  mother was the emperor's  favourite.  When 

Ziye  came to the throne,  jealousy  prompted  him  to demote this brother to Appendix  1: House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 347 

the  statu  of commoner. He  then  ordered  him  killed  dong  with another  full 

brother  (Zishi  + qi  ) and  sister. 

(SS/1/145/1-2;  SS/7/2063/3  - 20661'2;  NSl214 1411 2 - 4 1515) 

Liu  Ziren  @J  4 +(c.457-466): Ninth son of Liu  Jun,  he was killed at the age of 10 sui as part of the decimation of Liu Jun's line advocated by Liu Xiuren and  implemented  by Liu Yuh.  (SSl71206613  - 206715; 

NS/2/4  1516-7) 

Liu Zifeng  # 3. a : Tenth son. Died as a baby.  (SSl71205817) 

Liu  Zizhen  #J  + & (c.457-466): Eleventh son of Liu Jun, he was killed along with  his  other brothers.  (SS/712067/6- 10) 

Liu Zixuan  pi/  +-S:  : Twelfth  son. Died as a baby.  (SS/712058/7) 

Liu Ziyuan  #J %(c.458-466):  Thirteenth  son of Liu  Jun,  he  was  killed 

along  with  his  other brothers.  (SS.7.2067111  - 206814;  NS/2/4  1519) 

Liu Ziyu  81 7.  W (458-459):  Fourteenth son of Liu  Jun,  he apparently died of  natural  causes. (S  S171206815;  NS/2/4  15/ 10) 

Liu Ziheng  +8: Fifieenth  son. Died as a baby.  (SS17/2058/7) 

Liu  Zimeng  @/  +& (c.459-466): Sixteenth son of Liu Jun, he  was  killed dong with  his  other brothers.  (SS/7/2068/6;  NSI2/4  1611) 

Liu Zikuang  @]  -f  iJ€  : Seventeenth son. Died as a baby.  (SSl712058/7) 

Liu  Zichan  @J  +& (?-466): Eighteenth son of Liu  lun,  he was  kiued 

along  with  his  other brothers.  (SS/6/1858/8) 

Liu Ziyun  3 (c.  459-462):  Nineteenth son of Liu Jun, he  apparently 

died  of  natural  causes.  (SSl7120691 1-2;  NS/214  1612) 

Liu  Ziwen  4 sf  à; : Twentieth son. Died as a baby.  (SS/7/2058/7) 

Liu Ziyu  ,I -f  (?-466):  Twenty-first  son of Liu Jun, he  was  killed  dong 

with  his  other brothers. (S  SI61 16401 1 -2) Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 348 

Liu  Zishi  fi  ;f  6 (c.460-465): Twenty-second son of Liu  Jun,  he  was 

kilIed  by  his  brother, Ziye, at the  same  time as  Ziluan  3 .

(SS/7/2069/3-5;  NS/2/4  1613 -4) 

Liu  Zixiao  -f  (46  1-464):  Twenty-third  son of Liu Jun, he presumably died of  nahiral  causes at the age of three.  (SS/7/2069/6;  NS/2/4  1615) 

Liu  Ziyong  # + % : Twenty-fourth  son. Died as a baby.  (SS/712058/7) 

Liu Ziqu  a +# (?-466):  Twenty-fifih  son of Liu  Jun,  he  was  kiUed  dong 

with  his  other brothers for the  same  reason.  (SS/7/2058/8) 

Liu  Ziqi  .I-#Q  (?-466):  Twenty-sixth  son of Liu  Jun,  he was killed  dong 

with  his  other brothers for the  same  reason.  (SS171205818) 

Liu  Zisi  @J  +BJ  (463-466): Twenty-seventh son of Liu Jun, he  was  killed 

dong  with  his  other brothers.  (SSl71206917  207015;  NSl214  1616) 

Liu  Ziyue  @J  'f  tE  (?-466) Twenty-eighth son of Liu  Jun,  he  was  killed 

dong  with  his  other brothers.  (SS/7/2058/8) 

Liu Shuo  #le, Prince Mu of  Nanping  C& y 8 3 (c. 43 1 - c. 453):  Fourth  son of Yiong, he showed  Iiterary  talent and a love of  learning  fiom  an  early  age. He 

supported  Shao and  fled  with Junn when Liu Jun's troops approached the  city 

(SSl8/2434/14).  Although  captured and  invited  into Jun's camp rather  than 

executed, Shuo was  never  quite  trusted by Jin for holding office  under  Shao and 

failing  to go over to  his  side  when so  many  others had  done  so. He  finaiiy  chose to get nd of  him  by  poisoning  his  food. He  was  23 sui at the time of  his  death.  His 

three  sons,  ail  very  Young,  survived  Jun's  reign  but were murdered by  his 

successor, Ziye  (their  cousin), on the last day of  his  reign in 465 in revenge for 

their  mother's  refusal  to enter  his  inner  palace.  (SS/6/1856/3  - l858IlO; 

NSl213 9514  - 39619) Appendix 1:  House  of Song  O: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 349 

Liu Shao  @J  a, Prince of Luling  $ & (c.  432-452):  Fifih  son of Yilong, he  was 

made heir to the  childless  Liu  Yizhen  and therefore took  Yizhen's  title. He died of 

iilness  at the  age  of 2 1 sui. ( S  S / 6 /  163 9/7  - 12;  NSj2136616-7) 

Liu Dan  M s, Prince of  Jingling  & 3 (c. 43  3-459):  Sixth  son of  Yiiong,  he 

became  a victim  of  Jun's  suspicions and jealousy. Dan had supported Jun  agahst 

Shao and  later  against  Yixuan  and had won a considerable reputation for his 

military  exploits. This made Jun  jealous.  However, he  also  seems to have aroused his  brother's  suspicions for what may have been  only  ill-advised  pretensions to grandeur but were interpreted as signs of treacherous  imperial  ambition. Not only had Dan constructed a residence and  estate  that  outrivalled  al1  others for 

workmanship  and beauty but he had gathered together men of  talent  and  collected 

considerable  weaponry.  To  remove  him  from  the capital, the emperor appointed 

hirn  cishi of Southem Yanzhou  rfi  2 JY  , the capital of  which  was the  garrison  city of Guangling  & #a  (present-day Yangzhou, north of the  Yangzi).  However, 

sensing  that he was  under  a cloud of suspicion and that  his  life  was in danger, he used the attacks  from  the north on the border  regions  as an excuse for building up the defenses of the  city.  Whatever Dan really had in mind, the populace at large was  assurning  that he was preparing to tum on the  throne.  Jun launched a surprise attack on  Guangling  with  troops who were  allegedly  taking  up position  under  a

quickly  appointed new  inspecter  (cishi) of  Yanzhou.  Dan resisted, and Jun sent a

general  on a formal  campaign  against Dan the rebel. In the seventh  month  of that 

year,  Dan was murdered when the  city  fell, and  his  head  was  delivered to the capital.  His death had been preceded by that of  his  son  whom  he  had 

unsuccessfidiy  tried to  hide  among  the people. He was 27 sui at  his  death. 

(SS/7/2025/1  - 2037/15;  NS/2/396/10  - 400/5) 

Liu Hong  z , Prince  Xuanjian  of  Jianping  $ i fi  fi  (c. 434-458): Seventh and  favoured  son of  Ydong,  he was  sickiy  as a youth. He was respected by  Jun  for Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 350 

his  astute  judgement in  flairs  of state. He was 25 sui at his death.  (SSl6/1858111  -

186011 3;  NSI2/400/6-13) 

Liu Jingsu  #J i j  f (c. 452-476): Son of Liu Hong. In the seventh  month 

of  476  Jingsu took up arms at Jingkou (present-day  Zhenjiang),  where he 

was  stationed as  cishi  of Southem Xuzhou  & #t  . Then  twenty-four,  he 

was  the  oldest  of Emperor Wen's grandsons  (Le.  the generation of Liu  Ziye 

and Liu  Yuhh  @j 3 , now on the throne). He had established a reputation as  being  vimious,  dignified  and  respectful  of talent, and there  was  a feeling that the wild and  vicious  boy emperor now on the throne could be 

rightfully  replaced  by  him.  The  only  determined  opposition seemed to  corne 

fiom  the  Chen  family  (the emperor's  rnother  was a  Chen)  which  wanted to 

maintain  its position and  fiom  Emperor Ming's  old  associates who felt it was easier to manipulate a child  than  an  adult.  Jingsu had his  own  imperial 

ambitions and  was  finally  able to find an  opportunity  to  lead  an attack on 

Jiankang.  However, a combined  land  and naval expedition  was  launched against him in Jingkou.  His  initial success  against  the naval force soon 

collapsed  and  his  generals  deserted  him.  Jingsu was captured in the  city  and beheaded  dong  with  his  three  sons,  just  seven days  afler  the  revolt  began. 

He  was  25  sui  at his death.  (SS/6/1860/  14  - 186816;  NSl2/400/14  - 402/7) 

Liu Hui  @J  *, Prince  of  Lujiang  $ ir.  Z (c. 435 - 469):  Eighth  son of  Yiong,  he 

was  treated  with  contempt by  his  brothers for  his  stupidity.  In 469, when  his 

brother, Yuh  s$  , was on the throne, Hui was approached by a  general  who needed to  legitimize  his  own  ambitions by  clairning  to be  putting  a rightnil  heir  on the throne.  Hui,  apparently  pleased  with  the prospect, sent  bribes  to generals to  win 

their  support, and one of  them  reported this to the throne.  Although  not  taken 

senously, he  was  made a  commoner  and forced to  commit  suicide to  eliminate  the 

risk that  this  might  ocmr  again.  He  was  3 5 mi  at  his  death.  His  son  died  in 478, a Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 

year  before  the end of the Song, at the age of  28  sui.  (SSl71203811  - 204216; 

NSl2/402/8  - 40311) 

Liu Chang  93  ft  , Prince of  Jinxi  Q 3 (c. 436-?):  Nith  son of  Yilong,  he  was 

suspected by  his  nephew, Ziye (now on the throne) of  ploning  with Liu Yigong 

against  him.  He therefore led troops  northward  to Xuzhou (capital at Pengcheng  113 a, near  present-day Xuzhou) where Chang was stationed as cishi. Forewamed, Chang rose in rebellion but was  unable  to  rally  the  various 

commanderies  (jun)  in  his  jurisdiction and fled  north  to seek asylum with the Wei 

regirne. 

(S SI61 1868/7  - 18691 1 1 ;NSI21403/2- 14) 

Liu H u n  @j q , Prince of Wuchang  &, ii,  5 (c.  439-455):  Tenth son of Yilong, he was demoted to the  rank  of  cornmoner  and  forced  to commit suicide  at  the age of 17 sui. In 454 he  was  appointed cishi of  Yongzhou  # but in the  following 

year,  after  arriving at his post, he circulated a  surnrnons  to arms, declared himself the Prince of Chu  & 3 and announced  his  imperial  reign  title.  His  actions are described as being the  jest  of a sixteen-year-old.  Since  the  f l a i r  was exposed by the  Administrator  (zhangshi  k ),  who exercized  highest  administrative 

responsibility  in the  prince's  establishment, there  does  not seem to have been a

well-organized  plot. However,  his  brother,  Jun,  was suspicious and took no chances. 

(SS/7/204217  - 204317;  NSl21404/3-7) 

Liu Yuh  # &,  ,Prince of  Xiangdong  f 5 , Emperor Ming  (laizong)  ;E;  $ ry] 

## f (439-472;  r.  466*-472):  Eleventh son of Yilong, he came to the throne as the result of a  conspiracy  which  aimed  at  having  him  replace the  young  and 

diEcult  Ziye who had been on the throne for  only  a few  months.  The  imperial 

guard  acquiesced to the  murder  of Ziye  since  it was  sanctioned  by a declaration that the  "wild"  emperor had been  done  away with by  Yuh  on instructions  fiom  the Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 352 

Empress  Dowager (Liu  Ziye's  grandmother). * * Since  the Dowager's voice  could 

legitimize  the dethronement of Ziye,  another  edict soon foiiowed  from  her 

denouncing  the emperor's crimes and  rleclaring  Yuh as  the  worthy successor  to  the 

throne.  Yuh did not  actually  ascend the  throne  as emperor until  eight  days  afler  the 

assassination,  perhaps  because  some consolidation of power  was  first  necessary. 

One strategic action  was  the execution of Liu Zishang, the  fifieen-year-old  brother of the murdered Ziye, on the grounds of  incest  but more  likely  for the  purpose  of 

eliminating  a legitimate  claimant  to the throne  among  the deposed emperor's brothers, for Zishang would have had more  legitimacy  as the heir  than  his  uncle. In 466 a rebellion in the  West  which  saw Zixun, the  next  s u ~ v i n g brother of Ziye, 

declared  emperor at Xunyang  (Region  of  Jiangzhou),  received  wide  support. This too would  suggest  that Liu  Yuh's  clah  to the throne was not considered to be legitimate: the line of succession should not be to an uncle but to a son or, if there were no son, to a brother of the deceased emperor. (This, however,  runs  counter to one of the currents of thought observed  later  during  the Southem Qi when Xiao 

Ze  E&  was on  his  deathbed.). By the time the rebellion was suppressed in 466, however, Liu Yuh had succeeded in  elirninating  al1  the other brothers of Ziye, thereby  removing  any  daims  to the  throne  from  Jun's line. Yuh now became 

distrustfid  of  his  own  brothers and was  extremely  feamil  for the  safety  of  his  heir should he  suddenly  die.  His  physicai condition was  probably  a contnbuting  factor to  this  growing  fear.  He may have  inherited  his  father's  iilness,  for  like  his  father, he  is  said  to have had long periods when he was  confined  to bed. The  resulting 

isolation may have accentuated  his  suspicions of others,  most  notably towards the end of  his  reign.  It  rnay  also  have seemed apparent to  him  that  his  ihess  would 

mean  a prernature  passing  of the  mantle  of power to a young son who could be 

easily  manipulated  and even deposed. The  three  brothers whom Liu  Yuh  came to 

consider  a threat  to  him  and  his  own  line were  Xiuyou,  Xiuren  and  Xiumo.  By Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (I): Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 353 471,  only  Xiufhn.  who  was  considered too incompetent to  threaten  anyone,  was 

left  arnong  Yuh's brothers.  It  was at  this  time that  Xiao  Daocheng  a il& &, was

called  to the capital, for  Yuh  was now desperately  searching  for  allies  ;vho  would be sure to support the young heir apparent  after  his  own  death.  His  worst  feus 

were  eventually  to  come  true  but not  from  the  quarters  he had  feared.  The emperor died in 472,  at  the age of 34 sui, and was succeeded by Yuhh  # 8, his  nine-year-

old son, on the  following  day. 

Liu Yuh had been  known  for  his  attention to gathering men of talent and 

learning  around  him and for his  interest  in literature which  was  evidenced in his 

early  years  by his compilation of a  Li~erury Recordfrom  the  Beginning  of the 

Southem  Regimes  and  his  continuation of one of the  commentaries  on the  Lun  Yu. 

Later,  however, he becarne more preoccupied  with  the occult and insisted on avoiding inauspicious words and topics. He had  twelve  sons,  two  of whom were to 

take  the throne  after  him. 

(SS/11151/1  - 170/15;  NS/1/77/1  - 8511) *The date  will  appear in some sources as 465  since  Liu Yuh becarne emperor in the first year of  tuishi  64t+ which corresponds  overall  to 465. However, he took the throne on day  bingyin  R of the  twelfth  month  of that  year,  and this corresponds to  January  9,466. **The  Chinese  term  for the Dowager seems to  Vary.  Liu Ziye's  grandmother  was 

given  the  title  of  h g raihou  f (SS/4/  l286/13).  The  fïrst  declaration to the  impenal  guard  is  said  to have been issued by the  tazhou  h W (SS/8/23  l3/l  O), 

whiie  the  quickly  foiiowing  edict  is  said  to have been issued by the  taihuang  taihm  

> f

# ijk  W (SS/l/l46/5). 

Liu Yuhh  #!J S (463-477; r. 472-477):  Eldest  son of Liu  Yuh,  he succeeded his  father  at the age of  nine.  There  seem to have been some doubts about  his  paternity  since  his  mother had been  manied  off to a Li Appendk  1: House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 354 

Dao'er  ;è a d e r  falling out of favour with Liu Yuh and gave  birth  to Yuhh  after  being  recîlled  to the  imperial  harem. Yuhh  was  too  young  to be a d e r ,  and  his  irnmaturity  meant  iiiat  the throne was exposed to the intrigues of the  unscmpulous  and arnbitious.  His  behaviour,  too, became afactor in  undermining  the  stability  of the throne, for, as  officials  of the court became  fearfùl  for their lives, there was greater receptiveness to suggestions of plots to  remove  this  personal  menace. The  first  armed 

opposition came  from  his  uncle, Liu  Xiufan,  but ended  fairly  quickly  in failure. In 476 a revolt was led by Liu Jingsu who took up  arms  at  Jingkou 

(present-day  Zhenjiang),  where he was stationed as  cishi  of Southem Xuzhou. Liu Jingsu,  then  twenty-four, was the  oldest  of Emperor  Wen's 

grandsons  (i.e.  the generation of Liu Ziye and Liu Yuhh, now on the throne). He had established a reputation as being  virtuous,  dignified  and 

respectfùl  of talent, and there was a feeling that the  wild  and  vicious  boy emperor now on the throne could be  rightfùlly  replaced by  him.  The court was  divided  in its  suppon  for  him,  however. Jingsu finally took action but 

was  defeated and killed  dong  with  his  three  sons,  just  seven  days  after  the revolt  began.  The  following  year  (477),  Xiao  Daocheng  engineered  a coup in  which  the emperor was rnurdered and replaced by a younger brother, Liu Zhun  #!J 3. AU  this  was  legitirnized  by an edict  f?om  the ernpress dowager 

( h gtaihou  & f & , wife  of Liu Yuhh'  s father, according to  

> SS/4/1295/9)

cornmanding  these  measures to be  taken.  The edict, 

foliowing  the standard  rhetoric,  accused the emperor of being  wild, 

undisciplined,  murderous,  indulging  brutal and  licentious  appetites and 

behaving  more despicably  than  the worst  culprits  of  history.  In a separate 

edict,  Liu Yuhh,  already  dead,  was  demoted to the  title  of  Prince  of Appendk  1: House  of Song  O):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 355 

Cangwu  Commandery  (# & @ àP  ).  He is  known  to  history  as the "Second Deposed Emperor"  ( h m feidi  & & 9). 

(SS11117711  - 19019;  NS/1/85/2  - 9012) Liu  Faliang  @J  & & : Second son of Liu Yuh, he may have died as an infant, as he  was  never  given  a princely  title.  (SS/8/2237/4) 

Liu Zhun  #.J q, Prince of Ancheng  & 3 , Prince of  Ruyin  ;'a- 3 and 

Emperor Shun  M f (469-479; r. 477-479):  Third  son of Liu Yuh, his 

place on the throne was engineered by Xiao Daocheng. Zhun was  almost 

eight years of  age  when he took the throne four days  d e r  his  brother  was 

murdered.  Xiao  Daocheng occupied the role of prime  minister  and regent. In 479, the  nine-year-old  emperor was forced to issue a  declaration 

whereby he  declared  to the  realrn  that the  House  of Song was abdicating in favour of the  House  of Qi. The last Song emperor was demoted to the 

rank  of Prince of Ruyin. Less  than  a month  after abdicating, the last emperor "died"  at  the age of  nine  and was given the honourary posthumous title of Emperor Shun ("the  Obliging").  Two days  after  his  death,  his  five 

remaining  brothers were executed on the  pretext  of treason,  though  they were  only  about  eight  years of age. This  cleared  the field of  imperial 

relatives who could be used to  contest  Xiao  Daocheng's position. 

(SS/1/193/1  - 199114;  NS/1/90/3  - 93/2) 

Liu  Zhijing  # @ (?-470):  Fifth  son of Liu  Yuh,  he must have died as a

very  young  child  (SS11116711).  The  fourth  son is  said  to have died as in infant before a name  was given to  him  (SS/8/2237/4). 

Liu Xie  81 (7479):  Sixth  son of Yuh, he  was  executed by  Xiao 

Daocheng on the  unlikely  grounds of treason  dong  with  four  other 

brothers  in  the  month  foiiowing  the establishment of the Southem Qi throne.  (SS/6/1869/12  - 187  113;  NQS/1/34/2-3) Appendix  1:  House  of Song  0): Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 356 

Liu  You  W (?-479): Seventh son of Yuh, he died for  unexplained 

reasons  in the second  month  of  479,  about  two  months before Xiao Daocheng officiaiiy established the  Siiüthem  Qi  throne  (SSl1119914; 

SSl81223 81 1-5). 

Liu Ji  # (?-479):  Eighth  son of Liu Yuh, he was one of the five brothers executed for "treason" by Xiao Daocheng.  (SSl6/1882/3; 

SS/11167/3;  NQS/1/32/11) 

Liu Zan (470-478 o r 479): Ninth son of  Yuh,  he died for unstated reasons in either 478  (SS/7/207 113)  or 479, in the  last  month  of the Song 

reign  (SS/1/199/9). 

Liu Hui  4a(? -479): Tenth son of  Yuh,  he was executed for "treason" 

along  with four other brothers by Xiao Daocheng  just  after  Xiao established the Southern Qi dynasty.  (SSl81223 8/6-10) 

Liu Song  #d  ;9  (?  - 479): Eleventh son of Yuh, he was executed for "treason"  along  with four other brothers by Xiao Daocheng just  after  Xiao established the Southem Qi dynasty.  (SS/8/2238/11  - 223912) 

Liu Xi  @I ;it. (?  -479):  Tweîfth  son of Yuh, he was executed for "treason" dong with four other brothers by Xiao Daocheng  just  after Xiao established the Southern Qi dynasty.  (SS/8/2239/3-5) 

Liu Xiuren  @J  ++, Prince of  Jian'an  $ 3 (c.  443-47  1):  Twelfth  son of 

Yilong.  When  Ziye ordered the  three  of  his  remaining  uncles  whom he  feared 

(Yuh, Xiuren and Xiuyou)  h t o  the  palace,  making  them  his  persona1  prisoners and 

behaving  sadisticdy  to  hem,  it  was  only  through  clever  humoring  and  flattering 

by Xiuren  that  saved  them on  several  occasions  from  being murdered. At one 

particularly  critical  junchire,  ifit  had not been for  Xiuren's  calm  wit,  Yuh,  the 

fùture  Emperor Ming, would have been slaughtered  like  a pig as  punishment  for 

remonstrating  against  Ziye  d e r  he had forced the  pregnant  concubine of Liu Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants Meng  f # ,  the Chamberlain for Law  Enforcement  (tingwei  # BQ),  into the palace  with  the intention of  making  the  child  his  heir. On the  night  that Ziye  was 

murdered, Xiuren  lu-riedly  looked for his brother, dressed  hi=  up in  iaperial  garb 

and brought together a proper  imperid  guard  in the Western  Hail,  where the edicî 

from  the Empress  Dowager  was read declaring Yuh to be the proper heir. The next day  Xiuren  moved  into the Eastern  Citadel  (Don&  fi), the  prime 

minister's  residence, an indication of the political power he was to exercise. However, there  was  considerable opposition centered in the west where the murdered emperor's next  s u ~ v i n g younger brother,  Zixun,  had been  declared 

emperor, and  Xiuren's  role in suppressing the revolts in the  rniddle  Yangzi  region 

was absolutely crucial.  Later,  as Yuh  began  to show violent and  erratic  behaviour, 

people  tumed  more and more to Xiuren. Yuh seems to have  realized  the  growing 

power of his brother, and this oniy intensified  his  fear  that  his  own  line would be displaced, for he sensed that the state of his health would  mean  that his son would 

inhent  the throne before he was old enough to  rule  on his  own.  Consequently, he cailed Xiuren to the palace in 471 and instructed that poison be  given  to  him.  He was 29 sui at the  tirne.  His  two sons were  killed  at the ages of 19 and 1 1 mi 

respectively at the time of the  rebellion  of Liu Jingsu  (Prince of  Jianping)  in 476 in 

order  to prevent their being used by  ambitious  rivals  for control of the throne. 

(SS/6/1871/4  - 1879Il;  NSI21404/10  - 406/15) 

Liu Xiuyou  @J  PJr  Prince  of Jinping  -#-+3 (c. 445-471):  Thirteenth  son of 

Yiong,  he  feu  victim  to the suspicions of  his  brother, Yuh,  d e r  the latter took the 

throne.  Xiuyou  is  descnbed as being of  mediocre  talent but  overbearing,  and he had offended  his  brother by not responding to  his  imperid  cornmands.  As  cishi  of 

Jiingzhou  he had been a rapacious  plunderer,  exploithg  the people to the point of 

risking  rebeliion.  Jingzhou,  however, was also a sensitive  region,  and  many 

generals  and princes had made of this  rich  region  a military  base  f?om  which  to Appendix 1:  House  of Song  O: Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 358 

threaten  the capital. In  view  of this and the fact that  Xiuyou  was  not an  easily 

controllable  person,  Emperor Ming restricted  him  to the capital.  Realizllig  that he 

was  in  failing  health  and  fearing  that this brother would  not  serve  his  heir  after  his 

death,  Emperor Ming  arranged  to have Xiuyou  killed  during  a partridge  hunt  in the second  month  of the seventh  year  (47 1). He  was  27 sui at the  tirne.  His  twelve 

sons were exiled by Liu Yuh but allowed to retum to the capital in 473 by Liu 

Yuhh.  In 479, at the end of the Song, they were executed,  allegedly  for  attempting 

rebellion  against the  throne  (moufan  # h). 

(SS1611879/2  - 1881/6;  NS/2/407/1  - 40813) 

Liu Xiumao  & n, Prince of  Hailing  ft  & X (c.  445-46  1): Fourteenth son of Liu Yilong, he was appointed  cishi  of  Yongzhou  # Jil  in 458 where he was inveigled by one of  his  advisors  into  killing  military  staffopposed  to  him  and raising the flag of  revolt.  He was soon executed in the  fourth  month  of  461 

(SS/i/127/10)  at the age of 17 sui. 

(SS/7/2043/10  - 204513;  NS/2/408/4- 11) 

Liu Xiuye  @J&  s, Prince of Poyang  C @ 3 (c. 445-456):  Fifteenth  son of Yilong, he died  while  still  a young  child  of 12 sui. 

(SS/61 188 1/74; NS/2/408/12- 13) 

Liu  Xiuqian  @J  #,  Prince of  Linqing  & Z (c.  446-454):  Sixteenth  son of Yilong, he died of  illness  at the age of 9 sui. 

(SS/6/188 1/1011- 1882/4;  NS/2/409/1-4) 

Liu Yifu  4 x,  Prince  Huai of  Xinye  4!f 93  4 (c.  447-452):  Seventeenth son of Yilong, he died at the age of 6 sui. 

(SS/61 i 8 8215-6;  NS/21409/5) 

Liu Xiufan  fJ  a, Prince of Guiyang  & 1#  Z (c.  448-474):  Eighteenth  son of 

Yilong,  he  was  treated  with  contempt by  his  brothers for being slow of speech and 

mind.  This is  what  saved  him  fiom  being murdered  dong  with  his  other  brothers, Appendix  1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants for Yuh  never  considered  him  capable of  becoming  a threat.  In 474, about  two 

years  &er  his  nine-year-old  nephew  became  emperor, Xiufan launched an  attack 

agûhst  the capital  fiorn  the western base of  Jiangzhou  2~  Jy  , to  which  he  had  been appointed  cishi  in 470. He was angered at being excluded  fiom  the  regency,  for it 

seemed  to  him  that he was the  only  surviving  royal relative  suitable  for the role. He therefore  began  building up  his  military  rnight  and  attracting  men of talent who 

could  assist  him.  From Xunyang he launched a flotilla  of  merchant  ships  as  his 

attacking  navy.  When Fort  Dalei  f # , near  the  starting-point,  and Fort Quetou 

# 4 5]i  # ,close to the half-way point,  threw  in their support, the court was in a 

panic.  It was at this point that Xiao Daocheng took the  lead  in  advising  on appropriate defense  strategy.  He  himself  took up position in  Xinting  Qi  5 , 

southwest of the  city,  in preparation for  taking  the  brunt  of the attack. When 

Xiufan's  flotilla  arrived  at  this  point, Xiao succeeded in setting the ships on fire and  overwhelming  the  naval  force.  Those  of the enemy who  managed  to land were fended off by  northern  archers, and by that  aftemoon,  one of  Xiao's  generals had beheaded Xiufan who was rather unconventionally  directing  his troops  fiom  asedan chair, perhaps  because  he was  unable  to ride a horse.  Xiufan's  two  sons  who 

had been sent to Xiao as  guarantors  (zhizi  R-f)  in the hope of  winning  his support were beheaded. However, Xiufan's garrison clerk  (dianqian fi  a), the "brains"  behind  the whole operation, was able to spread the  nimour  that  Xiao  had been routed and Xiufan was now  in Xinting. The population, aristocrat and 

cornmoner  alike,  desperate to protect themselves fiom  repnsals  by the  victor, 

hun-ied  to  Xinting  to present their cards as a gesture of  loyalty  to the new  d e r . 

The  next  day, however, Xiao led  his  army  to  Xinting,  announced  that  Xiufan  and 

his  two  sons were  dead  and bumed  all  the  cards,  promising  that no-one  need  fear 

repnsals.  When the  last  of the enemy was defeated, the people are  said  to have Appendix 1 : House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and His Descendants 360 

lauded  Xiao  Daocheng as the saviour of the nation  (quan guojiazhe  ci gong ye  &

# a '2  &,  mQS/ 1/9/ 1 11).  The  entire  rebellion  had lasted  ody  Meen  days.  

> (SS/7/2045/4

# - 2052/1;  NS/2/40916  - 4 1 l/3;  NQS/1/7/4  - 9/15) Liu Xiuruo  @je8, Prince of  Baling  C @ a:l.(c. 448-471):  Nieteenth  and 

youngest  son of Yilong, he  suffered  the  sarne  fate  at the  hands  of Yuh as  his 

brothers,  Xiuyou  and Xiuren. Yuh felt that  Xiumo  was not treating  him  with  the respect that their older brother, Emperor  Xiaowu  (Liu  Jun), or their father, Emperor Wen (Liu Yilong), would have inspired. He  also  realized  that  Xiuruo  was 

building up a loyal  group  of supporters who could  overwhelm  his  own  young heir. 

Resolving,  therefore, to have this brother murdered, Yuh cailed  him  to court to receive new  titles  and positions and  cornmanded  him to  arrive  by the seventh day of the seventh  month,  presumably  for the festival of the Herdsboy and Spinning Girl.  Although  Xiunio  was  warned by  his  aides and  generals  to stay in the  region 

of Jingzhou and  hold  it  militarily  against the court, he did not  listen  and, upon 

h v i n g  in  Jiankang  on the day of the festival in 47 1, was ordered to commit suicide. He was 24 sui at the time of  his  death.  His  son was  killed  in 479  at  the end of the Song  regime.  

> (SS/6/1882/7

# - 1885/15;  NSIU41114  - 41213) Liu  Yikang  &,  Prince of Pengcheng  # &,  I.  (c.  409-45 1):  F O U R ~ son of Liu Yu, he  was  appointed  cishi  of  Jingzhou  #j  PJ  in 426 and  then  called  to court by the  ailing 

Wang Hong  5 in 429 to  assist  in the  goverring  of the  realm.  Wang Hong was  kom  one of the  great  aristocratie  families,  being the  great-grandson  of Wang Dao, the  first  prime 

minister  of the Eastern Jin, and his role was  similarly  that of prime  e s t e r  to Emperor Wen (Liu  Ydong)  until  his  death in 432. As a result  of Wang's death and the emperor's 

debilitating  and  oflen  near-fatal  iliness  between 436 and 439,  Ykang  came to  exercize 

considerable  power.  By the  fd of 439, the emperor must have recovered  sufnciently  to regain some control. A permanent rift developed  between  the brothers, and a  year  later Appendix  1 :  House  of Song  (I): Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 361 

(440) the emperor ordered the execution, exile or  demotion  of the members of the clique which had  grown  up  around  his  brother.  While  the emperor  w2r  lying  on  his  deathbed, 

they  had  developed plans to have Yikang, rather  than  the young  heir  apparent,  take  the throne. Yikang,  realizing  the danger of  his  situation, requested  permission  to retire  tiom 

the court and  was  sent to  Yuzhang  II).  f (present-day Nanchang  & ))  in Jiangxi  8 ). In 445, Liu Yikang was implicated in a rebellion  organized  by Fan Ye  3& 8 ) .  As punishrnent, 

he  was  demoted to  comrnoner  (shuren  & A )  status  dong  with  his  eldest son and four 

daughters  struck  fiom  the  family  records and  exiled  to  Ancheng  C &,  (near  present-day  Anfb  +&a in Jiangxi). However, in  view  of the possibility of  his  being the  rallying 

point for other rebels against Emperor Wen, he was sent poison in early 45 1. As a good Buddhist, he  refused  to commit suicide,  saying  that this  would  prevent  him  fkom  being 

reincamated  as a human,  and let himself be smothered instead He was 43 sui.  In  468  his 

royal  rank  and status were posthumously restored. Yikang had six sons,  two  of whom died in early  childhood  and four of whom were  killed  by  his  nephew, Shao, after the latter 

murdered  his  father and  seized  the throne. 

(SS/6/1789/  1 - l7W/lS;  NS/2/366/8  - 3691 15) Liu Yigong  @J &, *, Prince  Wenxian  of  Jiangxia  2 L (c. 4  t 3-465):  Fifth  and favounte son of Yu, he had become accustomed to extravagance and self-indulgence. 

Despite  his  many  titles, he  was  circurnspect  in his  activities  and avoided  taking  an  activist 

role  in court, especialiy  after  his brother, Yikang, was  dismissed  in 440. in 450, in face of a northem incursion which  eventualiy  went as  far  south  as Guabu  J&  + @resent-day 

Guabu  4aorth  of the  Yangzi  River in Jiangsu), Yigong  was  put in charge of the  armies 

and stationed at Pengcheng  $$ &,dong  with  his  nephew, Jun  @J  a. Yigong had to be encouraged not to flee in face of the approaching troops, and in 45 1, when the  northem 

armies  were  retreating  northward  âom  Guabu, he and Jun were  afkaid  to  pursue  them  and 

simply  stayed put in  their  fortress at Pengcheng. However, Yigong received  only  a minor 

demotion  in  his  generai's title for  his  less  than  exemplary  military  s e ~ c e and  was  soon Appendix 1:  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants stationed at  Xuyi  %f  & to look  after  the northem  regions  as  far  north  as Shandong. He retumed to court in 452,  taking  up residence in the Eastern  Citadel  @on&  Cheng  $L 

# a) as  was  customary  for  those  holding prime  ministerial  power. When  Shaù  killed  his 

father and seized the  throne  in 453, Yigong  served  under  km, but Shao suspected he 

might  lose his uncle's support  after  Jun  organized  a military  force to attack the capital. 

Unable  to defeat Jun southwest of  Jiankang,  Yigong  £led  southward  on horseback over to Jun's encampment. Funous, Shao murdered twelve of  his  sons  (his  own  cousins). Upon Jun's death in 464, the  imperial  testament  declared  that Yigong and Liu  Yuanjing  i#,  %

were to  take  up residence in the court and handle  al1  flairs  of state, and their  pre-eminent 

positions as regents were  confirmed  in an edict issued upon the  enthronement  of the 

fifieen-year-old  Liu Ziye. Their plans to  dethrone  Ziye were pre-empted by the adolescent emperor  himself  who Ied a detachment to  his  uncle's residence to  kill  hirn  and the last four of  his  sons. Yigong  was  53  sui  at the  tirne.  He was  known  for  his  knowledge of music,  his 

talent in  writing  histones,  his  equestrian  skills  and  his  long treks to  famous  mountains. 

None  of Yigong's  sixteen  sons  suMved  hirn.  As stated  above,  twelve  were  killed  by Shao in 453 and the last four were killed  dong  with their father by Ziye in 465.  

> (SS/6/1640/5

# - l652/7;  NS/2/3 l'O/  1 - 374/6) 

Liu  YUuan  & 9, Prince  of  Nanjun  &J  @ Z (c.  41 5-454):  Sixth  son of Yu, he  was 

considered to be of  mediocre  ability.  When Shao killed  his  own  father,  Y'ixuan  joined 

forces with Jun  against Shao. Soon  afler  Jun's accession to the throne, however,  Yuan 

cded  for a punitive expedition  Eorn  his  base in  Jingluig  where he had been stationed for ten  years.  Fîattered  by Zang  Zhi  C&  (father-in-law to his son and  imperial  "cousin";  they 

would not have been  true  first  cousins, however, for  Yixuan's  mother  was  not Empress 

Zang but  another  woman  by the  name  of Sun  [NS/2/363/10])  into  thinking  he  had the respect and  real  support of the court, and angered by Emperor  Xiaowu's  (Liu Jun) 

treatment  of  his  daughters  at the  Jiankang  court,  Y0kuan was  wiiîing  to cooperate with 

Zang. Zang probably  saw  his  relative as a weak  and  malleable  person  who would be  u s e u Appendix  1 :  House  of Song  (1):  Liu Yu and  His  Descendants 363 

in promoting  his  own  ambitions for power. However, the  attempted  overthrow  of the new 

regime  ended in  failure.  Yixuan  fled back to  Jiangling  where he was  thrown  into prison by 

his  own  generals and killed at the age of  40  sui.  (Since  he is  said  to have been 12 [sui] in   

> 424, it

is  dSÏcult  to work out  his  date of  birth  if he was  actually  killed in 454. The  years 

4 13,  414 and 4 15  al1  seem  possible.) Twelve of  his  sons were  also  killed in  Jianghg,  while four others, discovered in hiding in  Jiangning  ir  P, east of the capital, were  allowed  to commit suicide. Two of  his  eighteen sons had  already  died  much  earlier,  probably as children.  

> (SS/6/1798/1

# - l8O7/6;  NS/2/3  7417  - 3 7819) 

Liu Yiji  # & 4,  Prince Wen of  Hengyang  aE&  2 i; (c. 41 5-447): Seventh son of Yu, he  was  especially  beloved by  his  brother,  Yilong  (Emperor Wen). The  downfall  of  his 

brother  Yikang  made  him  hesitant to  take  an active  role  in state  flairs,  and  his  forced idleness worsened  his  well-known  chronic  drinking  problem. He died at the age of 33 

> [sui],

probably of  alcoholism.  One son died at the very end of  Jun's  reign  while  the  other 

died at the very end of the Song. It is  unclear  whether their deaths were "political".  

> (SS/Gl1653/12

# - 1656/1;  NS/2/379/1  - 380/4) Table 6 Genealogy  of the  House  of Song (the  Ruling  Liu  F a d y ) 

# - YifU&R 

# - Yizhen  & - Shao  i# 

# - .JuM  3iC 

# -'-a  -€  Ziye  3= 1)i 

Zishang  + &

Zirnin  + fi 

and 25 other sons 

# - Shuo* 

# - Shao  @

# - Dan  $k

# - Hong*  -Ji-%=*# 

# -.  Hui  :# 

# - Chang  ljle 

# - iiC 

# - Yigong 

# - Yiji  $Appendii  2:  House  of Song (II): Liu Yu's Half-Brothers 

HOUSE  OF SONG (II) (see Table 2) The  foliowing  outlines  the members of the  immediate  families  of the  h&brothers 

of Liu Yu.  Since  Yu's mother died in  childbirth,  his  father  m h e d  Xiao  Wenshou  j&  ft 

# ç,  by whom he had  two  more sons, Daolian  a a f#  and Daogui  @j a#,  . These 

members of the Liu  farnily  became  "royals" upon the establishment of the Song  Dynasty 

under  Liu Yu. 

Liu Daolian  #il& @,  Prince Jing of Changsha  f9 f 3 (c. 368-422): Younger  half-

brother of Liu Yu, he  is  described as  coarse,  mediocre  and  vend.  Whereas  the other  haif'-

brother, Daogui, was  prized  by Yu and  participated  in the  rnilitary  suppression of  Huan 

Xuan,  Daolian spent this period at home providing filial  care  to their mother (Liu Yu's stepmother). Daolian  is  said  to have participated in  later  military  campaigns  and been rewarded for  his  victories,  but this  meritorious  record  does  not seem consistent with Yu's

evaluation of  him.  When Yu appointed  his  ten-year-old son as  Inspector  (cishi) of Yangzhou, he was questioned by  his  stepmother who  felt  that  his  brother, now over  fifty, 

not  his  young son,  should  be  given  such  a position. Yu  said  that Yangzhou was too crucial a region  and too  demanding  a posting  for  his  brother to handle. He had neither the expenence nor reputation to handle the responsibilities.  Having  his  young son hold the position  meant  that Yu could  deal  immediately,  directly  and  persondy  in the  region's 

affairs  (as the  seat  of the capital, its political and  military  significance  was  enormous). Daolian died in the  sixth  month  of  422,  a month  afler  Yu, at the age of 55 sui. He had six 

sons.  (SS/Yl46  1/1  - l464/lO;  NS/2/3  S3/1  - 3W 8 ) 

Liu  YMn  # I& (c. 404-439): Eldest son and  heir  of Daogui, he  was  appointed  

> cishi

of  Yuzhou  $1 in about 430 and stationed at  Shouyang  4 H) (the 

regional  capital)  near  the border  with  the  nonh.  The  region  had collapsed 

economically  and  socidy,  becomhg  an  area  of crime, violence and famine, but he Appendk  2:  House  of Song  @):  Liu Yu's Half-Brothers 366 

is  credited  with  restoring  law,  order  and good  government  so that  it  onct:  again 

became  a strong  and prosperous  region.  He died in 439 at the age of  36  sui. 

(SS/5/1464/11  - l165/lO;  NS/2/3  54/9- 10) 

Liu Jin  #j  (?-45 3):  Killed  by  Liu Shao. (S SI51 l46S/ll- 12; 

NS/2/354/11) 

Liu Qi  @J  a(? - 466): Killed for conspinng to support Liu  Zixun  +

who was made the boy emperor in  defiance  of Liu Yuh  @J a,  the 

"legitimatey'  emperor in  Jiankang.  (SS/5/1465/13- 15) 

Liu Kai  #j#(?  -453): Killed by Liu Shao.  (SS/5/1466/1) 

Liu  Zhan  @J  (? -466): Killed for supporting Liu  Zixun  # 4 fi  as 

emperor.  (SS151146612) 

Liu Yun  a(? - 478): Described as being of  mediocre  abiiity,  he  was 

killed  by  Xiao  Daocheng  # 4 &,  for  his  part in  plotting  a palace coup 

against  him  in  complicity  with  Yuan  Can  & . Liu Yun's youngest 

brother,  Liu Shu  i&, and  his  cousin, Liu Bing  4*, were aiso 

involved,  but the conspiracy was exposed  because  of Bing's  early  arriva1  at Fort Shitou  ;6  where Yuan  Can  was  ganisoned.  Consequently, the conspirators were executed.  Since  these  events were at the end of the 

Chinese  year,  the equivalent Western calculation would be  January  of  478. 

Yun was executed on day  renrhen  a $ of the  last  month  of the  first  year of  shengming  or  January  12,478  (SS/l/l95/8,12,15). 

( SS/5/1466/3-9;  NS/2/3 541 12- 15) Liu Bi  .@J  R (? -466):  Killed  for  supporting  Liu  Zixun  as emperor. 

(SS/5/1466/1 O) 

Liu Jian  @j  (?-?): Died probably as a child.  (SS/5/1466/11) 

Liu Xie  #!! &(? -473): Died of unstated reasons.  (SS/5/1466/12) 

Liu Hao  @J  (? -476): Died of unstated reasons.  (SS/5/1466/13) Appendix 2:  House  of Song (II): Liu Yu's  HaK-Brothers  367 

Liu Shu  # i& (?-477 or 478): Considered of  mediocre  ability,  Shu  was 

killed  dong  with  his  cousin, Liu  Bing,  for  supporthg  Yuan  Can  in a

planned  palace coup  against  Xiao Daocheng. The plan was exposed 

because  of Liu  Bing's  early  and conspicuous  arrivai  at Fort Shitou where Yuan  Can  was  garrisoned.  Xiao took immediate action. Liu Yun  a (an 

older brother of Shu),  who  was to  lead  the palace  guard  against Xiao,  was 

Mled.  When Fort Shitou was attacked, a general who decided to support Xiao opened one of the gates. Yuan Can and the others went over the wall in an attempt to flee. Yuan  Can  and  his  son were  recognized  and executed on the spot.  Bing  and  Shu  escaped but were soon captured and executed. They were executed on the  sarne  day as Shu's older brother, Liu Yun (see 

above).  Western  calendncal  caiculation would put their death in  January  of 478. 

(SS111195113  - 19611-2;  SS/5/1466/14;  NS/21355/1-3) 

Liu  Yiqiog  @J  & &(c.  403-444):  Second son of  Daolian  and  officia1  heir  of  his 

childless  uncle,  Daogui,  he was noted for  his  literary  talent and continues to be 

known  for  his  Shishuo  Xinyu  @ S (A New Account of Tales of the  World), 

a compendium of  politicai  and social  history  in  anecdotai  form,  covering  largely 

the Eastern Jin period but  also  reaching  back into the  late  Han. He died in 444 at the age of  42  sui. 

(SS/5/147519  - 1480/6;  NSI2/359/1  - 360/3) 

Liu Ye  M # (?-?):  Killed  by Liu Shao.  (SS151148017;  NSl2/360/12) 

Liu Chuo  81# (?-479): Executed for  "plotting  rebellion"  in the 

last  year  of the Song.  (SS15/1480/7-8;  NSl21360112-13) 

Liu Wan  # # (?-?): Died in  childhood.  (SSl5/1480/8) 

Liu Yan  81*(?-?):  Simply  identified  as  younger  brother of Ye  *. 

(SS/5/148019) Appendix 2:  House  of Song  @):  Liu Yu's Half-Brothers 

Liu Jing  #J  # : See  under  Liu  Yan.  (SS15/1480/9) 

Liu Ying  4A : See  under  Liu  Yan.  (SS/5/1480/9) 

Liu Qian  @J  @ See  under  Liu  Yan.  (SS/5/1480/9) 

Liu Yiroag  & Y (?a4  1):  Third  son of Daolian.  (SS/5/1467/2-4;  NS/2/3  55/4-

> 6 )

Liu Ji (?-453):  Killed  by Liu Shao.  (SS/5/1467/5;  NS/2/3 5%) 

Liu Xi  # (?-470): Described as being of  mediocre  ability, he  was 

appointed cishi of Yingzhou  q JY  #j  R as a reward for  resisting  the forces 

wanting Liu Yuh removed  from  the  throne  and replaced by Liu  Zixun.  His

two  sons, Liu Huang  @J  aand Liu Min  f ,were executed at the end of  478  by  Xiao  Daocheng for  "plotting  rebellion"  (mmfan  aa). 

(SS/1/198/9- 10;  SS/5/1467/6-8;  NS/2/3  55/5-6) 

Liu Biao  @1&  : Died in early childhood.  (SS/5/1467/13) 

Liu Shi : Died in early childhood.  (SS/5/1467/13) 

Liu Shuang  BiJ  : Last of the sons to be listed.  (SS/5/1467/13) 

Liu Yizong  81& à (?-444):  Adrnired  for  his  charitable works,  his  cultivation of men of talent and  his  love of books and literature.  (SS/511468/1-5;  NS/2/355/7-8) 

Liu  Jie  @J  (7-453):  Killed  by Liu Shao.  (SS/5/1468/6;  NSIU35519) 

Liu Bing  @J  a (c. 433 -477 or 478): He was first brought to court by Liu 

## Yuh  4 because  of  his  excellent  reputation  as a cultivated and  disciplined 

person  at a time when the royal  family,  although  o r i g i d y  quite  numerous, 

was  singularly  lacking  in talent and  ability.  Liu  Bing,  however,  was  not 

really  noted for  political  cornpetence.  During  Liu  Xiufan's @J  ff 

rebeiüon  of 474, he  became  part of the  quadmmvirate  of regents for the boy emperor, but  this  choice is  deged  in one source to have  been  based  on the  fact  that  he  enjoyed  prestige as a royal  relative but  was  too  gentle  a

person  and too  lacking  in  ability  to pose a  threat  to  anyone Appendix  2:  House  of Song  @):  Liu Yu's  Half-Brothers 

(ZZTJI21236  1/23  [ium  1331). The group was  divided  between  Xiao 

Daocheng and Chu Yuan  84 who wanted to  remove  the emperor and Liu 

Bing and Yuan  C m  & who were opposed. The latter  two  sensed  their 

own  vulnerability  in the face of Xiao Daocheng's  growing  power and prestige. When a rebellion by Shen  Youzhi  -& 1k-t  broke out a few months 

afler  Xiao had placed the last  Puppet  emperor on the Song throne, Yuan 

Can  realized  something  had to be  done  to protect themselves. He and Liu Bing in  fact  had  already  been planning how to  eliminate  Xiao with the cooperation of sympathetic generals and the  imperial  bodyguard.  Now that Shen had revolted in the west, Yuan  Can  masterminded  a plot to attack Xiao in the palace and create an edict  from  the empress dowager which could be produced to  justi@  the attack. However, Liu  Bing  who  was  the governor of  Danyang  ++  (the seat of which  was  in  Jiankang)  at the  tirne 

and  very  fearful  for the outcome, scrambled over to Fort  Shitou  on the 

aftemoon  of the day on which the coup was to  take  place.  Amving  with  his 

family  and  several  hundred troops at the gates of the fort  several  hours before the secret plan was to be set into motion, Bing made  it  publicly  clear 

that a conspiracy  was  being  set into motion.  His  cousin, Liu Yun, who  

> was

to  lead  the palace  guard  against  Xiao, was  seized  and  killed.  Yuan  C m 

and  his  son were  killed  the  same  night.  Bing was executed  dong  with  his 

two  sons and  his  cousin, Liu Shu. They had  all  attempted  to flee over the  

> wall

when one of the generals opened a gate for Xiao supporters. Yuan 

Can  and  his  sons were  recognized  immediately.  Bing and Shu escaped but not for long. The  time  of  these  events was day  renshen  9 of the  last 

month  of the  first  year  of  shengming  A 8 8 ,  or  January  12,478, in Western 

calendrical  calculation.  He  was  then  45 sui. Liu Bing  was  married  to a second  cousin  (once removed), a daughter of Xiao  Sihua  ,!& S (see Appendix  2:  House  of Song (II): Liu Yu's Half-Brothers 370 

under  the  hum~aiu f R fine).  (SSI  11l96/  1-2; SS/5/  146817  - 14691 10; 

NS/2/355/10  - 356122) 

Liu Mo  #j  : Mentioned  simply  as being Liu  Bing's  younger  brother. 

(SS/5/1469/ll) 

Liu Xia  %(?-477 or 478): Descnbed as a  mediocre  person,  he  was 

suspected of  poisoning  one of Emperor Wen's wives who had had  him 

punished  for a liaison  with  her adopted daughter. As govemor of the 

eastem  cornrnandery  of Wu, he  attempted  to  launch  a revolt against  Xiao 

Daocheng  after  the execution of  his  brother, Liu Bing, but was  quickly 

defeated and killed.  (SS11119614-5;  SS1511469112  - 147011 ; NS/2/3  5611 3 -

35711) 

Liu Yibin  #J  4 8 (?-448):  Died in office.  (SU51 l470/2-4;  NSl2135712) 

Liu Yiqi  81& ;A  (?-455):  His  imperiai cousins are  said  to have mocked  him  for 

his  stupidity  and ignorance. (S SIS/ 147O/S-9;  NSl213  5712-4) 

Liu Daogui  a f i ,  Prince  Liewu  of  Linchuan  & 111  ,a  & 3.  (c.  370-4  12): Younger 

half-brother  of Liu Yu, he  was  closely involved with Yu in the suppression of the usurper, 

Hum  Xuan, who had forced the abdication of the Jin  emperor  and attempted to found a new royal  house  in 404.  His  major  role  was as one of the  three  generals who pacified Huan's power base in  Jianwg following  Huan's  murder.  Daogui died in  Jiankang  in 4 12 at the age of 43 sui.  Since  he had no sons,  his  brother's second son,  Yiqing  81& a, was made  his  official  heir.  (SS/5/1470/10  - l475/8;  NSI2/3  5715  - 3 58/15) Appendix  3: The  hanairi  Branch  of the Xiao  Family 

THE  XIA0  huangjzu  f 3 LINE  (Line  of the  "imperial  uncle") 

(ree  Table 2) 

Xiao Wenshou  8 ft  +(c.  343423):  Of a  relaiively  modest  family  at the  same  level as that of her  husband,  she  was  married  to Liu Qiao  @/  after  his  fbst  wife  died  giving  birth 

to Liu Yu (who was to become founder of the Song  dynasty).  Xiao Wenshou gave  birth 

to  two  sons of her  own,  Liu  Daolian  and Liu Daogui, and  was  treated with great  respect by her stepson over the  years.  She  outlived  Yu by a year,  dying  at the age of 8 1 sui  during 

the short reign of the adolescent  heir,  Liu  Yifu  @J  & 8 .

(SS/4/128O/I  1 - 128 111 1;NS/2/3  18/2-8) 

Xiao  Yuanzhi  j#  2 (?  -420): Younger brother of Wenshou, he died in the first  year  of 

his  step-nephew's reign.  Because  of  his  relationship  of uncle to the founder of the Song 

throne,  this branch of the  Xiao  family  is  known  as that of the  imperial  uncle  (hangjiu  f 

> ).

His  appointments  as  inspecter  (cishi  $1 ) and govemor  (taishou  f + ) were obtained  through  Liu Yu after he came to  dominate  the Jin court  during  the reign of Emperor An.  (SS/7/20 1 111 -2;  NS/21494/11-12) 

Xiao  Sihua  ,!& # (c.406-455):  Xiao  Sihua  had raised troops to support Liu Jun 

# @I aagainst  his  older brother, Liu Shao  4 , after  the  latter  had  killed  the emperor (their father) and  taken  the throne in 453. That  earned  him  the loyal 

&ection  of Jun, the  future  Emperor Wen.  Sihua  died shortly  aiter,  in 455, at the 

age  of  50, 54 or 56 sui.  His  period of  seMce  was  largely  in the reign of Emperor Wen.  Although  Yu once  praised  this  youtffil  cousin as  having  the  talent  to govern a country  (giroqi  $ S ),  the  historians'  evaluation  of  his  political  skills  is that he 

was  neither a  shining  mode1  of  integrity  nor desperately  compt  but  could  gather men of talent and  ski11  around  him.  Furthermore,  like  many  of the Xiao clan, he  is 

described as  having  both  scholarly  and martial  skills,  with  a cultivated talent in music and  calligraphy  and a mastery  of  archery  and  horsemanship.  His  actuaf Appendk  3: The  h m @ u  Branch  of the  Xiao  Family  3 72 

record in  his  military  and civilian positions suggests ambition but no consistency of 

purpose.  In 43 1, he fled in the face of an incursion  fiom  the Northern Wei and  was 

consequently  cîdemned  to work as a  prisoner  in the  Ordnzxe  Mmfactory 

(shangfang  & iq;5).  In 432, however, incursions into  Hanzhong  which  had 

been precipitated by  mistakes  by the  then  inspector  (cishi) gave the emperor the 

opportunity  to redeem this royal relative by  taking  him out of  prison  and  putting 

hirn  in charge of military  affairs  in the  region.  Sihua  was  successful,  primarily 

because  of the appointments of Xiao  Chengzhi  i#k 2, the father of the future 

first  emperor of the Southem Qi, and  two  other Xiao men of unstated relationship. In 45 1, he was a lone voice  against  a major northem expedition following incursions at  Xuanhu  f& (present-day  Runan  j+* &J  County, Henan). The opinion of the emperor and court prevailed, however, and he led troops that were 

successful  in  driving  away the invaders. In 452, though, he  was  unsuccessful  in  his 

part in  attacking  Qiao'ao  Qr#which  was vital for  any  northem  expedition (this 

was  known  as the  Qiao'ao  Ford on the Yellow River; a  fortress  lay on the  south 

side,  on what is now the old Yellow River bed, SW of  Chiping  County  8 q 1in Shandong  [ZLDC,  p. 9581).  Nevertheless,  he was appointed as  inspector  of the adjacent  region  of  Jizhou  X f i ,  the implication being that another  attempt  would be made in the  h r e .  The  murder  of the emperor in the  following  year  and  his 

own  death in 455 ended  these  pians. 

(SS/7/20  11/3  - 201  6115 ;  NS/495/1 - 496/9) 

Xiao  Huikai  a ,&  #]  (c. 423-471): Eldest  son of Xiao  Sihua,  he  was 

considered  aloof  and  dficult  and did not get  dong  with  his  brothers.  When 

he  was  stationed in Chengdu, he decided to support the cause of Liu  Zixun 

# a +# who had been put on the throne at  Jiangling  as the  rightful 

emperor in  defiance  of Liu Yuh who had  taken  the  throne  at  Jiankang. 

Although  Liu Yuh  was  ultimately  successfùi,  taking  the  throne  in 465, Xiao Appendix  3: The  hangjiu  Branch of the Xiao  Family 

Huikai  suffered  no  punishment.  The first  army  he sent  eastward  was 

defeated  by a  general  loyal to Liu Yuh  while  the second  amy  was beaten 

trying  tu  take  a difFerent  route. Seeing the  coliapse  of  Huikai's  troops, the people of the  region  rose up against  him,  for he had been a  harsh  and unpopular govemor, and lay siege to Chengdu,  preparing  to destroy it completely  under  the guise of  loyalty  to the  rightfùl  occupant of the  throne. 

However,  d e r  Liu  Zixun's  rebellion was put  down,  Yuh sent  Huiji  ,& 

# a, a younger brother of Huikai, as a special  envoy to  explain  his  desire  to have the siege  lifled.  Emperor Ming was conscious of the  strategic 

importance of the  region  and did not  want  to see it become an independent bastion of either the local population or a generai  fearful  for  his  life. Yuh 

was  probably  aware  as well that Huikai could  never  become the centre of opposition. He  was  known  for  his  grandiose but  fiustrated  ambitions (for 

exarnple,  he was  convincing  in  his  arguments about expanding the  temtory 

of Shu but lacked the  ski11  to  actuaily  do it). Although one of  his  daughters was to be  married  to a son of Liu Jun (Emperor  Xiaowu),  this  may have 

never  happened  since  the  histories  do not  speak  of a Xiao as being the Empress of Liu  Ziye  (the "deposed emperor") and the other sons of Emperor  Xiaowu  were about eleven when they were  killed.  His  son, Rui 

# *, was the last  inhentor  of the title of Marquis  ( h m  @ ) of  Fengyang 

County  B f  a &fi ,granted  originally  to Rui's  great-grandfather,  Xiao 

Yuanzhi,  for the fief and title were abolished  with  the end of the Song and the establishment of the Southem Qi. 

(SS/8/2  199 - ZO3/  1 1 ;NS/2/496/lO  - 499/2) 

Xiao Huiming  ,&  0A (?-c. 477):  Twin  brother  of Xiao Huikai. Died in office.  (SS/7/20  l6/l4- 15;  SS/8/2203/11;  NS/2/499/3-5) Appendix  3: The  hum'iu  Branch  of the  Xiao  Family  374 

Xiao  Huiji  a ,&  *(? - ?): Referred to as the  fourth  son of  Sihua,  he  was 

much  admired  by Liu Yigong  fi  af who gave a  daughter  in  marriage  to 

him.  He had excellent relations  with  Xiao Daocheng  # 4 &and  suffered 

no  reprisais  even though one  sister  was  married  to Liu  Xiufan  # #L  ff  who launched an attack on the court (which was now controlled by Xiao Daocheng) and another  sister  was  manied  to Liu  Bing  .@j  who joined 

Yuan  Can  & in a  failed  palace coup. Xiao saw that he  was  not part of 

any conspiracy and trusted  him  even more. He  held  office  under  the Southem Qi  after  Xiao Daocheng  established  the new  dynasty.  Huiji  was noted for his talent in music and chess.  (SS/7/2O  16/15;  NQS/3/809/13  -

81  1/9;  NS/2/499/12  - 501/1) 

Xiao  Huixiu  j#  ,&  #(?-500):  Held  various  positions as  inspecter  (cishi) 

or govemor  (taishou) d u h g  the Southem Qi.  (NQS/3/811/10  - 812/2; 

NS/2/5  0 1/6-9) 

Xiao Huilang  ,&  (?-?): Although he  supported  Liu  Xiufan  #J # a in his attack on  Jiankang,  he was  forgiven  by Xiao Daocheng and held positions  under  the Southern Qi. He was demoted when  his  garrison  clerk  

> (dimqim

# R & ) was  involved  in an unstated crime.  (NQS/3/8  13/34; 

NS/2/5O  11 10) Xiao Huiqian  a ,&  # (?-?):  (NS/2/50  111 1) 

Xiao  Sengzhen  flli  ff  (?-?): He would appear to be a younger brother of  Sihua. 

He  was  appointed Chief  Minister  for Law Enforcement  (tingwei  qing  # aQ  R )

during  the Song.  (LS/2/3 96/2) 

XUo  Huixun  ,&  # (?-?):  At the end of the Southem  Qî,he held the position of District Magistrate of Badong  E # (on the  Yangzi  west  of 

Jiangling  near  present-day  Fengjie  in Sichuan). When Xiao  Yan Appendix  3: The  hum'iu  Branch  of the  Xiao  Farnily  375 

launched the expedition  against  the Southem  Qi  throne  in  Jiankang? Huixun

joined  with  the govemor (taishou) of  Baxi  t!, 8 f to resist. Huixun sent  his  son, Xiao Gui, at the head of a force to  Shangming  _L  close to 

Jiangling (on the  south  side  of the  Yangzi  near  present-day  Songzi  $& ,

Hubei). When Jiankang fell, Huixun surrendered and  was  forgiven by  Yan. 

He  was  given  a court title and died in office.  (LS/2/396/2;  NS/2/505/4-5; 

NQSl2/672/2-3)  

> Xiao

Gui  -]h  (?-?): Sent by  his  father to  launch  an  attack  on Jiangling, he brought  his  troops to the  near-by  fortress  of Shangming. His  arriva1  caused considerable  panic  in  Jiangling.  Xiao 

Yingzhou  # #i  8 , who had been  left  in charge by  his  cousin, Xiao Yan, died in a state of apoplexy upon  hearing  that the troops were pressing  down  on his  gaison.  Gui's father surrendered  d e r  Xiao 

Yan  defeated the  loyalist  forces  at  Jiankang.  (NS/2/505/4-5; 

NQS/2/67212-3  & 673/2-3,  8)  

> Xiao

Chen  %f  (c. 478-529): Served  under  both the Southem Qi and Liang. He died at the age of 52  mi. 

(LSIU39612  - 39815;  NS/2/505/4  - 50711 3)  

> Xiao

Mozhi  SA(?-?): A younger cousin of Xiao  Yuanzhi,  he rose to the position of 

Govemor  (yzn  p )  of  Danyang  9f- e,  the capitai of  which  was  also  the  dynastic  capital (Jiankang).  Although  the administrative  area  of  Danyang  was one step below that of Yangzhou (govemed by a  cishi),  its  strategic  importance  meant  that the incumbent had to be competent and loyal.  Xiao  Mozhi  owed  his  position to  his  relative, Liu  Yu?  afler  he came to  dominate  the  .Jin  court  during  the  reign  of Emperor An.  (SSl7120 1711 ;

NQS/lRIl) Appendk  3: The  humgjïu  Branch of the  Xiao  Family  376 Xiao Bin  a *(?-453):  Killed  dong  with  his  sons for supporting Liu Shao  against 

Liu Jun.  (SSl7120 171 1 - 20  1812;  SSl81243417-8) 

Xiao  Jiaz  (M-453): Killed  dong  with  his  sons for supporting  Liu Shao 

against  Liu Jun. (S SI7120 1813  -5) Appendix  4: The  Line  of Xiao Chengzhi and the  House  of Qi 

## LINE  OF  XIA0  CHENGZHI  # 2

(see Table 7) 

Xia0  Daodu  3 fi,  Prince Yuan of Hengyang  a 2, Z (?  -?):  Eldest  son of Xiao Chengzhi, he died at some point  during  the Song. He accompanied  his  father on  various 

campaigns  and reached the position of Govemor  (taishou)  of a  cornmandery.  He  was 

given the  princely  title after  his  brother established the Southem Qi throne. He had no sons.  (NQS/3/787/1-3;  NS/4/1037/1-3) 

Xiao Daosheng  # ÿ & ,Prince Zhen of Shi'an  fi  R (?-?): Second son of Xiao 

Chengzhi.  He died at some point  during  the Song as an Audience Attendant  @ngchaojzing  

> $i #j

# 515  ), a low-ranking  member of the  Department  of  Scholarly  Counsellors.  He was given the  prinçely  title  after  his brother established the Southem Qi throne.  (NQS/3/788/6-

7;  NS/4/  1O3916) 

Xiao Feng  I f f  a, Prince Jing of  Shi'an  3& 3if  Z (?-?): Eldest son of Xiao Daosheng, he died  during  the Song as a  minor  official.  (NQS/3/788/8- 10; 

NS/4/  1039/7) 

Xiao Yaoguang  jk  jf  & (c.  468-499): Born  crippled,  he  was  considered by  his  grand-uncle, Xiao Daocheng  &,  ,as an unsuitable participant in the ceremonies required of an eldest son. Daocheng would have had  him 

replaced by  his  younger brother,  Yaoxin  & fi, if Xiao  Ze  a (Xao 

Daocheng's  eldest  son) had not intervened and persuaded  his  father not to 

displace  Yaoguang as heir to  his  father's title. When  his  uncle, Xiao  Luan 

# z,  was  regent,  Yaoguang  acted  as  his  uncle's chief  advisor  and 

encouraged  him  to eradicate the sons and grandsons of Xiao Daocheng and Xiao Ze.  M e r  Luan's  son  becarne  emperor, he  ploaed  to  seize  the throne but  was  foiled  when  his  brother, who was to have  supplied  rnilitary  support 

fkom  Jingzhou,  suddenly  died and  his  chief accomplice  inside  the  palace 

was  exposed.  However,  with  the  death  of  this  brother as  weli  as the Appendix  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengzh  and the  House  of Qi 378 

somewhat  earlier  death of another brother, he was able to  inherit  control of their troops.  "Men they  anived  at  the Eastern  Citadel  (Don*  )L  #), 

where he was stationed as Inspecror (cishi) of Yangzhou, he  planned  to use them to seize control of the palace. He did  not  act  prornptly,  however, and  his  hesitation  meant  that the court soon had the upper  hand  ditarily. 

He  was  executed four days  &er  the coup  began.  He  was  32 sui. 

(NQSl31788111  - 79 111 2;  NSl4/1039/11  - 104213) 

Xiao Yaoxin  if  (c. 469-499):  Since  Emperor Ming  was  womed 

about the  fate  of  his  young children, especially  his  eldest  son who  suffered 

fkom  a crippling  ailment,  he appointed  his  older nephew, Xiao  Yaoguang, 

as Inspector  (cishi)  of Yangzhou, a position which gave  hirn  control of the capital, and Xiao Yaoxin as Inspector  (cishi)  of  Jingzhou,  a posting  which gave  him  control of a strategic western  region.  He and  his  brother 

dorninated  the  realm  with their power.  Yaoguang  conspired with Yaoxin to seize the throne, but the latter died  before  the plot could  unfold. 

(NQSl2/79  11 13  - 792/6;  NS/411042/4  - 104316)  

> Xiao

Yaochang  & (?-498):  His  uncle, Emperor Ming, appointed  him 

Inspector  (cishi)of  Yuzhou  f@  where he seems to have died. 

(NQS/3/792/7  - 794/7) 

Xiao  Luan  a ,Emperor Ming  & $ !& (c. 452498): Second son of Xiao Daosheng and adopted  "third  son7' of  his  uncle, Xiao Daocheng, founder of the Southem Qi. He  murdered  off the  rightful  heirs in  order  to  usurp  the throne and 

officially  became  emperor on  day  guihai  of the tenth  month  ofjimnvu  @ &, ,

or December 5,494  (NQS/1/8411  l),  and died on day jiyou  Z 6 of the  seventh 

month  of yongîai  rjc  or September 1, 498, at the age of 47  sui  (NQS/l/9  1/12). He  was  given  the  posthumous  title of Emperor Ming. He had eleven sons,  two  of Appendix  4: The  Line  of  Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of Qi 3 79 

whom are described as  having  died as infants  (NQSl3/862/11).  (NQSl118311  -

9219;  NS/1/140110  - 14619;  WS/6/2168/8  - 2169112) 

Xiao Baoyi  8 f A,  Prince Yin of Baling  C,  & X (?-?):  Oldest  son of Xiao  Luan,  he was  stmck  at an  early  age with a form of  debilitating  ailment 

(polio or encephalitis perhaps?) that made it impossible for  him  to go 

arnong  the people.  When  Xiao  Yan  established the Liang  throne,  he appointed Baoyi as Prince of  Baling  so that he could serve the Qi ancestors. This  title  had first been  given  to  his  brother,  Baorong  a a, 

upon  his  dismissal  from  the throne. Baoyi  is  said  to have died at some point 

during  Xiao  Yan's  reign (502-549).  (NQSl3186311-9  ; NSl41111918  -

112016) 

Xiao Baojuan  a Q(c.  483-501): Second son of Xiao  Luan,  he took the throne upon the death of  his  father in 498. He was deposed as Marquis (hou) of  Donghun  f @ .ER  and was killed at the age of 19 sui on day 

bzngyin  a of the  twelfth  month  of the  third  year  of  his  reign, or December 31, 501  (NQS/1/102/I2).  (NQS/1/97/1  10811;  NS/1/146/10  -

15811;  WS/6/2169/13  - 2172/5) 

Xiao Baoxuan  # Q -B  (?- 500):  Third  son of Xiao  Luan,  he  was  led to the capital  fiom  Jingkou  0 (present-day Zhenjiang) and took up residence in the Eastern  Citadel  as the new emperor sponsored by Cui  Huijing  ,%

. His  brother had  hirn  killed  after  Cui's defeat . (NQSl31863110  - 864/6; 

NS/41112017  - 112113) 

Xiao Baoyuan  f i79.  (?  - 502):  FZth  son of  Xiao  Luan.  It  is  not stated how he  died.  However,  it  occurred  on day  dingsi  T C of the  third  month 

of  zhongxing  fi, or  April2  1, 502, one day  after  the abdication of  his 

brother  (Xiao  Baorong or Emperor He  + ) in  Jiangiing  and four days before the  arriva1  of the edict of abdication in  Jiankang  (NQSIIII  l4/lO-Appendk  4:  The Line of  Xiao  Cheng*  and the  House  of  Qi  380 

11). The timing is  suspicious,  especially  since  he could not have been more 

than  eighteen  years  of age.  (NQS/3/864/7-11;  NSl4/112  114-5) 

Xiao Baoyin  f ( R ) (? - 528):  Sixth  son of Xiao  Luan,  he becarne  involved  in a comic  opera  attempt  to take the throne  from  his  fûil 

brother,  Baojuan,  in the  fa11  of 501 when he would have been about fourteen.  AIthough  his  biography in the  Nan  Qi  Shu  States  that  he  was 

executed for treason in 502  (NQS/3/865/1 O), he  actually  fled to the Northem Wei in  502,  as  is  stated in the  imperid  m a l s  of the  N m  Qi  Shu 

itself  (NQSI 11 11416)  and  in the  Nan  Shi  (NS/4/  1 12 l/6  - 11221 1) According to the  Wei  Shu,  he seems to have fled in 501 when he was  sixteen  [sui] and 

arrived  in the  north  in 502  (WS/4/13  13/10-11).  Only  the  WeYei Shu  and Bei 

Shi  describe  what happened to  him  after  that point. In 503 the Wei court bestowed on  him  many titles,  including  that of Prince of Qi  * 3 which,  by tradition, established  his  legitimate  right  to take the southern  throne,  and he 

was  later  married to one of the princesses by  whom  he had three sons. He  

> was

eager to seek revenge  against  the Liang  regime  and participated in 

various  expeditions against the  south  which were in  fact  nothing  more  than 

relatively  minor  incursions of  vaqing  success. He  also  discouraged the 

court  Born  accepting  Xiao  Zhengde  na, the  disgruntled  grandson  of Xiao  Yan  # ijiwho hoped to receive Wei support as the  rightful  heir  to the Liang throne.  Baoyin  was  later  made  Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Yongzhou  @

## fi  $4 R (Yongzhou  of the Northem Wei had its  seat  at  Chang'an),  and in 

late  527 he declared  hirnself  emperor  of the  Qi  (WSl1/247/12- 13). In less 

than  three months, however, he and  his  family  and  officiais  were  forced  to flee the  city  (WS11/248/4-5).  Baoyin was  captured  and executed. 

(WS/4/1313/1  - 13291;  BS/4/1049/12  - 1057I5) Appendix 4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengzh  and the  House  of  Qi  381 

Xiao Baorong  j#  jr  a, Emperor He (c. 488-502):  Eighth  son of Xiao  Luan  and  last  emyzror  of the Southem Qi (Emperor He). Baorong 

was  ai;pointed  Inspector (cishi) of  Jingzhou  in 499, when he  was  only 

eleven. He  was  made emperor in  Jiangling  in the  spnng  of  501  under  Xiao 

Yan's  sponsorship  after  the latter had gained control of this  region  and launched the eastem expedition  against  the capital. Even before Baorong 

was  able to  arrive  in the capital  Jiankang,  he was forced by Xiao  Yan  to issue an edict of abdication. He was  killed  by  Yan  in 502 at the age of  15  

> sui.

(NQSIlIl  11 - 1 14;  NS/1/158/2  - 161/4) 

Xiao Baoyou  # 4k (? - 502): Ninth son of Xiao  Luan,  he was 

cornmanded  to commit suicide in an edict ostensibly  fkom  Empress Dowager Xuande  f k l; that accused  him  of plotting rebellion. Xiao 

Yan  had engineered this to destroy  al1  of Xiao  Luan's  line.  (NQS/3/865/11 

# - 866/  1;NS/4/  1122/2-31 

Xiao Baosong  a (?-502): Tenth son of Xiao  Luan,  he  was  executed in 502 on the pretext of plotting rebellion.  (NQSDl86612-3;  NU411  122/4) 

Xiao Baozhen  f A (?-502): Eleventh son of Xiao  Luan,  he was executed in 502 on the pretext of plotting rebellion.  (NQS/3/866/4-5; 

NS/4/  1 12215) 

Xiao  Mian  j#  Sj,  Prince Zhao of  Anlu  $ & k 3 (c.455-49 1): Noted for  bis 

good  govemment,  he was appointed by his uncle to  several  important  posts, 

including  Inspector  (cishi) of  Yingzhou  J11  and  later  of  Yongzhou  # where he died at the age of 37 sui. The people are  said  to have  grieved  at  his  loss and 

erected  a temple in  his  honour.  (NQSl3179418  - 795/6;  NS/4/1044/1-7) 

Xiao Baozhi  a fE (?-502):  When  Xiao  Baojuan  was  removed  fiom  the 

throne,  Baozhi  had  expected  to be sought out by the people as the new 

d e r .  When he was not, he  feared  for his iife and attempted a military  coup Appendk  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of Qi 382 

against  Xiao  Yan.  He was ordered to commit suicide on day  r e m  &,  of the second  month  of the second year of  zhongxiing  R, or  February  25, 502  (NQS/l/I  1115),  or  on  day  xinyou  9 ,or February  24  (LS/1/21/12 

& 22/6).  (NQS/3/795/7- 1 1; NSl4/  104418- 10) 

Xiao Baolan  ]A  9Je  (? - 502): Executed  along  with  bis  brother. 

Xiao Baohong  jt  2 (? - 502): Executed  along  with  his  brother. 

Xiao Daocheng  a & ,Emperor Gao  f #L  & f a of the  Southem  Qi  (427-482): 

Third  son of Xiao  Chengzhi  but a  haif'-brother  to the  two  older sons  (NQS/2/390/2-3).  He 

was  bom in the  fourth  year  ofyuanjia  2 or 427  (NQS/1/3/12),  overthrew the Song 

dynasty  in 479, took the newly created Qi throne on day jiawu  rf  of the  fourth  month 

ofjianyuan  J1  a, or May 29,479  (NQS1113 1/1),  and died on day r e m  +& of the  third 

month  ofjianyuan,  or  Apnl  11,482, at the age of 56  m i  (NQS/1/38/12).  He had  nineteen 

sons, of whom four seem to have died as infants.  (NQS/l/l/l  - 3916;  NS/1/97/1  - 11611; 

WS/6/2161/1  - 216413) 

Xiao  Ze  &,  Emperor Wu  & i,+(c.  440-493): Oldest son of Xiao Daocheng, he took the throne upon  his  father's  death in 482. He died on day 

wuyin  rfi  of the  seventh  month  ofyongming  RA,  or  August  27,493, at the age of 54 sui . There may be sorne  problems  in the dates and ages of Ze and  his 

father, for Daocheng would have had to be 13 when  Ze  was bom  (NQS/I161/10  &

62/10)!  (NQS/1/43/1  - 62/14;  NSIlIl1612  - 126/14;  WS/6/2164/4  - 2165/6). 

Xiao Changmao  f a, Prince  of  Nanjun  & Z$ Z,  wenhui  iaizi  ,& 

## f -f  (c. 458  - 493): Oldest son of Xiao  Ze,  he  was  bom when  his  father 

was  about 15, before he had reached the "capping ceremony"  (mogum 

# a ) age. In 479, when Xiao Daocheng had accepted the abdication of the 

last  Song emperor, he appointed this  grandson  as  lnspector  (cishz)  of 

Yongzbou  in  order  to have this major  military  base  under  a Xiao govemor. In 480, upon  establishing  the Qi throne, he gave  him  the title of Prince of Appendix  4: The  Line  of Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of Qi 

Nanjun,  thereby establishing the precedent in the  Southem  Dynasties 

period  of bestowing the  title  of  prince  (wang  E)on  the  grandson  who  was 

in  line  for the throne (di  hilangstrn  a 2 ). When  established  in the  Heir 

Apparent's Palace,  Changmao  was  known  for  attracting  around  him 

talented and  leamed  men of  letters  as well as bold and  distinguished  men of  

> arms.

He had a strong  interest  in  Buddhism,  as did  his  brother, Ziliang 

# + & . His father was angered upon discovenng that what was to have been a small  park  for his son had been tumed into a grandiose  estate.  He  was 

fùrther  angered upon discovering  after  his  son's death that he had amassed  

> all

the clothes,  carriages,  omaments  and trappings of an emperor, a  sign  to him of impatience to  take  the throne. This son had  seldom  gone  out on excursions and was  afflicted  by illness and  ovenveight.  He died at the age of 36 sui in the first  month  of the eleventh  year  ofyongming*  q, or 

February  25,493.  His  passing was a shock for  those  within  and  without  the court, for he had been involved in  &airs  of state and seemed a  fitting  heir. 

He was  given  the posthumous title of the  wenhui  crown  prince. He had four sons.  (NQS/î/397/1  - 402/7;  NS/M  - 1 10  117)   

> Xiao Zhaoye

# a Ia, Prince of  Yulh  ##  a E (c. 473 - 494): 

Having  taken  the throne upon  his  grandfather's  death, Zhaoye  was 

killed  by Xiao  Luan  at the age of 22 sui and replaced by  his 

younger brother. He was  given  the posthumous title of Prince of 

Yulin  rather  than  an  impenal  title.  (NQS/1/69/1  74/10;  NS/l/l33/1 

# - 138/12;  WS/6/2165/7  - 2167/14) 

Xino Zhaowen  a H A , Prince Gong of  Hailing  gt  3.  (c. 480 - 494): He  was  placed on the throne by  Xiao  Luan  foilowing 

his  brother's  murder  and  was  killed a few months  later  to  make  way Appendii  4: The  Line  of Xiao  Chengzh  and  the  House  of Qi for Xiao  Luan  to become emperor.  (NQS1117711  80112;  

> NSl1/138/13

# - 14019;  WS/6/2167/15  - 216817) 

Xiao Zhaoxiu  Ig, Prince of  Baling  C, & I.(c. 483 - 498): He  was  murdered at the age of 16 sui in the 498 wave of murders launched by Xiao  Luan  against  his  royal relatives.  (NQS/3/861/1  - 

> 862/4; NS141 11191 1-2)

Xiao Zhaocan  Bfl&  , Prince of Guiyang  #&  I#  iE (c. 49  1 - 498): He was 8 sui of age when  killed  by Xiao  Luan  in the 498 wave of murders of the royal princes.  (NQS/3/862/5-8;  NS14/111913-4) 

Xiao Ziliang  # + & ,Prince  Wenxuan  of Jingling  ft  (c. 460 - 

> 494):

Second son of Xiao Ze, he loved the  Company  of men of talent and 

leaming  and was even more devoutly Buddhist  than  his  older brother. He gathered Buddhist  monks  to discuss  theology  and  perform  ceremonies  on a

scale  unrnatched  in the southem  dynasties.  He was constantly  doing  good works and encouraging  his  fellow  men to do charitable deeds. He  himself 

opened a hospice  north  of  his  residence to  provide  for the poor and sick. He would personally serve food and  drink  at gatherings of  officials  and priests, an  act  considered  undignified  for someone of  his  prime  ministerid 

position.  Although  his  father appointed  him  on  his  deathbed as regent for the young Zhaoye  j#  If in 493, Ziliang  asked  that Xiao  Luan,  the  fùture 

usurper,  take  an active part in  al1  matters  of state. As the new emperor, Zhaoye was deeply suspicious of  his  uncle and was relieved when he died of  iiiness  in 494 at the age of 3 5 sui. This  fear  may have  stemmed  fiom  the 

fact  that when  Ze  suddenly  becarne  senously  il1  towards  the end of  his  reign 

people  both  within  and without the court were  afiaid  and  began  to  consider 

putting  Ziliang,  as the  next  oldest  brother of the  prematurely  deceased  heir, on the  throne.  This idea was cnticized by  Ziliang's  uncle,  Xiao Ye  # #, Appendix  4: The  Line  of  Xiao  Chengrhi  and the  House  of Qi 385 

who  argued  that he  himself  should have more legitimacy  than  his  nephew as an heir, for he was the  next  oldest brother of the present emperor. He was opposed to choosing an heir  fiom  the "senior" generation and 

recommended  that the throne continue  through  the  line  of the eldest. The question  was  resolved when Xiao  Ze  suddenly  recovered and  asked  for  his 

grandson  to corne to the palace and receive the  impenal  blessing  as  his  heir to the throne. However, Zhaoye must have  believed  that there  was  stU  an element of support for  his  uncle  despite  his  seerning  lack of  interest  in 

flairs  of state.  (NQS13169211  - 70  11 1 5;  NSl41110 118  - 1 10516;   

> WSl612 16517

# - 2 166/9)  

> Xiao

Zhaozhou  Bfl  fi(? - 500): A group of conspirators, 

including  a general  who had  served  under  Zhaozhou's  father, hoped to stage a coup which would place Zhaozhou on the throne. This 

was  partly  an attempt to  thwart  the  growing  domination of Xiao 

Yan  a $f  over the throne. Action was delayed, however, and one of the conspirators was  afiaid  the plot would be exposed if they continued to do nothing. He therefore decided to  save  hirnself  by 

being  the one to  reveal  the intended coup. A CO-conspirator was able to  kill  him  before he could  speak,  but an officiai discovered the secret plan  6om  a musk sachet on the  dead  man's body, and Zhaozhou was executed  along  with  his  brother and the  other 

conspirators.  

> (NQSl3/702/1

# - 70315;  NSl41 11 O5/7  - 110617) 

Xiao Zhaoying  Iff  IÇa  (? - 500): Executed  dong  with  his  brother. (sources  same  as for Xiao Zhaozhou) 

Xiao  Ziqing  -f  @,  Prince  of  Luling  $ & E (c. 468  - 494):  Third  son 

of Xiao Ze, he  angered  his  father for  disobeying  an  edict  against Appendk  4: The  Line  of  Xiao  Chengzh  and the  House  of Qi 386 

ostentatious decoration of vehicles (483) and  later  for  using  troops to stage a mock naval  bartle  on  his  way to  his  appointment at Southem  Yuzhou  &

(492). He  was  ordered  back  to  his  residence in the capital and  never 

allowed  into  the sight  OC  his  father  again.  He was  killed  at the age of  27  sui 

shortly  after  the  murder  of  his  uncle, Xiao  Qiang  j@ m. (NQS/3/703/6  -

70416;  NS/4/1107/1-10)  

> Xiao

Zixiang  j#  4,  Prince of Badong  C 3 ,posthumously demoted to Marquis of  YufÙ  ,R  &a (c. 469 - 490):  Fourth  son of Xiao Ze, he was  onginally  adopted by his uncle, Xiao Yi  &,  before the latter had  any  sons. He was kept on as heir even  after  Yi's  fist  son  was  born,  but in 488 the emperor was asked to  repeal  this,  and  Zixiang  lost  his  uncle's 

pMcely  title and was made Prince of Badong instead. In 489 he  was  sent out as  Inspector  (cishi)  of  Jingzhou  where he built up a large supply of weapons,  buying  them  through  the Man tribespeople. When  his  officiais 

exposed  this  to the emperor,  Zixiang  had them  kilîed.  His  father  was 

enraged and sent out  several  hundred  armed  men to  "arrest  his  son's unworthy  attendants"  and  prornised  to  spare  his  son's  Iife  if he acknowledged  his  guilt  and returned to the capital.  Zixiang  attacked the 

impenal  force  which  retreated.  Another  force was sent  under  Xiao Shunzhi 

i(father of Xiao  Yan,  future founder of the Liang), and  Zixiang's 

army  fled,  leaving  him  no choice but to  surrender.  His  older brother, the 

heir  apparent, had secretly instructed Xiao  Shunzhi  not to let  Zixiang 

retum  to the capital, and  Shunzhi  ordered  him  to  hang  himself.  He  was  22 

sui at the  time.  He is  said  to have loved the  martial  arts and outranked others in physical  strength  and courage.  (NQS/3/704/7  - 707/5; 

NS/4/1107/11  - 1 lO9/ll) Appendk  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengdu  and the  House  of Qi 3 87 Xiao Zijing  'f  $L  ,Prince of  Anlu  & 3 (c. 472  - 494):  Fifth  son of 

Xiao  Ze,  he was  caught  up in the 494 wave of murders by Xiao  Luan.  He 

was  23 sui  at  the time  ofhis  death.  (NQS/31707/6-11;  EIS/4/1109/12  -

11 1O B )  

> Xiao

Zimao  j@  +e, Prince of  Jin'an  ai  Z (c. 472 - 494): Seventh son of  Xiao  Ze,  he was endowed with literary talent  which  was  much  admired by  his  father. In 494 he was made Lnspector (cishi) of  Jiangzhou. M e r  his 

uncle,  Xiao Qiang, and younger brother, Zilong, were  kiiled  in 494,  Zimao 

hoped to  lead  a rebellion against Xiao  Luan.  A force  was  sent against hirn in Xunyang, and he was  killed  at the age of 23  sui.  (NQS/3/708/1  - 7 1013; 

NS/4/1110/6  - 1112/15) 

Xiao Zilong  -f  t, Pnnce of Sui  Jun  @& @ 3. (c. 474  - 494):  Eighth  son 

of  Xiao  Ze, he was  praised  by  his  father as their  farnily's Cao  Zhi  (son 

of Cao Cao)  because  of  his  literary  talent. Xiao  Luan  was  afraid  of him for 

his  intelligence, for he outclassed  a11 of Xiao Ze's sons, and had him killed the  same  night  he murdered Xiao  Qiang.  Like  many  of the  Xiao  clan, he is descnbed as suffering  from  obesity and had been on a regime  of  special 

pills.  He was 21 sui at  his  death.  (NQSl3/710/4-13;  NS/4/1113/1-6) 

Xiao  Zizhen  a + & , Pnnce of Jian'an  $ i.(c. 476 - 494): Ninth son 

of Xiao Ze, he was rnurdered by Xiao  Luan  at the age of 19 sui. 

(NQS/31711/1-6;  NU411  113/7-10) 

Xiao  Ziming  -7- 4, Prince of  Xiyang  B f# 3(c. 479  - 495): Tenth son of  Xiao  Ze, he  was  executed  dong  with  his  brothers, Xiao  Zihan  + 7

and Xiao  Zizhen  # -f- fi  after  being implicated in Xiao  Chen's  $&plot 

against Xiao  Luan.  He was 17 sui.  His  brother,  Xiao  Ziwen  # +2, 

acquired  his princely  title  in 495.  (NQSl3/7 1117- 7 12/1;  NS/4/1114/1-4) Appendix 4: The  Line  of  Xiao  Chengzh  and the  House  of Qi 388 Xiao Zihan  # P ,Prince of  Nanhai  F#J  j4  X (c. 479 - 495):  Eleventh 

son of Xiao Ze, he was  murdered  at the age of 19 sui for involvement in 

Xiao  Chen's  j&  plot.  (NQSI317 1212-5;  NS/4/1114/5-8) 

Xiao  Zilun  j#  -7.  .($,  Pnnce  of  Baling  C & E (c. 479 - 494):  Thirteenth 

son of Xiao  Ze,  he was  killed  at the age of 16 sui  &er  Xiao  Luan  had put Zhaowen on the  throne.  Despite  his  young age, he showed  much  presence of  mind  when an  official  arrived  with poison and the  edict  to commit suicide.  Zilun  stated that  this  was  fate;  the Xiao  farnily  was  paying  for its 

destruction  of the Liu  farnily,  and this official, an  old  family  &end,  had no control over the situation.  (NQSl317  1 Y6- 1 1 ;NSl41111419  - 1 1 1615) 

Xiao  Zizhen  + fi  , Pnnce of Shaoling  & 3 (c. 48 1 - 495): 

Fourteenth son of Xiao Ze, he was killed at the age of 15 mi  dong  with  his 

older brothers,  Ziming  'f- and  Zihan  + 7 for  his  alleged  part in Xiao 

Chen's  a $& plot  against  Xiao  Luan.  (NQSl317  1 31  1-2;  NS/4/1116/6) 

Xiao Ziyue  s-7. a , Prince of  Linhe  PJ6  Z (c. 485 - 498): Sixteenth son of Xiao Ze, he and  his  six younger brothers were  spared  in the 494 

murders of the Xiao farnily by Xiao  Luan.  Known  as the "Seven Princes", they were killed in 498  after  Xiao  Luan  recovered  fkom  an  ihess  and 

realized  how  wlnerable  his  own  young sons were should he suddenly pass away.  Ziyue  was  14 sui when he was  kîiled.  (NQSl317  13D-7; 

NS/4/1116/7-11) 

Xiao  Ziwen  2, Prince of  Xiyang  8 % 3i  (c. 485  - 498): 

Seventeenth son of Xiao  Ze,  he was  given  this  princely  title  after  Ziming  +

88  was  killed.  He  himseifdied  at the age of 14 sui in the 498 wave of murders.  (NQS/3/7  1318-9;  NS/4/1117/1-2) Appendix  4: The  Line  of  Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of  Qi  389 

Xiao Zijun  +d&,  Prince of  Hengyang  #f  @ 3 (c. 485 - 498): 

Eighteenth  son of Xiao  Ze,  he was 14 sui when  caught  up in the 498 wave of murders.  (NQSl317 141 1-2;  NSl411  I 1 7/34) 

Xiao  Zilin  +r#,  Prince of  Nankang  & dft  3.(c. 485 - 498): Nineteenth son of Xiao Ze, he was  much  beloved by  his  father  shce  his  mother  was 

Ze's  favourite. He was 14 sui when  killed  by Xiao  Luan.  (NQSl3171413-4; 

NSl41111715-9) 

Xiao  Zimin  a , Prince of  Yongyang  Ijc  I#  3 (c. 485 - 498): Twentieth son of Xiao  Ze,  he was 14 sui when killed in the 498 wave of murders.  (NQSl3178813-5;  NS/4/1039/3-5) 

Xiao Zijian  -f  $, Prince of  Xiangdong  ifs  Z (c. 486  - 498): 

Twenty-first  son of Xiao Ze, he was 13 sui when murdered. 

(NQSl317  1415-6;  NSl41 1 1 18/  1-2) Xiao  Zixia  j# %,  Prince of  Nan  Jun  & I.  (c. 492 - 498): Twenty-

third  son of Xiao  Ze,  he was the most beloved as a son bom in  his  father's "old age". He was 7 sui when caught up in Xiao  Luan's  murder  of the 

"seven  princes"  in  498.  (NQS1317 14/7-8;  NS/4/  1 11813-4) 

Xiao Yi  # f i ,  Prince  Wenxian  of  Yuhang  flP  f 2 & Z (c. 444 - 492): Second son of Xiao Daocheng, he was considered for a whiie  as a more appropriate  heir  to the  throne  by  his  father.  During  this  penod when Xiao Ze offended  his  father to the point that he  might  have been removed  From  the line of succession in favour of Xiao Yi, the latter continued to be  faitffil  and  respectful  to  his  older  brother, thereby  earnhg  the  steadfast  trust  and love of Ze. This tie of  loydty  may have been strengthened by the  fact  that they were  full  brothers, bom of the  same  mother. Yi 

died  at the age of 49 sui. He  is  said  to have had  sixteen  sons,  al  of whom  suMved 

to serve  under  the Liang  (LSI21509112),  but that  is  not  borne  out in the  historical 

record.  (NQSl2140511  - 4 1919;  NS/4/1059/5  - lO67/15) Appendix  4: The  Line  of  Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of Qi 390 

Xiao  Zilian  j#  3- (?  - 493):  Oldest  son of  Xiao  Yi, he  seems  to have died  quite  prematurely, in the eleventh  year  of  yongming  Ijc  iP]  , or 493. 

(NQSl214  1911 0-12;  NS/411068/1-2) 

Xiao Zike  # 7 #& (c.  478 - 529): In 498, when Xiao Zike  was  Governor 

of Wu  Cornmandery  $& i$, Wang  Jingze  3 a BI took up  anns  in  Kuaiji 

# 4,  declaring  that he was acting in support of  Zike  (NQSIU419115).  With this  threat  to the throne,  Xiao  Luan  called  Zike and  his  siblings  and  their 

families  and servants (over seventy people) to court where he intended to 

murder  them that  night.  However, Zike succeeded in  fleeing  to  Jiankang 

the  sarne  night,  and Xiao  Luan  desisted  fiom  his  plan. When Xiao  Yan 

established  the Liang  regime,  he was  given  various  positions in  seMce  to the Liang court. He was noted for  his  literary  talent and  recognized  this  as a characteristic of himself and  his  several  brothers. He  destroyed  al1  his 

own  writings.  He was 52 sui when he died.  (NSl41106815  - 1WOI9; 

LS/2/507/1  - 509115) 

Xiao Zicao  + (?  - 500?):  Third  son of  Xiao  Yi, he  is  said  to have died when  theyishi  A $ C'troops  of  righteous  rebellion"  or  sirnply 

"loyalist  troops")  surrounded  the palace. The reference  is  to the forces that were raised to overthrow  Xiao  Baojuan  and  his  court  clique  (see 

NQS/1/10516).  (NQS/21419/14  - 42012;  NS/4/1070110-12) 

Xiao  Zixing  -f  4-I.  (? - ?):  Fourth  son of  Xiao  Yi, he died  early  in  life. 

(NQ S/2/420/3) 

Xiao Ziguang  -f  & (?  - 501?):  Fifth  (?) son of  Xiao  Yi, he was  killed 

dong  with  the  third  son, Xiao Zicao.  (NQSl2/420/1) 

Xiao  Zifan  a + (c.  487 - c. 550): He  served  under  Xiao Wei  #, 

Prince of  Nanping  <fi  +X (younger brother of Xiao  Yan  @,  the  £ira 

Liang emperor), who  loved  literature  and  greatly  adrnired  his  talent.  He Appendk  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of  Qi  391 

was  noted  dong  with  Xiao  Zixian  # +f a and Xiao  Ziyun  a 'f  a for  his 

literary talent but was less  success£Ùl  in his government  career  because  of 

lis  appearance  and behaviour. He  never  rose  above  posts in the establishments  of  the  various  princes until,  d e r  a formai  protest,  he  was 

finally  made  Director  of the Palace  L i b r q  (bishu jiun  @ f P ). He died at the age of  64  sui.  (NS/4/1070/13  - 1071115;  LSl2/510/1  - 5 1113) 

Xiao Zixian  jlii  -f  IqC  (c. 489 - 537): Beloved by  his  father  above  ail the other sons, he was also noted for his literary accomplishments  which 

included  the  Nan  Qi  Shu  (History  of the Southem Qi), the historicai record of his  own  family.  Xiao  Yan  loved  hirn  and appreciated  hirn  for his 

demeanour  and conversation.  Known  also for  his  haughty  aloofhess,  he was  given  the posthumous  title  of "the Proud"  ÿiao  a). He was 49  sui  at 

his  death.  (NSl4/1072/11  - 107411 1; LSl215  1 114  - 5 12/15) 

Xiao Ziyun  j#  + (c. 487  - 549): Noted for  his  calligraphy  as well as  his 

literary  taste  and talent, he disliked  official  life and was  thirty  before  taking 

office. He fled  Jiankang  when the palace fell to Hou Jing and died of starvation in a Buddhist  temple in  Jinling  % f&  (present-day Changzhou, Jiangsu) at the age of  63  sui.  (NS/4/1074/12  - 107613;  LSl215  13/10  -

515113) 

Xiao  Zihui  Iff  If  Bf  (?-?): He was noted for  his  literary talent and  interest 

in  history  and  classics.  (NS/4/ 1076/7-8;  LSl2/5  16/24) 

Xiao Ying  e, Prince Xian of  Linchuan  @ 111  & 3 (c. 458  - 489):  Third  son of Xiao Daocheng, he  was  known  for  his  administrative  skills.  This made hirn very 

useful  at the  beginning  of the Southem Qi. He was 32 sui when he died,  leaving 

behind  nine  sons.  (NQSl2162  116  - 622114  & NS/4/1  07911  - 1O8Oll) 

Xiao  Zijin  j#  -f  (?  - early  Liang): Oldest son of  Ying,  he  is  said  to have plotted  rebeilion  against  the Liang and  was  executed  dong  with  his Appendix  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengzhi  and the  House  of Qi 392 

brother, probably  because  of  disciplinary  action  taken  against  the younger brother.  (NQSl21622115  - 62314;  NS/4/  107918 - 1O 8 O / l ) 

Xiao  Ziyou  a 3 # (? - early  Liang): Second son of  Ying,  he  was 

interested in music and theatre. He was  implicated  in  sexual  impropriety 

and  murder  in the  early  Liang and was stripped of  his  privileges of  rank  and office. He was executed  dong  with  his  older brother. (sources as  above) 

Xiao Huang  a, Prince Wei of Changsha  f 9 &,  X (c. 460 - 490):  Fourth  son of Daocheng, he was appreciated by  his  father for  his  equestrian  skills. He  lost  the 

favour  of  his  brother Ze, for  arriving  in court  from  Xuzhou  & J11  with more  than 

his  decreed maximum of  forty  armed  attendants. He died when he was 3 1 sui. 

(NQS/2/623/5- 624/  1 1;NSl411 O8OD  - 1O8 112) 

Xiao Ye  j#  4,  Prince  Zhao of  Wuling  &, BLI  X (c. 467 - 494):  Fiflh  son of Daocheng, he was not on good  terms  with his oldest brother. He was noted for  his 

love of  literature  and  his  unmatched  ski11  in  archery.  He  argued  for maintenance of the  line  of the eldest (di  *) just  before  his  brother (Emperor Wu) died when there was some doubt about who would succeed to the  throne  because  of the  heir's 

sudden  death. The new emperor, Zhaoye  a I#,  looked to  him  for support. Ye died when he was 28 sui, apparently  a victim  of Xiao  Luan.  (NQSl21624112  -

62619;  NS/4/108  113 - 1083110) 

Xiao Hao  g 1%  , Prince  Gong of  Ancheng  &j!k  3. (c. 468  - 491):  Sixth  son of Daocheng, he was a  sickly  person,  with a cairn and placid temperament, who died at the age of  24  sui.  (NQSI21626110  - 62711 ; NSl411083  11 0-1 1) Xiao Qiang  I I ) ,  Prince of Poyang  C R (c. 469 - 494):  Seventh  son of Daocheng, he  was  beloved  by  Ze  as a dutiful  younger brother and  was  next  to Yi in royal favour. Qiang was the  only  one of the brothers to be appointed Capital Commandant  (Iing*un  ) in charge of the principal  guarding  force of the capital (493). He  enjoyed  the affection of the people and the confidence of Zhaoye, Appendix  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengdu  and the  House  of Qi 393 the successor to  Ze  (Emperor  Wu). Zhaoye was suspicious of Xiao  Luan  and wanted  Qiang's  help in eradicating this  threat.  Qiang did not respond,  saying  that 

Luan  could be  txusted  since  he was simply  exercizing  authority  as the eldest  cf the royal  family  and had been commissioned to do  so  by their father. When  Luan  kiUed 

Zhaoye in  order  to place Zhaowen on the throne, Qiang  still  hesitated to use the  

> army

to  take  over the regency  from  Luan.  A coup he  half-prornised  to participate 

in was  exposed before he could  decide  whether to act or not.  Luan  surrounded  his 

residence with troops and had  him  killed.  He was 26 sui at the time.  (NQS/2/627/2 

# - 628/8;  NS/4/1084/1  - 108514) 

Xiao  Shuo  ]k  #,  Prince of Guiyang  & fi  3.(c. 470  - 494): Eighth son of Daocheng, he  was  frai1  and  sickly  and  often  confined  to bed.  M e r  Qiang  was 

murdered, he  realized  he would be the  next  victirn.  He was 25 sui at the  t h e  of  his 

death.  (NQSIU62819  - 62913;  NSl4/1085/5- 1 1) 

Xiao Jian  8, Prince Jian of  Shixing  R iq  I.(c. 47 1 - 49 1):  Tenth  son of 

Daocheng,  he loved literature, was  skilled  in  writing  and avoided ostentation. In 484 he was appointed as  Inspector  (cishi) of  Yizhou  1J11  (in Sichuan).  After 

retuming  to the  capital  in 49 1, he fell  il1  and  died  at the age of 2 1 sui. 

(NQS/2/629/4- 12;  NS/4/1086/  1 - 108813) 

Xiao Jun  & (c. 473-494): Eleventh son of Daocheng, he was  kilied  dong  with 

his  other  brothers by Xiao  Luan  a e r  Zhaowen had been put on the throne. He 

was  22 sui at  his  death.  (NQS/3/787/4  - 788/3;  NSl411 O37/4 - 103913) 

Xiao Feng  e, Prince of  Jiangxia  Zr  3 (c. 475 - 494): Twelfth son of 

Daocheng  he  was  a musician  (playing  the  qin  %)  and a calligrapher  and  was 

noted for  his  martial prowess.  M e n  Xiao  Luan  was  W n g  off the  various  princes, 

Feng sent a letter  of rebuke to  Luan  which  no-one  dared  forward.  Being  afhid  of 

hun,  Luan  chose not to send troops to  his  home but  rather  to  cal  him  to the 

imperial  temple where he was surrounded by  soldiers.  He  is  said  to have been Appendix  4: The Line of  Xiao  Chengzhr  and the  House  of  Qi  394 

strong enough to  fight  off  several  soldiers  with  his  bare  hands  but  was  findiy  Med 

by a few  soldiers  brave enough to  tackle  him.  He was 20 sui at the  tirne  of  his 

death.  (NQS/2/630/1-6;  NS/4/108814  - 109011) 

Xiao  Rui  a, Prince of Nanping  4 93 (c. 476 - 494):  Fifteenth  son of Daocheng, he was  killed  in  Xiangzhou  i&i H, where he had been  Inspector  (cishi), after Xiao  Luan  sent a force against the  region.  He was 19 sui at the time. 

(NQSlZ63017-11;  NS/4/1090/2-5)  

> Xiao

Jian  Pnnce of Yidu  + @ E (c. 477 - 494): Sixteenth son of Daocheng, he  was  killed  by Xiao  Luan  at the age of 18 sui.  (NQSl2/63  1/14; 

NSl41 109016  - 109  11 15) 

Xiao Qiu  &# , Prince of  Jinxi  % 5.  (c. 479  - 494): Eighteenth son of Daocheng, he was killed by Xiao  Luan  at the age of 16 sui.  (NQS/2/63 1/5-6; 

NS141109211) 

Xiao Xuan  48,  Pnnce of Hedong  ;q it (c. 480 - 498): Nineteenth son of Daocheng, he escaped the  fate  of the other princes in 494  because  of  his  young age,  mediocre  intelligence and the fact that he had been a favourite of Daocheng. In 497, an official, Wang Yan  5 &,  was executed on the grounds that he had been  plotting  to put Xiao Xuan on the  throne.  The  foiiowing  year,  Xiao  Luan 

ordered Xuan to  take  poison. He was 19 sui at the time.  Since  his  two  sons were 

kiiled  at the  sarne  tirne,  Xuan was the  only  one of the  p ~ c e s without issue. 

(NQS/63  117  - 632/2;  NSl4/1092/2-10) Table 7 Line  of Xiao  Chen- (Southern  Qi)  

> Bao-zhi

# a

Baolan Baohong  2

# - Daocheng  3&-Appendix 5:  Lines  of Xiao  Yuanzhi  and Xiao  Shizhi 

LINE  OF  XIAO  YUANZHI 

(see Table 2) 

Xiao  Yuamhi  a a kappears  to have been a brother of Xiao  Chengzhi  .k  *&and  an 

uncle  to Xiao Daocheng  (NQSIU66  1 / 1). Xiao  Jingzong  # $! (?-?): Son of Xiao  Yuanzhi  and father of Xiao  Jiigxian.  

> Xiao

Jingxian (c. 438 - 487): He was a close  confidant  of Xiao Daocheng and close to Xiao  Ze.  He died at the age of 50 sui. 

(NQSl2/66  111  664/1;  NSl4/1044/11  - 1046/1) 

Xiao Yi  j#  &(?  - 497): Xiao  Luan  was  suspicious  of  hm.  M e r 

Wang  Yan  If  jwas  killed,  Luan  had  soldiers  surround  his  home and  murder  him.  (NQS/2/664/2-5;  NS/4/  1 O46/2) 

LINE  OF  XIAO  SHIZHI 

Xiao  Shizhi  jk  # k w a s  the son of Xiao  Longzi  # a=f and first cousin to Xiao Daocheng' s father.  (NQSl2/664/6)  

> Xiao

Chifu  a (c. 430  - 485): The warmth of  his  relationship with  his  cousin, Xiao Daocheng  # &,  ,was like that of Xiao Daocheng with Xiao  Jingxian  #

# k. Daocheng had  this  cousin accompany the last Song emperor to the palace in 

Danyang  after  his  abdication and stay with  him  until  his  death. It  is  unclear  whether he was directly responsible for the emperor's  murder.  He was renowned as an 

administrator,  and when he died at the age of 56 sui,  his  farnily  had no accumulated  wealth.  (NQSI2/664/6  - 665/6;  NS/4/  104613 -7) 

Xiao  Yinghou  $f  (c. 462 - 501): He had  much  of  his  father's 

character  and  loved  the  literary  arts.  Since  he appeared to be  neutral  when Xiao  Luan  # X took the  throne,  he was  drawn  h t o  the govemment. He 

issued  the  cal1  to  arms  in 501 as part of the plan  mastenninded  by Xiao  Yan 

## 8to  remove  the  "evil  men  around  the throne". He  himself  stayed  behind Appendix  5:  Lines  of  Xiao  Yuanzhi  and  Xiao  Shizhi  397 

to look  after  Jiangling  % &but  died  under  the stress of being  unable  to 

deal  with troops  from  the  West  that were bearing  down  on the  city.  His 

death  that  year  war  considered  one  o î  the  three  blessings  of 50 1 , the other 

two  being the  birth  of Xiao Yan's oldest son and the  surrender  of a general 

Xu  Yuanyu  & a (NSl5/1307/4;  NSl411 OW3).  In effect, Xiao 

Yingzhou  was an obstacle to Xiao Yan's ambitions to take over the  Qi 

throne.  (NQSl2/665/7  - 67418;  NS/4/  104619  - 1 OW9) 

Xiao  Yingji  a (?-?): He is mentioned as  loving  the  military  arts  while 

his  older brother  loved  the  literary  arts  (NQSI21665110). 

Xiao Y ingda  # @ i&  (c.. 477  - 5 10):  Fifth  son of  Chifù,  he  served  with Xiao Yingzhou in Jiangling. He was 34  sui  at the time of  his  death. 

(LS/1/187/1  - 19015;  NS/4/lO49/lO-ll)  

> Xiao

Yingfu  a gi  +(?-c. 50 1): He fled  Jiankang  when  his  brother issued the  cd to  arms  masterminded  by Xiao  Yan  against the Qi. He joined up with a few hundred men in the present-day Jiangxi  region  and  was  placed in 

command  of the  region  by  his  brother, Yingda  j#  a, when the latter 

leamed  he had  these  forces. He was  unsuccessfùl,  however, in  withstanding 

attacks  by a loyalkt  general and attempted to  fiee  to Changsha. He  ran  out of food  dong  the way and died  from  ingesting too  much  when he finaily 

had access to food  again.  (NSl4/1  ON/  12- 13;  LS11/188/11- 1 5) Appendix  6: The  Line  of Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 

LINE  OF  XIA0  SHUNZHI  &

(see Table 8) 

Xiao Yi  Pb,  Prince  Xuanwu  of Changsha  $- &,  A (?  - 500):  Eldest  son of Xiao 

Shunthi  # &,  iie  was  noted for  his  good government and  military  abiiity  and helped 

protect  the Qi  regime  on  several  occasions. When General Pei Shuye  f led  Yuzhou 

in open  rebellion  against the  Qi  in 500, Yi was  called  upon to  lead  the attack against 

him.  Pei  was  &aid  and surrendered to the Wei. At the time, Yi was encouraged  by  his 

brother,  Yan  a .IjS (the future founder of the Liang), to use the  opportunity  to  march  on the capital and  rid  the  throne  of the  "evil  men surrounding it"  (rhu junce  zhi  mi  # ;B 

## 2 ). Yi made no response to this suggestion to stage a  military  coup.  Later,  when General Cui  Huijing  & W 5 surrounded the  impenal  city  with the intention of replacing the incumbent on the throne with the incumbent's younger brother, Xiao  Baoxuan  a 

> f

,the court sent an urgent  letter  to Yi who succeeded in  putting  down  this  revolt.  Again, 

Yan  sent an envoy  fiom  his  base in Yongzhou  ft  H,  waming  him  that, in  view  of  his 

great  service in  protecting  the  Qi  throne, he would now be feared in court and nsked being 

eliminated,  especially  if he were to accept  high  civilian  honours and let go of  his  army; 

therefore, he should either  lead  troops into the palace and  remove  the  unpopuiar  emperor and  his  clique,  ushg  legendary and  historical  precedent as justification, or request the emperor for gracious permission to withdraw with  his  army  to  Liyang  @ @ (in Yuzhou 

# M )fiorn  which  he  could  still  dominate  the capital and  hold  sway over the  realrn.  Yi  again 

rejected  his  brother's  advice.  Appointed  Director  of the Department of State  Affairs 

(shgshtr  ling  f +) in recognition of  his  service, he  was  feared by the ernperor's 

advisors  who  tried  to  convince  the emperor that Yi  was  preparing to  remove  the emperor 

in the  same  way that Xiao Zhaoye  # Ba  had been removed. Yi  was  urged to  £lee  for  his 

life  by  his  supporters but  argued  that a  person  in  his  prime  ministerial  position  could  not behave in  such  an ignoble  manner.  Yi was  seized  dong  with a brother, Rong  &,  and Appendix 6: The  Line  of B a o  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 399 

forced  to  take  poison. Another source  States  that the brother caught up in  this  was Chang 

(NQS/2/666/11-12).  (LS/2!339/6-7  & NSl411265111  - l267/5) 

Xiao Yuanye  jff  81s(c. 479-526): When  his  father  was  killed,  Yuanye went  into 

hiding  dong  with  two  brothers,  Yuanzao  # afflss and  Yuanxiang  a $ . After 

his  uncle established the Liang throne, he  held  various  civilian  and  military 

positions  until  his  death at the age of  48  sui. He  was  a devout  Buddhist  and  lefi 

behind  a collection of writings which were  widely  circulated.  (LSl2135911  - 36 115 

& NS/4/  126716-10) 

Xiao Xiaoyan  j#  +e ( c .  506-527 or 529 ?): Intelligent and endowed with literary talent, he was  much  admired for  his  writings  by  his  great-uncle, Xiao  Yan  a .M.  He died at the age of 23 sui at some point  after  his 

father's  death.  (LS/2/36  116-7  & NS/4/1267/12- 126811) 

Xiao Yuanzao  81$#  (c. 483-549): Described as having a humble and unassuming  manner  and literary talent, he received  many  important  military 

postings  and was praised for his good  govemment.  Xiao  Yan  is  said  to have exclaimed that he would have nothing to  fear  if  al1  his  sons and nephews were  like 

Yuanzao. However, in the  Northern  Expedition of 525, he  was  censured and removed  from  office and had  his  title  downgraded  for  two  years  after  retreating 

with  undue  haste. At the  tirne  of Hou Jing's  rebellion,  he was  czshi  of Southem 

Xuzhou  &j  #t  (the capital being  Jingkou  $ or present-day Zhenjiang) and sent  his  son to  lead  troops to help the capital. As  Director  of the  Lefi  of the 

Imperia1  Secretariat  ( s h g s h  mopuye  & f & Iff  #), he felt it  wrong  for somebody in his prime  rninisterial  position to flee and therefore chose to stay with the court  d u ~ g Hou Jing's  rebeliion.  He died in the palace at the age of  67  sui as 

a result  of  starvation.  (LSf2136 119  - 363/2  & NS/4/1268/2  - 1269/7) 

Xiao Yuanyou  # R (? - 533):  After  being  appointed  cishz  of  Yizhou  jf  , he 

succeeded  in  putting  down  a revolt by a local leader who  was  leading  a hundred-Appendix  6: The  Line  of Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 

thousand-strong  force on Chengdu, the capital of  Yizhou.  Yuanyou had been 

avaricious  and extravagant, and when the emperor discovered how this nephew had been acting, he  recalled  him  to Jiankang where he  feil  ill  fiom  "zxiety  and resentment"  (yi  youkui  chenai  fA & & )and  died.  (LS/  1/7S/I  Br 

NS/4/1269/8  - 1 2701 1 )

Xiao Shao  j#  4(?  - ?): When Jiankang  feii,  he accepted the  imperial  order 

to flee  westward  and  take  a secret  edict  conferring  titles on the  various 

princes so that  they  could exercize  legitimate  power on behalf of the Liang 

throne  and overthrow Hou Jing.  M e r  reaching  Jianghng,  Shao  was 

encouraged by  his  cousin, Xiao Yi  # -8,  to  write  a record of the  faiqing 

# t years  (547-549) and Hou Jing's violent overthrow of the  imperiai 

house,  but his work was deerned to be  far  fiom  factual.  Yi made  him  Prince of Changsha  9 Z and  cdshi  of  Yingzhou  $4 . (NS/4/1270/2-10) 

## Xiao Jun  a(?-?): An accomplished  calligrapher  and  essayist,  he  later 

practised martial arts and surpassed  ordinary  men in strength. When Jiankang fell to Hou Jing, he was wooed by one of Hou's  generals  but tned to work secretly  with  his  cousin, Xiao Fan  % Se,  to  attack  this  general.  He 

fded  and  was  in the end  kiiled.  (NS/4/1270/11- 12) 

Xiao Yuanlang  f W]  (?  - ?):  Harsh  and overbearing, he was disliked by his subordinates. Xiao  Yan  exiled  this nephew to the Guangzhou  region  (lingbiao 

# a) to redeem his reputation  aiter  leamhg  that he had had an officer executed for 

givhg  unwanted  critical  advice.  (NSl41127 1/ 1-2) 

Xiao Yuanming  ùfft  a (?  - 556): When Xiao Yan launched  his  Northem 

Expedition  in 547,  irnrnediately  afier  receiving  Hou  I i g  f&  3 into  the southem 

fold,  Yuanming  begged  to participate and was  permitted  to replace  his  cousin's son,  Xiao  Huili  # B , as head of land and naval forces and ordered to  advance 

on  Pengcheng  $$ $4. (present-day  Xuzhou in  northem  liangsu)  and flood it  into Appendix 6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 40 1

subrnission.  M e n  the Eastem Wei sent a  general  against  him,  he had no  strategy 

or plans, and the  various  m i e s  simply  started  plundering,  although  he is  said  to have kept  hs  ow.  unit  under  control. Yuanming  was  captured in a  dnuiken  stupor and  taken  into  Eastem Wei  almg  with other Liang  generals.  M e r  the Western Wei captured  Jiangling  and murdered Xiao Yi  # Q (who had been a rivai "client" emperor sponsored by Eastem Wei's successor, the Northern Qi), the Qi emperor decided to sponsor  Yuanming  as Yi's successor and have him placed on the throne at  Jiankang.  However, Wang Sengbian  3 @ , who had been controlling 

Jiankang  as Yi's lieutenant  since  the defeat of Hou Jing, and  Chen  Baxian  a, 

who had been part of Wang's expedition against Hou Jing and was now  exercizing 

infiuence  ftom  his  fortress of Southem  Yanzhou  2 east of the capital, had 

already  decided to bnng Xiao  Fangzhi  # ;5  , Nnth  and sole  surviving  son of the murdered Xiao Yi, to the capital to become the  next  emperor. As  Yuanming's 

party  approached the  Yangzi  under  Northern  Qi  escon,  Xiao  wrote  to Wang 

asking  hirn  to  meet  them and accept  hirn  as the heir to the  throne.  Wang  refùsed, 

and the  military  escort  attacked the  strategic  fortress of  Dongguan  f a, 

beheading its defender. Wang was  &aid  and  agreed  to accept Yuanming. The Qi troops  retumed  north,  and  Yuanming  was declared the new emperor in 555,  with 

Xiao  Fangzhi  narned  as the heir apparent  (raizï  h +) . Soon  afler,  Chen  murdered Wang,  dismissed  Yuanming and offered  liege  to  Fangzhi  as emperor.  Chen, 

however, requested vassal status  (cheng2un  ;iR  &,  as a fanguo  a ) fiom  the Qi in  order  to protect  himself  The  following  year,  the  attacking  Qi  army  asked  for the 

retum  of Yuanming, but the latter died in anger and  fiustration  before the  deai 

could  be  ananged.  (BQSlU44 111 - 44211  1 ;NS/4/127 Il6 - 127312) 

Xiao Yuanxiang  1(  (? - 536): Ninth  son of Yi, he  was  praised for  his  Wtue 

in office and held  various  inspectorates  (cishi  $(  i j  1). He was made heir to  his 

uncle, the  childless  Xiao  Rong  a . (LS/2/364/4-13 & NSl41127412  & 4-7) Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunrhi  and the  House  of Liang 402 

Xiao  Zao  (? - ? 548): At the time of Hou Jing's attack on the palace, Zao  was  Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Xinzhou  f% M#ilj e, to the west of  Jianghg. 

Hc sent a  naval  force that was supposed to be part of Yi's  If  expedition 

against  Hou Jing. However, the  various  naval forces  began  to  retum  to 

their  bases in the west  after  Hou Jing's siege of the palace succeeded. 

While  Zao was  waiting  for Yi to  retum  to  Jiangling,  he was secretly accused by one of Yi's generals of conspiring with Yu  ]A  S a n d  Cha  R 3

to  launch  a pincer attack on  his  base at Jiangling. Yi  rushed  back  overland 

fiom  Yingzhou  @ J11  and detained Zao at court. He  was  eventuaily  thrown 

into  prison  and executed.  (hW41 1274/8- 1 1 )

Xiao Fu  p #k,  Prince Zhao of  Yongyang  R I3 (?  - 497): Second son of  Shunzhi,  he did not  live  to see the foundation of the Liang by  his  younger brother.  (LSI2136313-6; 

NS/4/1273/4-7) 

Xiao  Boyou  jlA  #J  #(c.  484  - 506):  Known  as an adept of metaphysicai speculation  (nranli  rt;  B), he died  at  the  eariy  age  of 23 sui.  (LS/2/363/7-9) 

Xiao Yan  j#  8, gaom,  Emperor Wu  & a &, & (464-549):  Third  son of Shunzhi, he founded the Liang dynasty in 502 and ended  his  almost  half-century  reign  at the age of 86 sui as a paiace pnsoner  under  Hou Jing who  starved  him  to  death.  He had  eight  sons. 

(LS/1/1/1  - 97/7;  NS/1/167/1  - 22511  1 :  WS/6/2172/6  - 2188/1) 

Xiao Tong  a # (501-53 1):  Born  in  Xiangyang  f s,  capital  of the  Yongzhou  C

region  from  which  his  father was  launching  his  assault on the Qi dynasty, he was 

made  imperid  heir in the eleventh  month  of 502, about  haifa  year  after  his  father established the Liang dynas  t y in  Jiankang.  He died as the result of a  boating 

accident  in  the royal  park  on day  yisi  2 C,  of the  fourth  month  of the  thkd  year of 

zhongdarong  a ,or May  7, 53 1, at the age of 3 1 sui (29 in Western  tenns), 

and  was  given  the  posthumous  tit.!e of  zhaoming  Ber  flfl  ("  the  enlightened").  The 

deceased  crown  prince is therefore referred to as the  zhaoming  tuid  af $.. Appendk  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 403 

He had been a precocious  child  and was  known  for  his  ability  to read  quickly  and 

his  retentive  memory.  From the time of  his  capping ceremony (the officiai  entry 

into adulthood), he was  given  governrnent  documents to examine and 

disthguished  himself  for  his  quick  grasp  and  analysis  of problems. He could  not  be 

easily  deceived and would  ask  people to correct problems  without  actually 

incriminating  anyone. He collected books and gathered  scholars  together in the 

Heir  Apparent's  palace  on a scale  unknown  since  the southem throne was founded 

with  the Eastern Jin. Well-versed in Buddhism, in  which  he  was  initiated by  his 

father, he  performed  acts of  charity,  secretly having food and  clothing  given to the 

cold  and  hungry  people of the capital. About four  years  before  his  death, Tong had been  entrusted  to purchase a 

piece  of land for  his  mother's grave.  His  choice, however,  was  ovemimed  by  his 

father  after  a court  eunuch,  who had a direct  pecuniary  interest  in another site, persuaded  Yan  that  this  other  piece  of land was an auspicious  piece  of  ground  and would have a protective infiuence on the emperor. A Daoist  priest,  however, quietly  informed  Tong that this  particular  site would  exert  a baiefùl  effect on the eldest son  (Le.  Xiao  Tong  himseif).  To counter  this  influence, Tong secretly ordered that a wax  goose  and other  "de-witching"  objects  be buned by the  side  of 

his  mother's grave  next  to the  burial  site for the eldest son. The emperor discovered  this  when one of Tong's palace  supervisors,  £hding  himself  no longer favoured by  another  supervisor, accused this  coleague  of  using  black  magic  to 

assist  Tong. The implication, in Xiao Yan's  mind,  was that the  heu  apparent  was 

attempting  to place a curse on  him  in  order  to  succeed to the  throne  earlier. 

Consequently, when  his  son died,  Yan  had no  desire  to  make  Xiao  Hum  #the 

official  royal  grandson  and  confirm  the line of succession  through  Tong. One source, in  fact,  gives  this as the  prirnary  reason for Yan's  final  decision  to move the  line  of succession to  his  second son. However,  Yan  is  said  to have  treated  his Appendix 6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 404 

wayward  sons  with  great  indulgence.  His  hesitation about  letting  his  young 

grandson  become the  official  heir may have been  based  on a  legitimate  fear  that  ausurper could  manipulate  too young a  d e r  off the throne, as had happened  during 

the Qi. 

Xia0  Tong  lefi  a body of  literary  works, including 20 juan of  his  own 

composition,  10 juan of a prefaced collection  ( z h e n p  3.A )  of  official  writings, 

ancient and modern, a compilation of the most distinguished 5-character  poerns 

(wemhang yinghua  A O ) in 20 juan, and an  anthology  of  Chinese  poetry  

> ( w e m m

# a ) in  30 juan, this latter being the work by  which  he  is  remembered to this day. 

(LS/11165/1  - 171114;  NS151130713  - 1312/8) 

Xiao  Euan  j#  R, Prince  An  of Yuzhang  # f 3 (c. 5 18-54 1): The 

title of  Prince  of Yuzhang was  transferred  to Huan  fiom  Xiao Zong  $$ 

after  the latter deserted to the  north  in 52 1 . When Xiao Tong died in 53 1, the emperor was  reluctant  to put Huan on the throne  because  of  his  young 

age and  his  father's involvement in what looked to  him  like Daoist sorcery. Yan took over a  month  before he resolved to break the tradition of succession  through  the  line  of the eldest and appoint his  next  suMving  son, 

Gang  jlC:  fi,  as the heir apparent.  Since  he died on  day  renzi  +q of the 

twelfth  rnonth  of the  siah  year of  datong  F]  ,or  January  2 1, 54 1, the year of  death  may  appear  as either 540 or 54  1 .  (LS/1/85/4;  NS/5/13  1219  -

13  13/10) Xiao Dong  #! (? - 552): Hou Jing removed Xiao Gang  fiom  the throne in 55 1 in favour of  Xiao  Dong.  Three  months  later,  he in 

tum  removed Dong to  take  the throne  himseifas  emperor of the Han. Dong was  irnprisoned  dong  with  his  two  younger  brothers, 

Xiao Qiao  &and  Xiao Jiu  #,  but the  three  regained  their AppendLv  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 405 

fieedom  after  Hou Jing was defeated by  their  grand-uncle,  Xiao Yi 

# a 1$.  Conscious of the  problem  of heirs, however, Yi  arranged  to have one of  his  generals  invite the  three  very  young brothers  aboard 

ship  for a drinking  party  during  which they "fell"  overboard  and drowned.  (NS15113 1311 1 - 13 14/5) 

Xiao Yu  # s, Prince of Hedong  iq Z (? - 550): As  Inspecter  (cishi) 

of  Xiangzhou  sfs  HJ  , he was one of the  impediments  to  his  uncle, Xiao Yi (the  future  Emperor Yuan), who was  trying  to put the western  regions 

under  his  sole  control  before  establishing  himself  on the throne in  eastem 

Jiankang.  Yu was beheaded  after  Changsha (capital of  Xangzhou)  was 

unable  to hold out  against  his  uncle7s siege.  (NS/5/13  1415  - 13 15/3) 

Xiao Cha  jl&  v, Prince of  Yueyang  +i$ @ Z (c. 5 19  - 562):  Ensconced  in 

Xiangyang  N,  the base  fiom  which  his  grandfather,  Xiao  Yan,  had eventually  overthrown  the Qi, Xiao Cha  became  the client of the Western Wei. He took the throne in  Jiangling  as  ruler  of the Liang after the Wei 

amies  overthrew  Xiao Yi in 554.  Known  as the first  d e r  of the  Later  (or Rump) Liang, he was in effect a  carefùlly  guarded  vassal of the Western Wei and  Northem  Zhou. 

(BS/10/3086/6  - 3090/3;  ZSl3/855/1  - 86315) 

Xiao Liao  4#  (?  - ?): Eldest son of Xiao  Cha.  (ZS/3/866/8  &

867134;  BS/10/3094/2  & 11-12) 

Xiao Kui  j#  # (c.  542-585):  Third  son of Xiao  Cha.  Ruled  the 

Later  Liang throne  fiom  562-585.  (ZS/3/863/6  -865114; 

BSl101309014  - 309219) 

Xiao Cong  1(? - ? ): Made successor to  his  father  and 

then  called to the Sui capital in 587,  afker  which the Liang Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 406 

fief was abolished.  (ZSl3186611-6;  BS11 O/3092/lO  -

3093113) 

Xiao Huan  (?  - c. 590): Third son of Xiao Kui, he fled to the  Chen  after  his  brother was  called  to the northem capital and became the  focus  of southem  resistance  to the Sui  afier  the  Chen  was overthrown. He  was  captured  and executed in Chang'an  dong  with  his  uncle, Xiao  Yan  fi  &. 

(ZSl31867112-14;  BS/10/3095/5-10) 

Xiao Yan  a & (? - c. 590):  Fifth  son of Xiao Cha, he was executed in Chang'an  along  with his nephew for  opposing  Sui forces who had  overthrown  the  Chen. 

(ZSLV86715-7;  BS110/3094/2  & 13 - 309511) 

Xiao Ji  # & (? - ?):  Sixth  son of Xiao  Cha.  (ZS/3/867/8-9; 

BSI 1013 OW2) 

Xino Cen  j@  *(? - ?):  Eighth  son of Xiao  Cha.  (ZSl31867110-11; 

BSI 1013 09513 -4)  

> Xiao

Su  jk  &,  Prince  of Wuchang  & 8 3 (?  - ?):  (NS/5/13  12/10; 

> -4

Xiao Jian  g, Prince of Yiyang  ;dt  # E (?  - 537):  (NSl5113  12110  &

Xiao Zong  a &$,  Prince of  Yuzhang  f#  f 3.(c. 502  - 529?):  Although  Xiao 

Zong is  described  as Xiao  Yan's  second son,  his  mother had been the  number-

three  favourite  of Xiao  Baojuan  # a, the hapless Qi emperor  deposed  by Xiao 

Yan  in 501, and had  aven  birth  to Zong seven months  d e r  first  attracting  Yan's 

notice and  being  taken  into  his  palace.  Since  his  mother had made  him  suspect  his 

paternity,  Zong  is  said  to have  senled  the issue by  secretly  digging  up the grave of 

Baojuan,  for he  had  heard  that  if  blood  penetrated  the  bones  of a  person  who  had Appendk  6: The  Line  of Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang been buried, a father-to-son relationship could thereby be proven. The  results 

were positive but, in  order  to be convinced of their  vaiidity,  he murdered  " 5 

second son,  then  a little over a  inonth  old, and waited a  suitable  length  of  time 

d e r  the infant's  burial  to dig up the grave and repeat the  experhnent.  The  sarne 

results were obtained. Now convinced that  he  was not  Xiao  Yan's  son, he  began 

to treat  his  "brothers" with contempt and harbour  disloyal  intentions  against  the throne.  Since  he  knew  that Xiao Baoyin  a *, a younger brother of  Baojuan, 

had  fled  to the Northem Wei  years  before, he hoped to  make  contact with this supposed uncle. He succeeded in  obtaining  the  intermediary  s e ~ c e s of a northem Buddhist priest in Guangling  @ & (present-day Yangzhou) who  often  travelled between the  north  and  south  and was able to  recomrnend  a suitable  envoy. In 525 a Wei general in charge of Pengcheng  @ &(present-day  Xuzhou) surrended to the Liang. Pnor to this, Xiao  Yan  had sent this second son to Pengcheng to  take 

charge of  military  afîiirs.  However, being  afiaid  that Zong  rnight  be  overwhelmed 

by the Wei, he ordered  him  to  lead  his  anny  back.  Afiaid  that  Yan  suspected  him 

and  knowing  that there would be no  further  chance of  seeing  Baoyin if he retumed 

south,  Zong secretly went over to the enemy  side.  He  was  sent to Luoyang where he  was  honoured as Prince of  Danyang  $).  f#  3. and given the ernperor's  sister  to wed. Zong changed  his  name  to Zan at Baoyin's request and wore  rnourning 

for  his  presumed father. In 528 Baoyin  was  involved in a revolt in  Chang'an,  and Zong  tried  unsuccessfully  to  join  him  there. At this point, the Wei was in  tunnoil  

> with

Erzhu  Rong's  +5Jk  assaults on the throne. In 529, a Liang general escorted Yuan Hao  %da  (a  £irst  cousin of the northem emperor put forcibly on the throne by Erzhu Rong the year before and whose  sister  Xiao Zong had  man-îed), 

to Luoyang where he took the throne. Yuan Hao had  tumed  to the Liang for support the year before and had been sponsored as the  rightful  heir  to the Wei throne  (BS/3/712/1-3).  The Liang general was given a  letter  fiom  Xiao Zong Appendix  6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 408 

requestirig  permission to retum but was killed by  Erzhu  Rong before the  letter 

could be delivered. (Another interpretation  is  that the Liang  general  was  canying  arequest for Xiao Zong's return but was defeated before he had a chance tc  ddiver 

it.) According to the Liang  Shu, Zong  was  killed  shortly  afterwards.  The 

"northern"  historical  sources  Say,  however, that he died of  illness  at the age of 3 1

sui  &er  attempting to flee for  his  life  (WSl41132612 & BS/4/1058/3). In 538 men 

fiom  the  south  were able to  steal  his  coffin and bring it back to  Jiankang  where Xiao  Yan  had  him  buried  with  the honours due a tnie  son.  (NS/5/13  15/4  - 13 1816; 

LS/3/823/1 - 824/12; BS/4/1325/2 - 132615; WS/4/1325/2 - l326/5) 

Xiao  Zhi  a $ (? - ?): Son of Xiao Zong.  (NSl5113 18/7) 

Xiao Gang  a fi  (503-55  l), Prince of  Jin'an  Q 3 and Emperor  Jianwen  ;% 

iq  & (r. 549-55 1): Although  chosen  as  his  heir apparent aîter the death of Tong (they were full brothers,  being  of the  same  mother), he was enthroned, dethroned and  ultimately  killed  by Hou Jing. He was noted for  his  Literary  interests and for  his  contributions to the  literary  salon culture of the day. He had  twenty 

sons. 

(LS/1/103/1 - 10911  1;  NS11122911  - 22414) 

Xiao Daqi  k 1(523-55 1): Oldest son of Xiao Gang and  official  heir to the throne, he  was  strangled  on Hou Jing's orders when  his  father  was 

removed fiom the throne. He had had a chance to  flee  to the  north  but  told 

his  intimates  who pressed  him  to do so that he could not abandon  "king 

and country" when both had  fallen  into  enemy hands nor could he commit 

what was  tantamount  to an act of rebellion  against  his  father by fleeing. He 

was  given  the  title  of Lamented  Crown  Prince (ai  faizi  f $)  in 552. 

(LS/1/172/1-11; NS15/1337/6 - 1338112) 

Xiao  Dnxin  j#  (c.  523-55  1): Second son of Xiao Gang, he  was 

appointed  hspedor  (cishi)  of  Jiangzhou  in 547 and  gained  an  unfortunate Appendix 6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 409 

reptation for avaricious  govemment.  When the palace  fell  to Hou  J i the emperor sent a grand-nephew, Xiao Shao  a, westward  to  call  the 

various  princes to  anns,  and Xiao  Daxin  was appointed  General  of Southern Pacification  (pinpan jiangiun  &J  89). When Hou Jing sent one of  his  generals  against  him,  he was  findy  forced to  sumender,  for he had exhausted  his  resources and had  ody  a thousand-man defense force. He  was  killed  in the  fdl  of 55 1 when Hou Jing murdered  Daxin's  father in preparation for  usurping  the throne.  (LSl316 1315 - 61 5/ 1 ; NS15113  3 8113 -

1339113) 

Xiao Dakuan  # & (? - 554):  Third  son of Xiao Gang, he fled to 

Jiangling  where he was killed when Westem Wei forces overran it. 

(NS/5/1339/14 - 134011)  

> Xiao

Dalin  (c. 527-55 1):  Fourth  son of Xiao Gang,  he  was 

appointed Govemor  ( t a i s h )  of Wu  Commandery  in 550 and was  kiiled  there the  following  year.  (LS/3/615/2-8 &

NS/5/1340/2-7) 

Xiao Dalian  j#  i& (? - 55 1): Fifih  son of Xiao Gang, he  was  talented  in 

literature,  music and painting. Like  his  brother,  Dalin  ka, he was 

enrolîed  in the National Academy  (guonre  g ) and did  exceptionaily 

well  in  examinations.  When Hou Jing was  laying  siege  to the capital, Dalian 

was  Inspector  (cishi)  of Eastern Yangzhou  # (administrative  seat  at 

Kuaiji  t ##,  or present-day Shaoxing) and  led  an army of  fourty  thousand 

which  quickly  dispersed upon  hearing  that the palace had  fallen.  The  area 

of  Kuaiji  was  prosperous and  well-stocked  in  weapons  and grain for the  

> axmy.

The people were  w f i g  to  resist  Hou Jing  because  of  his  heavy 

exactions on  their  resources, but Dalian did not  provide  the leadership needed. He spent  his  days  drllikUig  and, when  attacked,  abandoneci  the  city Appendk  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 410 and fled  southward  but was seized by Hou Jing's troops.  Although  given  

> the

title of  Inspector  (cishi) of  Jiangzhou  by Hou Jing, he  wtis  completely in the  hands  of Hou who had  him  killed in the  auturnn  of 55  1 at the  age  OC 

25 sui.  (&S/3/6  15/10 - 6 l6/8  & NS/5/1340/8  - 134115) 

Xiao  Dachun  # (c. 53  1 - 55 1):  Sixth  son of Xiao Gang, he had a

wide  knowledge of  literature  and was  musically  accomplished. At the  tirne 

of Hou Jing's rebellion, he fled to  Jingkou  $C  f;(pressent-day  Zhenjiang) 

and returned with Xiao Lun  # & in an  unsuccessful  attempt to defeat Hou 

Jing  in the capital. The attacking forces were defeated and he was easily 

captured,  being obese and  unable  to  walk  easily.  Although  given  the title of Inspector (cishi) of Eastern Yangzhou, he  was  killed  along  with  his  other brothers in the  fa11  of 55  1 at the age of 22 sui.  (LS/3/6  16/9-12  &

NS/5/134  1/6-9) 

Xiao Dacheng  a &,  (? - 554):  Eighth  son of Xiao Gang, he fled to 

Jiangling  in 550  after  his  father was put on the throne by Hou Jing. Though skilled in  archery  and  horsemanship,  he also had a reputation for being 

wild.  He would go about in  full  armour in  Jianghg,  with the  result  that he was attacked once as a robber. He was killed when the Western Wei 

overran  Jianghng . (NS/5/  134 1/ 10- 1 2) Xiao  Dafeog  J; W (?  - ?):  Ninth  son of Xiao Gang, he fled to  lianglmg 

after  Hou Jing put  his  father on the throne. When the Western Wei  army 

marched on  Jiangling,  he was sent by  his  uncle, Xiao Yi  #$ (Emperor 

Yuan),  along  with  Dahuan  j#  to  meet  the enemy and sue for peace. In 

effect,  they  were being sent as  guarantors  (zhi  ) that Xiao Yi's  oEer  of peace was sincere.  Although the  N m  Shi says that he was  killed  by the 

attacking  Wei  troups  (NS15/1342/1-2),  the  "northern"  histories  state  that Appendix 6: The  Lhe  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 41 1he died  (peacefuily,  it would seem)  under  the Sui  (ZS/3/757/7  & 75919; 

ES/4/1063/8  - 106611). 

Xiao Daya  j&  A m(c.  533-c. 550):  Tweiflh  son of Xiao Gang, he died at the age of 17 sui, having fallen  il1  from  anger  uafen  c h e n ~ i & @ & & ) at Hou Jing's success . He had tned to  defend  the palace but,  realizing  the cause  was  hopeless, escaped over the  wall  with  a rope.  (LS/3/6  16/13; 

NS/5/134213-4) 

Xiao Dazhuang  8 (c.534-55 1):  Thirteenth  son of Xiao Gang, he 

was  murdered in the  fa11  of 55 1 at the age of 18 sui.  &SI3161  7 / 3 4 

NS/5/1342/5-6)  

> Xiao

Daj un  51,  &J  (c. 539 - 55 1): Fourteenth son of Xiao Gang, he was 

killed  in the  fdl  of 55 1 at the age of 13 sui.  (LSl316  17/6-8;  NSI517-9) 

Xiao Dawei  &,  (c.539-55 1 ) :  Fifieenth  son of Xiao Gang, he was 

killed  in the  fa11 of 5 5 1 at the age of 13 sui.  (L  S/3/6 1719- 10; 

NS/5/1342/10-11)  

> Xiao

Daxun  # (c.  540-549):  Sixteenth son of Xiao Gang, he died at the  early  age of 10 sui.  (NS/V1343/1) 

Xiao Daqiu  rft  (c. 54 1-551): Seventeenth son of Xiao Gang,  he  was 

murdered in the  fall  of 55 1 at the  age  of 1 1 sui.  (LSl316 1711 1 - 61 813  &

NS/5/1343/2/5) 

Xiao  Daria  a k (c. 54 1-55 1): Eighteenth son of Xiao Gang, he was murdered in the  fa11  of 55 1 at the age of 11 sui.  (LS/3/6  1814;  NS/W  34316-

8) 

Xiao  Dazhi  j#  ç (c. 542-55 1): Ninteenth son of Xiao Gang,  he  was 

murdered in the  f d  of 55 1 at  the age of 10 sui.  (LW316  18/7-9; 

NS/5/1343/9- 1 1) Appendix 6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 412 Xiao  Dahuan  ti  (7.  - 595?  ): Twentieth son of  Xiao  Gang, he  was 

taken  from  Jiankang  during  Hou Jing's massacre of Xiao Gang's  sons  in 55 1 and  then  placed  under  the  care  of a temple there  upm  Hou Jing's defeat. Wang  Sengbian  E f#  #$,  who was  then  in charge of  Jiankang,  sent 

him  to  Jianglhg  to  join  his  uncle, Xiao Yi.  After  the  Ml  of  Jiangling  to Western Wei forces, he was  taken  to  Chang'an  where he  still  was when the founder of the Zhou  reguiie  seized  power. He  wrote  considerably and lived into the  early  Sui.  (ZSl3/756/8  - 75919;  BS/4/1065/14) 

Xiao Ji  j&  #&,  Pnnce  Jian  of  Nankang  T& ,& 8 3 (c.  504-529):  Fourth  son of Xiao  Yan.  His  posthumous title  ofjian  iq  ("simple")  is  based  on the  fact  that he 

preferred  the simple  life  and had no  interest  in wealth or  Iuxury.  As  Inspector 

(cishi)  of Southem  Yanzhou  T#J  2 JY  (at  Guangling  )&  & or present-day Yangzhou), he had been noted for good  goverment,  and the  citizens  presented a

petition  to the court that he be kept on. He died in office  at  the age of 25 sui  after 

being  appointed to a position in the capital but was  never  able to attend to  his 

duties  because  of  his  frai1  and  sickly  constitution.  (LW2142714  - 428/8; 

NS/5/1318/8  - 131914)  

> Xiao

Huili  (c. 5 19-5  50): Eleven sui at the  time  of  his  father's death, he was an intelligent  child  who loved  literature  and  hiaory.  He  was 

much  beloved by  his  grandfather, Xiao  Yan,  who accorded  him  the  right  to the  same  robes and treatment as the  true  princes (the sons and brothers of Xiao  Yan).  His doting  grandfather had  originally  put  him  in charge of the disastrous Northem Expedition of 547 but  later  replaced  him  with  anephew, Xiao  Yuanmhg  % f@,  who had  begged  for the position but was to prove  just  as incompetent. M e r the defeat at Pengcheng,  Huiii  led 

his  forces back to  Guanghg  where he had been stationed as  Inspector 

(cishi)  of  Southem  Yanzhou.  When Hou  h g began  his  attack  on the Appendk  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang capital and declared Xiao Zhengde  Iff  3 emperor in 548, the new 

emperor's  brother, Zhengbiao  jA  3.  a, who  was  Inspecter  (cishi) of 

Northern  Yanzhou,  wanted  to march  south  to  Jiakang  in support of  his 

brother.  His cousin,  Huili  however, defeated  his  troops at the  half-way 

point at Guangling. This  victory  allowed  him  to leave the garrison city unguarded  while  he took  al1  his  troops to  Jiankang.  The palace  fell  to Hou Jing before  any  concerted  military  action was  taken,  and  Huili,  in the spirit of  all  the other  generals,  whether members of the royal  farnily  or not, 

simply  retumed  to Guangling with  his  troops.  Shortly  afkerwarâs,  Hou Jing sent an envoy with a spunous  imperial  comrnand  from  Xiao  Yan  to go to the palace.  Although  advised to  refuse  the  order,  Huili  said  that, as a loyal 

subject  and grandson, he  could  not disobey the command;  furthemore, 

fleeing  north  would accomplish  nothing  whereas  being  in the capital  rnight 

provide  an  opportunity  to destroy the enemy  fiom  within.  When Hou Jing 

felt  secure  enough to  lead  an  army  on his western  carnpaign  in 550 and  left 

only  a thousand  guards  in the capital, Huili plotted a coup that would  rely 

on a group  of  three  thousand men  who  had once been  under  him  and were now  southeast  of the capital. However, the plot  was  revealed  by  Xiao  Bi 

# # e, the nephew of Hou Jing"  erstwhile  emperor, and Huili was  seized 

and executed.  (LW /107/4;  LS/2/428/9  -429IlO;  NSWI  3 19/5  - 132018) 

Xiao  Tongli  j#  a W (? -550): Executed  dong  with  his  older  brother. Xiao Yiii  j@  X W (529-c. 550):  Described  as  "sixth  brother" of  Hu%,  he 

accompanied  hirn  in the first march on the  capital  during  Hou Jing's siege. 

M e r  Hu$  had been  cded  to the capital and an  unsuccessful  attempt to stage a  rebellion  in  Guangling  had been attempted,  Y i  fled  in an attempt to 

gather  a force of a thousand men.  His  troops  disintegrated  and he  was Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 414 

captured  and executed at the age of 2 1 [sui].  (LSl21429112  - 43011 1;

NS/5/1320/10  - 1321/6) 

Xiao Xu  a L(I,  Prince Wei of  luling  & &,  Bi  (c. 504-547): F i son of Xiao Yan, he is  said  to have been  bolder  and stronger  than  the average and was a superior  marksman.  He served as  Inspector  (czshi) of  Yongzhou  # f i ,  Jiangzhou 

## fl  and  finaiiy  Jiigzhou  $1 where he died at the age of 44 sui. In  these  distant 

regions,  he gathered  horses,  arms  and  soldiers  and arnassed gold and silver  objects. 

## Only on  his  deathbed did he send an  uncle  to the capital  with  his  accumulated 

wealth  in an  act  of filial acknowledgement of  wrongdoing.  (LSl2l430112  - 43 119; 

NS/5/1321/7  - 132216) 

Xiao An  a ;E (?-?): Oniy the  Liang  Shu  refers  to this eldest son 

(LS/2/43  1/1  O). 

Xiao Ping  ,% (?-?): Only the  Nun  Shi speaks of this eldest son 

(NS/5/1322/7).  He was executed for an unstated crime. 

Xiao Ying  a(?-?): Only the  Nan  Shi speaks of this second son 

(NS15/1322/7).  He seems to have been  subnormal  in intelligence. 

Xiao Lun  # &,  Prince  Xie of Shaoling  @ & X@. between  504 and 508; d. 55 1):  Sixth  son of  Xiao  Yan,  Lun had  imperid  ambitions which benefited  from  the confusion of Hou  h g ' s  rebellion  but were finaiiy  hstrated  when the Western Wei, which  already  had a client  "ernperor"  in Xiao Cha, attacked and  killed  him  in 55 1. He  was  buned in  Xiangyang  under  the supervision of  Cha.  The posthumous 

title  of  xie  a was  given  by  his  brother, Yi  el to whom it had been  recornmended 

f?om  the traditional canon of posthumous  names  for its  meaning  of "remiss in 

&airs of  state  and  diplomacy"  (NSl5/1326/1).  In  fact,  the histories  seem,  on the surface at  leaa,  to  give  conflicting  evaluations  of  him.  Thus,  he  is  described as 

being  of a  "heroic"  mold, bold and  forthright,  uninterested  in riches and  seifish 

acquisition, generous and  respectfùl  to  those  who served  him  as  advisors  and Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 415 

officers, and  unwilling  to vie with others for advantage  (NS/5/1326/2).  He  is  also descnbed, however, as  erratic,  irascible, violent and ostentatious, and  these 

contradictions  appear  within  the  same  bicgraphy  (NS/5/  1322/11  to  1323/4).  Once, as  Inspector  (cishi) of Southern Xuzhou  (Jingkou  or  present-dav  Zhenjiang),  he travelled  through  the marketplace incognito and was so angered on  hearing  afishmonger  denigrate  the cishi that he forced the hapless man to push a fish down 

his  throat  until  he was asphyxiated.  Later,  as cishi of Yangzhou (the  seat  of which 

was  Jiankang),  he  is  said  to have desired the very  finest  of  clothing  and  omaments 

and  demandeci  everything  on credit, with the result that people  eventually  closed down their shops, precipitating a penury  of cloth for the palace. In  view  of the  fact 

that he is also  said  to have made some attempts on  his  aging  father's  life,  it  is 

possible that the first positive  evaluation  should be  seen  in the context of someone who  was  consciously building up a body of very loyal elite  soldiers  and  advisors 

(shz  &)  to help  him  in  his  conquest of the  throne.  After  Hou Jing's  rebellion,  Lun 

fled  westward  and took up position in  Yingzhou  (present-day Wuhan)  Rom  which he  was  soon dislodged by  his  brother Yi. He  attempted  to  reassemble  but was defeated by Hou Jing's forces and fled to a  city  under  one of  his  former  officials 

who had been placed there by the Wei.  Although  sponsored by the Northern  Qi  as Prince of Liang, he did not receive  military  support there. Though the Western Wei  permitted  him  to  build  up the defenses of  this  city, they sent an  army  against 

him  when he prepared to  launch  an expedition against another city in what they may have  anticipated  was a move against their  own  Prince of Liang  (Xao  Cha).   

> (LS/2/43 1/11

# - 436/3;  NS/5/1322/9  - l326/8) 

Xiao Jian  # 9(? - 549): When Hou Jing  was  surroundhg  the palace, Xiao Jian  was  supposed to be  guarding  one of the gates. However, he is 

described  as spending  his  time  gambling  and  drinking  and  being  totaily 

indserent  to  the  sufferings  of  his  men who were  performing  meritorious Appendix 6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 416 

senrice  in defending the palace. Two of  his  staff  were so  angered  that they let  d o m  a ropi  to permit some of the enemy to  climb  in. He  was  killed 

wnen  the  palace  finally  Fd1.  (LSl2143614-6; NSl51132619-13) Xiao Q u e  ]A  9(? - c. 55 1): Described as bold in the martial arts and taiented in  literature,  he was considered  "crazy"  and rebuked for  practising 

horsemanship  and  archery  and studying The Art of War  (bzngfa  & -& ). 

Hou Jing was awed by  his  military  ability and  insisted  that he  corne  into  the 

city  at the time that the alliance to lift the siege in  549?  was  being 

negotiated lest he pose a  risk  to  hirn  on the  outside  with  his  troops. He had protested  against  this alliance with Hou Jing but was forced to comply by 

his  father on pain of death. Hou kept  hirn  in  his  entourage, but Que  tried  to use this to  his  advantage.  Dunng  a hunting  trip,  his  attempt  to  kill  Hou  was 

observed when the  string  of  his  bow broke, and he was seized and  kiiied. 

&SI2143617  - 43719; NS/5/1327/1 - 132813) 

Xiao  Zhi  jk  (?-?):  (LSI2143 SI1  0 & NS/511325/7) 

Xiao Yi  a q, Prince of  Xiangdong  $L E (508-555) and Emperor Yuan  fa 

% f +(r.  552-555): Seventh son of Xiao Yan, he  was  bom on day  ciingsi  7 

> C

of the eighth  month  of the seventh year of  tianjm  ft  e, or September 16, 508 

(LSIIII 13/1), took the throne in  Jiangling  on day  bingzi  #f  +of  the eleventh 

month  of the  first  year of  chengsheng  IF  B , or December 23, 552  (LS/1/13 1/6),

and died at the  hands  of the Western Wei on day  x i w e i  9 of the  tweW  month 

of the  third  year of  chengsheng,  or  January  27, 555, at the age of 47 sui 

(LS11113519). Yi  had  considerable  literary  talent and  lefl  a large body of  writings 

behind  hirn.  Although  he had many sons,  many  of them were too young to be  given 

titles  or  rank  and  there  is  no record of  their  names  (NS/5/1347/6-7). Six of  his 

h o w n  sons are discussed below.  &S/1/1  13/1  - 13618; NS/1/234/5 - 246/11) Appendix 6: The  Line  of Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 417  

> Xiao

Fangdeng  t (c. 528 - 549): Eldest son of Xiao Yi, he  is 

descnbed as an intelligent youth, talented in literature and  writing  and 

skiiied  in horsemanship and  archery.  However,  when  his  mother  fell  out of favour with Yi, he too  lost  the good  will  of his father. Yi  blaned 

Fangdeng's  mother for the death of  his  favounte, the mother of  his  second son. At the time of Hou Jing's  entry  into the  south,  Xiao  Yan  had  calleci  his 

eldest  grandsons  (eldest sons of  his  sons) to the capital but Hou Jing launched  his  attack  before they  could  amve. Fangdeng, however,  refbsed 

to  retum  to Jiangling at  his  father's request, and  his  father  finally  sent an 

infantry  and  cavalry  force of 10,000  which  quickly retumed  after  the palace fell. Back in Jiangling, he helped his father strengthen the fortifications of the city. When Xiao Yu  % hk nephew and  rival  to the southeast in 

Xiangzhou,  refùsed  to accept  his  commands,  Yi sent Fangdeng with 20,000 of  his  best  troops.  His  army  failed  and he drowned in battle at the age of 22  

> sui.

His  father is  said  not to have grieved at  this  loss.  (LS/1/1 M l ; 

LS/3/619/1 - 620/4;  NS/5/134/4  - 1 1 MY1  1 ) Xiao Zhuang  (c.  548  - 576):  Only  seven sui when the 

Western Wei attacked Jiangling, he was  hidden  by others and sent to  Jiankang  by Wang Lin 3 3#,  a general  whose  sister  was Xiao Yi's favourite. When Xiao  Fangzh  jk  h % took the throne as Emperor Jing, Zhuang was sent to the Northem Qi court as a

guarantor  (rhi).  In 557, when  Chen  was  about to accept the abdication of the Liang, Wang Lin requested that Zhuang be  made 

the  inhentor  of the Liang  line,  and in  early  558 he  was  put on the throne at  Yhgzhou  OP  Jil  . However, Wang  was  defeated by  Chen 

forces the  foilowing  year  and was  W y forced to flee into 

Northern  Qi  territory  Zhuang  was  given  titles,  including  that  of Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 418 

Prince of Liang, but the Qi collapsed before it could sponsor  him  as emperor. Zhuang died in the capital Ye  +,  unable  to  cope  with  his 

anger and  frustration  Qin@  ersi  Ia  &,  rio  % ).  (BQSI21442/12-i 4; 

NS15/1345/12  - 134611). 

Xiao  Fangzhu  jff  ; 5 e ( c .  535 - c. 552): Second son of Xiao Yi,  his 

mother  was Xiao Yi's favourite. He was intelligent and conversant in Laozi, the Book of C h g e s  and  metaphysical  (man  a) learning.  When  his 

older brother was killed, his father told him not to regret his brother's death for it worked to  his  own  advantage.  Only  15 sui, he was sent as Inspector  (cishi)  to  Yingzhou  where he was captured by one of Hou Jing's

generals. He was killed by Hou  during  the eastem expedition  against  Hou 

led by Wang Sengbian  Z -# #$ ,his  father' s principal  general.  (LS/3/620/5- 

> 10;

NS/5/  134612-7) 

Xiao  Fangju  jff  ;5 E (?-555):  Fourth  son of Xiao Yi, he was made heir apparent  d e r  his  father took the throne in  Jiangling  in  Iate  552. Yi had considered  removing  him  because  of  his  choice of  companions  and  his 

manner  of dress and  decomm,  but Jiangling  fell  to the Western Wei before 

this  could happen.  (LS/1/1 72/12  - 17314;  NS/5/1346/9  - l347/2)  

> Xiao

Fangzhi  t8 , Emperor Jing  &a  & (c.  542-5  57):  Ninth  son of Xiao Yi, he  was  the  only  royal  suMvor  of the  Ml  of  Jianghng  ix  &,  for he had been sent to Xunyang  4 as  Inspector  (cishi) of  Jiangzhou  ir 

pnor  to the Wei attack.  Brought  to  Jiankang  by Wang Sengbian and  Chen 

Baxian  as heir to the throne, he was  downgraded  to heir apparent  after  the 

Northem  Qi  asked  that Xiao  Yuanming  % R be put on the throne. Wang accepted, but  Chen  soon killed Wang and replaced  Yuanming  with 

Fangzh.  About one  year  later,  in 557,  Fangzhi  dutifirlly  abdicated  the Appendk  6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang Liang throne in favour of  Chen.  He was  only  16 [sui] at the time of  his 

death in 557  (LS/1/150/4).  (LS11/143/1  - 15014;  NS/1/246/12  - 250/10) 

Xiao Fanglüe  35: *(?-555):  Tenth son of Xiao Yi, he was sent to 

Chang'an  as a  guarantor  (zhi  a ) when  his  father made an alliance with the Wei in 550 but was very soon  allowed  to  retum.  He  was  killed  when 

Jianglmg  was  attacked.  (NS/5/  1347/3-6) 

Xiao  Fanggui  a ;5 #?-?):  Xiao Yi  is  said  to have intended to send this son to the Wei as a guarantor  (zhi  r ) in 550 but the Wei emperor made a 

pact  as brothers instead  (LS11/235/6). There is the  possibility  that the  two 

names,  Fanggui  and Fanglüe, refer to the  sarne  person,  with the second 

being  a comption  of the  first. 

Xiao Ji  # &,  Prince of  Wuling  &,  & dt  (c.  508-553):  Eighth  and youngest son of Xiao Yan, he showed a  studious  bent and  literary  talent when he was  Young.  In 537 he was appointed  Inspector  (cishi)  of  Yizhou  1JY  . Though  unwilling  to go, he was told by  his  father that this was a safe  place to  weather  out the  disturbances 

of the  realm.  M e r  the palace  feu  to Hou Jing,  Xiao  Shao  j#  brought  a secret 

edict  fiom  his  father in Jiankang  giving  him vice-regal powers and the  militas, 

authority  of the  yelIow  axe, both of  which  were to be  shared  with  his  brother in 

Jianghg.  In the  middle  of 550 he had  his  eldest son,  Yuanzhao  k a s, led  thuty 

thousand  crack troops  eastward  to be put  under  the  s u p e ~ s i o n of  Xiao  Yi in 

Jianghg.  Yi ordered  him  to stay put at a position  west  of  Jiangling  and not proceed to  Jiankang.  M e r  leaming  of  his  father's  death, Ji  intended  to  head 

another force  to  join  his  son but was advised by  his  brother that he  should  keep  his 

region  pacified  while  he  (Xiao  Yi) looked  after  eliminating  Hou Jing. In 552,  f i e r 

declaring  himseifemperor,  Ji launched an attack that  was  aimed  at  elVninating  his 

brother.  Despite  some  early  successes,  his  troops  began  to suffer  fiom  fatigue, Appendix  6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 420 

shortage  of food supplies and  loss  of morale.  M e r  several  defeats,  Ji  tried  to sue for  peacc  by agreeing to retum to  his  region  of Shu and be  recognired  as its  d e r , 

an arrangement first proposed by Xiao Yi in the face of Ji's  early  successes. Xiao Yi  refûsed.  M e r  several  cities surrendered to Yi's forces, Ji  was  captured  on  his 

ship  and sent to  Jiangling  where he was killed in 553.  (LS/1/127/13;  LSB/825/10  -

82616;  NSIS/1328/4  - 1333/6) 

Xiao Yuanzhao  jlS  fl9,  (? - 553): Xiao  Yan  is  said  to have made an exception for  this  grandson  in  allowing  him  to  join  his  father in Y i o u . 

Normally,  at the time, the sons of  those  of  his  sons sent to distant  regions 

had to stay in the capital as  guarantors  (zhi). There he  became  his  father's 

military  advisor  and  mastehnded  his  father's  military  campaigns.  After  his 

father and  fifth  brother were  killed,  he was  captured  by Xiao Yi's forces and sent  to  Jiangling where he was  thrown  into  prison  and  starved  to death. 

(NS/5/133  1/12 - 1332/2) 

Xiao Yuanzheng  81  iE  (? - 553): Second son of  Xao  Ji, he was  c d e d 

to Jiangling by  his  uncle  who had  mobilized  troops against Xiao Yuanzhao 

(still  encamped  West  of  Jiangiing)  a e r  their  father made  himself  emperor. 

Since  he did not commit suicide upon  hearing  of  his  father's death, Yi starved  him  to death in prison.  (NS15/133  1/14  - 1332/6) 

Xiao  Yuanpu  # a *(?  - 553):  Killed  along  with  his  other brothers. 

(NSI51132916  & 1331/10-11) 

Xiao  Yuansu  jk  Ql  a(c. 539-584):  Xiao Ji put  him  in charge of Chengdu 

along  with Xiao Hui  # when he launched  his  eastward  carnpaign  against 

Xiao Yi. However, they surrended to Western Wei troops in 553. He  was 

given  titles  and positions  under  the Wei, Zhou and Sui.  When  he died at 46  

> sui,

he  left  behind  a small  body of  writings.  (ZS/31755/2  - 756/7  &

BSI411 06219  - 1063/3) Appendix  6:  The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 42 1

Xiao  Yuanman  a QI(? - 553):  Fifih  son of Xiao Ji, he was  killed  dong 

with  his  father.  (NS/5/133  111 0) 

Xiao Chang  A #,  Prince  Xuan  of  Hengyang  # I.  (?-?):  Fourth  son of Xiao Shunzhi, he died  during  the  Southem Qi. One source  states  that he  was  kifled  dong  with 

his  brother Yi  (NQSI216P6111-12),  but another states that Rong was the  only  brother who was  killed  at the  same  time as Yi  (NSl41127412-3).  (LS/2/363/10- 1 1;  NSl41127319-

10) 

Xiao Yuanjian  j@  (? - 5 19): Eldest son of Xiao Chang.  (LS/2/364/1-3; 

NS/4/1273/11  - l274/l) 

Xiao  Jun  #a(?-?): Succeeded father as heir.  (LSl2136413) 

Xiao Xian  .Ik  & (?-?) Described as a younger son who succeeded  his 

father.  (NSl41127411) 

Xiao Rong , Pnnce  Jian of Guiyang  & iq  If  (? - 500):  Fifth  son of Xiao Shunzhi, he  was  seized and executed by Xiao  Baojuan  j#  f &,  then  emperor of the Southem Qi, 

d e r  Xiao Yi  g # was arrested. He had no sons.  (NSl4/1274/2-3) 

Xiao Hong  $ ,Pnnce  Jinghui  of  Linchuan  @ )II  ,&  X (c. 473-526):  Sixth  son of 

Shunzhi, he died at the age of 54 sui  &er  a somewhat  inglorious  career.  He had been 

hidden  by a Buddhist  pnest at the time that Xiao  Baojuan  seized and executed  his  oldest 

brother. When Xiao  Yan  established  the Liang regime, he was made  ïnspector  (czshi) of 

Yangzhou. In 505 he  was  put in charge of  military  fiairs  for an expedition to recover the 

eight  regions  of the  Northem  Wei.  Although  the  array  of  armarnents  and troops is  said  to have  dazzled  the northerners who had not  seen  anything  on  this  scaie for  weiî  over a 

century,  Hong  was  unable  to plan  strategy  or  provide  courageous leadership.  Despite  an 

early  success,  Hong  was  afiaid  to  advance  knowing  that the Wei  was  sending 

reinforcements.  Though  his  generais  wanted to press ahead, Hong  suggested  that they 

retum,  and the  compromise  was to stay put.  Since  the Wei  knew  there were  still  some 

very  formidable generals in the Liang camp, they hesitated to attack and decided to  wait Appendix 6: The  Line  of Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang for the inactive  m y to become  demoralized  and disintegrate. Hong chose to flee, and when the troops  realized  that their  general  was nowhere to be found, they  tira d o m 

their  weapons and  fled  back to  the  capital in a total state of  disarray.  When  he reached Fort  Eaishi  6 ;6  on the west  side  of  Jiankang,  the gates were not opened for  him 

imrnediately,  since  it seemed impossible that an  army  of a million men  could  f d  apart  so 

quickly  and a  trick  was  suspected.  Despite  this  debacle,  Hong managed to  retain  the good 

wiil  of Xiao  Yan. 

In 518 he was involved in a suspected  ambush  on Xiao  Yan.  At some unstated time he  also  ploned  with a niece,  one of Xiao  Yan's  daughters with whom he  was  having 

illicit  relations, to  kill  Yan  and become emperor and empress. Hong lived ostentatiously and attempted to  imitate  the  imperial  scale  in  al1  things he did, built or acquired.  Yan 

considered  him  to be a  person  of  little  ability  or judgment but, even when  his  actions 

angered  hirn  to the point that he demoted  him  in  punishment,  he would soon  restore  rank 

and position. Hong was thought to have about a  dozen  sons, but  only  seven were  known 

for sure.  (LS/2/339/5  - 341115;  NSl4/1275/1  - 127913)  

> Xiao

Zhengren  a& (?  - 5 1 1 ): The eldest son,  he  died early and  was  given  the title of "the larnented heir"  (ai shizi  8 f4 ).  (LS/2/34  111 1-12;  NS/4/1279/2) 

Xiao  Zhengyi  iE (?-?):  His  father had  origindy  favoured  Zhengli  fiC- iE 2

over this son as  his  officia1  heir. 

(LS/2/34  1/14;  NS/U  27914-8) 

Xiao  Zhengde  a a&, Prince of  Linhe  & a 3 (c. 495-549): He had been made 

Xiao  Yan's  heir at some point  during  494 and 498 but was  retumed  to  his  original position  after  Tong  %f  # was  bom in 50 1 . Zhengde continued to  consider  himself 

the  rightfùi  heir and hoped to receive  backing  korn  the  Northem  Wei  regirne.  He reached Luoyang in 522 but was  viewed  as too incompetent to be of use to the Wei court  (WS/4/1326/9).  Hou  Jmg  played on  his  resentment and ambitions and 

promised to  make  him  emperor in  exchange  for  his  help in  crossing  the  Yangzi  and Appendi  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 423 

opening  Jiankang  to  his  forces. When part of the  city  was  taken  in 548, Hou Jing 

made  him  emperor (day jiwei  & of the eleventh  month,  or  December  17,  548)' 

but when the  palace  finally  fell, Hou Jing did not  depose  Xiao  Yan  as  h2  had promised. Instead, Zhengde lost  his  impenal  title (day  gengwu  9 of the  thûd 

month,  or  April27,  549) but was only  killed  after  a letter  asking  a relative to  bring 

troops  to  the capital  was  intercepted. Zhengde is  said  to have had an  incestuous 

relationship  with  his  sister  by whom he had  two  sons. The histones state that he 

was  hated and dreaded by the people. The  historians'  assessment is that he caused the  downf'all  of the  House  of Liang. (LS13/828/7  - 829/6;  NS/4/1279/9  - 1282f  11)  

> Xiao

Jianli  W.  B (?-?): Considered  wild  and violent, he would go around in martial  gear  and was despised by the royal family.  During  the 

time  of  disorder  caused by Hou Jing's rebellion, he gathered a gang of 

thieves  and went out Nghtly on robberies. He was killed by a stray  arrow 

under  unstated  circumstances.  (NS/4/1282/3 2- 13)  

> Xiao

Zhengze  a iE  M (?-?):  This son  is  depicted  ingloriously.  Xiao  Yan  removed 

his  aristocratie  titie  and  exiled  hirn  to the  far  south  for  theft.  He  harboured 

resentment  against  his  various  uncles  and tned to  launch  an attack on Guangzhou. He was defeated by the  Inspecter  (cishi)of  Guangzhou and fled to a pnvy  where he  was  found by  villagers  who handed  him  over to the  authorities  for  execution. 

He was  struck  f?om  the family records but  his  wife  and  children  were forgiven. 

(NS/4/1283/1-6)  

> Xiao

Zheogli  iE  i (?-?):  Since  his  mother  was  his  father's  favourite,  he  was 

made heir to  his  father  instead  of Zhengyi  # iïi  j. M e r  his  father's  death,  he 

requested  his  grandfather  to restore Zhengyi to the position of  heir.  (NS/4/1283/7-

> 9 )

Xiao Bi  p a (?-?):  When his  uncle  was made emperor by Hou Jing, he looked  after  the manufacture of weapons to attack the palace.  When  his Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 424 second  cousin,  Xiao  Huili  W , was  plotting  to stage a palace coup in Hou Jing's absence in 550, Bi  lemed  of the plan and had  h h  exposed. He was honoured with a pnncely  title  and the  sumarne  of Hou. He was  N e d 

by Hou Jing's people  afker  his  behaviour made them suspect he  was 

undependable.  (NS/4/  12831 10- 13) 

1s  this  the  same  person  mentioned  in  NS/6/2006/1?  The  narne  also 

appears  as Xiao Gui  # f (LS/2/3  56/11. 6). 

Xiao Zhengbiao  a 3.  a (c.  508-549):  When Hou Jing put Xiao Zhengde on the 

throne,  this brother  did  not rush to  Jiankang  with troops  fiom  Northem Yanzhou where he  was  Inspector (cishi). Hou Jing sensed that he  was  jealous  and gave  him 

a princely  title and the  inspectorate  (cishi) of Southem  Yanzhou  which was  then  in the  hands  of Xiao  Huili.  Only  then  did  Zhengbiao  set out to block the Liang  amies 

of assistance. However,  he  was attacked and driven back by  Huili.  He  then  offered 

his  aliegiance  to the Eastern Wei which honoured  him  with titles and  rank.  He  is 

said  to have died there in the  winter  of 549 at the age of  42  sui  (WS/4/1327/3+5). 

(BS/4/1058/6-13;  WS/4/1326/6  - 1327/6) 

Xiao Guaogshou  a @ (?-?)  (BS/4/1059/1)  

> Xiao

Zhengxin  iE # (?-?): Full brother of  Zhengli  iE h ,he  was  equdy 

beloved by his  father  since  their  mother was  his  favourite.  He  is  descnbed as  being 

of  only  mediocre  intelligence.  (NU41 128412-3) 

Xiao  Xiu  A,  Prince  Kang  of  Ancheng  &, & $t  (c. 475 - 5 18): Seventh son of Xiao 

Shunzhi.  When the Liang  was  first  estabiished,  he was made  Inspector  (cishi)  of Southem Xuzhou  &J  3%  (Jingkou  0 ) and helped resettle the  area  and consolidate the Liang position  thereafter.  People had fled as  it  began  to be ravaged by  war  and  f&e  during  the 

stniggle  between the Qi and Liang.He was soon sent to the western  regions  to consolidate the Liang position there. When he died  at  44 sui, he was  greatly  moumed, and there was an unprecedented  nurnber  of cornmernorative  writings.  He  was  compassionate Appendix 6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang and  gentle  and actively encouraged  scholarship  and the compilation of  writings. 

(LSl2134211  - 34518; NS/4/1287/1 1290/4) 

Xiao Hui (c. 5 15-573):  His  cousin, Xiao Ji  &,  put  him  in charge of 

military  affars  for  Yizhou  after  the palace  fell  to Hou Jing and Xiao Ji had been 

given  vice-regai  authority.  After  making  himself emperor in Chengdu and 

organizing  an  army  for an eastem expedition, Ji put Hui in charge of Chengdu and gave  him  military  authority over the eighteen  regions  of the land of Shu. When Western Wei forces advanced  from  the  north,  Hui atîempted to hold out but lacked the  soldiers  and supplies. He  surrended  and was  permitted  to pledge allegiance to the Western Wei which gave  him  honours and titles. He was honoured  under  the successor Zhou  regime  with  various  titles, including an appointment as scholar at the  imperid  academy. He died  at  the age of 59 sui. He 

left  behind  a number of  writings  including poems and essays. He had been a noted 

cdigrapher  and was interested in  al1  areas  o f  knowledge.  (ZSl3175 111  - 753/10; 

## B S/4/1 O6 1 11 - 1 O62/6) 

Xiao Ji (?-?)  (ZSl3/753/ 1 1 ;88/41 106217-8) 

Xiao Ji  & (c.499-528): He  lefi  behind a body of  poetry  which was  collected 

and prefaced by  Xiao  Yi  # (Emperor  Yuan) but had a reputation for enjoying martial  arts,  consorting  with  "undes~able'~ people and keeping  his  distance  fiom 

the  learned  and cultivated.  (LS/2/345/9-14; NSl4/1290/5-7 )

Xiao Cao  # (?-?)  (LS/21345/ 14) 

Xiao Xin  # (7-585): He served in the court of Xiao Cha and Xiao  Kui 

and  was  a noted  literary  figure of  his  time.  (ZSl3187416-8) 

Xiao Tui  # #k  (? -549): A @ed  prose  writer,  he  was  killed  as he tned  to  defend 

the Eastern  Citadel  against  Hou Jing.  (LSIU34611-4; NS/4/1290/8-1 0) 

Xiao Wei  @,  Prince  Yuanxiang  of  Nanping  #J  ii  Z (c. 476-533): Eighth  son of Xiao  S h d ,  he  was  important to  Xiao  Yan  in the  founding  of the Liang. When  Yan  was Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 426 

preparing  to  launch  his  attack on the capital, he first  cailed  Wei and  his  youngest brother, 

## Dan  # $@,  to Yongzhou  tn  look  after  the  region  for  him.  Though  described as a devoted 

Buddhist  in later  years,  Wei melted  down  ail the copper  Buddhas  in the temples of 

Xiangyang  in  order  to  raise  funds  for  his  brother's expedition.  Weii-endowed  monks,  who must have  feared  total confiscation,  hid  their money and placed an apparently  successful 

curse of  ilhess  upon  him.  Since  Yongzhou was  almost  totally emptied of supplies and troops  after  the  "nghteous  army"  had set out,  two  govemors  (taishou) of  commanderies 

much  farther  up the  Mian  $3 River decided to use the  opportunity  to  make  the  region  their 

own  and  prepared  to attack Yongzhou. Wei and Dan sent troops about 150  kilometres 

west  up the  Mian  to  await  the  arriva1  of the rebels and  annihilate  them.  After  Xiao  Yan 

had  pushed  eastward  and laid  siege  to  Jiankang,  a distant relative, Xiao Gui,  began  closing 

in on  Jingzhou,  then  under  the protection of Xiao Yingzhou who died  under  the stress of 

dealing  with  the defeat of  various  generals  at the  hands  of Xiao Gui.  Troops  were  levied  in Yongzhou, and Xiao Dan led them to  Jiangling.  Within  ten days  after  sending Xiao Gui a

letter,  Dan was  successful  in  winning  the  surrender  of Gui. M e r the Liang was founded, Wei  held  various  posts  but  finally  withdrew  fiom  office on the  grounds  of  ihess  and apparent loss of  sight  in  later  life.  Wei was conversant in Buddhism and  m m e ,  writing 

many  commentaries  and essays and  attracting  many  scholars  about  hirn.  His  death at the age of  58  sui  is  described as  marking  the loss of a major  pillar  for the Liang  regirne  and the royal  family.  (LSI2134615  - 348/13; NS/4/1290/11 - 129216) 

Xiao Ke  # 4% (?-552): He was  Inspecter  (cishi)  of Yingzhou at the  tirne  of Hou Jing's  rebellion.  M e r  Hou Jing was  killed,  his  cousin, Xiao Yi (Emperor Yuan) sent  hirn  to  Jiankang  to help settle the  realm  because  of  his  reputation  within  the 

royal  family.  He died in office in Changsha.  (NS/4/l 29U7-14) 

Xiao Gong (c.  498-549): Xiao  Yan  took away  his  titie  and position  after  he 

embealed  grain fiom  the  governrnent  granary  of Yongzhou  despite  Xiao  Yan's 

wish  to keep  this  rnilitary  sensitive border  region  in constant  readiness.  He died in Appendix 6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 427 the  palace  during  Hou Jing's rebellion.  (LSI21348114  - 350/1;  NS/4/1293/1  -

l294/5) 

Xiao Jing  ;9(? - 549):  Deszribed  as a schoiar,  bibliophile  and  m m  of 

letters,  he was close to Xiao Gang (Emperor  Jianwen),  a sponsoi  of the 

literary  salon culture of their day.  (LSI213 5Olî-4;  NS/4/  1294/6-8) 

Xiao Qian  # & (?-?): He is  only  mentioned as a  third  son  (LSI2/348/13). 

Xiao Qi  ;i!%, (?-?): As Inspector of Northern  Yanzhou,  he fled  dong  with  his 

cousin, Xiao Tui, to the Eastern Wei in 549  after  the palace  fell  to Hou Jing and was honoured with  titles  by the Eastem Wei and its successor regime, the 

Northem  Qi.  (BQSl2144311-6;  NSl41 1294/9- 10;  BS/4/1059/2-7) 

Xiao Fang  a a(?-?): He accompanied  his  father to Ye  e , the capital of the Eastern Wei, and stayed in the north. He was noted for  his  talent in painting and  poetry.  (BQS/2/443/ 10 - 4431 1; BS/4/  lO59/8- 12) 

Xiao Hui  jt  &,  Prince  Zhonglie  of Poyang  Ç & A 3.(c.  476-526): Ninth  son (one lone source describes  him  as the tenth son  PSI41 12941 1 11)  of Xiao  Shunzhi,  he is described as precociously intelligent and a student  of  history  in  his  mature  years.  He  was 

made  Inspector  (cishi)  of  many  important regions,  beginning  with Southem Xuzhou, which  flanked  the capital to the east, in 503, and  Yingzhou,  in 505, which he helped  retum 

to  normal  afker  the  hirmoil  of Xiao  Yan's  attack  fiom  the west.  Yingzhou  had been racked by an  epidemic  which must have decimated an  enormous  part of the population, for he had to  order  the bodies of  victirns  to be  buned  irnmediately  upon  his  arrivai. He  served  in 

Yizhou  and  h d y  in  Jingzhou  where he died at the age of  5 1 sui. He  was  reputedly generous and charitable,  showing  no acquisitive instinct and  giving  away what he  eamed 

during  his  various  periods  as  hspector  (cishi). He  is  said  to have  shed  thirty-nine  sons and 

thirîy-eight  daughters.  (LSIU3 SOIS  - 35214;  NS/4/1294/11  - l 2 W l 5 ) 

Xiao Fan  6(c. 500 - 55  l?):  He  is  descnbed as  priding  himself  on  his  ability  to plan  strategy  and  delighting  in ancient  things  and men of talent,  though  himseifnot Appendix  6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 428 a leamed  person.  He was originally sent out as Inspector (cishi) of  Yizhou  in 526 

and had  already  reached  Jiangling  by the  tirne  of  his  father's  death. He  was  later 

put in charge of  Yongzhou  where the people and  =y  were  delighted  at  his  care 

and concern. At the time, his uncle, Xiao Xu  1Ji,  who was not on good  tenns 

with  this nephew,  was  Inspector (cishi) of  Jingzhou  and accused  him  of  plotting 

rebeliion,  for Fan had been  raising  troops,  strengthening  fortifications and building up  m i l i t q  supplies. Fan  rushed  to the capital to  explain  himself  and,  although 

Xiao  Yan  excused  him,  there was a  current  of opinion that felt he indeed had 

disloyal  ambitions. Before Hou Jing attacked the capital, Fan was  aiready 

Inspector (cishi) of  Hezhou  + JEi  and based at Hefei  +IIC  . When the  palace  feu, 

he fled to Dongguan  $L  IWj  and asked for assistance  From  the Western Wei, sending 

two  of  his  sons as  guarantors  (zhi).  Wei troops seized Hefei but gave no assistance to Fan. Forced to flee, he  contacted  his  cousin,  Daxin  # 4~  ,who  said  he wanted to  retum  to  Jiangzhou  of which he was cishi. They retumed together to this  region,  which Fan now tried to dominate, restricting the  real  area  in which  his 

cousin had  any  Say.  Mutual  suspicions  meant  their  amies  were not used  against 

Hou Jing. In fact, Fan's thousands of troops were soon facing  starvation  because 

of the  inability  to  secure  deliveiy  of grain, caused  largely  by Hou Jing's expedition 

against  the western princes.  Fmstrated  at  his  hopeless position, Fan died at the  age 

of  52  sui.  Sixteen  of his sons were  later  advised by one of Fan's  generais  to 

surrender  to Hou Jing's troops and were murdered.  (LSI2/352/4  - 35313; 

NS/4/1296/2  - 12971 15) 

Xiao Si (? -55  l?):  He is  described  as  handsome  and of  great  guth  (a standard description of  many  Xiao men),  physicdy  strong  and  daring,  not a stickler  for  behavioural  niceties and humble  enough  to  win  the  steadfàst 

loyalty  of  soldiers  and advisors. At the  tirne  of his father's  death,  he  was  in charge of  J ' ï  +if R (near  present-day Qianshan  .k  JI  County  in  Anhui, Appendix 6: The  Line  of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 429  

> NE

of  Jiujiang),  of  which  he had been made governor when  his  father went to  Jiangzhou.  The  city  was short of food and soldiers. One of Hou  Jing's 

generals, Ren  Yue  C e, was  pressing  hard  againsî  him,  but Si  felt  he must hold out  rather  than  surrender. He was  killed  by a stray  arrow. 

(LSl213 53/4-7; NSl4/  129811 -5) 

Xiao  Zi  (? - 5 5  l?):  Being considered a  harmless  scholarly  type  (wenruo 

# a ), he  was  one of the very few allowed by Hou Jing to have access to Xiao Gang. He  was  aiso  the  only  person  with sufficient courage to  visit  Xiao  Huili  after  this 

cousin  attempted an  unsuccessful  palace coup. He was hated by Hou Jing's supporters and  finaiiy  assassinated.  (NSl4/  129816-9) 

Xiao Xiu (Xun)  #(@)(c.  5 0 4  - c. 5 5 5 ) : He had  shown  early  talent in composition and  later  proved  himself  to be an able  administrator.  While  an Inspector  (cishi)  in Hanzhong, he  was  attacked by Westem Wei forces and forced to surrender. He was treated  well  and  iater  sent back to  Jiangling  with a thousand 

civilian  and  rnilitary  families.  His  cousin, Xiao Yi  jk  @,  was  anaid  and  arranged  to have  his  horses  and weapons  stolen  en route. He was  then  appointed as  Inspector 

(cishi)of  Xiangzhou  at Changsha. The  area  had been devastated by  war  but  Xiu 

encouraged agriculture and the retum of the population.  His  cousin treated  him 

with the respect due an  elder  rnember of the royal  farnily.  When  Jianghg  was 

attacked by the Westem Wei,  Xiu  was  unable  to send help in  tirne.  He died of 

anger  and  fhstration  at the age of 52 sui as a consequence of  his  inability  to  raise 

troops to  defend  the royal  family  f i e r  the young Emperor Jing had been put on the 

throne.  (NS/411298/10  - 13 0011 O) 

Xiao Tai  d(? - 568):  Appointed  Lnspector  (ctshi)  of  Qiaozhou  , a region 

north  of the  Yangzi,  he  failed  to understand the  character  of the people of the 

region  (one  historical  source  describes  those  north of the Yangzi as  being 

guangqiang  @ , far  6om  meek and docile  [NSl4/  1300/  121).  Unlike  previous Appendk  6: The Line of  Xiao  S h d and the  House  of Liang 430 

incumbents, he was  exacting  and  harsh,  imposing duties that made no distinction between aristocrat and commoner. Hence, by the time Hou  Img  began  his  march 

on the capital, the  loyalty  of  this  region  had been lost, and no-one offered resistance. When the  Chen  was established, Tai was  afkaid  for  his  safsty  and fled to the  Northem  Qi where he  was  rewarded with titles and position.  (NS/4/1300/11-

13;  ZS/3/754/1-14) 

Xiao  Zibao  ? 9 (?-?): He  served  the founder of the Sui but was  later 

executed at some point between  58  1 and 600.  (ZS/3/754/15) 

Xiao Yong  a ijc  (?-?): Mentioned by  name  only in  NS/4/1297/11. 

Xiao  Tien  i.U (?-?): Mentioned  by  narne  only in  NS/4/  1297/  13. 

Xiao Tui  a (?-?):  M e r  the  fa11 of  Jiankang  to Hou Jing, he fled  dong  with  his 

cousin, Xiao Qi  # &t,,  to the  Northem  Qi where he was  given  rank  and honour. He died at some point between 5 5 1 and 5 59.  (BQS/2/443/7-8;  BS/4/1 060/1-2) 

Xiao Kai  fi (?-?): Talented in calligraphy and  highIy  respected as the 

"dean  of southem  scholars".  (BQSI2/443/8-9;  BS/4/1060/3-4) 

Xiao Dan  i) , Prince  Zhongwu  of  Shixing  R & & 3 (c.478-522): Eleventh and youngest son of Xiao  Shunzhi  (no tenth son is ever identified; perhaps he died as a baby), he stayed  behind  with Xiao Wei  a # to look  after  Yongzhou  while  Xiao Yan led  his 

expedition  against  the Qi  regirne.  Upon the death of the  Inspecter  (cishi)  of  Jingzhou  and the  threat  to  Jiangling  fkom  the approach of Xiao Gui to the  West,  he replaced the 

deceased  cishi  of  Jiangzhou  and  led  soldiers  fiom  Xiangyang  (Yongzhou)  to  Jiangling 

and  w i t h  ten days had won the surrender of Gui.  Since  the  region  was on a war  footing, 

there  had been considerable public and pnvate deprivation, and Dan  was  carefùl  to 

maintain  a strict and  lean  administration. He opened up new  areas  for  agriculture,  reduced 

corvee  service, looked  after  famiiies  of  dead  soldiers  and  brought  stability  to the  region. 

He  retumed  to  Jiankang  in 508 and was made  cishi  of  various  regions,  finally  retuniing  to Appendix  6: The Line of  Xiao  Shunzhi  and the  House  of Liang 43 1

Jimgzhou  in 5 15. He died at the age of 45 sui.  (LS/2/3 W 8  - 3551 1 1; N S M  30 111  - 

> 1302/10)
> Xiao

Liang  j#  & (?-?  j.  Heir of Xiao Dan  (LW213 5511  1 ;NS/4/1302/10) 

Xiao Ying  # j?-?):  Admired  by Xiao  Yan  for  his  intelligence as a youth,  he 

was  appointed  as govemor  (taishou)  ahead  of  his  brothers and cousins. As cishi of Southem Xuzhou, he was  known  for distributing grain and silk to the poor he encountered as he travelled around the district. He died in office as  cishi  of Guangzhou.  (NS/411302/11 - 1303/13) 

## Xiao Ye  jk  6(7-?):  He had  literary  talent and had been a close  fnend  of  his 

cousin, Xiao Gang.  (NS/4/1303/15 - 130416) Table 8 Line  of  Xiav  Shunzh~ (Liang) Xiao Shunzhi  -

# sa* 

# -xu* 7

# 1:

-Hui*  I:

# - Dan  @ -1:

Zhengde  i€ 

Zhengli  5. 

and 5 other sons 

Hui a

and 2 other sons 

Ke  ItP 

and 3 other sons 

F m * 

and 6 other sons 

Liang  jE 

and 2 other sons 

L and 4 other sons 

# - Chang#  - Yuanjian  % ifs 

# - Rong  S

L and other sons 

# - Fu  # - BOYOU IIe SF 

L and 3 other sons 

4YuanZhao  80%. Appendix 7: The  Line  of Xiao  Chongzhi 

LINE  OF  XIA0  CHONGZHI 

(see Table 2) 

Xiao Chongzhi  # $2 (? - 486): Youngest of the  three  sons of Xiao Daoci  j#  jr B, he 

served  the Song as Secretariai  Censor  (zhishu  shiyushi  % f @#p  ) (NS/4/1259/2). 

The  two  older sons were Xiao S h a n g h i  & 5, who died dunng the  late  Qi, and Xiao 

Shunzhi  father of the founder of the Liang  dynasty.  Xiao  Chongh  was 

Govemor  (taishou  f ) of the  Dongyang  Cornmandery  @ (present-day  Jinhua  & +

in Zhejiang) when an  uprising  in the  region  occurred that resulted in  his  death in 486 

(NQS11/5  119). Xiao  Chongzhi  had four sons. 

Xiao Jing  (Bing)  # %R;  ( 8  ) (c. 477  - 523): Histories published in the Tang  give 

his  name  as Jing, for reasons of avoidance, rather  than  Bing  (LSI2/373/n.  3). When 

Xiao  Yan  launched  his  expedition  against  Jiankang, Jing  was  able to bnng over the 

generals  in the western  regions  north  of the  Yangzi.  He  was  greatly  respected  in court and consulted by  Xiao  Yan  on  civilian  and  rnilitary  matters.  In  5 19 he was appointed  Inspector  (cishi) of  Yingzhou  where he died at the age of 47 sui. 

(LSI2136711  - 37013;  NS/4/t260/6  - L261115)  

> Xiao

Mai  # #b  (?  - ?):  Farned  For  his  filial piety,  his  love of  literature  and 

his  skül  in  goveming.  He had  coilected  30,000 volumes by the  t h e  of  his 

death.  Xiao  Yan  sent  him  as Inspector (cishi) to Guangzhou where he ended the practice of  battening  off foreign traders and brought a  halt  to 

piracy,  bringing  about the  retum  of foreign  ships.  Unlike  previous  cishi, he 

was  so honest about  sending  foreign tnbute to the capital that Xiao  Yan 

exclairned  that Guangzhou was now  satisfjing  the needs of the court and 

army  thanks  to the close  control  and honesty of Xiao Mai.  (NSl41126Ul 

l26WS) Appendix  7: The Line of Xiao Chongzhi 434 

Xiao Quan (?  - 550): He conspired with  Xiao  Huili  I f f  fe  to be  rid 

of Hou Jing. However, the plot was exposed and he  was  executed.  

> (NS14/

1 263 /6-7) 

Xiao  Miau  s a (?  - 550): He was  killed  dong  with  his  brother,  Xiao 

Quan.  (NS/4/1263/9) 

Xiao Bo  s (? - 557): When the  Inspecter  (cishz)of  Guangzhou went over to the  side  of Hou Jing  after  Xiao Gang  became  emperor in 550, he was attacked by  Chen  Baxian  # f # (future founder of the  Chen  dynasty) who was  then  in charge of the  southem  region.  Chen  transferred the 

Guangxi inspectorate to Bo, who was  then  stationed in present-day 

Guangxi.  Later,  he was transferred  farther  north  to Jinzhou but 

retumed  to Guangzhou  after  the Wei attacked and  destroyed  Jiangling  in 554. When  Chen  Baxian  accepted the abdication of the Liang throne, Bo 

raised  troops in  protest  but was  quickly  defeated and executed. 

(NS/4/1263/ 1 O - l264/2) 

Xiao Chang  # 8 (c. 480  - 5 18): He comrnitted suicide at 39 sui  d e r  being put 

under  v h a l  house  arrest  in  Jiankang.  He had had to be removed  fiom  positions of authonty  because  of  his  fiequent  drinking  bouts  which  resulted in  his  intruding  into 

people' s homes and  committing  murder.  (L SIU3  7O/4- 1 1;NS/4/  1 264/3 -5) Xiao Ang  # I(i (c. 483 - 53 5): Known  for  his  good  govenunent,  he died in 

Jiangzhou,  where he was  cishi,  at the age of 53  mi.  (LS/2/370/12 - 37 I/4; 

NS/4/1264/6-10) 

Xiao Yu  2 (c. 485  - ?): He had asked Xiao  Yan  to send  him  to border  regions, 

but  Yan  was hesitant to send  this  unstable  and  undisciplined  cousin who  enjoyed 

no  particular  prestige to  such  sensitive regions. In 524 he avoided  execution  after 

being  found  minting  coins  within  his  residence.  Yan  first  exiled  him  and  then 

recailed  him  to the capital to correct  his  ways  through  Buddhist  discipline.  Yan Appendix  7: The Line of  Xiao  Chongzhi 

was  delighted  at the reforming  effect  this  had on Yu and appointed  him  to the govemorship of a  comrnandery  southeast of the capital where he  cared  for the people and kept check on bad  officials.  The people are  said  to have grieved over 

his  loss and raised temples and steles in  his  honour.  (LSI2137 l/5  - 373/2; 

NS/4/1264/11 - 1 265/7) GLOSSARY 

## baiguan  a @

## Baijia  Fu baikui  3 #$$ 

# BaiXia  6 7; 

## baornzng  wu  changzhu  $ +

## bazuo  A 1

## Bei Qi  Shu  jt  E 8

## BeiShi  jtk 

## biantai  huangquan  ,@ 2 a

## b u y i s ~ 

## canjun  +

# Cao Cao  Q #& 

# Cao Wei  @

## ce  t

## chaowung  a

## Chen 

## Chen  Baxian  f$k  &

## Chen  Xianda  @ a i$ 

## chenshu  $& f

## Chu Yuan  $& 

## czdeng  shizu  ;fi  0 &

## cimen  fi 

## cishi  $J

## Cui  Huijing  #& 

## dai  di 

## Dalei  (Fort)  $@  &, 

# Danyang  Commandery  +f % i& 

## daoyi  & &

## Deng  Wan  @ Si 

## dianqiun  *P& 

## Ding,  Lady  7R

## disun  4#j  a

## diwang fei  yizu  + 5 # - &

## Dongcheng  Li  $L I

## Dongfu  Cheng  $L &f  3&

## Donghai  Commandery  $L

## dudu  4fie Jiangzhou  Zr  3y 

## Jiankang  &

## Jiankang  Shilu  $A 4&

# JianyeRiBI  ( $% 

## Jin  Shu  Q f

## Jingling,  Duke  of  R & jl@  "k' 

## Jingzhou  Uil  fi 

## jingen  che  & #k  ?g 

## Jinling  Commandery  -ff  & gk 

## jishizhong  $&  $ +

## Jiu Xi  a

## jiupin  jt  S

## iim  45  &  

> jzuzu menhu

# & r l  P

## Jizhou  JY 

# lun  np 

## Kuaiji  .Q  ## 

## rang  @F 

## L a w e  fdL  @

## Langye  Cheng  q%  @& 

## Lanling  Xian  a & #& 

## Leicheng  5

## Li Dao'er  + 2

## l i d l h f i 

## Li  Yanshou  # a

## lî  zhang 

# L i q  Shu  f

## Liang  zhu 

## iibu  shangshu  R +$ & #

## ring  +

## Linghu  Defen  9%4

lingiun  jiangiun  .bfl  T #q  T

## Liu  Bing  @. 

## Liu Chang  @J  iJlia 

## Liu Chong  $p  $+ 

## Liu Dan  $Ij 

## Liu  Daogui  @J  3#, 

## Liu  Daolian  @j a tl]C

## Liu Fang  $p %Liu Hong  81

## Liu Hui  @]  +# 

## Liu  Hun  91*+ 

## Liu  Jingsu  @J 

## Liu  Jun  @] 

## Liu  Junn  #J  $# 

## Liu  Mian  @.J ilb 

## Liu  Shanyang  @l il  H$ 

## Liu Shao  $il  BE6 

## Liu Shuo  @j 4# 

## Liu  Xiufan  #J  *$

## Liu  Xiumao  @J  @

## Liu  Xiuren  # %f= 

## L i u x i m o  @J*% 

## Liu  Xuan  # t&

## Liu  Yifb  #&  8

## Liu  Yigong  # Jlt  ijS 

## Liu Yiji  #!J & +

## Liu  Yikang  # A

## Liu  Yilong  @J  iJ @

## Liu  Yiqi 

## Liu  Yixuan  #]  )]t 

## Liu  Yizhen  qlil&  Ji 

## Liu Yu  @J#$ 

## Liu  Yuanjing  $p 

## Liu  Yuh  &

## Liu Yuhh  %

## Liu  Yun  a

## Liu  Zhan  @] 

## Liu  Zhun  @j 

## Liu  Zifàng  @J  +$f 

## Liu  Ziluan  gJ  ? X

## Liu  Zishang  @]  Jf 

## Liu  Zishi  @J  6

## Liu  z y e  @J  IJ-F  *Liu  Zixun  @J+W 

## lu  shangshu  shi  4& & f +

## Marquis of  Xiyang  County  fi  +@

## Mei  Chong'er  amenfa  r9  I

## menfa  shizu  fl AB  +&

## menfa  zhengzhi  89  &

# Man  (River)  $5 

## Min  @ (Emperor) 

## Miyazaki  Ichisada  $ $

## moufan  K

# mu  ;ift 

## Nan  Qi  Shu  & -8 

# Nan  Shi  &

## nanbei fenge  i)J  jt;  +

## Pei Shuye  SJl  l]k 

## Pencheng  & $18,

## Penkou  -a Opiaoji  d~jiungiun 1#f  #$ 

## Podun  t4.g 

> P ~ J U

# f% 

## qiaoxing 

## Qinhuai  (Rwer)  4 ifk 

## qzng  :* Qingzhou  * SY 

## Quetou (Fort)  4@ a

## rijiiao  El &

## Ru  Fazhen  $ &

## Ruan  Dianfu  le, 

## shangdik 

## shegui  J&  j& 

## sheji  #ka 

## Shen Wenji  -& A +

## Shen Youzhi  -& fk &

## Shen Yue  -& @

## shijia  d m  f A& 

## Shitou  ;6  E]i

## shizhong  #

## shizz  +& +

## shizu  #i &

## shim  =t  &

## shim jiating  & & bft  &

## Shouchun  +;ff. Wang  Tianhu  3A fi 

## Wang Wei  Z 4$

## Wang  Xuanzhi  Z *& 

## Wang  Yan  1.fii 

## WmgyuMagongtianxia  5 & . ~ # ~ 7 ; 

## wei  jiangiun  # #$ 

# Wei Shu  a f

## Wei  Zheng  # &

## wugu  I

# Wujin  Xian  &,  if& 

# wushijhche  a II+  &JJ  JP 

## w w i 

## m i n g  $3  4% 

## w i n g  3ï  W 

> xi

# #

## xian  #&   

> xiangguo $8

# a

## Xia  Houxiang  a @ 3+ 

## Xiao  Baojuan  &

## Xiao  Baoxuan  j#  -k: 

## Xiao  Baoyin 

## Xao  Bin  j# 

## Xiao  cha  # %$

## Xiao Chang  # #

## Xiao  Changmao  j#  &k

## Xiao  Chen  #

## Xiao  Chen  # j& 

## Xiao  Chengdu  j#  lp  t

## Xiao Dalian  &

## Xiao Dan  j# 

## Xiao Daocheng  # a &, 

## Xiao Daodu  a ig &

## Xiao Daosheng  # i& &

Z a o  Daqi 

## Xia0  Dong  @

## Xia0  Fan  #

# Xiao  Fan@  a % @

# Xia0  Gang  fi  fliB 

## Xiao Hong  2Z a o  Hui  # &

## Xiao  Huixun  ,&  911 

## Xiao  Jian  # a

## Xiao Luan  j#  X

## Xia0  Mozhi  j# C 4

## Xia0  Qiu  a && 

## Zao  Que  j#  1

## Xiao  Rui  # @f, 

## Xiao  Shunzhi  a M t 

## Xiao  Sihua  a ,!& Y

## Xao  Song  -fiB 

# Xiao  Tanzhi  )8 5

## Xia0  Tong  j# 

## Xiao Wei  -fl(i  f$ 

## Xiao Wenshou  #i f +

## Xiao  Xiu* 

## Xiao  Xuan  &

## Xia0  Yan  fi 

## Xiao Yaochang  # i& a

## Xiao  Yaoguang  & &

## Xiao  Yaoxin  j#  & &

## Xiao  Yingda  a i& 

## Xia0  Yingzhou  jJi  #

## Xiao  Yuanmll?g 

# Xiao Ye Xiao Yi  j#  #& 

## XiaoYuanzhi 

## Xiao  Ze  #

## Xiao  Zhaowen  j#  2

## Xiao  Zhaoyes 

# Zao  Zhaoying  % f@  8

# Xiao  Zhaozhou  # tg$ #

## Xiao Zhen  #

## Xiao  Zheng  j#  @

## Xiao  Zhengbiao  i~ 

## Xao  Zihan  % p

Z a o  Zijing  5 a

## Xiao  Zike  j& 

## Xiao  ZiIiang  #OFFICIAL  AND PRE-MODERN  FIISTORICAL  WORKS 

Ban Gu  & a. H m  Shu  3 + . Beijhg:  Zhonghua Shuju  Q $ $A$,  1962. 

Chen  Shou  e(l$  . San Guo Zhi  2 a ,& . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1959. 

Dao  Xuan  3S.  Guang Hongming Ji  fi  % Fg]  # . Sibu  Congkan  Chubian  W ?]  a # edition. 

Reprint,  Taipei:  Commercial Press,  1965. 

Fan Ye  id,  e. Hou  Han  Shu  f . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1965. 

Fang  Xuanling  & @& e. Jin Shu  .$ a . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1974. 

Li Baiyao  6 M.  Bei  Qi Shu  Jt  $ . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1973. 

Li  Y m h o u  $$& *. Bei Shi  k k . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju,  n.d. 

. Nan  Shi  &J  k. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju,  n.d. 

Linghu  Defen  +$&a S.  Zhou  Shu  f l  f .  Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju,  n.d. 

Ouyang  Xiu  # .#and  Song  Qi j)i  @.  Xin Tang Shu  $.  Bcijing: Zhonghua Shuju,  n.d. 

Seng You  1P)  *. Hongming Ji  rg]  # . Sibu  Congkan  Chubian  a ?]  a # edition. Reprint, Taipei: Commercial Press, 1965. 

Shen Yue  @.  Song Shu  jF  $.  Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1974. 

Sima Guang  p7  & 215.  Zizhi  Tonglian,  Wenbai  Duizhao  Quanyi  a r, A 6 % &.$,  3 vols. 

Edited  by  Zhang  Hongni  2 #and  Shen  Zhihua  .;l(; f,*. n. p.:  Gaige  Chubanshe  z!k d:  i56 

&,  1991. 

Sima Qian 4 a. Shi Ji  a. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1982. 

Wei Shou  I/(t  . Wei Shu  af . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuj y n.d. 

Wei  Zheng  aaand Linghu Defen . Sui  Shu  . Bcijing:  Zhonghua  Shuju, 1973. 

Xiao  Zixian  # +a. Nan  Qi Shu  & $ . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1974. 

Xu  Song  8 . Jiankang  Shilu  & & ki&. Edited  by Meng  Zhaogeng  & BFI  & ,Sun Shuqi Z$ i& &$ and 

Wu Yiye  $$Mi  S.  Shanghai: Shanghai Guji  Chubsuishe  +, $@ ;k  & @i ;)t , 1987. 

Yao  Silian  a. Liang  Shu  f . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1973. 

. Chen  Shu  & f . Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1972. 

OTI-ER  WORKS 

Balazs,  Etieme.  Chinese  Civifization and  Bureaucracy.  New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964. 

Beasley,  W. G. and E. G.  Pulleyblank,  eds.  Historians  of China and Japan. London: Oxford University Press, 1961. Chan,  Wing-Tsit.  A Source Book  in  Chinese  Philosophy.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969. 

Croweil,  William G.  "Northem  Émigrés and the  Problems  of  Cennis  Registration  under  the Eastern Jin 

and  Southern  Dynasties". In State and Society in  Earfy Medieval  China,  ed.  Albert  E.  Dien,  17  1-

209.  Staaford:  Stanford  University Press,  1990. 

De  Bary,  Wm.  Theodore  ,Wing-Tsit Chan, and Chester Tan,  eds.  Sources of  Chinese  Tradition. New 

York: Columbia University Press,  1960. 

Chea  Changqi  a dL  *. Liangiin  Nonchao  Zhengzhishi  Gao  ift  ft  $J  & j$ R S.  Kaifeng: Henan 

Dame  Chubanshe  H& kq  & Kh*,  1992. 

Ch'en,  Kenneth.  "Anti-Buddhist  Propagauda  During  the  Nan-Ch'ao."  Hantard  Journal  ofAsiatic  Studies 

15  (1952):  166-192. 

Dien,  Albert E.,  ed.  State  and Society in  Early  Medieval  China.  Stanford:  S t d o r d  University Press, 1990. 

Dong  Zuobin  .If  f . Zhongguo  Nianli  Jianpu  B a W .  Taipei, 1974. 

Dubs,  Homer,  tr.  The  Histoty  of the Former Han  Dynasîy,  vol. 3.  Baltimore:  Waverly Press, 1955. 

Duil,  Jack.  "A  Historical  introduction  to the  Apocryphal  (Ch'an-Wei)  Texts  of the Han  Dynasty."  PbD. 

d i s . ,  University of Washington, 1966. Eberhard,  Wolfram.  Conquerors and Rulers: Social Forces in  Medieval  China, 2d. ed.  Leiden, 

1965. 

## . 'The  Upper-Chss  Family in  Traditional  China." In The  Famify  in  History,  ed. 

Charles E. Rosenberg, 59-94. n. p. : University of  Pennsylvania  Press, 1975. 

E k ; ,  Patricia Buckley. The  Aristocratic  Families  of  Early  lin,eïial  China: A Case  Study  of  the Po-Ling Ts  'ui  Family. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978. 

Feng  Zuomin  a # a, ed.  Baihua  Zuorhuan  .b  % # . Taipei:  Xingguang  Chubanshe  a &

# fie, 1984. 

Freedman,  Maurice,  ed.  Family and  Kinship  in  Chinese  Society. Stanford:  Stanford  University 

Press, 1970. 

Fudan  University,  Lishi  Dili  Yanjiusuo  B k & a W a Bf  . Zhongguo  Lishi  Diming 

Cidian  $ Bg  a @ $$  . Nanchang  & 8 : Jiangxi  Jiaoyu  Chubanshe  a 2!i  a &

E;)1, 1988. 

G a i n ,  Dennis.  "Social  Order  in the Early Southern Dynasties: The  Formation  of the Eastern Jin."  Ph.D.  d i s ,  Hantard  University, 1980. 

## . "The  Great Farnily in  Medieval  South China," Harvard Journal of  Asian  Studies  41, 

no. 1 (1981): 65-74. 

## . "kinventing  China:  Pseudobureaucracy  in the Early Southem Dynasties". In State and Society in Early  Medieval  China,  ed.  Albert E.  Dien,  139-170.  Stanford:  Stanford 

University Press, 1 990. 

Gu  Jiegang  & a RJ . Gushi  Bian  #$  . [Shanghai]:  hishe  & +k,  1926. Reprint, Hong Kong: Taiping Press, 1962. 

Holmgren,  Jennifer,  "Imperid  Marriage  in the Native  Chinese  and Non-Han State, Han to Ming." 

In  Marriage  and  Inequality,  ed. Rubie S. Watson and Patricia  Buckley  Ebrey,  58-96. 

Berkley  : University of  California  Press, 1991. 

Holzman,  Donald.  "Les  débuts du système médiéval de choix et de classement des fonctionnaires: les neuf  catdgories  et l'impartial et juste."  ,Uélanges  1 ( 1957):  387-4  14. 

## . "Les sept sages de la forêt des bambous et la société de leur temps."  T'oung  Pao  44 

(1956): 3  17-346. 

Hucker, Charles O. A Dictionary  oJOJlicia1 Titles  in  Intperial  China.  Stanford:  Stanford University Press,  1985. 

Johnson, David George. The  Medieval  Chinese  Oligarchy.  Bouider:  Westview  Press,  1977. 

Kawakatsu  Yoshio.  "La  décadence de l'aristocratie chinoise sous les Dynasties du Sud," Acta 

Asintica  XM:  (1971): 13-38. 

Leban,  Carl.  "Managing  Heaven's  Mandate:  Coded  Communications in the Accession of Ts'ao 

P'ei,  A.D.  220."  In  Ancienr  China: Studies in Early  Civilization,  ed. David T. Roy and 

Tsuen-Hsuin  Tsien, 3 15-340.  Hong  Kong:  Chinese  University Press, 1978. 

Legge,  James,  tr. The  Chinese  Classics,  vol.  1,  Confucian  Analecfs,  The Great  Leaming,  The Doctrine of the  Mean.  Reprinted  fiom  last  editions  of Oxford University Press; Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press,  1960. 

## . The  Chinese  Classics,  vol. II, The  Works  of Mencius.  Reprinted  h m  last  editions  of 

Odord  University Press; Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1960. 

Li  Zongye  $3$.  Zhongguo  Lishi  Yaoji  Jieshao  9 BP  k # +a. Shanghai: Shanghai Guji  Chubanshe  .;f  tt;  Xa*,  1982. 

Lü  Simian  # & JaB  Xijin  Nmbeichao  Shi  8 % &J k . Shanghai: Shanghai Guji Chubanshe 

Ls;6#  & E*,  1983. 

Mamey,  John.  "Emperor  Chien-Wen of Liang  (503-55  1):  His  Life  and  Litemnire."  Ph.D.  d i s , 

University of  Wisconsin,  1972. 

Rogers,  Michael  E. The  Chronicle  of Fu Chien: A Case of  lkjtemplur  History.  University of 

California  Press,  1968.  #10 in  Chinese  Dynastie  Histories Translations. 

## . "The  Myth  of the  Battle  of the Fei River". T'oung Pao 54  (1968):50-72. 

Shen  Qiwei  & d& and Xu  Guanglie  .#t & FQ  ,eds.  Zhongguo Lidai  Zhiguan  Cidian  9 a

# a '$  *. Shanghai: Shanghai Cishu Chubanshe  @ $ & t:e, 1992. Sun Shuqi  J#t  i& W .  Liuchao Sixiang Shi  k ,!& a A .  Nanjing: Nanjing Chubanshe  & ;O,  & fi 

# *, 1992. Tan  Qixiang  4 # ,ed.  Zhongguo  Lishi  Difuji  ft  a ,vol. 4:  Dongjin  Shiliuguo, 

Nanbeichao Shiqi  $% + + - ifi  it;  )8).  Shanghai:  Ditu  Chubanshe  a & f i 

# e, 1982. Tang  Changru  a. Wei Jin Nanbeichao Shiluncong  a% il;  iitt  # f . Beijing:  Sanlian 

Shudian  Z#  f &,  1955. 

## . Wei Jin Nanbeichao  Shiluncong  Xubian  Wb  % & fi  a f # . Beijing:  Sanlian 

Shudian  2 f &,  1959. Teng  Ssu-YU  4$ HA ,  tr.  Family  Instructionsfor the Yen Clan (Yen-shih  Chia-hsûn  & & #C  w, 

by  Yen  Chih-T'ui  & 2 a). Leiden:  E. J.  Brill,  1968. 

Tian  Yuqing  ~3  . Dongiin  Menfa  Zhengzhi  fi%. f 'J  $&  . Beijing: Beijing  Damie 

Chubanshe  k s k & k t : % ,  1989. 

Wan  Shen- @ M, ed. WeiJin Nanbeichao Shi Lungao  aa & j t  @J  *a. Hefei  -4-B :

Anhui Jiaoyu Chubanshe  &Le, 1983. 

. Chen  Yinke  Wei Jin Nanbeichao Shi  Jiangyanlu  +& a% & % 4 # # a. 

Hefei  gllt: Huangshan  Shushe  3i  f 4k,  1987. Wang Liqi  Z 49  8, ed.  Yonshi  J i m n  Jijie  & J%,  *l#  1)iC  , m. ed.  Beijing:  Zhonghua  Shuju 

1993. 

Wang Yitong  3P m .  Wuchao  Mendi  f #j  t'j  s, rev.  ed., 2 vols. Hong Kong:  Zhongwen  Daxue 

Chubanshe  zp  3;  & fie, 1978. 

Wolf',Margery.  "Chiid  Training and the  Chinese  Family." In  Family  and  Kinship  in  Chinese 

Socieîy,  ed.  Maurice Freedman,  40-63.  Stanford:  Stanford  University Press,  1970. 

Yang Lien-Sheng. Excursions in Sinology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969. Yong Rong  & aet al.  Siku  Quanshu Zongmu Tiyao  14 fi  f 4&  €l  # .(n.p.,  n.d.,  Wanyou 

Wenku  & $ k#ed.,  vol. 10, 16-17. Zhao Yi  a s, Nian  'ershi  Zhaji  -tf  =k .1M iS  , ed. Du  Weiyun  & a a. Taipei:  Huashi 

Chubanshe  +k  & t:#k,  1977. Zhou  Yiliang  PJ  - 8 .  Wei Jin Nanbeichaoshi  Lunji  a9 & 98  iitt  ii)  a.  Beijing:  : Zhonghua 

Shuju  9 **a, 1963. 

. Wei Jin Nanbeichaoshi Zaji  a%.  & fi  4 $ L e .  Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju  *f

4,  1985. 

## . Wei Jin Nanbeichaoshi Lunji Xubian  a % & k a ka  # # Y.  Beijing: Beijing 

Daxue  Chubanshe, 1991. 

Zou  Jiwan  Ilp  & 8 . Wei Jin Nanbeichao Shi  a % A #j  ft.  Taipei:  Changqiao  Chubanshe  ft 

h$  & Ka*,  1979. 

Zürcher,  E. The  Buddhisr  Conquest  of China, 2 vols.  Leiden:  E. J. Briii, 1959.
