Title: Expanding Access to In Vitro Fertilization

URL Source: https://www.akingump.com/en/insights/blogs/trump-executive-order-tracker/expanding-access-to-in-vitro-fertilization

Markdown Content:
Expanding Access to In Vitro Fertilization (Trump EO Tracker)
-------------------------------------------------------------

February 18, 2025

Reading Time : 1 min

This order makes it the policy of the Administration to ensure reliable access to IVF treatment, including by easing unnecessary statutory or regulatory burdens to make IVF treatment more affordable. Within 90 days of the order, the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy will submit to the President a list of policy recommendations on protecting IVF access and aggressively reducing out-of-pocket and health plan costs for IVF treatment.

#### Additional Documentation

*   Trump Executive Order - Expanding Access to In Vitro Fertilization
*   White House Fact Sheet

Related Content
---------------

Trump Executive Order Tracker

The significant number of executive orders published by the Trump Administration cut across dozens of industries and areas of law. This searchable tool breaks down the order…

Previous Entries
----------------

Trump Executive Order Tracker

October 24, 2025

Grants a two-year

exemption from

compliance with the

Environmental Protection

Agency's (EPA) 2024 Primary

Copper Smelting Rule for

the Freeport-McMoRan ...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

October 15, 2025

Imposes a

government-wide freeze

on civilian hiring across all

executive departments and

agencies, except for

positions tied to national

security, immigration enfo...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

October 15, 2025

Directs the Secretary of

Defense to use any

available Fiscal Year 2025

funds to continue paying

active duty and reserve

military personnel during

the ongoing lapse in appr...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

October 6, 2025

Approves the Alaska

Industrial Development

and Export Authority’s

(AIDEA) appeal under the

Alaska National Interest

Lands Conservation Act

(ANILCA) and reinstates f...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

August 1, 2025

Directs the Secretary of

Defense to federally

mobilize at least 300

members of the Illinois

National Guard to protect

federal personnel,

property, and law enforce...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

September 30, 2025

This order directs the

MAHA Commission, in

coordination with the

Secretary of HHS, the

Assistant to the President

for Science and

Technology (APST), and th...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

September 29, 2025

Imposes tariffs under

Section 232 of the Trade

Expansion Act on imports

of timber, lumber, and

wood products to address

threats to U.S. national

security. Establishes duty ...

Read More

Trump Executive Order Tracker

September 29, 2025

Defines any armed attack

on Qatar as a threat to the

U.S.. Directs the Secretary

of War and State Director

of National Intelligence to

create joint contingency

plans with Qatar to respo...

Read More

© 2025 Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP. All rights reserved. Attorney advertising. This document is distributed for informational use only; it does not constitute legal advice and should not be used as such. Prior results do not guarantee a similar outcome. Akin is the practicing name of Akin Gump LLP, a New York limited liability partnership authorized and regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority under number 267321. A list of the partners is available for inspection at Eighth Floor, Ten Bishops Square, London E1 6EG. For more information about Akin Gump LLP, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP and other associated entities under which the Akin Gump network operates worldwide, please see our Legal Notices page.
