Title: 

URL Source: https://www.seniorpub.com/papers/FourSeasonsTimes.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 10 Oct 2025 14:47:46 GMT

Markdown Content:
Volume 10, Number 7 Lakewood, NJ 08701 October 2025 

IN THIS ISSUE Your Concierge 5Senior Travel 9Travel Resources 10 Welcome Abroad 15 

Activity Listing 

21 

Event Calendar 

22 

Travel Discounts 

27 Club News 28 

Committee News 

43 Movie Talk 45 

In the Air 

46 GOING 

# PLACES 

In autumn, our minds turn from summer fun to places to go in the fall and winter. Whether we enjoy taking day trips, traveling to distant locations, or heading south, we need to make decisions. Do we look into something new? Is now the time to go abroad? Should we take a cruise? Or would we prefer to stay close to home and visit local sights? In this issue of the Times , we look at travel from a senior vantage point. What haven’t we seen? What are our travel preferences? What are some tips for taking a cruise? Are we physically capable of taking a desired trip? We also provide travel resources that might help you decide where you’re headed. FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 2 

> ads-679

4PAGE 3 

2025 FOUR SEASONS COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Erma Hoover  ....................................................... President Thomas Gialanella  ...................................... Vice President Deborah Catalina  ................................................ Secretary Dan Pagano  ......................................................... Treasurer Lee Godfrey  ........................................................... Trustee Geri Pitocco  ........................................................... Trustee Carlos Antunes  ....................................................... Trustee 

2025 COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS 

John Howley  ....................................Architectural Control Steve Sellick  .....................................Buildings & Grounds George Smith  .................................... CALTEC & Website Brenda Page  ................................................ Condominium Larry Goldman  ........................... Emergency Management Lynette Downey  .....................................................Finance Jane Secci/Elizabeth Candiotti ........... Four Seasons Times Sal Tagliarino  ..............................................................Golf Flo Fortuna  ...................................... House and Recreation Laura Dahl  ...........................................................Judiciary Ron Helmka  ...................................................... Landscape Janet Fusco………........................................……..Library Cynthia Lanno .............................................................Pool Roseann Carlson  ...................................................... Social Erma Hoover/Geri Pitocco ........................................ Town 

FOUR SEASONS TIMES EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 

Jane Secci, Ph.D. ............................ Managing Editor Elizabeth Candiotti ...........................................Editor Danny Janelli  ..................... Director of Photography 

GRAPHIC DESIGN 

Katie Barbour  ............... Senior Publishing Company 

WRITERS/PROOFREADERS 

Dee Bludgus, Elizabeth Candiotti, Frank Mongiello, Charlie Philip, Jane Secci, Marthe Yannich 

PHOTOGRAPHY 

Danny Janelli 

For Advertising Information Please contact Senior Publishing at 1.888.637.3200. www.seniorpublishing.net SENIOR PUBLISHING COMPANY accepts advertisements which are based upon information provided by the advertiser. SENIOR PUBLISHING COMPANY does not independently investigate the accuracy of ad vertisement content and does not warrant or represent the accuracy of the content of any advertisement. 

FOUR SEASONS TIMES 1560 Spring Meadow Drive Lakewood, NJ 08701 fourseasonstimes@gmail.com 

Senior Publishing solicits and publishes all advertising. Neither the Four Seasons Community Association nor the Four Seasons Times endorses or recommends any advertiser in this publication. 

PUBLICATION POLICY 

The Four Seasons Times is published eight times each year. The paper is distributed free to every Four Seasons resident under the sponsorship of the Board of Trustees of the Four Seasons Community Association. The 2025 publication schedule is January, February, April, May, July, August, October, and November. This publication is produced to inform, educate, and entertain the residents of Four Seasons Lakewood. Residents are invited to submit original, copyright-free articles of interest and relevant photographs. There is a limit of 500 words for most articles. We do not accept material that is 

offensive, divisive, or political. Photographs must 

be copyright-free and meet format and quality standards to be considered for inclusion. All submitted material is subject to the approval of the Times Executive Committee and will be edited. Not all submitted material will be published due to editorial considerations and space limitations. 

2025 CONDOMINIUM BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Brenda Page  ........................................................ President Susan Levy  .................................................. Vice President Robert Kinley  ...................................................... Secretary Arthur Lippens  .................................................... Treasurer Joe Caserta  ............................................................. Trustee FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 4 

FOUR SEASONS TIMES SUBMISSIONS The deadline to submit content for the November issue is: OCTOBER 1, 2025 Submit to: fourseasonstimes@gmail.com 

The submission date cannot be extended this month for any reason. To submit an article, place your full name, telephone number, and email address at the top of your submission. The text must be in Word format and must not be password protected, read-only material, or a PDF. If possible, please use Arial 12-point font. Most articles are limited to 500 words. If you submit photographs, they must be in a jpeg or similar format and be inserted and sent as an email at-tachment. Do not cut and paste pictures into Word or directly into your email. Provide captions for all photographs. We do not accept any artwork or clip art. We acknowledge receipt of all items submitted to fourseasonstimes@gmail.com . If you do not receive an acknowledgment, please re-send your submission. 

# WINDWARD WEALTH ADVISORS 

# WE’RE AT THE HELM TOGETHER 

Our seasoned experts bring over 60 years 

of collective financial expertise to the table, providing informed, strategic advice that 

only time-tested professionals can offer. 

> Erick Simonds, CRC | Lisa Sninski | Eugene P. Sninski, II

Erick@windwardwealthadvisors.com Lisa@windwardwealthadvisors.com Eugene@windwardwealthadvisors.com Schedule a Complimentary Consultation 

## 732-230-6191 

> AD 8562
> ads-8701 PAGE 5

FOUR SEASONS CONCIERGE RESTAURANT SCENE 

New restaurants abound! It’s hard to keep up with our local restaurant scene. Here are a few of the latest additions selling everything from pan-cakes to elegant seafood. There also are two new places to check out the heavenly brew. 

Buttermee Pancakes (4.2) 

8 Ocean Avenue North, Long Branch Mini pancakes every which way (buttermeepancakes.com )

Carpe Vita (5.0) 

516 Bay Avenue, Point Pleasant Beach 

Offers juices, smoothies, acai bowls, and well -ness products ( carpevitajuice.com )

Ellis’ Chicken & Crab Cakes (4.5) 

208 North Bay Avenue, Beach Haven Fried chicken and crab cakes to eat in or take out ( ellislbi.com )

The Reef Club (5.0) 

1A Allen Avenue, Allenhurst Seafood by the sea ( thereefclub.com )

Seawatch Coffee & Market (4.6) 

101 1 st Avenue, Manasquan Offshore Coffee, sandwiches, and baked goods ( seawatchcoffeemarket.com )

Steady Hand Café & Collective (4.8) 

710 Main Street, Bradley Beach (steadyhandcollective.com )

TASTY FOOD TO GO 

If you’ve attended a Four Seasons event lately, you’ve probably enjoyed the delicious food prepared by Merri-Makers Catering . If you want prepared meals at home, Merri-Makers (4.6) 

offers an array of frozen, ready-to-heat and eat appetizers and desserts at its chef’s market at 511 

Herbertsville Road, Brick Township. Also, every day at 4:00 p.m., the store sells hot takeaway food that’s ready for pickup. Hours are Tuesday to Saturday, 2:00 – 7:00 p.m. The food items change often, so take a look at the menu on Merri-Makers’ website. ( merrimakerscateringmarket.com ) or call 908.907.1573. 

AT THE FARMSTAND 

It’s that time of year when locals head to Na-ture’s Reward Farm Market (4.7) , 3124 Bridge Avenue, Point Pleasant, to buy fresh fruits and vegetables. Some say the corn (although pricey) 

is the best you’ll find in our area. Others are fans 

of Silverton Farms (4.6) at 1520 Silverton Road, Toms River ( silvertonfarmsnj.com ). For a closer look at this delightful farm, see photographer Danny Janelli’s photos on Page 48 of this issue. 

ARTISAN CHOCOLATE 

I f y o u ’ r e ac h o c o h o l i c i n search of hand-made treats, visit 

Sweet Revenge (5.0) , 527 Bay Avenue, Point Pleasant Beach. This award-win-ning chocolatier p r o d u c e s m i l k and dark choco-late locally. She also creates cus-tom chocolates for special occa-sions and as gifts. The retail store is open limited hours, so check online before you go ( sweetre-vengechocolate.com ). 

STOP & SHOP FINED 

The Ocean County Department of Consumer 

Affairs found violations at the Stop & Shop (4.1) 

in Toms River that resulted in $75,000 in fines and 

penalties against the supermarket chain and an FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 6 

order to safeguard “accurate product labeling and compliance” in all of its NJ stores. An investigation uncovered “mislabeled product dates and spoiled products waiting to be placed on display. . . Beef and poultry were stamped with dates indicating when they were put out for display rather than when they were pack-aged, ‘creating the appearance of freshness well beyond the actual delivery dates’” ( patch.com ). The investigators noted that the chain was rely-ing on pre-packaged products from wholesalers rather than using in-store butchers ( stopand-shop.com ). Shoppers beware! The “sell by” or “packed by dates” stamped on products are no guarantee of product safety or freshness. 

CLOTHES AND MORE CLOTHES 

It’s amazing how many clothing stores are 

opening, despite the availability of online shop-ping. Retail stores are not dead – they’re evolving! Here are a few shops that have opened nearby. 

They offer everything from casual clothing to el -egant occasion apparel. 

Dry Goods , a chain store providing trendy clothing directed at young women, will open this fall at the Freehold Raceway Mall, 3710 US-9, Freehold ( drygoodsusa.com ). Also new to this mall is J. Crew Factory , featuring classic clothing 

at affordable prices. 

Lululemon has opened at 761 Asbury Av-enue, in Ocean City, on the former site of the Ron Jon Surf Shop. The store sells its high-style athletic wear. The store is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. ( shop.lululemon.com ). 

Ross Dress for Less (4.1) has opened at 

Brick Center Plaza, 51 Chambers Bridge Road, 

Brick Township, on the former site of Bed, Bath & 

Beyond. The store offers discounted apparel and 

decorative items for the home ( rossstores.com ). 

Windsor Fashions (4.7) is now located among the discount stores at 1 Premium Outlets Boulevard, Tinton Falls. The store sells elegant 

formal and informal wear, with everything offered 

from gowns to jeans ( windsorstore.com ). 

MORE STORE CLOSINGS Claire’s is in bankruptcy and is closing several of its Claire’s and Icing stores in the U.S. and 

Contined from Page 5 PAGE 7 

pany in 2017. They’re responsive, pleasant, and will clean your windows inside and out at a reasonable price. Or go for it all and have them power wash your entire home or provide other home services. Call Jenna at 732.908.7575, or go online at atouchof-glassnj.com .

CAR WASH 

Maybe more than your windows need wash-ing. Residents say their cars get especially dirty in our location. However, many aren’t that pleased with local car washes, citing everything from, “My car was not really cleaned” to “they’re crooks!” Several residents said they wash their ve-hicles with a garden hose at home. Other locals head to Prestige Auto Spa (4.9 ), at 883 Fischer Boulevard, Toms River. They like the choice of cleaning packages at various prices. Prestige is open every day beginning at 8:00 a.m. ( prestige-autospanj.com ). 

> Jane Secci

GAMES GALORE 

Are you hooked on classic board games? Do you love game nights? Are you eager to shop for new games? The Board Room may be tailored to you. This new game store at 1123 Asbury Avenue, 

Ocean City, offers space for you to test or play 

over 150 games. The store also sponsors events and classes. You can even munch on snacks as you play your favorite game. For a closer look at 

what’s offered, go to the store’s website at ( the-boardroomocnj.com ). 

LET THEM SHINE! 

Are your windows looking dull? Are the crev-

ices filled with debris? Well, you can make them 

sparkle by hiring A Touch of Glass (5.0) . Two young couples in Toms River founded this profes-sional window-cleaning and power-washing com-abroad. However, two of its apparel stores in our area are not on the closing list. These include 

Claire’s in the Jersey Shore Premium Outlets and 

Icing located in the Ocean County Mall ( stores. claires.com ). In our August issue, we noted the bankruptcy of AT HOME and the closing of several of its stores. Add the AT HOME store on Route 88 in Brick Township to the list. It was just announced that our local store is slated to close permanently. FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 8 

# 732.513.6992 732.513.6992 Residential & Commercial Residential & Commercial 

# OWNER OPERATED – NO SUBCONTRACTORS OWNER OPERATED – NO SUBCONTRACTORS We Are a Roofing Certified Company We Are a Roofing Certified Company Credit Cards Accepted • LOW PRICES AVAILABLE Credit Cards Accepted • LOW PRICES AVAILABLE 

# Call us for a Free Estimate Call us for a Free Estimate 

## 25 Years of Experience 25 Years of Experience Licensed & Fully Insured Licensed & Fully Insured NJ HIC #13VH07720100 NJ HIC #13VH07720100 FIVESTARSQUALITYCONSTRUCTIONNJ.COM FIVESTARSQUALITYCONSTRUCTIONNJ.COM FRANCISCO@FIVESTARSQUALITYCONSTRUCTIONINC.COM FRANCISCO@FIVESTARSQUALITYCONSTRUCTIONINC.COM ads-6915 

EPDM EPDM •• COPPER WORK COPPER WORK •• SLATE SLATE •• TPO TPO •• FIBERGLASS FIBERGLASS ROOF TILE ROOF TILE •• SHINGLES SHINGLES •• CEDAR SHAKES CEDAR SHAKES •• TORCH DOWN TORCH DOWN ••

WINDOW REPLACEMENTS WINDOW REPLACEMENTS •• GUTTERS GUTTERS ALL KINDS OF ROOFING ALL KINDS OF ROOFING PAGE 9 

SENIOR TRAVEL 

Earlier in our lives, when we were working and caring for a family, we dreamed of having the freedom to travel without restrictions. We imagined going on road trips, cruises, and world tours. When we were newly retired, we managed 

to fulfill some of those dreams and enjoyed them 

immensely. However, as we age, we become less inclined to walk or drive long distances. We may curtail our travel adventures as driving long dis-

tances becomes harder, flying becomes difficult, 

and tours seem exhausting. So, what do we do now? Do we give up traveling altogether? Or do 

we find ways of getting around our senior issues 

and forge ahead? Despite the challenges, traveling for seniors 

has a host of benefits. According to the Freebird 

Club, a group that advocates travel for seniors, travel experiences enhance personal growth by 

offering opportunities to explore cultures, broaden 

perspective, and stimulate curiosity. They also contribute to physical and mental health by giving seniors a chance to engage in activities like walk-ing, hiking, and learning new things. In addition, the chance to create new relationships reduces feelings of loneliness and isolation ( freebirdclub. com ). So where do we begin? We could start close to home. One of the programs on our local PBS channel is called “ Drive By NJ .” Every episode highlights an area in New Jersey that has histori-cal or educational value and is less than a one-hour drive from home. To access this resource, search online for “ Drive By NJ ” and choose from the destinations that it features. Another resource for close-to-home destina-tions is the AAA. If you are a member, you can visit one of their centers (there is one right around the corner from Shop Rite) and ask for their New Jersey guidebook. It lists all the attractions in our state, plus places to stay if you are inclined. In addition, don’t forget that we live less than two hours away from two of the most desirable tourist destinations in the country – New York City and 

Philadelphia. These cities offer endless possibili -ties for exciting adventures that you can do at your own pace. If you are interested in traveling while engag-ing in a learning environment, go to Road Scholar 

to find out about a range of destinations and 

learning experiences from bridge to the history of the Caribbean. It is worth investigating. And if you want to travel without leaving the house, you can try their online programs ( roadscholar.org ). Another mode of travel appropriate for seniors is slow travel. Slow travel consists of going to a single location where you stay at a B&B, hotel/mo-tel, vacation home, or apartment for an extended stay. You can then leisurely explore, get to know the culture, and relax. Grand Tours are excellent for seniors because they handle all aspects of the trip, such as trans-portation, meals, activities, and sightseeing desti-nations. Plus, you have the advantage of making friends because you will be together for the whole trip. If this type of travel appeals to you, the Four Seasons Travel Club runs several of them a year, where you can join members of our community for an exciting adventure. 

Many seniors enjoy cruises because they offer 

all levels of activity from one base. However, there are some caveats for seniors, which you can read about in Frank Mongiello’s article in this issue. The types of travel we have described have a host of advantages, but only if you ensure your safety as well. The National Council on Aging recommends that you check with your doctor before you go and follow public health guidelines for the places you visit. While traveling on a bus or plane, make sure you keep hydrated, don’t sit too long in one position, pack antibacterial wipes, and always keep your medicines and documents with you, especially your credit cards ( ncoa.org ). If you keep these tips in mind, you should be able to have an exciting and meaningful adventure traveling in keeping with your physical condition and overall health. For more travel information, see our listing of Travel Resources on the following pages.  

> Elizabeth Candiotti FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 10

TRAVEL RESOURCES 

Below is a list of the major airline companies 

that fly out of Newark and/or Philadelphia. We’ve 

listed their website address. 

NEWARK INTERNATIONAL (EWR) newarkairport.com 

Aer Lingus – aerlingus.com 

Aeromexico – aeromexico.com/en-us 

Air Canada – aircanada.ca 

Air France – airfrance.us 

Air India – airindia.com 

Air Premia – airpremia.com 

Alaska Airlines – alaskaair.com 

Allegiant Air – allegiantair.com 

American Airlines – aa.com 

Arajet – arajet.com 

Austrian Airlines – austrian.com 

Breeze Airways – flybreeze.com 

British Airways – britishairways.com 

Delta – delta.com 

Egyptair – egyptair.com 

El Al – elal.com 

Emirates – emirates.com 

Ethiopian Airlines – ethiopianairlines.com 

Frenchbee – frenchbee.com 

Frontier Airlines – flyfrontier.com 

Icelandair – icelandair.com 

Jet Blue – jetblue.com 

La Compagnie – lacompagnie.com 

LOT Polish Airlines – lot.com 

Lufthansa – lufthansa.com 

Porter – flyporter.com 

Scandinavian Airlines – flysas.com 

Singapore Airlines – singaporeair.com 

Spirit – spirit.com 

Sun Country – suncountry.com 

Swiss – swiss.com 

TAP Air Portugal – flytap.com 

Turkish Airlines – turkishairlines.com 

United Airlines (Hub) – united.com 

Volaris – volaris.com PHILADELPHIA INTERNATIONAL (PHL) phi.org 

Aer Lingus – aerlingus.com 

Aeromexico – aeromexico.com/en-us 

Air Canada – aircanada.ca 

Alaska – alaskair.com 

American (Hub) – aa.com 

American Eagle – aa.com 

British Airways – britishairways.com 

Delta – delta.com 

Discover Airlines – lufthansa.com 

Frontier – flyfrontier.com 

JetBlue – jetblue.com 

Southwest – southwest.com 

Spirit – spirit.com 

Sun Country – suncountry.com 

United – united.com PAGE 11 

If you look online by searching “list of com-

mercial airlines,” you’ll be amazed at how many 

exist globally, some of which you’ve never heard of. Below is a list of large and small airlines we 

found, but they do not fly out of Newark or Phila -

delphia. You may fly one of them when you are 

abroad or as connections between countries and smaller cities. 

A-M 

Aegean Airlines, Air Dolomiti, Aeroflot, Aerolin -eas Argentinas, Air Arabia, Air Astana. Air Austral, Air Baltic, Air Belgium, Air Caraibes’ Air China, Air Corsica, Air Dolomiti, Air Europa, Air France, Air Macau, Air Malta, Air Mauritius, Air Namibia, Air New Zealand, Air North, Air Seoul, Air Serbia, Air Tahiti Nui, Air Transat, Air Vanuatu, AirAsia, All Nippon Airways, Avelo Airlines, Avianca, China Eastern Airlines, Finnair, Gulf Air, Hawaiian Air-lines, KLM, Korean Air, Lion Air (Indonesia), Ma-laysia Airlines, Mango, Middle East Airlines 

N-Z 

Nok Air, Nordwind Airlines, Norwegian Air In-ternational, Oman Air, Peach, Pegasus Airlines, Philippine Airlines, Porter, Qantas (Australia), Qatar Airways, Ryanair, Saudia, Scoot Airlines, Shanghai Airlines, Silkair, Skylanes, South Af-rican Airways, SpiceJet, Spring Airlines, Spring Japan, SriLankan Airlines, Swiss, Swoop, TAAG, TACA,TAP Portugal, Tigerair Australia, Transa-via Airlines, TUI UK, Tunis Air, Turkish Airlines, Ukraine International, Ural Airlines, UTair Avia-

tion, Uzbekistan Airways, Vietnam Airlines, Virgin 

Atlantic, Virgin Australia, Vistara, Viva Aerobus, 

Volaris, Volotea, Vueling Airlines, West Jet, Wiz -

zair and Xiamen Airlines 

POPULAR CRUISE LINES 

Below, we’ve listed some familiar cruise lines, 

but there are many others of various sizes and lev -els of luxury, ranging from river cruises to yachts. Carnival Cruise Line – carnival.com 

Celebrity Cruises – celebritycruises.com 

Cunard Line – cunard.com 

Disney Cruise Line – disneycruise.disney. go.com 

Holland America Line – hollandamerica.com 

MSC Cruises – msccruisesusa.com 

Norwegian Cruise Line – ncl.com 

Princess Cruises – princess.com 

Regent Seven Seas Cruises – rssc.com 

Royal Caribbean – royalcaribbean.com 

Seabourn – seabourn.com 

Virgin Voyages – virginvoyages.com HOTEL BOOKING & PRICING SITES 

Hotel rates can vary greatly even for the same room on the same date. Here are online resources that can help you compare prices and get the best rate. Agoda – agoda.com 

Booking.com – booking.com 

Expedia – expedia.com 

Expedia/AARP – expedia.com 

Google – google.com/travel/hotels 

HotelsCombined – hotelscombined.com 

HotelTonight – hoteltonight.com 

Hotels.com – hotels.com 

Kayak – kayak.com 

Momondo – momondo.com 

Priceline – priceline.com 

Skyscanner – skyscanner.com 

Trip.com – us.trip.com 

Tripadvisor – tripadvisor.com 

Trivago – trivago.com 

Vrbo (vacation rentals) – vrbo.com FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 12 

TOURS & TRIPS 

Tours are available to meet your every need. Whether you want to see sights, learn something new, or try new culinary skills, there’s a tour or trip for you. We’ve listed only a very few of the larger 

companies that offer specialized travel packages. 

Alumni Tours 

Many universities offer travel opportunities 

to their alumni. Typically, the trips are provided by package tour sellers such as AHI Travel and Premier World Discovery. These trips are well-

planned and affordable. 

Below are a few examples of colleges with these programs. You can look online and see what educational travel entails. Harvard Alumni Travel – alumni.harvard.edu 

University of Michigan – alumni.umich.edu 

New York University – nyu.ahitravel.com/travel-with-us 

Rutgers – rutrip.ahitravel.com Bicycle Tours 

Backroads – backroads.com 

Senior Cycling – seniorcycling.com Cooking Tours 

Boston Food Tour – secretfoodtours.com 

Culinary Backstreets – culinarybackstreets.com 

Epitourean – epitourean.com 

Globus – globusjourneys.com 

The International Kitchen – theinternational-kitchen.com 

Intrepid Travel – intrepidtravel.com 

Sonoma Food Tour – sonomafoodtour.com 

Trafalgar – trafalgar.com 

Viator – viator.com Educational Tours 

EF Go Ahead Tours – goaheadtours.com 

National Geographic Journeys – nationalgeo-graphic.com 

Road Scholar – roadscholar.org 

Smithsonian Journeys – smithsonianjourneys. org Global Travel 

Adventures Abroad – adventures-abroad.com 

Firebird Tours – firebirdtours.com 

Grand European Travel (GET) (AARP) – getours. com 

Kensington Tours LTD. – kensingtontours.com 

Overseas Adventure Travel – oattravel.com 

YMT Vacations – ymtvacations.com Safaris 

Audley Travel – audleytravel.com 

National Geographic – nationalgeographic.com 

Thomson Safaris – thomsonsafaris.com Solo Tours 

Adventures for Solo Travelers – afstravelers.com 

Exodus Adventure Travels – exodustravels.com 

Explore Worldwide – exploreworldwide.com 

Intrepid Travel – intrepidtravel.com 

Rick Steves Tours – ricksteves.com 

Road Scholar – roadscholar.org 

TCS World Travel – tcsworldtravel.com Walking Tours 

Country Walkers – countrywalkers.com 

ElderTreks – eldertreks.com 

Walking the World – walkingtheworld.com PAGE 13 

OCTOBER FESTIVALS 

Our local area is “rich” in fall festivals. Below are a few of the popular October events. 

October 3-5, 2025 Jersey City Art & Studio Tour eventbrite.com October 4, 2025 Collingswood Book Festival collingswoodbookfestival.com October 4-5, 2025 Historic Smithville Oktoberfest historicsmithville.com October 5, 2025 Downtown Freehold Oktoberfest downtownfreehold.com October 10-11, 2025 LBI Fly International Kite Festival 

lbifly.com 

October 11-12, 2025 Irish Festival at Historic Smithville smithvilleirishfestivalnj.org October 11-12, 2025 Mullica Hill Fall Festival mullicahill.com October 12, 2025 New Brunswick Oktoberfest newbrunswick.com October 13, 2025 Holland Ridge Fall Flower Festival hollandridgefarms.com October 16-19, 2025 Cape May Birding Festival njaudubon.org October 25-26, 2025 Halloween Food Truck/Music Festival (Asbury Park) municiaplevent.com 

> ads-5537

FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 14 

> ad-8440 PAGE 15

WELCOME ABOARD 

Should I take a cruise? Is it a good way to travel? Is it safe? Is it worth the price? What is a river cruise like? These are some questions that travel agents frequently receive. Cruising is popular. Recent statistics show that cruising is on the rise, and river cruising (both in the U.S. and abroad) is in demand. The cruise industry has experienced record sales since the pandemic. This year, cruising surpassed the pre-pandemic numbers by a large margin. 

Cruise lines are adding new and larger ships to accommodate this rising demand. In 2024, 34.6 million passengers cruised globally, which was a 9% increase over 2023. Approximately 19 million Americans were projected to cruise this year, and that number is likely to rise in the upcoming years. To some, cruising is the only way to travel. Many have cruised well over 100 times, and some people have retired and actually live on cruise ships. Having no taxes to pay is enticing! Luckily for many of us at Four Seasons, there are many options when it comes to cruising without the need 

to fly to Florida or other distant ports. 

Royal Caribbean Cruises and Celebrity 

Cruises offer many options that depart from Bay -onne, NJ. Crystal and Silversea also sail at times from Bayonne. MSC (Mediterranean Shipping Company) sails from the Red Hook Terminal in Brooklyn. Carnival, Norwegian, Cunard, Disney, Holland America, and Princess depart from Man-hattan and Brooklyn. Cruising can be a great value. Your room is included in the price (more on this below), and you can eat just about 24/7 if you desire. Of course, this is not recommended! Entertainment (most of which is Broadway cal-iber) is available in the evening. Dance lessons, cooking demonstrations, trivia contests, movies, Karaoke, casinos (except for Disney cruises), and a host of other activities are available. You can do as much or as little as you want on a cruise. Visit-ing new or familiar destinations is an economical and fun way to travel while taking a cruise. Some ships hold over 7,000 guests, not in-cluding the crew, which can exceed 2,000 people 

on larger ships. Many cruise lines offer activities 

and programs for children. Royal Caribbean, Carnival, and Norwegian Cruise lines seem to have more kids onboard than Holland America, Celebrity, and Princess. There is one cruise line, Virgin, that does not allow anyone under the age of 18 to cruise with them. However, Virgin only sails from Florida and the Caribbean. Some of the older ships carry between 1,500 to 2,500 guests, which, for some seasoned travelers, is just the right number. There are many options when considering and booking a cruise. It is worth researching if you’re looking for an economical way to travel. If you’re considering taking a cruise, below are helpful tips and suggestions. Whether you are new to cruising or an experienced traveler, 

you may find this information useful. Some of 

you already know many of these tips, but others may not. 

GENERAL CRUISE TIPS 

Book your cruise early. Some folks like to 

book last-minute deals, which is fine if you are 

in Florida. There can be enticing last-minute of-

fers, but if you’re flying to any other destination, last-minute flights tend to be priced higher than 

normal, and seats may be limited. Booking early guarantees the price. It cannot increase, but the price can decrease after you’ve booked. Always check the price periodically. If you 

haven’t made your final payment (never pay in 

full when you initially book) and you see a price decrease, contact the cruise line or your travel agent to get the lower fare applied. Once you’ve paid in full, you are locked in at the higher price. 

However, if the price drops before the final pay -

ment is made, it may affect the amenities that you 

receive from the cruise line or your travel agent, such as onboard credit and specialty dining. FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 16 

Continued from Page 15 

Always book through a reputable travel agent. Most cruise lines charge the same price for the cruise, no matter how you book it. Some cruise lines even advise booking through a travel agency. Having a travel agent takes the worry out of man-aging your booking. Travel agents also provide you with amenities (e.g., shipboard credit, pre-paid gratuities, wine, specialty dinners, and reduced deposits) in addi-

tion to what the cruise line offers you. 

Always purchase travel insurance; you just never know. Unforeseen circumstances can happen, pre-cruise, or even during the cruise. Some people believe that if you become ill or if a tragic event occurs, the cruise lines will refund your money. This is not true. The cruise lines like to have fully-booked ships. It’s purely a busi-ness decision. The cruise lines will lose money if a room is unoccupied. Again, always purchase travel insurance; it protects your investment in case something goes wrong. When passengers become ill on board, they may need to be airlifted by helicopter to the near-est port. It can cost over $150,000 to airlift one person. Without insurance, you will be responsible for this amount. Unfortunately, as we age, the cost of travel insurance increases, but it is well worth spending a few hundred dollars instead of losing thousands. Medicare and many secondary insurance companies are not accepted overseas. Some people believe that their credit card company automatically provides travel insurance. Some do, but they pay out a minimal amount. 

Room Types 

Each cruise line offers various levels of state -rooms, from an interior cabin (sort of like a large walk-in closet), ocean view rooms with a porthole or square window (which will not open for obvious reasons), balconies, mini suites, or larger suites. The price can increase for each room type, but sometimes you can get a deal where a balcony room is priced lower than an ocean view. Always do your research. 

Room Location 

There are many opinions on where you want to be on a ship. Most people believe the myth that if you’re on a higher deck, you will feel less motion. Actually, it’s the opposite. The lower to the water level you are, the less motion you will feel. Try putting your hand out as if you’re going to shake someone’s hand. Move your hand side to side, and see which moves farther, the top or the bottom of your hand. The least desirable location is at the front of the ship. This is where you feel the “rocking and rolling” the most. Cruise ships are equipped with 

stabilizers, which are located several feet below the water line. They are the size of a jet airplane wing, and ships have two stabilizers. They can be 

adjusted by the captain to get the smoothest sail-ing possible. They are usually located mid-ship, hence the reason for not booking a room toward the front (bow) of the ship. Some suggest book-ing a room either midship or toward the aft (rear). However, if there are 15-20 feet of seas, you’ll feel the ship rocking no matter where you are, but the 

motion will be slightly controlled by the stabilizers. 

Many of the ocean view rooms are located on the lower level of the ship, so if you’re concerned about becoming seasick, book on a lower deck. Another great location is an aft-facing room (at the rear of the ship). This is where you will enjoy a wonderful panoramic view of the ocean, and will enjoy a smoother sailing. The main dining rooms are always located at the rear of the ship on a lower deck(s) for this reason. These rooms can be a bit pricy. You can book an assigned cabin or a “guaran-tee” cabin that is lower in price. This means you select your room type, but not its exact location. The cruise line will assign a room to you before your embarkation date. If you’re a gambler, you may want to save by booking a “guarantee room,” that could put you anywhere on the ship. You can book a room on a future cruise at the Future Cruise Desk of your current cruise. The advantage of booking a cruise in advance is that you get the best rate available (although, as mentioned earlier, the price you paid can drop). 

The cruise lines may offer a reduced deposit. 

For example, we recently took a cruise and while PAGE 17 

onboard, booked a cruise for early next year. They allowed a reduced deposit for booking onboard, 

as opposed to booking when you’re off the ship. 

We paid the reduced deposit of $200 (per couple). If we waited to book at home, the deposit required is $900. The best part about booking onboard is that, 

depending on your room type, they will offer you 

shipboard credit for your future cruise. In our instance, we booked a cruise and will receive a total of $200 (the deposit amount) in shipboard credit for that cruise. This is in addition to the amenities we’ll receive from our travel agency. In our case, we will receive free gratuities on that cruise from the agency. The cruise lines charge somewhere around $14 per person, per day for gratuities. These are given to your room attendant 

and dining staff. 

Helpful Hints Packing: Statistics show that many of us tend to pack about 20 percent more clothes than needed. Just use common sense when packing and try to plan your wardrobe for each day. Creat-ing a list of what you are bringing may be helpful when packing. 

Hook magnets: Most cabin walls on cruise ships are made of metal. Bring at least six or more 

hook magnets of varying sizes. You can hang 

hats, belts, sleepwear, and other items on the walls to save on closet space, which is generally very limited on ships. 

Thermal travel cups: The coffee/tea cups and 

plastic cold drink “glasses” on ships are small. The larger thermal cups are a much better alternative. I always label mine with my initials and stateroom number just in case I leave it behind (I’ve done this a few times!). 

Tea: If you are a tea drinker, the buffet and dining rooms offer a good selection of teas. How -

ever, these are typically flavored teas. If you prefer 

Lipton, Red Rose, Tetley, or other plain teas, bring your own tea bags. 

Hanging shoe organizer: This can be placed on the outside of the bathroom door. Besides shoes, the extra pouches can hold a variety of items, such as Ziploc bags for vitamins, medica-tions, and sunblock. 

Extra hangars: It’s always a good idea to bring some extra hangars. On one of our cruises, 

they literally had a total of five hangers in the 

room. Of course, we asked for more, but avoid the hassle and pack some wire hangers in the front pouch of your suitcase. 

Extension cords/Power strip: Many of the ship’s rooms have one power outlet. Bring a small power outlet with a few receptacles. 

Small night light: It might come in handy. Some of the older ships don’t have night lights in the bathrooms. 

Domestic and foreign plugs: If you travel outside of the U.S, Canada, and Mexico, U.S. ships have outlets that will accommodate our plugs. However, if you plan to spend time on land in another country, be sure to purchase a device 

made specifically for that country. 

Sticky notes: These are useful for leaving a note to your cabin attendant or other guests in your room, and have many other uses. 

Stain stick: Bring a Tide Stain Stick, or any other brand. Dry cleaning and laundry services are available onboard the ship, but they tend to be expensive. 

Phone service: There are telephones avail-able in the staterooms, but the cost to make a call from your room can be from $2.00 to $8.00 per minute. Unless you purchase a pricy Internet/ phone package from your cruise line, your cell phone won’t work unless you’re in port. It’s a good idea to check with your cell phone provider 

in advance. Some offer international service or a 

one-time phone for international calls. Yes, they can be expensive. Many cell phone carriers allow free or low-cost texting services. 

Ship time: There may be times when you 

travel into different time zones while cruising. 

When this happens, announcements will be made to remind you to change your clocks and watches. It is important to stay on the ship’s time. It may seem inconvenient, but it isn’t as bad as watch-ing your ship sail away while you’re in a foreign country. Don’t leave your watch on your local time! FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 18 

Shore excursions: All cruise line offers side trips in the ports. Some travel agencies also offer 

excursions. These are priced higher than if you book something similar while onshore. However, the cruise line excursions will guarantee that you won’t miss the ship if you’re delayed. There have been instances where someone (not me!) booked a local excursion and arrived at the pier after the ship departed. When this happens, you are re-sponsible for reaching the next port. Be careful when using other vendors to book an excursion. 

PASSPORTS 

Believe it or not, your U.S. Passport expires six months before the expiration date listed. Be sure that your passport is valid for at least six months before your return from a cruise or land tour. Don’t be that couple at the dock who watch their ship depart because their passports were due to expire four months after the trip. Hopefully, you found this information helpful. Happy Travels and Bon Voyage! 

Frank Mongiello 

FOR SUPERB CRAFTSMANSHIP AND A FOR SUPERB CRAFTSMANSHIP AND A SOLID COMMITMENT TO EXCELLENCE, TRUST SOLID COMMITMENT TO EXCELLENCE, TRUST A PROFESSIONAL FULL SERVICE A PROFESSIONAL FULL SERVICE ROOFING COMPANY ROOFING COMPANY EXPERTLY TRAINED & HIGHLY SKILLED CREWS EXPERTLY TRAINED & HIGHLY SKILLED CREWS 

SMALL REPAIRS TO FULL ROOF REPLACEMENTS, SMALL REPAIRS TO FULL ROOF REPLACEMENTS, NO JOB IS TOO BIG OR SMALL NO JOB IS TOO BIG OR SMALL 

* COMPLETE ROOF MAINTENANCE * ROOF REPAIRS * COMPLETE ROOF REPLACEMENT AND INSTALLATION * GUTTERS AND SIDING * GUTTERS CLEANING * FINANCING AVAILABLE * FREE EVALUATIONS 

WE ARE LICENSED, BONDED AND INSURED WITH OVER 49 YEARS OF EXPERIENCE CALL TODAY TO SCHEDULE YOUR APPOINTMENT 732-244-8588 LIC#13VH06840400 

> ads-7122

FOR SUPERB CRAFTSMANSHIP AND FOR SUPERB CRAFTSMANSHIP AND SOLID COMMITMENT TO EXCELLENCE, T SOLID COMMITMENT TO EXCELLENCE, T A PROFESSIONAL FULL SERVIC A PROFESSIONAL FULL SERVIC ROOFING COMPANY ROOFING COMPANY EXPERTLY TRAINED & HIGHLY SKILLED C EXPERTLY TRAINED & HIGHLY SKILLED C 

SMALL REPAIRS TO FULL ROOF REPLACEME SMALL REPAIRS TO FULL ROOF REPLACEME NO JOB IS TOO BIG OR SMALL NO JOB IS TOO BIG OR SMALL 

* COMPLETE ROOF MAINTENANCE * ROOF REPAIRS * COMPLETE ROOF REPLACEMENT AND INSTALLATION 

# MICHELE’S MICHELE’S GOLD BUYERS LLC GOLD BUYERS LLC 

GOLD - DIAMONDS - SILVER - COINS 

DIAMONDS DIAMONDS DIAMONDS DIAMONDS DIAMONDS DIAMONDS 

> ON-SITE SECURITY BONDED LICENSED - INSURED

Michele DeGeorge Serving Ocean & Monmouth Counties DeGeorge Professional Building 249 Brick Blvd. - Brick, NJ 08723 OFFICE: 732-262-4653 (GOLD) CHECK OUT OUR WEBSITE: www.michelesgoldbuyers.com ads-2748g 

WE BUY GOLD WE BUY GOLD “When it’s time to sell Trust Michele” 

# Bulletin 

> ads-2693
> Richard Smith NJLMP #13079 NJHVAC #07151 NJHIC #12VH11674700

HVAC Services 

Furnace Repair & Install Mini Split Repair & Install AC Repair & Install Boiler Repair & Install PAGE 19 

ads-578a 

# Eliminate Pain and Maximize Your Health At... 

# FITZPATRICK CHIROPRACTIC, LLC 1184 FISCHER BLVD. Suite 1B TOMS RIVER, NJ 08753 732-288-0500 

Dr. Robert Fitzpatrick, Jr., B.A. Dr. Lisa Morreale-Fitzpatrick, B.S., R.N. Medicare Assignment Accepted Just 10 Minutes from Four Seasons Now using state-of-the-art Class IV Warm Laser Therapy for Pain Management. Treats the spine, extremities and a plethora of conditions! Call to discuss your complimentary laser session. PROTECTING ACTIVE LIFESTYLES FOR OVER 27 YEARS 

ads-468 18 

®Registered trademark of Bath Fitter Franchising Inc. Independently owned and 

operated by O’Gorman Brothers Inc. *Special offer good on the purchase of a 

bathtub, wall, and faucet kit. One coupon per customer. May not be combined 

with any other offer. Coupon must be presented at time of consultation. Discount 

applies to same day purchases only. Previous orders and estimates excluded. 

Off er valid only at these locations **Subject to credit approval. Minimum monthly 

payment required. Offer expires 10-31-25 ‡Most Bath fi tter tub installations are 

completed in one day. Some exceptions apply. See location for full details. Casey O’Gorman Plumbing license #13549/ HIC #13VH030115500 FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 20 

# FOUR SEASONS LAKEWOOD 

> ads-8314

# www.michellesellstheshore.com Realty One Group Emerge 514 Brick Blvd., Brick, NJ 08723 732-477-0200 michellelukowiak@gmail.com 

REALTOR ® ASSOCIATE 

# Let Me Help You Take Your Home From‘For Sale’ To SOLD! Michelle Lukowiak Are You Ready To Make A Move? 

# 908-910-3537 Your Four Seasons Trusted Realtor and Resident Specializing In Our Communities Resales Here Are A Few Of My Recent Successes Here Are A Few Of My Recent Successes 3 Heathersway Ct. - PENDING $539,000 44 Autumntide Dr. - SOLD $408,000 43 Greensprings Dr. - SOLD $515,000 14 Sunlight Springs Rd. - SOLD $535,000 62 Springlawn Dr. - SOLD $680,000 PAGE 21 FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 22 PAGE 23 

INDOOR POOL RULES 

The following are key Four Seasons indoor pool rules to remember. You can review the complete set of rules that are posted in the pool room behind the lifeguard. • All guests must be accompanied by a resident at all times. • Residents and guests must sign in upon entering the pool room. • No rafts, tubes, or other floating devices are permitted, except noodles and arm floaties. 

• No jumping into the pool. No roughhousing. • No children under 3 years old. Children need to be potty-trained. No diapers, swim-ups, or pull-ups. • No carriages or strollers are permitted. • Children’s hours are from 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. when permitted. Please check the Weekly Activity Listing for the days when the indoor pool is open to children. • No one is admitted with rashes, cuts, open sores, or band-aids. • No glass is permitted. • The lifeguard will close the pool for 30 minutes when there is thunder. • If a resident enters the pool to do laps, please allow them a free lane. • The Jacuzzi hot tub runs for a 15-minute interval. The next reset is after a 5-minute shutoff. 

• The indoor pool is closed to children when the outdoor pool is open. 

THANK YOU 

To Our Community and New Friends, We want to express our sincere thanks and appreciation for the outpouring of love and support we 

received during a very difficult time in our lives. The loss of our sister Marie Pizzo and her husband Tony (Tomatoes) Pizzo has had a profound impact on our family. The many expressions of kindness 

and comforting words that we received have helped us immeasurably to get through this ordeal. 

The beautiful tribute from the Garden Club epitomized the warmth and empathy that have been 

so prevalent throughout this time. We can’t thank you all enough. We feel the love, and from this, we have gained the strength to get through it all.  

> With all our love and gratitude, Joyce & Joe Marotta FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 24

EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORT 

We rely on emergency services if we’re having a health crisis or are involved in a serious ac-cident. Many factors go into deciding how and where you will be transported for medical attention. 

In New Jersey, transportation guidelines are the responsibility of the Office of Emergency Medi -

cal Services (OEMS). OEMS certifies more than 20,000 emergency medical technicians (EMTs) 

and more than 1,700 mobile intensive care paramedics (MICP’s). It also licenses more than 4,500 vehicles, including mobility assistance vehicles, ambulances, mobile intensive care units, specialty-care transport units, and air medical units. When someone is seriously injured, EMS personnel need to decide whether transportation by ambulance or helicopter will get the patient to the trauma center sooner. They consider ground travel 

time to the nearest trauma center (e.g., distance, traffic, and congestion) and a helicopter’s estimated time of arrival (ETA), transfer time, and flight time to the trauma center. They also consider the number 

of patients who need to be transported. According to OEMS guidelines, ground transport should be used for an un-entrapped patient who is within 30 minutes of ground travel time from a trauma center. Entrapped patients are an ex-ception to the 30-minute rule if a helicopter can reach the scene while a patient is being rescued or extricated. The guidelines state that air transportation should be considered when incidents involve more than three critical patients. JEMSTAR, the New Jersey Emergency Medical Services Helicopter Response Program, is oper-

ated jointly by several NJ government offices and funded by surcharges on motor vehicle registrations. 

The surcharge on a vehicle’s registration is $4, 3 goes to JEMSTAR for capital and operational costs, and $1 is used for New Jersey State Police training. There is also an NJDOH grant to the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and Virtua Health. The grant is up for bid every three years. 

Currently, the New Jersey State Police use five medically configured Agusta Westland AW-139 

helicopters, one on-call, and four serving as backup. The helicopters are owned, piloted, and main-tained by the New Jersey State Police, Aviation Unit, which is responsible for the oversight of the program’s aviation operations. NJDOH is responsible for the oversight and management of JEM-STAR’s medical services. In addition to the state-funded air medical system (JEMSTAR), NJDOH licenses in-state-based air medical units operated by private air ambulance companies. The Department currently licenses twelve air medical programs, eight of which are based in New Jersey. The Regional Emergency Com-munications System (REMCS) at University Hospital in Newark, NJ, serves as the state’s designated lead communications center for dispatching and management of New Jersey’s air medical resources. Do you have the right to specify where you want to be treated? According to Google online AI resources, “In New Jersey, you can generally choose your destination hospital in a non-life-threat-ening situation, but emergency responders can override your request based on medical necessity. For severe or urgent conditions, state law and medical protocols require EMTs to transport you to the closest “appropriate” facility. Be aware that if you ask to go to other than an “appropriate” facility, you may not be completely covered by your insurance. Occasionally, the most appropriate hospital is not able to accept emergency patients and is listed as “on divert.” This means the facility is temporarily not accepting ER patients, and the emergency 

responders must use protocols to find another appropriate facility.  

> Adapted from material provided by Senator Robert W. Singer, 30 th District,
> and the Office of Emergency Medical Services (OEMS). PAGE 25

# Pat’s Landscaping 

> spc-705

NJ Home Improvement Contractor’s License # 13VH06164300 

# ⁕ Shrub & Tree Trimming 

# ⁕ Bush & Small Tree Removal 

# ⁕ New Bushes & Trees Planted 

# ⁕ Perennial and Annual Flower Planting 

# ⁕ Fresh Mulch and Decorative Stone Spread 

# ⁕ Cleanups any time of the Year 

# ⁕ Garden Wall, Curbstone & Field Stone Borders 

# ⁕ Fall Thatching, Slicing, and Seeding 

# ⁕ Landscape Design 

# 848-448-1310 

** let us update your yard ** 

Family Run Business for over 20 Years! 

call us today for a free estimate!! FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 26 

www.rzpest.com 

ALL INSECTS ALL ANIMALS ALL RODENTS 

# 1-732-489-9513 

FREE ESTIMATES 100% PEST ELIMINATION, NO IFS, ANTS, OR BUGS ABOUT IT! 

Business Lic. #97622A – Lic. # 25801A 

> ads-2704B

## ALL INSECTS ALL INSECTS COVERED COVERED GROUND BEETLES • CENTIPEDES • MILLIPEDES EARWIGS • SPIDERS • ANTS • SILVERFISH • CRICKETS **BED BUGS NOT INCLUDED** **WOOD DESTROYING INSECTS NOT INCLUDED** One Time Service $95 - $105 *Yearly Quarterly Service $250 - $270 *

4 Times Inside - 3 Times Outside 

Termite Contracts $100 * per year with no current termite problems. Quarterly Pest Control Termite Inspection $80 *

> *PRICES DO NOT INCLUDE TAX

Neighbor Discount - $70 * Each Get 5 neighbors for a one time spray only (inside/outside) - MUST BE APPLIED SAME DAY SENIOR DISCOUNT $725 * ANY Termite Job 

We handle all kinds of jobs ranging from smaller repairs to constructing entirely new 

roofs. No matter the size 

of your project, Toms River 

Roofing & Siding guarantees 

quality on all of our services. 

Toms River Roofing & Siding contractors offer great customer 

service, and want to impress you with our close attention to detail! LIC # 13VH09899700 ad-8239 

# 732-797-8053 

 Each Work Site Completely Cleaned 

 Premium Materials on All Jobs 

 Roof Restoration, Replacement & Repairs 

 Siding Installation & Repair 

 Professional Pressure Washing 

 24/7 EMERGENCY PATCHING 

 LOW COST SOLAR 

ASPHALT - ROOFING - GUTTERS WWW.TOMSRIVERROOFINGNJ.COM NOT THE BIGGEST — JUST THE BEST 

> — ALL MAJOR CREDIT CARDS ACCEPTED —

FREE ESTIMATES 

# 1/4 B&W Beaverson Blvd. Corner Cafe Briar II News Brick Corner Cafe Lion’s Pride HCO Newsletter HC Silverton Pavilion News Leisure Times Greenbriar Times LV News Seaview Tidings Renaissance Times Four Season Times 

> ads-5621

## 732-890-8261 

rhaggan2@njmedicareplans.net www.njmedicareplans.net Medicare Insurance Consultation and Enrollment Service Robert G Haggan II Robert G Haggan II 

Insurance Agency 

2850 Yorktowne Blvd., Unit 24, Brick, NJ 08723 Why call a 1-800 number and deal with the operator of the day when you can get personalized service with a local Medicare Insurance Agent. 

## CELEBRATING OVER 17 YEARS 

Independent Agent, serving New Jersey’s Medicare eligible population since 2007! MEDICARE INSURANCE PAGE 27 

BEFORE YOU GO 

As we plan our travels for late fall and winter, it’s critical to check our home and take safety steps 

before heading out for an extended period. The cold winter weather can cause pipes to freeze. 

When they burst, it results in damage to a home and, possibly, to adjoining property. You may not be covered by insurance if water or other damage occurs. 

Experts caution against turning off your heat in winter. In our climatic zone, they suggest you turn down your thermostat to a minimum of 60°F and turn off your water until you return. They also 

advise unplugging all of your electronic devices. Other common-sense advice includes putting a hold on your mail or forwarding it, storing all valu-ables in a safe or safety deposit box, and leaving your key with a family member, friend, or neighbor. Law enforcement suggests you do not leave a hidden key anywhere on your property because thieves 

are well-versed in how to find it. In this digital age, they also advise you not to post your trip online 

before you leave or while you are away. It lets robbers know you’re not at home. 

Before you leave, a final safety check is in order. Are your smoke detectors and other alarms 

working? Have you removed all the garbage? Is the outside of your home clear of debris and are all objects, such as covered patio furniture, secured? Leave your home knowing you have taken the right steps to ensure all will be well when you return. 

TRAVEL DISCOUNTS 

City Pass is a program that gives you multiple attractions for a single fee in several cities. For example, the New York City Pass costs $156 and allows you to go to the Empire State Building, American Museum of Natural History, Top of the Rock Observatory, 9/11 Memorial, Ferry to Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island, Circle Line Sightseeing Cruise, Intrepid Museum, and the Guggenheim 

Museum. City Passes for fifteen destinations can be found on citypass.com . They are definitely 

worth looking into. You will get access to the most famous attractions in each city and save money. If you’re looking for “freebies,” go online to lifevacs2025@gmail.com . Life Vacs contains guides for locations in the US and abroad. The 2025 version also has recommendations for places to stay and helps with hotel bookings. When it comes to travel guides, you have a few options. You can log on to travelguidesfree. com. You will find free print and online travel guides for the U.S. and Canada. Wikitravel is a new 

online program ( wikitravel.org ) offering worldwide travel information about travel sites. AAA supplies 

travel guides to members and has an on-site travel agency. 

YULIYA NUDELMAN, MD 

Internal Medicine      

> Office: 732.339.7360 Fax: 862.274.4708 500 River Avenue, Suite 110 Lakewood, NJ 08701 SPPANJ.com ad# 8647
> 31 Years of Experience ∙Teaching All Ages Special Needs Friendly ad 8683 FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 28

TRAVEL CLUB 

Fourteen residents of Four Seasons went on an 11-day trip to Alaska in July 2025. The trip started with a four-day land tour, which took us from Fairbanks to Denali National Park and Mount McKinley. Along the way, we took a river cruise along the Chena River, where we saw caribou and the Trail Breaker Kennel, home to the Iditarod champion sled dogs. Denali National Park and Mount McKinley are spectacular, and pictures alone do not do them justice. Our seven-day Princess cruise began in Whittier and continued through Glacier Bay, Hubbard Bay, and also ports in Skagway, Juneau, and Ketchikan. Before or after exploring each town, we went on excursions. Whether it was taking a helicopter ride and trekking on Mendenhall Glacier in 

Juneau, dog sledding in Skagway, or going on a fishing boat in Ketchikan, every experience was described as amazing, spectacular, unbelievable, and more. If visiting Alaska is a bucket list item, a once-in-a-lifetime trip, or a place you’ve visited before, it truly is an amazing vacation. 

The Travel Club meets on the second Tuesday of every month at 9:15 a.m. in the Clubhouse Theater. All are welcome to attend to see where our next travel adventure might take you. 

> Carol Navatto

PAGE 29 

FREE ESTIMATE 

> ads-8342

AWNING, INC. FAMILY OWNED AND OPERATED SINCE 1914 

Offering: 

• Window Awnings • Canopies •Retractable Awnings 

• Electric Screens • Louvered Roof Systems 

• Seasonal Installs/Removals/Storage • Furniture Re-slings Highway 35 North, Wall Township 

732.449.5940 info@opdykeawnings.com  

> ad-5038 FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 30

FOUR SEASONS LIBRARY 

My mom always said if you had a library card, you could go anywhere you wanted. I never truly 

understood what she meant until I got older and was able to appreciate all that books have to offer. 

A reader can take a journey with an author and travel anywhere. As youngsters, we followed Gulliver on his travels to strange and distant lands. In high school, we took the ten-year journey home with Odysseus after the Trojan War. We experienced a trip around the world in eighty days with Jules Verne. We fell down the rabbit hole with Alice and traveled to Wonderland. The spirit of adventure and travel can be found in many novels – even when it is least expected. 

The theme of travel is found in many books for that specific reason – to learn about a particular 

place with the intention of visiting. Many other books include a more subtle, underlying hint of travel as a part of the storyline. The travel message in some stories is light and cheery, while in others it 

is more solemn. Either way, we are fortunate to travel to far-off places without leaving the comfort 

of our armchairs. Fern Michaels’ book, “ Santa Cruise ,” tells of four high school friends who reunite years later to take a cruise during the holidays. The story shares fun and friendship during a special time of year. “The People You Meet on Vacation ,” by Emily Henry, follows two friends as they take their annual vacation. Henry’s other novel, “ Happy Place, ” deals with a similar topic. “Where the Lost Wander ,” by Amy Harmon, follows a group of wagon train families as they explore the Oregon Trail. “ The Poisonwood Bible ,” by Barbara Kingsolver, follows an American missionary family as they move to the Belgian Congo. “ One Italian Summer ,” by Rebecca Serle, tells the story 

of a woman who goes to Italy after her mother’s death. She not only finds beautiful scenery, but also 

a way to move on after her loss. Cheryl Strayed’s memoir “ Wild ” recounts the author’s journey in the 

wake of her mother’s death. She decides to hike a thousand miles along the Pacific Coast all alone. Against all odds, the journey allows her to heal and move forward. Elizabeth Gilbert’s “ Eat, Pray, Love ” is another example of someone moving on and shedding their grief. Gilbert takes a year-long 

journey around the world in an effort of self-discovery and healing. 

There are so many stories that deal with travel and the journey. Some are concerned with the actual tourism to places all over the globe. Others take us on a more emotional journey, as we dis-cover our own personal path through life. Then there are those books that combine both travel and a pilgrimage to create an unforgettable tale. Whatever your choice, you can visit the Four Seasons Library and borrow the book that best meets your taste. And… if you decide to visit the Four Seasons Library, you will notice it has had a complete facelift! Special thanks again go out to all who helped with this project. Please travel to the Four Seasons Library and experience our new look. 

> Dee Bludgus
> ads-3537

PAGE 31 

# OCEAN P 

BRIAR II • CAREFREE GAZETTE • COU CRESTWOOD SUN • ECHOES OF TH GREENBRIAR TIMES • HC BULLETIN • LAKE RIDGE VIEWS • LEISURE RIDGE LV WEST NEWS • RENAISSANCE CEDAR GLEN WEST • METEDECONK MO NORTH NEWS • OUTLOOK • PARK EC SENTINEL • SOUTH KNOLL SPIRIT • SO 

THE EXPRESS • THE GARDENER 

WESTLAKE J 

> Central Air Conditioning • Boilers • Furnaces Heat Pumps • Hot Water Heaters Tankless Water Heaters • Attic Fans Oil/Gas/Propane Conversions
> Air Cleaners • Dryer Vents • Humidifi ers
> Tune-Ups • Service Plans

√ FREE ESTIMATES ON REPLACEMENTS & NEW INSTALLATIONS 

√ CERTIFIED & TECHNICALLY TRAINED PROFESSIONALS 

√ SAME DAY SERVICE / REPLACEMENTS 

√ CERTIFIED, LICENSED, BONDED, & INSURED 

√ SERVICE & INSTALL ALL MAKES & MODELS 

$500 OFF 

GAS CONVERSION 

$150 OFF 

Central A/C and / or Gas Boiler/Furnace Replacement 

$250 OFF 

NEW INSTALL OF AIR CONDITIONING OR 

$100 OFF TANKLESS GAS HOT WATER SYSTEM 

$50 OFF 

OR 

1-800-688-TEMP www.caretemp.com 732-349-1448 732-657-8367 

FINANCING AVAILABLE 

891 Route 37 West, Toms River, NJ 08755 

FREE 2nd Opinion 

Mention “SPC” & Receive Additional Savings! 

FREE 

HEAT CONTRACT For New Customers (Call for Details) 24/7 EMERGENCY SERVICE 

COUPONS MUST BE PRESENT WHEN SIGNING CONTRACT and may not be used for prior services/installations. Coupons do not expire, unless otherwise stated. 

# $500 OFF 

## GAS CONVERSION 

# $150 OFF 

Central A/C and / or Gas Boiler/Furnace Replacement 

# $250 OFF 

NEW INSTALL OF AIR CONDITIONING OR HEATING SYSTEM 

# $100 OFF TANKLESS GAS HOT WATER SYSTEM 

# $50 OFF GAS HOT WATER HEATER 

OR 

> ads-1101

1-800-688-TEMP www.caretemp.com 732-349-1448 732-657-8367 

Central Air Conditioning • Boilers • Furnaces Heat Pumps • Hot Water Heaters Tankless Water Heaters • Attic Fans Oil/Gas/Propane Conversions 

Air Cleaners • Dryer Vents • Humidifi ers 

Tune-Ups • Service Plans 

√ FREE ESTIMATES ON REPLACEMENTS & NEW INSTALLATIONS 

√ CERTIFIED & TECHNICALLY TRAINED PROFESSIONALS 

√ SAME DAY SERVICE / REPLACEMENTS 

√ CERTIFIED, LICENSED, BONDED, & INSURED 

√ SERVICE & INSTALL ALL MAKES & MODELS 

NJ HIC #13VH02253000 Fred Paprocky, Master HVACR Contractor Lic # 19HC00878000 891 Route 37 West, Toms River, NJ 08755 

FINANCING AVAILABLE FREE 2nd Opinion 

Mention “SPC” & Receive Additional Savings! 

# FREE 

HEAT CONTRACT For New Customers (Call for Details) 24/7 EMERGENCY SERVICE 

ad-8699 FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 32 

> ads-8311

 

Synthetic 

# 4 SEASONS LAKEWOOD 

N.J. Lic. #13VH12238300 

Remove Dirt, Mold and Mildew Houses & Gutters — Concrete Patios Driveways • Walkways • Pavers GUTTER CLEAN-OUTS 

Call 732-608-6181 

Fully Insured Free Estimates Full Service Hot Water & Soap 

Executive Enterprises of N.J. LLC 

## Soft Washing 

TOMS RIVER, NJ 

Professional Results at Affordable Prices 

QUALITY OF WORK IS SECOND TO NONE! 

OUR SERVICE IS SAFER AND WILL PRODUCE BETTER RESULTS USING BIODEGRADABLE ENVIRONMENTALLY SAFE CLEANING PRODUCTS 

> ads-1071b

Low Pressure Roof Stain Removal 

SPECIAL SENIOR PRICING 

> SAFELY WASHING HOUSES AND ROOFS IN 4 SEASONS LAKEWOOD FOR 20 YEARS

with 2 YEAR WARRANTY 

*FALL SPECIAL* House Wash 

> Must sign up by October 31, 2025. 4 Seasons Lakewood Residents ONLY

ad-8572 PAGE 33 

FOUR SEASONS GOLF CLUB 

Congratulations to the 2025 Four Seasons Golf Club champions! It was a wonderful season with 

amazing golf achievements. 

LADIES’ CHAMPIONS “A” Flight Winner: Diana Braisted  Runner Up: Colette Gepp “B” Flight” Winner: Cocetta Barnish  Runner Up: Nancy Tiedemann “C” Flight Winner: Roseanne Carlson  Runner Up: Ellie Stone “D” Flight Winner: Marthe Yannich  Runner Up: Geri Pitocco MEN’S CHAMPIONS “A” Flight Winner: Bob Demsey  Runner Up: Rico Bellini “B” Flight Winner: Paul Cisek  Runner Up: Sal Tagliarino 

“C” Flight Winner: John Yalango  Runner Up: John Coffey 

“D” Flight Winner: Frank Wolf  Runner Up: Ken Chaves 

We look forward to seeing everyone for our 2026 season. Watch the Weekly Activity Listing for details about registration for current and new members. FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 34 

FOUR SEASONS BOWLING LEAGUE 

Four Seasons opened its fall bowling season on August 27, 2025, at Ocean Lanes. The sounds 

of excitement, cheers, and fun filled the air. Opposing teams cheered for each other, and bowl -ers formed new friendships. Our committee thanks all our participants for making this a wonderful opening month. We will post high scores and averages for teams and individuals at the end of the month. Below are the August results. Weekly results are posted in the Communication Room in the Clubhouse. You can also view standings online at https://oceanlanes.com . Go to the pull-down on the top right of the page and click on “Standings.” 

INDIVIDUAL HIGH AVERAGES Men: Gil Corbley (198.33); Gary Barnish (181.33); Roger Mckeon (180.33); Butch Anderson (180.33) 

Women: Diana Braisted (175.00); Grace Currivan (164.00); Mary Jaroszewski (156); Peggy Winslow 

(151.67) 

SEASON HIGH SCORES: TEAM Team Scratch Game  Team Scratch Series 

Strike Force  683  Up Schitz Creek  1997 Up Schitz Creek  683  Henry’s @ Klees  1994 Henry’s @ Klees  678  Strike Force  1854 

Team Handicap Game  Team Handicap 

Strike Force  683  Up Schitz Creek  1997 Up Schitz Creek  683  Henry’s @ Klees  1994 Henry’s @Klees  678  Unbowlievable  1950 

SEASON HIGH SCORES: INDIVIDUAL Men’s Scratch Game  Men’s Scratch Series 

Gil Corbley  225  Gil Corbley  595 Wayne Raisch  218  Gary Barnish  544 Gary Barnish  211  Roger Mckeon  541 Joe Pacia  205  Butch Anderson  541 

Men’s Handicap Game  Men’s Handicap Series 

Wayne Raisch  282  Joe Pacia  723 Joe Pacia  267  Wayne Raisch  660 Jim Rudolph  250  Jim Rudolph  653 Jim Kartalis  248  Charles Fragapane  650 

Women’s Scratch Game  Women’s Scratch Series 

Grace Curivan  194  Diana Braisted  525 Diana Braisted  186  Grace Curivan  492 

Mary Jaroszewski  184  Mary Jaroszewski  468 

Peggy Winslow  182  Peggy Winslow  455 

Women’s Handicap Game  Women’s Handicap Series 

Joann Volpicella  241  Brenda Page  661 Peggy Winslow  239  Joann Volpicella  648 Maryann DeCristofano  238  Lucretia Cropsey  639 Bernadette Kelly  237  Peggy Winslow  626 

> The Bowling Committee PAGE 35

FIT CLUB STRENGTH TRAINING 

Physical trainer and Four Seasons resident, Linda Tempio, leads three Strength Training classes weekly. They are designed for residents of 

all fitness levels. The classes begin with a warm-

up to prevent injury and move on to resistance training. We use hand-held weights with correct form and posture to help maintain and improve muscle mass and bone density. We end with a cool-down, stretch period, and work to improve balance. Registrants need to bring water and hand weights to class. No mats are used in any of the classes. If you are interested in taking these classes, there are a few openings in the Thursday class at 3:00 p.m. 

BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION 

We’ve formed a new series of classes for residents who want to change their eating be-havior. Resident, Regina Sachs, RN, is a retired nurse who was an instructor at Princeton Hospital and the Princeton Weight Management Center. She will help you build a healthier lifestyle that is meaningful and sustainable. The September sessions are full, but you are welcome to register for the next sessions. The dates and times are to be determined. 

ARTS & CRAFTS 

Join our Fit Club members every Monday from 

11:15 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. to socialize with others as 

you work on any type of art or craft. Bring your snack or lunch. 

MAH JONGG FOR BEGINNERS 

If you want to learn how to play Mah Jongg or polish your beginning skills, join us every Wednes-day at 2:30 p.m. in the Activity Center. We have an ongoing, welcoming group that will help you master the game. To register for any of the Fit Club classes or activities, send an email to fourseasonstimes@ gmail.com . Indicate the desired activity, your name and address, and telephone number. 

Strength Training, Behavior Modification, Arts & 

Crafts, and Beginners Mah Jongg are all free, but you must be a member of the Fit Club ($10 annual dues) to register. To pay dues, bring a $10 check payable to the Four Seasons Community Association to the Activity Desk in the Clubhouse. Note Fit Club on the memo line. 

BOCCE 

The 2025  Bocce  season has come to an end 

after completion of the playoffs and finals.  Play -ers and spectators were rewarded with Italian ice 

after the final game on Monday, July 28, 2025. 

The  winners for 2025 are as follows: 

1 ST  PLACE 

Betty & Ralph Mutarelli, Don Guida, Al Hunter, Mary Murphy, Tony Sclafani 

2 ND  PLACE 

Arleen & Larry Weisenstein, Dan DeBiase, Pat & Pete Kelleher, John Nardone 

3 RD  PLACE 

Paul & Diane Alfano, Joan Hoban, Mike Rec-

chia, Bette Ann Seiffert, Jim Sierotko 

4 TH  PLACE 

John Kehoe, Carol MacDonald, Marie Bell, Yola Flynn, Carmela Giambrone 

Congratulations!  The winners received their awards at the Bocce  Luncheon, which was held on  Tuesday, August 26 th  at the Spring Lake Manor. 

Sign-up for the 2026 season will be held on Wednesday, October 15, 2025,  from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. in the Clubhouse Ballroom.  Registration forms will be in the Communication Room. 

JEWISH AMERICAN CLUB 

We had wonderful meetings in July and Au-gust. Everyone enjoyed the wonderful voices of two long-time entertainment favorites – Steve Berger and “ Strictly 60’s .” Our members have the opportunity to share good news. Judi and David Lederman made a CHAI donation in celebration of their granddaugh-ter Naomi Lederman. She graduated from high school and is beginning her studies in physics at Cornell University. Our future looks exciting! On tap are sing-

ers, games, prizes, and Denny More, a psychic/ 

mentalist. At our Thursday, November 20, 2025, meeting, we will have a Holocaust presentation on events that must never be forgotten. This meet-ing will be open to members and non-members. Please join us for this important program. Watch for details in the Weekly Activity Listing, on Chan-nel 1300, and on Clubhouse bulletin boards.  

> Francine Kaplan FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 36

ITALIAN AMERICAN CULTURAL CLUB 

What a success 2025 has been! We’ve held one tremendous event after another. The Summer 2025 highlight was a barbecue to top all barbecues. Our feast included chicken, ribs, hamburgers, 

hot dogs, sausage & peppers, corn on the cob, various salads, and condiments, finished off with 

watermelon, cookies, and gelato. We were also blessed to have a photographer/member from the camera club take photographs of the event. Also, we featured a trumpet player who accompanied with beautiful background music. 

The September dinner was catered by Nino’s Coal Fire Pizza & Restaurant in Brick Township, 

where they feature vocalist Max Valentino. We were lucky to have him perform for us at the dinner, 

which offered the foods of Sicily. Some of our members shared highlights of their trip to Italy in a 

movie and provided information about what they saw and learned on their trip. Now for the dinner of all dinners! October marks the annual visit of our friends, direct from Italy. The folk group “I Canterini della Riviera Jonica Melino Romolo ” is coming to our area to perform for the Ocean County and New York City Columbus Day parades. We are the only lucky ones who will watch them perform at a private function. The 40-plus entertainers will sing, dance, and play unique Italian instruments. The group comes from the Jonian coast of Sicily. It was founded by Melino Romolo and Sebastiano Totaro in 1965 at Roccalumera, a town in the province of Messina near Taormina. Roccalumera has ancient origins dating back to the Roman domination. In the Middle Ages, Filippo IV gave the feudal town to the noble La Rocca, who built the current old town, known for its Sicilian Baroque churches built in the 17th Century and also for a famous resort. The group spreads Sicilian culture both in Italy and abroad. They perform songs of love, work on the land and sea, and sing carnival songs. Their costumes are authentic early 19th-century attire worn by shepherds. Please 

do everything possible to not miss this extravaganza. 

All of our club’s success is due to our wonderful and hard-working Board and volunteer team, who keep making it happen. Our membership is now 370 residents because of our successful dinners, the rock bottom price we charge to attend our dinners, and keeping the dues at $10.00 annually. Please 

continue to drop off your checks for your 2025 dues at the Clubhouse Activity Desk through October 

1st. Please note that we will accept dues checks for the 2026 year starting on December 1, 2025. You 

must have paid your 2025 dues on or before September 1 of this year to be entitled to a subsidized 

annual Christmas Party price. The only exception will be new members to the community who join. This year’s Christmas Party is set for Saturday, December 6, 2025, from noon until 5:00 p.m. 

This will be our fifth IACC Christmas party at the Clarion Hotel in Toms River. We aim to keep the 

cost for Members (whose dues were paid on or before September 1st) as low as possible. We are still working out the details of this year’s Christmas Party and will keep you posted. Please put the date and time on your schedule so that you can attend the event. Thank you for being members and for your support! 

> Alan M. Floria, IACC President PAGE 37
> ad-6321

# N M. FLORIA, Esq. 

## .florialawoffices.com 

# to me... 

# REE 

ts & Estates and Powers torney r Law Estate 

Admitted in NJ & FL 

# 732-920-9222 

verson Blvd., Ste. 4B, Brick 

> ads-6639

Lions Head Office Park 

# ALAN M. FLORIA, Esq. 

## www.florialawoffices.com 

Four Seasons Resident 

# Talk to me... It’s FREE 

• Trusts & Estates • Wills and Powers of Attorney • Elder Law • Real Estate 

Admitted in NJ & FL 

# 732-920-9222 

35 Beaverson Blvd., Ste. 4B, Brick 

> ads-6639

Lions Head Office Park 

# n’s Head South Four Seasons Lakewood 

> ads-4097

FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 38 

ads-2728 

# BULLETIN QUARTER PAGE - B/W TABLOID P

The h custom comm Contr smoo projec while budge ity ex & Mo 

Don't and Faceb ads-7211 The home improvement industry ranks #1 in over-all customer complaints almost every year due to poor communication & shoddy workmanship. Proven Contracting's customer-centric approach creates a smooth, stress free customer experience. Our on-site project managers provide constant communication while ensuring projects are in-stalled on time... on budget! Proven Contracting specializes in top quality exterior home improve-ments throughout Ocean & Monmouth Counties. 

Don't take our word for it, check out our reviews and ratings on Google, BBB, Yelp, Angi and Facebook! 

1057 Atlantic City Blvd., Bayville, NJ 08721 1358 Hooper Ave. Suite 217 Toms River, NJ 08753 

ad - 8691 PAGE 39 

IRISH AMERICAN CLUB 

Another season has begun, and I look forward to the beautiful fall foliage and wonderful autumn 

goodies – apples from the farm, apple cider, apple cider donuts, pumpkin pie, apple pie, and schnitzel. We’re offering some of these delicious fall foods at the Irish American Club’s Oktober-funfest 

and Barnyard Races on Tuesday, October 21, 2025, in the Clubhouse Ballroom. Enjoy a traditional 

Bavarian schnitzel dinner with noodles and all the fixings prepared by Thistle’s. Soda, water, tea, and coffee are on us. BYOB. Come dressed as a farmer and bring your dollars to our Ballroom Barnyard Races. The dance floor will be converted into a race track (like we do with the horse races). There will be six barnyard animals in each race. We have Miss Piggy, Red Rooster, Daffy, Chicken-Little, 

Elsie Cow-pie, and Bullseye lined up to run. There will be farmhands to help each jockey and animal, take your bets, and announce the races. If you would like to be part of the barnyard setup or the races, let me know. The event will be lots of fun, plus you’ll eat a great meal. If you haven’t seen a cow milked before, don’t worry. You won’t get to see that here either, but we will have a petting pen of farm animals. Sign up on Tuesday, September 30, 2025, from 6:30 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. in the Arts & Crafts room in the Clubhouse. Believe it or not, we’re getting ready for Christmas. We’ll hold our Christmas party on Saturday, December 13, 2025, from 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. in the Clubhouse Ballroom. 

Tee Time will cater a five-course dinner, starting with a fabulous assortment of hot and cold appetiz -ers. You’ll get to enjoy them while you meet and greet your friends. Then, you’ll sit back and enjoy a wonderful meal. You’ll get the white glove treatment at our Christmas event. Dance or just enjoy listening to the 

music of LeeAnn and the Shore Soundz. The signup date is Tuesday, November 18 th, in the Arts and 

Crafts room from 6:30 to 7:00 p.m. It’s always a fun time with lots of door prizes and great entertain -ment. Look for details in the Weekly Activity Listing, watch Channel 1300 for more information, or check the posters in the Clubhouse Communication Room and on the bulletin boards. You don’t have to be Irish to become a member of the Irish American Club. You need to live in the Four Seasons and pay $10 annual dues (separate check) to the Four Seasons Community As-sociation . Oh, look, it’s almost Halloween. I must get started putting up my Christmas tree! Don’t forget to put these dates on your calendar. 

> Tom Nuzzi , President

THEATER CLUB 

The Theater Club, under the direction of Sally Dubrowski, meets with residents who are theater lovers on the second Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Clubhouse Theater. You are welcome to enjoy the world of entertainment with us and participate in theatrical discussions and activities. At meetings, we might engage in trivia, pantomime, storytelling, or scene reenactments with play scripts, or interpretations of playwriting from old theater productions we’ve seen and loved. 

We might do soliloquies of lines from films such as “ On The Waterfront ,” “ Gone With the Wind ,” “ All About Eve ,” and “ Casablanca .” We might read a scene from Broadway shows such as “ A Streetcar Named Desire ,” California Suite ,” “ Butterflies Are Free ,” or “ Lion In Winter .” We might do skits from TV shows such as “ Laugh In ,” “ All In The Family ,” or “ Saturday Night Live .” Our meetings are fun for anyone interested in theater. If you are, we would love to have you join us. So, c’mon down! We’re holding a seat on the aisle just for you.  

> Charlie Philip FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 40

At our Friday, August 15, 2025, dance, Rock n Roll once again presented “ Sky’s The Limit .” It is a delightful entertainment band, and its musicians intermingled with our members at the event. The 

dance floor was filled with smiling faces singing 

along with the band and dancing away! The band played oldie songs to bring back memories and mixed it up with very popular dance numbers. A luscious-looking peach short cake was served 

along with soda, water, coffee, and tea. Rock n Roll Club broke a record in raffle sales in August. 

We collected $1,200 and gave out $600 in six 

raffle prizes ($100/prize). 

On Friday, September 19, 2025, Rock N Roll once again presented the wonderful and profes-sional group “ The Jersey Tenors .” It was a night-club show. This was the second time we had the pleasure of having them entertain us. Before the show, Rock and Roll served shrimp cocktail and a tray of assorted sandwiches with two sides and dessert. Our anniversary dance will take place on Fri-day, October 17, 2025, during our annual mem-bership month . We will present the musical group “Band of Gold .” We will also celebrate Halloween. You are invited to wear a Halloween costume, and we will hold a contest for the best costume. One for the men and one for the women. Sign up for our October dance will take place on Wednesday, October 8, 2025, from 6:30 to 7:30 p.m. at the Clubhouse in the Old Arts and Crafts room. You will need to bring two (2) checks. One check is $10.00 per person for membership for the com-ing year, and the second check will be $15.00 per person for the dance (unless you already paid for membership in September). As always, we look forward to seeing you at our dances. 

> Linda Hansen, Vice President; Lucille Possumato, President

MEN’S CLUB 

Our next meeting is on October 9, 2025, in the Clubhouse. We will begin with breakfast at 8:30 a.m. and then hear a presentation at 9:30 a.m. Alan Brennan from Caption Call will discuss a telephone product that displays the text of a message or conversation as well as the live sound of the conversation. All are welcome. We invite prospective members to join us for a free breakfast and stay for the meeting. Mark your calendars! The next Night at the Races will take place on Saturday, November 1, 2025. Ticket sales will begin on Monday, October 6, 2025, in the Old Arts & Crafts room in the Club-house. See the Weekly Activity Listing for details. Residents who attended the Men’s Club-sponsored outing to the Jersey Shore BlueClaws game against the Hudson Valley Renegades on August 22 nd  enjoyed a perfect summer evening. 

More than 60 of us relaxed as we watched our 

local Phillies team shut out the Yankees affili -ate 3-0. This made up for their loss against the Brooklyn Cyclones, witnessed by over 80 of us in 

May.  To top it off, we set a record when three Four 

Seasons attendees caught BlueClaws T-shirts. 

As always, our ticket included a hot dog, soda, and ice cream treat, followed by a spectacular 

fireworks display. 

Do you know anyone who is ill or has a loved one who has just passed away? Charles Damian will send them a card on behalf of the Men’s Club. You can send an email to Charles at charles. damian.broker@gmail.com. 

> George Smith

WOMEN’S CLUB 

In August, the Women’s Club had a lovely lun-cheon catered by Tee Time. We were entertained by Denny Moore, a magician and comedian. He kept the women guessing and laughing for a solid hour. 

On October 3, 2025, we will offer free bingo. There will be five games, four with a cash prize of $50 and one for a grand prize of $100. Please 

join us. 

> Mary Keefe PAGE 41

GARDEN CLUB 

Summer 2025 is over, and many of our gar-deners say it wasn’t our best growing season. Rain put splits on many tomatoes, and the brutal weeks of extreme heat delayed their ripening. If you have your patch cleaned out and cov-ered with a tarp over a layer of grass and leaves, you’re in good shape for next year. But maybe you’re still gardening, because you planted fall season vegetables that mostly include leafy greens and root vegetables. You may have heard that some veggies taste sweeter after a light frost, and we can expect our 

first one this month. Root crops in particular can 

survive colder temperatures and grow sweeter. This is partly due to their ability to store up starch as energy. When temperatures drop, they convert 

these starches to sugars, which act as anti-freeze 

for their cells. Here are a few words about some of our 2025 avid gardeners: 

Hishi Velardo , a veteran club member of twelve years, not only gardens in the fall, but into winter. Her cool-weather favorites are garlic, chives, and arugula. One unusual veggie you may see growing in her patches is bitter melon. This Asian specialty looks like a dimpled cucumber, but it is indeed bitter. It contains many vitamins and nutrients. Now in his second club year, Kurt Duester-dick says he did well with Japanese eggplant and string beans this year. He likes the camaraderie with other gardeners and enjoys the idea of grow-ing his own veggies. Kurt picks his tomatoes early to avoid predation and ripens them in a cupboard. A Four Seasons resident since it opened, Ger-aldine Deluca , was among those who planned and started our community garden. She rejoined 

the club this year to grow tomatoes and zucchini. 

Geraldine sees fellow club members as “down to earth and easy to talk to,” but she is not pleased with the many narrow paths between patches. (You’re not alone!) First-time gardener Sandra Blicher visits her patch every day to grow lots of tomatoes. “I love it,” and “It’s peaceful being with nature,” she said. Sandra likes that people share their ideas and experiences. Sandy plans to keep her patch next year. 

DEBORAH HOSPITAL FOUNDATION 

Our members enjoyed a wonderful summer, and shared our travel experiences during our 

meetings. We realize that as we travel through the adventure we call life, we take different paths. The 

common denominator is that we found Four Sea-sons when there are still so many paths to take. The Deborah Chapter is busy all year, enabling individuals to be part of a group that is solely a 

charitable organization. 

In August, we celebrated the dedication of two long-standing members. For over 27 years, Myrna Kaplan and Priscilla Greenwald gave their time, understanding, and friendship to many members, both old and new. The Deborah Hospital Foundation chapter continues to raise awareness and funds. We encourage the community to participate in “Dine and Donates” and in our unique and exciting events on the second Friday of the month. We hope to see you at our fashion show in October with clothes from Chico’s outlet. We’ll hold a game day meeting in November, and complete the year with music and a breakfast. For details, look at the Weekly Activity Listing, 

watch Channel 1300, or read the flyers on the 

bulletin boards in the Communication Room and elsewhere in the Clubhouse. 

> Carol Padgitt

No newcomer to gardening, but “still trying to perfect it,” Marie Borst and her husband Artie 

grow tomatoes, peas, and eggplants. She says the garden “was a way to meet people when we 

first moved here” and finds the garden “relaxing.” 

However, she doesn’t like the critters with whom we share the garden. Mark your calendar for Friday, November 14, 2025, when the Garden Club will host a Friends-giving Dinner . Freshly roasted turkey, glazed 

ham, mashed potatoes, and French green beans, catered by Merri-Makers, will be served. I’m told the green beans are growing here in Jersey. Look at the Weekly Activity Listing for sign-up details. 

> Ed Schneider

FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 42 

> ads-6253
> ads-8136 PAGE 43

CALTEC AND WEBSITE COMMITTEE 

Our committee has been busy. Every month, 

our members film the open Board of Trustees 

meeting so that it can be aired on Optimum Channel 1300 and posted on our website. This 

requires at least five or six volunteers who arrive 

at the Clubhouse an hour before the meeting to set up the microphones, cameras, and other 

equipment. The meeting is filmed and given to 

Butch Bennett. Then, it is formatted for Channel 1300 and the website. 

As for the acoustics and speakers in the Ball-room, we’re still researching ways to improve the sound. Several companies have come in and given us proposals for work we might be able to do in the future. Currently, there are two sound systems in the Ballroom. We have a PA System and a Surround System. We’re looking for ways to improve the sound by combining the two systems and not spending too much money. We’ve tried it temporarily at an Irish Club event and thought the sound was much better, and all could hear.  Com-bining the systems would help until we have the budget to install a new system. The idea is still under discussion as we work toward a permanent solution. The music for the pool, which was bought for you by our members, is up and running. Our mem-bers supported the Comedy Show with lighting, audio, and video.  We also supported the Chorus with its show, and the Men’s Club “Night at the Races.” Lynette Downey, our webmaster, has exciting news. We’re getting a new website to replace our 10-year-old site. PropertyPop is our new vendor. The new site was approved by our Board of  Trust-

ees,  and  the contract  was  signed.  After financial matters are  finalized,  we will begin migrating our documents and files onto the new site. 

Some of the features of our new website are  the ability for residents to chat and email each other. Board members and committee and club chairpersons will be able to easily  create  email 

lists.  Future functions include notifications to the 

gatehouse, electronic voting for elections, and much more. Look for  announcements, instruc-tions, and training details. Meanwhile,  continue to access our present website for community  in-formation. 

SOCIAL COMMITTEE 

We look back with gratitude on the many summer activities that brought us together. While the weather wasn’t always on our side, it didn’t dampen our spirits. This season, our community enjoyed a luau and two delicious BBQs. These gatherings gave neighbors the chance to relax, share good food, and strengthen the bonds that make our community special. We’re also proud to highlight the annual fundraiser at our Sunset Social in support of the Matthew Pellegrino Foundation. Winding River entertained us with great music. Thanks to the generosity of our residents and the hard work of our committee, we raised over $750.00. This shows the heart of our community coming together not only for fun, but also to support meaningful causes. A big thank you goes out to 

everyone who helped organize and contribute to 

the event’s success. See the Weekly Activity Listing for the sign-ups for upcoming events. We’ll host a dinner show in November, a New Year’s Eve celebration, and a New Year’s Day brunch. Thank you, Social Committee volunteers, for all your help. Here’s to carrying the spirit of togetherness into the fall season! 

> Rosanne Carlson

Lynette needs volunteers to help her with our new site. Currently, she is working alone. No web experience is required. We will train you. We’re 

also looking for volunteers to edit films. Rich is 

providing training. Please call Tony Spinelli, Vice Chairperson, if you are interested in volunteering or would like any information about joining our committee.  We have two types of volunteers: 1) Members who attend the monthly meetings and have the right to vote; and 2) Volunteer members who aren’t expected to attend the monthly meet-ings but help with committee work. We thank our existing volunteers and welcome new ones. We hope that your participation is a re-warding experience.  We encourage any resident to join us. Without additional volunteers, there is a chance that needed technical tasks won’t get done, and we’ll have to pay to get the required help in the future. We need you! 

> Kathy Nuzzi, Treasurer, Publicity Lynette Downey, Webmaster

FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 44 

ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL COMMITTEE 

The mission statement of the Architectural Control Committee (ACC) states that ACC “was es-tablished to ensure that the visual harmony of the community is maintained in accordance with the guidelines of the Four Seasons Master Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, the Community 

Association Resolutions, and the Residents Handbook. The ACC shall decline any modification re -quests that could cause harm or injury to the aesthetics and/or the property within the community.” 

To make any residential exterior modifications to your free-standing or condominium property, you must submit a Modification Request Form (MRF) to the Management Office. There are two categories of modification requests. Standard Track modifications involve structural changes and necessitate 

surveys and/or measurements. Standard Track changes may take up to 45 days for approval. Fast 

Track modifications do not have those requirements and are typically approved in a shorter timeframe. 

ACC committee members are all Four Seasons residents. All Free Standing and Condo residents are eligible to join. The committee meets on the last Wednesday of each month to review submitted MRF forms and make recommendations to the Community or Condo Boards to approve, conditionally approve, or reject submissions. To be included in the monthly review, you must complete the MRF 

and provide it to the Management Office two Wednesdays before ACC’s monthly meeting. 

I have had many conversations with residents about why they chose Four Seasons. Many have mentioned proximity to family, medical assistance, golf, and shopping. Most residents attest that our community is aesthetically inviting. ACC is committed to continuing to foster that sentiment. 

John Howley, ACC Chairperson 

# 1/4 Bulletin 

> ads-378b
> All phases of Shrub and Ornamental Tree Maintenance, Pruning, Feeding, Replacement, Stump Removal & Landscape Design.
> Also specializing in
> Cleanup and Flower Bed Mulching. Angie’s List Preferred Contractor
> PROTECT YOUR GREATEST INVESTMENT

YOUR HOME! 

> Maintenance of your landscape will maximize the value of your home. “As a 3rd Generation Arborist, I’ve Specialized in the care of trees and shrubs for over 20 years in Retirement Communities”

Call (732) 371-0977 for a Free Estimate and Consultation. 

> * We will beat any legitimate written estimate from another company.

October & November are the ideal months to plant, transplant, trim & feed shrubs and trees to maintain their optimal health. Call today to schedule a Free Consultation and Landscape Audit to evaluate the health of your landscaping and to schedule necessary Fall projects. 

01, 15, 29, 54, 57, 65, 66, 80, 132 

> ad-6150 PAGE 45

MOVIE TALK 1953 

Major events in 1953 included the crowning of Queen Elizabeth II for a reign lasting over 70 years. 

In the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin died of a stroke and was replaced by Nikita Kruschev. In July, an armistice was signed that ended the Korean War. Convicted spies, Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, were executed for espionage. President Harry S. Truman extended his best wishes to incoming president 

Dwight D. Eisenhower, symbolizing a peaceful transition of power. Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay were the first to reach the summit of Mt. Everest. A food processor named Swanson distributed the first packaged TV dinner, which consisted of a 

turkey meal. Mickey Mantle of the New York Yankees hit the longest home run ever recorded (565 feet), and later, the NY Yankees defeated the Brooklyn Dodgers in the World Series. A young man, George W. Jorgenson, traveled to Denmark and returned as Christine Jorgenson, the result of the 

first successful transsexual operation. TV Guide published its first issue, as did Playboy Magazine .A top song of the year was Patti Page’s rendition of “ How Much Is That Doggie In The Window .” 

Finally, a TV purchaser could go down to the local big store and buy one of the first color TV sets available. An ad read, “Buy now. They’ll never be cheaper.” The cost was $1175. 

Meanwhile, in Hollywood...Sex in films received a major boost when the director of “ The Moon Is Blue ” refused to delete the words “virgin” and “pregnant” from the finished script. Clark Gable ap -peared in “ Mogambo, ” which was a remake of 1932’s “ Red Dust, ” which also starred Clark Gable. Marlon Brando surprised everyone by portraying Mark Antony in Shakespeare’s “Julius Caesar.” The 

first 3D film, “ House of Wax ,” was shown. William Holden played a hero-heel prisoner of war in a 

Nazi concentration camp called “ Stalag 17. ” Audrey Hepburn made her first screen appearance as 

a princess cavorting with William Holden in “ Roman Holiday .” The top grosser of the year was the 

first wide-screen movie in Cinemascope called “ The Robe .” 

Other top films in 1953 were “ Lili ” (Leslie Caron); “ The Band Wagon ” (Fred Astaire and Cyd Cha-risse); “ Titanic ” (Clifton Webb and Barbara Stanwyck); “ Calamity Jane ” (Doris Day and Howard Keel); “Call Me Madam ” (Ethel Merman); “ How To Marry A Millionaire ” (Marilyn Monroe, Betty Grable, and Lauren Bacall); “ Miss Sadie Thompson ” (Rita Hayworth, Jose Ferrer); and “ From Here To Eternity ”(Burt Lancaster, Frank Sinatra, Deborah Kerr, and Donna Reed). 

Oscar night, March 25, 1954, was the first to be televised and took place in Hollywood with Donald 

O’Connor as host. It was also televised from New York with Fredric March as host. Oscar awards were given to Actor William Holden (“Stalag 17”) and Actress Audrey Hepburn 

(“Roman Holiday). (Of interest: The Writing Award went to Ian Hunter for this film, but he was not 

the real writer. He acted as a front for the real writer, Dalton Trumbo, who was blacklisted as one of the 10 who refused to testify at the HUAC hearings). The top awards for Supporting Actor, Supporting Actress, and Director went to Frank Sinatra, Donna Reed, and Fred Zimmerman. Of interest was the case of Frank Sinatra, who was no longer 

on top of the world. His films were flops, record sales were only fair, his marriage to Ava Gardner 

was fading, and he owed the government $100,000 in back taxes. Sinatra pleaded with Columbia 

Studios to give him a chance to play Pvt. Maggio, the impetuous loudmouth. Sinatra was finally given 

the role for the rock bottom salary of $8,000. He won the Oscar and went on to again become one of the most legendary performers of the century.  

> Charlie Philip FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 46

TWO PLANES, THREE KIDS, AND ME 

It was a typical cold and dreary February day in New Jersey. Grey skies blanketed the sky, dark clouds hung low, and the chilly wind was howling. The anticipated snowfall had moved out to sea, which was the morning’s only bright spot. The year was 1984. I was on my way to beautiful and 

sunny San Diego, California, for my first out-of-

state business trip. The thoughts of palm trees, balmy weather, and no threats of snow were appealing. I was ready for my week-long trip to paradise, even though it would involve work. It was going to be fun, or so I thought. 

My flight departed on time from Newark at 7:30 

a.m. This was a pleasant and welcome surprise. Once airborne, the pilot cruised to about 32,000 feet, where we were greeted by glorious sunshine 

and virtually no clouds. The flight was smooth and 

uneventful, until… “Ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain,” came the announcement over the raspy and almost inaudible speaker system. “I regret to inform you that our scheduled layover in O’Hare (Chicago) has been delayed due to heavy fog. I will keep you updated as we get closer.” I looked out the window where the sunshine had been a few minutes earlier, only to see nothing but fog. After circling Chicago for over an hour, we were given an update. “Ladies and Gentlemen, this is your captain once again. We have been advised that O’Hare has been closed 

indefinitely due to the increased fog, so we have to 

divert to a nearby airport. We are not sure where 

we’re going; it all depends on air traffic. Several 

planes are being rerouted. Stay tuned.” We landed in Cleveland, Ohio, about 90 min-utes after the pilot’s announcement. When we started our descent, all we saw was a city covered in several inches of snow. We landed amid the chaos at Cleveland’s Hopkins Airport terminal. 

Every flight going into Chicago had been diverted 

to other airports. We were actually among the lucky ones. After walking and standing for eight hours in the extremely overcrowded and noisy terminal, we were advised that we were booked on the 

last flight to Los Angeles that evening. All of the remaining flights to San Diego were completely booked. “You’ll have a connecting flight waiting in 

Los Angeles,” the weary gate attendant told us. “We’ll provide you with that information on your 

flight to LA.” We finally landed, without incident, in Los An -

geles at 11:00 p.m. Pacific time. Yes, it was 2:00 a.m. in New Jersey. A gruff gate agent directed us to the last gate in a different terminal to catch the flight to San Diego. We were greeted by another 

unfriendly fellow, who turned out to be the co-pilot of the 10-seat plane. Pointing at me, as I stood on the desolate tarmac, he barked, “You, how much do you weigh?” He proceeded to ask everyone in our group this question. After speaking with someone on a Walkie-Talkie, he escorted us and our luggage to what appeared to be a minivan with wings and two propellers. I cannot describe the feeling of being up for over 20 hours and having a stranger ask how much I weighed, especially at what technically was 2:00 a.m. on my body’s time. Again, selecting 

me to be the first, he told us which seat to sit in. We 

learned later that our seating assignments were based on our weight. “Just wonderful,” I thought. I honestly prayed that I had rosary beads with me. 

It was my first flight on such a small plane. I was 

concerned. A little over an hour later, our bumpy 

flight arrived in San Diego. I swear that at times it felt as if we were flying sideways! We were unceremoniously dropped off on 

the outdoor tarmac, which was next to a Cy-clone fence with a small gate at the far end. Mr. “Friendly” advised us to go through that gate and 

look for taxis. We finally got to bed around 4:00 a.m., and our first meeting took place at 8:00 a.m. 

The work meetings and conference went very well. After the conference, the short ride to the airport was quick. Checking in at the airport was 

a breeze, as was boarding the plane. Other than 

the trip from Newark to San Diego, it was a great week, but I was still happy to be going home. 

The two-hour flight to our stopover in Denver 

was pleasant and easy. We were welcomed by a beautiful sunny day in Denver, with temperatures in the 60s. We changed planes for the anticipated 

four-hour flight to Newark. “This is much better than last week’s flight. It can’t be any worse than 

that,” I thought to myself. 

Everything was fine. Until…I located my seat, 

sat by the window, and settled in for the four-hour PAGE 47 

flight to Newark. A few minutes later, a young 

couple with a small child sat in the two seats to my left. The tot was less than a year old, and the 

mom had him on her lap for the flight. We were ready for takeoff, or so I thought. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, this is your pilot speaking. Unfortunately, we are having an issue with one of the tires, but the crew hopes to have it changed within the hour.” “Okay, this isn’t terrible,” I said to the young couple. “Hopefully, they can make up the time.” That’s when the clouds rolled in. The beautiful sunshine was gone, and then it happened. Snow, lots of it. In the seat in front of me, a 5-year-old girl stood up on her seat and faced me. She began to use her seat as a trampoline. Up and down, up and down, all while glaring at me with an “I don’t care if you don’t like me, I’m doing it anyway” look. I wasn’t too concerned, as she would be seated and belted in within a short time. During 

the usual pre-flight instructions from the flight at -

tendant, my seat began to shake violently. At first, 

I didn’t know what was happening. I noticed that the seats next to me were still. As luck would have it, another little brat was sitting behind me, kicking the back of my seat and laughing hysterically. I immediately turned around and looked him in the eye, hoping he would stop. You guessed it; he didn’t. He only laughed harder. I then looked at his parents, who were seated beside him. They didn’t even look at me or their monster. The kicking continued. Trying to be nice, I turned around again and asked the parents if they could get their child to stop kicking my seat. It was not the response that I was expecting. “He’s just having fun,” the mother said. The father added, “Don’t worry, he’ll tire himself out and stop soon.” The little monster had more energy than one could imagine. As did the kid who continued to jump up and down while staring at me. Between the jumping and kicking, I wished that I had driven home from Denver instead. The long-awaited announcement came from the cockpit. “Folks, good news, and bad news. The mechanics have replaced the tire, and we’re 

going to push off the gate shortly. The bad news 

is that snow is falling, and temperatures have plummeted. The plane has to be de-iced before 

takeoff.” After another delay, we lifted off. We flew 

above the storm, and glorious sunshine returned. 

We leveled off at our cruising altitude and were 

told that lunch was about to be served. The seat-

belt sign was off. Once again, everything seemed fine. Until…the jumping began in earnest. The little 

one behind me resumed his kicking routine. Just as I was about to say something to both of them, the baby next to me decided to deposit everything he had eaten in the last few days into his diaper. It was not pleasant. If I didn’t know any better, I’d say the kid had a beer and some hard-boiled eggs. 

Just as the flight attendant served my lunch, 

the jumping imp suddenly discovered that her trampoline act didn’t sit well with her stomach. She vomited all over the back of her seat and herself, and narrowly missed me. The hapless parents didn’t know what to do about Mr. Stinky and the contents of his diaper. They just sat there and stared blankly into space. The little one didn’t like his situation and began 

a screaming fit that rivaled a Scottish banshee. As the flight attendant walked by, I politely 

handed her my uneaten lunch. It’s impossible to 

enjoy food with your hand squeezing your nose. 

Luckily, the baby cried himself to sleep. I de-cided that a nap for me was also in order. It was 

my only escape. As I nodded off, the now-famous 

imp started to kick my seat again. The sudden jolt of the seat knocked my arm into the baby’s mother. Of course, one motion led to another, and the screaming baby was back in action. I decided that my only peace would be by taking a visit to the bathroom, or in airline terms, the lavatory. I stayed locked inside for quite a few minutes. It was heaven. Until… “Folks, we’re experiencing some turbulence. The seatbelt sign is back on. Please return to your seats.” I actually yelled, “Do I have to!” 

I managed to nod off. There was peace. Un -til… “Ladies and Gentlemen, there is some bad weather ahead, and our arrival in Newark is going to be delayed. We’ll be sure to keep you updated 

and apologize for the delay.” I pressed the button for the flight attendant. 

“How may I help you, sir?” came the surprisingly pleasant reply. “Do you have any parachutes on board?” I asked.  

> Frank Mongiello FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 48

LOCAL ROAD TRIP 

Photographer Danny Janelli loves to visit Silverton Farms (4.6), 1520 Silverton Road, Toms River, to pick organic produce, enjoy a community farm-to-table meal, and take in the beautiful land-scape. Of course, he goes with his camera in hand. You can go online to see when the farm is open and what’s available to purchase ( silvertonfarmsnj.com ). PAGE 49 

Angel Appliance Repair 

732-403-6975 50+ years serving your community. Senior owned and operated 

*Lg and Samsung specialists* 

10% off repairs for Seniors and Veterans 

Service calls are just $99. 

# NOVA Heating 

# and Air Conditioning 

Family owned and operated since 1987 

## 732-938-4314 

Free Service Call With REPAIR Ask Us About 0% Financing 

License #19HC00338900 www.novaheatandairnj.com 

# ARROW ELECTRIC 

Friendly service because nice matters! 732-269-6960 

Family Owned and Operated Since 1980 

HIGH QUALITY ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS AND REPAIRS 

Lighting, Fans, Panels, Troubleshooting and EVERYTHING in between! 

Master Lic. # 15333 - BONDED & INSURED - ArrowElectric.org 

# All Papers 

# Directory 

Next Service Date: _________________ 

## NJ Dryer Vent Guy LLC. 

Specializing in residential & commercial dryer vent cleaning 

Rich Shashaty 

Featuring: Safe...Effective Ro Vac Lint Removal 

Licensed and Insured 

Office: 732.409.3009 

Mobile: 718.541.9401 Queen Ann Road Brick, NJ 08723 License 13VH04639300 

PROSPECT 

HANDYMAN SERVICE 4 SEASONS RESIDENT 

Smoke Alarms-Lighting Fixtures-Disposals-Inspection Items Fix Hard To Open Windows-No Job Too Small 

CALL LENNY GADALETA 732-492-9417 

INSURED LIC#13VH04108700 

# REED’S 

HEATING & COOLING 

Quality Service & Honesty Are Our Top Priority 0% FINANCING Credit cards accepted Maintenance ~ Repair ~ Installation 

732-942-6000 $20 OFF Service - Not to be Combined Master HVACR Lic# 19HC00452100 

## SENIOR DISCOUNT! 

We arrive in Company Cars & Uniforms 

Insured and Bonded Residential & Commercial 

# Casey’s Cleaning Since 1986 

# 609-548-2660 

caseyscleaning.com 

DIRECTORY 

## Tom’s 

Cabinet Refacing & Painting 

Existing Doors & Drawer Fronts Or replacement Doors & Drawers Sprayed Not Brushed Solid Colors 

Work Done by Owner Tom DeLuca 

Lic NJ#13VH10945700 Insured 

Over 45 Years Experience 

732-557-0100 

> NJ Lic# 13vH04551400

CALL FOR FREE ESTIMATE FULLY LICENSED & INSURED 732-836-0026 www.coastalrestorationsinc. COM 

## POWERWASHING POWERWASHING 

SOFT WASH PROCESSED USED ALL SIDING , A LL EXTERIOR SURFACES G UTTERS & R OOF CLEANING STUCCO & S TONE CLEANING /R EPAIR ENVIRONMENTALLY SAFE PRODUCTS 

> RESTORATIONS INC.
> SENIOR DISCOUNTS

FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 50 

# Directory 

## MJF Plumbing, Heating, AC 

For all your plumbing, heating, and AC problems 

Time to schedule your heating checkup! 

## 732-477-1605 Plb. Lic. 10983 Owner on Every Job • Senior Discounts 

# Pets Are Family Too! 

Dog Walking . Pet Sitting . Training Jennifer Coletta NEW NUMBER 917-549-0787 jenpets@optonline.net Four Seasons Resident 

# Handyman Jim 

## (908) 670-2732 

Any Job, Big or Small – Just Call 

For All Your Home Repairs 

– Fully Insured – Lic.#13HV08821300 

For All Your Home Repairs 

# NEED A RIDE? 

Airport / Cruise Terminals Special Occasions & Point to Point 

## 888-777-6627 

Licensed - Insured - Senior Discounts Triple Seven Limo T7Limo.com KERRY’S FRIENDLY CAR SERVICE LOCAL & LONG DISTANCE DROP OFFS & PICK UPS. DOCTORS. SHOPPING. AIRPORTS. NYC. ATLANTIC CITY. HOSPITALS. CRUISE SHIPS. FAMILY FUNCTIONS. RESTAURANTS. Accommodations for Large Groups KERRY Cell: 732-606-2725 24 HOUR SERVICE • CALL FOR FREE ESTIMATES!! 

## Joseph 

4 Season Resident, Retired Electrician 

Install/Replace Light Fixtures, Switches & Outlets Carpentry Work 

Call Joe @ 732-202-8811 

Mark’s Home Maintenance 

> Attic Stairs • Roof/Siding Repair • Garbage Disposal Gutter Cleaning/Guards • General Bathroom/Kitchen Maintenance Microwaves • Wall Mount TV • Bathroom Safety Hand Rails Bathroom Tile Repaired/Regrouting/Mold Removal Door Lock Sets • Crown Molding Installed • Smoke Detectors

## 732-664-7119 Lic# NJHIC-13VH13590500 

## A FRIEND’S HOUSE 

ADULT SOCIAL DAY PROGRAM FOR THOSE WITH COGNITIVE ISSUES GRANTS AVAILABLE FOR THOSE WHO QUALIFY BRICK / TOMS RIVER AREA 732-244-5565 

ALL PAPERS 

FALL CLEAN UPS!! 

LANDSCAPIING/YARD WORK Paver Installation & Repairs We Do Almost Everything Serving Adult Communities for 20+ Years 

732-678-7584 Free Estimates 

LIC# 13VH09155700 FULLY INSURED 

DIRECTORY 

## CRYSTAL WINDOW CLEANING 

LET US MAKE YOUR WINDOWS CRYSTAL CLEAR 

Over 40 years Experience • Insured 

## CALL (732) 841-3341 PAGE 51 

# Directory 

Garage Door & Opener Installation and Repair Specialists 

We service Ocean & Monmouth Counties Free New Door Estimate • Same Day Repairs For Quality Material & Workmanship, 

Call Us And Book Your Appointment Today! 

## Garage Door Masters LLC 

garagedoormastersllc.com garagedoormastersllc@gmail.com 

Call or Text: 732-870-7313 

PROSPECT 

HANDYMAN SERVICE 4 SEASONS RESIDENT 

Bathroom Renovations-Tile-Toilets-Vanities-Faucets 

CALL LENNY GADALETA 732-492-9417 

INSURED LIC#13VH04108700 

Companion Services 

Deborah @ 732-320-8771 Retired R.N. 

• Companionship • Support & Healing • Organizing • Errands & Shopping • Medical Appointments • Exercise Assist 

MARK’S HOME MAINTENANCE 

Reduce the risk of falls 

SAFETY HAND RAILS / GRAB BARS 

We can securely install grab bars/safety hand rails in the shower and other areas of the home where assistance is needed 

732-664-7119 

> License # NJHIC-13VH13590500

# S & W Painting and Powerwashing 

Spring/Summer Painting 

All Phases of Painting / Interior & Exterior Cleaning of Siding • Gutters • Driveways • Sidewalks • Decks Free Estimates • Insured • 38 years exp. • Senior Discounts 

We Accept Major Credit Cards www.swpaintingnj.com 732-581-6275 

## CAREGIVERS 

EXPERIENCED HOME HEALTHCARE GROUP 

WILL HELP YOU, HOURLY OR 24/7 

(PERSONAL CAREGIVERS, COOKING, SHOPPING AND TRANSPORTATION. REFERENCES AVAILABLE) 

CALL NATELA ROWLAND 732 300 7652 Nice Guy Car Service 

24 Hour Service CALL JOHN PUGLISI for Reasonable Rates 

Cell: (732) 779-8366 - Highly Recommended -

NYC, Newark, Atlantic City, Philadelphia Airports, Cruise Ships, (Groups up to 16) 

HANDYMAN SERVICES 

FAUCETS HOSEBIBS CARTRIDGES DISPOSALS OTHER THINGS 

Call Sebby 

732-807-3403 

A Four Seasons Resident 

This Dr. Makes House Calls! 

Window Balance Repairs Glass & Screen Repairs Insulated Glass Replacement Storm Doors & Tabletops 

DR. J’S 

WINDOW & SCREEN HOSPITAL 

(732) 899-2611 

> 610 Route 88, Point Pleasan t

DIRECTORY FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 52 

# Directory 

# S

# COASTAL 

# GARAGE DOORS 

Residential 

We Do It All 

(732) 341-8141 

# #29, #87, #02, #03 DOOR QUEST GARAGE DOOR REPAIR & REPLACEMENT 

Cable, Spring Roller, Opener 

# 732-507-9988 

> Lic# 13VH10883700 • FREE ESTIMATES

# CUSUMANO CONSTRUCTION 

ADDITIONS • DECKS • ROOFS • WINDOWS REMODELING • SIDING • TILE AND MORE We Do All Types Of Painting 732-370-6722 

NJ Lic# 13VH02950300 Insured 

John’s Tri County Painting 

Fully insured - 40 years experience Father & Son- References - Great pricing Excellent Interior/Exterior painting wallpaper removal- wall repairs and more work 

Lic #13VH06577400 

732-262-7553-cell-732-552-4994 

PQ PAINTING SERVICE LLC 

Family Owned/Operated Since 1967 

NJ HIC. REG. #13VH12471600 / FULLY INSURED 

> Angie’s List Super Service Award Winner

Senior Discounts 

Call us 7 days a week 

732-500-3063 • 609-356-2444 

www.pqpaintingservice.com 

Int./Ext. Painting & More Home Improvements • Deck Repairs Fully Insured • Free Estimates • Reasonable Rates 

ALL PAPERS PAGE 1 & 2 

Home Improvements 

& Renovations 

By PQ PAINTING SERVICE LLC SINCE 1967 PQ Painting Service – an Angie’s List Award Winner 

NJ HIC REG #13VH12471600 / Fully INSURED 

All Carpentry (Framing, Crown Molding, Trim Etc.), Flooring (Laminates & Hardwoods), Siding, Kitchens and Baths, Decks, Sheetrock, Spackling & Taping, Int./Ext. Painting, Staining See our website for a full list of services 

732-500-3063/609-356-2444 

Visit us online at http://pqpaintingservice.com 

ALL PAPERS PAGE 1 & 2 

Serena Skye 

In-Home Massage Therapy 

25 Years Experience 

845-826-5809 

Joyology101.com 

## DRIVEWAY SEALCOATING 

$50 (ONE CAR) DRIVEWAY 

$75 (TWO CAR) DRIVEWAY 

# 732-504-7620 Cell: 732-221-4840 

New or Unsealed Driveway EXTRA! 

GROUP DISCOUNTS AVAILABLE! 

LAKE RIDGE - 02 

DIRECTORY 

# ESH LANDSCAPING 

All Your Landscaping Needs 

Mulch, Cleaning, Trimming, Power Washing, Paver Patios, Ornamental Fish Ponds and Waterfalls 

Fully Insured Landscaping Design 

Free Estimates • 732-506-9636 No Job Too Big or Small 

ANCHOR HOME MAINTENANCE LLC 

General Home Repairs Big and Small 

Painting – Power Washing – Carpentry 

Roofing and Siding Repairs 

Gutter Cleaning 

Call James for a Free Estimate 

732-864-7779 

Senior Discounts LIC#13VH12132000 PAGE 53 

## OLGA’S HOME HELPERS 

Compassionate European Women Home Health Care/Companionship Live-in or Live-out Insured & Bonded 

Call Nataliya at 732-278-7865 

# WINDOW REPAIRS 

Replace fogged or broken insulated glass & balancer springs 

Repair difficult to open windows 

BOB CIPOLLA 732-580-6091 FULLY INSURED & REGISTERED REG # 13VH03215600 

# Directory  

> Established since 1984 NJ HIC.#13VH12663100

## ADEL MIKHAIL & SONS OVERHEAD GARAGE DOORS LLC Sales • Service • Installation Automatic Door Openers 732-363-2122 / 732-905-9975 

# European Caregiver 

■ Personal Care ■ Driving ■ Cooking ■ Companion ■ Light Cleaning ■ English 

20 Years’ Experience in “Four Seasons” Excellent References! 

Call Irma at 732-606-6675 

Try my Marsh S&P500 Daily Prediction System (MSPDPS) 

Since 2014, it has returned 65% APR. 

Free details from r.marsh@prodigy.net 

732-477-4029 

# We Do Garages 

Declutter & Organize • Paint Floors, Walls & Ceiling 

Install Shelving • Complete Cleanouts 

Call Us Kevin 732-278-7871 Ron 908-461-6703 NEW LOOK PAINTING 

4 SEASONS RESIDENT Interior & Exterior Painting Powerwashing & Handyman Services Call Ron Intile 

## 973-223-8708 

Insured NJHIC# 13VH12473600 

DIRECTORY 

Proven Contracting, LLC 

ROOFING • SIDING • WINDOWS • SKYLIGHTS • GUTTERS HANDYMAN SERVICES • NO $ DOWN/0% FINANCING AVAILABLE • ON-SITE PROJECT MANAGERS • GAF MASTER ELITE (PRESIDENT’S CLUB) ROOFING CONTRACTOR • CERTAINTEED 5 STAR/JAMES HARDIE PREFERRED SIDING CONTRACTOR • ANDERSEN CERTIFIED WINDOW CONTRACTOR • A+ RATING ON BBB 732-800-4616 • PROVENROOFING.COM Proudly Serving Ocean & Monmouth Counties HIC #13VH07527200 

## T & K LANDSCAPING 

Design, Installation & Maintenance of Flower Beds/Pavers/ Retaining Walls/Mulch/Trees/Plants/Shrubs/Power Washing, Fencing & Gutter Cleaning/Patio/Fence Enclosures/Concrete Patios/Walkways 

20 Years in Business/Fully Insured/Free Estimates 

Call Kevin 1-732-535-1097 

Lustre Clean Pro Dry Carpet Cleaning 

This month only: FREE Germicide Treatment 

Normally a $90 Value • Let’s Stay Healthy! 

Imagine being able to walk on your carpets immediately! 

Voted “Best of the Best” by Asbury Park Press 

Includes: Soil Retardant, Deodorizing, Spot Cleaning 

3 Areas $149, 4 Areas $198, Add’l Areas Only $49 Each 732-918-8035 FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 54 

PLEASE PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS WHOSE ADS SUPPORT THE PUBLICATION OF THE FOUR SEASONS TIMES 

VOLUNTEER AT FOUR SEASONS 

Several committees need your help. 

To find out about committee opportunities, 

see Cathy or Mary at the Activity Desk in the Clubhouse or contact 

fourseasonstimes@gmail.com 

# Directory 

DAVID M. LEDERMAN, CPA 

Personal, Business & Trust Income Tax Filings 

Court Reporting and Filings for Estates, Special Needs Trusts, Guardianships 

DAVID@MLCPALLC.COM 732-920-7801 

Lions Head Office Park * A Four Seasons Resident 

# Major Appliance Service 

Factory Authorized 

Refrigerators • Freezers • Ranges Washers • Dryers • Dishwashers 732-892-8508 

All work fully guaranteed Insured 

AME Plumbing 

*Senior Discount* $25 OFF $150 or more Cannot be combined, call for details 

> EXPIRES OCTOBER 31, 2025
> Water & Sewer Lines, HVAC, Drains, Water Heaters & Leak Detection

732-785-4226 

www.ameplumbingnj.com NJ Master Plumbers # 1289700 

> Custom Interior Painting Cabinet Refi nishing Garage floor coatings Powerwashing

Call for free consultation : Joe Carfagno 609-224-0235 

“Transforming spaces; Enhancing lives” NJ License: 13vh11150000 carfagnoprofessionalpainting.com 

## Aplus Plumbing Heating 

## & Drain Cleaning 

“Your Community Plumber” 

Call 732.295.7775 

nj lic# 72870 Insured Free Estimates 

# Hometowne Plumbing 

# No Job Too Small 

# 732-270-3232 

Lic. 9452 PROUD TO SERVE UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS 

Under Slab / Foundation 

## Plumbing Pipe Leak Repair 

• 25 + yrs Experience • NJ Licensed & Insured • Job Complete from $3,400 to $3,600 • Water heaters installed, $1,750 

201-995-7695 Cell Al Q & Co. 

PERSONAL HOME CARE WITH KINDNESS 

27 Years Experience – Responsible – Trustworthy Quality Elder Care. Live In/Out, Overnight/Hourly 

Cooking, Shopping, Medical Transport Provides P.T. Services 

Many References Available 

Call 732 300 1348 for Free Consultation 

DIRECTORY PAGE 55 

> ads-7332

I live right here in Four Seasons 

and my family has lived here for 20 years! I am a full time real estate professional with a Senior Real Estate Specialist certification. I am proud to offer Full Concierge Service including: • Advancement/Relocation both local and national • House Content Sales • Moving and Storage • Clean out 

Tracey Carfora, Realtor Associate Your on site Four Seasons Specialist 

Resident of Four Seasons/Notary Public Call/Text – 732-768-9681 

> SOLD
> FOR SALE

## What clients are saying… “Finally closed on my condo. So happy and loved my realtor Tracey. She made things so easy. Very professional and also lives in Four Seasons too.” 

> SOLD
> FOR SALE

FOUR SEASONS TIMES OCTOBER 2025 PAGE 56 

PRST STD US POSTAGE PAID LAKEWOOD, NJ 08701 PERMIT NO. 211
