Title: Trump says he will deploy National Guard to Chicago but doesn't say when

URL Source: https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/trump-vows-crime-chicago-fast-after-violent-labor/story?id=125181053

Published Time: 2025-09-02T20:59:00.000Z

Markdown Content:
President Donald Trump on Tuesday told reporters he would deploy National Guard troops to Chicago but didn't say when.

"Well, we're going in," Trump said in the Oval Office when asked if he's made a decision on the matter after days of threats and warnings.

But the president gave no timeline or specifics, quickly adding, "I didn't say when we're going in."

"Look, I have an obligation. This isn't a political thing. I have an obligation," Trump said.

President Donald Trump listens to a question during an event to announce that the Space Force Command will move from Colorado to Alabama, in the Oval Office at the White House in Washington, September 2, 2025.

Brian Snyder/Reuters

Trump pointed to gun violence in the city over Labor Day weekend as a reason for federal intervention. He said Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker, a Democrat, should be requesting his administration's help.

Recent Stories from ABC News

Visit Advertiser website GO TO PAGE

"If the governor of Illinois would call up, call me up, I would love to do it. Now, we're going to do it anyway. We have the right to do it because I have an obligation to protect this country," Trump said.

Pritzker quickly pushed back as he and other Chicago officials held a news conference on Tuesday afternoon.

"First, I want to address the president's unhinged remarks a few minutes ago begging me to call him. No, I will not call the president, asking him to send troops to Chicago. I've made that clear already," Pritzker said.

Pritzker, Chicago's Democratic Mayor Brandon Johnson and various local officials rejected Trump's desire to send National Guard troops to the city. They emphasized there is no "emergency" unfolding in Chicago that would justify such a move, with Pritzker saying it's all "a big show" on Trump's part.

"When did we become a country where it's okay for the U.S. president to insist on national television that a state should call him to beg for anything, especially something we don't want. Have we truly lost all sense of sanity in this nation, that we treat this as normal?" Pritzker said.

Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker speaks during a press conference, Sept. 2, 2025, in Chicago.

Kiichiro Sato/AP

A U.S. official confirmed to ABC News last month that planning was underway at the Pentagon for the potential use of National Guard troops in Chicago -- an area Trump has repeatedly singled out as he mulled sending the Guard to other major American cities following his federal takeover of Washington.

Trump then appeared to back off somewhat, saying he preferred cities ask for his administration's assistance.

But over the weekend, referencing recent crime, Trump warned Pritzker to "straighten it out, FAST, or we're coming!"

On Monday, Mayor Johnson led a chant of "no troops in Chicago" at a Labor Day march.

Popular Reads
-------------

"No federal troops in the city of Chicago, no militarized force in the city of Chicago," he said in fiery remarks. "We're going to defend our democracy in the city of Chicago. We're going to protect the humanity of every single person in the city of Chicago."

Earlier Tuesday, Trump ramped up the threats.

"Chicago is the worst and most dangerous city in the World, by far," Trump wrote on his social media platform. "Pritzker needs help badly, he just doesn't know it yet. I will solve the crime problem fast, just like I did in DC. Chicago will be safe again, and soon."

Violent crime in Chicago dropped significantly in the first half of the year, according to official data released by the city. Shootings were down 37% and homicides have dropped by 32% compared to the first half of 2024, while total violence crime dropped by over 22%, according to the crime statistics.

Protesters hold signs reading "Trump lies, Democraty dies" during a rally outside Trump Tower on Labor Day in Chicago, Illinois, September 1, 2025.

Kamil Krzaczynski/AFP via Getty Images

Meanwhile, the administration is preparing for a surge in increased immigration enforcement operations in Chicago as soon as this week, sources told ABC News.

Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem said the intention was for more resources to be sent to Chicago but did not divulge details.

"I won't disclose the details because they are law enforcement and investigative folks that are on the ground there, and I want to make sure we keep their security our number one priority," Noem said on "Face the Nation" on Sunday. "But we will continue to go after the worst of the worst across the country, like President Trump has told us to do, focusing on those that are perpetuating murder and rape and trafficking of drugs and humans across our country, knowing that every single citizen deserves to be safe."

Pritzker said he expected Chicago to experience something similar to what played out in Los Angeles and Washington, including the positioning of armed federal agents on federal property.

The governor said he believes agents are planning to "raid Latino communities and say they're targeting violent criminals" but who may not be, and that Trump "will be looking for any excuse to put active duty military on our streets, supposedly to protect ICE."

"Let's be clear, the terror and cruelty is the point, not the safety of anyone living here," Pritzker said.

_ABC News' Luke Barr, Michael Pappano and Bill Hutchinson contributed to this report._
