Title: July 12, 2016 Clinton and Sanders Joint Appearance in Portsmouth

URL Source: https://p2016.org/clinton/clinton071216sp.html

Markdown Content:
July 12, 2016

In New Hampshire, Bernie Sanders Endorses Hillary Clinton
---------------------------------------------------------

In Portsmouth, New Hampshire on Tuesday, Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders came together to discuss their commitment to building an America that is stronger together and an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.

After thanking Sen. Sanders for his endorsement and pointing to the importance of standing together, Clinton said, "And now, with your help, we are joining forces to defeat Donald Trump, win in November, and yes, together build a future we can all believe in."

Clinton's and Sanders' remarks, as transcribed, are below:

HILLARY CLINTON:

"Thank you! That was so great.

Hello, New Hampshire! It is so great, it is so great to be here with so many friends, old and new. to be back with so many friends old and new.

Thank you! Thank you so much. I have to say it is such a great privilege to be here with Senator Sanders. Being here with him and New Hampshire, I can’t help but reflect on how much more enjoyable this election is going to be now that we’re on the same side. Because you know what? We are stronger together.

And I want to give a special thanks to someone who has been with Senator Sanders every step of the way, not just throughout this campaign but over the years, his wonderful wife, Jane Sanders.

And also I’ve had the pleasure of meeting his son, Levi Sanders! Thank you!

I also appreciate greatly having the opportunity for all of us to hear from the speakers beforehand, Governor Maggie Hassan, the next Senator from the state of New Hampshire!

Senator Jeanne Shaheen who is doing a tremendous job for you.

And we are delighted to have heard from and to have with us Bill McKibben and Jim Dean.

Over these last few weeks, Bernie and I have worked together on plans to put college within reach for more people, and to ensure that everyone in America has access to quality, affordable health care. And now, with your help, we are joining forces to defeat Donald Trump, win in November, and yes, together build a future we can all believe in.

Just as Bernie said, over the years, I’ve gotten to know him as a colleague and a friend. His reputation for passionate advocacy hasn’t always made him the most popular person in Washington. But you know what? That’s generally a sign you’re doing something right.

Throughout this campaign Senator Sanders has brought people off the sidelines and into the political process. He has energized and inspired a generation of young people who care deeply about our country, and are building a movement that is bigger than one candidate or one campaign.

So thank you, thank you Bernie – for your endorsement, but more than that, thank you for your lifetime of fighting injustice. I am proud to be fighting alongside you because my friends, this is a time for all of us to stand together. These have been difficult times for America.

This is a time for all of us to stand together – because these have been difficult days for our country.

Taking on the systemic racism that plagues our country – and rebuilding the frayed bonds of trust and respect between law enforcement and the communities they serve – will require contributions from all of us. And we have to begin by starting to listen to each other. And more than that, we then have to do something that will help us fix these problems.

We have to reform our broken criminal justice system, take back our democracy from the wealthy special interests, and make our economy work for everyone, not just those at the top. And you know what? We have to do all these things at the same time.

That’s why throughout this campaign, we’ve been calling for eliminating racial profiling and disparities in sentencing. Ending the era of mass incarceration, dismantling the school-to-prison pipeline, providing more employment opportunities for formerly incarcerated people.

In addition to that, I am proposing two new steps that get law enforcement the support they need while also stopping the tragedy, the tragedy of black men and women – and black children – being killed in police incidents.

First, let’s bring law enforcement and the communities they swear to protect and serve together to develop national guidelines on the use of force by police officers.

 And second, let’s provide better training on implicit bias, that remains a problem even in our best police departments but it also remains a problem across our society.

I’m asking for all of us to really search our hearts and minds to make sure that we don’t have those implicit biases. Let’s learn from police departments like Dallas that had made strong progress, and apply their lessons nationwide. Because everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law.

Remember, when gunfire broke out in Dallas, the peaceful protestors and the crowds that had gathered to support them ran to safety, while the police officers – who just minutes before had been talking with and taking pictures with and protecting the protesters – the police officers ran the other way – they ran into the gunfire. That’s the kind of courage and dedication our police and first responders show every single day.

So yes – let’s take real, meaningful action to end the epidemic of gun violence in America. From Sandy Hook to Orlando to Dallas, and so many other places, these tragedies tear at our soul. And so do the incidents that don’t even dominate the headlines. Just this past Sunday, a young man, Seth Rich, who worked for the Democratic National Committee to expand voting rights, was shot and killed in his neighborhood in Washington. He was just 27 years old.

Surely we can agree that weapons of war have no place on the streets of America. Our police and first responders should never have to face a madman, a racist, a person filled with hatred, with an assault weapon. We owe it to every officer who puts his or her life on the line to protect us – so let’s protect them.

And we can’t stop there. This is part of a broader challenge across our country. Inequality is too high, wages are too low, and it is just too hard to get ahead for too many Americans.

We need an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. Not just the millionaires and billionaires but everybody.

And to do that, we need to go big and we need to go bold. This isn’t a time for half measures. So we are setting five ambitious goals.

For starters, in my first 100 days as President, we will make the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II.

More jobs here in New Hampshire and across our country, especially in places that have been left out and left behind. In communities of color. In coal country. Indian Country. Everywhere where a person deserves the same shot at the American Dream as anybody else in our country.

And when I say good-paying jobs, I mean it. As Bernie said, Donald Trump thinks wages are too high. He actually stood on a debate stage and said so. He does want to get rid of the federal minimum wage altogether.

Well, both Senator Sanders and I believe anyone who is willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family. And Bernie is right – $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage. So sorry Donald, if you’re watching, we’re not cutting the minimum wage – we’re raising the minimum wage.

We’re going to create millions of good jobs by making America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century. As Bernie reminds us so powerfully, we owe it to future generations to work together to combat climate change. And we're going to do it. We've got the intelligence. We've got the innovation. We're going to roll up our sleeves and demonstrate to the world what America is made of. We're going to have that clean energy economy. We're going to make it work for everybody.

And make no mistake – we will defend American jobs and American workers by saying ‘no’ to the assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively. And we’re going to say ‘no’ to attacks on working families and ‘no’ to bad trade deals and unfair trade practices, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Second, we’re going to make college debt-free for all and help millions of people struggling with existing student debt save thousands of dollars.

Here in New Hampshire, students are carrying one of the highest debt loads in the country. I’ve heard from young people who can’t start a business, move out of their parents’ home, or even get married because of all the student debt holding them back.

So with your help, we’re going to make it so future students won’t have to borrow a dime to attend public colleges or universities. Thanks to the new proposal Senator Sanders and I worked on together, for families making less than $125,000 a year, we will eliminate tuition at those schools altogether. And we will do more to help students cover all the costs of getting an education – including books, supplies, and living expenses.

Because in the words of a student I met here in New Hampshire, ‘paying for college shouldn’t be the hardest thing about going to college.’

Third, we’re going to rewrite the rules, and crack down on companies that ship jobs and profits overseas. Let’s reward the companies that share profits with their employees instead.

And we will defend and strengthen the tough reforms President Obama put in place on the financial industry – not let Donald Trump tear them up. Because we do, we do need to make sure that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again.

Number four, we’re going to make sure Wall Street, corporations, and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes. When people say the game is rigged, the best evidence is our tax code. It is riddled with scams, loopholes, and special breaks. It is wrong that some millionaires do pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries, and we’re going to stop it.

Now compare what Senator Sanders and I intend to do with Donald Trump’s tax plan. His tax plan would make our current system even worse. Independent analysts say he would add $30 trillion to the national debt in order to give a massive gift to the wealthiest Americans, Wall Street money managers, and our largest corporations. But after all, what else should we expect from someone who calls himself ‘the King of Debt’?

Now we have been pointing out the problems with his tax plan for months. And I think Donald is starting to feel the pressure.

In fact, even as we speak, he’s apparently bringing in the biggest names in trickle-down, supply-side economics to help him figure out what to do – now these are the same advisors who brought us 30 years of a disastrous Republican philosophy that gave the huge breaks to those at the top.

Now you don’t have to be psychic to know what’s going to happen next: they’re going to come back with another plan with maybe some bells and whistles, Bernie, that tries to disguise the fact that they still are slashing taxes for the wealthy, large corporations, and Donald Trump himself. And they’ll try to use voodoo economics to tell us all the ways it will actually help the economy.

But they’re not fooling anybody, at least I hope they’re not. Just like his current plan – which he calls ‘inspiring,’ ‘tremendous,’ and ‘amazing’ – you know, he uses a lot of adjectives to avoid telling you any specifics. Here’s what we know for sure: whatever he comes out with next is going to give huge tax cuts to the corporations and the rich at the expense of the middle class.

Now there’s that old saying, you’ve heard it, I used to hear it a lot in Arkansas, you can put lipstick on a pig – but it’s still a pig.

And I’ve got to tell you, the first time that the Republicans pulled the voodoo economics, you know, they fooled us. Shame on them. But if they come back with the same argument and people fall for it, shame on us. But I will promise you this, Senator Sanders and I will spare no effort to make sure the people of America know that once again Trump and his cronies are trying to pull the wool over our eyes and come back with the same failed policies that hurt us before.

We’re not going to let them get away with it again.

And finally, our fifth goal is we’re going to step up and respond to the way American families actually live and work in the 21st century. Our families and our workplaces have changed, so isn’t it time for our policies to change too?

Let’s expand Social Security to match today’s realities, not cut or privatize it.

Let’s join the rest of the developed world and offer paid family leave.

And finally, let’s guarantee equal pay for women once and for all.

I can just envision the tweets Donald is putting together. And Donald Trump can accuse me of playing ‘the woman card’ all he wants. If fighting for equal pay and paid family leave is playing the woman card, then deal me in.

And I’ll tell you, these aren’t just my fights. These are Bernie’s fights. These are America’s fights. And I feel with all my being, these are fights we have to wage and win together.

As Bernie and his supporters have argued so eloquently, we won’t get anywhere unless we overhaul our campaign finance system.

It is past time to end the stranglehold of wealthy special interests in Washington, and get back to government of the people, by the people, and for the people.

That’s why as president from my very first days, I’ll make campaign finance reform a top priority. We will do everything we can to overturn Citizens United. And we will require everybody – Democrats, Republicans, and Independents, whoever – to disclose their donors.

And while we’re at it, we are going to create a small-donor matching system to make it easy for more Americans to be elected at every level of government. Because just like Bernie, I’ve met so many people here in New Hampshire with great ideas for our country. I want to see you run for office and win.

And here’s another radical idea: Let's make it easier to vote, not harder. Let’s fight back against attacks on voting rights across the country – attacks that disproportionately affect low-income voters, people of color, students, the elderly, and women.

That means we need to restore the Voting Rights Act and then keep going. All Americans should be automatically registered to vote on their 18th birthday. Every state should have at least 20 days of in-person voting. And no one in America should ever have to wait more than 30 minutes to cast their ballot.

So Senator Sanders and I will be working to get unaccountable money out of politics and the voices of everyday Americans back in.

Because as Bernie has said: This isn’t a progressive issue. It’s not a conservative issue. It’s an American issue.

And let me close with this: To everyone here and everyone across the country who poured your heart and soul into Senator Sanders’ campaign, thank you. Thank you. I was proud of the campaign we ran, it was a campaign about issues not insults. And our country desperately needs your voices and involvement and so does this campaign and so does the Democratic Party. Because you know what? we need to take back the Senate and take back the House and make sure we have Democratic governors and Democratic state legislators. Let’s open the doors to everyone who shares our progressive values.

This is one of the most important elections in our lifetimes. So I’m asking you to stand with us. And then, I’m asking you to keep working with me in the weeks, months, and, yes, years ahead. You will always have a seat at the table when I’m in the White House.

As Bernie will tell you, talk is cheap. We need to keep fighting to make sure everything we’ve stood for is real in the lives of people across America.

This amazing country of ours is worthy of our best efforts. This election, let’s send a clear message: In America, we don’t tear each other down – we lift each other up. We build bridges, not walls. We put common interest ahead of self-interest. We stand together because we’re stronger together.

So I need your help. Please join this campaign. Make it your own. You can take out your phone right now and text JOIN, J-O-I-N, to 47246. Or go to hillaryclinton.com. We accept $27 donations, too, you know.

I can’t tell you how grateful I am to be standing here with Senator Sanders. Because I think both of us realize that each of our campaigns together represent the best of who we are. And now it is time for us to take that message to the rest of the country. I am fully aware that the other side will do everything possible to distort, to misinform, and we can’t let that happen. We have to be standing up and fighting for the America that we know we can create together. I am confident and optimistic about our future, particularly when it comes to young people. I think America’s best years are still ahead of us. So join with us. Let's make this happen together and win the election!

Thank you very much!"

SENATOR SANDERS:>

“Bill McKibben, Jim Dean, Governor Hassan, Senator Shaheen, thank you very much for your kind remarks. And let me begin by thanking the 13 million Americans who voted for me during the Democratic primaries. And thank you, New Hampshire, for giving us our first great victory. And a very special thanks to the people of the state of Vermont whose support for so many years – as a Mayor, as a Congressman, as a Senator and as a presidential candidate – have sustained me and Jane and our entire family. Vermont, thank you.

Let me also thank the hundreds of thousands of volunteers throughout this country, in every state in the Union, who worked so hard on our campaign and the millions of contributors who showed the world that we could run a successful national campaign based on small individual contributions – two and a half million of them.

Together, we have begun a political revolution to transform America and that revolution continues. Together, we will continue to fight for a government which represents all of us, and not just the 1 percent – a government based on the principles of economic, social, racial and environmental justice.

I am proud of the campaign we ran here in New Hampshire and across the country. Our campaign won the primaries and caucuses in 22 states, and when the roll call at the Democratic National Convention is announced, it will show that we won almost 1,900 delegates. Far more than almost anyone thought we could win. But it is not enough to win the nomination. Secretary Clinton goes into the convention with 389 more pledged delegates than we have and a lot more super delegates.

Secretary Clinton has won the Democratic nominating process. And I congratulate her for that. She will be the Democratic nominee for president and I intend to do everything I can to make certain she will be the next president of the United States.

I have come here today not to talk about the past but to focus on the future. That future will be shaped more by what happens on November 8th in voting booths across our nation than by any other event in the world. I have come here to make it as clear as possible as to why I am endorsing Hillary Clinton – and why she must become our next president.

During the last year I have had the extraordinary opportunity – an extraordinary opportunity to speak to more than 1.4 million Americans at rallies in almost every state in our country. I was also able to meet with many thousands of other people at smaller gatherings. And the profound lesson that I have learned is that this campaign is not really about Hillary Clinton, or Donald Trump, or Bernie Sanders, or any other candidate who sought the presidency. This campaign is about the needs of the American people and addressing – and addressing the very serious crises that we face. And there is no doubt in my mind that, as we head into November, Hillary Clinton is far and away the best candidate to do that. It is very easy to forget – and Republicans want us to forget – where we were seven and a half years ago when President Obama came into office. As a result of the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior on Wall Street, our economy was in the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression. Some 800,000 people a month were losing their jobs, we were running up a record-breaking deficit, and the world’s financial system was on the verge of collapse. We have come a long way in the last seven and a half years and I thank President Obama – I thank President Obama and Vice President Biden for their leadership in pulling us out of that terrible recession. But I think we can all agree that much, much more needs to be done.

Too many Americans are still being left out, left behind and ignored. In the richest country in the history of the world there is too much poverty, there is too much despair.

This election is about the single mother I saw in Nevada who, with tears in her eyes, told me that she was scared to death of the future because she and her daughter were not making it on the $10.45 cents an hour she was earning. This election is about that woman, and the millions of other workers in this country who are falling further and further behind as they try to survive on totally inadequate wages.

Hillary Clinton understands that we must fix an economy in America that is rigged and that sends almost all of the new wealth and income to the top one percent. Hillary Clinton understands that if someone in America works 40 hours a week, that person should not be living in poverty. She believes – we all believe – that we must raise the minimum wage to a living wage.

And further, she wants to create millions of new jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure. Our roads, our bridges, our water systems, our wastewater plants.

But her opponent – Donald Trump – well, he has a very different view. He believes that states should have the right to lower the minimum wage or even abolish the concept of the minimum wage. If Donald Trump is elected, we will see no increase in the federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour – a starvation wage.

This election is about which candidate will nominate Supreme Court justices who are – who will nominate Supreme Court justices who are prepared to overturn the disastrous Citizens United decision – a decision which is allowing billionaires to buy elections and is undermining our democracy. (Applause.) This election is about who will appoint new justices on the Supreme Court who will defend a woman’s right to choose – who will defend the rights of the LGBT community – who will defend workers’ rights, the needs of minorities and immigrants, and the government’s ability to protect our environment.

If anyone out there thinks that this election is not important, take a moment to think about the Supreme Court justices that Donald Trump will nominate, and what that means to civil liberties, equal rights, and the future of our country.

This campaign is about moving the United States toward universal health care – and reducing the number of people in our country who are uninsured or under-insured. Hillary Clinton wants to see that all Americans have the right to choose a public option in their health care exchange – which will lower the cost of health care for millions. She also believes that anyone 55 years or older should be able to opt in to Medicare – and she wants to see millions more Americans gain access to primary health care, dental care, mental health counseling, and low-cost prescription drugs – through a major and dramatic expansion of community health centers throughout this country. Hillary is committed to seeing thousands of young doctors, nurses, psychologists, dentists and other medical professionals practice in underserved areas as we follow through on President Obama’s idea of tripling funding for the National Health Service Corps.

In New Hampshire, in Vermont, and across this country, we have a major epidemic of opiate and heroin addiction. People are dying every day from overdoses. Hillary Clinton understands that if we are serious about addressing this crisis, we need major changes in the way we deliver mental health treatment throughout this country. And that is what expanding community health centers will do and that is what getting medical personnel into the areas we need them most will do.

And what is Donald Trump’s position on health care? Well, no surprise there. Same old, same old Republican contempt for working families. He wants to abolish the Affordable Care Act – throw 20 million people off of the health insurance they currently have, and cut Medicaid for low-income Americans. The last thing we need today in America is a president who doesn’t care about whether millions of Americans will lose access to the health care coverage they desperately need. We need more people with access to quality health care, not fewer.

Hillary Clinton also understands that millions of our seniors, disabled veterans, and others are struggling with the outrageously high cost of prescription drugs. She and I are in agreement that Medicare must negotiate drug prices with the pharmaceutical industry – and that we must expand the use of generic medicine. Drug companies should not be making billions in profit while one out of five Americans are unable to afford the medicine they need. The greed of the drug companies must end.

This election is about the grotesque level of income and wealth inequality that currently exists, the worst it has been in our country since 1928. Hillary Clinton knows that something is fundamentally wrong when the very rich become richer while many others are working longer hours for lower wages. She knows that it is absurd that middle-class Americans are paying an effective tax rate higher than hedge fund millionaires – and that there are corporations in this country that make billions of dollars a year in profit, yet because of the loopholes that their lobbyists created, in a given year, they do not pay a nickel in federal taxes. That is wrong.

While Hillary Clinton supports making our tax code fairer and more progressive, Donald Trump wants to give hundreds of billions of dollars in tax breaks to the very wealthiest people in this country. His reckless economic policies will not only exacerbate income and wealth inequality, they will increase our national debt by trillions of dollars.

This election is about the thousands of young people I have met throughout this country, who have left college deeply in debt, the many others who cannot afford to go to college, and the need in this country to have the best educated workforce in a highly competitive global economy. Hillary Clinton believes that we must substantially lower student debt, and that we must make public colleges and universities tuition free for the middle-class and working families of this country. This is a major initiative that will revolutionize higher education in this country, and improve the lives of so many of our people. Think of what it will mean – think of this – when every child in this country, regardless of the income of his or her family, knows that if they study hard – if they take school seriously, yes, they will be able to get a college education, and leave school without debt.

This election is about climate change, the greatest environmental crisis facing our planet, and a need to leave this world in a way that is healthy and habitable for our children and future generations. Hillary Clinton is listening to the scientists who tell us that if we do not act boldly in the very near future, there will be more drought, more floods, more acidification of the oceans, more rising sea levels. She understands that we must work with countries around the world in transforming our energy system away from fossil fuel and – away from fossil fuels and into energy efficiency and sustainable energy, and that when we do that, we can create a whole lot of good paying jobs. Well, Donald Trump, like most Republicans, sadly and tragically is choosing to reject science. Something no presidential candidate should ever do. He believes that climate change is a hoax. In fact, he wants to expand the use of fossil fuels. That would be a disaster for our country, and for the entire planet.

This election is about the leadership we need to pass comprehensive immigration reform, and repair a broken criminal justice system. It's about making sure that young people in this country are in good schools, or at good jobs, not in jail cells. Secretary Clinton understands that we do not need to have more people in jail than any other country on Earth, at an expense of $80 billion a year.

In these stressful times for our country, this election must be about bringing our people together, not dividing us up. While Donald Trump is busy insulting Mexicans, and Muslims, and women, and African-Americans, and our veterans, Hillary Clinton understands that our diversity is one of our greatest strengths. Yes, we become stronger when black and white, Latino, Asian-American, Native American, all of us stand together. Yes, we become stronger when men and women, young and old, gay and straight, native-born and immigrant, fight to rid this country of all forms of bigotry.

It is no secret that Hillary Clinton and I disagree on a number of issues. That is what this campaign has been about. That is what democracy is about. But I am happy to tell you that at the Democratic Platform Committee, which ended Sunday night in Orlando, there was a significant coming together between the two campaigns, and we produced – we produced by far the most progressive platform in the history of the Democratic Party. Our job is to see that platform implemented by a democratically controlled Senate, a democratically controlled House, and a Hillary Clinton presidency. And I intend to be in every corner of this country to make certain that it happens.

I have known Hillary Clinton for 25 years. We were a bit younger then. I remember her as a great First Lady, who broke precedent in terms of the role that a First Lady was supposed to play. And as she helped lead the fight to universal health care, I served with her in the US Senate, and know her as a fierce advocate for the rights of our children. And I know her, and all of you know her, as one of the most intelligent people that we have ever met. Hillary Clinton will make an outstanding president, and I am proud to stand with her today. Thank you all very much.”

###

For Immediate Release, July 12, 2016

 Contact: press@hillaryclinton.com

* * *

Hillary for America

Pennsylvania Sanders Delegates Join Bernie Sanders in Uniting Behind Clinton's Candidacy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Joining U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders, who today endorsed Hillary Clinton at an event in New Hampshire, Pennsylvania delegates who supported Sanders during the primary are coming together to defeat the dangerous and divisive candidacy of Donald Trump. In endorsing Clinton, Sanders spoke of his friendship with her—from Senate colleague to presidential campaign rival—and stressed their shared vision for an America that is stronger together, with an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top.

"Our Democratic Party platform is the most progressive platform in our party's history. It's a platform that will ensure that people of Pennsylvania come before the special interests and the billionaires. Democrats are united to support Hillary Clinton because she will fight for our values,"a Lou Agre, a Bernie Sanders delegate from Philadelphia.

"I'm proud that our Democratic Party is uniting around progressive issues such as raising the minimum wage, lowering the cost of college and making health care more affordable. Bernie Sanders and his supporters have done an incredible job of bringing new life and ideas to the Democratic Party. Joined together, we must elect a leader who will fight for these issues on our behalf, and Hillary Clinton is that leader. Pennsylvanians must do everything we can to defeat Donald Trump in November and ensure he doesn't get anywhere close to the White House,"said Cheryl Marshall, a Bernie Sanders delegate from Columbia County.

"Our Party must come together to fight for a strong progressive agenda as embodied in our Party's platform. Our nominee will run on a platform committed to a $15 minimum wage, tuition-free college for working families, expanding Social Security, and creating millions of jobs rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure. Our Party and Hillary Clinton are committed to enacting that platform, which shows that more unites us than divides us. Donald Trump goes against everything we have fought to achieve, and it is crucial that we unite behind Hillary Clinton to stop him,"said Chuck Pascal, a Bernie Sanders delegate from Allegheny County.

###

For Immediate Release, July 12, 2016

* * *

* * *

Republican Reactions

Donald J. Trump for President

Bernie Is Now Officially Part Of A Rigged System
------------------------------------------------

"Today, Bernie Sanders will be endorsing one of the most pro-war, pro-wall street, and pro-off shoring candidates in the history of the Democratic Party. The candidate who ran against special interests is endorsing the candidate who embodies special interests. The candidate who ran against TPP is endorsing the candidate who helped draft the TPP. The candidate who ran in opposition to globalization is running against the candidate who has led the push for globalization. The candidate who warned that open borders destroy the working class is endorsing the candidate with the most open borders policy in our history. The candidate who wants to reform H1-B visas is endorsing the candidate who supported lifting the caps on H1-B visas. The candidate who wants less war is endorsing the candidate who launched wars in Iraq and Libya and would lead us to a new war in Syria. The candidate who wants to get money out of politics is voting for the candidate who has made a career out of making money from politics.

Bernie's endorsement becomes Exhibit A in our rigged system - the Democrat Party is disenfranchising its voters to benefit the select and privileged few." - _Stephen Miller, Senior Policy Advisor_

_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\__

Selling Out: Bernie Endorses Wall Street
----------------------------------------

### **HILLARY CLINTON HAS COLLECTED OVER $41 MILLION FROM FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR HER 2016 PRESIDENTIAL BID**

**Hillary Clinton Has Collected $41,347,279 Million From Employees Of Financial Services During Her 2016 Presidential Bid.** (Center For Responsive Politics, Accessed 7/12/16)

**HILLARY CLINTON****HAS MADE MILLIONS FROM SPEECHES TO FINANCIAL SERVICES COMPANIES**

**_Clinton Has Personally Made $3,440,000 From Speeches To Financial Services Companies_**

**In April 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Morgan Stanley For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In April 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Deutsche Bank For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In April 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Fidelity Investments For $225,000.**(Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In May 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Apollo Management Holdings, L.P. For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In May 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Itau BBA USA Securities For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In June 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Goldman Sachs For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In July 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To UBS Wealth Management For $225,000.**(Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In October 2013, Clinton Gave Two Speeches To Goldman Sachs For $225,000 Each.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In November 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Golden Tree Asset Management For $275,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In November 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To Bank Of America For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In November 2013, Clinton Gave A Speech To The CME Group For $225,000.** (Hillary Clinton, Accessed 7/12/16)

**In June 2014, Clinton Gave A Speech To GTCR For $280,000.** (Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report, 5/15/15)

**In July 2014, Clinton Gave A Speech To Ameriprise For $225,000.** (Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report, 5/15/15)

**In October 2014, Clinton Gave A Speech To Deutsche Bank For $260,000.** (Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report, 5/15/15)

**In January 2015, Clinton Gave A Speech To Canadian Imperial Bank Of Commerce For $150,000.** (Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report, 5/15/15)

**_Clinton Also Was Paid At Least $1,000,000 Through Her Foundation For Speeches To Financial Services Companies_**

**Clinton Was Paid Between $250,001 And $500,000 For A Speech From Carlyle Investment Management, LLC Through The Clinton Foundation.**(Clinton Foundation, Accessed 7/12/16)

**Clinton Was Paid Between $250,001 And $500,000 For A Speech From Citibank N.A. Through The Clinton Foundation.** (Clinton Foundation, Accessed 7/12/16)

**Clinton Was Paid Between $250,001 And $500,000 For A Speech From Goldman Sachs Through The Clinton Foundation.** (Clinton Foundation, Accessed 7/12/16)

**Clinton Was Paid Between $250,001 And $500,000 For A Speech From JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A. Through The Clinton Foundation.** (Clinton Foundation, Accessed 7/12/16)

* * *

Republican National Committee

RNC Statement On Bernie Sanders’ Endorsement Of Hillary Clinton
---------------------------------------------------------------

WASHINGTON – Republican National Committee (RNC) Chairman Reince Priebus released the following statement on Bernie Sanders’ endorsement of Hillary Clinton in New Hampshire, a state he won by 22 points in the Democrat primary:

“This hollow display of left-wing solidarity flies in the face of Bernie Sanders’ months-long crusade against Hillary Clinton’s judgment, character, and fitness to serve as president,” said RNC Chairman Reince Priebus. “Voters won’t forget Sanders’ blistering criticisms of Clinton’s paid speeches to Wall Street banks, her reliance on big-money special interests to fund her campaign, or her support for overseas military interventions. While Sanders may have pushed the Democrat Party even further to the extreme left, his supporters must rightly be wondering if their candidate has all of a sudden sold out to the same rigged system he so strongly campaigned against.”

###

* * *

* * *

Republican Preactions

Donald J. Trump for President

TOP FIVE REASONS SANDERS SUPPORTERS WILL NEVER BE EXCITED ABOUT HILLARY CLINTON
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. SANDERS: CLINTON HAS BACKED "VIRTUALLY EVERY TRADE AGREEMENT THAT HAS COST THE WORKERS OF THIS COUNTRY MILLIONS OF JOBS"

Sanders Stance On Trade Stands In Stark Contrast To The Radical, Corporate Globalist Agenda That Clinton Represents As She Refuses To Disavow TPP

Sanders Has Criticized Clinton For Voting "For Virtually Every Trade Agreement That Has Cost The Workers Of This Country Millions Of Jobs." NBC POLITICAL DIRECTOR CHUCK TODD: "So you believe she doesn't have the judgment to be president of the United States?" SANDERS: "Well, when you vote for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs, when you support and continue to support fracking, despite the crisis that we have in terms of clean water, and essentially, when you have a super PAC that is raising tens of millions of dollars from every special interest out there, including 15 million from Wall Street, the American people do not believe that that is the kind of president that we need to make the changes in America to protect the working families of this country." ( NBC's "Meet The Press," 4/10/16)

Sanders' Campaign Called Clinton A Potential "Outsourcer-In Chief," Saying She "Has Been A Consistent Advocate Of The Job-Killing Trade Deals" That Have Lost "Almost 5 Million Manufacturing Jobs Over The Last 15 Years." "At a rally on Wednesday former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told those gathered, 'Don't let anybody tell you we can't make anything in America anymore.' What she failed to tell the audience is that she has been a consistent advocate of the job-killing trade deals that have contributed to the loss of nearly 60,000 factories in the United States and almost 5 million manufacturing jobs over the last 15 years." (Press Release, "Hillary Clinton: Outsourcer-In-Chief," Bernie 2016, 3/3/16)

Sanders Has Attacked Clinton For Being "Very Reluctant To Come Out In Opposition" To The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). "He rattled off various trade agreements that Mrs. Clinton backed and that he had opposed. 'On the issue of trade, Secretary Clinton's views and mine are very different,' Mr. Sanders said. He also pointed to Mrs. Clinton's original kind words for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a 12-nation deal that is one of the Obama administration's key priorities. As secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton called it the 'gold standard,' but she came out against it once it was completed in October, six months into her presidential campaign. 'She was very reluctant to come out in opposition,' Mr. Sanders said. 'She is running for president. She concluded it was a good idea to oppose the TPP, and she did.'" (Laura Meckler and Peter Nicholas, "Bernie Sanders And Hillary Clinton Spar Over Trade In Midwest," The Wall Street Journal , 3/3/16)

Sanders Has Attacked Clinton For Supporting NAFTA. "Appearing before a boisterous crowd here of about 4,500 people in a hockey arena, Sanders touted his long record of opposition to trade deals and said that as first lady Clinton 'thought NAFTA was a good idea' when it was passed in the early 1990s. 'I was right. She was wrong,' Sanders said. 'I understood that American workers should not be forced to compete against desperate people making pennies an hour,' Sanders said. 'I want to see poor people around the world do better, but that does not mean we have to destroy the middle class of this country.'" (John Wagner, "Sanders Knocks Clinton For Supporting NAFTA While First Lady," The Washington Post , 2/23/16)

Trump Is Adamantly Opposed To Unfair Trade Deals, That Harm Americans

Trump Has Said That Clinton-Backed Trade Deals, Including NAFTA, China's Entry Into The WTO, And KORUS Have Killed American Jobs. TRUMP: "It was Bill Clinton who signed NAFTA in 1993, and Hillary Clinton who supported it. It was also Bill Clinton who lobbied for China's disastrous entry into the World Trade Organization, and Hillary Clinton who backed that terrible agreement. Then, as Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton stood by idly while China cheated on its currency, added another trillion dollars to our trade deficits, and stole hundreds of billions of dollars in our intellectual property. The city of Pittsburgh, and the State of Pennsylvania, have lost one-third of their manufacturing jobs since the Clintons put China into the WTO. Fifty thousand factories across America have shut their doors in that time. Almost half of our entire manufacturing trade deficit in goods with the world is the result of trade with China. It was also Hillary Clinton, as Secretary of State, who shoved us into a job-killing deal with South Korea in 2012. As reported by the Economic Policy Institute in May, this deal doubled our trade deficit with South Korea and destroyed nearly 100,000 American jobs. As Bernie Sanders said, Hillary Clinton 'voted for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs." (Donald Trump, Remarks At A Campaign Event, Monessen, PA, 6/28/16)

### 2. SANDERS: CLINTON IS IN THE POCKET OF WALL STREET

Sanders Has Said That Clinton Is In The Pocket Of Big Banks, Saying That Wall Street Has Been "The Major Campaign Contributor" To Clinton. CBS POLITICAL DIRECTOR JOHN DICKERSON: "Senator Sanders you said that the donations to Secretary Clinton are compromising. So, what did you think of her answer?" SANDERS: "Not good enough. Here's the story. I mean, you know, let's not be naive about it. Why do-- why, over her political career, has Wall Street been a major-- the major campaign contributor to Hillary Clinton?" (Sen. Bernie Sanders, Democratic Primary Debate, Des Moines, IA, 11/14/15)

Sanders Has Said That Clinton Wants To Bring "Oligarchy" To The Country Because "Wall Street And Other Special Interests" Are Supporting Her. "Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders on Sunday pressed his line of attack again that 'Wall Street and other special interests' are for rival Hillary Clinton and want to bring 'oligarchy' to the country." (Colin Wilhelm, "Sanders Taunts Clinton Again On Wall Street Ties," Politico , 4/17/16)

Sanders Attacked Clinton Saying That "You're Not Going To Have A Government That Represents All Of Us, So Long As You Have Candidates Like Secretary Clinton Being Dependent On Big Money Interest." "'This is the issue of American politics today: Do we have a government that represents all of us or just the 1 percent?" Sanders said on CNN's "State of the Union.' 'You're not going to have a government that represents all of us, so long as you have candidates like Secretary Clinton being dependent on big money interests.'" (Colin Wilhelm, "Sanders Taunts Clinton Again On Wall Street Ties," Politico , 4/17/16)

Sanders Has Said That Instead Of Fighting Big Banks After The Great Recession, Clinton Was Busy Taking Their Money. CNN'S CHIEF POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT DANA BASH: "Senator Sanders, you have consistently criticized Secretary Clinton for accepting money from Wall Street. Can you name one decision that she made as senator that shows that he favored banks because of the money she received?" SANDERS: "Sure. Sure. The obvious decision is when the greed and recklessness and illegal behavior of wall street brought this country into the worst economic downturn since the Great Recession - the Great Depression of the '30s, when millions of people lost their jobs, and their homes, and their life savings, the obvious response to that is that you've got a bunch of fraudulent operators and that they have got to be broken up. That was my view way back, and I introduced legislation to do that. Now, Secretary Clinton was busy giving speeches to Goldman Sachs for $225,000 a speech." (Sen Bernie Sanders, Remarks At The CNN Democrat Debate , Brooklyn, NY, 4/15/16)

Trump Has Stated That Clinton Is "Totally Controlled By Wall Street"

Trump Has Echoed Sanders Attack That Clinton Is "Controlled By Wall Street." "At a campaign rally here in one of the most liberal towns in America, Donald Trump offered praise for an ­unusual party: avowed democratic socialist Bernie Sanders. 'Now, I'm no fan of Bernie Sanders, but he is 100 percent right,' Trump told a crowd here this weekend. 'He is 100 percent right: Hillary Clinton is totally controlled by the people that put up her money. She's totally controlled by Wall Street.'" (Jose A. Delreal, "How Donald Trump Is Running To The Left Of Hillary Clinton," The Washington Post , 5/9/16)

### 3. SANDERS: HILLARY CLINTON = D.C. ESTABLISHMENT

Clinton's Status As The Darling Of The Democrat Establishment Has Proven To Be A Big Vulnerability For The Candidate Especially Against Bernie Sanders Who Is Campaigning On An Anti-Establishment Platform

"Clinton Is The Favorite Of The Democratic Establishment, Regardless Of How You Want To Define It." "Yes, Clinton is the favorite of the Democratic establishment, regardless of how you want to define it. She has locked up the endorsements of more sitting senators, congressmen, and governors than any Democratic candidate in history had by this point in the race and enjoys a massive lead in the super-delegate race. She has the broad support of mainstream media outlets, including the backing of the Des Moines Register in Iowa, as well as the Boston Globe and the New York Times. (The Washington Post has chimed in with its own scathing takedown of Sanders.) And let's not forget that the current chairwoman of the national party, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, was a high-profile Clinton surrogate in 2008 and has done pretty much everything she can to help Hillary in the 2016 cycle." (Josh Voorhees, "Hillary Says She's Not An 'Establishment' Candidate - Because She's A Woman," Slate , 2/4/16)

Sanders Has Used Clinton's Backing From The Democrat Establishment Into A "Knock On Her Candidacy." "In an election where voters are frustrated with the political system, Sanders has tried to turn Clinton's backing from party leaders into a knock on her candidacy." (Julie Pace And Ken Thomas, "Dems Ready For Long, Pricey Primary Between Clinton, Sanders," The Associated Press, 2/5/16)

Sanders Attacked Clinton Saying She "Has The Entire Establishment Or Almost The Entire Establishment Behind Her." "'I will absolutely admit that Secretary Clinton has the support of far more governors, mayors, members of the House,' Sanders said during Thursday's contentious Democratic debate. 'She has the entire establishment or almost the entire establishment behind her.'" (Julie Pace And Ken Thomas, "Dems Ready For Long, Pricey Primary Between Clinton, Sanders," The Associated Press, 2/5/16)

 To The "Activist Left" Segment Of The Democrat Party, The Strength Of The Establishment Is "Frustrating." "That's not to say that the Democratic establishment's strength is a good (or a bad) thing. To the activist left, it's frustrating, particularly if Clinton ends up tacking to the center in the general election." (Molly Ball, "The Democratic Establishment Prevails,"The Atlantic ,6/3/16)

The Atlantic Headline: "The Democratic Establishment Prevails" (Molly Ball, "The Democratic Establishment Prevails,"The Atlantic, 6/3/16)

"The Democratic National Committee Has Been Pilloried For Its Hamhanded Attempts To 'Rig' The Process In Clinton's Favor, From The Scheduling Of Debates To Fundraising Agreements." (Molly Ball, "The Democratic Establishment Prevails,"The Atlantic ,6/3/16)

"The Democratic Primary Has Descended Into Bitter Acrimony That Poses Real Questions About Whether The Sanders And Clinton Factions Will Come Together In November." (Molly Ball, "The Democratic Establishment Prevails,"The Atlantic, 6/3/16)

Clinton's 2016 Campaign Is Has Close Ties To Washington, D.C. Establishment Lobbyists

In April 2015, Clinton's Campaign Confirmed It Will Accept Donations From Lobbyists And PACs. "Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign will accept donations from lobbyists and political action committees, a difference in policy from the man she's hoping to replace, President Barack Obama. The Clinton campaign confirmed that there would be no prohibition on such donations, after The Huffington Post was tipped off by two lobbyists supportive of the former secretary of state's run for the White House." (Sam Stein and Paul Blumenthal, "Clinton Campaign Will Accept Donations From Lobbyists And PACs," The Huffington Post, 4/16/15)

Lobbyists That Represent Drug And Oil Companies Are Raising "Stacks Of Money" For Clinton's Campaign. "Hillary Clinton took aim this week at the pharmaceutical industry and the Keystone oil pipeline. But that doesn't mean the Democratic presidential front-runner isn't enjoying the support of lobbyists representing drug and oil companies in Washington, many of whom are helping raise stacks of money for her campaign." (Catherine Ho, "Clinton Takes Aim At Pharma, Keystone - But Industry Lobbyists Still Provide Campaign Cash," The Washington Post's Power Post, 9/24/15)

Clinton Has Taken More Than $1.2 Million In Bundled Donations From Oil And Gas Lobbyists. "And Greenpeace, a progressive environmental organization, released a recent report showing that Clinton had also received more than $1.2 million in donations bundled -- or fundraised -- by lobbyists for fossil-fuel industry on her behalf. The organization also tied millions more donations tied to the fossil-fuel industry to the super PAC supporting Clinton, Priorities USA Action." (Abby Phillip, "'I Am So Sick Of The Sanders Campaign Lying About Me': Clinton Snaps At Greenpeace Activist," The Washington Post , 3/31/16)

Tony Podesta, A Clinton Bundler, Is A "Big-Shot" Democrat Lobbyist Who Has Lobbied On Behalf Of Big Oil. "Heather Podesta and Tony Podesta have raised $31,150 and $74,575, respectively. The power ex-couple are big-shot Democratic lobbyists. Tony's brother John is Clinton's campaign chair and former White House chief of staff to Bill Clinton. Even though John Podesta is considered a climate hawk, Tony and his ex-wife Heather represent fossil fuel companies. Heather's recent past clients include Marathon Oil and Bill Koch's Oxbow Carbon, a coal giant, and from 2004 to 2006 she lobbied for Koch Industries. Tony lobbied for BP in the wake of its disastrous Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion, and through last year he represented Golden Pass, a company co-owned by ExxonMobil and Qatar Petroleum that wants to export liquefied natural gas." (Ben Adler, "Hillary Clinton Rakes In Money From Fossil Fuel Interests," Grist, 7/21/15)

Podesta Has Said That "K Street Will Find A More Welcome Home In A Clinton White House." "Speaking to The Hill last year, Tony Podesta said that unlike President Obama, who instituted a ban on registered lobbyists in his administration, K Street will find a more welcome home in a Clinton White House." (Lee Fang, "Top Hillary Clinton Advisors And Fundraisers Lobbied Against Obamacare," The Intercept, 2/8/16)

"Not Only Is Hillary Taking Money From Lobbyists; She's Also Hiring Them To Run Her Campaign." (Patrick Caldwell, "Clinton's Top Aides Have Lobbied For Companies Liberals Despise," Mother Jones, 7/8/15)

"There Are At Least Six Clinton Campaign Staffers Who, At One Time Or Another, Earned A Paycheck As A Registered Lobbyist." "There are at least six Clinton campaign staffers who, at one time or another, earned a paycheck as a registered lobbyist. They've lobbied for a range of controversial special interests, from the Keystone pipeline and Lehman Brothers to SeaWorld and some of the country's largest corporations." (Patrick Caldwell, "Clinton's Top Aides Have Lobbied For Companies Liberals Despise," Mother Jones, 7/8/15)

Clinton's Consultant On Delegates, Jeff Berman, Worked As A Lobbyist For TransCanada And Lobbied Clinton's State Department For The Construction Of The Keystone XL Pipeline. "The newest hire for Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign is a longtime strategist who played a key role in her 2008 primary defeat while working for then-Sen. Barack Obama. He's also a Washington lobbyist who lobbied the State Department - led, at the time, by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton - on behalf of the company seeking to build the controversial Keystone XL pipeline. Clinton's new consultant, Jeff Berman, has followed, in many respects, a well-worn path for those in Washington D.C. He spent a large chunk of his career in the public sector before a stint on K Street, and now he's back again." (Sam Stein, "Hillary Clinton's Newest Consultant Was A Major Keystone Lobbyist," The Huffington Post, 6/25/15)

Joel Benenson, Clinton's "Chief Pollster And Strategist," Has Done Work For The Financial Services Forum, "A Lobbying Group For Wall Street Interests Such As Citigroup And Goldman Sachs." "The Benenson Strategy Group, the consulting firm run by Joel Benenson, now serving as the Clinton campaign's chief pollster and strategist, was retained by the Financial Services Forum, a lobbying group for Wall Street interests such as Citigroup and Goldman Sachs. Lobbying records show the Financial Services Forum has worked over the years to weaken a variety of Dodd-Frank reforms. In 2013, the Financial Services Forum paid Benenson's firm $273,459 to lobby on a number of rules that were mandated by Dodd-Frank, including capital requirements designed to prevent another financial crisis. Danny Franklin, a partner with the Benenson Stategy Group, wrote to The Intercept to say the Financial Services Forum is not currently a client of his firm, but declined to comment any further." (Lee Fang, "Top Hillary Clinton Advisors And Fundraisers Lobbied Against Obamacare," The Intercept, 2/8/16)

Clinton's Campaign Adviser And Fundraiser Steve Elmendorf, "Was Retained By Goldman Sachs As One Of The Bank's 'Primary Lobbyists' Working To Weaken the Dodd-Frank Bill." "Steve Elmendorf, a campaign adviser and fundraiser who has collected $30,505 for Clinton, was retained by Goldman Sachs as one of the bank's "primary lobbyists" working to weaken the Dodd-Frank bill. Records show that after the bill was signed into law, Elmendorf continued to work on behalf of a number of Wall Street clients to ensure the implementation was favorable to financial industry interests." (Lee Fang, "Top Hillary Clinton Advisors And Fundraisers Lobbied Against Obamacare," The Intercept, 2/8/16)

### 4. SANDERS: DEMOCRAT ESTABLISHMENT IMMIGRATION POLICIES WOULD DRIVE DOWN AMERICANS' WAGES, CREATE OPEN BORDERS

In 2007, Sanders Opposed Comprehensive Immigration Reform, Arguing That An Increase In Guest Worker Visas Would Drive Down Wages. " Sanders opposed comprehensive immigration reform in 2007 on the grounds that it would expand the number of guest workers in the United States…'If poverty is increasing and if wages are going down, I don't know why we need millions of people to be coming into this country as guest workers who will work for lower wages than American workers and drive waged down even lower than they are now,' Sanders said in a television interview in June 2007." (Sam Frizell, "Why Conservatives Praise Bernie Sanders On Immigration," TIME, 1/7/16)

Sanders In 2007: "Our Border Is Very Porous." "Bernie Sanders once railed against the effects of the 2007 immigration bill and its guest-worker program on American workers and wages, and seemed to lament the lack of sanctions on employers for hiring undocumented immigrants in a video posted to what was then his Senate website…'I believe we have very serious immigration problems in this country,' he said, later in the video. 'I think as you've heard today, sanctions against employers who employ illegal immigrants is virtually nonexistent. Our border is very porous.'" (Megan Apper, "Bernie Sanders On Immigration In 2007 Video: This Is A Bad Bill For American Workers," Buzzfeed , 2/19/16)

Sanders Has Opposed Guest Worker Programs For Low-Skilled Workers Saying That More Workers Would Lower Wages For American Workers. "Sanders ultimately voted for the 2013 comprehensive immigration reform legislation along with ever other Democrat in the Senate, but was still opposed to guest worker program for low-skilled workers, saying it could lower wages for American workers." (Sam Frizell, "Why Conservatives Praise Bernie Sanders On Immigration," TIME, 1/7/16)

Sanders Stated That The Guest Worker Programs That Clinton Supported In The 2006 Bill Are "Akin To Slavery"

At A February 2016 Democrat Debate, Sanders Said The Guest Worker Programs In The 2006 Comprehensive Immigration Reform Bill Were "Akin To Slavery." 'I voted for comprehensive immigration reform in 2007. Sen. Sanders voted against it at that time,' Clinton said. 'I think we have to get to comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship.' Sanders countered: 'The Southern Poverty Law Center, among other groups, said that the guest worker programs that were embedded in this agreement were akin to slavery. Akin to slavery - where people came into this country to do guest work were abused, were exploited.'" (Nick Gass, "Clinton, Sanders Spar On Immigration," Politico, 2/11/16)

Sanders Cited A Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Report That Compared The Agricultural Guest Worker Programs Clinton Supported To "Modern Servitude." " For one, the 'akin to slavery' quote isn't made up: The SPLC did publish a report in 2007, 'Close to slavery: Guestworker programs in the United States,' that likened the existing H2A and H2B guest worker programs to modern servitude. The report looked at the conditions of about 121,000 guest workers living in the United States - including those in forestry, agriculture, and seafood preparation - and found high fatality rates, lack of basic medical care, and few means of redress." (Jeff Stein, "The Bernie Sanders/Hillary Clinton Feud Over Guest Workers, Explained," Vox, 2/26/16)

Trump Has Vowed To Crack Down On Guest Worker Abuses To Save American Jobs.

Trump Advocates For Controlling "The Admission Of New Low-Earning Workers" In Order To Help Grow Wages. "Every year, we voluntarily admit another 2 million new immigrants, guest workers, refugees, and dependents, growing our existing all-time historic record population of 42 million immigrants. We need to control the admission of new low-earning workers in order to: help wages grow, get teenagers back to work, aid minorities' rise into the middle class, help schools and communities falling behind, and to ensure our immigrant members of the national family become part of the American dream." (Donald J. Trump For President, Accessed 7/11/16)

Trump's Immigration Plan Calls For A Pause Before Any New Green Cards Are Issued To Make Hiring American Workers And Legal Immigrants A Priority. "Before any new green cards are issued to foreign workers abroad, there will be a pause where employers will have to hire from the domestic pool of unemployed immigrant and native workers. This will help reverse women's plummeting workplace participation rate, grow wages, and allow record immigration levels to subside to more moderate historical averages." ( Donald J. Trump For President, Accessed 7/11/16)

### 5. SANDERS: CLINTON SUPPORTS NATION-BUILDING IN MIDDLE EAST THROUGH WAR AND INVASION

While Clinton Was Eager To Intervene In Iraq And Libya, Sanders Insisted Upon Diplomacy Instead Of A Costly Invasion And War

Sanders Draws Sharp Contrast Between His Views And Hillary Clinton's Support For Foreign Intervention Overseas. THE GUARDIAN'S DAN ROBERTS: "Your campaign pulled an advert the other day that was specifically linking Hillary Clinton to Wall Street. A lot of people appreciate your desire not to go negative personally, but do you need to do more to delineate the differences between you and Secretary Clinton?" SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT): "My view is that in terms of foreign policy, regime change without worrying about what happens the day after you get rid of the dictator does not make a lot of sense. I voted against the war in Iraq; helped lead the war against the war in Iraq. God, I only wish that I had been successful in stopping that war that given all that has happened since with the rise of Isis and so forth. Secretary Clinton voted for that war. She was proud to have been involved in regime change in Libya, with Gaddafi, without worrying I think about what happened the day after and the kind of instability and the rise of Isis that we have seen in Libya." ( Dan Roberts, "Sanders: Clinton's Pursuit Of 'Regime Change' In Libya Helped Rise Of Isis," The Guardian, 12/18/15)

Sanders Has Blamed Clinton For Encouraging Extremism In Libya And Questioned Her Judgment On The Iraq Vote

Sanders Blames Clinton's Libya Intervention For Encouraging Extremism. "Bernie Sanders has accused Hillary Clinton of encouraging Islamic extremism in Libya, in a prelude to a Democratic debate on Saturday during which he is expected to go on the attack for the first time over the unintended consequences of the former secretary of state's more interventionist foreign policy. Speaking to the Guardian in an extensive pre-debate interview, the senator from Vermont criticised Clinton for carelessly fomenting regime change in Libya 'without worrying' about the ensuing instability that has helped Islamic State forces take hold in the country." ( Dan Roberts, "Sanders: Clinton's Pursuit Of 'Regime Change' In Libya Helped Rise Of Isis," The Guardian , 12/18/15)

Sanders Claims That Hillary Clinton Doesn't Have The Judgement To Be President, Partly Due To Her Iraq War Vote. SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT): "But I do Question Her Judgement. I question a judgement which voted for the war in Iraq, the worst foreign policy blunder in the history of this country." (New York Democratic Primary Debate, 4/14/16)

Click To Watch

Trump Views Interventions As A Last Resort And Believes America Should Spend Its Money Domestically Rather Than Deposing Foreign Leaders

On Cavuto, Trump Said We Should Focus The Money On Promoting A Strong Economy Rather Than Invade Iraq. CAVUTO: "If you had to sort of breakdown for the president, if you were advising him, how much time do you commit to Iraq versus how much time you commit to the economy, what would you say?" TRUMP: "Well, I'm starting to think that people are much more focused now on the economy. They are getting a little bit tired of hearing, we're going in, we're not going in, the - you know, whatever happened to the days of the Douglas MacArthur. He would go and attack. He wouldn't talk. We have to - you know, it`s sort like either do it or don't do it. When I watch Dan Rather explaining how we are going to be attacking, where we`re going to attack, what routes we're taking, what kind of planes we're using, how to stop them, how to stop us, it is a little bit disconcerting. I've never seen this, where newscasters are telling you how - telling the enemy how we're going about it, we have just found out this and that. It is ridiculous." (Andrew, Kaczynaski, "In 2002, Donald Trump Said He Supported Invading Iraq," BuzzFeed , 02/18/16)

Trump Said That We Should Wait And Focus On The Economy Before Invading Iraq. " CAVUTO: 'So you`re saying the leash on this is getting kind of short here, that the president has got to do something presumably sooner rather than later and stringing this along could ultimately hurt us.' TRUMP: 'Well, he has either got to do something or not do something, perhaps, because perhaps shouldn't be doing it yet and perhaps we should be waiting for the United Nations, you know. He`s under a lot of pressure. He`s - I think he`s doing a very good job. But, of course, if you look at the polls, a lot of people are getting a little tired. I think the Iraqi situation is a problem. And I think the economy is a much bigger problem as far as the president is concerned.'" (Andrew, Kaczynaski, "In 2002, Donald Trump Said He Supported Invading Iraq," BuzzFeed , 02/18/16)

Trump Opposed Removing Gadhafi From Power In A February 2016 Republican Primary Debate. " 'We would be so much better off if Gaddafi would be in charge right now,' Trump said then. He has also hit Clinton over the U.S. intervention in Libya in his stump speech." (Eric Bradner, "Trump -- Again -- Reverses Libya Position," CNN, 6/5/16)

In October 2015, Trump Says Libya Would Be Better Off Without An Intervention . CHUCK TODD: "If Saddam And Gaddifi Do You Think Things Would Be More Stable?" DONALD TRUMP: "Of course it would be. You wouldn't have your Benghazi situation which is one tehing, which is just a terrible situation. Libya, is one thing, its not even a country. No one knows what's going on over there." ("Face The Nation," CBS , October, 2015)

* * *

Republican National Committee

**The Top 15 Sanders Attacks On Clinton**
-----------------------------------------

### **_Sanders Abandons His Movement, Embraces Pro-Wall Street, Pro-Intervention, Pro-TPP Candidate Who He Recently Mocked As Unqualified And Unable To Lead A Political Revolution_**

______________________________  ______________________________  ______

### **TOP TAKEAWAYS**

*   While Sanders' endorsement of Clinton today is sure to be filled with sunshine and smiles, there is no forgetting the contentious primary between the two rivals that has left many of his supporters unwilling to back her.
*   Sanders repeatedly eviscerated Clinton on the campaign trail, questioning both her judgement, character and qualifications for assuming the presidency.
*   Sanders saved his strongest attacks on Clinton for her insider and Wall Street ties, support for Middle East interventions, and trade deals, saying she is in the pocket of those interests and stating he doesn't "think Hillary Clinton can lead a political revolution."
*   Sanders even went so far as to term Clinton's use of the term "super predators" as being "racist" and saying she knew the use of the term was racist as well.
*   On top of all these attacks, Sanders also went after Bill Clinton's treatment of women, saying it was "disgraceful."

* * *

**Sanders Is Expected To Endorse Clinton Today In New Hampshire.**"Bernie Sanders is poised to endorse Hillary Clinton at a campaign event Tuesday in New Hampshire, provided that final disagreements in the Democratic platform can be resolved during a weekend party meeting in Orlando, people familiar with the talks say." (Jeff Zeleny, "Bernie Sanders Poised To Endorse Hillary Clinton At Event Tuesday," CNN, 7/7/16)

### **#1****: SANDERS SAID HE DOESN'T "THINK HILLARY CLINTON CAN LEAD A POLITICAL REVOLUTION…"**

**Just Last Month, Sanders Said Clinton Couldn't Lead A Political Revolution.** ABC'S GEORGE STEPHANOPOLUS: "So it sounds like you are prepared to play a pretty constructive role with Hillary Clinton, after speaking with her on Tuesday night, but as you know a lot of your supporters still pretty upset, and Jill Stein, the green party candidate is reaching out to them, she sent this tweet, 'Don't forget, Bernie Sanders signed up for a political revolution, Hillary is the antithesis of the revolution,' do you agree with that and do you believe that Hillary Clinton can lead a political revolution?" SEN. SANDERS (D-VT): "Well, I don't think Hillary Clinton can lead a political revolution, but I think that Hillary Clinton is smart, and she certainly is smart, she will understand that good public policy, taking on the big money interest, and standing up for working families, standing up for the environment, standing up for clean water, is in fact good politics, can she do that? Yes. Will she go as far as I would like? No, she won't, but I think what millions of people really want to understand and see is what kind of commitment she has to addressing the real crisis in this country, and transforming the democratic party away from the party which simply is there in many respects to raise money from the wealthy, into a party which listens to the pain of a declining middle class and 47 million people living in poverty and shows the courage to tell the big money interests that this world is gonna change." (ABC's " Face The Nation," 6/12/16)

### **#2:****SANDERS HAS SAID CLINTON WAS NOT QUALIFIED TO BE PRESIDENT**

**Sanders Attacked Clinton For Being Unqualified To Be President On The Grounds Of Her Wall Street Ties And Foreign Policy Record.** "Bernie Sanders doubled down Thursday on his criticism that Hillary Clinton is 'not qualified' to be President, even as Clinton sought to avoid escalating the most heated dispute yet in their increasingly bitter Democratic primary contest. 'Are you qualified to be President of the United States when you're raising millions of dollars from Wall Street whose greed, recklessness and illegal behavior helped to destroy our economy?' Sanders said in Philadelphia. 'Maybe the American people might wonder about your qualifications, Madame Secretary, when you voted for the war in Iraq, the most disastrous foreign policy blunder in the modern history America.'" (Sam Frizell, "Clinton And Sanders Clash On Qualifications As Democratic Race Gets Bitter," _Time_ _,_ 4/7/16)

**Click To Watch**

**Sanders Said That Clinton "Might Want To Apologize To The Families Who Lost Their Loved Ones In Iraq."** "The Vermont senator has sharpened his tone in recent days. After a Clinton supporter and daughter of the principal killed at Sandy Hook said that Sanders owes her 'an apology' for opposing lawsuits against gun manufacturers, Sanders rebuked Clinton harshly. 'Maybe Secretary Clinton might want to apologize to the families who lost their loved ones in Iraq,' he said on CBS." (Sam Frizell, "Clinton And Sanders Clash On Qualifications As Democratic Race Gets Bitter," _Time_ _,_ 4/7/16)

### **#3:****SANDERS HAS ATTACKED CLINTON'S JUDGEMENT**

**Sanders Claims That Hillary Clinton Doesn't Have The Judgement To Be President, Partly Due To Her Iraq War Vote.** SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT): "But I do Question Her Judgement. I question a judgement which voted for the war in Iraq, the worst foreign policy blunder in the history of this country." (New York Democratic Primary Debate, 4/14/16)

**Click To Watch**

### **#4:****SANDERS HAS REPEATEDLY ATTACKED CLINTON ON HER TIES TO WALL STREET**

**_Politico_****Headline: "Sanders Taunts Clinton Again On Wall Street Ties"** (Colin Wilhelm, "Sanders Taunts Clinton Again On Wall Street Ties," _Politico_ _,_ 4/17/16)

**Sanders Has Criticized Clinton For Her High Speaking Fees, Saying They Must Be Speeches That Would "Enlighten Humanity" And Be "Written In Shakespearean Prose."** "Sanders also criticized Clinton for the amount of money she receives for giving speeches. Over the years, he said, Clinton has given speeches for $225,000 a piece. 'Now, seems to me if you're going to get $225,000 a speech, it must be an extraordinarily brilliant speech,' Sanders said. 'It must be a speech that would enlighten all of humanity, probably solve all of the crises facing our planet, must have been a speech written in Shakespearean prose.'" (Alexa Torrens, "Bernie Sanders Speaks On Primary Initiatives For Presidency At Rally In Syracuse,"_The Daily Orange_ _,_ 4/12/16 _)_

**Sanders Has Also Said That Clinton's Wall Street Speeches "Must Be A Brilliant, Earth Shattering Speech" For The High Price Tag.** "'We have shown the world that we can run a campaign without being dependent on powerful and wealthy special interests,' Sanders said. 'Secretary Clinton has chosen to raise her funds in a different way. In addition to that, as some of you may know, Secretary Clinton has given a number of speeches to Wall Street financial institutions for $225,000 a speech. Now, $225,000, that is a lot of money and I kind of figure that if you give a speech for that kind of money it must be a brilliant, earth shattering speech.'" (Daniel Strauss, "Sanders Jabs Clinton On Iraq Vote, Wall Street Ties," _Politico_ _,_ 5/3/16)

**Sanders Has Said That Clinton Wants To Bring "Oligarchy" To The Country Because "Wall Street And Other Special Interests" Are Supporting Her.** "Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders on Sunday pressed his line of attack again that 'Wall Street and other special interests' are for rival Hillary Clinton and want to bring 'oligarchy' to the country." (Colin Wilhelm, "Sanders Taunts Clinton Again On Wall Street Ties," _Politico_ _,_ 4/17/16)

**Sanders Attacked Clinton Saying That "You're Not Going To Have A Government That Represents All Of Us, So Long As You Have Candidates Like Secretary Clinton Being Dependent On Big Money Interest."** "'This is the issue of American politics today: Do we have a government that represents all of us or just the 1 percent?" Sanders said on CNN's "State of the Union.' 'You're not going to have a government that represents all of us, so long as you have candidates like Secretary Clinton being dependent on big money interests.'" (Colin Wilhelm, "Sanders Taunts Clinton Again On Wall Street Ties," _Politico_ _,_ 4/17/16)

#### **_Sanders Has Been Consistently And Effectively Attacking Clinton On Her Wall Street Ties_**

**Sanders "Won't Let Clinton Avoid Clinton Avoid Her Ties To Wall Street…And Audiences Love It."** "He won't let Clinton avoid her ties to Wall Street. He's going to keep bringing it up as he barnstorms New Hampshire and the nation, and audiences love it." (David Lightman, "Wall Street Cash, Goldman Speaking Fees Hang Over Clinton," _The Kansas City Star_ _,_ 2/5/16)

**Sanders' Attack On Clinton's Wall Street Ties Addresses Voter "Anger At Wall Street" And "Feeds Any Sentiment That Clinton Can't Be Trusted." "** Not only does it address their anger at Wall Street, but it feeds any sentiment that Clinton can't be trusted." (David Lightman, "Wall Street Cash, Goldman Speaking Fees Hang Over Clinton," _The Kansas City Star_ _,_ 2/5/16)

**"Clinton's Been Stumbling On Wall Street For A Long Time Too, And It Just Keeps On Causing Her Trouble."** (Simon Malloy, "Democratic Debate Night: The First One-On-One Clash Leaves Hillary Clinton Stumbling On Wall Street," _Salon_ , 2/5/16)

**When Asked About The $675,000 Goldman Sachs Paid Her For Speaking Engagement, Clinton's "Body Language Buckled" And "Recoiled As She Answered."** "On Wednesday night, the Democratic presidential candidate tried a different approach when asked by CNN's Anderson Cooper if it was appropriate to accept $675,000 for three speeches made to Goldman Sachs … After having given a strong performance during much of the town hall forum, Mrs. Clinton's body language buckled when pressed on the issue. Was it an error in judgment? Did she really not know she would be running for president after leaving the State Department? Mrs. Clinton recoiled as she answered." (Alan Rappeport, "Questions On Speeches To Goldman Sachs Vex Hillary Clinton," _The New York Times_ _,_ 2/4/16)

### **#5:****SANDERS HAS ATTACKED CLINTON ON HER FOUNDATION'S FOREIGN GOVERNMENT DONATIONS**

**Sanders Has Taken Aim At The Clinton Foundation's Foreign Government Donations.** CNN'S JAKE TAPPER: "You have not been critical of the Clinton Foundation, but there are those who say that there is something inherently wrong with an American charity, especially one with ties to a Secretary of State, taking money from the Saudis, and other foreign governments that don't represent our values. Is that a fair criticism?" SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT): "Yes, it is. If you ask me about the Clinton Foundation, do I have a problem, when a sitting Secretary of State and a Foundation ran by her husband collects many millions of dollars from foreign governments, governments which are dictatorships, you don't have a lot of civil liberties, or democratic rights in Saudi Arabia, you don't have a lot of respect there for opposition points, for gay rights, for women's rights, um yeah, do I have a problem with that? Yeah I do." TAPPER: "You think it creates an appearance of conflict of interest?" SANDERS: "Yeah, I do." (CNN's "State Of The Union," 6/5/16)

### **#6:****SANDERS HAS GONE AFTER CLINTON ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM, CALLING HER USE OF THE TERM "SUPER PREDATORS" RACIST**

**Sanders Said Clinton Knew "What That Language Meant" When She Referred To "Super Predators," Saying It "Was Referring To Young Blacks."** "Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) criticized former President Bill Clinton for recently defending his wife Hillary Clinton's use of the term 'super-predators' while discussing a controversial 1994 crime bill. 'I think we all knew back then what that language meant,' Sanders told ABC's George Stephanopoulos on Sunday. 'That was referring to young blacks. And I don't think in this country, elected officials or leaders should be using that type of terminology.'" (Ryan Reilly, "Bernie Sanders: 'We All Knew' What Hillary Clinton Meant By 'Super-Predators'," _The Huffington Post_, 4/10/16)

**Click To Watch**

**Sanders Said Clinton's Use Of The Term "Super Predators" Was "Racist" And Said "Everybody Knew It Was A Racist Term."** "Bernie Sanders slammed his rival's 1996 use of the term 'super predators' Thursday evening, calling it 'racist' on stage at the Democratic debate in Brooklyn. Asked why Sanders had criticized Bill Clinton's defense of his wife use of the phrase 'super predators,' Sanders responded: 'Because it was a racist term and everybody knew it was a racist term.'" (Reena Flores, "Bernie Sanders Slams Clinton's 'Racist' 1996 Super Predators Comment," CBS News, 4/14/16)

**CBS News Headline: "Bernie Sanders Slams Clinton's 'Racist' 1996 Super Predators Comment"** (CBS News, 4/14/16)

### **#7:****SANDERS HAS CRITICIZED CLINTON FOR VOTING "FOR VIRTUALLY EVERY TRADE AGREEMENT THAT HAS COST THE WORKERS OF THIS COUNTRY MILLIONS OF JOBS"**

**Sanders Has Criticized Clinton For Voting "For Virtually Every Trade Agreement That Has Cost The Workers Of This Country Millions Of Jobs."** NBC POLITICAL DIRECTOR CHUCK TODD: "So you believe she doesn't have the judgment to be president of the United States?" SEN. SANDERS (D-VT): "Well, when you vote for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs, when you support and continue to support fracking, despite the crisis that we have in terms of clean water, and essentially, when you have a super PAC that is raising tens of millions of dollars from every special interest out there, including 15 million from Wall Street, the American people do not believe that that is the kind of president that we need to make the changes in America to protect the working families of this country." ( NBC's "Meet The Press," 4/10/16)

**Click To Watch**

#### **_Sanders Has Attacked Clinton For Supporting NAFTA_**

**Sanders Has Attacked Clinton For Supporting NAFTA.** "Appearing before a boisterous crowd here of about 4,500 people in a hockey arena, Sanders touted his long record of opposition to trade deals and said that as first lady Clinton 'thought NAFTA was a good idea' when it was passed in the early 1990s. 'I was right. She was wrong,' Sanders said. 'I understood that American workers should not be forced to compete against desperate people making pennies an hour,' Sanders said. 'I want to see poor people around the world do better, but that does not mean we have to destroy the middle class of this country.'" (John Wagner, "Sanders Knocks Clinton For Supporting NAFTA While First Lady," _The Washington Post_, 2/23/16)

#### **_Sanders Has Attacked Clinton For Supporting TPP_**

**Sanders Has Attacked Clinton For Being "Very Reluctant To Come Out In Opposition" To The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).** "He rattled off various trade agreements that Mrs. Clinton backed and that he had opposed. 'On the issue of trade, Secretary Clinton's views and mine are very different,' Mr. Sanders said. He also pointed to Mrs. Clinton's original kind words for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a 12-nation deal that is one of the Obama administration's key priorities. As secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton called it the 'gold standard,' but she came out against it once it was completed in October, six months into her presidential campaign. 'She was very reluctant to come out in opposition,' Mr. Sanders said. 'She is running for president. She concluded it was a good idea to oppose the TPP, and she did.'" (Laura Meckler and Peter Nicholas, "Bernie Sanders And Hillary Clinton Spar Over Trade In Midwest," _The Wall Street Journal_, 3/3/16)

#### **_Sanders Has Accused Clinton Of Being A Potential "Outsourcer-In-Chief" As President_**

**Sanders' Campaign Called Clinton A Potential "Outsourcer-In Chief," Saying She "Has Been A Consistent Advocate Of The Job-Killing Trade Deals" That Have Lost "Almost 5 Million Manufacturing Jobs Over The Last 15 Years."** "At a rally on Wednesday former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told those gathered, 'Don't let anybody tell you we can't make anything in America anymore.' What she failed to tell the audience is that she has been a consistent advocate of the job-killing trade deals that have contributed to the loss of nearly 60,000 factories in the United States and almost 5 million manufacturing jobs over the last 15 years." (Press Release, "Hillary Clinton: Outsourcer-In-Chief," Bernie 2016, 3/3/16)

### **#8:****SANDERS HAS ATTACKED CLINTON'S ALLEGED SUPPORT OF FRACKING NATURAL GAS**

**Sanders Has Criticized Clinton For Her Stance On Fracking, Saying His Answer On Fracking "Is A Lot Shorter. No I Do Not Support Fracking."** QUESTION: "Fracking can lead to environmental pollution including, but not limited to, the contamination of water supply. Do you support fracking?" CNN'S ANDERSON COOPER: "Secretary Clinton?" CLINTON: "You know, I don't support it when any locality or any state is against it, number one. I don't support it when the release of methane or contamination of water is present. I don't support it - number three - unless we can require that anybody who fracks has to tell us exactly what chemicals they are using. So by the time we get through all of my conditions, I do not think there will be many places in America where fracking will continue to take place. And I think that's the best approach, because right now, there places where fracking is going on that are not sufficiently regulated. So first, we've got to regulate everything that is currently underway, and we have to have a system in place that prevents further fracking unless conditions like the ones that I just mentioned are met." COOPER: "Senator Sanders, you…" SEN. SANDERS (D-VT): "My answer - my answer is a lot shorter. No, I do not support fracking. And by the way - by the way, Anderson, I'm glad you raised the issue of climate change, because the media doesn't talk enough about what the scientists are telling us, and that is, if we don't get our act together, the planet that we're going to leave our children may not be healthy and habitable." (Bernie Sanders, Remarks At The CNN Democratic Primary Debate , Flint, MI, 3/6/16)

**Click To Watch**

**Sanders Attacked Clinton For Being "Too Soft" On Fracking And Calls For A Nationwide Ban On The Practice.** "Democratic presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders has a new line of attack against Hillary Clinton tailor-made for New York voters: that she is too soft on hydraulic fracturing. Sanders has taken a firmer line against the drilling practice than the Democratic front-runner, calling for it to be banned nationwide. He highlighted his fracking stance in an ad released this week, putting the issue front and center as he seeks to make up ground ahead of the crucial New York primary next week, which will award 247 delegates." (Devin Henry, "Sanders Injects Fracking Into Battle For NY," _The Hill_, 4/13/16)

*   **Sanders Said That Because Clinton Does Not Support A Total Fracking Ban, She "Continue[s] To Support Fracking."** NBC NEWS' POLITICAL DIRECTOR CHUCK TODD: "So you believe she doesn't have the judgment to be president of the United States?" SANDERS: "Well, when you vote for virtually every trade agreement that has cost the workers of this country millions of jobs, when you support and continue to support fracking, despite the crisis that we have in terms of clean water, and essentially, when you have a super PAC that is raising tens of millions of dollars from every special interest out there, including 15 million from Wall Street, the American people do not believe that that is the kind of president that we need to make the changes in America to protect the working families of this country." (NBC's "Meet The Press," 4/14/16)

*   ### **#9:****SANDERS ATTACKED CLINTON FOR HER INCONSISTENCY ON A $15 MINIMUM WAGE**

**At An April Debate, Sanders Attacked Clinton Over Her Minimum Wage Stance, Saying That She Has Not Consistently Supporting A $15 Minimum Wage.** CNN'S WOLF BLITZER: "If you're both screaming at each other, the viewers won't be able to hear either of you." SEN. SANDERS (D-VT): "OK." BLITZER: "So please..." SANDERS: "I will..." BLITZER: "…don't talk over each other." SANDERS: "I believe I was..." BLITZER: "Go ahead." SANDERS: "…responding. All right? When this campaign began, I said that we got to end the starvation minimum wage of $7.25, raise it to $15. Secretary Clinton said let's raise it to $12. There's a difference. And, by the way, what has happened is history has outpaced Secretary Clinton, because all over this country, people are standing up and they're saying $12 is not good enough, we need $15 an hour." CLINTON: "OK." BLITZER: "Go ahead, Secretary. Secretary?" SANDERS: "And suddenly..." BLITZER: "Secretary, go ahead." SANDERS: "To suddenly..." CLINTON: "Thank you. Thank you very much." SANDERS: "To suddenly announce now that you're for $15, I don't think is quite accurate." (Sen Bernie Sanders, Remarks At The CNN Democrat Debate, Brooklyn, NY, 4/15/16)

*   **Sanders' Said Clinton "Has Confused A Lot Of People" With Her Shifting Position On Minimum Wage.** SEN. SANDERS (D-VT): "I think the secretary has confused a lot of people. I don't know how your there for the 'fight for 15,' when you say you want a $12 an hour national minimum wage. Now, in fact there is an effort, Patty Murray has introduced legislation for $12 minimum wage, that's good. I introduced legislation for $15 an hour minimum wage, which is better and ultimately what we have got to determine is after a massive transfer of wealth from the middle class to the ton tenth of 1%, when millions of people are working longer hours I think we have to be clear, not equivocate, $15 an hour minimum wage in 50 states in this country as soon as possible." (Sen. Bernie Sanders, Democratic Debate, Brooklyn, New York, 4/14/16)

**Click To Watch**

*   **Earlier In The Debate, Clinton Said She Would Sign A $15 An Hour Federal Minimum Wage Bill If She Were Presented With One As President.** CNN'S WOLF BLITZER: "You stood on the stage with Governor Cuomo in support of new legislation to raise New York's minimum wage to $15 an hour, but you do not support raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour. As president, if a democratic congress put a $15 minimum wage bill on your desk, would you sign it?" CLINTON: "Of course I would. I have supported the 'fight for 15.' I'm proud to have the endorsement of most of the unions that have led the 'fight for 15.' I was proud to stand on the stage with Governor Cuomo, with SEIU, and others who have been leading this, and I will work as hard as I can to raise the minimum wage. I always have. I supported that when I was in the senate, but what I have also said is we've got to be smart about it. Just the way Governor Cuomo was here in New York. If you look at it, we moved more quickly to 15 in New York City, more deliberately toward 12, 12.50, upstate, then to 15. That is exactly my position, it's a model for the nation. That's what I will do as president. Go as quickly as possible to get to 15." (Hillary Clinton, Democratic Debate, Brooklyn, New York, 4/14/16)

**Clinton Previously Claimed To Support A $15 Wage For Some Areas, Such As New York City, But Has Said That Figure "May Not Make Sense For Less Dense Areas With Lower Costs Of Living."** "Clinton has said previously that a $15 minimum wage, which is fast becoming a reality in pricy cities like Seattle and Los Angeles, may not make sense for less dense areas with lower costs of living. She said she supported the recent move by the wage board of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D) to recommend a $15 minimum wage for fast-food workers in that state. But she has also said such a level may not be appropriate nationally." (Dave Jamieson, "Hillary Clinton Voices Support For $12 Minimum Wage, But Balks At $15," _The Huffington Post_, 7/30/15)

*   **In Remarks On The Minimum Wage Clinton Has Said "What You Can Do In L.A. Or In New York May Not Work In Other Places."** "'I think part of the reason that the Congress and very strong Democratic supporters of increasing the minimum wage are trying to debate and determine what's the national floor is because there are different economic environments. And what you can do in L.A. or in New York may not work in other places.'" (Kyle Blaine, "Hillary Clinton Declines To Support A National $15 Minimum Wage," _BuzzFeed_, 7/16/15)

### **#10:****SENATOR SANDERS HAS REPEATEDLY ADVOCATED FOR A MEDICARE FOR ALL SYSTEM AGAINST PROTESTS FROM HILLARY**

**Sanders Stated That A Single Payer System Represents What His "Campaign Is All About" At A Democratic Primary Debate.** "'That's what our campaign is about, it is thinking big,' Sanders said at a primary debate earlier this month. Accomplishing goals like implementing single-payer health care (or 'Medicare for all') is dependent on reducing the influence of big corporations, he argued. 'Nothing real will get [done] unless we have a political revolution where millions of people finally stand up.'" (Stephanie Condon, "Hillary Clinton: Single-Payer Health Care Will "Never, Ever" Happen," CBS, 1/29/16)

**Clinton Responded That Sanders Was Not Being Realistic And A Single Payer System Would "Never, Ever Come To Pass."** "She added, 'People who have health emergencies can't wait for us to have a theoretical debate about some better idea that will never, ever come to pass.'" (Stephanie Condon, "Hillary Clinton: Single-Payer Health Care Will "Never, Ever" Happen," CBS, 1/29/16)

### **#11:****SANDERS ATTACKED CLINTON FOR USING GAY RIGHTS ISSUES ONLY FOR POLITICAL GAIN**

**Sanders Attacked Hillary Clinton For Choosing Personal Political Gain Over The Civil Liberties Of The LGBT Community.** MSNBC'S RACHEL MADDOW: "You have been remarkably consistent in your policy positions over the years, also your style, you have as far as I can tell in 35 years in public office never have run a negative ad against an opponent. I can find no instances of you even saying anything particularly nasty or sharp tongued about an opponent but you are drawing a sharp contrast here." SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT) "I am. And the reason that I am is I think its important for voters in the democratic primary process to understand one very important fact. Yes it is a good idea that recently for example that Hillary Clinton has decided to oppose the TPP, Trans-Pacific Partnership. That's Great, I am glad she did that. Well, I have been opposed to those disastrous trade deals from day one. I am glad that Hillary Clinton has no come onboard and said she is against the Keystone Pipeline. Well you know what, if you take climate change seriously, and you understand the cataclysmic impact that it will have on this planet it's a no brainer, I have been against it since day one. Everybody knows that. And then we get to this issue of DOMA. Here was my point, it was a simple point. I have had in many years in politics have had to make tough votes. And as you just indicated, the times then were very, very different. We had a lot of homophobia, you know right wing republican leadership clearly trying to push this anti-gay legislation. And it bothered me to hear Secretary Clinton say what DOMA was really about was intended to prevent something worse. That just wasn't true, it wasn't true. And I think if you hear today what many of the gay activists are saying they will concur with me. Hillary Rosen, who you know, and she is a supporter of Secretary Clinton she said, 'Bernie Sanders is right. Note to my friends Bill and Hillary, please stop saying DOMA was to prevent something worse, it wasn't, I was there.' So my only point there was that was a tough vote, it really was. And there were a lot of decent people who in there hearts wanted to vote no and voted yes for political reasons." (Rachel Maddow, MSNBC, 10/27/15)

**Click To Watch**

### **#12:****SANDERS HAS CONTINUALLY ATTACKED CLINTON FOR THE FAILED POLICY IN LIBYA**

**Sanders Blames Clinton's Libya Intervention For Encouraging Extremism.** "Bernie Sanders has accused Hillary Clinton of encouraging Islamic extremism in Libya, in a prelude to a Democratic debate on Saturday during which he is expected to go on the attack for the first time over the unintended consequences of the former secretary of state's more interventionist foreign policy. Speaking to the Guardian in an extensive pre-debate interview, the senator from Vermont criticised Clinton for carelessly fomenting regime change in Libya 'without worrying' about the ensuing instability that has helped Islamic State forces take hold in the country." (Dan Roberts, "Sanders: Clinton's Pursuit Of 'Regime Change' In Libya Helped Rise Of Isis," _The Guardian_ , 12/18/15)

**Sanders Draws Sharp Contrast Between Hillary Clinton's Hawkish Views On Foreign Policy And His More Liberal Tendencies.** THE GUARDIAN'S DAN ROBERTS: "Your campaign pulled an advert the other day that was specifically linking Hillary Clinton to Wall Street. A lot of people appreciate your desire not to go negative personally, but do you need to do more to delineate the differences between you and Secretary Clinton?" SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (D-VT): "My view is that in terms of foreign policy, regime change without worrying about what happens the day after you get rid of the dictator does not make a lot of sense. I voted against the war in Iraq; helped lead the war against the war in Iraq. God, I only wish that I had been successful in stopping that war that given all that has happened since with the rise of Isis and so forth. Secretary Clinton voted for that war. She was proud to have been involved in regime change in Libya, with Gaddafi, without worrying I think about what happened the day after and the kind of instability and the rise of Isis that we have seen in Libya." (Dan Roberts, "Sanders: Clinton's Pursuit Of 'Regime Change' In Libya Helped Rise Of Isis," _The Guardian_, 12/18/15)

**Click To Watch**

### **#13:****SANDERS HAS ATTACKED CLINTON FOR HER NON-STANCE ON THE PAYROLL TAX CAP**

**At An April Debate, Sanders Attacked Clinton For Not Answering A Question On Whether She Supported Lifting The Cap On Taxable Income For Social Security.** CNN'S WOLF BLITZER: "Secretary, let's talk about Social Security, another critically important issue. Senator Sanders has challenged you to give a clear answer when it comes to extending the life of Social Security and expanding benefits. Are you prepared to lift the cap on taxable income, which currently stands at $118,500? Yes or no, would you lift the cap?" CLINTON: "I have said repeatedly, Wolf, I am going to make the wealthy pay into Social Security to extend the Social Security Trust Fund. That is one way. If that is the way that we pursue, I will follow that. But there are other ways. We should be looking at taxing passive income by wealthy people. We should be looking at taxing all of their investment. But here's the real issue, because I - I've heard this, I've seen the reports of it. I have said from the very beginning, we are going to protect Social Security. I was one of the leaders in the fight against Bush when he was trying to privatize Social Security. But we also, in addition to extending the Trust Fund, which I am absolutely determined to do, we've got to help people who are not being taken care of now. And because Social Security started in the 1930s, a lot of women have been left out and left behind. And it's time that we provide more benefits for widows, divorcees, for caregivers, for women who deserve more from the Social Security..." BLITZER: "Thank you, Secretary." CLINTON: "…system and that will be my highest priority." BLITZER: "Senator? Go ahead, Senator." SANDERS: "An interesting comment, but you didn't answer the question." (Hillary Clinton, Remarks At The CNN Democrat Debate, Brooklyn, NY, 4/15/16)

**Click To Watch**

*   **Sanders And Clinton "Argued Over One Another," With Sanders Challenging Clinton To Definitively Say She Backed Raising The Payroll Tax Cap.** "The two argued over one another, with Clinton claiming she had answered the question and Sanders shooting back: 'What's wrong with it, are you prepared to support it?' 'I have supported it,' Clinton said. 'We are in vigorous agreement here, senator. We're having a discussion about the best way to raise money from wealthy people to extend the Social Security trust fund. Think about what the other side wants to do. They're calling Social Security a Ponzi scheme and want to privatize it. … We both want to make sure Social Security is vibrant and well-funded.' Sanders bragged that he drew Clinton over to his side on the issue. 'If that's the case, welcome on board. I'm glad you're here,' the Vermont senator said." (Jonathan Easley, "Sanders Presses Clinton On Social Security Plan," _The Hill_, 4/14/16)

*   **Sanders Continued To Press After Clinton Equivocated, "Leaving Room For Interpretation" Whether She Actually Did Support Lifting The Cap.** "But Clinton seemed to equivocate, leaving room for interpretation as to whether she supports Sanders's proposal. 'Maybe I'm a little confused,' he shot back. 'Are you or are not supporting lifting the cap on taxable income?' Clinton said Congress should look into taxing 'passive income' of wealthy individuals. 'I have said yes, we're going to pick the best way or combination of ways,' the former secretary of State said, to which Sanders threw up his hands." (Jonathan Easley, "Sanders Presses Clinton On Social Security Plan," _The Hill_, 4/14/16)

**Throughout The Campaign Clinton Has "Openly Mused About Lifting The Cap On Income Subjected To Social Security Taxes," But Has Not Given A Firm Stance.** "Hillary Clinton said on Tuesday that new revenue was needed to shore up Social Security and openly mused about lifting the cap on income subjected to Social Security taxes, a position championed by Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.**"**(Patrick Healy, "Hillary Clinton Says Some Americans Might Have To Pay More Into Social Security," The New York Times , 1/27/16)

*   **Clinton Has Not Made Distinctions About What Income Thresholds Would Qualify For The Increased Social Security Tax Cap Or What Incomes Would Qualify For The Raised Tax Cap.** "Mrs. Clinton has held the position that she would consider Social Security taxes on the wealthiest Americans, saying she might target 'some of their income above the current Social Security cap,' according to her campaign website. While she did not make the distinctions about the wealthy or 'some' income on Tuesday, a campaign spokesman said her position remains the same as stated on the campaign website." (Patrick Healy, "Hillary Clinton Says Some Americans Might Have To Pay More Into Social Security," The New York Times , 1/27/16)

### **#14:****SANDERS ATTACKED CLINTON FOR BREAKING HER PLEDGE NOT TO RAISE TAXES ON THE MIDDLE TAX, BY BACKING A SODA TAX ON THE WORKING POOR**

**Sanders Said Clinton's Support For Philadelphia's Soda Tax Violates Her Pledge Not To Raise Tax On Middle-Class Americans, Saying A Soda Tax Would Be Placed "On The Backs Of The Poorest People" In The City.** "Speaking of Mayor Jim Kenney's proposal to tax soda and juice drinks to pay for universal pre-school, Sanders said he shares the mayor's goal of providing child care. The senator differed with the mayor and Clinton over how to pay for the proposal. 'I do have a serious disagreement with how you fund this. You don't have to fund child care on the backs of the poorest people in this city. That is a regressive way to raise funds.' Breaking her own pledge to oppose any new taxes on those making less than $250,000 a year, Clinton earlier this week supported the tax that would hurt the poorest people in Philadelphia." (Press Release, "Sanders Addresses Philadelphia Panel On A Moral Economy," Bernie Sanders 2016, 4/22/16)

**Sanders Called The Tax "Regressive" And Said The Tax Could End Up Costing Low-Income Families "A Lot Of Money."** QUESTION: "Thank you senator. Thank you. So, we want to go local here to Philadelphia here for a moment. Mayor Kenney recently introduced a plan to provide universal pre-school to all four-year-olds in Philadelphia. We think that's a great idea. It's a great idea is it not? We want our kids to start school earlier, get their education (inaudible). But, to pay for this, he wants to put a tax on soda, that would disproportionately low-income and middle-class Philadelphians. What are your thoughts on this? And does this sound like a moral issue to you?" SANDERS: "Well, here's' what it sounds like. I absolutely agree with the mayor that we need a revolution, as I mentioned earlier, in child care and pre-K. Too many kids are in inadequate child care centers, where the instructors don't have the training or the background to provide the quality care those kids need. No argument, I would go further than the mayor. I think this is a right, not just for four-year-olds, but for all of our children. But I do have a serious disagreement with how you fund this. When you have massive income and wealth inequality, when 58 percent of all new income generated today is going to the top 1 percent, you don't have to fund child care on the backs of the poorest people in this city. That is a regressive way to raise funds. Now I also note, and I'm not going to argue with anybody, we have an obesity problem in this country, I don't want kids getting hooked up on sugar, I agree with that as well. So let's deal with that issue, let's get kids off of sugar, let's make sure that we have the best child care system in the world in America. And I will fight for that as President, but you don't do it through regressive taxation. Now you can talk about getting a 12 ounce bottle of soda, that's like 30 or 40 cent tax on that bottle of soda. At five bottles, bottle a day, that's two bucks a week for a low-income family, that's a lot of money. That's a lot of money. So again, the goal is, the right goal, but the method and the approach and the raising funds is the wrong way to do it in my view." (Sen. Bernie Sanders, Remarks At A Campaign Event, Philadelphia, PA, 4/22/16)

**At An April Campaign Event, Clinton Endorsed Mayor Jim Kenney's Proposed 3-Cents An Ounce Soda Tax.** CLINTON: "We obviously have to do a whole lot more to avoid what they call the 'school to prison pipeline' and replace it with a 'cradle to college pipeline' and that really starts early, and it starts early with working with families, working with kids, building up community resources. I'm very supportive of the mayor's proposal to tax soda to get universal preschool for kids. I mean I don't, you know, we need universal preschool, and if that's a way to do it, that's how we should do it." (Hillary Clinton, Roundtable In Philadelphia Pennsylvania, 4/20/16)

**Clinton Pledged "Not To Raise Taxes On Families Making Under $250,000 A Year."** MUIR: "This is fun, this is democracy at work. And Secretary Clinton, let me ask you about your tax plan because from the crushing cost of college education the next question most families have is will my taxes go up under the next President? You have said it's your goal not to raise taxes on families making under $250,000 a year, a goal, but can you say that's a promise as you stand here tonight?" CLINTON: "That is a pledge that I'm making…" (Hillary Clinton, Democratic Primary Debate, Manchester, New Hampshire, 12/19/15)

**By Endorsing A Soda Tax, Clinton Was Endorsing A "Very Regressive Tax That Falls More On The Poor."** "A tax on sugary soft drinks, like the one proposed in Philadelphia and endorsed by Mrs. Clinton this week, divides the left. It can be seen as achieving an admirable public health goal of less sugar consumption or as a very regressive tax that falls more on the poor than the rich, since the poor tend to drink more soda." (Margot Sanger-Katz, "A New Policy Disagreement Between Clinton And Sanders: Soda Taxes," _The New York Times_ , 4/22/16)

### **#15:****SANDERS HAS GONE AFTER BILL CLINTON'S TREATMENT OF WOMEN**

**Sanders Called Bill Clinton's Sex Scandals "Totally, Totally, Totally Disgraceful And Unacceptable."** "'I hear what you're saying,' Sanders responded. 'Hillary Clinton is not Bill Clinton. What Bill Clinton did, I think we can all acknowledge was totally, totally, totally disgraceful and unacceptable.'" (Lisa Hagen, "Sanders: Bill Clinton's Scandals 'Totally Disgraceful,'" _The Hill_ , 1/8/16)

**Click To Watch**

* * *

* * *

Jill Stein for President

 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE - Wednesday July 20, 2016
Contact: Meleiza Figueroa, Press Director

Stein campaign goes viral, overwhelms Facebook, breaks Google blackout
----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Jill Stein for President campaign goes viral for days after Sanders’ Clinton endorsement, overwhelms Facebook, breaks Google blackout

 Boston - After Senator Bernie Sanders endorsed Hillary Clinton at 11:29am on Tuesday July 12 in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, Jill Stein’s Green Party Presidential campaign began experiencing an immediate surge in online traffic, with a huge spike in social media interest that made Jill Stein a trending topic on both Facebook and Twitter several times throughout the week.
Stein’s online growth following Sanders’ endorsement was so strong that by Saturday, the campaign had succeeded in an appeal to be added to Google’s top search results for “Presidential candidates”, and by Sunday the campaign was receiving widespread reports from followers that Facebook was preventing them from inviting more friends to like Stein’s page.

The surge was unleashed after Politico posted an article about Jill Stein’s live tweeting of the Clinton-Sanders event, which quickly began trending on Facebook. Buzz continued to grow as Stein posted a statement on the endorsement, congratulating Sanders for his success in an “undemocratic primary” and thanking him “for showing clearly how a grassroots campaign, armed only with a progressive vision and small contributions from real people, can win over the majority of Americans.”

On the evening of the endorsement, Dr. Stein hosted a live video discussion on her Facebook page with the title “What’s next for our revolution?”, taking questions from supporters across the country. Jill Stein was trending on Facebook when the live video started, and within hours the video had reached over 2 million people on Facebook, getting over 350,000 views.

Stein’s posts continued to go viral over the course of the week, including stories about donations to the campaign jumping 999% the day of Sanders’ endorsement, Stein’s public offer to pardon whistleblower Edward Snowden, and high-profile endorsements for Stein’s Green campaign from actor Viggo Mortensen and renowned academic Dr. Cornel West, who had recently served as a delegate to the Democratic Party’s platform committee. By the time Stein broadcast a Facebook Live appearance together with West on Sunday, reaching over 1.3 million people, the campaign had begun to receive a flood of messages and comments from people saying that Facebook was no longer allowing them to invite friends to Dr. Stein’s page.

Despite Facebook’s apparent decision to put the brakes on Jill Stein’s page, in the one-week period following Sanders’ endorsement Stein still brought in an increase of 92,583 new followers, a higher increase than either Hillary Clinton, whose page added roughly 79,000 new followers, or Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson. Overall, Stein’s Facebook following grew by 31.5%, Johnson’s by 9.5%, Donald Trump’s by 2.0% and Clinton’s by 1.8%.

Meanwhile on Twitter, Stein’s following grew by 27,403 over the same period, an increase of 20.9%. Stein’s tweets earned over 14 million impressions. Stein’s most viral tweet of the week, one featured in the Politico story, aimed a direct jab at the popular argument that voters have to settle for the “lesser evil”: “It sounds like the only good thing Bernie can say about Hillary is that she's not Donald. That's what most of her supporters like about her.” The viral takedown of Clinton’s campaign strategy was retweeted 8,206 times, reaching 721,000 people on Twitter alone.

On Thursday, two days after the endorsement, Stein’s campaign posted a petition revealing that the top results of a Google search for “Presidential candidates” yielded the names, pictures and party affiliations of Trump, Clinton, Sanders and Johnson, but not Stein. After over 20,000 supporters signed the petition within 24 hours, Jill Stein promptly appeared next to the other candidates in Google’s top results.

“The explosion of interest in Jill Stein’s campaign this week shows that when people get a chance to hear from Jill, they want to hear more - and they want their friends to hear about Jill too,” said Dave Schwab, the campaign’s Communications Director. “The Internet, and social media in particular, are empowering us to bypass the traditional gatekeepers of the political establishment so we can have a conversation directly with regular people who are ready for a new kind of politics.”

“A recent NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll showing Jill Stein at 6% nationally shows that literally millions of Americans are ready to reject the failing two-party system and try a new way forward with the Green Party, a truly democratic party of the people that has never taken money from corporations or super PACs,” continued Schwab. “We’re now reaching critical mass as these millions of Americans spread the word, online and in their communities, that we all deserve better than Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump as President. Between now and November we will bring together the 60% of Americans who want a new major party with the independents who now outnumber both Democrats and Republicans. Together we will break the DNC-RNC stranglehold on the Presidential debates, and we will break free from the two-party trap for good.”

-end-
