Title: 

URL Source: https://www.europol.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/socta2017_0.pdf

Markdown Content:
Cybercrime fraud money laundering illicit online trade firearms trafficking environmental crime drug  trafficking currency  counterfeting document  fraud Organised property crime Migrant smuggling sports corruption Intellectual property crime Trafficking in human beings 

# EUROPEAN UNION 

# SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 

# Crime in the age of technology EUROPEAN UNION 

# SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 

## Crime in the age of technology TABLE OF CONTENTS FOREWORD OF THE DIRECTOR INTRODUCTION KEY JUDGMENTS UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME 

Defining serious and organised crime Organised crime grouRs (OC)s) and otJer criminal actors 'ngines of organised crime DriXers of crime 

ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

Currency counterfeiting CyDercrime Drug Rroduction, trafficking and distriDution 'nXironmental crime (raud +ntellectual RroRerty crime Organised RroRerty crime 2eoRle as a commodity 5Rorts corruRtion 6rafficking of firearms .inks DetYeen serious and organised crime and terrorism 

CONCLUSIONS ANNEX – LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 6810 12 13 14 17 24 26 28 28 34 41 42 46 47 49 54 54 55 56 58 FOREWORD 

# OF THE DIRECTOR I am pleased to present the European Union (EU) Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment 2017 (SOCTA 2017). The 

SOCTA 2017 is Europol’s flagship product providing information to Europe’s law enforcement community and decision-makers. It serves as the cornerstone of the EU Policy Cycle for Serious and Organised 

Crime. 

The Policy Cycle ensures effective cooperation between national law enforcement agencies, EU Institutions, EU Agencies and other relevant partners in the fight against serious and organised crime. This is the second edition of the SOCTA, following its inaugural edition 

released in 2013. The SOCTA 2017 delivers 

a set of recommendations based on an in-depth analysis of the major crime threats facing the EU. The Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers will use these recommendations to define priorities for the coming four years. The SOCTA 2017 is the outcome of the work of many contributors from law enforcement authorities in the Member States, in countries with strategic and operational agreements with Europol, our institutional partners in the EU and 

Europol. 

Europol is a key partner to the Member States in meeting security challenges by providing a highly developed platform for the exchange of criminal intelligence as well as analytical and operational support for some of the most complex international investigations in the EU to date. In drafting the SOCTA 2017, Europol harnessed this unique information position. The SOCTA 2017 represents the outcome of the largest data collection on serious and organised crime ever undertaken in the EU. Europol has been able to use its singular intelligence capability as the information hub for criminal intelligence in the EU to analyse and identify the key crime threats facing the EU today. Informed by its analysis of the prevailing threat, the SOCTA 2017 identifies a number of key priorities, which, in Europol’s view, require the greatest concerted action by Member States and other actors to ensure the most effective impact. These include cybercrime, the production, trafficking and distribution of illicit drugs, migrant smuggling, organised property crime, and the trafficking in human beings (THB). In addition, Europol recommends focussing on three cross-cutting crime threats with a significant impact across the spectrum of serious and organised crime – document fraud, money laundering and the online trade in illicit goods and services. The SOCTA 2017 also explores potential links between serious and organised crime and 

terrorism. 

In 2013, Europol reported the presence of at least 3,600 internationally operating 

Organised Crime Groups (OCGs) in the 

EU. In the SOCTA 2017, we identify approximately 5,000 international OCGs currently under investigation in the EU. This increase is primarily a reflection of a much improved intelligence picture. It is also an indication of shifts in criminal markets and the emergence of smaller groups and individual criminal entrepreneurs in specific criminal activities, especially those taking place online. These developments highlight the complex dynamics that shape the serious and organised crime landscape in the EU. They also emphasise the need for the continued and enhanced exchange of information between law enforcement authorities as part of their day-to-day business. Connecting law enforcement authorities and facilitating the real-time 24/7 exchange of information remains Europol’s core business. The SOCTA 2017 is a forward-looking document that both describes and anticipates emerging threats from serious and organised crime. In this edition of the SOCTA, we highlight the role of technology in particular. Criminals have always been adept at exploiting technology. However, the rate of technological innovation and the ability of organised criminals to adapt these technologies have been increasing steadily over recent years. Developments such as the emergence of the online trade in illicit goods and services are set to result in significant shifts in criminal markets and confront law enforcement authorities with new challenges. In identifying and specifying these challenges, Europol hopes to provide a tangible contribution to the efforts of Member States and the EU in fighting serious and organised crime. I look forward to Europol’s continued support for and cooperation with law enforcement agencies and other partners in the EU and beyond. 

4oD 9ainYrigJt 

Director of Europol  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

7INTRODUCTION 

6Je 'uroRean 7nion and 'uroRol 

The European Union (EU) is a unique 

economic and political partnership between 28 European countries. i It 

was created in 1958 as the European Economic Community with the aim to foster economic cooperation among its six founding partners. Since then, the number of EU Member States enlarged and the economic union developed into an organisation covering a wide range of policy areas. The official name changed to the European Union in 1993 to reflect the broader cooperation on which members’ partnership is based. EU law is built on a series of treaties, voluntarily and democratically agreed by all Members. 

These agreements set out the EU’s goals in 

its main areas of activity. There are three main institutions involved in EU legislation: the European Parliament, which represents the EU’s citizens and its members are directly elected by them; the Council of the European Union, which represents the governments of the Member States  

> i

The Member States of the EU are: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and 

United Kingdom. 

who share the presidency on a rotating basis. The third institution is the European Commission, which represents the interests of the Union as a whole. Europol is the EU’s law enforcement agency and assists the Member States in their fight against serious international crime and terrorism. Established as an EU agency in 2009 1 , Europol, or the European Police Office, is at the heart of the European security architecture and offers a unique range of services. Europol is a support centre for law enforcement operations, a hub for information on criminal activities as well as a centre for law enforcement expertise. Analysis is at the core of Europol’s activities. To give its partners deeper insights into the crimes they are tackling, Europol produces regular assessments that offer comprehensive, forward-looking analyses of crime and 

terrorism in the EU. 

8

6Je 5OC6#  

The SOCTA 2017 is the most comprehensive study of serious and organised crime in the EU ever undertaken. It is the outcome of a detailed analysis of the threat of serious and organised crime facing the EU providing information for practitioners, decision-makers and the wider public. As a threat assessment, the SOCTA is a forward-looking document that assesses shifts in the serious and organised crime landscape. The SOCTA 2017 sets out current and anticipated developments across the spectrum of serious and organised crime, identifies the key criminal groups and individuals active in criminal activities across the EU and describes the factors in the wider environment that shape serious and organised crime in the EU. The SOCTA 2017 also describes the dynamics that drive organised crime in the age of technology and reflects on how OCGs and individual criminal entrepreneurs seek to exploit the latest technological innovations. The SOCTA is the product of close cooperation between Europol, the law enforcement authorities of the Member States and third parties such as EU agencies, international organisations and countries outside the EU with strategic or operational agreements with Europol. The involvement of these crucial stakeholders is also reflected in the SOCTA’s role as the cornerstone of the EU Policy Cycle for 

Serious and Organised Crime in the EU. 6Je '7 2olicy Cycle for 5erious and Organised Crime in tJe '7 

The Policy Cycle provides a robust framework that brings together the law enforcement authorities of the Member States, Europol and a wide range of multi-disciplinary partners in the fight against serious and organised crime. The Policy Cycle translates strategic objectives at the European level into concrete operational actions against serious and organised crime. The Policy Cycle is a methodology adopted by the European Union in 2010 to address the most significant criminal threats facing the EU. Each cycle lasts four years and optimises coordination and cooperation on the crime priorities agreed by all Member States. During the cycle, all concerned services and stakeholders, at national and EU level, are invited to allocate resources and mutually reinforce efforts. Emerging threats are also monitored so that they can be effectively addressed. Relying on the analytical findings of the SOCTA 2017, the Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers of the EU will decide on the priorities in the fight against serious and organised crime for the second full Policy Cycle from 2018 to 2021. These priorities will determine the operational work carried out in the framework of the Policy Cycle for the next four years. The crime priorities agreed at European level in the context of the Policy Cycle are reflected in operational activities at Member State level. 

6Je 5OC6# /etJodology 

As part of an iterative process, the SOCTA Methodology has been further developed and refined by experts at Europol and from the law enforcement authorities of the Member States. The SOCTA Methodology allows Europol to understand and assess serious and organised crime holistically. The SOCTA analyses and describes criminal markets and crime areas in the EU; the OCGs or individual criminals carrying out these criminal activities; as well as the factors in the broader environment that 

shape the nature of serious and organised 

crime in the EU. Using a mixed methods approach of qualitative and quantitative analysis techniques and a set of clearly defined indicators, Europol is able to identify and specify the most threatening criminal phenomena in the EU. Europol arrives at the recommended priorities for the fight against serious and organised crime for the Policy Cycle based on this Methodology. The SOCTA Methodology ensures transparency and reliability providing decision-makers with a solid basis for their deliberations. The SOCTA Methodology is a public document and can be accessed online. 2

Data and sources 

The findings of the SOCTA 2017 are the outcome of detailed analysis of intelligence 

gathered as part of the largest data 

collection on serious and organised crime ever undertaken in the EU. Member States, cooperation partners outside the EU and institutional partners contributed more than 2,300 questionnaires on crime areas 

and OCGs. The amount of data provided 

for the SOCTA 2017 has more than doubled compared to the SOCTA 2013. In addition, Europol relied heavily on the operational intelligence held in its Analytical Workfile on Serious and Organised Crime (AWF SOC) to provide a thorough and extensive analysis of the criminal threats facing the EU. Where appropriate, the data collected through questionnaires and available in Europol’s databases were complemented by information from open sources.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

9

## The SOCTA 2017 is the most comprehensive study of serious and organised crime in the EU ever undertaken. Serious and organised crime in 

the EU features a great variety 

of criminal activities, which are 

increasing in complexity and scale. 

The profits generated by some of 

the successful OCGs and individual 

criminals active in the EU are 

enormous and rival those of multi-

national corporations. 

More than 5,000 OCGs operating 

on an international level are 

currently under investigation 

in the EU. The number of 

OCGs operating internationally 

highlights the substantial scope 

and potential impact of serious 

and organised crime on the EU. 

Criminals quickly adopt and integrate new 

technologies into their  modi operandi  or build 

brand-new business models around them. The 

use of new technologies by OCGs has an impact 

on criminal activities across the spectrum of 

serious and organised crime. This includes 

developments online, such as the expansion 

of online trade and widespread availability of 

encrypted communication channels, as well 

as other aspects of technological innovation 

such as more accessible and cheaper high-

performance drone technology. Technology has 

a fundamental and lasting impact on the nature 

of crime. 

Document fraud, money laundering and the online trade in illicit goods and 

services are the engines of organised crime in the EU. Although neither 

document fraud nor money laundering have a direct impact on most citizens in 

the EU, they facilitate most, if not all, other serious and organised crime. The 

online trade in illicit goods and services is expanding rapidly. Almost all types of 

illicit goods are now bought and sold via online platforms that offer the same 

ease of use and shopping-experience as most legal online platforms. Depending 

on the type of commodity and service, this includes platforms both on the 

surface web and the Darknet. Data is also traded as a commodity. The online 

trade in illicit goods and services is foreseen to increasingly disrupt established 

criminal markets and their traditional distribution model over the next few 

years. 

# KEY JUDGMENTS 

10 

# ORGANISED 

# CRIME GROUPS 

# TECHNOLOGY AND ENGINES OF ORGANISED CRIME Many of the OCGs are highly 

flexible and display great 

adaptability in the speed with 

which they adjust their  modi 

operandi  or whole business models 

to changes in the environment. 

Many criminal activities are 

increasingly complex and require a 

variety of skills as well as technical 

expertise to carry out. 

The most threatening OCGs are 

those which are able to invest 

their significant profits in the 

legitimate economy as well as into 

their own criminal enterprises, 

ensuring business continuity 

and a further expansion of their 

criminal activities. The involvement 

in serious and organised crime 

may allow some terrorist groups 

to generate funds to finance 

terrorism-related activities. 

An increasing number 

of individual criminal 

entrepreneurs offer Crime-as-

a-Service (CaaS). The online 

trade in illicit goods and services 

enables individual criminals 

to operate their own criminal 

business without the need for 

the infrastructures maintained 

by ‘traditional’ OCGs. 

Cybercrime is a key challenge to digital 

economies and societies. Cyber-dependent 

crime is underpinned by a mature CaaS 

model, providing easy access to the 

tools and services required to carry out 

cyber-attacks. Child Sexual Abuse (CSE) 

perpetrated online is increasingly profit 

driven. The growth of card-not-present 

(CNP) fraud, coupled with successful 

industry measures to tackle card-present 

(CP) fraud, has resulted in CNP fraud 

accounting for 66% of total card fraud value. 

Migrant smuggling has emerged as one 

of the most profitable and widespread 

criminal activities for organised crime in 

the EU. The migrant smuggling business is 

now a large, profitable and sophisticated 

criminal market, comparable to the 

European drug markets. 

The illicit drugs market remains the largest 

criminal market in the EU. More OCGs 

are active in the production, trafficking 

and distribution of illicit drugs than any 

other phenomenon. The industrial-scale 

production of synthetic drugs within the EU 

continues to expand and cements the EU 

as a key source region for these substances 

distributed worldwide. OCGs maintain 

complex trafficking operations cooperating 

with OCGs on a global scale to orchestrate 

the wholesale importation of illicit drugs 

into the EU. Within the EU, the majority of 

OCGs involved in the distribution of illicit 

drugs deal in multiple illicit drugs, also 

called poly-drug trafficking. 

THB for labour exploitation is increasing and 

is expected to continue to expand. OCGs are 

expected to exploit the presence of a large 

number of potentially vulnerable persons 

in the EU following the migration crisis. 

Labour exploitation threatens to undermine 

the legitimate labour market lowering 

wages and impeding economic growth.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

11 

# CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES 

Organised property crime encompasses a 

range of different criminal activities carried 

out predominantly by highly mobile OCGs 

operating across the EU. A steady increase 

in the number of reported burglaries over 

recent years is a particular concern in many 

Member States. UNDERSTANDING 

# ORGANISED CRIME OCGs are as varied as the markets they 

service and the activities they engage in. 

In many cases, OCGs reflect the societies, 

cultures and value systems they originate 

from. As societies across Europe become 

more interconnected and international in 

outlook, organised crime is now also more 

connected and internationally active than 

ever before. 

Since the year 2000, the United Nations 

Convention against Transnational 

Organized Crime has provided an 

internationally shared definition of an 

organised criminal group as  “a group of 

three or more persons existing over a 

period of time acting in concert with the 

aim of committing crimes for financial or 

material benefit.”  This definition was also 

adopted in the EU’s Council Framework 

Decision 2008/841/JHA of 24 October 

2008 on the fight against organised crime 

and continues to reflect law enforcement 

authorities’ conceptualisation of organised 

crime across the world. However, this 

definition does not adequately describe 

the complex and flexible nature of modern 

organised crime networks. 

OCGs operate in a criminal economy 

dictated by the laws of supply and demand 

and are favoured by social tolerance 

for certain types of crime such as the 

trade in counterfeit goods and specific 

frauds against public authorities or large 

companies. These factors will continue 

to shape the organised crime landscape. 

Individual criminals and criminal groups 

are flexible and quickly adapt to exploit 

new victims, to evade countermeasures or 

identify new criminal opportunities. 

# DEFINING  SERIOUS AND 

# ORGANISED CRIME 

# Who How What 

CRIMINAL NETWORKS CORRUPTION TECHNOLOGY DOCUMENT FRAUD CRIMINAL FINANCES (MONEY LAUNDERING) ONLINE TRADE COUNTERMEASURES AGAINST LAW ENFORCEMENT VIOLENCE AND EXTORTION CYBERCRIME Child sexual exploitation Cyber-dependent crimes Payment card fraud DRUG PRODUCTION TRAFFICKING AND DISTRIBUTION ILLICIT WASTE TRAFFICKING FRAUD Excise fraud Investment fraud Mass marketing fraud Payment order fraud Value Added Tax fraud INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY CRIME MIGRANT SMUGGLING TRAFFICKING OF FIREARMS ORGANISED PROPERTY CRIME CURRENCY COUNTERFEITING SPORTS CORRUPTION TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS TRAFFICKING OF ENDANGERED SPECIES ORGANISED CRIME GROUPS CRIMINAL EXPERTS 

> CaaS CRIME AS A SERVICE

EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017  13 ORGANISED CRIME GROUPS (OCGs) 

# AND OTHER CRIMINAL ACTORS 

The OCGs and individual criminals operating in the EU are highly diverse. They range from large ‘traditional’ OCGs to smaller groups and loose networks supported by individual criminals, who are hired and collaborate ad hoc . More than 5,000 OCGs operating on an international level are currently under investigation in the EU. This figure does not necessarily reflect an overall increase in organised crime activity in the EU compared to 2013, when Europol reported on the activities of 3,600 internationally operating OCGs in the EU. This increase is primarily a reflection of a much improved intelligence picture. The increase also points to the emergence of smaller criminal networks, especially in criminal markets that are highly dependent 

on the internet as part of their modi operandi or business model. Overall, the number of OCGs operating internationally highlights the substantial scope and potential impact of serious and organised crime on the EU. The criminal markets involving illicit drugs, trafficking of human beings and migrant smuggling attract the largest numbers of OCGs and continue to generate the greatest profits among the various criminal markets in the EU. However, emerging crime phenomena such as the online trade in illicit goods and services may eclipse these markets in size and profits in the future. The online trade in illicit goods and services is no longer merely a modus operandi , but an expanding, highly dynamic and substantial criminal market itself. Over the past few years, criminals of more than 180 nationalities were involved in serious and organised crime in the EU. The majority of OCGs operating on an international level are composed of members of more than one nationality. Nonetheless, the majority of the suspects (60%) involved in serious and organised crime in the EU are nationals of a Member 

State. 

The diversity of the criminal actors operating in the EU is also reflected in the structures of the OCGs. 30% to 40% of the OCGs operating on an international level feature loose network structures. An approximate 20% of these networks only exist for a short period of time and are set up to support specific criminal ventures. Hierarchically structured OCGs continue to dominate traditional criminal 

markets. 

The fragmentation of the serious and organised crime landscape and the emergence 

of more groups and looser 

networks detailed in the SOCTA 2013 did not affect all criminal markets. The fragmentation of criminal markets was particularly pronounced in relation to highly cyber-dependent criminal activities. Around these types of activities, an increasing number of individual criminal entrepreneurs come together 

on an ad hoc basis for specific criminal ventures or to deliver 

CaaS. 

# 5,000 international OCGs currently under investigation 

# >180 nationalities involved 

30-40% LOOSE 20% SHORT TIME VENTURES 

Most OCGs are organised 

HIERARCHICALLY 24% 

> up to five
> members

# 60% 76% 

> six or more members

of the suspects involved in serious and organised crime in the EU are EU nationals. 

5tructure ComRosition 

14 UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME #ctiXities 

More than one third of the OCGs active in the EU are involved in the production, trafficking or distribution of drugs. Other key criminal activities for OCGs in the EU include organised property crime, migrant smuggling, THB and excise fraud. 

2olycriminality 

45% of the OCGs reported for the SOCTA 

2017 are involved in more than one 

criminal activity. The share of these poly-criminal groups has increased sharply compared to 2013. OCGs also often engage in more than one criminal activity to mitigate risks, reduce operational costs and increase profit margins. The OCGs involved in the trafficking of illicit goods are the most poly-criminal groups in the EU. These groups typically traffic more than one illicit commodity such as counterfeit goods or different types of illicit drugs. Many OCGs are highly flexible and able to shift from one criminal activity to another or to add new criminal activities to their crime portfolio. In many cases, OCGs operate on an on-demand basis and only become active once new profit-opportunities emerge. The integration of digital systems in many criminal activities and the expansion of the online trade in illicit goods and services 

is transforming serious and organised 

crime. Criminals are increasingly adapting the supply chain models of global online 

retailers. 

The concept of CaaS has been an emerging feature of various criminal markets for some years. However, increasingly OCGs also openly advertise ad hoc opportunities for individual criminals to provide them with support or expertise for specific criminal ventures. 

OCGs operating on an international level are typically active in more than three countries (70%). A limited number of groups is active in more than seven countries (10%). Since 2012, Europol has been supporting the German-led ISEC project on “Strengthening cross-border operational cooperation in the fight against mobile organised crime groups (MOCGs) from the Baltic Sea Region, including Russian-speaking MOCGs”. The project has resulted in the dismantling of more than 100 OCGs. A total number of 575 arrest warrants were issued. The damage caused by the MOCGs targeted by this project exceeded EUR 65 million. These MOCGs mainly carried out organised property crime, drug trafficking, document counterfeiting and money laundering. 

Drug trafficking 

Organised property crime Migrant smuggling 

Trafficking in 

human beings Excise fraud Involvement of OCGs active in the EU in different crime areas 

Sharing Economy 

An increasing number of individual criminal entrepreneurs come together on an ad hoc 

basis for specific criminal ventures or to 

deliver CaaS 

Poly-criminality TRENDS 45% of the OCGs reported for the SOCTA 2017 are involved in more than one criminal activity Many OCGs have expanded their crime portfolio in response to the sustained high level of demand for smuggling services during the migration crisis. 

# 7 out of 10 

OCGs are typically active in more than three countries 

INTERNATIONAL DIMENSION AND MOBILITY  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

15 CorruRtion 

OCGs use corruption to infiltrate public and private sector organisations relying on bribery, conflicts of interest, trading in influence and collusion in order to facilitate their criminal activities. Corruption distorts legitimate competition and erodes public trust in authorities and legal systems. Corruption is used to enable all types of criminal activity. However, the prevalence and scale of corruption associated with dif-ferent crimes vary. Some criminal activities use corruption as an integral part of their 

modus operandi .

Corruption is increasingly facilitated by on-line services. Some criminals use cryptocur-rencies and alternative banking platforms to transfer funds to their accomplices in the public and private sector. The use of these techniques makes it more difficult to detect financial flows and to uncover corruption. 

8iolence and eZtortion 

OCGs tend to avoid the use of violence. Violence usually attracts law enforcement attention, which is often incompatible with the profit-driven motivations of those involved in organised crime. OCGs mostly employ violence against members of their own or competing OCGs. Violent crimes targeting rival OCGs often take place in the context of “turf wars” over territory or influence. OCGs extort property or money from individuals by intimidating their victims, threatening to carry out serious bodily injury and murder. Very few OCGs engage in extortion as their core activity. Some OCGs offer to carry out racketeering and extortion as a service for other criminal networks and lend “professional extorters” to affiliated OCGs. Hostage takers kidnap, hold and release individuals in exchange for ransom payments. In the EU, this criminal activity is not widely carried out by OCGs. However, OCGs involved in migrant smuggling have been known to use the threat of kidnapping in order to extort debt payments. 

Countermeasures against laY enforcement 

Countermeasures are the actions and behaviours of individual criminals and criminal groups to disrupt or prevent law enforcement activities against them. OCGs use various countermeasures to recognise and mitigate law enforcement actions. The application of countermeasures requires an awareness of the methods and techniques used by law enforcement authorities in investigating criminal networks. OCGs use a number of countermeasures to secure their communication against law enforcement surveillance. These include technical countermeasures such as the use of encryption, foreign and pre-paid SIM cards or satellite telephones as well as reliance on code. To evade physical surveillance during transport, OCGs frequently change vehicles, often hired or leased using fraudulent IDs. 

16 UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME OBTAIN INFORMATION STAY OFF THE RADAR SUPPORT ACTIVITIES 

> Obstruction of justice Witness intimidation Avoid controls Upcoming controls Ongoing investigations
> Confidential data
> Ease transport Obtain permits Bid rigging

OBJECTIVES OF CORRUPTION FRAUDULENT TRANSPORT ORDERS, CUSTOMS CERTIFICATES AND DECLARATIONS STOLEN BLANK DOCUMENTS SALE AND RENTAL OF GENUINE DOCUMENTS BREEDER DOCUMENTS (BIRTH CERTIFICATES, MARRIAGE RECORDS, WORK CONTRACTS OR INVITATIONS TO STAY IN THE EU) FRAUDULENT TRAVEL AND IDENTITY DOCUMENTS (PASSPORTS, ID CARDS, DRIVING LICENSES, VISAS, ETC.) ILLICIT DRUGS COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY COUNTERFEIT GOODS FRAUDULENT DOCUMENTS FIREARMS MONEY LAUNDERING SYNDICATES NEW PAYMENT METHODS SUCH AS CRYPTOCURRENCIES, ONLINE PAYMENTS AND INTERNET VOUCHERS TRADE-BASED MONEY LAUNDERING CASH SMUGGLING SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME DOCUMENT FRAUD MONEY LAUNDERING ONLINE TRADE IN ILLICIT GOODS AND SERVICES ENGINES OF ORGANISED CRIME 

Document fraud, money laundering and the online trade in illicit goods and services are the engines of organised crime. These cross-cutting criminal threats enable and facilitate most, if not all, other types of serious and organised crime. The business models of OCGs active across the spectrum of serious and organised crime rely on document fraud, money laundering and online trade to maintain their criminal enterprises. 

EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017 17 CRIMINAL FINANCES AND MONEY LAUNDERING 

Money laundering sustains and contributes to the growth of criminal markets across the EU. Money laundering is linked to virtually all criminal activities generating criminal proceeds. 

Money laundering allows OCGs to introduce the proceeds of crime into the legitimate economy. Almost all criminal groups need to launder profits generated from criminal activities. However, the way in which money laundering is carried out varies greatly depending on an OCG’s level of expertise as well as the frequency and scale of money laundering activities. Criminal networks continuously seek to exploit the latest technological developments such as cryptocurrencies and anonymous payment methods. Rapid transaction processing and the proliferation of effective anonymisation tools are significant obstacles in the identification of the beneficial owners of criminal proceeds. A growing number of online platforms and applications offer new ways of transferring money and are not always regulated to the same degree as traditional financial service providers. Money launderers heavily rely on document fraud to facilitate their activities. Fraudulent documents such as false invoices and forged ID documents are used to conceal the origin of criminal cash, to open bank accounts or to establish shell companies. Money launderers provide services to both organised crime and terrorist organisations. 

OPERATION KOURI 4

In 2016, a Joint Investigation Team (JIT) composed of French, Belgian and Dutch investigators, Eurojust and Europol dismantled a complex network involved in the laundering of drug trafficking proceeds based in Morocco. Cash couriers travelling by car collected up to EUR 1 million per month in cash across Western Europe and transported it to Belgium and the Netherlands to be transferred to Morocco via the Middle East using the Hawala system. The operation resulted in the seizure of more than EUR 7.1 million in cash. 

OPERATION SNAKE 3

In 2015, Europol supported Spanish authorities in dismantling a Chinese network involved in the laundering of criminal proceeds from THB for labour exploitation, the production of counterfeit goods as well as excise tax fraud. Relying on middlemen and third parties, the OCGs had established complex corporate structures and various accounts to transfer money to China. In addition to their main criminal activities, the group also offered money laundering and international remittance services to other OCGs based in the EU in exchange for a negotiated percentage of the laundered funds. Between 2009 and 2015, the European branch of this OCG had laundered more than EUR 340 million. 

/oney laundering syndicates 

OCGs increasingly use money laundering syndicates acting as illegal service providers to launder money. In exchange for a commission of between 5% and 8%, these syndicates offer complex laundering techniques and carry out the laundering operations on behalf of other OCGs. 

CasJ 

Cash remains at the core of the money laundering business. Cash continues to be smuggled by couriers and, increasingly, by post and parcel services. 

18 UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME 

> OPERATION SNAKE

MONEY LAUNDERING SYNDICATES 

relying on a network of middlemen and complex laundering techniques 

TRADE-BASED MONEY LAUNDERING 

False invoicing and forged ID documents are used by shell companies owned by OCGs to conceal criminal funds 

NEW PAYMENT METHODS 

such as cryptocurrencies and anonymous payment methods are 

significant obstacles in the identification of the beneficial 

owners of criminal proceeds 

CASH SMUGGLING 

by couriers or using post and parcel services 

ORGANISED CRIME GROUPS TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS MONEY LAUNDERING 

Most common methods  

> OPERATION KANDIL 5

A 2016 investigation by French, Spanish, German and Dutch law enforcement authorities disrupted an OCG laundering the proceeds generated by the trade of heroin. This OCG collected proceeds throughout the EU and laundered the funds in Middle Eastern countries relying on cash couriers and trade-based money laundering techniques. The OCG purchased expensive second-hand cars, heavy machinery and construction equipment in Germany in cash and exported them to Iraq where they were again sold for cash. The group then used Money Service Businesses and Hawala to introduce the funds into the legitimate financial system, leaving virtually 

no paper trail. 

6radeDased money laundering 

Trade-based money laundering is a highly effective way of concealing criminal funds by manipulating or forging purchases or sales using double invoicing, false invoicing, over- and under-invoicing by companies that are owned by OCGs, their associates and relatives. 

0eY Rayment metJods 

New payment methods such as cryptocurrencies, prepaid cards, online payments and internet vouchers are continuously emerging and are generally less well-regulated than traditional payment methods. In combination with alternative banking platforms, these new payment methods allow the movement of large amounts of criminal funds. Underground banking systems are financial networks operating outside of normal banking channels to transfer money internationally, avoiding the fees and regulations of conventional banks.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

19 DOCUMENT FRAUD 

Document fraud is a key facilitator for organised crime. Document fraud entails the production and use of counterfeit documents as well as the use of genuine documents obtained by means of deception or misrepresentation. The production and use of fraudulent documents has also been linked to terrorist actors. Document fraudsters and forgers manipulate or produce all types of identity, travel and administrative documents. Fraudulent documents are used and traded extensively among OCGs and represent a significant obstacle in the fight against serious and organised crime. Fraudulent IDs are in high demand and are the most commonly traded type of fraudulent document. Increasingly, fraudulent documents are traded online. Online marketplaces are used by criminals to display the range of genuine documents on offer and allow document forgers to receive orders directly from clients. 

The use of fraudulent documents in the EU has 

significantly increased. It represents a significant threat 

to the EU. 

7nderstanding tJe different tyRes of document fraud 

> BERLIN CHRISTMAS MARKE T AT TACK

On 19 December 2016, a Tunisian suspect drove a truck into a Christmas market in the centre of Berlin, Germany. The terrorist attack left 12 people dead and 56 others injured. The perpetrator was a rejected asylum seeker from Tunisia and had previously been suspected of involvement with the Islamic State. After his asylum claim was rejected, the suspect travelled throughout Europe using multiple identity documents under different 

aliases. 

Document fraud is a key enabler of all types of criminal activity as well as terrorism. Document fraud is also expected to emerge as one of the fastest growing criminal markets over the coming years. High-quality counterfeit documents are primarily produced by highly specialised counterfeiters. Fraudulent documents are increasingly traded online and 

trafficked using post and parcel 

services. 

LOOKALIKE 

Used by someone other than the legitimate owner, based on physical resemblance OCGs dealing with genuine documents exploit weaknesses in the issuance chain of documents and 

benefit from the easy 

citizens can claim new ones 

FORGED 

A genuine document with some alterations 

COUNTERFEITED 

An entirely fabricated document 

STOLEN BLANK 

from administration and 

filled with the clientŨs 

biographical data 

FRAUDULENTLY OBTAINED 

through false supporting documents or corruption 

EXPIRED 

Used by its legitimate owner after its expiry date 

GENUINE 

DOCUMENT 

FALSE 

DOCUMENT 

20 UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME THE MAIN CRIME AREAS LINKED TO OR SUPPORTED BY DOCUMENT FRAUD  

> DOCUMENT FORGERY AND MIGRANT SMUGGLING 6

In May 2016, Greek and Czech law enforcement authorities arrested several suspects involved in the forgery of documents and migrant smuggling as part of an international investigation supported by Europol. The forged documents were subsequently provided to irregular migrants to enter the EU or to legalise their stays there. The investigation in Greece highlighted the structure and the hierarchy of the Athens-based network. The fees for the forged documents ranged from EUR 100 to EUR 3,000 per piece depending on the quality, type and country of issue. The documents forged by the criminal group included passports, national ID cards, visas, driving licences, asylum seekers’ registration cards and residence permits. 

6Je Rroduction of forged documents 

Increasingly sophisticated security features protecting documents against forgery as well as improved technical control measures have compelled OCGs to improve the quality of fraudulent documents. Suppliers of raw materials now primarily rely on Darknet marketplaces to sell their products. 

$reeder documents 

Breeder documents are documents that are used to obtain other forms of legitimate identification for the purpose of establishing a false identity. Fraudulent breeder documents are typically used to apply for genuine travel and identity documents and driving licences. Birth certificates, marriage records, work contracts or invitations to stay in the EU are forged in order to obtain visas, residency or work permits on false grounds. 

6Je sale and rental of genuine documents 

The sale or rental of travel and identity documents such as passports is an increasing concern. There has been a significant increase in the number of lost and stolen documents in circulation. Instability and armed conflicts often allow criminal groups to obtain blank documents from the affected regions. This is also true for conflict zones on the periphery of the EU and has been highlighted by the widespread availability of thousands of non-EU blank identity documents. 

Migrant smuggling Property crime Money laundering 6rafficking in 

Human Beings Fraud Terrorism Drug 

trafficking # multiRurRose tool 

Fraudulent documents are multi-purpose criminal tools and each document can be used repeatedly to support different criminal activities. Documents forgers are service providers often cooperating with multiple OCGs involved in various criminal activities. 

BIRTH CERTIFICATE MARRIAGE RECORD WORK CONTRACT INVITATION TO STAY IN THE EU VISA RESIDENCY PERMIT WORK PERMIT 

FORGED VALID  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

21 ONLINE TRADE IN ILLICIT GOODS AND SERVICES 

cultural goods, excise tobacco, firearms, heroin, hormonal substances, specimens of endangered species, stolen vehicle parts and accessories, synthetic drugs and new psychoactive substances (NPS), as well as compromised payment card data are sold and purchased online. It is not only illicit commodities that are traded online, but also criminal services. The expanding CaaS business model provides customers with access to a wide range of criminal services. A prime example of this is cybercrime, where customers can access such services as malware coding, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) services, bulletproof hosting and anonymisation services, botnet hire and money laundering. Vendors often attempt to hide illegal goods among legal products on online platforms on the surface web. In some cases, surface web vendors redirect their customers to mirror sites on the Darknet or advertise their products using false product designations or descriptions. The online market caters to dealers who buy in bulk for re-sale as well as individual users. The diminishing reliance on access to street networks of consumers of illicit commodities challenges the established business models in many criminal markets. 

The online trade in illicit goods and services has been expanding steadily over recent years. It is expected that this trade will continue to grow rapidly for the foreseeable future and that online platforms will emerge as a key distribution platform for all types of illicit goods in the EU. The Darknet is a key facilitator for various criminal activities including the trade in illicit 

drugs, illegal firearms and 

malware. Darknet marketplaces are becoming increasingly de-centralised. 

6rade on tJe surface YeD 

The distribution of illicit commodities via online platforms has soared in recent years and is expected to continue to increase steadily over the coming years. Online trade offers the opportunity to reach a huge number of potential customers. Illicit goods purchased online are predominantly trafficked using postal and parcel services. 

6Je Darknet 

The Darknet is a distributed anonymous network within the deep web that can only be accessed using software such as The Onion Router (TOR), I2P and Freenet. While these tools were ostensibly developed for the purpose of legitimately protecting freedom and privacy, confidential business activities and relationships, they can equally be used by criminals for the same purpose - to conceal their identity and/or the hosting location of websites, forums and markets, collectively referred to as “hidden services”. 9

> THE SALE OF DRUGS VIA PHOTO-SHARING PL ATFORMS

Photo-sharing applications and platforms are popular with a huge number of users. These services allow users to create communities around shared interests using hashtags. Drugs dealers and users make use of these platforms to form communities to discuss, exchange information and trade various types of illegal drugs. Potential customers scroll through pictures of advertised products and then contact the dealer privately using direct messaging functionalities. The eventual transaction takes place either face to face or via online payment and delivery by mail. 

As of January 2017, the TOR network had over 1.7 million directly connecting users, and hosted over 60,000 unique onion domains. 7 In one study, almost 57% of active sites could be 

classified as related to some 

form of illicit activity. 8

Online platforms operating in the legal economy have had a profound impact on business models, shopping experiences and customer expectations. The multiplication of sales platforms makes online trade easier, more accessible and cheaper. This development has been mirrored in the online trade in illicit goods as criminals, like legitimate traders, look to opportunities online to grow their businesses. Virtually all illicit commodities are now traded online either on dedicated criminal online marketplaces or by exploiting otherwise legal online platforms. The number of goods on offer and frequency with which new products become available indicates that the online trade in illicit goods is thriving and highly dynamic. Commodities such as cannabis, cocaine, counterfeit currency, counterfeit medicine, 

22 UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME Child Sexual Exploitation Material Malware and cybercriminal services 

> Trafficking of firearms
> Counterfeit medicine
> Illicit drugs
> Stolen
> goods

P2P 

> Peer-to-peer (P2P) platforms use clients
> running on users devices to
> allow customers and vendors to connect directly with each other.

SOCIAL MEDIA STANDARD BROWSING 

> Surface web platforms
> selling illicit commodities are often easy to find using simple internet searches, using a
> standard browser. Illicit commodities,
> especially drugs and counterfeit goods, are increasingly advertised
> and sold on social media platforms.

MARKETPLACES 

> Vendors often attempts to hide
> illegal goods among legal
> products.

TOR BROWSING 

> The Darknet is a distributed anonymous network within
> the deep web that can only be
> accessed using software such
> as TOR, I2P and Freenet.

DARKNE T ARMS VENDORS ARRESTED IN SLOVENIA 10 

Firearms traffickers use Darknet marketplaces to sell illegal firearms to private individuals, members of OCGs and terrorists based in the EU. In December 2016, Slovenian law enforcement authorities, with the support of Europol, arrested two suspects accused of selling various live firing weapons including automatic rifles, hand and smoke grenades as well as ammunition via a prominent Darknet marketplace. The firearms were paid for in Bitcoin. 

5Jift to Dark markets 

There is a shift from sales on the surface web to sales on the Darknet, typically when the status of a product or substance changes from being legal to illegal. For example, the sales of gun parts or de-activated firearms is legal in certain jurisdictions and therefore available on the surface web, but when the gun is assembled or re-activated it is illegal and will be sold on the Darknet. Likewise, a previously undiscovered New Psychoactive Substance (NPS) is initially unregulated and can be sold on the surface web, but as soon as it is regulated or restricted, sales will move to the Darknet. Dark markets are highly unstable. New decentralised markets are likely to overcome the weakness and vulnerability of being hosted in a specific location. These localised Dark markets cut out intermediaries, cater to sellers and buyers in their own language allowing them to interact directly. Transactions on local platforms enable sellers and buyers to avoid international mail systems by arranging the local collection of illegal 

goods. 

It is estimated that the top 1% most successful vendors are responsible for 51.5% of all transactions on Dark markets. 11 Goods and services offered on the Darknet are available to anyone, be it an individual user, an OCG or terrorist group. 12 Although the exact scale of the criminality on the Darknet cannot be fully determined as of yet, the Darknet is clearly an established criminal environment hosting an increasing number of platforms including Dark markets and other hidden services. 

# SURFACE WEB DARKNET  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

23 Drivers of crime shape the nature and impact of serious and organised crime activities. 13 They include facilitating factors and vulnerabilities in society which create opportunities for criminals. 

6ecJnology 

For almost all types of organised crime, criminals are deploying and adapting technology with ever greater skill and to ever greater effect. This is now, perhaps, the greatest challenge facing law enforcement authorities around the world, including in the EU. e

Technological innovation continues to shape society and the economy, and by extension the serious and organised crime landscape in Europe. Criminal actors in the EU display a high degree of adaptability and creativity in exploiting and employing new technologies. While not all criminal activities are driven by technological developments, the internet and ever-increasing connectivity have an impact on virtually all types of serious and organised crime. Innovation in technology and logistics increasingly enable OCGs to commit crime anonymously, anywhere and anytime without being physically present. The Internet of Things is constantly expanding. Connectivity of all types of devices, including phones and appliances, is increasingly a reality in households and businesses across the EU. However, these devices remain vulnerable to intrusion and criminals are already deploying techniques to compromise these devices in order to gain personal and financial information and confidential data on business transactions. 

)eoRolitical conteZt 

The serious and organised crime landscape in the EU is fundamentally affected by the geopolitical situation in and around Europe. The impact of conflicts on the periphery of the EU, such as in Libya and Syria, on serious and organised crime in the EU has already materialised and will continue to influence crime. Armed conflicts and poverty are the most significant push factors for migrants travelling to the EU. The emergence of new conflicts or destabilisation of countries on the periphery of the EU would sustain the migration flow to the EU. Armed conflicts close to the EU also entail the risk of returning foreign fighters as well as the large-scale trafficking of firearms originating from these regions. 

# DRIVERS OF CRIME 

24 UNDERSTANDING ORGANISED CRIME 

.egal Dusiness structures 

OCGs exploit various legal business structures and professional experts to maintain a facade of legitimacy, obscure criminal activities and profits, and to perpetrate lucrative and complex crimes. Legal business structures allow OCGs to operate in the legal economy and enable them to merge legal and illegal profits. 

-ey locations for crime 

Key locations for crime feature well-developed transport and communication infrastructure. These locations are used to organise the global distribution of illicit commodities. 

OCGs hide illicit goods among legal commodity flows, which are increasing in speed and volume and almost impossible to check thoroughly. Criminal groups will take advantage of weaknesses in new technologies, such as automated transport systems, and exploit gaps in the legal frameworks regulating them. Key locations for crime are characterised by several different factors: the presence of efficient transport infrastructures, proximity to or connections with source countries and consumer markets, access to business and investment opportunities, as well as demand for illicit commodities or services. USING TECHNOLOGY TO FIGHT SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME 

Technology is also a significant aid 

to law enforcement authorities in the 

fight against serious and organised 

crime. This includes the use of advanced digital forensics tools, the deployment of predictive policing software driven by Big Data as well as drones for the monitoring of areas and large events. EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017 25 ASSESSING 

# ORGANISED CRIME 

The criminal markets and criminal activities detailed in 

this chapter are presented in alphabetical order. 

# CRIMINAL MARKETS 

# AND SERVICES The production of counterfeit currency requires varying degrees of sophistication depending on the currency and level of quality of the resulting counterfeits. Counterfeit banknotes of various currencies are traded online on surface web and Darknet marketplaces. Consequently, counterfeit currency is increasingly trafficked using parcel services. While the production of counterfeit currency is currently not a major threat to the stability of the euro, the common European currency remains popular with counterfeiters. The most commonly counterfeited euro banknote denominations are the EUR20 and EUR50 notes. 14 In 2016, the European Central Bank (ECB) decided to halt the production of EUR500 banknotes by the end of 2018 in an effort to fight money laundering as well as the production of counterfeit euro banknotes. Cyber-dependent crimes are offences that can only be committed using a computer, computer networks or other form of information communications technology. Cybercrime is a global phenomenon affecting all Member States and is as borderless as the internet itself. The attack surface continues to grow as society becomes increasingly digitised, with more citizens, businesses, public services and devices connecting to the internet. 

# CURRENCY COUNTERFEITING CYBERCRIME 

A mature CaaS model underpins cybercrime, providing easy access to the tools and services required to carry out cyber-attacks. 

Cryptoware (ransomware using encryption) is a significant threat to 

the EU, targeting not only citizens but increasingly public and private sector organisations alike. Networks intrusions for the purpose of illegally acquiring data 

have significant impact globally, resulting in the loss of intellectual 

property and the compromise of mass amounts of data which can be used for further criminality including fraud and extortion. 

OPERATION AVAL ANCHE 15 

On 30 November 2016, after more than four years of investigation, the Public Prosecutor’s Office Verden and the Lüneburg Police (Germany) in close cooperation with the United States Attorney’s Office for the Western District of Pennsylvania, the Department of Justice and the FBI, Europol, Eurojust and global partners, dismantled an international criminal infrastructure platform known as ‘Avalanche’. The Avalanche network was used as a delivery platform to launch and manage mass global malware attacks and money mule recruiting campaigns. The monetary losses associated with malware attacks conducted over the Avalanche network are estimated to be in the hundreds of millions of euros worldwide, although exact calculations are difficult due to the high number of malware families managed through the platform. The global effort to take down this network involved the crucial support of prosecutors and investigators from 30 countries. The operation marks the largest-ever use of sinkholing to combat botnet infrastructures and is unprecedented in its scale, with over 800,000 domains seized, sinkholed or blocked. 

# C;$'4D'2'0D'06 C4+/'5 

28 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME of internet users feel the risk to become a victim of cybercrime 85% Cryptoware 

Cryptoware (ransomware using encryption) has become the leading malware in terms of threat and impact. It encrypts 

victimsŨ user generated files, 

denying them access unless the victim pays a fee to have their 

files decrypted. 

Malware and ID theft 

Malware typically steals user data 

such as credit card numbers, login 

credentials and personal information from infected machines for subsequent use by criminals in fraud. 

Network attack 

Network intrusions that result in unlawful access to or disclosure of private data (data breaches) or intellectual property are 

growing in freSuency and scale, 

with hundreds of millions of records compromised globally each year. 

Payment order fraud 

Criminals use fraudulent transfer orders to defraud private and public sector organisations. Fraudsters heavily rely on social engineering techniques and malware to carry out this type of fraud. 

Payment card fraud 

Compromised card data is readily available and easy to obtain on 

forums, marketplaces and 

automated card shops in the deep web and Darknet. 

Online sexual exploitation 

Child Sexual Exploitation Material is increasingly 

produced for financial gain and 

distributed through the Darknet. Coercion and sexual extortion are increasingly being used to victimise children. 

The digital underground 

The CaaS model provides easy access to tools and services 

across the entire spectrum of cyber-criminality, from entry-level to top-tier players, including those with other 

motivations such as hacktivists or even terrorists. This allows even entry-level cybercriminals to carry out attacks of a scale disproportionate to their technical capability. Criminal forums and marketplaces within the deep web or Darknet remain a crucial environment for cybercriminals to communicate and are a key component for CaaS. 

CRIME-AS-A-SERVICE Cybercrime continues to grow as society becomes increasingly digitised  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

29 /alYare 

The development and distribution of malware continues to be the cornerstone for the majority of cybercrime. Information-stealing malware, such as banking Trojans, still represent a significant threat. This type of malware typically steals user data such as credit card numbers and login credentials from infected machines for subsequent use by criminals in fraud. Since late 2013, cryptoware (ransomware using encryption) has become the leading malware in terms of threat and impact. Cryptoware encrypts victims’ user generated files, denying them access unless the victim pays a fee to have their files decrypted. Following the trend of information stealers, cryptoware campaigns are increasingly targeting public and private sector entities. 

0etYork attacks 

Network attacks vary in modi operandi and 

purpose. Website defacement is a common but low-impact attack, and often the trademark of hacktivist groups targeting government or public websites. Network intrusions that result in unlawful access to or disclosure of private data (data breaches) or intellectual property are growing in frequency and scale, with hundreds of millions of records compromised globally each year. 16 

Compromised data can be used for a variety of criminal purposes including fraud and extortion 17 and is highly valued by financially motivated criminals. 18 

Some Member States highlight the particular threat posed by insiders to a company’s security. Any sector or network which holds data which can be monetised is a target for such attacks. 

Data has become a key commodity for criminals. Increasing internet connectivity by citizens, businesses and the public sector, along with the exponentially growing number of connected devices and sensors as part of the Internet of Things will create new opportunities for cybercriminals. Malware targeting smart devices will lead to new sources of data leakage and network compromise and create new botnets. Given the ease of entry into cybercrime, the use of cyber tools and services by traditional OCGs to enhance or expand their capabilities is likely to become more commonplace. 

Organised Crime Groups 

Ransomware locks your computer and mobile devices or encrypts 

your electronic files, demanding a ransom payment in order to regain 

control of your data. Ransomware can be obtained on the Darknet by OCGs 

Means of infection 

Compromised websites, fake mobile apps, email 

attachments 

Ransom 

> Payment is almost exclusively in Bitcoins

The proceedings 

can be used for any other criminal activity 

Devices at risk 

Computers and mobile devices 

CRYPTOWARE 

How it works 

30 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME While neither offline nor online CSE meet the criteria to be considered ‘organised crime’ this is still a high priority crime due to the degree of physical and psychological damage to one of society’s most vulnerable groups – children. Online and offline child sexual exploitation are often considered two different crime areas. However, a number of offenders are involved in both. There are indications that this is the case for about 30% of offenders in possession of CSEM. The increasing global availability of broadband internet and internet-enabled devices continues to fuel the growing number of both offenders and victims in this area. While the same can be said of any number of crime areas, this phenomenon is a major contributor to online CSE. The internet provides offenders and potential offenders with an environment in which they can operate with an enhanced level of safety and anonymity. In particular, there is a growing number of forums on the Darknet dedicated specifically to the production, sharing and distribution of CSEM. Typically this refers to services on the TOR network. Peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing applications are the preferred method of exchanging CSEM. 

Commercial C5'/ 

Children are sexually exploited largely to satisfy the sexual appetites of those with a sexual interest in children. However, there is a growing trend in the production of CSEM for financial gain. A particular activity associated with commercial production of CSEM is that of Live Distant Child Abuse (LDCA). LDCA is a significant threat in this area of criminality. LDCA involves a perpetrator paying to direct the live abuse of children on a pre-arranged specific time-frame through video sharing platforms. 

5elf)enerated +ndecent /aterial (5)+/) 

There is a growing trend in the production of Self-Generated Indecent Material (SGIM) - typically teens or pre-teens taking indecent images of themselves to be shared privately with a partner or someone they believe they can trust, for example in grooming scenarios. Subsequently, these images can be distributed either accidentally or maliciously without the owner’s consent. 

5eZual eZtortion 

Often associated with the production of SGIM is the growing practice of sexual extortion, whereby an offender uses an explicit image of a minor - obtained incidentally or through coercion or deception - to further coerce or extort the child into either producing more material or engaging in further online or even offline abuse. In some cases the perpetrator alternatively seeks financial gain. 19 

# O0.+0' C*+.D 5':7#. ':2.O+6#6+O0 (C5')  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

31 

Child Sexual Exploitation Material (CSEM) is increasingly 

produced for financial gain. 

A growing number of Darknet forums facilitating the exchange of CSEM, coupled with the ease of access to these networks, is leading to an increase in the volume of material exchanged through the Darknet. Coercion and sexual extortion are increasingly being used to victimise children. Offenders use these methods to obtain further 

child abuse material, for financial 

gain or to get physical access to the victim. Some OCGs have partly industrialised their processes, using workshops to produce counterfeit cards. 

Payment card fraud is a low-risk, high-profit activity. Compromised card data is readily available and easy to obtain on forums, marketplaces and automated card shops in the deep web and Darknet. Payment card fraud can be split into two distinct crime areas: Card-present fraud and card-not-

present fraud. 

CardRresent fraud (C2) 

CP fraud requires an offender to present a physical card at an automated teller machine (ATM), Point of Sale (POS) or other terminal. This crime has two stages: obtaining a card, and the use of the card. The cards used are either lost or stolen genuine cards, or counterfeit cards. Unlike fraud using lost or stolen cards, fraud using counterfeit cards is typically committed outside the Single Euro Payments Area 

(SEPA). 

CardnotRresent fraud (C02) 

CNP fraud involves the use card data to make fraudulent purchases online or by telephone. Unlike CP fraud, the data required is only that needed to make an online credit card purchase – the name of the card holder, billing address, card number, expiry date and security code. The fraud, commonly referred to as ‘carding’, is committed across all sectors but the purchases of physical goods, airline tickets, car rentals and accommodation with compromised cards have generally seen an increase throughout the EU. Where CNP is used to fraudulently purchase goods, like CP fraud, offenders will typically purchase high-value goods with the intention of reselling them. Offenders will often use packet mules or reshipping services to safely receive their fraudulently obtained 

goods. 

CNP is fuelled by the availability of compromised card data resulting from 

# PAYMENT CARD FRAUD  

> INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL NE T WORK BEHIND L ARGE-SCALE PAYMENT FRAUD DISMANTLED 20

In September 2016, Italian and Romanian law enforcement authorities supported by Europol disrupted an international criminal group responsible for large-scale misuse of compromised payment card data, prostitution and money laundering. The criminal network used sophisticated ATM skimming devices which allowed them to compromise ATMs and deceptive phishing techniques to perform a high volume of fraudulent transactions. Estimated losses incurred by the criminals’ activities amount 

to several hundred thousands of euros. 

Micro-camera bars, card readers, magnetic strip readers and writers, computers, phones and flash drives, several vehicles, as well as thousands of plastic cards ready to be encoded were seized in several locations. 

Some OCGs run ‘laboratories’ to study ATMs in order to conduct targeted attacks. 

32 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

data breaches, information stealing malware and phishing. As many data breaches often involve the compromise of millions of card details at once, there is a considerable excess of card data compared to the demand. Among the places where compromised card data can be found are an increasing number of illegal carding sites on both the deep web and Darknet where not only card data can be purchased but offenders can learn about how and where to ‘card’. New payments methods provide offenders with new opportunities to use compromised card data. By uploading the card data to smartphone services, offenders can make “in app” or “on site” payments to apps which they control. The growing e-commerce industry will result in a parallel growth of CNP fraud, especially as industry measures at preventing CP fraud become more effective. Criminal modus operandi will be shaped by industry measures to counter payment card fraud. Emerging and alternate payment options such as contactless payment using Near Field Communication (NFC) will drive innovation within OCGs to enable them to abuse new technologies. New electronic/ card-less payment methods may however ultimately result in a downwards trend card 

fraud. GLOBAL ACTION AGAINST AIRLINE FRAUDSTERS 21 

Global Airport Action Days combine the efforts of law enforcement and private sector partners to combat the fraudulent online purchases of flight tickets, which is estimated to cost the industry over EUR 1 billion per year. Fraudulent online transactions are highly lucrative for organised crime and are often purchased to facilitate more serious criminal activities including migrant smuggling, THB, drug trafficking and terrorism. In October 2016, the fifth Global Airport Action Day was organised through coordination centres at Europol, INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation in Singapore and Ameripol in Bogota. The activity was supported by Canadian and US law enforcement agencies. Representatives from airlines, online travel agencies, payment card companies, Perseuss and the International Air Transport Association (IATA) worked together with law enforcement officers deployed in the airports. Eurojust assisted throughout the action week, together with the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) which deployed officers to 20 airports, assisting in the detection of identity fraud, fake documents and migrant smuggling. 193 individuals suspected of traveling with airline tickets bought using stolen, compromised or fake credit card details were detained. 43 countries, 75 airlines and 8 online travel agencies were involved in this global operation which took place at 189 airports across the world. 

ID THEFT AND PAYMENT CARD FRAUD 

STEP 1 

A fraudster uses malware and 

social engineering to access 

your computer 

STEP 2 

Your login credentials, bank account details, 

credit card numbers and other personal information are stolen 

STEP 3 

Your data is sold on the Darknet 

STEP 4 

OGCs use your compromised 

ID and financial data to 

support their criminal activities  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

33 Drug markets remain the largest criminal markets in the EU. More than one third 

of the criminal groups active in the EU are involved in the production, trafficking or distribution of various types of drugs. The trade in drugs generates multi-billion euro profits for the groups involved in this criminal activity. The EU retail drug market is estimated to be worth at least EUR 24 billion a year. 22 The immense profits 

generated from the trade in drugs fund 

various other criminal activities allowing OCGs to thrive and develop their criminal enterprises at the expense of the health, prosperity and security of EU citizens. OCGs involved in drug trafficking heavily rely on corruption to facilitate their trafficking activities. They also make use 

of fraudulent documents such as fake 

import or company registration certificates to import illicit drugs among legal goods, to procure pre-precursors and purchase equipment used as part of production 

processes. 

Online trade 

Criminals continuously seek out methods 

and technologies to make their business 

models more effective and increase profit 

margins. Online marketplaces on the 

Darknet are now a key platform used to advertise and sell all types of drugs. The anonymous nature of online transactions 

on these marketplaces and the use of 

cryptocurrencies reduce the risks of detection by law enforcement authorities for both vendors and buyers. 

Technology 

Technical innovation and the accessibility of sophisticated equipment have allowed OCGs to maximise the production output of individual sites. Large-scale cannabis cultivation sites are often maintained using professional growing equipment such as climate control systems, CO2 and ozone generators. Similarly, laboratories manufacturing synthetic drugs feature advanced chemical equipment and production lines capable of producing synthetic drugs on an industrial scale. Drone technology is expected to advance allowing drones to travel greater distances and carry heavier loads as well as making them more affordable. OCGs involved in drug trafficking will likely invest in drone technology for trafficking purposes in order to avoid checks at border crossing points, 

ports and airports. 

# DRUG PRODUCTION, TRAFFICKING AND DISTRIBUTION 419 EUR 

billion/year 

in profits previously undetected N2S reported in the E7 for the first time over the past five years of the criminal groups active in the E7 are involved in the drug market Drug market generates 

TRENDS ONLINE TRADE 

Online marketplaces on the Darknet are noY a key platform used to advertise and sell all types of drugs. 

SYNTHETIC DRUGS 

The market for synthetic drugs continues to be the most dynamic of the drug markets in the E7. 

CUTTING - EDGE TECHNOLOGY 

Technical innovation and sophisticated eSuipment alloY OCGs to maZimise the production output. 

TOXIC WASTE 

The production of synthetic drugs generates large Suantities of highly toZic and dangerous Yaste. Dump sites often remain contaminated for a significant period of time and their recovery is costly. 

LIBYA 

.ibya is emerging as a neY distribution hub for cannabis resin trafficked to the E7 across the Mediterranean Sea. 

# >75% of the OCGs involved in the trafficking of one drug also traffic and distribute other types of drugs. 

# ~65% 

of OCGs involved in the drug trade are 

simultaneously involved in other criminal activities such as the trade in counterfeit goods, THB and migrant smuggling. Drugs 

are also used as a means of payment 

among criminal groups. 

34 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME Cannabis remains, by far, the most widely consumed illegal drug in the EU. 23 Cannabis is distributed on EU markets as cannabis resin and herbal cannabis. In recent years, herbal cannabis has been increasingly popular with consumers, which has led to an increase in the production and availability of herbal cannabis within the EU and in countries close to EU markets. Growing equipment, seeds and other raw materials used for cannabis cultivation in the EU are readily available online and often originate from the Netherlands. The indoor cultivation of herbal cannabis in the EU is expected to further expand over the coming years with new growing techniques and increasingly sophisticated growing technologies being used by OCGs in order to increase harvest yields and profits. Outdoor cultivation of herbal cannabis remains limited compared to the indoor cultivation of cannabis. Albania remains the main source of herbal cannabis trafficked to the EU. The main source of cannabis resin consumed in the EU is Morocco from where it is trafficked to the EU primarily by sea and road transport. Cannabis resin originating from Morocco is increasingly smuggled to the EU across the Mediterranean Sea departing from Libya. Cannabis resin shipments are transported across the Mediterranean Sea to the Spanish coast using high-powered vessels where they are dropped into the sea and retrieved by OCGs on local fishing vessels or pleasure boats using GPS signalling devices. 

# CANNABIS  

> ‘ROSE OF THE WINDS’ – INTERNATIONAL OPERATION AGAINST DRUG TRAFFICKING 24

In December 2016, a multinational police team including Europol announced the arrest of a major Moroccan drug kingpin. The work that led to this arrest began in April 2016. The Moroccan national had orchestrated a multi-tonne drug delivery. This is the latest successful result achieved by JOT ’Rose of the Winds’. Approximately one week prior to his apprehension, the Spanish Guardia Civil, supported by Europol, the French Direction Nationale du Renseignement et des Enquêtes Douanières and the Italian Guardia di Finanza, localised and intercepted a merchant vessel flying the flag of Panama. The ship was subsequently escorted to the port of Almeria, where a thorough search revealed the illegal cargo of 19.6 tonnes of cannabis resin. The crew were arrested and the shipment was seized. The investigations also revealed a poly-crime involvement of the transnational organised crime networks active in large-scale drug trafficking in the Mediterranean Sea. Namely, concrete and recurrent links with migrant smuggling and cocaine trafficking have been ascertained. 

## The market for cannabis remains by far the largest drug market in the EU. The market for cannabis remains by far the largest drug market in EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017 35 ALBANIA 

Main source 

CZECH REP. 

Distribution hub 

NETHERLANDS 

Main distribution hub 

CANNABIS HERB 

2roduction, trafficking and 

distribution 

CANNABIS 

/eans of transportation Trafficking to E7 Trafficking within E7 

CANNABIS RESIN 

Cannabis resin continues to be trafficked in large Suantities 

from Morocco to the E7. 

Libya is emerging as a new 

distribution hub for cannabis 

resin trafficked to the E7 across the /editerranean Sea. 

The indoor cultivation of 

herbal cannabis in the E7 is expected to further expand over the coming years with new growing techniSues and increasingly sophisticated growing technologies being used by OC)s.   

> PLEASURE BOAT SPEED BOAT BUS PRIVATE CAR CONTAINER COURIER LORRY LORRY SMALL AIRCRAFT SMALL AIRCRAFT COURIER

MOROCCO 

> Main source

AFGHANISTAN 

> Main source

ALBANIA 

> Distribution hub

LIBYA 

> Distribution hub

NETHERLANDS 

> Distribution hub

SPAIN 

> Distribution hub

36 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

> SOURCE: EMCDDA & EUROPOL EU DRUG MARKETS REPORT 2016

Cocaine is primarily produced in Colombia, Peru and Bolivia and trafficked to the EU via other South American countries such as Brazil, Venezuela, Argentina, the Caribbean Sea region and West Africa. Over the last two years, the production of cocaine in Colombia has intensified significantly. An increase in the production output in Colombia will likely impact on the EU in the form of intensified trafficking activity as well as greater availability of cocaine on drug markets in the Member States. The trafficking modi operandi associated with the trade in cocaine have largely remained the same. Cocaine is typically trafficked as part of large shipments in containers or in smaller quantities by couriers. Large shipments of cocaine are trafficked in containers hidden among legal goods or as part of the rip-on/rip-off modus operandi .

Brazil is a key point of departure for cocaine couriers travelling directly to the EU. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) and destinations in East Africa have emerged as hubs for cocaine couriers travelling to the EU. Cruise ships departing from the Caribbean Sea region are increasingly being used to traffic cocaine to the EU. 

# COCAINE 

## More OCGs are involved 

## in cocaine trafficking 

## than any other criminal activity in the EU. 

OPERATION FULECO 

Brazil is among the main countries of departure for couriers trafficking cocaine to the EU. This has been confirmed by the results of Operation Fuleco, an effort by Member States supported by Europol targeting cocaine couriers arriving to the EU’s major airports. During Operation Fuleco, nearly 200 cocaine couriers were arrested and almost 500 kilograms of cocaine seized in the Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Germany and Ireland. Operation Fuleco took place in June and July 2014 and involved 12 Member States including Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Romania, Spain, Sweden and 

the United Kingdom. 

COCAINE 

2roduction, trafficking and 

distribution 

NETHERLANDS BELGIUM SPAIN COLOMBIA PERU BOLIVIA PROFITS 5.7 BILLION EUR / YEAR 

Significant increase in 

production in Colombia may 

result in intensified trafficking activity to the E7. 

Means of transportation 

Trafficking to E7 Trafficking within E7   

> PLEASURE BOAT CONTAINER CONTAINER COURIER LORRY SMALL AIRCRAFT PARCEL

Main producers Main entry points in the EU  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

37 

> SOURCE: EMCDDA & EUROPOL EU DRUG MARKETS REPORT 2016

Afghanistan remains the leading producer 

of heroin trafficked to the EU. The production output of opium and heroin in 

Afghanistan is very high and is projected to 

remain so for the foreseeable future. Production of heroin remains rare in the EU. However, depending on the 

development of the demand for heroin and 

potential disruptions to trafficking activities 

from Afghanistan further laboratories may 

emerge in the EU in the future. Heroin is also available on online marketplaces 

and is occasionally distributed across the 

EU in small quantities via post and parcel services. 

# HEROIN HEROIN 

2roFuction trafficking anF 

distribution Partial shift for the 

trafficking of heroin froO the $aNkan route 

to the Caucasus route AFGHANISTAN 

Main producer 

PAKISTAN 

Main producer 

BALKAN ROUTE SOUTHERN ROUTE NORTHERN ROUTE CAUCASUS ROUTE 

6rafficking to '7 6rafficking Yithin '7 

Means of transportation    

> $75 24+8#6' %#4 LORRY %174+'4 2#4%'. $75 24+8#6' %#4 %106#+0'4 5/#.. $1#6 ('44;
> LORRY %174+'4 2#4%'.

38 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

> SOURCE: EMCDDA & EUROPOL EU DRUG MARKETS REPORT 2016

The Balkan route remains the main entry 

route for the trafficking 

of heroin into the EU. The production of different types of synthetic drugs takes place in various Member States. The intended destination markets for synthetic drugs produced in the EU vary according to the substance and production location. A share of the large-scale production of 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA), amphetamine and, to a lesser extent, methamphetamine in the Netherlands and Belgium is intended for trafficking to markets outside the EU, while the production of synthetic drugs in other parts of the EU predominantly supplies domestic and neighbouring EU markets. The Netherlands and Belgium remain a globally significant production and distribution hub for MDMA and amphetamine. The OCGs involved in the production of synthetic drugs are highly flexible and have significant financial resources to constantly explore new market opportunities such as engaging in the production of other synthetic drugs including mephedrone. Production sites for methamphetamine are expected to also appear in other Member States in greater numbers in the future, especially those with existing production capabilities for amphetamine. 

# SYNTHETIC DRUGS AND NEW PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES (NPS) Main producers Methamphetamine Amphetamine MDMA Export / Main destinations CZECH REP. SLOVAKIA POLAND NETHERLANDS BELGIUM to UNITED STATES to to AUSTRALIA AUSTRALIA 

Trafficking to EU Trafficking within EU 

Means of transportation   

> PRIVATE CAR LORRY PARCEL CONTAINER COURIER AIR
> FREIGHT PARCEL

SYNTHETIC DRUGS AND NEW PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES 

Production, trafficking and distribution The market for synthetic drugs continues to be the most dynamic of the drug markets in the EU. The production capacity of synthetic drug laboratories has increased significantly in recent years. Over the last five years, 419 new NPS were detected in the EU for the first time. 

EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017 39 

> SOURCE: EMCDDA & EUROPOL EU DRUG MARKETS REPORT 2016

2recursors and RreRrecursors 

OCGs producing synthetic drugs in the EU continue to be highly flexible and will remain so in the future. They are quick to adopt alternative precursor and pre-precursor substances in reaction to any shortages in established precursor substances. China remains a major supplier of pre-precursor substances and essential chemicals as well as hardware and glassware for synthetic drug laboratories in 

the EU. 

Some OCGs have specialised in the procurement and production of pre-precursor and precursor substances supplying OCGs producing and distributing synthetic drugs in the EU. 

NPS 

NPS continue to be produced in China and, to a lesser degree, India and trafficked to the EU in large quantities. NPS production in the EU is largely limited to packaging and re-selling of imported substances. However, some limited NPS production is thought to take place in the EU. 

> OPERATION ALIMAYA

In March 2016, Spanish law enforcement authorities in cooperation with other Member States and supported by Europol were able to dismantle a network importing and distributing large quantities of dangerous NPS in the EU. This network used various companies to import and sell these substances, especially synthetic cannabinoids from China, generating significant profits. Coordinated action in March 2016 involving house searches at four locations resulted in the seizure of 550 litres of acetone, 75,000 envelopes used for packaging different NPS brands, NPS worth more than EUR 1.5 million. This investigation highlights the profits involved in the distribution of NPS. 

> CONTAINER SEIZURE OF 2.8 TONNES OF MDMA AND ME THAMPHE TAMINE VALUED MORE THAN USD 1.5 BILLION 25

In November 2014, Australian law enforcement authorities seized a maritime shipping container holding approximately 2.8 tonnes of MDMA and methamphetamine. The load was estimated to have a street value of more than EUR 1.4 billion (USD 1.5 billion). At the time, the value and size of the seizure was unprecedented. The container arrived in Australia from Europe and was seized following an intelligence operation. The seizure led to the arrest of several 

individuals in Australia and Australian 

law enforcement authorities suspect 

the involvement of several OCGs in the 

production, trafficking and intended distribution of this shipment. This seizure highlights the scope of the trafficking of synthetic drugs from the EU to destination markets around the world. 

> CHILDREN BURNT BY DUMPED WASTE FROM SYNTHE TIC DRUGS PRODUCTION

In August 2015, four children and accompanying adult suffered severe burns to their legs after coming in contact with chemical waste dumped by suspected synthetic drug producers in Belgium. Some of the waste produced as part of the manufacture of synthetic drugs is highly dangerous. Drug producers frequently dump this type of waste away from their laboratories in order to disguise their locations. The great quantities of MDMA and amphetamine produced by Dutch OCGs are not solely intended for distribution in the EU. The MDMA and amphetamine output from production in the Netherlands and Belgium is trafficked to destination markets around the world. Australia remains among the most significant destination markets outside the EU for synthetic drugs produced in the Netherlands and Belgium. In some cases, large shipments of synthetic drugs are trafficked to destinations outside the EU in maritime shipping containers. 

There has been a significant increase in the amount of MDMA trafficked from the Netherlands to the United States over the last two years. The production of synthetic drugs generates large quantities of highly toxic waste. OCGs dump this waste away from production laboratories to conceal their location. Dump sites often remain contaminated for a significant period of time and their recovery is costly. The dumping of toxic waste in public places also entails significant risks for the health and safety of citizens. In recent years, the number of dump sites discovered in the EU has been increasing. Dump sites are most frequently discovered in the Netherlands and Belgium. There is a growing market for illegal hormonal substances in the EU. These substances are both trafficked to and illegally produced in the EU. Hormonal substances trafficked to the EU typically originate from China, India and Thailand. However, over the last few years production facilities for illicit hormonal substances have also been discovered in 

the EU. 

# HORMONAL SUBSTANCES 

40 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME ENVIRONMENTAL CRIME 

IVORY TRAFFICKING 

In November 2016, Austrian law enforcement authorities seized 560 kilograms of trafficked ivory, the equivalent of 590 elephant tusks. Ivory is worth more than EUR 1,000 (USD 1,000) per kilogram on the Austrian black market. German law enforcement authorities seized 1,200 kilograms of ivory at a Berlin airport, Germany, in May 2016. Raw and manufactured ivory were falsely declared and destined for Vietnam. Environmental crime covers a diverse range of different offences including the improper collection, transport, recovery or disposal of waste, the illegal operation of a plant in which a dangerous activity is carried out or in which dangerous substances or preparations are stored, the killing, destruction, possession or trade of specimens of protected wild fauna or flora species, and the production, importation, exportation, placing on the market or use of ozone-depleting substances. Environmental crime is characterised by its impact on the natural environment. The environmental impact manifests itself in increasing levels of pollution, a degradation of wildlife, a reduction in biodiversity and the disturbance of ecological balance. Environmental crime puts public health at 

risk. 

# ILLICIT WASTE TRAFFICKING 

The use of legal business structures for illicit waste trafficking activities by criminal actors are an inherent feature of this crime area. In many cases, criminal actors and legal businesses are indistinguishable from one another. As part of this development, criminals involved in illicit waste trafficking have moved towards the more complex business model of illicit waste management rather than just illegally dumping waste. Illicit waste traffickers now operate along the entire waste processing chain, heavily relying on the use of legal business structures for their activities. The trafficking of illicit waste typically involves the use of fraudulent documents. 

# TRAFFICKING OF ENDANGERED SPECIES 

The trafficking of and trade in endangered species involves the collection or processing of animals and plants protected by national and international regulations. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) provides the international framework for the protection of endangered species and aims to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten 

their survival. 

The EU is primarily a transit region for endangered species trafficked to destination markets in Asia and North America. The most commonly trafficked species and wildlife products trafficked from, to and via the EU include glass eels, reptiles, exotic birds, pangolin, fish, narwhal meat, shells, corals, date mussels, timber and ivory. The number of OCGs involved in the trafficking of and trade in endangered species is low, but believed to be increasing. The OCGs involved are highly specialised and typically only focus on this specific activity.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

41 FRAUD 

Alcohol, cigarettes and mineral oils are subject to excise duty upon production in, or on import to, the EU. OCGs use various 

modi operandi to avoid excise duties and generate significant profits selling both genuine and counterfeit excise goods at lower prices than their licit equivalents. Excise tax fraud is driven by legislative differences and varying excise tax rates applied by different jurisdictions. 

# EXCISE FRAUD INVESTMENT FRAUD 

## Excise goods are increasingly offered and bought online. 

> UNDERSTANDING EXCISE FRAUD
> ABUSE OF DUT Y SUSPENSION SCHEMES

FUEL FRAUD 

Fuel fraud is a growing phenomenon and typically involves base-oil fraud, also called ‘designer fuel’ fraud and fuel laundering. This type of fraud requires significant expertise, which is usually only available from trained chemists or similar 

professions. Investment fraud schemes generate 

huge profits. One investigation revealed estimated profits of up to 

EUR 3 billion generated by one OCG. 

What is social engineering? Social engineering techniques are a key element to many different types of fraud. Social engineering is the use of deception 

to manipulate individuals into divulging 

confidential or personal information that may be used for fraudulent purposes. 

> OPERATION BATEO

In 2015, law enforcement authorities in the EU launched an investigation into an OCG with ties to Germany, Portugal and Spain. This OCG operated a sophisticated pyramid fraud scheme offering investments into a music sharing platform and other online services. The OCG used various front companies. The investigation was able to identify more than 50,000 victims in 34 countries. Overall, the OCG was able to generate an estimated profit of more than EUR 3 billion. Successful investment fraud schemes typically use various social engineering techniques to operate. Fraud schemes relying on social engineering are particularly hard to counter. The abuse of duty suspension schemes 

are the main modi operandi used to 

avoid the payment of excise duties on alcohol products and are also increasingly used to avoid excise duties on tobacco products. These modi operandi involve 

the exploitation of the EU Excise Movement Control System (EMCS), a computerised system registering the movement of excise goods within the EU, and the T1 procedure, which is applied for excise goods under suspension schemes imported from outside the EU, by falsely declaring the real destination and quantities of excise goods imported 

into the EU. 

How does it work? In relation to alcohol products, as part of the import process for the EMCS and the T1 procedure, criminals declare a Member State which applies low excise rates as the intended destination of the trafficked goods. Accomplices in the declared country of destination, such as corrupt warehouse employees, confirm receipt of the goods. However, in reality the goods are exported to countries applying high excise rates. The goods appear legitimate as documents certify that any excise obligations due were paid. If the product originates from a country applying high excise rates, the goods often do not leave the country at all and the movement of the goods is purely 

virtual. 

In other cases, traffickers file an application for the transfer of one load and use a duplicate of the transport authorisation to import multiple loads without paying excise duties. 

42 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME Mass marketing fraud schemes rely on mass-communication media, including telephones, the internet, mass mailing, television and radio, to contact victims and solicit money or other items of value in one or more jurisdictions. Between May 2014 and May 2015, a UK-based OCG defrauded over EUR 690,000 (GBP 600,000) from pensioners across the country. Posing as police officers, OCG members contacted victims by phone to warn them of the risk of fraud involving their bank. The victims were encouraged 

to transfer their savings to safekeeping 

accounts controlled by the fraudsters. 26 

Fraudsters already rely on social media and instant messaging applications to obtain sensitive information or elicit payments from their victims. Scams relying on phishing or cold-calling can target thousands of victims at once. In one cold-calling case, one telecommunications provider was confronted with 3.6 million attempts against 90,000 victims. 

# MASS MARKETING FRAUD 

> UNDERSTANDING INVESTMENT FRAUD

Criminals orchestrate various investment fraud schemes. The most common schemes encountered in the EU include: 

# SECURITY BREACH SCAMS 

Fraudster calls posing as an IT specialist from the employee’s company (or as a bank employee) Informs of a security breach on the company’s system (or on the internet banking facility) 

OPTION 1: Requires 

financial details 

necessary for check-up and/or downloading of a remote access software The data/access obtained is used to transfer funds from the company’s account to the fraudster’s account 

OPTION 2: Encourages the employee to contact the bank. Uses technology to remain on the line after termination of the call and therefore obtain sensitive 

financial details disclosed to the bank employee 

(account numbers; access codes) 

## STEP 1 STEP 2 STEP 3 STEP 4 

•Encourages transfer of funds to a “safe-keeping account” 

•The employee transfers funds to an account controlled by the fraudster The money is re-trans-ferred to accounts in multiple jurisdictions ALTERNATIVE 

Fraudsters operating Boiler room schemes use cold-calling to contact their victims and pressure them into investing in non-existent or very low-value stocks. Fraudsters often use false documents and certificates to present their company and the offered stock as legitimate. 

As part of Ponzi schemes , fraudsters attract a group of initial investors with promises of very high returns in a very short time. The fraudster starts to repay the initial investors to attract more victims using funds accrued from additional investors. In reality, the money is not invested and the fraudsters ultimately disappear with the funds. The money is laundered through multiple bank accounts held by various front companies in different jurisdictions. 

Pyramid schemes operate on the same 

model as Ponzi schemes. However, the initial investors are actively involved and are required to recruit new investors in order to get profits.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

43 Criminals use fraudulent transfer orders to defraud 

private and public sector organisations. Typically, the affected organisations are active internationally. This increasingly common type of fraud is also referred to as CEO fraud, wire transfer fraud or business e-mail compromise. Fraudsters heavily rely on social engineering techniques and malware to carry out this type of fraud. OCGs organising CEO fraud schemes targeting organisations based in the EU typically operate remotely from outside the EU. Typically, stolen funds are 

transferred through series of 

accounts in various Member States before reaching destination accounts outside 

the EU. 

VAT frauds are highly complex forms of tax fraud relying on the abuse of the VAT rules for cross-border transactions. VAT fraudsters generate multi-billion euro profits by avoiding the payment of VAT or by fraudulently claiming repayments of VAT by national authorities following a chain of transactions. The most common form of VAT fraud is Missing Trader Intra-Community (MTIC) fraud. Changes in commodity prices have an impact on the profitability of MTIC fraud schemes involving specific commodities or services. This is particularly true for fraud schemes involving the energy sector and related commodities, which are subject to frequent price fluctuations. 

# PAYMENT ORDER FRAUD 

# 8#.7' #DD'D 6#: (8#6) (4#7D 

A fraudster calls posing as a 

high-ranking figure of the 

company Requires an urgent transfer of funds and absolute 

confidentiality 

Invokes a sensitive situation (e.g. tax control; merger; acquisition) Pressures the employee not to follow the regular authorisation procedures Instructions on how to proceed are given later by a third-person or via e-mail The employee transfers funds to an account controlled by the fraudster. The money is re-transferred to accounts in multiple jurisdictions CEO IMPERSONATION 

•Requests to receive information on clients 

(e.g. all unsettled invoices) 

•Uses the information obtained to defraud 

clients ALTERNATIVE 

STEP 1 STEP 2 STEP 3 STEP 4 STEP 5 STEP 6 

UNDERSTANDING FRAUDULENT TRANSFER ORDERS UNDERSTANDING VAT FRAUD 

MTIC FRAUD 

Cross-border transactions within the EU are zero-rated, which means that the payment of the VAT is not due until the goods are sold at their destination. This enables traders to import goods without accounting right away for the VAT. In simple MTIC cases, fraudsters sell the goods, charge the VAT to buyers without remitting the value to the tax authorities. More complex cases of VAT fraud are typically known as carousel frauds. As part of these fraud schemes goods are imported and sold through a series of companies before being exported again. The exporters of these goods claim and receive the reimbursement of VAT payments that never occurred. 

44 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME +nsurance fraud 

Fraudsters defraud hundreds of millions of euros from private and public insurance providers each year. OCGs are increasingly involved in fraud schemes targeting health care systems. In 2015, German law enforcement authorities dismantled a Russian-speaking OCG providing nursing services in order to defraud health care insurance 

providers. 

# OTHER TYPES OF FRAUD 

2rocurement rigging 

Procurement procedures are frequently the target of corruption. Criminal groups use bribes to elicit information or directly influence the evaluation of bids in order to win public service tenders in competition with legal businesses. This type of manipulation is particularly notable in the energy, construction, information technology and waste management sectors. 

.oan and mortgage fraud 

Fraudsters organising loan or credit fraud schemes typically rely on fraudulent documents to obtain bank loans, which are never paid back. 

$enefit fraud 

Benefit fraud schemes cause significant financial losses for all Member States. 

OCGs and individual fraudsters target 

social and labour benefit schemes to defraud the state of regular benefit payments. Benefit fraud is strongly linked to THB and migrant smuggling. 

'7 suDsidy fraud 

OCGs have repeatedly attempted to defraud EU funds by submitting applications for EU grants or tenders. Typically, these applications are based on false declarations such as fraudulent progress reports as well as fraudulent documents such as fake invoices.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

45 POLY-CRIMINAL OCG INVOLVED IN THE TRADE IN COUNTERFEIT GOODS AND DRUG TRAFFICKING 

In 2015 and 2016, Europol supported an operation targeting an Italian OCG selling counterfeit champagne in various Member States. Investigations in Italy and Germany revealed that some of the suspects were also involved in the trafficking of cocaine. During house searches in Germany, investigators seized more than 12,000 bottles of fake champagne. The investigation also uncovered links to VAT and excise fraud. In 2015, more than 80,000 seizures were registered by customs authorities in the EU. These shipments contained more than 40 million articles worth an estimated EUR 642 million. Cigarettes remain the most frequently seized counterfeit product accounting for 27% of all seizures, followed by other goods such as batteries or air fresheners at 10% as well as toys at 9%. Regular household items such as body care articles, medicines, toys, electrical household goods represent 25.8% of the total number of seized counterfeit products. The infringement of intellectual property rights is a widespread phenomenon in the EU. Cheap counterfeit copies of popular goods remain highly popular with consumers. Criminals are able to produce counterfeit goods in large quantities at minimal costs and use online platforms to easily and effectively market their products internationally. Counterfeiting and piracy are terms used to describe a range of illicit activities related to Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) infringement. Most counterfeit goods infringe a trademark, which means that a good is produced without the authorisation of its rights holder. OCGs are increasingly involved in the violation of IPR. OCGs produce a wide range of counterfeit goods and manufacture sub-standards goods distributed on EU markets including food and beverages, pesticides and pharmaceutical products. Counterfeit and sub-standard goods pose significant risks to the health and safety of consumers. China remains the source country of most of the counterfeit goods trafficked to the EU. The trade in goods between the EU and China has expanded significantly in recent years. China is the biggest source of imports to the EU by far. 

# INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY CRIME 

Thousands of online shops are 

used to sell counterfeit goods. In 2016, Operation In Our Sites (IOS) resulted in the seizure of 4,780 domain names and associated online shops selling counterfeit merchandise. The distribution of counterfeit pharmaceutical products online is particularly dangerous. In 2016, Operation Pangea IX specifically targeted online vendors of counterfeit medicines. The operation resulted in the seizure of potentially dangerous medicines worth more than EUR 50 million. 

Online distriDution 

Online marketplaces are the key distribution channel for counterfeit goods. The sales volume of counterfeit goods online has increased significantly over recent years. Counterfeiters use social media platforms to advertise their products and steer potential consumers to online sales platforms. The sale of counterfeit goods online is closely related to the increasing use of parcel and postal services to distribute counterfeit products, which is difficult to detect among an increasing flow of licit goods sold online and sent via postal 

freight. 

Counterfeit RJarmaceuticals 

While the counterfeiting of pharmaceuticals previously primarily affected lifestyle medicines, counterfeiters increasingly target almost all types of medicinal products including cancer medication and various types of medical devices. 

Counterfeit goods not only cause losses in unpaid duties and taxes, but also reduce the sales 

volume, profits and investments 

of legitimate businesses. This removes incentives for investment in research, development and innovation. 

46 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME ORGANISED PROPERTY CRIME  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

47 

OCGs make use of various online services to facilitate their burglaries. This includes checking on social media platforms whether individuals are away from targeted residences, scouting targeted neighbourhoods using free online navigation tools and fencing goods via online marketplaces. 

In September 2015, Europol supported French, Belgian and Moldovan law enforcement authorities in disrupting the activities of a Moldovan OCG carrying out serial burglaries targeting bicycle shops. The offenders typically stole luxury bikes worth more than EUR 10,000 each. The bikes were transported from Paris to Moldova on long-distance passenger busses. The bikes were eventually sold in Ukraine as well as via online marketplaces. This OCG was highly mobile and operated with a strict division of tasks between group members. Organised property crime encompasses a range of different criminal activities carried out predominantly by mobile OCGs operating across the EU. Organised burglaries, thefts and robberies as well as motor vehicle crime and the trafficking of cultural goods all fall into this broad category of criminal activity. However, the OCGs carrying different types of property crime are also highly diverse. Some OCGs are highly specialised in specific types of crime or modi operandi , while others are active in several types of property crime 

and other forms of serious and organised 

crime. MOCGs typically operate in and predominantly target the most prosperous Member States in Western and Northern Europe. Despite the highly organised nature of MOCG operations, the organised crime involvement in property crimes remains under-investigated. In many cases, incidents of property crime are still classified as petty criminality without recognising the organised crime aspect. Online marketplaces have made it easier to advertise and sell stolen goods. These marketplaces are now used extensively to sell stolen goods, particularly low-bulk high-value goods such as phones, tablets and other electronic equipment. Legal business structures are used extensively to fence stolen goods, often in the country of origin of the MOCGs involved in organised burglaries and thefts. 

Organised Durglaries and tJefts 

Some Member States note a steady increase in the number of reported burglaries over recent years. This increase particularly affects business premises, which are targeted much more frequently than before. Burglaries of business premises often involve intrusion into the property via the roof. Many incidents of pickpocketing are not attributed to organised crime. However, the scale and level of organisation of pickpocketing raids across many Member States suggests that MOCGs are heavily 

involved. 

Organised roDDeries 

MOCGs are increasingly targeting commercial premises for armed robberies, which typically have less sophisticated security measures in place. Attacks on banks and other cash-intensive businesses have declined notably in recent years due to the security measures put into place at their locations. Jewellery stores and other businesses selling highly valuable and compact goods remain popular targets for armed robbers using various methods of attack including smash and grab. 

LOGICAL ATTACKS ON ATMS 

As part of a new modus operandi, attackers drill or burn small holes into the ATM case in order to reach the ATM’s computer hardware components. The attackers use this access to intrude into ATM’s operating system and force it to dispense cash. OCGs increasingly rely on technical tools and expertise to overcome new vehicle security measures. 

/otor XeJicle crime 

The theft and fraudulent acquisition of motor vehicles remains a lucrative business for the various OCGs involved in this criminal activity. Some OCGs steal specific vehicles to order for clients based in destination countries. While the overall number of stolen vehicles appears to have remained stable in many Member States over recent years, the number of recovered vehicles has dropped considerably across several Member States. This trend likely indicates a further shift from individual offenders to the involvement of more 

professional OCGs. 

ELECTRONIC COMPROMISE 

OCGs involved in the theft of motor vehicles increasingly rely on high-tech tools to gain access to vehicles and to overcome security measures. Information on how to overcome car security systems can be easily found on online messaging boards and websites. In many cases, the tools used for electronic compromise are readily available to order online and often originate from China. Some OCGs steal cars as part of burglaries and home jacking attempts. MOCGs target residential homes with high-value cars parked outside, breaking and entering these premises to retrieve the original car keys and steal the vehicle. Vehicle theft is intimately linked to document fraud. OCGs use fraudulent documents to give stolen cars new identities for registration or exportation purposes. 

The trade in spare parts is increasingly taking place on online marketplaces. OCGs have adapted to this and now rely on these platforms to sell the cannibalised spare parts from stolen vehicles. The illegal online trade in cultural goods is expanding.  

> 3,561 ARTEFACTS SEIZED IN OPERATION PANDORA 28

In January 2017, Europol joined forces with law enforcement authorities from 18 countries, Interpol, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and the World Customs Organization (WCO) to tackle the theft and illicit trafficking of cultural goods. Operation Pandora was successfully led by Cypriot and Spanish police:  ͧ 3,561 works of art and cultural goods were seized, almost half of which were archaeological objects; 500 archaeological objects were found in Murcia, Spain, of which 19 were stolen in 2014 from the Archaeological Museum in Murcia;  ͧ over 400 coins from different periods were seized following investigations into suspicious online advertisements. Several of the retrieved artefacts are of great cultural importance in the archaeological world, such as a marble Ottoman tombstone and a post-Byzantine icon depicting Saint George, along with two Byzantine artefacts. All of them were seized in Greece during actions carried out by the Hellenic Police. 

Cultural goods trafficking 

The conflicts in Libya, Syria and Iraq are thought to have resulted in the intensified trafficking of cultural goods from this region to the EU. This trend is expected to continue due to persistent instability in the region and the lack of law enforcement resources to prevent or intercept trafficking activities in origin and transit countries. A small portion of the funds generated by cultural goods trafficking in the Middle East and North Africa region could potentially be used to support terrorist organisations. However, the profits achieved from cultural goods trafficking for these organisations are thought to be low compared to other revenue streams. 

WAR CRIMES 

In some cases, the destruction, removal and trafficking of cultural goods in the context of an armed conflict can amount to a war crime. Significant cultural goods are protected by international law. International humanitarian law and international criminal law have established various forms of attack against cultural property as war crimes. Activities related to the destruction or trafficking of cultural goods amounting to war crimes potentially have an impact on the EU. The deliberate destruction of archaeological and cultural heritage in Palmyra as well as other places in Syria and Iraq could potentially be considered a war crime according to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal 

Court. 27 Subsequently, law enforcement authorities seized cultural goods originating from Palmyra and trafficked to Europe. 

48 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

> OPERATION PANDORA

Armed conflicts, economic and population pressures in Africa and the Middle East will continue to act as the main push factors for irregular migrants travelling to the EU. Migrant smuggling to and within the EU will remain a key criminal threat. The number of unaccompanied minors present in the EU has 

increased significantly in recent 

years as a result of the migration crisis. This group is very vulnerable to all types of exploitation. 

Migrant smuggling has emerged as a highly profitable and widespread criminal activity for organised crime in the EU. The migrant smuggling business is now a large, profitable and sophisticated criminal market, comparable to the European drug markets. The demand for and supply of smuggling services has grown significantly since 2014. More than 510,000 illegal border crossings between border-crossing points at the external border of the EU were registered in 2016. 29 This is a substantial decrease compared to 2015, when over one million 

irregular migrants entered the EU on 

the Eastern Mediterranean and Central Mediterranean routes. 30 Nearly all of the 

irregular migrants arriving in the EU along 

these routes use the services offered by criminal networks at some point during their journeys. During 2016, 1,234,558 applications for asylum were recorded in the EU. In 2015, the European Asylum Support Office (EASO) reported just over 295,000 positive decisions on asylum applications by Member States. 31 

This means that a large number of irregular migrants who did not apply for asylum or whose applications were rejected may attempt to stay illegally in the EU. In addition to the transportation of migrants, document fraud has emerged as a key criminal activity linked to the migration crisis. The provision of fraudulent documents will continue to represent a substantial threat to the security of the EU. Fraudulent documents are used and can be re-used for many different criminal offences. 

# PEOPLE AS COMMODITY MIGRANT SMUGGLING MIGRANT SMUGGLING ROUTES  

> SOURCE: EUROPOL INFORMATION (2017)
> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

49 /igrant smuggling Ť a daily Dusiness 

In 2015, migrant smuggling networks offering facilitation services to reach or move within the EU generated an estimated EUR 4.7 billion to EUR 5.7 billion in profit. These profits have seen a sharp decline in 2016, dropping by nearly EUR 2 billion between 2015 and 2016. This development is in line with the overall decrease in the number of irregular migrants 

arriving in the EU and as a result of a fall in 

the prices for migrant smuggling services following the peak of the migration crisis in 2015. OCGs involved in migrant smuggling display an unprecedented level of organisation and coordination. While established smuggling 

modi operandi remain unchanged, migrant smugglers have shown great versatility in the means of transport, concealment methods and technologies they use. Migrant smuggling is a multi-national busi-ness. Migrant smugglers originating from over 122 countries are involved in facilitating the journeys of irregular migrants to the EU. Most migrant smuggling networks are composed of various nationalities involving both EU and non-EU nationals. Migrant smuggling networks heavily rely on social media to advertise smuggling services. Migrant smugglers make use of ride-sharing applications and P2P accommodation plat-forms to provide a cover for their smuggling activities. This leaves regular users at the risk of inadvertently becoming facilitators by unknowingly transporting or hosting irregular 

migrants. 

Migrant smuggling is a highly profitable crim-inal activity featuring sustained high levels of demand and relatively low levels of risk. Some OCGs previously involved in other criminal activities such as the illegal trade in excise goods, drug trafficking or organised property crime have added migrant smuggling to their portfolio of criminal activities. Migrant smug-gling does not require access to significant resources and OCGs can rely on their existing knowledge of routes and infrastructure used to smuggle goods across borders. The distinction between legal and illegal activities is increasingly blurred. Individual criminal entrepreneurs can step in and out of criminal activities by providing ad hoc services, espe-cially taxi and truck drivers. 

> OPERATION DAIDALOS

In March 2015, Operation Daidalos targeted a criminal group smuggling irregular migrants from Greece to other Member States which was involved in the production and distribution of forged travel documents. In addition to providing these documents to irregular migrants, the group also sold these to other OCGs. The criminal network operated primarily in Greece. 

+llegal Dut not undocumented Ť document and identity fraud 

Service packages offered by migrant smug-glers now frequently include the provision of fraudulent travel and identity documents. Fraudulent documents allow irregular mi-grants to enter and move within the EU as well as to change from irregular to legalised residence status under false pretences or by using fake identities. Migrant smuggling networks are increasingly offering tailor-made facilitation services including high-quality fraudulent documents. The abuse of genuine passports by look-alikes continues to be the main modus operandi used by document fraudsters. ID cards are the most commonly detected document used as part of document fraud. In 2015, they ac-counted for 50% of all detections in the EU. In 2016, more than 7,000 people were detected with fraudulent documents on entry at the external borders of the EU. 32 

#n emerging market 

Both the quantity and the quality of fraud-ulent documents circulating in the EU have increased. The sustained increase in demand for fraudulent documents has prompted established counterfeiters to increase their production output and establish new print 

shops. 

#Duse of legal cJannels 

Migrant smugglers frequently abuse legal channels to facilitate the entry of irregular migrants to the EU or to legalise their stay. The abuse of legal channels involves a variety 

of modi operandi including sham marriages, bogus paternity, false employment contracts, fake invitations letters, false medical visa, and false claims to be victims of trafficking or 

refugees. 

50 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

BUSINESS MODEL 

Supply of fraudulent documents 

Migrant hands over his bio data and a photograph eletronically Facilitator sends details to the forger Forger procures passport and applies a fake visa, stamp and bio data on the document Facilitator hands the passport to the migrant in exchange for fee Migrant smugglers widely rely on social media and use online platforms such as ride-sharing 

websites, or P2P accommodation platforms, to arrange facilitation services. Migrants smugglers pass irregular migrants from one network to another along the route of the migrants’ journey. EU suspects typically work as drivers transporting irregular migrants within the EU to destination countries. Document fraud has emerged as a key criminal activity linked to the migration crisis. 

The demand for smuggling services has grown 

significantly since 2014. DOCUMENT FRAUD COMMUNICATION VIA SOCIAL MEDIA TRANSPORTATION & ACCOMMODATION 

Migrant smuggling networks offer their services including transportation, accommodation, the provision of fraudulent documents and information on contact points in other countries. 

FACILITATION SERVICES 

/igrant smuggling to and YitJin tJe '7 Yill remain a key criminal tJreat  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

51 THB for sexual and labour exploitation includes the recruitment, transportation, harbouring and exploitation of victims. OCGs involved in THB typically operate in independent cells that deal with the various stages of recruitment, transport and exploitation. Traffickers rely heavily on document fraud to enable their trafficking activities. This includes the use of fraudulent identity, travel and breeder documents as well as the abuse of legal channels such as the EU visa regime for tourism, study and work visas. OCGs involved in THB also continue to exploit asylum provisions in order to traffic non-EU nationals into the EU. On many occasions, victims are provided with fraudulent documents to conceal their real identity and age. 

6*$ for seZual eZRloitation 

The sexual exploitation of EU nationals no longer relies predominantly on the use of violence and coercion towards victims. Some OCGs are increasingly relying on threats of violence towards victims and their families rather than attacking the victim. Victims originating from outside the EU are still routinely subjected to violence, debt bondage, passport confiscation and other forms of coercion as an integral part of trafficking modi operandi. 

# 64#((+C-+0) +0 *7/#0 $'+0)5 (6*$) 

CRIMINAL GANG ACCUSED OF TRAFFICKING OVER 150 WOMEN INTO PROSTITUTION DISMANTLED BY AUSTRIA 33 

In November 2016, Austrian law enforcement authorities with the support 

of Europol dismantled a Chinese OCG 

involved in the trafficking of up to 300 women. Victims were lured to Austria on promises of work as nannies or masseuses. They were provided with forged documents and brought to Austria illegally. Upon their arrival in Vienna, OCG members took away the victims’ IDs. The women were placed in so-called “sex studios” owned by the OCG and forced to work as prostitutes. After a few weeks they were transferred to other brothels in 

Austria. 

The migration crisis has resulted in an increase in the number of potential victims of THB. A growing number of vulnerable adults and unaccompanied minors in the EU are likely to be 

targeted by traffickers. The trafficking of victims within 

the EU remains a key threat. 

TRAFFICKING VICTIMS FORCED INTO CRIMINALIT Y 34 In November 2016, a Spanish investigation supported by Europol resulted in the arrest of 16 suspected traffickers and the rescue of nine minors. The OCG trafficked young women and forced them into pickpocketing in various Member States. The victims were initially lured to Spain and travelled there using counterfeit documents. In Spain, the traffickers trained the victims in pickpocketing techniques and forced them to commit thefts in crowded areas and on public transport. The OCG shared family ties and was hierarchically structured operating in smaller groups in different European cities. The larger criminal network was mainly composed of nationals from Bosnia and Herzegovina and traded the victims from one group to another for an estimated EUR 5,000 each. 

52 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

6*$ for laDour eZRloitation 

The involvement of OCGs in THB for labour exploitation is increasing in the EU. OCGs cater to the growing demand for cheap labour across many Member States and have access to a large number of potential victims. THB for labour exploitation threatens to infiltrate the legal economy, where it lowers wages and hampers economic growth. 

THE BUSINESS MODEL 

There has been little change in the types of industries featuring labour exploitation. Traffickers continue to target less regulated industries as well as those featuring seasonal demand for workers. Vulnerable sectors include agriculture, catering, cleaning, construction, entertainment, fishing, hospitality, retail and transportation. Traffickers take advantage of discrepancies in labour legislation to organise the exploitation of victims in the grey zone between legal employment and labour exploitation. Some victims receive wages equivalent to the minimum standard in their countries of origin. However, these are far below acceptable salaries in countries of exploitation where they do not have sufficient resources to cover their living expenses. These wage dumping practices seriously undermine the legal labour market in countries of destination and make it difficult for victims of labour exploitation to be recognised as such. 

6rafficking of underage Xictims 

Traffickers often specifically target underage victims, both male and female, to sexually exploit them. The exploitation of underage victims is not always motivated by financial profit. In some cases, underage victims are trafficked for the purpose of producing CSEM, which is traded on online platforms. MIGRANT SMUGGLING AND HUMAN TRAFFICKING RING OPERATING VIA THE MEDITERRANEAN 35 

In November 2015, a joint operation 

between Spanish and Polish law enforcement 

authorities, coordinated by Europol, revealed the operation of a migrant smuggling network exploiting irregular migrants from Pakistan in restaurants in Spain. Irregular migrants were forced to work long hours in appalling conditions without salary, holiday or social security to repay their debts to smugglers 

for the travel and provision of fraudulent 

documents. The migrant smugglers used 

the criminal proceeds to invest in new restaurants, which were also used for the 

exploitation of irregular migrants.  

> EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017

53 

Links between migrant 

smuggling and trafficking in 

human beings 

OCGs involved in THB often exploit existing migratory routes to traffic victims within the EU. While the migration crisis has not yet 

had a widespread impact on THB for labour 

exploitation in the EU, some investigations show that traffickers are increasingly targeting irregular migrants and asylum seekers in the EU for exploitation. Irregular migrants in the EU represent a large pool of potential victims susceptible to promises of work even if this entails exploitation. 

SHAM MARRIAGES 

There has been an increasing number of reports of incidents of sham marriages in several Member States. This increase is likely related to the migration crisis and an increase in the number of irregular migrants seeking to transition to legal residence status after failed asylum applications. 

Traffickers continue to rely on the use of social media, Voice-over-IP (VoIP) and instant messaging applications at all stages of the trafficking cycle. The traditional trafficking flow from Eastern Europe to Western Europe has been replaced by multiple and diverse flows of victims all over the EU. OCGs have further increased the use of legal businesses that can conceal exploitations such as hotels, nightclubs and massage parlours. 

## LABOUR EXPLOITATION SEXUAL EXPLOITATION CHILD TRAFFICKING 

Traffickers continue to target less regulated industries as well as those featuring seasonal demand for workers. Traffickers often specifically target underage victims, both male and female, to sexually exploit them. THB for labour exploitation is increasing in the EU. 

MIGRANT SMUGGLING TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS 54 ASSESSING ORGANISED CRIME 

# SPORTS CORRUPTION 

Criminal networks use match-fixing to manipulate the outcomes of sports matches, which skews betting odds and allows them to generate significant profits. Match-fixing in the EU primarily affects football games. However, match-fixers are also targeting tennis, snooker and dart competitions. In some cases OCGs have infiltrated sporting clubs in order to orchestrate money laundering schemes. 

FOOTBALL AND MONEY L AUNDERING 

In May 2016, as part of Operation Matrioskas, law enforcement authorities dismantled a Russian-speaking OCG which had infiltrated football clubs and laundered several million euros across the EU. The OCG used middlemen to purchase football clubs experiencing financial pressure. The group was able to conceal their money laundering activities among the large financial transactions and cross-border money flows, which are not unusual for professional football clubs. Weak governance allowed the OCG to use the clubs to launder money by over- or under-valuating players on the transfer market as well as by accepting bids for television 

rights deals. 

# TRAFFICKING OF FIREARMS 

The proliferation and availability 

of illegal firearms in the /ember 

States increases the risk of their use by terrorist groups to carry out attacks in the EU. 

Illegal firearms are increasingly 

accessible due to their availability online. 

Recent terrorist attacks in the EU carried out by jihadist terrorists using trafficked firearms have demonstrated the lethal consequences of the trade in illicit firearms. Several incidents of violent clashes between criminal 

gangs have highlighted that the use of illegal 

firearms remains a significant threat to EU citizens. 

ONLINE TRADE 

Firearms are frequently traded on online platforms including Darknet marketplaces. Both individual criminals and OCGs obtain illegal firearms via online marketplaces. This development has resulted in a significant increase in the use of parcel and postal services to traffic firearms and firearm components. Online trade allows individuals with no or limited connections to organised crime to procure firearms. These individual criminal actors increasingly engage in the trafficking of firearms and firearm components as part of a CaaS business model and have emerged as key distributors of illegal firearms in the EU. The online trade in illegal firearms via various platforms is set to expand further over the coming years. 

Using post and parcel services is now the most common way of 

trafficking firearms in the E7. 

DIVERSION FROM LEGAL SUPPLY 

Firearms traffickers are highly adept at exploiting legal loopholes and differences in regulatory regimes between Member States to divert firearms from legal suppliers. The reactivation of deactivated weapons and conversion of blank-firing firearms are among the main sources of illegal firearms trafficked in the EU. Firearms traffickers often convert blank-firing firearms or reactivate deactivated firearms purchased from legal dealers based in countries applying less stringent acquisition rules such as more permissive licensing and registration requirements. Various conflict zones in the periphery of the EU have the potential to emerge as major sources of firearms trafficked to 

the EU. 

In June 2016, Italian law enforcement authorities arrested two members of the mafia clan ‘Ceusi’ on charges of firearms trafficking. The suspects had purchased over 160 decommissioned firearms from Slovakia. Some of the firearms were reactivated and sent to Malta in parcels. The Italian OCG maintained links with Egyptian OCGs involved in migrant smuggling activities. 36 

platforms is set to expand further over the 

coming years. EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017 55 

# LINKS BETWEEN SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME AND TERRORISM 

Terrorism and the groups carrying out terrorist offences have evolved significantly over the last decade. The EU has been the target of repeated terror attacks and plots in recent years. The investigations into the terrorist attacks in Brussels and Paris, carried out in March 2016 and November 2015 respectively, uncovered the involvement of some of the perpetrators in different types of serious and organised crime including the trafficking of illicit drugs, as well as personal contacts with criminal groups involved in the trafficking of firearms and production of fraudulent documents. Recent investigations have revealed that 

terrorist groups have made use of migrant 

smuggling networks to allow their operatives to enter the EU. However, these cases do 

not suggest that terrorist groups maintain 

sustained engagement with OCGs involved in 

migrant smuggling. 

The profit-driven nature of organised crime activities is in many cases incompatible with terrorist acts, which attract a great degree of media and law enforcement attention to the 

perpetrators. 

The pursuit of criminal activities in support of terrorist activities is not a new phenomenon. However, the involvement of suspects with extensive criminal backgrounds and access to the resources and tools of organised crime networks in terrorism is particularly threatening in light of the fast pace of radicalisation and willingness to very quickly engage in terrorist attack following the beginning of the radicalisation process. The threat emanating from links between serious and organised crime and terrorism is two-fold. Firstly, the potential exploitation of OCG infrastructures to procure tools, such as firearms or fraudulent documents, and move goods and people may deliver lethal weapons used in attacks in the EU to terrorist groups. Secondly, involvement in serious and organised crime may allow terrorist actors to generate funds to finance terrorism-related activities. The suspects are involved in various crime areas including money laundering, migrant smuggling, heroin and firearms trafficking, organised property crime and THB. These suspects are typically involved at a low level in organised crime and do not fill major roles within organised crime networks. CONCLUSIONS 

Tackling organised crime in the 

age of technology 

Serious and organised crime is a key 

threat to the security of the EU. Criminal 

groups and individual criminals continue 

to generate multi-billion euro profits 

from their activities in the EU each year. 

Some parts of the serious and organised 

crime landscape in the EU have changed 

drastically in the past years - in large part 

due to advancements in technology that 

have had a profound impact on the wider 

society and economy. 

Technology is a key component of most, 

if not all, criminal activities carried out 

by organised crime groups in the EU and 

has afforded organised crime with an 

unprecedented degree of flexibility. This 

flexibility is particularly apparent in the 

ease with which criminals adapt to changes 

in society. 

The internet, the multitude of online 

platforms and communication channels it 

hosts have had a huge impact on society, 

strengthening and transforming the 

economy, driving innovation and shaping 

social interaction. However, it is also a key 

enabler of criminal activity and plays a role 

in all types of criminality. 

The impact of technology on crime, 

however, extends beyond the internet and 

involves all kinds of technical innovation 

such as advances in drone technology, 

automated logistics, and advanced printing 

technologies. 

The role of the SOCTA 

The vital role of technology for organised 

crime is reflected in the data collected 

and analysed for the SOCTA 2017. For the 

SOCTA 2017, Europol has undertaken the 

largest-ever data collection on serious and 

organised crime in the EU. 

Europol relied on more than 2,300 

questionnaires contributed by Member 

States, Europol’s operational and 

strategic partners outside the EU and our 

institutional partners as well as operational 

intelligence held in Europol’s databases to 

produce the most detailed assessment of 

the nature and scale of criminal threats 

facing the EU and its Member States yet. 

Based on an in-depth analysis of this 

data and a methodology endorsed by the 

Member States, Europol identifies the key 

threats from serious and organised crime 

facing the EU today and over the coming 

years. 

# RECOMMENDED 

# PRIORITIES 

Based on the outcome of a 

comprehensive analysis of the 

indicators and factors detailed in 

the SOCTA Methodology, Europol 

recommends key priorities to 

tackle the most threatening 

forms of serious and organised 

crime. In addition to five specific 

criminal activities carried out 

by organised crime in the EU, 

Europol is also recommending 

to focus on three cross-cutting 

threats that enable or enhance 

all types of serious and 

organised crime. 

56 EU SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT 2017  57 

# SPECIFIC PRIORITY CRIME 

# THREATS: 

Cybercrime 

Drug production, trafficking and distribution 

Migrant smuggling 

Organised property crime 

Trafficking in human being 

# CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITY CRIME 

# THREATS: 

Criminal finances and money laundering 

Document fraud 

Online trade in illicit goods and services 

HIGH THREAT THREAT 

> THREATS CROSS-CUTTING CRIME THREATS

CRIME AREAS Currency counterfeiting CYBERCRIME Drug 

trafficking 

Environmental crime Fraud Intellectual property crime 

ORGANISED PROPERTY CRIME MIGRANT SMUGGLING 

Trafficking of firearms 

TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS 

Corruption 

Criminal finances including money laundering Document fraud, including identity fraud Online trade in illicit goods (firearms, counterfeit goods, drugs) 

Extortion 

Countermeasures against law enforcement Illicit waste trafficking 

Production 

Trafficking of 

endangered 

species Distribution 

including online 

Burglaries and 

theft Online trade in counterfeit 

goods Excise fraud 

Motorvehicle crime Production of counterfeit 

goods in the 

EU 

Investment 

fraud 

Organised robberies Trafficking of 

counterfeit 

goods (not 

online) in the EU MTIC fraud External 

borders of the 

EU Secondary 

movements Risk for labour 

exploitation 

Labour 

exploitation Sexual exploitation Child 

trafficking 

Online child 

sexual 

exploitation 

Cyber-

dependent crime 

(malware, cryptoware, etc.) 

Payment card 

fraud (card-not-present fraud) Synthetic drugs 

production in the EU 

Trafficking of precursors and pre-precursors 

Import of cocaine to the EU via major 

ports and couriers 

Poly-drug 

trafficking in 

the EU 

Large-scale cannabis 

production and 

trafficking in 

the EU Online trade 

(including 

de/reactiva-tion) Traditional 

trafficking 58 

# ANNEX LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

ATM Automated teller machine AWF SOC Analytical Work File on Serious and Organised Crime CaaS Crime-as-a-Service CNP Card-not-present COSI Standing Committee on Operational Cooperation on Internal Security CP Card-present CSE Child Sexual Exploitation CSEM Child Sexual Exploitation Material DDoS Distributed denial of service EASO European #sylum Support Office 

ECB European Central Bank EMCDDA European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction EMCS Excise Movement and Control System EU European Union IPR Intellectual Property Rights LDCA Long-distance child abuse MDMA 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine MOCG Mobile organised crime group MTIC Missing Trader Intra Community NFC Near Field Communication NPS New Psychoactive Substances OCG Organised crime group P2P Peer-to-peer POS Point of Sale SEPA Single Euro Payments Area SOCTA Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment THB Trafficking in *uman Beings 

TOR The Onion Router VAT Value Added Tax 1Council Decision of 6 April 2009 establishing the European Police Office (Europol) (2009/371/JHA), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/ publications-documents/council-decision-of-6-april-2009-establishing-european-police-office-europol 2Council Document 12159/12, Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment (SOCTA) - Methodology (04/07/2012), accessible at http://data.consilium.europa. eu/doc/document/ST-12159-2012-INIT/en/pdf 3Europol 2015, Large Chinese money laundering network dismantled (12/05/2015), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/ news/large-chinese-money-laundering-network-dismantled 4Europol and Eurojust 2016, Hawala money laundering ring dismantled by Joint Investigation Team (29/11/ 2016), accessible at https://www.europol. europa.eu/newsroom/news/hawala-money-laundering-ring-dismantled-joint-investigation-team 5Europol 2016, Iraqi money laundering syndicate based in Germany dismantled with support of Europol and Eurojust (31/03/2016), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/iraqi-money-laundering-syndicate-based-in-germany-dismantled-support-europol-and-eurojust 6Europol 2016, Dozens arrested for massive document forgery and migrants smuggling (31/05/2016), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/ newsroom/news/dozens-arrested-for-massive-document-forgery-and-migrant-smuggling 7https://metrics.torproject.org 

> 8

D. Moore and T. Rid 2015, Cryptopolitik and the Darknet, p. 21 9Europol 2016, Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA) 2016, p.47 10 Europol 2016, Darknet arms vendors arrested in Slovenia with support of Europol (20/12/2016), available at https://www.europol.europa.eu/ newsroom/news/darknet-arms-vendor-arrested-in-slovenia-support-of-europol 11 Carnegie Mellon University 2015, Measuring the Longitudinal Evolution of the Online Anonymous Marketplace Ecosystem, available at https://www. usenix.org/system/files/conference/usenixsecurity15/sec15-paper-soska-updated.pdf 12 Europol 2016, Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA) 2016, p.49 13 In 2014, Europol published a report on the future of serious and organised crime “Exploring tomorrow’s organised crime”, which highlighted key drivers for change which have an impact on serious and organised crime in the EU. The report is available on Europol’s website at https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-documents/exploring-tomorrow%E2%80%99s-organised-crime 14 European Central Bank 2016, Annual Report 2015, p. 76 15 Europol 2016, ‘Avalanche’ network dismantled in international cyber operation (01/12/2016), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/ newsroom/news/%E2%80%98avalanche%E2%80%99-network-dismantled-in-international-cyber-operation 16 Symantec 2016, Internet Security Threat Report, p.54 17 Europol 2016, Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA) 2016, p.36-37 18 Verizon 2016, 2016 Data Breach Investigation Report, p.4 19 Europol 2016, Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA) 2016, p.24 20 Europol 2016, International criminal network behind large-scale payment fraud dismantled (07/09/2016), accessible at https://www.europol.europa. eu/newsroom/news/international-criminal-network-behind-large-scale-payment-fraud-dismantled 21 Europol 2016, Global action against airline fraudsters (19/10/2016), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/global-action-against-airline-fraudsters-193-detained 22 EMCDDA & Europol 2016, EU Drug Markets Report 2016, p. 23 23 EMCDDA & Europol 2016, EU Drug Markets Report 2016, p. 60 24 Europol 2016, ‘Rose of the Winds’ – International operation against drug trafficking (01/12/20160, accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/ newsroom/news/%E2%80%98rose-of-winds%E2%80%99-%E2%80%93-international-operation-against-drug-trafficking 25 ABC News 2014, Six charged after drug bust which seized 2.8 tonnes of MDMA and methamphetamine worth $1.5 billion (29/11/2014), accessible at http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-29/six-charged-over-enormous-$1.5b-drug-bust/5927904 26 BBC 2015, Gang guilty over £600,000 phone scam against pensioners (10/12/2015), accessible at http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-35064360 27 Europol 2016, 3561 artefacts seized in Operation Pandora (23/01/2017), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/3561-artefacts-seized-in-operation-pandora 28 European Parliament 2015, Parliamentary questions: Answer given by Vice-President Mogherini on behalf of the Commission (22/09/2015), accessible at http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getAllAnswers. do?reference=E-2015-008402&language=EN 29 Frontex 2017, Risk Analysis for 2017 30 UNHCR 2015, Over one million sea arrivals reach Europe in 2015, accessible at http://www.unhcr.org/news/latest/2015/12/5683d0b56/ million-sea-arrivals-reach-europe-2015.html 31 EASO 2015, Latest Asylum Trends – 2015 Overview, accessible at https:// www.easo.europa.eu/sites/default/files/public/LatestAsylumTrends20151. pdf 32 Frontex 2017, Risk Analysis for 2017 33 Europol 2016, Crime gang accused of trafficking over 150 women into prostitution dismantled by Austria (17/11/2016), available at: https://www. europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/crime-gang-accused-of-trafficking-over-150-women-prostitution-dismantled-austria 34 Europol 2016, Europol teams up with Spanish authorities to bring down human trafficking network (29/11/2016), available at https://www.europol. europa.eu/newsroom/news/europol-teams-spanish-authorities-to-bring-down-human-trafficking-network 35 Europol 2015, Hit on migrant smuggling and human trafficking ring operating via the Mediterranean (03/11/2015), available at: https://www. europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/hit-migrant-smuggling-and-human-trafficking-ring-operating-mediterranean; 36 Europol 2016, Weapons smugglers arrested in Italy with the support of Europol (09/06/2016), accessible at https://www.europol.europa.eu/ newsroom/news/weapon-smugglers-arrested-in-italy-support-of-europol 

# REFERENCES EUROPEAN UNION 

> SERIOUS AND ORGANISED CRIME THREAT ASSESSMENT

www.europol.europa.eu 

Follow us Eisenhowerlaan 73, 2517 KK The Hague, the Netherlands 

ISBN 978-92-95200-77-7 DOI 10.2813/114730 QL-04-17-236-EN-N
