Title: 

URL Source: https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/DIG/DIG-Russia-Hoax-Memo-and-Timeline_revisited.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 18 Jul 2025 16:43:21 GMT

Markdown Content:
UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

The timeline of events, as evidenced by the attached documents, is as follows: 

Key Intelligence Manipulated and Withheld from the American People by the IC :

BEFORE THE ELECTION 

• August 31, 2016 — A DHS official tells former DNI James Clapper that there was “ no indication of a 

Russian threat to directly manipulate the actual vote count. ”

• September 2, 2016 — The FBI requests for the whistleblower’s pre -election assessment on alleged 

Russian election activity in an upcoming, pre -election ICA to be “softened,” given the FBI was 

“uncomfortable” implying that there was “definitive information that Russia does intend to 

disrupt our elections.” 

• September 9, 2016 — An ODNI and PDB official says that an upcoming PDB should make clear that 

Russia “probably is not trying…to influence the election by using cyber means” to target election 

infrastructure. Several IC officials agree. 

MEMORANDUM FOR: 

SUBJECT: 

Director of National Intelligence Tulsi Gabbard 

Intelligence Community suppression of intelligence showing 

“Russian and criminal actors did not impact” the 2016 

presidential election via cyber -attacks on infrastructure UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

The lead author on the PDB agrees. UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

• September 12, 2016 — The IC publishes an Intelligence Community Assessment (ICA) on cyber 

threats to the election. The report finds “foreign adversaries do not have and will probably not 

obtain the capabilities to successfully execute widespread and undetected cyber attacks” on 

election infrastructure. 

Two days later, the IC publishes the aforementioned PDB with near identical findings. It finds that 

foreign adversaries do not have the capability to “covertly overturn the vote outcome.” 

• October 7, 2016 — ODNI and DHS suppress the above September intelligence findings in their press 

release that states with “confidence” the Russian government directed the DNC and DCCC hacks.” 

o Their statement omitted the fact that the FBI and NSA had “ low confidence ” in attributing the 

data leaks from these entities to Russia. 

o Note: There is still supporting evidence indicating the Russian government directed hacking of 

the DNC and DCCC. 

• November 6, 2016 — Donald J. Trump defeats Hillary Clinton and wins the 2016 U.S. Presidential 

Election. 

AFTER THE ELECTION 

• December 7, 2016 — The IC is working on a new PDB examining the potential impact of cyber hacks 

on the election results. DNI Clapper’s office develops talking points based on the PDB’s findings: 

o “Foreign adversaries did not use cyberattacks on election infrastructure to alter the US 

Presidential election outcome” 

o “We have no evidence of cyber manipulation of election infrastructure intended to alter results” UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

• December 8, 2016 — IC officials discuss the draft PDB, which finds that “Russian and criminal 

actors did not impact recent US election results by conducting malicious cyber activities against 

election infrastructure.” The group also decides the PDB will be published the following day, due to 

“high administration interest.” UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

A few hours later, after initially coauthoring the PDB, the FBI (led by FBI Director James Comey) 

inexplicably withdraws from coordinating on the product and notifies other IC officials that the FBI will 

be drafting a dissent. 

Later in the afternoon, a senior PDB official kills the PDB “based on some new guidance.” The post -

election PDB , which once again assessed that Russia did not hack the election , was never published. UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

• December 9, 2016 — The Obama White House gathers top cabinet officials for a National Security 

Council Principals Committee (PC) Meeting. James Clapper, John Brennan, Susan Rice, John Kerry, 

Brian McKeon, Loretta Lynch, Andrew McCabe, and Avril Haines are among those in attendance. 

After the meeting, in an email titled “POTUS Tasking on Russia Election Meddling ,” Director of 

National Intelligence James Clapper’s assistant sends an email to ODNI leaders tasking them with the 

creation of an “assessment per the President’s request.” ODNI leads the effort, along with CIA, FBI, 

NSA, and DHS. UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

Specifically, the assessment will address the following questions: UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

That same day, Deep State officials in the IC begin leaking blatantly false intelligence to the Washington 

Post, as proven by the unpublished PDB and previous IC products, claiming that Russia used “cyber 

means” to influence “the outcome of the election.” 

Later that evening, another leak to the Washington Post falsely alleges that the CIA “concluded in a 

secret assessment that Russia intervened” in the election to help President Trump. UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

At this point, there is no official IC assessment that contain s that conclusion. 

• December 14, 2016 — IC officials again leak to the media, this time claiming that IC officials believe 

“with a high level of confidence” that Russian President Vladimir Putin was personally involved in the 

“U.S. Election Hack.” 

• December 16, 2016 — Though President Obama admits there is no “evidence of machines being 

tampered with” during the election, he says he was concerned that potential hacks “could hamper vote 

counting and affect the actual election process.” 

“What I was concerned about in particular was making sure that [Wikileaks/Clinton emails] 

wasn’t compounded by potential hacking that could hamper vote counting and affect the actual 

election process itself. And so in early September, when I saw President Putin in China, I felt that 

the most effective way to ensure that, that didn’t happen was to talk to him directly. And tell him 

to cut it out.” – President Obama on hacking the vote. 

Reality: Multiple IC assessments before and after the election consistently showed no credible reporting 

of Russian intent or capability to do what President Obama alleges .

• Late December 2016 — Due to the ODNI Whistleblower ’s questioning his leadership about why an IC 

assessment was being created that contradicted multiple IC assessments, the whistleblower is 

immediately removed from emails regarding the drafting of the Obama -ordered IC assessment . The 

whistleblower is sidelined, despite the fact that they led the ICA on similar topics in September, just 

months prior. 

• Late December 2016/Early January 2017 — The National Intelligence Officer for Cyber pressures the 

ODNI Whistleblower to accept a number of findings in the Obama ICA, including that the Russian 

government had a preference for President Trump. 

“As for the 2017 ICA’s judgement of a decisive Russian preference for then -candidate Donald 

Trump, I could not concur in good conscience based on information available, and my 

professional analytic judgement. ” – ODNI Whistleblower UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

The ODNI Whistleblower will later recall that his superior said , “you need to trust me on this,” and 

referenced reporting the ODNI Whistleblower was “not allowed to see.” 

• January 6, 2017 — The Obama administration shares the unclassified ICA with the public. It falsely 

alleges, based in part on “further information” that had “come to light” since the election, that Putin 

directed an effort to help President Trump defeat Hillary Clinton. Th is “further information” is later 

confirmed to be the Steele Dossier. 

The assessment also: 

o Suppresses intelligence from before and after the election showing Russia lacked intent and 

capability to hack the 2016 election. 

o Deceives the American public by claiming the IC did not assess the “impact ” of Russian 

activities .

o Reality: The IC did, in fact, assess for impact. The unpublished December PDB stated 

clearly that Russia “did not impact” the election through cyber hacks on the election .

o Assesses Russia was responsible for leaking data from the DNC and DCCC, while failing to 

mention that the FBI and NSA previously expressed LOW CONFIDENCE in this attribution. 

ALMOST THREE YEARS LATER 

• September 18, 2019 — The ODNI Whistleblower assists in a FOIA request related to the Obama ICA. 

Specifically, an IC official asks the ODNI Whistleblower to search for material related to the Steele 

Dossier, as it “was a factor” in the Obama ICA. This revelation shocks the OD NI Whistleblower, who 

had been told that DNI Clapper viewed the Steele Dossier as “untrustworthy.” UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

“The assertion…was in contradiction to what [the National Intelligence Officer for Cyber Issues] had 

previously implied, and at no time during the prior three years had any of the [National Intelligence 

Council] staff members suggested to me that the IC viewed the “Steel Dossier” [sic] material as 

credible.” – ODNI Whistleblower recalls learning of the Steele Dossier’s inclusion in the ICA. 

###
