Title: Trump Continues to Go After Harvard with Vengeful, Reckless Stupidity

URL Source: https://www.esquire.com/news-politics/politics/a64981005/trump-proclamation-foreign-student-visas-harvard/

Published Time: 2025-06-05T17:30:56.884550-0400

Markdown Content:
Everyone knows of the great friend of the Blog, Clio, Muse of History, and of her MCU identity, The Proclaimer (!). Well, she doesn’t like what this administration is up to, history-wise, and she is very cheesed off by people who Proclaim through tinny trumpets. From _The_ _Guardian_:

> Donald Trump signed a proclamation to restrict foreign student visas at Harvard University, the White House said on Wednesday. ... Trump declared that it would jeopardize national security to allow Harvard to continue hosting foreign students. The proclamation is the US president’s latest attempt to choke the Ivy League school from an international pipeline that accounts for a quarter of the student body, and a further escalation in the White House’s fight with the institution. “I have determined that the entry of the class of foreign nationals described above is detrimental to the interests of the United States because, in my judgment, Harvard’s conduct has rendered it an unsuitable destination for foreign students and researchers,” Trump wrote in the order.

His “judgment” consists of whatever ignited his sputtering synapses that morning on Fox News’s flagship morning offering _Three Dolts on a Divan._(And, not for nothing, but a word of warning to the dolts: Don’t invite the vice president onto the divan.) So don’t hand me this jive. Can he find one secondary schoolteacher elsewhere on the planet who thinks Harvard is “an unsuitable destination” because of its “conduct”? Officially, in a statement, the White House managed to be sappy, ignorant, and insulting, all at the same time.

> Trump officials have repeatedly raised the stakes and sought new fronts to pressure Harvard, cutting more than $2.6bn in research grants and moving to end all federal contracts with the university. The latest threat has targeted Harvard’s roughly 7,000 international students, who account for half the enrollment at some Harvard graduate schools.

As the proud father of a recent graduate from Harvard’s Chan School of Public Health, I have a personal reason to be revolted by this act of vengeful, reckless stupidity.

> “President Trump wants our institutions to have foreign students, but believes that the foreign students should be people that can love our country,” the White House said in a fact sheet about the proclamation.

To that end, the president has ordered his minions to comb uninvited through the social media accounts of potential foreign students to find reasons to deny them their visas. Some brilliant physics major from Germany with a 4.0 once posted on Xwitter that the last season of _The Apprentice_ was the worst? Sorry, Hans. You have to work elsewhere to discover your revolutionary new power source. (And, if _The New York Times_ is to be believed, that won’t be hard.)

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

This Proclamation was part and parcel of what was a busy day of presidential chest pounding and Proclamatin’. He also announced that he was simply banning all migrants from 12 countries, many of them violent wreckages of what they used to be.

> “I have determined to fully restrict and limit the entry of nationals of the following 12 countries: Afghanistan, Burma, Chad, Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Haiti, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, and Yemen”, Trump states in the proclamation. “I have determined to partially restrict and limit the entry of nationals of the following 7 countries: Burundi, Cuba, Laos, Sierra Leone, Togo, Turkmenistan, and Venezuela.”

This is quite a list. In it, he sells out the people who risked their lives helping us in Afghanistan and the Haitians whom he accused on the stump in 2024 of eating dogs and cats and ducks, whom he slandered again on Wednesday as an excuse for revoking the Temporary Protected Status they were granted under President Biden, the guy whose syntax, you may recall, so displeased Jake Tapper and Alex Thompson.

Getting back to the whole Harvard affair again, the Commonwealth (God save it!) has been largely up to the challenge of the past five months of a lawless administration. Boston mayor Michelle Wu took a bite out of the president in her State of the City speech and she’s stood in against the inevitable blowback. Out in Worcester, citizens resisted when ICE came to call. In Milford, ICE goons arrested a student at Milford High School, and the student body has risen up with the town behind them, and their demands have brought Governor Maura Healey into play. And Harvard continues to be Harvard—stubborn, arrogant, and in many ways Not Columbia, which surrendered and continues to pay the price for it.

Twelve years ago, a Harvard Law School grad dropped by town to give a little talk in church. It had been a bad week in Boston, and we needed a bit of what we are retold. This is part of what he said.

> I’m here today on behalf of the American people with a simple message: Every one of us has been touched by this attack on your beloved city. Every one of us stands with you. Because, after all, it’s our beloved city, too. Boston may be your hometown, but we claim it, too. It’s one of America’s iconic cities. It’s one of the world’s great cities. And one of the reasons the world knows Boston so well is that Boston opens its heart to the world.

> Over successive generations, you’ve welcomed again and again new arrivals to our shores—immigrants who constantly reinvigorated this city and this commonwealth and our nation. Every fall, you welcome students from all across America and all across the globe, and every spring you graduate them back into the world—a Boston diaspora that excels in every field of human endeavor. Year after year, you welcome the greatest talents in the arts and science, research—you welcome them to your concert halls and your hospitals and your laboratories to exchange ideas and insights that draw this world together.

A real president said that once, in the spring of 2013. A real president with whom this shebeen has had its differences, God knows, but a real president nonetheless. President Obama came in 2013 to bring to a wounded city the comfort of recalling what it has meant to the country that began on the streets and docks of the city, and in the fields and paths and rivers and town greens and churchyards of what are now its sprawling suburbs. Blowhard kings and princes, even mock ones covered in gilt, do not have a good track record picking fights in the place. Bring it.
