Title: PC -1 Proforma

URL Source: https://su.edu.pk/upload/Publications/1%20PICS%20jan%201-15,%202019_1609405317.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 31 Dec 2020 09:01:57 GMT

Markdown Content:
12

# Table of Contents: 

1: Business Recorder …………………………………………………………… ... .3

2: Dawn News…………………………………………………………………… .. 77 

3: Dunya News …………………………………………………………………… .133 

4: Express News ………………………………………………………………… ... 148 

5: Jang News ……………………………………………………………………… .173 

6: Pakistan Observer ………………………………………………………………. 190 

7: The Express Tribune…………………………………………………………… .192 

8: The Nation ……………………………………………………………………… .202 

9: The News ……………………………………………………………………… ... 264 3

# Business Recorder 

# Business Recorder, 01 -01 -19 

ASIA FX Indonesian rupiah leads gains on “progress” in US -China talks 

SINGAPORE: Most Asian currencies were set to end a bumpy year on a positive note, with the 

Indonesian rupiah leading gains on Monday as investors took heart f rom signs of progress in 

Sino -US trade talks. 

Market sentiment was buoyed after US President Donald Trump said he had a “very good call 

with his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping on Saturday and claimed “big progress” was being made 

on trade discussions. 

Re gional currencies came under pressure from multiple factors in 2018 including the Sino -US 

trade conflict, the US Federal Reserve’s hawkishness, and worries over global economic 

slowdown. 

Mizuho Bank in a note to clients said that despite valuation in emer ging market assets becoming 

increasingly attractive, investors remain cautious as some see potential risks ahead. 

The Indonesian rupiah strengthened as much as 0.8 percent on Monday but pared some gains by 

0400 GMT. 

However, the rupiah was poised to weaken over 6 percent this year, after it breached the 15,000 

per dollar mark in October, a level last seen in the Asian financial crisis two decades ago. 

The Malaysian gained 0.3 percent against the greenback, while the Singapore dollar was 

marginally fi rmer. 

Meanwhile, the Indian rupee strengthened 0.2 percent on the last trading day of the year, but 

remained the worst performing currency in the region. 

The rupee weakened this year on concerns of a widening current account deficit as rising global 

crud e oil prices increased to cost of imported fuel. Though the rupee regained some ground as 

the strength in oil prices faded, investors remain concerned ahead of a general election due by 

May, as Prime Minister NarendraModi’s market -friendly party fared poor ly in regional polls in 

earlier this month. 

The Taiwan dollar, the Korean won, the Thai baht and the Chinese yuan were not trading on 

account of holidays. —Reuters 4

# Business Recorder, 01 -01 -19 

China factory activity shrinks for first time in over 2 years 

# BEIJING: China’s factory activity contracted for the first time in over two years in December, 

highlighting the challenges facing Beijing as it seeks to end a bruising trade war with 

Washington and reduce the risk of a sharper economic slowdown in 2019. 

The increasing strain on factories signals a continued loss of momentum in China, adding to 

worries about softening global growth, especially if the Sino -US dispute drags on. 

Trade frictions are already disrupting global supply chains, fuelling concerns o f a bigger blow 

next year to world trade, investment and shaky financial markets. 

The official Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) - the first snapshot of China’s economy each 

month - fell to 49.4 in December, below the 50 -point level that separates growth f rom 

contraction, a National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) survey showed on Monday. 

It was the first contraction since July 2016 and the weakest reading since February 2016. 

Analysts had forecast it would dip to 49.9 from 50.0 the previous month. 

China is expected to roll out more economic support measures in coming months on top of a raft 

of initiatives this year. A prolonged downturn in the factory sector, key for jobs, would likely 

spark further attempts to juice domestic demand. 

In November, industrial output rose the least in nearly three years, while earnings growth at 

industrial firms fell for the first time in nearly three years. 

A PMI sub -index on overall factory output prices fell to 43.3 in December from 46.4, signaling 

earnings erosion. A gauge on overall production fell to 50.8, the lowest since February, from 

51.9. 

New orders - an indicator of future activity - continued to soften, reinforcing views that business 

conditions in China will likely get worse before they get better. 

A sub -index f or total new orders contracted for the first time in at least a year, falling to 49.7 

amid persistently weak demand at home and softening global growth. 

New export orders shrank for a seventh straight month, with the sub -index falling to 46.6 from 

47.0. 5

UNCERTAINTIES 

Many analysts doubt that Beijing and Washington can bridge their many differences and reach a 

comprehensive trade deal in the latest round of talks. 

US President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed early this month to a 90 -

day ceasefire that delayed a planned Jan. 1 US increase of tariffs on $200 billion worth of 

Chinese goods while the two sides negotiate. 

Trump said over the weekend that a possible trade deal was progressing well, but few concrete 

details have emerged. 

The trade war has resulted in billions of dollars of losses for both sides this year, hitting 

industries from autos and technology to US agriculture. 

“There are many short -term orders from overseas but few long -term orders received by Chinese 

factories as caution remains amid the trade uncertainties,” said Nie Wen, economist at Hwabao 

Trust in Shanghai. 

“The medium to long -term export prospect is not optimistic particularly.” 

Warehouses across the US are bursting with Chinese goods after retailers stocked up before fresh 

tariffs, suggesting little chance of a near -term export rebound even if a trade deal is reached. —

Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 01 -01 -19 

# China’s steel, steelmakin g ingredients prices fall 

MANILA: Prices of steel and steelmaking ingredients in China fell on Friday in lethargic 

trading, pressured by worries over the outlook for demand amid ongoing concerns about the 

global economy. 

Business confidence among entrepre neurs in China worsened in the fourth quarter compared 

with the previous one, and was at the lowest since the second quarter of 2017, according to a 

survey by the People’s Bank of China published early this week. 

The most -active steel rebar contract on th e Shanghai Futures Exchange ended the session down 

0.5 percent at 3,404 yuan ($496.70) a tonne, posting its first weekly loss after three straight 

weeks of gains. 

Hot rolled coil was down 0.2 percent at 3,345 yuan. 6

Mirroring the trend in the Shanghai met als market, prices of steelmaking raw materials such as 

coke and coking coal also dropped, posting their second consecutive weekly losses. 

“(Investors) are more fixated on recession jitters and continued weak macro numbers coming out 

of China”, said INTL FC stone commodity consultant Edward Meir. 

The most traded coke futures on the Dalian Commodity Exchange fell 0.5 percent to 1,901 yuan 

a tonne. Coking coal futures edged down 0.2 percent to 1,179.5 yuan. 

Dalian iron ore futures climbed 0.6 percent to 494.5 yuan. 

Spot iron ore for delivery to China rose 0.4 percent to $72.30 a tone on Thursday, according to 

SteelHome consultancy. 

China will ratchet up support for the economy in 2019 by cutting taxes and keeping liquidity 

ample, as growth is expected t o slow further next year, the country’s top leaders said in an 

annual econom ic meeting this month. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 01 -01 -19 

Soyabeans rise on US -China trade hopes but set for annual drop 

# PARIS/KUALA LUMPUR: Chicago Soyabean futures edged up on Monday as 

investors saw signs of thawing relations between Washington and Beijing in the trade dispute 

that has disrupted flows of the most valuable US agricultural export to China. 

Soyabeans were poised to end 2018 with an annual decline after the plunge in exports to China 

coupled with big harvests in the United States and Brazil weighed on prices. 

A resumption in Chinese imports of US Soyabeans this month as part of a negotiated truce 

between the world’s two largest economies has helped Chicago prices rebound from a decade 

low in September. 

Wheat, in contrast, is set to notch up its biggest annual rise since 2012 after a sharp fall in 

production in major exporters Russia, the European Union and Australia, making it one of the 

biggest gainers in commodi ty markets this year. 

Corn has also risen this year as tightening wheat supply fuelled additional demand from livestock 

feed makers, offsetting concerns about disruption to US shipments to China. 

In quiet trading ahead of Tuesday’s New Year holiday closu re, the most -active Soyabean 

contract on the Chicago Board Of Trade rose 0.6 percent to $9.00 -3/4 a bushel by 1111 GMT. 7

For the year, Soyabeans are set to drop 6.3 percent, marking a second straight annual decline. 

The price benchmark hit its lowest in a lmost 10 years in September at $8.12 -1/4. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 01 -01 -19 

Adding transparency to CPEC deals 

The Chinese Embassy has taken the unprecedented step to announce the exact terms and 

conditions of loans/investments under the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). This was 

no doubt partly to offset concerns from the Trump administration echoed by the Managing 

Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that consideration of a bailout package would 

require details of Pakistan’s debt pr ofile. On 13 December, Director Communications IMF 

reiterated the Fund’s position: “Clearly debt transparency is essential to conduct proper analysis 

of the sustainability of a country’s debt. That is what the IMF does when we are going into a 

programme wi th our member countries. So that will be the case in Pakistan.” 

China, through its embassy in Islamabad revealed that Pakistan will repay 6.017 billion dollar 

loans plus interest to it; and maintained that 18.9 billion dollar worth of 22 early harvest pro jects 

under the CPEC are under construction/completed focused on removing infrastructural 

impediments to Pakistan’s economic developments and these include: (i) 5.874 billion dollars 

loan with a composite interest of 2 percent with repayment scheduled in 2 0 to 25 years (with 

sovereign guarantee provided by the Pakistan government); (ii) 12.8 billion dollars in energy 

projects with 3 billion dollar equity provided by the Chinese companies, and the remaining 9.8 

billion dollars raised from commercial banks at 5 percent with a repayment schedule ranging 

from 12 to 18 years. The Pakistan government would not be responsible for repayment and it is 

the Chinese companies that would be responsible; (iii) interest -free loan is being provided for 

expressway east bay i n Gwadar; (iv) grant for livelihood projects though the amount was not 

mentioned; and (v) Pakistan provided funding for feasibility study of ML -1 up gradation. 

Economic Affairs Division provided data of CPEC projects the same day (it however differs, 

albei t marginally, from the data provided by the Chinese Embassy) with total to be repaid 

estimated at 7.457 billion dollars (including principal of 6.035 billion dollars and interest of 

1.422 billion dollars) with an annual repayment of 350 million dollars. EA D further stated that 

out of the 6 billion dollar concessional loans, 4 billion dollars has been received so far. These 

discrepancies, however small, need to be ironed out. 

The question is whether this information would satisfy the IMF as well as prospect ive local 

investors. First off, Chinese companies, unlike their Western counterparts, are not independent of 

the Chinese government hence the claim of their independence could be raised by the IMF. 

Secondly, the Fund/local investors would require details of associated agreements, including the 

tariff to be imposed once these projects are completed, the taxes to be levied on the Chinese 8

companies as well as whether Chinese or Pakistani labor is being employed during the 

construction of these projects. 

Thir dly, according to a Business Recorder exclusive, Pakistan borrowed short -term loans of 

around 13 billion dollars from China during the five -year tenure of the PML -N, at a very high 

rate of interest and a very short amortization period. Reports indicate tha t China has not agreed 

to extend any budget support/balance of payment support to Pakistan, in spite of requests by the 

present government, and given the ongoing foreign exchange reserve crisis, it is a foregone 

conclusion that the government would also in cur short -term loans from China. The Fund would 

no doubt request the government for details of such loans. 

To conclude, while China is perhaps the only country able and willing to undertake large 

infrastructure projects in Pakistan, which makes Chinese in flows at present highly desirable, yet 

the nature of this partnership needs to be further strengthened or else Pakistan’s massive external 

financing requirements at present would compel it to procure lending elsewhere, including the 

IMF and the West, who m ay employ their enhanced l everage to undermine the CPEC. 

# Business Recorder, 02 -01 -19 

Jimmy Carter says US, China should partner in Africa 

WASHINGTON: Former US president Jimmy Carter warned Monday of the risks of sliding into 

a Cold War with China and cal led on the powers to find common cause on African 

development. 

Marking the 40th anniversary of his January 1979 normalization of relations with Chinese leader 

Deng Xiaoping, Carter voiced concern that both countries were increasingly describing each 

other as threats. 

“If top government officials embrace these dangerous notions, a modern Cold War between our 

two nations is not inconceivable,” the 94 -year -old former president wrote in The Washington 

Post. 

“At this sensitive moment, misperceptions, miscalculations and failure to follow carefully 

defined rules of engagement in areas such as the Taiwan Strait and South China Sea could 

escalate into military conflict, creating a worldwide catastrophe,” he warned. 

Carter, who has devoted his post -presid ential career to eradicating poverty, said that the “easiest 

route” to cooperation between the United States and China was in Africa. 

“Both countries are already heavily involved there in fighting disease, building infrastructure and 

keeping peace - somet imes cooperatively. Yet each nation has accused the other of economic 

exploitation or political manipulation,” Carter wrote. 9

“Africans — like billions of other people around the world — do not want to be forced to choose 

a side.” 

“By working together wit h Africans, the United States and China would also be helping 

themselves overcome distrust and rebuild this vital relationship,” he wrote. 

The United States has stepped up warnings to developing countries about Chinese assistance, 

accusing Beijing of wooi ng countries with projects that become debt traps. 

US -China tensions have soared in 2018 over trade disputes, although President Donald Trump 

has frozen the latest planned tariff hike and on Saturda y reported “big progress.” —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 03 -01 -19 

‘China, China, China’: New Pentagon chief sets priority 

WASHINGTON: Patrick Shanahan, the acting US defense secretary, started his first full day at 

the Pentagon’s helm Wednesday by telling colleagues he sees China as a key priority. 

Shanahan, who took the top spot January 1 after Jim Mattis resigned amid disagreements with 

President Donald Trump, told key Defense Department staff to focus on the National Defense 

Strategy, a broad review that highlights a new era of “Great Power competition” with Russia and 

China. 

“While we are focused on ongoing operations, Acting Secretary Shanahan told the team to 

remember China, China, China,” a defense official said. 

The US accuses Beijing of an ongoing pattern of military and economic espionage, and has 

criticize d China’s ambitious “Belt and Road” trade and infrastructure initiative as being a form 

of economic coercion. 

“In 2019, the National Defense Strategy remains our guide. America’s military strength remains 

our focus,” Shanahan said in a New Year’s message on Twitter. 

The defense official said Shanahan would later Wednesday attend a cabinet meeting with Trump, 

the president’s first of 2019. Little known outside business and Washington circles, Shanahan 

takes the world stage at a time of tumultuous changes a nd unpredictable foreign policy moves 

under Trump. 

Shanahan did not serve in the military but has worked since July 2017 as the deputy defense 

secretary. Before that, he spent more than 30 years at Boeing. Among the most immediate issues 

on his plate will be the pace at which the US pulls 2,200 or so troops out of Syria, following 

Trump’s decision last month to exit the war -torn country. 10 

According to US officials, Trump is also mulling a 50 percent draw down in Afghanistan —

another momentous move that has left lawmakers and international allies fearing for what comes 

next. 

Shanahan announced that Pentagon comptroller David Norquist will perform the duties of deputy 

secretary of defense, the official said. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 04 -01 -19 

Eyeing China, US to hold missile drill in Japan’s Okinawa 

TOKYO: The US military will this year conduct its first ever missile drill around the Japanese 

island of Okinawa, according to a report Thursday, as Washington seeks to counter an 

increasingly assertive China. 

The US military has told its Japanese counterpart it plans to deploy surface -to -ship missiles in 

the strategically important Okinawa this year for the first such drill by Japan’s key ally, the 

Sankei Shimbun reported, without citing sources. 

The drill would inv olve a mobile rocket launcher seen as a counter -measure to potential attacks 

from Chinese surface -to -sea ballistic missiles, the paper said. 

In recent years, Chinese warships have frequently sailed through waters near Okinawa, where the 

majority of US tro ops in Japan are based. 

Experts say China’s increasingly active maritime activities are part of a plan to establish control 

of waters within the so -called “first island chain” that links Okinawa, Taiwan and the 

Philippines. 

Some analysts believe Beijing seeks to end US military dominance in the western Pacific by 

exerting control of the second island chain that links Japan’s southern Ogasawara island chain, 

the US territory of Guam, and Indonesia. 

China’s rapid military build -up has unnerved Asian neighb ors, with Japan’s defense chief last 

year saying China had been “unilaterally escalating” its military activities in the previous year. 

Beijing insists the activities are for self -defense. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 04 -01 -19 

China stocks falter as economic concerns take over 

SHANGHAI: Chinese stocks edged lower on Thursday as expectations of policy support failed 

to offset persisting worries over economic growth. 11 

The Shanghai Composite index ended nearly flat at 2,464.36, while the blue -chip CSI300 index 

fell 0.2 percent. 

The People’s Bank of China said on Wednesday evening it had relaxed its conditions on targeted 

reserve requirement cuts to benefit more small firms. The move came after China reported its 

first factory activity contraction in over two yea rs in December. 

But “that policy alone is not enough to give the market an obvious boost,” said Cao Xuefeng, 

head of research at Huaxi Securities in Chengdu. Cao noted that the market will react more 

positively to further details on tax cuts, which will c ome at some point this year, China’s leaders 

said last month. “Some in the market have said that there might be as much as 5 trillion yuan of 

tax cuts over the next five years,” he said. 

Most of CSI300’s sub -indexes were down. The IT sector lost 1.3 percent, telecom shares slid 2.8 

percent, while consumer staples dropped 1.8 percent and healthcare shed 2.8 percent. Financials 

bucked the trend and climbed 1.1 percent. 

The smaller Shenzhen index was down 0.8 percent and the start -up board ChiNext Comp osite 

index fell 1.2 percent. Apple Inc made a rare cut to its quarterly sales forecast on Wednesday, 

and, for the first time since the iPhone was launched in 2007, issued a warning on its revenue 

guidance ahead of releasing quarterly results. 

Shares of A pple suppliers across the Mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan markets came 

under pressure. 

Although “there is some impact in Apple concept stocks, most people care more about macro 

data,” said Zhang Gang, a Shanghai -based analyst at Central Securities. 

While most sectors eased, securities companies, which typically rise when share prices are 

expected to jump, rose 2.2 percent. This could foreshadow a rebound in A -shares in the coming 

months. “If the market warms up this year, these brokerages will benefi t first,” Zhang added. 

Jim McCafferty, head of equity research, Asia ex -Japan at Nomura, also noted that this year may 

be less gloomy than the last. “The Chinese market, having delivered a dismal 2018, is one of the 

least expensive markets globally,” he s aid. But pressure remains on Chinese stocks in the near 

term, as listed companies, which were hit by the double whammy of Sino -US trade war and 

softer economic growth at home, begin to report their 2018 earnings, Cao noted. 

The largest percentage losers in the Shanghai index were TonghuaDongbao Pharmaceutical Co 

Ltd, Shanghai U9 Game Co Ltd and Kangmei Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, all down 10 percent. 12 

The largest percentage gainers in the main Shanghai Composite index were Pengqi Technology 

Development Co Ltd and Guodian Nanjing Automation Co Ltd, both up 10.1 percent, Qingdao 

Huijintong Power Eouipment Co Ltd, up 10 percent. 

About 12.4 billion shares traded on the Shanghai exchange, roughly 90.5 percent of the market’s 

30 -day moving average of 13.75 billion s hares. The volume traded was 10.99 billion as of the 

last full trading day. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 04 -01 -19 

China’s population shrinks despite two -child policy 

China’s population shrank last year for the first time in 70 years, experts said, warning o f a 

“demographic crisis” that puts pressure on the country’s slowing economy. 

The world’s most populous nation of some 1.4 billion for decades limited most families to one 

child in an attempt to keep population growth sustainable. 

But since 2016 it has a llowed couples to have two children in response to concerns about an 

ageing society and shrinking workforce. 

The number of live births nationwide in 2018 fell by 2.5 million year -on -year, contrary to a 

predicted increase of 790,000 births, according to an alysis by US -based academic Yi Fuxian. 

Yi, a researcher at the University of Wisconsin -Madison, is a long -term critic of the one -child 

policy and his work has previously gained traction among the country’s leadership. 

Enforced through fines but notorious for cases of forced abortions and sterilization, the one -child 

policy caused birth rates to plummet after it was introduced in 1979. 

However childbirths have not increased as much as forecast since the two -child policy came into 

force and there has been rising speculation the government will further ease restrictions. 

Last year marked a “historic turning point for the Chinese population”, said Yi, who studied 

publicly available data on births in towns and villages across China. 

This downward trend may b e irreversible, he cautioned, due to factors such as a decrease in the 

number of women of childbearing age and the reluctance of couples to have children due to 

rising education, health and housing costs. 

Yi’s calculations show that the number of deaths i n 2018 was about 11.58 million and the total 

population shrank by 1.27 million. 13 

“The Chinese population has started to decrease for the first time since the founding of New 

China in 1949, the ageing problem has accelerated, and economic vitality has weakened,” he told 

AFP. 

Yi’s findings, due to appear in an upcoming research paper co -authored with Peking University 

economist Su Jian, were pieced together from National Health Commission figures. 

The experts also used other official statistics includi ng school enrolment figures, household 

registration data and government censuses to reach their conclusions. 

China’s National Bureau of Statistics is expected to release official nationwide birth figures for 

2018 later this month. 

In the meantime, data released by some local authorities indicate a significant drop in births last 

year. 

In Qingdao, a city in eastern Shandong province — one of China’s most populous regions —

births between January and November decreased by 21 percent to just over 81,000 co mpared to 

the previous year. 

RenZeping, chief economist at property developer Evergrande Group, wrote in a research note 

that China is walking into a “demographic crisis” as the easing of the one -child policy has failed 

to boost the country’s fertility ra te. 

Tracking China’s demographic changes is difficult as the figures published by the health 

commission and statistics bureau do not always match, said He Yafu, an independent 

demographer based in southern Guangdong province. 

But he said Yi’s estimate of the drop in children born in 2018 is likely to be correct. 

The number of women of childbearing age is expected to fall by more than 39 percent over the 

next decade and China’s two -child policy isn’t enough to shore up dwindling birth rates, He 

added. 

Yi said he was skeptical of the National Bureau of Statistics figures, accusing the organization of 

“inflating the number of births” to account for families who may not have registered their 

second, third or fourth child. 

Local authorities seeking more fund s from the central government have also “over -reported” 

school enrolment figures and hospital live births, he said. 

Yi added that the statistics bureau may have also under -reported the number of deaths. 14 

In 2016, Yi was invited to speak at the Boao Forum in southwest China, an annual gathering of 

influential figures including politicians and businesspeople — the same year Beijing announced 

an end to its one -child rule. 

He is now urging the government to get out of people’s bedrooms by scrapping the two -ch ild 

limit and offering more incentives including generous maternity leave and tax breaks for 

parents. 

If the government doesn’t intervene now, “China’s ageing crisis will be more severe than Japan, 

and the economic outlook will be bleaker than Japan”, Yi said. 

China’s labor force is becoming smaller as the population greys, putting intense strain on the 

country’s fragile pension and healthcare systems. 

For each elderly citizen, there are seven people who are working and contributing to the social 

welfare system, Yi said — a figure set to shrink to just four by 2030. 

“The US economy will not be overtaken by China, but by India, which has a younger 

population,” he said. “China’s economic vitality will continue to decline, which will bring about 

a disastrous impact on the global economy.” -AFP 

# Business Recorder, 05 -01 -19 

China stocks rebound 

SHANGHAI: China stocks bounced back from a more than four -year low on Friday, closing the 

week higher, as the government said it would cut banks’ reserve requirement ratios and as 

optimism about trade talks with the United States helped sooth investor nerves. 

The blue -chip CSI300 index rose 2.4 percent to 3,035.87, while the Shanghai Composite Index 

closed up 2.0 percent at 2,514.87. 

The benchmark Shanghai index brie fly touched a more than four -year low just as the market 

opened. 

For the week, CSI300 and SSEC were up 0.8 percent each, both snapping three consecutive 

weekly falls. 

China will cut banks’ reserve requirement ratios (RRRs), taxes and fees, Premier Li Keq iang said 

on Friday, as the world’s second -largest economy shows further signs of cooling. 15 

China and the United States will hold vice -ministerial level trade talks in Beijing on Jan. 7 -8, as 

the two sides look to end a dispute that is inflicting increasin g pain on both economies and 

roiling global financial markets. 

China’s services sector extended its solid expansion in December, offering some cushion for the 

slowing economy, a private survey showed on Friday. 

“We are strategically optimistic, as the A -shares market is in the midst of the final stage of the 

fifth round of bullish -bearish cycle, with the valuation(s) already touching bottom,” Haitong 

Securities wrote in note. 

In comparison with other global stock markets, the A -shares market has greater appeal, and as 

China has been developing equity financing to support industrial upgrading, residential asset 

allocation will be more focused on the stock market, the brokerage added. 

On the mainland, sectors ral lied strongly across the board by financial firms, in particular 

brokerage firms , which are expected to benefit from a market rebound. 

An index tracking major brokerage firms soared 6.6 percent, while the CSI China mainland 

banks index climbed 2 percent. 

The largest percentage gainers in the main Shanghai Composite index were Pengqi Technology 

Development Co Ltd, up 10.11 percent, followed by Pengqi Technology Development Co Ltd, 

gaining 10.11 percent, and Southwest Securities Co Ltd, up by 10.11 percent. 

The largest percentage losers in the Shang hai index were Nanjing Panda Electronics Co Ltd, 

down 8.82 percent, followed by Ningbo Joyson Electronic Corp, losing 6.89 percent, and 

GuangDong Super Telecom Co Ltd, down by 4.94 percent. 

As of 07:03 GMT, China’s A -shares were trading at a premium of 19 .87 percent over the Hong 

Kong -listed H -shares. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 05 -01 -19 

13 Canadians held in China since arrest of Huawei executive 

OTTAWA: Thirteen Canadians have been detained in China following the arrest on December 1 

of a senior executive from Chinese telecoms equipment giant Huawei, Ottawa said Thursday, 

with eight subsequently released. 

Global Affairs Canada spokesperson Guillaume Berube confirmed the detentions to AFP, adding 

the figures excluded Hong Kong. 16 

The thirteen include former diplomat Michael Kovrig and consultant Michael Spavor, arrested 

on December 10, for activities said to threaten national security, as well as Sarah McIver, who 

was subsequently freed and returned to Canada. 

China “safeguards the security and legitimate rig hts and interests of foreign citizens” in the 

country, said spokesman for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs Lu Kang on Friday at a regular 

press briefing, adding that he didn’t have information on the specific cases. 

There are approximately 200 Canadian s overall who have been detained in China for a variety of 

alleged infractions and continue to face ongoing legal proceedings, and the number has remained 

relatively stable in recent years. By way of comparison, there are almost 900 Canadians in a 

similar situation in the US. 

Some observers believe the detentions of Kovrig, who works for the International Crisis Group, 

and Spavor, who is frequently consulted on matters linked to North Korea, were retaliatory 

actions following the arrest in Vancouver of Hua wei’s Chief Financial Officer MengWanzhou, 

who faces extradition to the United States. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 05 -01 -19 

US warns citizens of arbitrary action in China 

WASHINGTON: The United States warned its citizens Thursday they could face arbitrary action 

by authorities when they visit China, following the detention of a number of Canadians. 

Updating a travel advisory, the State Department maintained its previous guidance that 

Americans should “exercise increased caution” in China but stopped short o f discouraging 

visits. 

Whi le the language was same as earlier, the State Department warned “arbitrary enforcement of 

local laws,” sudden prohibitions on exiting the country and harassment of US citizens of Chinese 

heritage. 

“In most cases, US citizens onl y become aware of the exit ban when they attempt to depart 

China, and there is no method to find out how long the ban may continue,” it said. 

“US citizens under exit bans have been harassed and threatened,” it said. 

It also advised Americans to look out for last -minute security checks and curfews in Xinjiang 

and Tibet, two minority -dominated regions where Beijing has sought to impose strict control. 17 

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, asked about the updated advisory in a televised interview, said 

the State Department wanted Americans to “understand the risk but still travel there when it’s 

appropriate.” 

“We wanted to let them know that there have been more risks from what China has done in terms 

of folks traveling there and not being permitted to return,” P ompeo told Fox News host Sean 

Hannity. 

China has detained 13 Canadians since early December when a senior executive of Chinese 

telecom giant Huawei was arrested in Vancouver on a US request for alleged violations of 

Washington’s sanctions on Iran, according to Ottawa. 

Two of the arrests — of former diplomat Michael Kovrig and consultant Michael Spavor —

were widely viewed as retaliation for the arrest of Huawei chief financial officer MengWanzhou, 

who is facing extradition to the United States. 

Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang hit back at a regular press briefing in Beijing 

Friday. “The travel warning issued by the US, frankly speaking, does not stand,” he said. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 05 -01 -19 

China will launch options for rubber, cott on and corn 

BEIJING: China will launch options for rubber, cotton and corn on Jan. 28, the country’s 

securities regulator said at a press briefing on Friday, adding to the tools available to hedge on 

price risks in the world’s largest agriculture market. 

The regulator approved the launch of corn and cotton options in June last year. 

It now has also approved trading of rubber option contracts, according to Gao Li, spokeswoman 

for China Securities Regulatory Commission. “Prices of natural rubber, cotton and corn have 

been quite volatile in recent years. Launching these options contracts can help enterprises 

manage risks effectively,” the regulator said in a statement published on its website. 

China is the world’s top consumer of rubber and cotton, and its second -largest consumer of corn. 

In 2017, China launched soymeal and sugar options, its first such commodity derivatives. 

Options give a holder the right to buy or sell a commodity at a particular strike price and are 

widely used in Europe and the United States by investors across commodities markets. Users 

range from commercial hedgers such as farmers and oil drillers to institutional and speculative 

investors. —Reuters 18 

# Business Recorder, 05 -01 -19 

China could put reforms on hold to boost economy 

President Xi Jinpinghailed China’s “reconstructive reforms” in a New Year speech, but the 

sorely needed changes could be put on ice in favor of averting a potentially devastating 

economic downturn. 

The way ahead is further complicated by a volatile trade dispute with the United States that — if 

unresolved — will add to the burden of Beijing’s policymakers as they seek to fuel an economy 

that is running out of steam. 

Beijing has for years come under pressure to introduce much -needed reforms to the country’ s

infrastructure and lumbering state -owned enterprises as part of a drive to tackle a burdensome 

debt mountain and transform its growth engine from investment and exports to domestic 

consumption. 

ut Gene Fang from ratings agency Moody’s told AFP: “When tr ade -offs between reforms and 

growth arise, we expect that the priority will more often be given to supporting growth.” 

Ten years ago, China unleashed the full power of its financial arsenal by introducing massive 

stimulus measures, which helped Beijing av ert the worst of the financial crisis engulfing the rest 

of the world. 

However, that helped sow the seeds of today’s economic troubles, with debt at alarming levels 

and necessary economic reforms not addressed as leaders focused on maintaining stable grow th 

and employment. 

Now, with the global economy stuttering, a slowdown in key export markets is denting a crucial 

source of income while the country is also struggling with a plethora of structural problems such 

as an ageing — and now shrinking — populati on, a dwindling pool of rural workers, 

overcapacity and air pollution. 

And then there is the trade war with the United States, which has magnified the problems while 

sending shudders through global markets. 

“The Chinese economy is struggling, the debt me ss is unresolved and the impact from the US 

tariffs has barely begun,” said Bill Bishop, an expert on China, who added the Communist Party 

will do “everything it can to juice the economy” with “multiple forms of stimuli”. 

“Whether or not significant econom ic reforms will now also be forthcoming, and not just more 

promises, is the trillion -dollar question,” he said. 19 

Xi and US President Donald Trump may have agreed a temporary truce in their multi -billion -

dollar stand -off — and Beijing Friday announced face -to-face talks will begin next week — but 

there is little optimism the row will be brought to an end any time soon. 

In the absence of a breakthrough in current negotiations, “the US -China trade conflict will weigh 

on growth in China and on the wider Asia -Pac ific region, via a slowdown in Chinese demand”, 

according to analysts Oxford Economics. 

The impact of the trade row came in to full view this week when Apple announced a shock cut in 

its revenue forecast for the December quarter blaming the steeper -than -ex pected “economic 

deceleration” in China and emerging markets and citing the China -US frictions. 

While analysts still believe China — which last month celebrated 40 years since opening up to 

the world — should still achieve its growth target of 6.5 percent for 2018 that would be the 

weakest rate in almost three decades. That after an average growth ra te of 9.7 percent a year 

between 1978 and 2015. 

Raymond Deng, an analyst at Singapore -based DBS Bank, said the government must raise 

domestic consumption and inject “sufficient” cash into the market, while “eliminating state -

owned enterprises with backwar d production capacity”. But with a debt crisis brewing, 

authorities have decided against 2008 -like stimulus, instead opting for a series of separate 

measures including making it easier for banks to lend and much -hyped tax cuts. 

Some sectors saw a one perc ent drop in VAT and taxpayers will in 2019 benefit from deductions 

in education, critical healthcare and mortgage repayments, while the rate at which tax kicks in 

has also been raised. 

“If the tax reduction plan is implemented well, it cannot only boost c orporate profits and 

household consumption in the short term, but also improve the economic structure in the long 

run,” said Zhu Chaoping, a strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management. 

Meanwhile, Beijing University economics professor Su Jian believes suppor t for consumption 

requires a rise and a “better distribution” of household income, as well as increased health, 

education and social support to steer people away from precautionary saving. 

He also points out that China’s GDP per capita is about one -eighth of that of the United States. 

“The development margin is still large... the GDP can still grow seven percent for 20 years,” he 

said. However, for many economists wealth generation could continue to weaken. Zhu expected 

“a GDP increase of around five percent across the next 10 to 15 years”, while Capital Economics 

expected the growth rate to even decline to two percent by 2030. -AFP 20 

# Business Recorder, 06 -01 -19 

PQ coal -fired plant: Chinese firm pays $167m taxes and duties 

BEIJING: Chinese company, Pow er China alone has paid $167 million to Pakistan in term of 

taxes and duties, since the operationaliz ation of Port Qasim coal -fired power plant. 

There are other companies as well in Pakistan which contribute to national exchequer, paying 

their due role in strengthening of the country's financial network. 

According to the Chinese media group, the China Economic net, there are other areas where the 

roles of Chinese companies are highly commendable in the context of Pakistan's overall socio -

economic developm ent. 

According to the report of China Economic Net, till present, Port Qasim coal -fired power plant 

has paid more than 167 million US dollars of different kinds of taxes and duties to the federal 

and provincial governments of Pakistan. 

Furthermore, POWER CHINA creates over 4,000 employment opportunities for the local people 

in the peak period of construction. 

More than 600 long -term stable employment opportunities have been provided after entry of 

commercial operation. Also, the project indirectly increa ses local jobs by over ten (10) thousand 

in relevant fields such as materials supply, equipment transportation, legal advice, financial audit 

etc. 

According to the report, in the future, the average annual energy output is around nine(9) billion 

kWh, whic h is expected to support 4 million local families' and more than 20 million peoples' 

daily power consumption and effectively improve the local power shortage situation and provide 

continuous power for Pakistan's economic development. 

The cumulative energy output of Port Qasim coal -fired power plant is up to 7.559 billion kWh 

with its aggregate grid output of 7.1 billion kWh. 

According to the China Economic Net, the power generation capacity of Port Qasim power plant 

is equivalent to 10% of the current nat ional power generation capacity in Pakistan, which has 

played an important role in promoting the structural adjustment and economic development of 

Pakistan's power industry. —INP 21 

# Business Recorder, 06 -01 -19 

China’s Chongqing to step up support for real e conomy 

SHANGHAI: The sprawling southwestern Chinese city of Chongqing has introduced more 

measures to bolster the real economy amid growing pressure from Beijing to step up support for 

the country’s private sector as economic growth slows. 

The city has announced 18 policy measures to further enhance the healthy development of 

enterprises in the real economy, and will provide more fiscal and financial support, lower 

corporate costs and make it easier for firms to do business, the official Chongqing Daily reported 

on Saturday. 

Chongqing will set up a relief fund of at least 10 billion yuan ($1.46 billion) to help private firms 

suffering from temporary liquidity problems, the newspaper added. 

Other provinces and regions have also sought to provide more support for the private sector, with 

the world’s second -largest economy losing momentum aggravated by an ongoing trade dispute 

with the United States. 

The northeast rustbelt province of Liaoning also introduced 16 measures to help revitalize 

private firms , and pledged to implement tax cuts, the official Xinhua news agency reported on 

Saturday. 

China’s factory activity contracted for the first time in more than two years in December, 

highlighting the challenges facing Beijing as it seeks to end tit -for -tat trade tariffs with 

Washington and reduce the risk of a sharper economic slowdown. 

In efforts to boost liquidity in the economy, China’s central bank said on Friday it was cutting 

the amount of cash that banks have to hold as reserves for th e fifth time i n a year. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 06 -01 -19 

China’s population set to peak at 1.44bn in 2029 

SHANGHAI China’s population is set to reach a peak of 1.442 billion in 2029 and start a long 

period of “unstoppable” decline in 2030, government scholars said in a research report published 

on Friday. 

The world’s most populous country must now draw up policies to try to cope with a declining 

laborforce and a rapidly ageing population, according to the summary of the latest edition of the 

“Green Book of Population and Labor” published by the China Academy of Social Sciences 

(CASS). 22 

Growth in the working population had now stagnated, the report said, and the rising number of 

elderly people will have a far -reaching impact on the social and economic development in th e

country, especially if fertility rates remain low. 

“From a theoretical point of view, the long -term population decline, especially when it is 

accompanied by a continuously ageing population, is bound to cause very unfavorable social and 

economic consequ ences,” it said. 

China’s population is expected to fall back to 1.36 billion by the middle of the century, it said, 

which could mean a decline in the workforce of as much as 200 million. If fertility rates remain 

unchanged, the population could fall to 1. 17 billion by 2065, it said. China decided in 2016 to 

relax a controversial “one -child policy” aimed at curbing population growth and allow all 

couples to have two children. However, the country’s birth rate still fell 3.5 percent in 2017 and 

is expected t o have fallen again last year. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 06 -01 -19 

China slashes banks’ reserve requirements again as growth slows 

BEIJING: China’s central bank said on Friday it was cutting the amount of cash that banks have 

to hold as reserves for the f ifth time in a year, freeing up $116 billion for new lending as it tries 

to reduce the risk of a sharp economic slowdown. 

The cut comes amid mounting worries about the health of the world’s second -largest economy, 

which is facing both slowing demand at ho me and punishing US tariffs on its exports. 

Global stock markets sold off on Thursday after a warning from tech giant Apple Inc about 

slowing China sales, while data this week showed manufacturing activity shrank in December 

for the first time in more tha n two years. 

The announcement came just hours after Premier Li Keqiang said China would take further 

action to bolster the economy, including reserve requirement ratio (RRR) cuts and more cuts in 

taxes and fees, highlighting the urgency to cope with incre asing headwinds. 

“This speedy RRR cut with great intensity fully demonstrates the determination of policymakers 

to stabilize growth,” said Yang Hao, an analyst at Nanjing Securities. 

“At present, the economy is facing very big downward pressure amid inte rnal and external 

troubles.” 

The cut in RRR is the first in 2019 by the People’s Bank of China (PBOC). It cut the ratio for all 

banks, freeing up a net 800 billion yuan ($116.51 billion) after lenders use some of the 1.5 

trillion yuan in liquidity release d to pay back maturing medium -term loans. 23 

The size of the cut was at the upper end of market expectations, and the net funds released would 

be the largest amount in the five cuts since last January. 

“Policy easing will be stepped up further over coming m onths,” Capital Economics said in a 

research note. 

“With credit growth still slowing and, typically, a six -month lag before any turnaround in credit 

affects the economy, worries about the outlook for China will persist for several months yet.” 

RRRs - currently 14.5 percent for large institutions and 12.5 percent for smaller banks - will be 

lowered by a total of 100 basis points in two stages, the PBOC said. 

The cuts will be effective Jan. 15 and Jan. 25, ahead of the long Lunar New Year celebrations 

when cash conditions often get tight. 

Further cuts in the RRR had been widely expected this year, especially after a spate of weak data 

in recent months showed the economy was continuing to lose steam amid increased signs of a 

pinch from the trade war with the United States. 

China reported on Monday that factory activity shrank in December for the first time in over two 

years. 

China and the United States will hold vice -ministerial level trade talks in Beijing on Jan. 7 -8, as 

they seek to end a dispute tha t is inflicting increasing pain on both economies and roiling global 

financial markets. 

But the central bank said growth was still within a reasonable range and it would continue to 

implement a prudent monetary policy, without engaging in massive stimulus .

We will maintain reasonable and sufficient liquidity, maintain reasonable growth in the scale of 

money and credit and social financing, stabilize macro -leverage and seek internal and external 

balances,” it said. 

Analysts say Beijing will have to keep u p a steady stream of stimulus to engineer a sustainable 

economic turnaround. But they note policy transmission difficulties faced by the central bank to 

boost credit for private and small firms - which are vital for economic growth and jobs. 

Cutting bench mark interest rates may be a last resort as that could weigh on the yuan and fuel 

debt risks, analysts say. 

The central bank said on Friday, after a work meeting, that it would keep liquidity reasonably 

ample, and market interest rates steady. 24 

Economists believe the government could take more fiscal steps by cutting taxes and boosting 

spending on infrastructure, amid expectations that the budget deficit ratio could be lifted to 3 

percent in 2019 from 2.6 percent last year. Still, economic growth is though t to have cooled to 

around 6.5 percent last year - which would be the weakest since 1990 - in line with the target but 

down from 6.9 percent in 2017. 

A further deceleration is seen this year, with some analysts forecasting growth will cool to just 

over 6 percent. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 07 -01 -19 

# In space, the US sees a rival in China 

WASHINGTON: During the Cold War, US eyes were riveted on the Soviet Union’s rockets and 

satellites. But in recent years, it has been China’s space programs that have most worried US 

strategists. 

China, whose space effort is run by the People’s Liberation Army, today launches more rockets 

into space than any other country — 39 last year, compared to 31 by the United States, 20 by 

Russia and eight by Europe. 

On Thursday it landed a space rover on the dark side of the Moon — a first by any country —

and plans to build an orbiting space station in the coming decade. In the decade after that, it 

hopes to put a Chinese “taikonaut” on the Moon to make the first moonwalk since 197 2. China 

now spends more on its civil and military space programs than do Russia and Japan. Although 

opaque, its 2017 budget was estimated at $8.4 billion by the Organization for Economic 

Cooperation and Development. 

That’s far less than the $48 billion t he United States spends on its military and civilian space 

programs, says analyst Phil Smith of consulting firm Bryce Space and Technology. But it is 

more than double Russia’s civilian space budget, which has been slashed to $3 billion. 

Overcoming a lag o f several decades, China’s leaders have very methodically replicated the 

stages of space development achieved by other great nations: a first satellite in 1970, its first 

manned space mission in 2003, the first docking of a manned spacecraft to an orbiting module in 

2012, and activation of the BeiDou satellite navigation system, China’s answer to GPS. 

“If they continue on this trajectory, they’re going to quickly eclipse Russia in terms of their 

space technology capabilities,” said Todd Harrison, an expert on military space programs at the 

Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. 

China currently poses no threat to the commercial satellite launch market, which remains 

dominated by companies including US -based SpaceX and Europe’s Arianes pace, and Russia. 25 

Nor has China’s progress in space exploration eclipsed that of the US. NASA’s head 

congratulated China on its Chang’e -4 Moon landing but a 2011 US law bars space cooperation 

with Beijing, although Congress could lift that restriction. 

The real rivalry is in two areas: in the short term, military uses of space; and long -term, the 

exploitation of resources in space. The mining of minerals or water on the Moon or on asteroids, 

notably to produce fuel for rockets, is still a long way off, bu t American start -ups are already 

working on it. 

Unlike the Cold War, the new conquest of space is unfolding largely in a legal vacuum. 

In the 1960s and ‘70s, Washington and Moscow negotiated several treaties on space, principally 

to guarantee scientific cooperation and to ban weapons of mass destruction in space. 

“The treaties are too vague to be really certain what the legal result is for something like space 

mining,” said Frans von der Dunk, a professor of space law at the University of Nebraska -

Lincol n. 

Moreover, they have been overtaken by new military technologies: anti -satellite lasers, cyber 

attacks, electronic jamming, and land -based anti -satellite missiles — like the one China tested in 

2007. 

Laws of war govern conflicts on Earth, but there is no equivalent for space. And unanswered 

questions abound. 

If one satellite collides with another in space, does that constitute an “attack”? What would be a 

proportional response? Civilian satellites should be protected from reprisals but what about 

satel lites with dual civilian and military uses? How does a nation respond to a cyber attack of 

uncertain origin? “It’s very hard to distinguish between weapons and non -weapons in space,” 

said Jack Beard, a professor in the University of Nebraska’s space law pr ogram. 

“It’s unfortunately hard to envision any major armed conflict on Earth not extending into space,” 

he added. “The Chinese have been preparing for whatever eventuality may be in the future, and... 

they have been experimenting with systems to interfere with our communications, our 

transmissions from satellites to drones.” 

Harrison concurs: “The United States has not been keeping pace with the threats against our 

space systems,” and that has left the US vulnerable. Meanwhile, US dialogue with B eijing is 

virtually nil, in contrast with Washington’s exchanges with Moscow during the Cold War. 

“If there’s a crisis in space involving China, it’s not clear our military knows who to call,” said 

Harrison. 

But other observers take a more skeptical view of portraying China as an aggressive adversary of 

the United States. —AFP 26 

# Business Recorder, 07 -01 -19 

Qatar Airways acquires 5pc of China Southern Airlines 

> DUBAI/BEIJING

: Qatar Airways has acquired a 5 percent stake in China Southern Airlines, the 

state -owned Gulf carrier said on Wednesday, in a move to gain access to the fast -growing 

mainland Chinese market. 

Qatar Airways also owns a 20 percent stake in British Airways -parent International Consolidated 

Airlines Group, 10 percent of South America’s LATAM Airlines Group SA, 49 percent of Italy’s 

Meridian and 9.99 percent stake in Hong Kong’s Cathay Pacific. 

Qatar’s flagship airline has sought new partners and routes after it was blocked last year from 

flying to the lucrative markets of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates because of 

restrictions imposed by those countries. 

Saudi Arabia, UAE, Bahrain and Egypt, imposed a political and economic boycott on Qatar 

since June 2017, accusing it of supporting terrorism, which Doha denies. 

China Southe rn in a separate statement said Qatar Airways may consider increasing its stake in 

the airline in the next 12 months. Qatar had no previous investment in the Chinese airline. 

Qatar Airways is the second foreign carrier that has a stake in China Southern, a fter American 

Airlines. The Chinese carrier left the Skyteam airline alliance at the start of the year. 

There are opportunities for “us to work together and build a long term relationship in ways that 

would bring benefits to customers of both airlines,” s aid Qatar Airways’ Chief Executive Akbar 

al -Baker. 

Ajith K, director of Asia transport at UOB Kay Hian, said given that China Southern is the 

biggest competitor of Cathay Pacific in Greater China, this deal could strengthen the China 

Southern’s position a t the Hong -Kong carrier’s expense. 

“Why Qatar is doing, seems to me, one of course is to gain access to the Chinese market. 

Secondly it’s probably that they are hedging against their bet given they own almost 10 perc ent 

in Cathay Pacific. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 07 -01 -19 

China tobacco monopoly’s global unit plans HK IPO 

HONG KONG: The international wing of the world’s largest cigarette maker — a Chinese state -

owned tobacco monopoly — plans to list on the Hong Kong stocks exchange, filing documents 

showe d on Wednesday. 27 

The unit seeking listing only accounts for a fraction of China National Tobacco Corporation, a 

hugely profitable state -run behemoth that has a monopoly on tobacco inside the world’s most 

populous nation where smoking remains stubbornly popu lar. 

China National Tobacco buys leaf from overseas markets like Brazil and the United States and 

then sells it to domestic cigarette manufacturers at a six percent mark -up. 

It also has a monopoly on all tobacco exports from China, a fairly limited marke t largely catering 

to Chinese tourists in duty -free outlets across Asia. 

China National Tobacco does not publish data on its accounts but Bloomberg News said a rare 

release of financial data in 2012 suggested it earned profits on par with huge businesses l ike 

HSBC or Walmart. 

The international subsidiary planning to list — China Tobacco International — is a much smaller 

fish, recording revenue of HK$5.1 billion ($651 million) for the nine months ending in 

September, according to documents filed with the Ho ng Kong stock exchange. 

The listing comes at a time of growing global pressure, including inside China, to curb smoking. 

Tobacco claims nearly seven million lives yearly from cancer and other lung diseases, and 

accounts for about one -in -10 deaths worldwi de, a million in China alone, according to the World 

Health Organization. 

Even as the percentage of adults who smoke has dropped in rich nations and plateaued in some 

emerging ones, the total number of smokers keeps climbing, driven by an expanding global 

population and more people in poor countries lighting up. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 07 -01 -19 

Apple cuts outlook, sees ‘challenges’ in China 

SAN FRANCISCO: Apple cut its revenue outlook for the latest quarter Wednesday, citing 

steeper -than -expected “economic deceleration” in China and emerging markets. 

The rare revenue warnings from Apple suggested weaker -than -anticipated sales of iPhones and 

other gadgetry, in part because of trade frictions between Washington and Beijing. 

Apple shares slid some 7.6 percen t in after -hours trade on the news. 

The company slashed its revenue guidance for the first fiscal quarter of 2019, ended December 

29, to $84 billion — sharply lower than analyst forecasts averaging $91 billion. 28 

“While we anticipated some challenges in ke y emerging markets, we did not foresee the 

magnitude of the economic deceleration, particularly in Greater China,” Apple chief executive 

Tim Cook said in a letter to investors. 

“We believe the economic environment in China has been further impacted by ris ing trade 

tensions with the United States.” 

Apple is the target of nationalist sentiment over the arrest of Huawei’s chief financial officer in 

Canada at the behest of the United States on alleged Iran sanctions violations. 

MengWanzhou was detained in Ca nada on December 1 on a US extradition request linked to 

sanctions -breaking business dealings with Iran. —AFP 

# Busin ess Recorder, 07 -01 -19 

China reveals plans for carrier relocation to Beijing’s new airport 

BEIJING: China’s aviation regulator published on Thursday plans for airline relocation to 

Beijing’s new mega -airport set to open this year and said it would let foreign carriers decide 

which of the capital’s airports they will use. 

eijing Daxing International Airport, due to open in September, will acco mmodate 72 million 

passengers a year by 2025 and is expected to become one of the world’s busiest airports upon 

completion. 

This will be the cities second such facility and help relieve pressure on Beijing Capital 

International Airport, whose annual capac ity has reached 100 million passengers. 

Foreign airlines, along with those in Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, can choose which airport 

they want to operate in, with the option of having a presence in both. Chinese carriers, except 

China Postal Airlines, will have to use only one airport, according to the Civil Aviation 

Administration of China (CAAC). 

China initially planned to relocate airlines from the Sky Team alliance to the new airport, while 

Star Alliance airlines would stay at the existing Beijing airpo rt. 

Airlines including China Southern, China Eastern, Beijing Capital Airlines and China United 

Airlines will be relocated to Beijing Daxing International Airport, while carriers such as Air 

China, Hainan Airlines and Grand China Air will stay at Beijing Capital International Airport. —

Reuter s29 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

Special North Korean train enters China: Yonhap 

SEOUL: A special North Korean train entered China late Monday, Yonhap news agency 

reported, raising speculation that leader Kim Jong UN could be on his way to Beijing. 

The train crossed the border around 10.15 pm local time (1315 GMT) and was expected in the 

Chinese capital Tuesday morning, the Southern news agency reported, citing an informed 

source. 

China is the isolated, nuclear -armed North’s key diplomatically and main source of trade and aid, 

and Kim visited three times last year to pay his respects to leader Xi Jinping. 

Until his first trip in March, Kim had not meet Xi for more than six years after inheriting power 

from his father , as relations between the neighbors once described as close as “lips and teeth” 

deteriorated. 

But a whirlwind of diplomacy enveloped the Korean peninsula last year, with Kim also meeting 

the South’s President Moon Jae -in three times, and culminating in h is high -profile Singapore 

summit with US counterpart Donald Trump in June. 

None of Kim’s 2018 trips to China were announced in advance, and the earliest indications of 

the first one — before Kim met either Moon or Trump — came when his train was spotted i n

Beijing. 

In the Chinese border city of Dandong, dozens of security vehicles and officials blocked the 

roads around the train station on Monday before the train passed through, Yonhap reported, 

before reopening them afterwards. 

It had not been confirmed whether a senior North Korean official was on board, it quoted its 

source as saying. 

But Japan’s Kyodo news agency said hotel guests in Dandong had not been allowed to enter 

rooms facing the river that forms the border on Monday afternoon, in what it cit ed sources 

describing as “an apparent move to prevent the train from being seen”. 

Kim’s birthday is reportedly on Tuesday, although that has never been confirmed by Pyongyang, 

and a visit by him to China would be likely to heighten speculation about a sec ond Kim -Trump 

summit. 

In Singapore the two men signed a vaguely -worded pledge about the denuclearization of the 

Korean peninsula, but progress has since stalled amid disagreements over what that means, with 

meetings and visits cancelled at short notice. 30 

Negotiations were underway on the location of their next meeting, Trump said Sunday, while 

remaining evasive on its timing. 

The US president said last week he had received a “great letter” from the North Korean leader 

but declined to reveal its contents. 

“We are negotiating a location,” he told reporters. “They do want to meet and we want to meet 

and we’ll see what happens.” Washington is demanding Pyongyang gives up its nuclear arsenal 

before any relief from economic sanctions is granted, while the North is insisting on immediate 

concessions from the US. Culminating in late 2017, Pyongyang carried out six atomic blasts and 

launched rockets capable of reaching the entire US mainland, but has now carried out no such 

tests for more than a year. 

Officials fro m the Blue House in Seoul could not immediately be reached for comment by 

AFP. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

Punjab CM lures Chinese towards best investment scope 

MUHAMMAD SALEEM 

LAHORE: Punjab Chief Minister SardarUsmanBuzdar Monday said that best inve stment 

opportunities are available in the province of Punjab and the provincial government would 

provide all the necessary facilities to the Chinese companies that would make investment in 

Punjab. 

“We would welcome the investment of Chinese company in ene rgy and other sectors,” the CM 

said while talking to a Chinese delegation that led by Wang Xu President of Huaneng Shandong 

Ruyicalled on him at his office here Monday. 

Wang Xu said Huaneng Shandong Ruyi would set up its office in Punjab and hoped that ne w

investment opportunities would be created as a result of it. “We want to expand cooperation in 

textile and other sectors as well,” he said. He also briefed the Chief Minister about company’s 

performance and its projects’ details. 

Talking on the occasion , the CM maintained that bilateral relations between Pakistan and China 

were touching new heights, adding China had always sided with Pakistan in every difficult 

situation. “We appreciate Chinese investment in Pakistan as a number of projects, which have 

been started in collaboration with China, are running successfully.” 

He said that investment environment had been boosted further due to the multibillion dollar 

CPEC project. He said the best investment opportunities were available in Punjab, adding the 31 

pr ovincial government would provide all the necessary facilities to the Chinese companies that 

would make investment in the Punjab. “We would welcome the investment of Chinese company 

in energy and other sectors,” he added. He also congratulated the delegati on on the advent of 

new Chinese year. The delegation also extended an invitation to the Chief Minister to visit 

Shandong. 

Vice President Huaneng Shandong Liu Jie, CEO Sahiwal Coal Power Plant Song Taji, CEO 

Ruyi Group Li Aiying were included in the delegation. Chairman P&D, Principal Secretary to 

CM, Secretary Energy, MD Punjab Power Development Board and others were also present at 

the meeting. 

# Business recorder, 10.01.19 

China’s FX reserves fall in 2018 

BEIJING: China’s annual foreign exchange reserves fell for the third time in four years in 2018 

as the yuan came under strong selling pressure from the cooling economy and escalating Sino -

US trade tensions. 

Depreciation pressure on the yuan is likely to persist this year as Beijing is expected to roll out 

more policy easing measures to reduce the risk of a sharper slowdown. 

But a test of the yuan’s decade lows that was feared by global financial markets just months ago 

may be less of a risk, if analysts are correct in forecasting the US dollar’s long rally is drawing to 

a close. 

China’s foreign exchange reserves - the world’s largest - fell by $67.24 billion last year to $3.073 

trillion, central bank data showed on Monday. That compared with a $129.4 billion increase in 

2017 to $3.14 trillion. 

In December, reserves rose by $11 billion, after a rise of $8.6 billion in November. The latest 

gain was slightly above forecasts of $8 billion by economists in a Reuter’s poll. 

The country’s foreign exchange regulator attributed the 

increase to valuation effects due to the appreciation of non -dollar currencies and increases in 

prices of major countries’ bonds held by China. 

Reserves are likely to remain generally stable in 2019, the State Administration of Foreign 

Exchange (SAFE) said in a s tatement. 

In a rare respite last year, the yuan rebounded 1.3 percent against the dollar in December as the 

greenback faltered and Washington and Beijing agreed to resume negotiations to end their bitter 

trade dispute. 32 

But the Chinese currency still fell 5.3 percent for 2018 as a whole, its fourth annual loss in five. 

Still, the risk of heavy capital outflows from the cooling economy seem to have been largely 

contained last year, thanks to timely interventions by authorities in currency markets, tougher 

capital controls adopted in the last downturn in 2014 -2015, and a sudden shift in expectations for 

US policy tightening. 

But even if the dollar falters as expected, the yuan faces the same key pressure points this year as 

last. 

US President Donald Trump has said talks toward a trade deal are progressing well, but it is 

unclear if Beijing will yield to key US demands over trade imbalances, market access, and more 

protection for intellectual property. 

Failure could quickly reignite pressure on the yuan, as Trump has threatened to proceed with a 

sharp US tariff hike on Chinese goods and Beijing is widely expected to retaliate. 

The trade dispute between the world’s largest economies has already disrupted the flow of 

hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of g oods and stoked fears of a global economic slowdown. 

Even if a trade agreement is reached soon, analysts say it would be no panacea for China’s 

economy, which is expected to continue decelerating in coming months. 

China’s manufacturing activity contracte d in December for the first time in more than two years 

and key credit gauges are hovering around record lows. 

On Friday, the central bank said it was cutting the amount of cash banks must hold in reserve for 

the fifth time in the past year, freeing up $1 16 billion for new lending. 

Chinese authorities have been attempting to reduce pressure on the yuan by pledging they will 

not resort to massive stimulus as they have in the past. But some analysts believe more 

aggressive easing measures such as rate cuts a re possible if economic conditions deteriorate 

more rapidly. Policymakers may also have to contend with a significant structural shift in 

China’s global capital flows, as its current account is swinging from a decades’ long surplus to 

deficit, potentially making the yuan exchange rate more volatile. 

“The PBOC appears to have sold only a small amount of foreign exchange last month, 

suggesting that the renminbi has faced little downward pressure recently,” Capital Economics 

said in a research note after the r eserves data. 

“Pressure on the renminbi may return in the coming months, however, given that we expect 

China’s economic growth to weaken further and interest rates in China to fall further.” —Reuters 33 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

Goalie howler as China, Korea survive scares at Asian Cup 

AL -AIN, (United Arab Emirates): Favorites South Korea scraped past the Philippines and China 

needed a spectacular goalkeeping gaffe to spark their comeback against lowly Kyrgyzstan as 

lesser teams continued to trouble bigg er sides at the Asian Cup on Monday. 

A day after defending champions Australia were rocked 1 -0 by Jordan, South Korea, still 

awaiting the arrival of star forward Son Heung -min, left it late before beating the Philippines by 

the same score line. 

Fellow debutants Kyrgyzstan led China 1 -0 at half -time but they were left to rue a costly error by 

goalkeeper PavelMatiash, who’s embarrassing own goal put the Chinese on course for a 2 -1

win. 

After hosts UAE were held by Bahrain, and Syria were kept to a goalle ss draw by Palestine, it 

provided more evidence that the gap has narrowed between Asian teams. 

Separately, Thailand’s Serbian coach MilovanRajevac paid the price for yet another shock result 

when he was given his marching orders following Sunday’s 4 -1 defe at to India. 

“Like all Thai football fans across the country, I am also disappointed with the result,” 

Thailand’s FA president SomyotPoompanmoung said, explaining the rapid dismissal. 

“But as president of the football association, I cannot stand still wi th this problem.” 

Kyrgyzstan looked capable of pulling off an almighty upset against China when AkhlidinIsrailov 

smashed home the opening goal just before half -time in Al Ain. 

But China profited from the howler of the tournament so far when Matiash, atte mpting to claw a 

defensive header over the bar, batted it over the line instead. 

A Chinese winner looked inevitable and it was Yu who completed the turnaround, rounding 

Matiash and scoring from a tight angle 12 minutes from time. 

Lippi, who is expected t o leave his post at the end of the Asian Cup, said he was “enormously 

unhappy” at China’s first half performance, but proud of their revival. 

“During the first half we weren’t playing well, and I thought if we keep playing like that we’re 

going to lose th e match,” said the 2006 World Cup -winning coach. 

“After the reaction from my players in the second half, I’m happy that we won the three points.” 34 

Later in Dubai, prolific goal poacher Hwang Ui -jo snatched a second -half winner as South Korea 

beat Sven -Gor an Eriksson’s Philippines, who impressed on their tournament debut. 

The Koreans, looking to end 59 years of hurt after failing to win the title since 1960, soaked up 

considerable pressure in their opening Group C fixture before Hwang broke the deadlock af ter 67 

minutes. 

The Japan -based striker swivelled and smashed home from close range to settle his side’s nerves 

after Newcastle midfielder Ki Sung -yueng limped off with a suspected hamstring injury. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

China has ‘good faith’ to fix trade issues as talks with US resume 

BEIJING: China has the “good faith” to work with the United States to resolve trade frictions, 

the Foreign Ministry said on Monday, as the world’s two largest economies resumed talks in a 

bid to end their trade d ispute. 

US officials are meeting their counterparts in Beijing this week for the first face -to -face talks 

since US President Donald Trump and China’s President Xi Jinping agreed in December to a 90 -

day truce in a trade war that has roiled global markets. 

Trump said on Sunday that trade talks with China were going very well and that weakness in the 

Chinese economy gave Beijing a reason to work toward a deal. 

On Monday, US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross told NBC the talks were being held with 

appropriate le vel staff and would help determine how the administration moves forward. 

Ross also said he saw “a very good chance that we will get a reasonable settlement that China 

can live with, that we can live with and that addresses all of the key issues,” adding t hat it would 

be easiest to tackle immediate trade but harder to resolve enforcement issues and structural 

reforms such as intellectual property rights and market access.” 

The two sides agreed to hold “positive and constructive” dialogue to resolve economi c and trade 

disputes in accordance with the consensus reached by the countries’ leaders, Foreign Ministry 

spokesman Lu Kang told reporters at a regular news briefing. 

“From the beginning we have believed that China -US trade friction is not a positive situ ation for 

either country or the world economy. China has the good faith, on the basis of mutual respect 

and equality, to resolve the bilateral trade frictions,” Lu said. 35 

Trump imposed import tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars of Chinese goods last year and 

has threatened more to pressure Beijing to change its practices on issues ranging from industrial 

subsidies to intellectual property to hacking. China has retaliated with tariffs of its own. 

“As for whether the Chinese economy is good or not, I have already explained this. China’s 

development has ample tenacity and huge potential,” Lu said. “We have firm confidence in the 

strong long -term fundamentals of the Chinese economy.” 

Lu also said that Vice President Wang Qishan would attend the World Ec onomic Forum in 

Davos, Switzerland in late January, but added that he had not yet heard of any arrangements for a 

meeting with Trump there. 

By Monday afternoon, few details had emerged of the talks, which were scheduled to run 

through Tuesday. 

The US dele gation, led by Deputy US Trade Representative Jeffrey Gerrish, includes 

undersecretaries from the US Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Energy and Treasury, as 

well as senior officials from the White House. 

TuXinquan, a Chinese trade expert at Beijing’ s University of International Business and 

Economics, told Reuters before talks began that the meetings would likely focus on technical 

issues and leave major disagreements to more senior officials. 

“China’s economy is significantly slowing down, and the US stock market is declining quickly. I 

think the two sides need some kind of agreement for now,” Tu said. 

Data last week showed manufacturing has slowed in both China and the United States, though 

the US Labor Department on Friday reported a surge in new jobs in December along with higher 

wages. 

Officials have given scant details on concessions that China might be willing to make to meet US 

demands, some of which would require structural reforms unpalatable for Chinese leaders. 

Even if a trade agreement is reached soon, analysts say it would be no panacea for China’s 

economy, which is expected to continue decelerating in coming months. 

China’s stridently nationalist Global Times tabloid said in an editorial late on Sunday that 

statements from both sides that they hoped to reach a deal were cause for optimism, but that 

Beijing would not cave in to US demands. 

“If China was going to raise the white flag, it would have done it already,” the paper said. —

Reuters 36 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

Monday’s early trade: Wall Street higher as US -China trade talks begin 

# • Amazon, Netflix lead consumer discretionary stocks higher 

• PG&E shares slump after reports of exploring bankruptcy 

NEW YORK: US stocks rose on Monday as gains in the technology and consumer discr etionary 

sectors helped extend Friday’s rally, with investors focused on the ongoing US -China trade 

talks. 

The rally was led by momentum names such as Amazon.com Inc, Netflix Inc and big technology 

stocks, adding to Friday’s surge of over 3 percent after strong jobs numbers and Federal Reserve 

Chair Jerome Powell’s comments soothed worries about interest rate hikes. 

Fears of a global slowdown have caused sharp pullbacks in the markets over the last few months. 

But since hitting a 20 -month low on Christmas Eve just a rounding error from levels considered 

to be a bear market, the S&P 500 has now gained over 8.5 percent. 

The trade spat has been a major overhang and the effects of tariffs on billions of dollars of goods 

have started showing up in economic dat a and a reduction in analysts’ estimates for earnings 

growth rates at S&P 500 companies. 

US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross said on Monday China and the United States were likely 

to reach a good settlement over immediate trade issues, while an agreement on structural trade 

issues and enforcement will be harder. 

“We’re looking at commentary from the Fed suggesting they’re going to be flexible around rate 

hikes, there’s positive commentary on the US trade war,” said Christopher Anselmo, director at 

Nasdaq IR Intelligence. “That positive sentiment is forward looking.” 

The consumer discretionary index jumped 2.49 percent, while the technology sector gained 1.14 

percent. 

In economic data, the Institute for Supply Management’s domestic services sector index fell to a 

five -month low, although one bright spot was a rise in new orders, which Anselmo said was 

helping sentiment. 

At about 11:50 a.m. ET, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 156.40 points, or 0.67 

percent, at 23,589.56. The S&P 500 was up 23.97 point s, or 0.95 percent, at 2,555.91 and the 

Nasdaq Composite was up 93.60 points, or 1.39 percent, at 6,832.46. 

Nine of the 11 major S&P sectors were higher, with only the defensive consumer staples and 

utilities indexes logging losses. 37 

Utilities were dragged lower by PG&E Corp, which slumped about 22 percent after Reuters 

reported the company was exploring filing some or all of its business for bankruptcy protection 

as it faces billions of dollars in liabilities related to fatal wildfires in 2018 and 2 017. 

Dollar Tree Inc jumped 5.7 percent after activist investor Starboard Value LP called on the 

company to sell its underperforming Family Dollar business and proposed replacing a majority 

of its board. 

Loxo Oncology Inc surged 65.8 percent after Eli Lill y and Co said it would buy the cancer drug 

developer for about $8 billion. Lilly fell 1.2 percent. 

Advancing issues outnumbered decliners by a 4.56 -to -1 ratio on the NYSE and a 3.07 -to -1 ratio 

on the Nasdaq. 

The S&P index recorded no new 52 -week highs or new lows, while the Nasdaq recorded 24 new 

highs and 10 new lows. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

China shares climb 

SHANGHAI: China shares ended higher on Monday after the central bank moved to support 

economic growth with a broad cut in the amount of cash banks must hold as reserves, but 

ongoing uncertainty over the economy and outlook for trade continued to weigh on the market. 

At the close, the Shanghai Composite index was up 0.72 percent at 2,533.09 points. 

The blue -chip CSI300 index was up 0.6 1 percent at 3,054.30 points, with its financial sector sub -

index lower by 0.23 percent and the healthcare sub -index up 0.27 percent. An index tracking 

consumer staples gained 1.08 percent. 

The People’s Bank of China said on Friday it was cutting the amoun t of cash that banks have to 

hold as reserves for the fifth time in a year, freeing up $116 billion for new lending as it tries to 

reduce the risk of a sharp economic slowdown. 

But analysts downplayed the impact of the cut to banks’ reserve requirement ra tios (RRRs). 

“The 100bp RRR cut was largely expected, not a game -changer,” Nomura analysts said in a note 

on Monday. 

“We expect there to be limited room for the market to continue to fall from its current position. 

But the economic and credit cycles remai n in a downturn, corporate profitability and 38 

performance growth are weakening, and there is a limit to further loosening of macro policy,” 

analysts at Guodu Securities said in a note. 

The smaller Shenzhen index ended up 1.71 percent and the start -up board ChiNext Composite 

index was higher by 1.839 percent. 

Around the region, MSCI’s Asia ex -Japan stock index was firmer by 1.28 percent, while Japan’s 

Nikkei index closed up 2.44 percent. 

At 07:19 GMT, the yuan was quoted at 6.851 per US dollar, 0.29 percen t firmer than the 

previous close of 6.871. The currency strengthened to a one -month high against the dollar on 

Monday. 

The largest percentage gainers on the main Shanghai Composite index were Shanghai Zhixin 

Electric Co Ltd, up 10.14 percent, followed by Lanzhou LS Heavy Equipment Co Ltd, gaining 

10.12 percent, and Fujian Furi Electronics Co Ltd, up by 10.11 percent. 

The largest percentage losers on the Shanghai index were New China Life Insurance Co Ltd, 

down 6.72 percent, followed by Wuhan Hanshang Grou p Co Ltd, losing 3.82 percent, and 

Fushun Special Steel Co Ltd, down by 3.28 percent. 

So far this year, the Shanghai stock index is up 1.6 percent, the CSI300 has risen 1.4 percent and 

China’s H -share index listed in Hong Kong is down 0.1 percent. 

About 17.73 billion shares were traded on the Shanghai exchange, roughly 132.3 percent of the 

market’s 30 -day moving average of 13.40 billion shares a day. The volume in the previous 

trading session was 16.89 billion. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

China b uys more US soya as officials meet for trade talks 

CHICAGO: Chinese importers made their third large US soyabean purchase in the past month on 

Monday, as officials from both countries meet this week for the first face -to -face talks since 

agreeing to a 90 -day trade war truce on Dec. 1, two traders with knowledge of the deals said. 

Chinese state -owned firms bought at least three cargoes of US soyabeans on Monday morning, 

or about 180,000 tonnes, the traders said. One of them said the total was closer to 15 cargoes, or 

about 900,000 tonnes. 

The soyabeans will be shipped mostly from terminals in the Pacific Northwest from January 

through March, with a smaller volume to be exported from US Gulf Coast terminals, the traders 

said. 39 

US soyabean exports to Chin a, the world’s top buyer, have plummeted this season during a bitter 

trade dispute, with swelling supplies sending prices to near decade lows. 

US President Donald Trump imposed import tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars of Chinese 

goods last year a nd has threatened more to pressure Beijing to change its trade practices. China 

retaliated with tariffs of its own, including a 25 percent duty on US soyabean shipments which 

remains in place. 

Officials from both nations are meeting in Beijing this week i n talks scheduled to run through 

Tuesday. China’s Foreign Ministry on Monday noted his country’s “good faith” to work with the 

United States to resolve trade frictions. 

China has booked more than 5 million tonnes of US soyabeans in the past month’s deals, a

fraction of China’s typical purchases from the United States which normally total more than 30 

million tonnes. 

Grain traders have been awaiting news of further Chinese buying, although official US 

confirmation of any deals has been suspended due to a pa rtial US government shutdown. 

Benchmark US soyabean futures on the Chicago Board of Trade rose for a fourth straight trading 

session on Monday and touched a three -week high as renewed Chinese buying offset concerns 

about abundant global supplies. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

Chinese steel, iron ore gain on cenbank policy, trade optimism 

BEIJING: China’s steel and iron ore futures started the week firmly on Monday, buoyed by 

central bank policy easing and on hopes that Beijing and Washington can str ike a comprehensive 

trade deal. 

China’s central bank on Friday cut the amount of cash that banks have to hold as reserves for the 

fifth time in a year, freeing up $116 billion for new lending. 

A group of US delegates are meeting with their counterparts i n Beijing this week for the first 

face -to -face talks since leaders of the two countries agreed to a 90 -day truce in a trade war in 

December. “The market is improving its expectations over the macro -economic situation amid 

Beijing’s attempts to stabilize th e economy,” analysts from Huatai Futures said in a note. 

Meanwhile, Baoshan Iron & Steel Co, the largest listed steel firm in China, said it would raise 

prices of some steel products for March del ivery by 50 yuan ($7.30) a ton .

Benchmark construction steel rebar prices on the Shanghai Futures Exchange settled 1.8 percent 

higher at 3,520 yuan a ton . They jumped as high as 3,526 yuan before the market closed at 0700 40 

GMT, a level last seen on Dec. 21, 2018. However, analysts also warned of waning demand in 

the off -peak season. 

Inventories of steel products at Chinese traders rose for the second week in the week end ed Jan. 

4, adding 416,000 ton from the prior week to 8.38 mi llion tonnes, data compiled by m ysteel 

consultancy showed. Rebar stocks were up 6.4 perc ent at 3.35 million tonnes and hot -rolled coil 

stocks were up 2.5 percent at 1.8 million tonnes. 

Construction sites in northern China typically halt work in winter due to freezing conditions. 

Investors are closely watching the Sino -US trade talks, as well as waiting for further potential 

stimulus measures from Beijing that could ease downward pressure on China’s economy, the 

analysts said. 

The most -active iron ore contract on the Dalian Commodity Exchange closed 1.8 percent higher 

at 514.5 yuan a tonne, ju st shy of its day’s peak of 515 yuan; it’s strongest since Oct. 29. 

Coking coal futures climbed 1.5 percent to 1,195 yuan, while coke for May delivery rose 1.5 

percent to 1,964 yuan. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 08 -01 -19 

Copper steadies as traders eye US -China trade talks 

LONDON: Copper prices steadied on Monday after the biggest rise in three months in the 

previous session on investor hopes that Chinese measures to boost lending would be followed by 

progress in trade talks with the United States. 

Prices were also supported by a weaker dollar after Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell 

hinted that the pace of US interest rate rises could slow. 

A weaker dollar makes metals cheaper for buyers using other currencies. 

Benchmark copper on the London Metal Ex change (LME) closed 0.1 percent up at $5,923 a 

tonne after surging 3.2 percent on Friday in its biggest one -day gain since Sept. 21. 

It rose from a low base, however, having hit an 18 -month low of $5,725 last week. 

Copper, aluminum, zinc and nickel fell by between 16 and 26 percent last year as top consumer 

China’s metals -hungry economy slowed and a trade dispute with Washington heralded further 

deceleration. 41 

Prices could fall again if this week’s trade talks fail said ING analyst Warren Patterson, addin g

that tight supplies of copper and other industrial metals would lift prices over the course of the 

year. 

“From here we expect upside across the board,” he said, predicting that copper would average 

$6,400 a tonne in the second quarter and rise towards $ 7,000 by the end of 2019. 

US and Chinese officials are meeting for the first face -to -face talks since the two countries 

agreed in December to a 90 -day truce in a trade war that investors fear will curb global economic 

growth. 

China said on Monday it had the “good faith” to work with the United States to resolve trade 

frictions. 

US Secretary of State Wilbur Ross said a good settlement was likely on immediate trade issues 

but an agreement on structural trade issues and enforcement would be harder. 

The tal ks come after China’s central bank on Friday said it was cutting reserve requirements for 

banks for the fifth time in a year, freeing up $116 billion for new lending. 

German industrial orders fell more than expected in November, adding to a slew of recent 

indicators showing Germany’s exporters are suffering from the trade dispute between China and 

the United States. 

LME aluminum ended 0.7 percent up at $1,878.50 a tonne, zinc finished with a gain of 2.5 

percent at $2,498, lead rose 0.2 percent to $1,953, tin climbed 1 percent to $19,750 and nickel, 

which did not trade at the close, was bid up 0.4 percent at $11,150. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 09 -01 -19 

Trump says US -China trade talks going ‘very well’ 

WASHINGTON: US President Donald Trump boasted Tuesday that US -China trade 

negotiations were going “very well” as officials held talks in Beijing that will spill into a third 

day. 

A member of the US delegation said the two sides would resume talks on Wednesday as they 

continue their first face -to -face meeting s since Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed 

to a tariff truce during a meeting in Argentina on December 1. 

The talks are taking longer than expected as the Chinese commerce ministry had said last week 

that the meetings would take place on Monday and Tuesday. 42 

“Talks with China are going very well!” Trump said on Twitter, but gave no further information. 

The Wall Street Journal reported Tuesday the two sides were narrowing their differences, with 

Chinese officials offering greater purchases of US goods and services and Cabinet -level follow -

up meetings expected later this month. 

Word of progress briefly drove US stocks higher in early morning trading but major indices soon 

pared much of those gains. 

The meeting between the US delegation — led by D eputy US Trade Representative Jeffrey 

Gerrish and including officials from the Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture and Energy 

Departments — and the Chinese side ran late into Tuesday night. 

“I can confirm we are continuing tomorrow (Wednesday),” Steven Winber g, assistant energy 

secretary, told reporters after returning to his hotel in Beijing. He declined to provide more 

details. 

The Trump administration wants Beijing to abandon its strategy of seeking global industrial 

predominance through the alleged theft and forced transfer of American technology as well as 

massive state intervention in markets. 

The truce came after the two sides imposed import duties on more than $300 billion of each 

other’s goods. 

US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross said Monday that Chin a’s economy was more vulnerable 

to the fallout from the trade war. 

“It certainly has hurt the Chinese economy,” Ross told CNBC, noting that China exports many 

more goods to the United States than the other way around. 

Ross said there was a “very good chance” of reaching an agreement, although monitoring 

compliance would present a challenge. 

Without a resolution, punitive US duty rates on $200 billion in Chinese goods are due to rise to 

25 percent from 10 percent on March 2. 

The second day of trade ne gotiations coincided with an unannounced visit by North Korean 

leader Kim Jong Un for talks with Xi in Beijing, amid speculation of a second meeting between 

Kim and Trump. 

Some analysts say that China — Pyongyang’s key diplomatically and main source of tr ade —

could use Kim’s visit as a bargaining chip in the US trade talks. 43 

But Bonnie Glaser, a senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the 

timing of the North Korean leader’s arrival could be coincidental. 

“I don’t see any linkage with the trade talks,” said Glaser. 

“China’s ability to use (North Korea) as leverage has diminished considerably since Trump 

opened his own channel to Kim,” she said. 

Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang said Kim’s visit and the trade tal ks were “two 

separate matters”. 

“China’s position in the China -US trade friction and its solutions to the friction is open, it’s 

transparent,” Lu said at a regular press briefing. 

“We have shown our sincerity, we have established our stand in this, so we don’t need other 

actions to gain the confidence of the US. The US is very clear about China’s stance.” 

A separate geopolitical issue angered China on Monday when a US Navy guided -missile 

destroyer sailed near disputed islands in the South China Sea — a v ast expanse claimed by 

Beijing. China called it a violation of its sovereignty that has damaged “peace, safety and order” 

in the waterway. 

The United States periodically sends planes and warships through the area to signal to Beijing its 

right under international law to pass through the waters. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 09 -01 -19 

China approves five GM crops for import 

BEIJING: China has approved the import of five genetically modified crops, the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Affairs said in a statem ent on Tuesday, amid growing pressure from the 

United States to open up its market to more farm goods. 

The crops are RF3 canola, originally developed by Bayer and now owned by BASF, Monsanto’s 

glyphosate -tolerant MON 88302 canola, DuPont Pioneer DP4114 co rn, Syngenta’s SYHT0H2 

soybean and Dow Agro Sciences ’ DAS -44406 -6 soybean. 

China is the world’s top importer of soybeans and a major buyer of other grains but it has not 

approved any GMO products for import since July 2017, when it cleared two products fo llowing 

high -level talks with Washington. It also approved two products in June 2017. 44 

The new approvals came after Chinese officials met their US counterparts in Beijing on Monday 

for the first face -to -face talks since US President Donald Trump and Chines e President Xi 

Jinping agreed in December to a 90 -day truce in a trade war that has roiled global markets. 

The US is the world’s largest producer of GMO crops but the slow and unpredictable process of 

getting approvals for GM crops in China has long been a major irritant in agricultural trade 

between the two countries. 

Some products have been waiting for Beijing’s approval for seven years. 

China’s scientific advisory board on genetically modified crops did not approve any products 

when it met in June. 

China does not allow the planting of genetically modified food crops, but does allow GMO 

imports, such as soybeans and corn, for use as animal feed. 

The ministry said on Tuesday it had also renewed the import approval for 26 other GMO crops, 

extending their approval by a further three years. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 09 -01 -19 

Man Utd to open ‘experience centers’ in China 

LONDON: Manchester United announced on Tuesday they are opening a series of 

“entertainment and experience centers” in China as they seek to capitalize on a huge fanbase in 

the world’s most populous country. 

The first centers, developed in partnership with Chinese property developer Harves, are 

scheduled to open in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenyang by the end of 2020. Arsenal last year 

op ened a club -themed sports bar and restaurant in Shanghai and French side Paris Saint -Germain 

also have a hub in the same city, equipped with indoor football pitches and a bar. 

Each venue at the Manchester United centers will feature “interactive and immer sive 

experiences” and will include restaurants and a club store, the Premier League club said in a 

statement. 

“We first visited China in 1975 and we’re proud to have seen our fan base in the region grow and 

develop their passion for United over the years ,” said Manchester United’s group managing 

director Richard Arnold. 

“This new concept will allow them to get closer to the club they love.” —AFP 45 

# Business Recorder, 09 -01 -19 

China stocks decline 

SHANGHAI: China stocks closed slightly lower on Tuesday amid investor caution as US and 

Chinese officials seek to reach a trade deal in Beijing 

The blue -chip CSI300 index fell 0.2 percent, to 3,047.70, while the Shanghai Composite Index 

lost 0.3 percent to 2,526.46. 

US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross predicted on Monday that Beijing and Washington could 

reach a trade deal that “we can live with” as dozens of officials from the world’s two largest 

economies resumed talks in a bid to end their trade dispute. 

China’s for eign ministry said Beijing had the “good faith” to work with the United States to 

resolve trade frictions, but many analysts doubt the two sides can reach a comprehensive 

agreement on all of the divisive issues before a March deadline. 

There seemed to be scant market reaction to North Korean leader Kim Jong Un ’s visit in China. 

The CSI300 financial sector sub -index was lower by 0.45 percent, while the healthcare sub -index 

was up 0.37 percent. 

The smaller Shenzhen index ended down 0.12 percent and the star t-up board Chi Next 

Composite index was weaker by 0.36 percent. 

Around the region, MSCI’s Asia ex -Japan stock index was weaker by 0.21 percent, while 

Japan’s Nikkei index closed up 0.82 percent. 

At 07:33 GMT, the yuan was quoted at 6.8574 per US dollar, 0.1 percent weaker than the 

previous close of 6.8505. 

The largest percentage gainers on the main Shanghai Composite index were Jinzhou Port Co Ltd, 

up 10.07 percent, followed by Pengqi Technology Development Co Ltd, gaining 10.06 percent, 

and Zhejiang Tia ntaiXianghe Industrial Co Ltd, up by 10.03 percent. 

The largest percentage losers on the Shanghai index were Wuxi New Hongtai Electrical 

Technology Co Ltd, down 9.98 percent, followed by Pengqi Technology Development Co Ltd, 

losing 9.82 percent, and BTG Ho tels Group Co Ltd , down by 7.18 percent. —Reuters 46 

# Business Recorder, 09 -01 -19 

Aluminum drops as bears attack, others wait for news on China 

LONDON: Aluminum prices slipped on Tuesday as bearish speculators kept up selling pressure, 

while other base metals were lack luster ahead of the conclusion of US -China trade talks. 

Aluminum has been the worst performer on the London Metal Exchange during the last two 

months on concerns about excess supply that gathered momentum after the United States said it 

would lift sanctions on Russian giant Rusal. 

“I’ve been pretty gloomy on the aluminum market for some time and I expect more downside in 

coming months,” said Ross Strachan, senior commodities economist at Capital Economics in 

London. 

“There are smelter re -starts in the US, a very large expansion in Bahrain, and in China you’ve 

got significantly more production than at this time a year ago,” he said. 

“This is all coming at a time when demand is proving to be relatively soft and slowing in a 

number of the major markets.” 

Aluminum closed down 0.8 percent at $1,864.50 a tonne in final open outcry trading, rowing 

back some of its rebound since touching $1,785.50 last week, the lowest in about a year. 

Aluminum has the biggest speculative net short position o f the LME complex at 28 percent of 

open interest, a level not seen since November 2015, according to estimates by MarexSpectron 

detailed in a note. 

Excess supply was evident in a build -up of LME aluminum inventories, which rose again on 

Tuesday, daily LME data showed. The stocks have surged nearly 40 percent since mid -October 

last year. 

The United States and China will continue trade talks in Beijing for an unscheduled third day, a 

member of the US delegation said on Tuesday, as the world’s two largest ec onomies looked to 

resolve their bitter trade dispute. 

The uncertainty was leading to muted activity, Strachan said. “I think people are holding back 

before we’ve got any news on the trade talks or the (US government) shutdown, which is 

lingering in the bac kground.” 

The dollar index rose 0.3 percent, snapping a three -day losing streak, weighing on metals as it 

makes them more expensive for buyers using other currencies. 47 

Chart patterns are indicating that downside momentum has receded in copper, StéphanieAy mes, 

head of technical analysis at SocietyGeneral, said in a note. 

“Copper is now inching towards the upper band of the short -term down sloping trend at 

$5,980/$6,010... A break above will mean signs of a larger recovery towards $6,079 and more 

importantl y $6,108/$6,170.” 

LME copper fell 0.3 percent to end at $5,906 a tonne, zinc shed 0.5 percent to finish at $2,485, 

nickel gained 0.4 percent to $11,190, tin gained 1 percent to $19,940 and lead climbed 0.8 

percent to $1,969. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

Chinese general issues ‘war criminal’ warning to Taiwan 

BEIJING: Taiwan independence supporters would be regarded as “war criminals” if China was 

forced to intervene militarily to retake the island, a Chinese general warned Wednesday. 

“Supporters of Taiwanese separatism must stop in time to avoid disaster, repent and return to the 

right path. Otherwise they will become the scum of the Chinese nation and be condemned by 

history,” said He Lei, former vice president of the Academy of Military Science s. 

“If we are forced to use force to settle the Taiwanese issue, they will be held responsible. In other 

words, they will inevitably be considered war criminals,” the lieutenant general said, adopting a 

martial tone in a meeting with journalists. 

China s till sees Taiwan as part of its territory to be reunified, despite the two sides being ruled 

separately since they split in 1949 after a civil war won by Mao Zedong’s communists. 

General He’s warning to Taiwanese separatists comes after President Xi Jinpi ng last week said 

China would not renounce the option of using force to recover the island and vowed that 

reunification was “inevitable”. 

Taiwan considers it a sovereign state, with its own currency, political and judicial systems, but 

has never declared formal independence from the mainland. 

Relations have been strained since the 2016 election of President Tsai Ing -wen, who has refused 

to acknowledge Beijing’s stance that the isla nd is part of “one China”. —AFP 48 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

China steel prices rise 

BEIJING: Chinese steel futures prices inched up on Wednesday, buoyed by Beijing vowing to 

introduce policies to strengthen consumer spending and optimism that the months -long US -

China trade row is finally coming to an end. 

China plans to intro duce policies to boost domestic spending on items such as automobiles and 

home appliances this year as part of wider efforts to strengthen consumption, a senior official at 

the country’s top state planner said. 

A variety of steel products, especially hot -rolled coil and cold -rolled coil, are widely used to 

make autos and household items. 

“The main focus of fundamentals in the steel market is now on the demand side,” a Shanghai -

based steel trader said. 

“Some mills have already hiked prices for February and March delivery as they expect to see 

stronger demand after Chinese New Year in February,” he added. 

The listed unit of China’s largest steel firm, China Baowu Group, said on Sunday it would raise 

hot -rolled coil and cold -rolled steel coil prices for Marc h delivery by 50 yuan ($7.31) a tonne. 

The most -active hot -rolled coil contract on the Shanghai Futures Exchange climbed 0.7 percent 

to 3,421 yuan a tonne when market closed at 0700 GMT. 

Benchmark Shanghai rebar futures also rose marginally by 0.1 percen t to 3,507 yuan. 

On Tuesday, some Chinese industrial websites reported that the top steelmaking city of 

Tangshan has issued a smog alert, effective from Jan. 8 to Jan. 14, asking steel mills to cut 

sintering output by 30 percent to 60 percent, or shut com pletely depending on emission levels. 

The Tangshan government declined to comment but said in a statement that it expects to see air 

quality worsen during Jan. 10 -12. 

“But investors are still cautious... they are waiting for progress in Sino -US trade talks,” said the 

Shanghai trader. 

Chinese and US teams ended trade talks in Beijing on Wednesday that lasted longer than 

expected and officials said details will be released soon, raising hopes an all -out trade war that 

could badly disrupt the global econ omy can be avoided. 49 

The most -traded iron ore futures on the Dalian Commodity Exchange pared gains in the 

afternoon session after hitting a 10 -week high at 517 yuan a tonne in early trade. It settled down 

0.6 percent at 509.5 yuan. —Reuters 

# Business Record er, 10 -01 -19 

US official says China trade talks ‘went just fine’ 

BEIJING: The United States and China on Wednesday concluded three days of extended talks to 

resolve their trade war, with a member of the American delegation saying negotiations “went just 

fi ne”. 

The US officials arrived in Beijing on Monday for the first sit -down talks since President Donald 

Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping agreed on December 1 to a three -month truce in the 

escalating trade spat. 

Asian markets rose on increasing optimism that the two sides would be able to hammer out a 

deal ahead of a March deadline and avert further import tariff hikes. 

A member of the US delegation, Under Secretary for Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs Ted 

McKinney, told reporters that the team wou ld return to the United States later on Wednesday. “I 

think they went just fine,” McKinney said of the talks as he left the hotel with his luggage, 

adding the trip “has been a good one for us”. 

Trump boasted on Twitter on Tuesday that discussions in China were “going very well!” 

China’s foreign ministry confirmed the negotiations had ended in Beijing but declined to 

comment on the outcome, saying details would be released later. “If it’s a good outcome, it 

doesn’t just benefit the US and China, but it is also good news for the world economy,” said 

foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang. 

The US delegation, led by Deputy Trade Representative Jeffrey Gerrish, had been scheduled to 

end its visit on Tuesday. 

“The extension of the talks indicates that both sides t ake this very seriously,” Lu said. 

Washington has been clamoring for an end to the forced transfer — and even theft — of 

American technology, as well as steep government subsidies for Chinese companies. The Trump 

administration also wants Beijing to buy m ore American goods to narrow a yawning trade gap 

and allow foreign players better access to the Chinese market. 50 

The US Trade Representative office said Wednesday that the talks focused on “ways to achieve 

fairness, reciprocity, and balance in trade relati ons,” as well as the need for “ongoing verification 

and effective enforcement” of any agreement. 

“The talks also focused on China’s pledge to purchase a substantial amount of agricultural, 

energy, manufactured goods, and other products and services from t he United States,” USTR 

said in a statement. 

US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross signaled on Monday that there was a “very good chance” 

of reaching an agreement. 

China’s economy was more vulnerable to the fallout from the trade war, he said. Apple chief 

executive Tim Cook said he has “heard some very encouraging words” about the talks as well. “I 

don’t speak for them obviously,” Cook told CNBC in reference to the Trump administration. “I 

do talk with them and I give them my ideas and thoughts.” 

The US sm artphone maker has felt the pinch of the bruising trade spat, and warned that 2018 

revenues would miss its forecast — in large part due to a slump in iphone sales in China. 

The temporary trade war ceasefire came after the two sides imposed import duties on more than 

$300 billion in two -way trade. 

Without a resolution, punitive US duty rates on $200 billion in Chinese goods are due to rise to 

25 percent from 10 percent on March 2. 

Global financial markets retreated late last year, largely over concerns abo ut the economic 

impact of a protracted trade war. Bloomberg reported that Trump is eager to strike a deal to boost 

markets, citing people familiar with White House deliberations. 

The current trade round coincided with an unannounced visit from North Korea n leader Kim 

Jong Un, who arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for talks with Xi, ahead of a possible second 

meeting between Kim and Trump. 

China — Pyongyang’s sole diplomatically and main source of trade — said it would not use 

Kim’s visit as a bargaining chip in the US trade talks. 

Kim’s train left Beijing on Wednesday around the same time the US trade negotiators headed for 

the airport. —AFP 51 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

China’s passenger car sales fall for first time in years 

BEIJING: China’s annual passenger car sales fell last year for the first time in more than 20 

years as the trade war with the US rocked consumer confidence and Beijing reined in car 

financing channels. 

Passenger car sales fell to 22.4 million vehicles in 2018, down 5.8 percent f rom a year earlier, 

data from the China Passenger Car Association (CPCA) showed on Wednesday. 

In December sales plummeted 19.2 percent from a year earlier, the CPCA said. 

The slumping market has hit China’s manufacturing sector, which contracted last mon th for the 

first time in more than two years, according to official data. 

Beijing’s bruising trade war with Washington comes as it grapples with a slowing domestic 

economy — growth is expected to have eased to around 6.5 percent in 2018, down from 6.9 

per cent in 2017. 

The gloomy export picture has reinforced the need for Beijing to rely on its legion of consumers 

to grow its economy. 

But the government’s campaign against debt was in full force last year, cutting into parts of the 

shadow finance industry like peer -to -peer lending which financed car purchases for some 

consumers. 

Declining car sales may be last year’s phenomenon, said CPCA secretary general Cui Dongshu a.

“I hope that’s the case,” he said. 

Officials are taking steps to reignite consumer spe nding. Policies will be rolled out to push auto 

and home appliance consumption, an official at the state planner told official news agency 

Xinhua this week. 

Still some officials have indicated car sales may have little room for growth. “The period of 

rapid growth in production and sales of cars is over and low growth speed could become the 

norm in the automotive market,” XinGuobin, vice minister of industry and information 

technology said last year, according to China News. —AFP 52 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

China stocks surge on trade talk hopes 

SHANGHAI: China stocks closed higher on Wednesday on optimism around the United States 

and China moving closer to a trade deal, and Beijing encouraging consumer spending amid 

economic slowdown. 

The blue -chip CSI300 index ended up 1.0 percent at 3,078.48, while the Shanghai Composite 

Index closed 0.7 percent higher at 2,544.34 points. 

The US trade delegation in Beijing is “wrapping up” meetings with Chinese officials and will 

return to the United States later on Wednesday after a “good few days”, a US official said. 

Originally scheduled for Monday and Tuesday, the negotiations were extended by a day amid 

signs of progress on issues, including purchases of US farm and energy commodities, and 

increased access to China’s markets. 

“We believe that the talks far exceeding their initial timeframe indicates that both Chinese and 

US officials are determined to reach an agreement in these negotiations,” Hu Shaohua, an analyst 

at Donghai Securities, said in a note. 

Sha res of most Chinese automakers rallied after the vice chairman of the country’s state planner 

said the country would introduce policies to boost domestic spending on items, including 

automobiles and home appliances. 

Consumer firms also gained, in particula r home appliance makers, as Beijing encourages 

spending in the sector. 

Around the region, MSCI’s Asia ex -Japan stock index was firmer by 1.43 percent, while Japan’s 

Nikkei index closed up 1.1 percent. 

At 07:09 GMT, the yuan was quoted at 6.839 per US dol lar, 0.23 percent firmer than the 

previous close of 6.8548. 

Shares of Jinzhou Port Co Ltd, up 10.13 percent, were the biggest percentage gainers on the 

main Shanghai Composite index, followed by those of Lifan Industry Group Co Ltd, gaining 

10.1 percent a nd ChangshuFengfan Power Equipment Co Ltd, up 10.08 percent. 

Shares of Pengqi Technology Development Co Ltd, down 8.06 percent, were the biggest 

percentage losers on the index, followed by those of Zhejiang Dafeng Industrial Co Ltd, down 

5.6 percent, and Shandong Tyan Home Co Ltd, falling 4.88 percent. 53 

While the Shanghai benchmark index has risen 2 percent so far this year, the CSI300 is up 2.3 

percent. China’s H -share index listed in Hong Kong is up 2.1 percent. 

About 19.19 billion shares were traded on the Shanghai exchange, roughly 143.4 percent of the 

market’s 30 -day moving average of 13.38 billion shares a day. The volume in the previous 

trading session was 15.81 billion. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

Envoy seeks intellectual support for Chine se projects 

RECORDER REPORT 

LAHORE: Chinese Ambassador in Pakistan Yao Jing has said that there is need of intellectual 

support for success of Chinese projects in Pakistan and called upon PU administration and 

faculty members to play their role in this re gard. 

He expressed these views during a meeting with PU Vice Chancellor Prof Niaz Ahmed at his 

office here on Wednesday. Chinese Consulate General Long Dingbing along with his Chinese 

colleagues, PU Registrar Dr Muhammad Khalid Khan, Director External Lin kages Prof 

DrKanwalAmeen, deans of faculties and principals were present on this occasion. 

Addressing the meeting, ambassador Yao Jing expressed the desire to enhance more and more 

bilateral relations among the academic institutions of both the countries. He also stressed the 

need to promote cultural and people -to -people relations between the two countries. He said that 

Chinese government was offering scholarships to Pakistani students for their higher education in 

China however, more scholarship would be provided to top students to pursue their studies in top 

Chinese universities. 

He said that China was encouraging investment and promotion of technology in Pakistan. He 

said that China also wanted to give more access to Pakistani products in China. He said that 

CPEC would play lead role in socio -economic development of Pakistan and the region. 

He said that Lahoris were the friendliest people and Chinese Consulate General Long Dingbing 

was a lucky person who got posting in this city. 

PU VC Prof Niaz Ahmad said that PU was playing active role in promoting Pak -China relations. 

He said that recently, PU had granted admission to 15 Chinese students in PhD programme while 

as many as 3,500 students had completed Chinese language course from PU Confucius Centre. 

He said that PU had also signed memorandums of understandings with 30 Chinese institutions to 

enhance collaboration in different sectors and many PU faculty members and students were 

visiting China. 54 

He said that PU had organized two international conferenc es and several seminars on China -

Pakistan Economic Corridor last year. Later, the PU VC presented souvenir to Chinese 

ambassador .

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

NTDC official invites Chinese group to set up manufacturing units 

RECORDER REPORT 

LAHORE: National Transmission and Dispatch Company (NTDC) Deputy Managing Director 

WajahatSaeed has invited ZTT Group from China for setting up manufacturing units of cables 

and conductors to transfer technology to Pakistan. There is also a need of setting up Opti cal 

Power Ground Wire (OPGW) units in the country, he added. 

He said the NTDC has planned to transmit and distribute 50,000 megawatt from existing 26000 

megawatt electricity in next 20 years which would require the presence of transmission and 

distributio n technology facilities in the country. 

He was speaking at a seminar organized by ZTT International in collaboration with MK 

Engineers and Consultant on transmission and distribution technology at a local hotel. 

It may be noted that MD NTDC was expected to address the seminar but he could not make it 

because of his preoccupation in the federal ministry. A good number of engineers from the 

public and private sector were present to attend the seminar. 

He also introduced the NTDC to the audience and latest initiatives taken by it to improve the 

transmission and distribution of electricity system in the country. 

CEO ZTT Ryan Shi and CEO MKEC ShahidMehmood also spoke on the occasion. Also, 

detailed presentation was made on the introduction of cutting -edge technology of high 

temperature low sag equipment in Pakistan by ZTT. ZTT Group is a global and leading 

manufact urer active in the research development, design, production, supply, and installation 

with a complete wide range of telecom, power, renewable energy and in the oil and gas 

industries. 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

Oil up over 4pc on US -China trade talk hope s, OPEC cuts 

• US crude climbs above $50/bbl for first time in 2019 

• Saudi Arabia confident cuts by OPEC, allies will balance market 55 

• US oil stockpiles fall less than expected: EIA 

NEW YORK: Oil prices jumped more than 4 percent on Wednesday as the ext ension of US -

China talks raised hopes of easing trade tensions between the two superpowers, while OPEC -led 

crude output cuts also provided support. 

US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures rose $2.38 to $52.16 a barrel, a 4.8 percent 

gain, by 1:15 p .m. EST (1815 GMT), the first time this year that WTI has topped $50. 

Brent crude futures gained $2.48, or 4.2 percent, to $61.20 a barrel. 

West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures for February delivery rose $2.38 to $52.16 a 

barrel, a 4.8 percent gai n. 

The day’s sharp gains extended a rally that has pushed prices up more than 13 percent in 2019. 

“After a dreadful December for risk markets, crude oil continues to catch a positive vibe,” said 

Stephen Innes at futures brokerage Oanda in Singapore, noti ng that investors were growing less 

fearful that US -China trade tensions would slow global economic growth and dampen demand 

for crude. 

The trade talks in Beijing were carried over into an unscheduled third day, amid signs of 

progress on issues including Chinese purchases of US farm and energy commodities. 

State newspaper China Daily said Beijing was keen to end the trade dispute, but that any 

agreement must involve compromise. 

Oil prices also have received support from supply cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum 

Exporting Countries and allies including Russia. 

The OPEC -led cuts, which officially began in January, are aimed at reining in an emerging glut 

as US crude output has surged to a record 11.7 million bpd. 

Saudi Arabia’s energy minister said he was confident that action to rein in output would bring 

the oil market into balance. Khalid al -Falih also said he would not rule out calling for further 

action. 

Data from the US Energy Information Administration (EIA) showed domestic crude stockpiles 

fell less than expected last week. Gasoline and distillate inventories rose more than anticipated. 

Crude inventories fell by 1.7 million barrels, smaller than the 2.8 million -barrel draw analysts 

had expected. 

Gasoline inventories rose by 8.1 million bar rels, far exceeding analysts’ expectations in a 

Reuter’s poll for a 3.4 million -barrel gain. Distillate stockpiles rose by 10.6 million barrels, more 56 

than five times the expected 1.9 million -barrel increase, the EIA data showed. 

“The report is bearish giv en the smaller -than -expected decline in crude oil inventories and the 

very large increase in refined product inventories,” John Kilduff, a partner at Again Capital 

Management in New York. 

Morgan Stanley cut its 2019 oil price forecasts by more than 10 percent. The bank said in a note 

it now expected Brent to average $61 a barrel this year, and WTI to average around $54 per 

barrel. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 10 -01 -19 

# Copper touches 1 -week high on China demand optimism 

LONDON: Copper prices climbed to one -week highs on Wednesday after reports of fresh 

stimulus in top consumer China and signs of progress in Sino -US trade talks reinforced 

expectations of stronger growth and demand. 

Benchmark copper on the London Metal Exchange ended up 0.9 percent at $5, 958 a tonne. 

Earlier, the metal used widely in power and construction touched $6,008 a tonne, it’s highest 

since Dec. 31. 

“Depreciation of the Chinese currency and the stimulus effect will start to come through and 

Chinese data will start to improve, a ma jor positive for industrial metals,” said Guy Wolf, global 

head of market analytics at brokerage MarexSpectron. 

“Chinese data coming through confirms that growth slowed significantly, but this is all rearview 

mirror stuff.” 

The Chinese yuan has fallen ne arly 10 percent against the dollar since March last year. This will 

help its export industry, a large part of China’s economy. 

Latest comes from a state planning officer saying China plans to introduce policies to boost 

domestic spending on items such as autos and home appliances this year as part of wider efforts 

to boost consumption in China. 

The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) will also introduce policies in 

house leasing and services, as well as elderly and child care, with plans to also lower investment 

barriers in other sectors such as culture and sports. 

China’s most globally high -profile and successful carmaker, Geely, is forecasting flat sales this 

year, a sharp slowdown from 2018 as the country’s giant auto market struggles wit h slowing 

economic growth and more cautious consumers. 57 

“The central government has already started to encourage local governments to resume and 

speed up major projects, as evident in accelerating project approvals by the NDRC in October,” 

analysts at Soci etyGeneral said in a note. 

“More RRR cuts is a foregone conclusion and we argue that the PBOC should begin to lower 

interest rates.” 

China’s foreign ministry said on Wednesday that the latest round of trade talks with the United 

States had concluded, wit h the results to be released soon. 

Exports of copper concentrate from Indonesia’s Grasberg mine, the world’s second -largest 

copper mine, are e xpected to drop to 200,000 ton s this year fro m around 1.2 million ton s in 

2018. 

Copper is testing resistance at the 21 -day moving average, currently around $6,008. A break 

above could see momentum pick up for a test of $6,110, where the 50 - and 100 -day moving 

averages appear to be converging. 

Aluminum slipped 0.6 percent to $1,852.5 a tonne, zinc rose 0.3 percent t o $2,492, lead climbed 

0.1 percent to $1,971, tin gained 0.6 percent to $20,065 and nickel added 0.6 percent to 

$11,250. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

China offers Elon Musk permanent residency 

BEIJING: Tesla boss Elon Musk has been offered a “green card”, China said Thursday, a 

privilege enjoyed by an elite group of foreigners, including several Nobel laureates and a former 

NBA star. 

Musk was in China for the ground -breaking of Tesla’s first overseas factory, which will allow it 

to sell vehicles dir ectly in the world’s largest market for electric vehicles. 

The high -profile entrepreneur met with Premier Li Keqiang on Wednesday in Beijing, where 

they discussed Tesla’s China ambitions, said the State Council — the country’s cabinet. 

“I hope to build T esla’s Shanghai factory into a global example,” Musk told Li, according to a 

readout. “I really love China; I’m willing to visit here more often.” 

Li replied: “If this is what you truly have in mind, we can give you a ‘Chinese green card’.” 

Tesla declined to comment on the offer. 58 

The number of foreigners with Chinese permanent residency crossed 10,000 in 2016, according 

to state -run China Daily. 

Members of this club, according to the paper, include Dutch scientist Bernard Feringa, who won 

the 201 6 Nobel Prize in chemistry, former NBA all -star Stephon Marbury, and Nobel -winning 

economist Robert Mundell. 

Getting a Chinese “green card” has been described as “one of the most difficult tasks in the 

world”. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

China moon ro ver ‘Jade Rabbit’ wakes from ‘nap’ 

BEIJING: China’s lunar rover got back to work on the far side of the moon Thursday after 

waking from five -day hibernation, its official social media page announced. 

“Afternoon nap is over, waking up and getting moving,” the Yutu -2 (Jade Rabbit -2) posted on 

the Twitter -like Weibo. 

The rover on Saturday went into standby mode to protect itself from temperatures reaching 

towards 200 degrees Celsius (390 degrees Fahrenheit), the China Lunar Exploration Program 

under the China National Space Administration (CNSA) said. 

The 140 -kilogram (308 -pound) rover has since resumed activities, which will include taking a 

picture of the front side of the lander and exploration missions. 

The Chang’e -4 mission — named after a moon god dess — made the world’s first soft landing on 

the moon’s far side on January 3. 

The rover, named after the moon goddess’s pet rabbit, successfully separated from the lander and 

drove onto the moon’s surface last Thursday. 

Beijing is pouring billions into its military -run space program , with hopes of having a crewed 

space station by 2022, and of eventually sending humans on a lunar mission. 

This is the second Chinese probe to land on the moon, following the Yutu (Jade Rabbit) rover 

mission in 2013. 

China ’s space agency has said the mission “lifted the mysterious veil” from the far side of the 

moon, which is never seen from Earth, and “opened a new chapter in human lunar exploration”. 

Unlike the near side of the moon that offers many flat areas to touch d own on, the far side is 

mountainous and rugged. 59 

The moon is “tidally locked” to Earth in its rotation so the same side is always facing Earth. 

The Chang’e -4 probe is equipped with instruments developed by scientists from Sweden, 

Germany and China to stud y the lunar environment, cosmic radiation and the interaction between 

solar wind and the moon’s surface, the official Xinhua news agency reported. 

Chang’e -4 landed within the South Pole -Aitken (SPA) Basin, the largest and deepest impact 

crater in the sola r system. 

Scientists have said it is a key area for solving several unknowns about the moon, including its 

internal structure and thermal evolution. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

China’s iron ore futures dipped 

BEIJING: China’s iron ore futures dipped by more than 1 percent on Thursday, as emergency 

anti -pollution measures in the north of the country dampened demand for steelmaking raw 

materials. 

The Ministry of Ecology and Environment said late on Wednesday that it expects a bout of 

severe smog to bla nket regions in northern China, including top steelmaking province Hebei and 

coal mining hub Shanxi, from Jan. 10 -14. 

Some cities have issued smog alerts and asked heavy industry to restrict production, particularly 

the use of sinter plants, during the forecast pollution period. 

Sintering is a highly pollute process that melts iron ore before it is put into a blast furnace. 

The most -active iron ore futures on the Dalian Commodity Exchange fell as much as 1.5 percent, 

their steepest drop since Dec. 25, before closing down 1.2 percent at 506.50 yuan ($74.61) a 

tonne. 

Stocks of imported iron ore at Chinese ports had raised to 140.6 million tonnes, as of Jan. 7, their 

highest level in seven weeks, data compiled by Steel Home showed. 

“Iron ore prices could be volatile in the near term due to restrictions on sintering plants,” analysts 

at Huatai Futures said in a note. “But there will still be some support for prices as steel mills are 

expected to replenish their stocks ahead of Chinese New Year in February, while shipments from 

overseas miners may fall in the coming weeks.” 

Among other steelmaking ingredients, coke closed down 1.4 percent in Dalian at 1,934.50 yuan a 

tonne, while coking coal shrugged off an earlier dip to eke out a 0.1 percent gain at 1,192 yuan a 

tonne. 

Benchmark steel rebar prices on the Shanghai Futures Exchange closed down 0.3 percent at 

3,514 yuan a tonne as investors remain cautious over trade talks between China and the United 60 

States. 

China’s commerce ministry said the three -day tal ks in Beijing this week were extensive and 

detailed, and established a foundation for the resolution of each other’s co ncerns. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

China says US trade talks ‘laid foundation’ to resolve concerns 

BEIJING: China said Thursday that trade talks in Beijing with a US negotiating team had “laid 

the foundation” to resolve concerns held by both sides in a bruising trade war. 

US officials visited Beijing from Monday to Wednesday for the first sit -down talks since 

President Donald Tru mp and Chinese leader Xi Jinping agreed on December 1 to a three -month 

truce in the escalating spat. 

World markets rose Wednesday on increasing optimism that the two sides would be able to 

hammer out a deal ahead of a March deadline and avert further impor t tariff hikes — though 

Asian stocks were mostly down on Thursday. 

China and the US “conducted extensive, in -depth and meticulous exchanges... which enhanced 

mutual understanding and laid the foundation for resolving issues of mutual concern,” the 

Chinese commerce ministry said in a statement. 

“Both parties agreed to continue to maintain close contact.” 

Washington has been clamoring for an end to the forced transfer — and even theft — of 

American technology and intellectual property, as well as steep gov ernment subsidies for 

Chinese companies. 

When asked about progress in those areas on Thursday, China’s commerce ministry spokesman 

GaoFeng said that structural issues were a focus of the talks. 

“Negotiations between the two sides in this area made progre ss,” he said. 

The US Trade Representative office said Wednesday that the talks focused on “ways to achieve 

fairness, reciprocity, and balance in trade relations”, as well as the need for “ongoing verification 

and effective enforcement” of any agreement. 

For Washington, ensuring China makes good on its pledges is key — and Gao acknowledged 

that was important to China as well on Thursday. 61 

“The Chinese side also believes that the implementation mechanism of any agreement is very 

important and both parties h ave an obligation to carry it out,” Gao told reporters during a regular 

press conference. 

“For the next step, both sides will continue to work hard together, and advance the negotiation 

work according to the original plan.” 

The Trump administration also wants Beijing to buy more American goods to narrow a yawning 

trade gap — a sticking point for US president — and allow foreign players better access to the 

Chinese market. 

“The talks also focused on China’s pledge to purchase a substantial amount of agric ultural, 

energy, manufactured goods, and other products and services from the United States,” USTR 

said in a statement. 

Gao declined to provide details when asked about purchases on Thursday. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

China factory gate inflation d ives as trade war rumbles on 

BEIJING: The cost of producing goods in China’s factories slowed sharply in December, a sign 

demand remains weak as the US trade war drags on, while consumer inflation also flagged, 

official data showed Thursday. 

The producer price index (PPI) — an important barometer of the industrial sector that measures 

the cost of goods at the factory gate — rose 0.9 percent on -year in December, compared with a 

2.7 percent rise the previous month. 

The reading marks the lowest growth since September 2016, and fell short of forecasts in a 

Bloomberg News survey. 

A slowdown in factory gate inflation reflects sluggish demand, while a turn to deflation could 

dent corporate profits. 

It “may enter negative territory very soon given the negative s equential growth it already 

recorded”, Goldman Sachs economists forecast. —AFP 62 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

China stocks weakens 

SHANGHAI: Chinese shares shed earlier gains to end lower on Thursday as worries about 

sluggish economic growth sunk in, while the excitement over the US -China trade negotiations 

and policy support faded. 

The Shanghai Composite index closed 0.4 percent weaker at 2,535.10 points, while the blue -chip 

CSI300 index was down by 0.2 percent. 

China’s producer prices in December rose at their slowest pace since September 2016 as 

factories confront a slowdown in demand even as Beijing steps up policy support to bolster the 

economy. 

The “slowdown is in line with the wider trend, but the scale of the fall was surprisingly big. It 

reflects t hat the Chinese economy deteriorated really rapidly in the fourth quarter of last year,” 

said Steven Leung, director of sales at the brokerage UOB Kay Hian in Hong Kong. 

These worries helped offset the optimism brought about by the Chinese central bank, w hose 

governor promised on Wednesday to ratchet up support for the economy by improving its policy 

transmission mechanism. 

“The economy is obviously weak, but what’s changed is that it is now weak beyond the market’s 

expectation. We would expect stronger po licy support to come,” said Cao Xuefeng, head of 

research at Huaxi Securities in Chengdu. 

CSI 300’s financial sector sub -index closed lower by 0.3 percent, the consumer staples sector 

edged up 0.1 percent, and the healthcare sub -index ended 0.5 percent lo wer. 

The smaller Shenzhen index and the start -up board ChiNext Composite index were weaker by 

0.3 percent. 

The largest percentage gainers in the main Shanghai Composite index were Baoding 

TianweiBaobian Electric Co Ltd, XiAn Typical Industries Co Ltd, an d Jiangsu Sunshine Co Ltd, 

all up by 10.1 percent. 

The largest percentage losses in the Shanghai index were Pengqi Technology Development Co 

Ltd, which closed down 10.1 percent, followed by ARTS Group Co Ltd, which ended 10 percent 

lower and Pengqi Technol ogy Development Co Ltd, which closed 9.9 percent lower. 

About 15.99 billion shares were traded on the Shanghai exchange. The volume in the previous 

trading sess ion was 19.19 billion. —Reuters 63 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

Chinese envoy suggests steps to attract huge investment in Pakistan 

RECORDER REPORT 

LAHORE: Ambassador of China to Pakistan Yao Jing has said that good trade policies, low rate 

of taxes, tax incentives and business -friendly environment in Pakistan can attract huge Chinese 

investment. 

He was speaking at the Lahore Chamber of Commerce & Industry. 

He said there is no quota restriction for Pakistani businessmen in China. The mutual trade can be 

enhanced through people to people direct contact. 

Businessmen of both the countries should play their role to further increase bilateral trade, he 

added. 

The Chinese ambassador said that under the Joint Coordination Committee they are working on 

several projects under the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) like power plants, 

railways, metro tr ain, road infrastructure and Gwadar Port. 

He said that Chinese government is also focusing on health, education, agriculture, water, 

poverty alleviation and socio economic development of less -developed areas like Balochistan 

and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 

He said special economic zones are also underway which should be given priority because they 

would boost joint ventures, private to private cooperation, especially in manufacturing and socio -

economic sectors of the country. 

He added that 70 -80 percent priori ty would be given to Pakistan’s share with main focus to 

enhance exports of Pakistan. 

“There is a dire need to find ways to develop consistent policies and stable economic relations 

with each other. Our present level of trade seems to be the result of lac k of knowledge about the 

mutual potential of Pakistani and Chinese economies,” the ambassador added. 

He also assured that the LCCI delegation visiting China in March would be extended full 

cooperation and support. 

LCCI President Almas Hyder said that bil ateral trade figures are following increasing trend from 

the last four years. Since 2014, the average increase in imports from China is almost US 2 billion 64 

dollars per year. In contrast to that Pakistan’s exports are constantly dipping for the last three 

years, he said. 

Almas Hyder said that Prime Minister of Pakistan during his visit to China in November 2018 

was assured that the Chinese government would offer special concessions to Pakistan to enhance 

exports. 

China and Pakistan have agreed upon sharing trade related data to address the issue of disparity 

in the figures of imports and exports between the two countries. 

For example, Pakistan’s imports from China in 2017 were shown as $15.4 billion on ITC 

website. When the base country is taken as China, the same source shows that China exported to 

the tune of $18.3 billion to Pakistan, he added. 

The LCCI president said that due to miss -declaration, both the countries are suffering losses 

therefore necessary measures should be taken to check it. Pakistan has not been able to reap full 

benefits of FTA with China in terms of exports as China has given better tariff rates to ASEAN 

countries. 

Since FTA is being re -negotiated, there must be deliberations on these facts, he added. He also 

proposed formation of a task force comprising members of business community of Lahore and 

Chinese counterparts to address these concerns. 

He said due to the buildup of unfavorable trade scenario for the Chinese companies in the USA, 

many of them are relocating to India, Vietna m and Cambodia but not to Pakistan that is 

surprising. 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

Oil eases after rally as trade talk hopes fade, China data weak 

• Iran will not comply with US sanctions: oil minister 

NEW YORK: Oil prices were slightly lower on Thursday in see -saw trade, easing the day after a 

strong rally as investors were no longer encouraged by US -China trade talks and as weak 

Chinese economic data dampened risk appetite. 

Brent crude futures fell 23 cents to $61.21 a barrel, by 1:09 p.m. EST (1809 GM T). US West 

Texas Intermediate crude futures fell 9 cents to $52.27 a barrel. 

Earlier in the session, both benchmarks hit their highest in nearly a month. WTI hit a session 

high of $52.70 per barrel and Brent rose to $61.91 a barrel. 65 

The previous session , oil prices jumped 5 percent, capping off an eight -day rally that marked 

oil’s longest sustained rise since July 2017. 

Global financial markets had surged on hope Washington and Beijing would avert an all -out 

trade war. Three days of talks between the tw o biggest economies that concluded on 

Wednesday. 

But the rise in global markets began to dwindle after the two sides issued vaguely positive 

statements that lacked concrete details. 

On Thursday, US President Donald Trump told reporters the countries were having “tremendous 

success” in their discussions, but offered no other details. 

Disappointing data from China added to concerns about the global economy. China’s producer 

prices in December rose at their slowest pace in more than two years, a worrying si gn of 

deflationary risks. 

“Data out of China, weak inflation and the consummation of China -US talks without any major 

breakthroughs that we’re aware of at this point led to some profit taking after the incredible run 

we had yesterday,” said Phil Flynn, an analyst at Price Futures Group in Chicago. 

The US stock market, which oil futures have tracked closely, was also mostly flat after a four -

day rise. 

“Today’s price movement has been heavily driven by swings in the equities,” Jim Ritterbusch, 

president of Ritterbusch and Associates, said in a note. 

Barclays forecast that Brent will remain range bound at $55 to $65 per barrel as inventories build 

in the coming months, while it expects “the market will return to a balanced state” by the second 

half of 2019. 

US bank Morgan Stanley cut its 2019 oil price forecasts by more than 10 percent on Wednesday, 

pointing to weakening economic growth expectations and rising oil supply. 

US crude oil production has held around a record high of 11.7 million barrels per day since early 

November, according to government data. 

To counter rising US output, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its 

allies, including Russia, reached a deal to rein in supply that officially began in January. 

Iranian Oil Minis ter BijanZanganeh said US sanctions against his country were “fully illegal” 

and Tehran would not comply with them. 66 

The OPEC deal had hung in the balance on concerns that Iran, whose crude exports have been 

depleted by US sanctions, would receive no exemp tion a nd block the agreement. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

Copper slips as US -China trade optimism fades 

• Tin touches 6 -month peak 

LONDON: Copper slipped on Thursday as optimism over US -China trade talks faded and poor 

China data weighed, though a weaker dollar and still tight supply -side conditions kept losses in 

check. 

China said the three days of talks in Beijing had established a “foundation” to resolve the two 

country’s differences, but gave virtually nothing in the way of details on key issu es at stake. 

At the same time, the world’s biggest base metals consumer released data showing factory -gate 

inflation rose at its slowest rate in more than two years. 

“The question is how sustainable the (China -US) developments will be. It’s given the mar ket 

breathing space but there’s still no substantial information communicated,” said Xiao Fu, head of 

commodity market strategy at Bank of China International. 

Underpinning copper, however, the dollar languished near a three -month low, making dollar -

priced metals cheaper for non -US investors. 

Three -month copper on the London Metal Exchange ended down 0.5 percent at $5,928 a tonne, 

snapping three days of gains. The metal fell 18 percent in 2018 and has slipped 0.1 percent since 

the start of this year. 

“The net spec short is small but growing at 5.4 percent of open interest. Support (is at) 

$5,890/900 basis the lows this week,” said MarexSpectron in a note. 

The soldering metal closed above $20,000 a tonne for the first time since late June on 

Wednesday. It closed up 0.4 percent at $20,140 a tonne, having hit a fresh six -month high of 

$2,200. 

“The price rise is likely to have been triggered by concerns about supply, for Indonesia - the 

world’s largest tin exporter - has been exporting considerably less tin since October,” 

Commerzbank said. 

Stocks of tin held in LME -registered warehouses are at their lowest in 20 years at just 1,505 

tonnes, down 50 percent since mid -December. 67 

Exports of copper concentrate from Indonesia’s Grasberg mine, the world ’s second -la rgest 

copper mine, are expected to drop to 200,000 tonnes this year from around 1.2 million tonnes in 

2018. 

Copper production in Chile, the world’s top producer of the red metal, reached 5.33 million 

tonnes in November, a 6 percent increase over the same period of the previous year. 

Mining firm Anglo American Plc is betting on South America as its main growth area for base 

metals in the coming years, a top executive told Reuters. 

Aluminum ended up 0.5 percent at $1,861, zinc closed down 1.3 percent at $2, 461, lead ended 

up 0.3 percent at $1,976 while nickel ended flat at $11,245. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 11 -01 -19 

CPEC projects may create 1.2m jobs, opine experts 

BEIJING: Approximately 1.2 million jobs could be created indirectly in Pakistan because of 

agreed projects under the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), experts said here on 

Thursday. 

The CPEC has been blamed for causing a debt trap and economic distress in Pakistan, but facts 

have proved that the recent surge in Chinese investment is yielding employment benefits. 

This is a hard -won achievement, but 1.2 million jobs aren’t enough. While the first phase of the 

CPEC concentrated on infrastructure projects, the second part should focus on employment 

creation by setting up special economic zones (SEZs) and supporting economic integration. 

According to the report, the CPEC needs to accelerate the shift of its focus to provide more jobs 

for Pakistani people. 

Although there has been much controversy about the CPEC over issues such as an unev en 

distribution of interests among Pakistani people, the project can only move forward. But it won’t 

be plain sailing due to challenges such as Pakistan’s foreign exchange crisis and security 

problems, and people should be prepared for potential setbacks. However, as long as the CPEC 

creates a lot of jobs, it will win the favor of Pakistani people. 

The construction of transportation infrastructure under the CPEC framework has created many 

jobs for local people. This is obviously good news for the country’s poverty alleviation 

campaign. However, infrastructure work provides mainly limited -term employment. 

It takes time to complete infrastructure construction, but the country will see a substantial 

decrease in job creation in the future if it relies heavily on infrastructure construction to generate 

employment. With about 200 million people, Pakistan needs long -term employment 

opportunities. The CPEC has its weak points, but it also offers unique advantages. The CPEC is 68 

designed to connect Gwadar Port in sout hwest Pakistan with China’s inland areas, offering 

another shipping option for Chinese importers and exporters. —INP 

# Business Recorder, 12 -01 -19 

Russia, China push UN to stay out of DR Congo poll dispute 

UNITED NATIONS: Russia and China led calls at the United Nations Security Council on 

Friday for world powers to stay out of an election dispute in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

Western nations and observers have questioned the outcome of the December 30 poll, in which 

opposition leader Felix Tshiseke di was declared the winner, with Belgium, France and the 

United States saying they await details from election authorities on the vote count. 

The council heard competing appeals from the DR Congo’s poll chief to accept the result, while 

the head of the Ca tholic bishops conference urged the top UN body to demand the release of data 

from polling stations to allow verification. 

China and Russia made clear that the top UN body should be concerned by the stability of the 

DR Congo as it undertakes what is set t o be the first peaceful handover of power since its 

independence from Belgium in 1960. 

Russian Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia said “any speculation” about the vote was 

“unacceptable” and “liable to generate far -reaching repercussions for stability both in th e DRC 

and the entire Great Lakes region.” 

China’s envoy Ma Zhaoxu called for “full respect” of the authority of the CENI election 

commission that organized the vote and announced the outcome. 

“We believe that the people of the DRC have the ability and wis dom to resolve the relevant 

issues in their own way,” said Ma. 

There are suspicions that President Joseph Kabila, in power since 2001, has entered into a deal 

with Tshisekedi to hand him the presidency after his hand -picked candidate came in third place. 

Opposition rival Martin Fayulu, who came in a close second, has dismissed the result and 

announced he will challenge the outcome before the Constitutional Court. 

Bishop Marcel Utembi, who heads the CENCO Catholic bishop conference, renewed his claim 

that the announced results are not in line with the data collected by its 40,000 observers, 

suggesting that Fayulu was the winner. Utembi argued that the release of the records of vote -

counting at the polling stations could “dispel doubt among the population a s to the outcome and 

may th erefore set minds at rest.” —AFP 69 

# Business Recorder, 12 -01 -19 

Wu magic sparks China to 3 -0 Asian Cup win over Philippines 

ABU DHABI: Star striker Wu Lei fired a brilliant double as China beat the Philippines 3 -0 on 

Friday to virtually assure their place in the last 16 of the Asian Cup. 

Marcello Lippi emerged victorious against old foe Sven -Goran Eriksson in a heavyweight 

coaching clash despite spirited early resistance from the Filipino ‘Street Dogs’ in Abu Dhabi. 

China, run ners -up in 1984 and 2004, improved to six points from two games in Group C after 

beating Kyrgyzstan 2 -1 in their opening game. 

They should have led after 32 minutes when Wu Xi headed wastefully wide from point -blank 

range. 

But Wu Lei provided the spark f ive minutes before half -time, turning on the edge of the box and 

whipping a right -foot shot into the far corner. 

His second was even better as he swivelled to slam a Hao Junmin free kick past goalkeeper 

Michael Falkesgaard on the volley after 66 minutes t o effectively finish the tie. 

Substitute Yu Dabao added a third with his first touch 10 minutes from time. 

Pulverised 8 -1 the last time the teams met in 2017, the Philippines gave China more of a game 

this time, having lost 1 -0 to South Korea on their Asian Cup debut earlier this week. 

Kevin Ingreso forced a fingertip save from China goalkeeper Yan Junling in first -half stoppage 

time but Eriksson’s faded badly after the break. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 12 -01 -19 

China shares move up 

SHANGHAI: Shares in China ended higher on Friday amid news that China’s top trade 

negotiator may visit Washington this month, boosting optimism about a resolution to the Sino -

US trade war. However, concerns about a slowing economy continued to weigh on investor 

sentiments. 

The Shanghai Composite index settled 0.74 percent higher at 2,553.83, while the blue -chip 

CSI300 index advanced 0.72 percent. 

The smaller Shenzhen index gained 0.76 percent and the start -up board ChiNext Composite 

index crept 0.204 percent higher. 70 

US Trea sury Secretary Steven Mnuchin announced on Thursday that Chinese vice Premier Liu 

He will “most likely” visit the US capital later in January for trade talks. 

US President Donald Trump said his country is “having tremendous success with China” in trade 

ne gotiations. 

China plans to set a lower economic growth target of 6 -6.5 percent in 2019 compared with last 

year’s target of “around” 6.5 percent, policy sources told Reuters, as Beijing gears up to cope 

with higher US tariffs and weakening domestic demand .

Around the region, MSCI’s Asia ex -Japan stock index firmed 0.3 percent, while Japan’s Nikkei 

index closed up 0.97 percent. 

At 07:18 GMT, the yuan was quoted at 6.7524 per US dollar, 0.54 percent firmer than the 

previous close of 6.789. 

The largest per centage gainers in the main Shanghai Composite index were Win time Energy Co 

Ltd, up 10.13 percent, followed by Henan Zhongfu Industrial Co Ltd, gaining 10.1 percent and 

Ningxia Jiaze Renewables Corp Ltd, up by 10.08 percent. 

The largest percentage losers in the Shanghai index were Shanghai Guangdian Electric Group Co 

Ltd, down 10.09 percent, followed by Zhan chang Big Data Corp Ltd that lost 10.01 percent, and 

Jinzhou Port Co Ltd, down 9.16 percent. 

So far this year, the Shanghai stock index is up 2.4 percent and the CSI300 has risen 2.8 percent, 

while China’s H -share index listed in Hong Kong is up 3.2 percent. 

About 14.94 billion shares were traded on the Shanghai exchange, roughly 109.1 percent of the 

market’s 30 -day moving average of 13.69 billion shares a day. The volume in the previous 

trading session was 15.99 billion. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 12 -01 -19 

Base metals rise on trade detente hopes as US -China talks loom 

• Copper on track for biggest weekly jump since Nov 

• Zinc backwardation eases 

LONDON: Copper prices rose on Friday on hopes for a thaw in a trade dispute between 

Washington and Beijing, as the two sides prepared for more talks to resolve their issues. 71 

US officials expect China’s top trade negotiator to visit Washington this month , signaling that 

higher -level discussions are likely to follow this week’s talks with mid -level officials in Beijing. 

The tit -for -tat trade dispute has pushed down metals prices on expectations it could hurt demand, 

especially from top consumer China. 

“W e started off the year with a series of weak data that raised concerns about demand, but it’s a 

better environment for base metals at the moment given the progress in trade talks,” Danske 

Bank commodities analyst Jens Pedersen said. Three -month copper on t he London Metal 

Exchange (LME) ended 0.2 percent higher at $5,942 per tonne, logging its biggest weekly gain 

since mid -November. 

The dollar rose against the euro, boosted by technical factors after falling earlier on a message 

that the U.S Federal Reserve will be patient on monetary policy. 

Indonesia exported 5,260.55 tonnes of refined tin last month, an increase of nearly 51 percent 

from a month earlier, data from the Trade Ministry showed. 

China plans to set a lower economic growth target of 6 -6.5 percent in 2019 compared with last 

year’s target of “around” 6.5 percent, policy sources told Reuters, as Beijing gears up to cope 

with higher US tariffs and weakening domestic demand. 

China’s refined zinc production saw its steepest plunge since 2013 las t year amid tight raw 

material supply, longer maintenance periods and the relocation of the country’s top smelter, 

according to Antaike, the research arm of the China Nonferrous Metals Industry Association. 

The discount of LME cash zinc to the three -month contract narrowed to $12 a tonne, the smallest 

since Oct. 15. 

Nickel was the biggest gainer in the base metals complex, rising 2 percent to $11,460 per tonne 

after touching its highest since Nov. 15. On -warrant stocks of nickel available to the market in 

LME -approved warehouses were at their lowest since April 2014 at 144,882 tonnes. 

Aluminium fell 1.3 percent to $1,836 per tonne, zinc gained 1.3 percent to $2,492, lead rose 1.3 

percent to $2,002, and tin added 0.8 percent to close at $20,300 after tou chi ng a six -month 

high. —Reuters 72 

# Business Recorder, 13 -01 -19 

CTD directed to submit report on Chinese Consulate attack on Feb 8 

KARACHI: The anti -terrorism court (ATC) on Saturday directed the Counter Terrorism 

Department (CTD) to compile and submit the inve stigation report on February 8 with regard to 

the attack on the Chinese Consulate in Karachi. 

Amid the hearing, CTD officers, investigating into the case and having failed to find any 

evidence and arresting those responsible for the attack on the Chinese Consulate, pleaded with 

the court to close the case, whereas the jury expressed concerns over “reasons for keeping the 

case in the A -Class category.” 

The A -class category is applicable to those cases where suspects are apparently unknown or 

untraceable. 

‘Why there had been no efforts to catch the attackers,’ the court asked, while ordering the 

officers strictly to investigate the matter thoroughly and arrest the suspects. 

The current report presented before the court mentioned ‘information’ regarding the killing of 

AslamAchoo, however, further states of having no confirmation or evidence. 

AslamAchoo ‘was’ a senior commander of the banned outfit Balochistan Liberation Army 

(BLA). —NNI 

# Business Recorder, 13 -01 -19 

China stock market inflows could double in 2019: securities official 

SHANGHAI: The inclusion of Chinese A -shares in global stock indexes could see foreign 

inflows into China’s stock market double in 2019; the Shanghai Securities News quoted a top 

Chinese securities regulator as saying on Saturday. 

“Last year, net foreign stock market inflows reached 300 billion yuan ($44.38 billion) and this 

year we estimate that inflows will increase further. We could expect 600 billion yuan,” Fang 

Xinghai, vice chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commissi on (CSRC), was quoted as 

saying at a market forum. 

It did not say where the forum was taking place. 

Fang said that in addition to the Shanghai -Hong Kong and Shenzhen -Hong Kong Stock Connect 

programmes, the inflows would be driven by a boost in the propor tion of A -shares included in 

MSCI global indexes, as well as the inclusion of A -shares in FTSE Russell and Dow Jones 

indexes. 73 

Fang also said that a number of US, Japanese and European investment banks had applied to 

raise their stakes in domestic brokerag es to 51 percent. 

In December, UBS Group became the first foreign bank to win approval for a majority stake in a 

domestic securities joint venture. 

Fang said that several foreign banks had expressed a hope to apply to raise their stakes to 100 

percent once permitted by regulations, and that the CSRC would strongly support such a move. 

China’s benchmark share indexes were among the world’s worst performing equity markets last 

year, losing around a quarter of their value as the escalating Sino -US trade war put further 

pressure on the slowing Chinese economy. But stocks have drawn some support over the last 

month on signs of an ea sing in trade tensions. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 13 -01 -19 

China’s yuan to break 7 per dollar in six months 

BENGALURU: China’s yuan is still expected to breach the key 7 -per -dollar mark within six 

months as a dimming economic growth outlook is likely to push the central bank toward easier 

monetary policy this year, a Reuter’s poll found. 

The number of analysts predicting the yua n will weaken to 7 per dollar or beyond at any time 

during the polling horizon increased in the latest poll from previous months and was the highest 

since a July 2017 survey. 

Although the yuan fell about 6 percent last year, with most losses coming after June when the 

US -China trade war escalated, it still did not crack the 7 -per -dollar rate. 

The managed currency, also known as the renminbi, went through wild gyrations last year, with 

the spread between its high and low the widest in almost three decades. For the second month 

running, a strong majority of analysts who answered an extra question said the yuan would 

weaken to 7 per dollar within six months, despite a widely -held view the Chinese authorities will 

step in to defend it at that key level. 

That view is largely driven by expectations the Chinese economy will lose further momentum in 

2019 amid softening domestic and export demand, prompting the central bank to take more steps 

to reduce the risk of a sharper slowdown. 

However, median estimates in t he wider Jan. 2 -8 poll of more than 70 foreign exchange 

strategists showed the yuan will only weaken about 1.5 percent to 6.95 per dollar by end -June 

from about 6.85 on Tuesday. It is then forecast to end the year at 6.89 per dollar. Much will also 74 

depend on how long it takes China to stabilize its cooling economy and whether Washington and 

Beijing end their trade war. 

“Looking at the Chinese fundamentals, the economy is slowing and the central bank is easing 

monetary policy, with a lot of uncertainties ov er the next steps for the trade dispute between the 

US and China,” said Erik Nelson, currency strategist at Wells Fargo. 

“All these point to further weakness in the Chinese currency,” he added. 

US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross said on Monday the United States and China could reach a 

trade deal that “we can live with” as dozens of officials from the world’s two largest economies 

held talks in a bid to end a trade dispute that roiled global markets last year. 

Despite optimism around the talks in Beijing, some respondents warned that the US -China 

relationship remained on shaky ground and that tension could flare up again soon. 

“Until the outcome in the latest US -China trade truce proves as substantial as the working level 

discussions, the risk remains for more tariffs on each other’s goods. If the US reinstates the 

decision to lift the tariff rate on $200 billion worth of China’s goods to 25 percent from 10 

percent, the yuan could depreciate to 7.30 per dollar,” noted Philip Wee, currency strategist at 

DBS Bank. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 13 -01 -19 

China raises corn output estimate by 20pc 

BEIJING: China will produce 257.33 million tonnes of corn in the 2018/19 crop year; the 

agriculture ministry said on Friday, up 20 percent from last month’s forecast of 21 5.04 million 

tonnes. 

The higher outlook was based on China’s most recent agriculture census, the ministry said in its 

monthly China Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates report. 

China, the world’s second largest producer of corn, sharply revised highe r its corn output data 

for the past 10 years last November following its third national agricultural census. 

The ministry on Friday also raised its forecast for corn consumption in the year that began in 

October to 285.28 million tonnes, up by 34.48 milli on tonnes from its previous estimate. 

Corn imports for the year were seen at 1.5 million tonnes, down from the previous forecast of 2.5 

million tonnes, the report said. 75 

China’s 2018/19 corn ending stocks deficit was seen at 26.5 million tonnes against th e previous 

forecast of 33.31 million tonnes. 

Soybean production for 2018/19 was forecast at 16 million tonnes, up from a previous forecast of 

15.8 million tonnes. 

Soybean consumption for the year was seen at 102.8 million tonnes, down 3 percent from 107 

million tonnes in the previous year, as a series of deadly African swine fever outbreaks and 

lower protein levels in animal feed pushed down demand for soyameal, the ministry said in the 

report. 

China has confirmed about 100 cases of African swine fever across 23 provinces since early 

August last year. The disease, for which there is neither a cure nor a vaccine, is deadly to pigs 

bu t does not harm people. —Reuters 

# Business Recorder, 13 -01 -19 

China’s Huawei fires employee detained in Poland 

BEIJING: Huawei said Saturday it has fired a Chinese employee who was arrested in Poland on 

espionage allegations, as China’s telecom giant distanced itself from the case amid Western 

concerns that it could act as a proxy for Chinese security services. 

This week’s deten tion of Wang Weijing follows the December arrest of Huawei’s chief financial 

officer in Canada and US efforts to blacklist the company internationally over security concerns. 

While China’s government has vociferously defended Huawei CFO MengWanzhou and 

dem anded her release, the firm swiftly sacked Wang, who works at its representative office in 

Poland. 

“His alleged actions have no relation to the company,” Huawei said in a statement to AFP. —

AFP 

# Business Recorder, 14 -01 -19 

China will tackle US trade dispute in 2019: minister 

BEIJING: China will work to straighten out trade frictions with the US this year; the countries 

commerce minister told state media, following talks with US negotiators this week. A large US 

delegation ended a three -day visit to Be ijing Wednesday in the first face to face trade talks since 

President Donald Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping in December pledged a three -month 

truce in the escalating tariff spat. 76 

China said the talks had “laid the foundation” to resolve mutual concer ns on trade. 

“We will properly handle the China -US economic and trade frictions” this year, commerce 

minister Zhong Shan said, according to a Saturday report by state media outlet Xinhua. 

Zhong said Beijing will also promote outside investment, work to p ass a foreign investment law 

and improve its dispute resolution system, Xinhua reported. 

China’s policymakers have long promised a more open and free market with better protections 

for foreign investors, but officials have been slow to make good on those pledges — leading the 

European Union Chamber of Commerce in China to coin the term “promise fatigue”. 

Zhong said China’s negative list — which restricts investment in certain industries — will be 

further slimmed down, while Beijing also intends to expand economic sectors open for foreign 

investment without the need for a Chinese joint -venture partner. 

The minister specifically outlined a push for foreign investment in manufacturing, high -tech 

industries and investment in China’s inner regions — pledges wh ich are similar to promises 

made last year. 

Pushing Beijing to implement economic reforms and further open up areas for US investment is 

a focus in trade neg otiations with Washington. —AFP 

# Business Recorder, 14 -01 -19 

Ahsan terms CPEC national strategic project 

KARACHI: PML -N leader AhsanIqbal has said that people of Pakistan are custodians of the 

CPEC as a strategic national project. 

In a press statement, he said that Pakistan doesn’t face any economic difficulty due to the CPEC 

investment on the contra ry the CPEC has greatly helped Pakistan solve energy crisis, untapped 

valuable resources such as Thar coal, where coal with equal energy value as Saudi Arabia and 

Iran’s oil was sitting underground for 70 years, brought much needed foreign investment, help ed 

build modern transport infrastructure in the country on most favorable terms. 

Balance of payment crisis is not an outcome of the CPEC rather it is due to the political drama, 

which was staged to oust PML -N government that shied away billions of dollars in foreign 

investment due to political uncertainty while GDP was growing to almost 6 percent. 

But, inflow of dollars got stalled due to shying away of billions of dollars in investments thanks 

to Panama drama. Some vested interests and elements in presen t government are unnecessarily 

creating controversies about CPEC. We should refrain from making national projects centre of 77 

any controversy. The present government has now found that CPEC projects we re done most 

transparently. —PR 

# Business Recorder, 14 -01 -19 

Bank of China to enable payment in yuan on US e -commerce platforms 

BEIJING: Bank of China’s New York branch will enable Chinese firms to receive payment in 

yuan rather than dollars from their sales on US e -commerce platforms this year, the official 

Xinhua news agency reported on Sunday. 

Pledging to introduce more services for small and medium -sized enterprises engaged in cross -

border trade between the United States and China, executives from the branch said payment in 

yuan would be possible by tapping new functions of e -MPay, a cross -border payment system 

launched by the branch in 2016. 

The branch is developing a system using an existing platform to “facilitate trade finance for e -

commerce players,” said Xu Chen, president and chief executi ve officer of Bank of China USA, 

Xinhua reported, without providing further details. 

The system will adhere to US anti -money laundering rules through artificial intelligence and 

cyber security technologies, Xu added. 

Bank of China has run into problems w ith overseas anti -money laundering regulations in the 

past. In February 2017, it agreed to pay a 600,000 euro ($688,000) fine to settle a case involving 

its Milan branch. Prosecutors had alleged more than 4.5 billion euros was smuggled to China 

from Italy between 2006 and 2010. 

A unit of fellow state -owned bank Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) last year 

settled money laundering charges in the United States. —Reuters .

# Dawn News 

# Dawn News, 01 -01 -19 

China`s manufacturing shrinks in December 

BEIJING: China`s manufacturing activity in December contracted for the first time in over two 

years, official data showed on Monday, amid a bruising trade war with the United States and a 

slowing domestic economy. 78 

The manufacturing Purchasing Managers` Ind ex (PMI), a gauge of factory conditions, came in at 

49.4 for the month, down from 50.0 in November, according to official figures from the National 

Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 

Marking its lowest point in over two years, the PMI fell below the 50.0 mark sep arating 

expansion from contraction. 

`Some industries have gradually entered the off -season of production, and companies are 

cautious about the recent market expectations,` said NBS statistician Zhao Qinghe in a statement. 

`Second, due to factors such as mo re external environmental variables and slower internal 

demand, the recent import and export boom has been lower.` He noted that the average PMI for 

2018 has been 50.9, but a slowdown in global economic growth and international trade friction 

had impacted China`s manufacturing industry. 

After spending much of the year locked in a trade war, China and the US are now reportedly 

preparing for talks after a 90 -day truce agreed between Donald Trump and Xi Jinping in 

Argentina earlier this month. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 0 2-01 -19 

Cooperation best for both China and US, Xi tells Trump 

BEIJING: History shows that cooperation is the best choice for both China and the United States, 

Chinese President Xi Jinping told US President Donald Trump in a congratulatory message on 

Tuesd ay to mark 40 years since the establishment of diplomatic ties. 

The two countries agreed last month to a 90 -day temporary ceasefire in their bitter trade war to 

give them time to hold fresh talks to try and end a dispute that has seen those level increasin gly 

severe tariffs on each other’s` goods. 

In his message to Trump, Xi said China -US relations have experienced ups and downs but have 

made historic progress over the past four decades, state news agency Xinhua said .

This has brought huge benefits to the two peoples and has contributed greatly to world peace, 

stability and prosperity, Xi added. 

`History has proved that cooperation is the best choice for both sides,` Xi said. 

Sino -US relations are in an important stage, he added. 

`I attach great importance to the development of China -US relations and am willing to work with 

President Trump to summarize the experience of the development of China -US relations and 79 

implement the consensus we have reached in a joint effort to advance China -US relations 

featuring coordination, cooperation and stability so as to better benefit the two peoples as well as 

the people of the rest of the world,` he said. 

Trump sent his own congratula tory message in return, saying it was his priority to promote 

cooperative and constructiv e US -China relations, Xinhua added. 

Xi and Trump also spoke by telephone over the weekend. Trump said he had a `long and very 

good call` with Xi and that a possible trade deal between the United States and China was 

progressing well. China and the United S tates have made plans for face -to -face consultations 

over trade in January, China`s Commerce Ministry said last week. 

Xinhua said it was only natural the two countries would have disagreements and encounter 

problems, considering their `different social sys tems, development paths and historical and 

cultural backgrounds` -Reuters 

# Dawn News, 03 -01 -19 

China acknowledges it`s extending financial help to Pakistan 

ISLAMABAD:ChinaonWednesday tentatively acknowledged it was extending financial 

assistance to help Pakistan boost its dwindling foreign exchange reserves. 

Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang in his daily media briefing in Beijing said: `The 

Chinese side has offered and will continue to offer its best through assistance, trade, investment 

and all -around practical cooperation to support and boost Pakistan`s economic and social 

development. 

He was responding to a question about a Financial Times report, which said that China had 

pledged to lend at least $2bn to Pakistan to shore up its foreign exchan ge reserves and prevent 

further devaluation of the rupee against the dollar. 

This was the first official confirmation by a Chinese official that Beijing had planned to extend a 

fina ncial package to Islamabad. 

Mr. Lu further noted that Pakistan and China ar e `all -weather strategic partners` and both have 

been `in close communication with each other on the relevant cooperation`. 

The details of the conditions onwhich the assistance is being extended to Pakistan are still not 

known, though there have been specu lations it`s being given as a loan at an exorbitant rate. 

Pakistan had formally sought Chinese assistance during Prime Minister Imran Khan`s visit to 

Beijing last November. The Chinese leadership had after the meetings with PM Khan pledged to 80 

help Pakistan out of the looming economic crisis, but the details were subsequently worked out 

in meetings at the official and experts` levels. 

It was initially said that Chinese package would also include a currency swap arrangement and 

increased access for Pakistani products to Chinese markets to redres s Pak -China trade imbalance. 

Mr. Kang in his statement also indicated that the package would be a comprehensive one. 

Pakistan is also planning to launch `Panda Bond` to rise up to $1 billion from Chinese equity 

market. Pakistan and China are, moreover, jointly undertaking the multi -billion dollar 

infrastructure and communications project the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). So 

far 22 early harvest projects under the CPEC have been completed or are under construct ion with 

a total investment of $18.9bn.The CPEC, officials say, is being expanded and the two sides at a 

meeting of the Joint Coordination Committee held on Dec 20 had signed a memorandum of 

understanding on industrial cooperation and an agreement was also reached on promoting the 

construction of special economic zones. Moreover, China pledged to support projects such as 

education, agriculture, poverty alleviation, health care and vocational training under the newly 

set up socio -economic component of the co nnectivity project. 

Pakistan had earlier secured balance of payments support from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab 

Emirates both of whom had pledged to deposit $3bn each in the State Bank of Pakistan. Saudi 

Arabia has already transferred $2bn to Pakistan u nder the arrangement. The kingdom has, 

moreover, promised to provide oil on deferred payment. 

Negotiations with the International Monetary Fund over a bailout are, meanwhile, continuing and 

the government last month submitted a Memorandum of Economic and F inancial Policies 

envisaging fiscal adjustment, energy pricing, monetary and exchange rate policy and 

structuralreforms,but differencesbetween the two are said to be persisting. 

# Dawn News, 03 -01 -19 

Chinese contractor to build warship for Pakistan: report 

KARACHI: China has startedbuildinganadvanced warship that would be exported to Pakistan 

under a defense agreement between the two neighboring countries, China Daily reported on 

Wednesday. 

The newspaper, which quoted China State Shipbuilding Corp one of the largest state -owned 

defense contractors, said the construction had started at the Hudong -Zhonghua shipyard in 

Shanghai. It is said to be a version of China`s most advanced warship. 

Though the Chinese corporation did not specify the type, China Daily quote d Pakistan Navy as 

saying the ship`s class was Type 054AP, which is based on China`s People`s Liberation Army 

(PLA) Navy`s Type 054A frigate. Pakistan has ordered four such ships, the newspaper said, 

quoting a statement by the Pakistan Navy. 81 

InJunelastyear ,Pakistan Navy had announced that it was purchasing two multirole Type 054A 

frigates from China for bolstering its war fighting capability. 

The navy had said that Pakistan`s fleet of Type054A warships would grow to four by 2021. The 

PLA Navy has about 30 o f the Type 054A ships, each of which has a loaded displacement of 

4,000 tonnes and is equipped with advanced radars and missiles. 

According to a researcher at the PLA Naval Military Studies Research Institute, Cao Weidong, it 

appeared that the equipment in stalled on the ships will be Chinese, which shows China`s 

`progress in the industry and the Pakistani Navy`s confidence in our technology and capability`. 

Previously, Pakistan would always ask its Chinese contractors to install Western radars and 

weaponry as it behaved that West`s technology was superior to China` s, Mr. Cao said. 

`I believe the reason they choseourtypeisthatour s is one of the few that can carry out all of the 

air -defense, ant i-ship and anti -submarine tasks, he said, adding that he believed that the ships 

would improve Pakistan`s naval defense.KARACHI: China has startedbuildinganadvanced 

warship that would be exported to Pakistan under a defense agreement between the two 

neighboring countries, China Daily reported on Wednesday. 

The newspaper, which quoted China State Shipbuilding Corp one of the largest state -owned 

defensecontractors, said the construction had started at the Hudong -Zhonghua shipyard in 

Shanghai. It is said to be a version of China`s most advanced warship. 

Though the Chinese corporation did not specify the type, China Daily quoted Pakistan Navy as 

saying the ship`s class was Type 054AP, which is based on China`s People`s Liberation Army 

(PLA) Navy`s Type 054A frigate. Pakistan has ordered four such ships, the newspaper said, 

quoting a statement by the Pakistan Navy. 

InJunelast year,Pakistan Navy had announced that it was purchasing two multirole Type 054A 

frigates from China for bolstering its war fighting capability. 

The navy had said that Pakistan`s fleet of Type054A warships would grow to four by 2021. The 

PLA Navy has about 30 of the Type 054A ships, each of which has a loaded displacement of 

4,000 tonnes and is equipped with advanced radars and missiles. 

According to a researcher at the PLA Naval Military Studies Research I nstitute, Cao Weidong, it 

appeared that the equipment installed on the ships will be Chinese, which shows China`s 

`progress in the industry and the Pakistani Navy`s confidence in our technology and capability`. 

Previously, Pakistan would always ask its Chi nese contractors to install Western radars and 

weaponry as it behaved that West`s technology was superior to China`s, Mr . Cao said. 82 

`I believe the reason they choseourtypeisthatoursis one of the few that can carry out all of the air -

defense, anti -ship and anti -submarine tasks,` he said, adding that he believed that the ships would 

improve Pakistan`s naval defense. 

# Dawn News, 03 -01 -19 

Police reopen missing Chinese engineer case 

RAWALPINDI: Following the directives of the federal government, the police have reopened 

the case of the kidnapping of Chinese engineer Pingzhi Liu, who went missing under mysterious 

circumstances while working on a tunnel linked to a river at the Karot Power Project, Kahuta on 

Dec 20, 2017. 

A kidnapping case was registered with the K ahuta police, who had closed the file. 

Sources said a deputy superintendent of police has now been assigned the investigation. 

The police suspected that Mr . Liu may have gone back to China via land and made all efforts to 

track him down. The investigation was stopped when they could not find any clue. The interior 

ministry has now directed the police to reopen the case and track down the missing engineer. 

When Mr . Liu went missing, the immigration authorities at the Benazir Bhutto International 

Airport were aliened but according to the immigration record, he had not left the country by air. 

Senior Superintendent of Police (Operation) Abdul QadirQamar on Wednesday visited the Karot 

Hydropower Project and checked the security arrangements in place for the prot ection of the 

project and its workers. 

In addition to the army, 450 to 500 personnel of the Special Protection Unit (SPU), established 

for the security of foreigners and 35 personnel of the Rawalpindi police have been deployed at 

the power project. 

The Pun jab Home Department had already asked the police and SPU to review security checking 

at the project following the disappearance of the Chinese engineer from the project without a 

clue. 

However, the Chinese builders of the projects view the present security arrangements as a hurdle 

in the momentum of the construction work. 

Since Mr Liu has gone missing, the police, intelligence agencies and SPU personnel have 

launched searched in and around the construction site and rough areas. 83 

The Chinese government has al so taken notice of the difficulties being faced by the project 

company in regards to security issues including checking and vetting of local staff before hiring. -

Mohammad Asghar 

# Dawn News, 03 -01 -19 

US -China trade war takes toll on global manufacturing 

LOND ON: Factory activity weakened across much of Europe and Asia in December as the US -

China trade war and a slowdown in demand hit production in many economies, offering little 

reason for optimism as the New Year begins. 

A series of purchasing managers` index es for December released on Wednesday mostly showed 

declines or slowdowns in manufacturing activity across the globe. 

In China, the Caixin/IHS Markit PMI slipped into contraction territory for the first time in 19 

months, broadly tracking an official surve y released on Monday. 

`We are really seeing a global slowdown into this year, and in Asia, particularly, export -oriented 

countries are hurting,` said Irene Cheung, Asia strategist at ANZ. 

`Our expectation for central banks is that most of them won`t change policy in 2019 and these 

numbers coming out on the weak side won`t changes that outlook. 

Eurozone manufacturing activity barely expanded at the end of 2018, providing disappointing 

reading for European Central Bank policymakers, just after they ended thei r 2.6 trillion -euro 

asset -purchase scheme. 

Earlier PMI surveys showed Italy remained in contraction territory and was joined by France, 

where data showed a first deterioration in operating conditions for 27 months. 

Manufacturing growth in both Germany and Spain was modest, easing to the weakest in around 

two -and -ahalf years. 

British factories, however, ramped up stockpiling as they prepared for possible border delays 

when Britain leaves the E uropean Union in less than three months` time. 

The UK manufacturin g PMI rose to a six -month high, stronger than all forecasts in a Reuter’s 

poll of economists. 

Survey compiler IHS Markit cautioned the improvement did not herald a big change in the 

outlook for Britain`s stuttering economy -it was caused in large part by manufacturers 

stockpiling inputs and finished goods. 84 

`Despite the headline index rising to a six -month high in December, the manufacturing PMI still 

suggests that the sector stagnated in Q4,` said Andrew Wishart at Capital Economics. 

Later on Wednesday, sur veys are expected to show US activity was a tad slower, but still 

expanding, in a sign China has suffered more from trade frictions than the United States. 

But world shares started 2019 on a downbeat note, oil prices and bond yields slid, and the 

Japanese yen strengthened on Wednesday as the factory survey data confirmed the picture of a 

global economic slowdown. 

China brakes China`s weakness spilled over to other Asian economies. Malaysian manufacturing 

slowed to its weakest pace of expansion since the sur vey began in 2012, and Taiwan fell to its 

lowest since September 2015. 

Meanwhile, official economic data out of Singapore showed its gross domestic product grew 

more slowly than forecast in the fourth quarter as the city -state`s manufacturing contracted on a

quarterly basis. 

With growth slowing and inflation below or barely within target in most countries, Asian central 

banks are unlikely to continue their tightening cycle this year, barring any shocks in currency 

markets. 

The world`s two largest economies agreed at the start of December to a 90 -day truce following 

tit -for -tat tariffs that have disrupted the flow of hundreds of billions of dollars of goods between 

the two countries. -Reuters 

# Dawn News, 03 -01 -19 

Qatar Airways buys 5pc stake in Chinese airline 

DOHA: Qatar Airways said on Wednesday that it had acquired a five per cent stake in China 

Southern Airlines, as it seeks to establish itself in the Asian aviation market. 

The state -owned airline said in a statement the deal was part of its `strategy to inv est in the 

strongest airlines around the world`, but did not specify the cost of the transaction. 

China Southern Airlines is one of China`s `big three` carriers. 

Qatar Airways also owns a 20pc stake in International Airlines Group which holds British 

Airwa ys under its umbrella as well as shares in LATAM Airlines Group, Italy`s Meridiana and 

Hong Kong based Cathay Pacific. 

The latest deal comes as Qatar seeks new partners and routes for the national airline due to an 

ongoing diplomatic dispute in the Gulf. 85 

Since June 2017, Qatar has been politically and economically isolated regionally by Saudi 

Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. 

These Gulf peers continue to impose a blockade, after accusing Doha of supporting `terrorists` 

and being too close to Sa udi Arabia`s Shiite archrival Iran charges Qatar denies. 

The aviation deal follows warming relations between Doha and Beijing. 

Government officials in Qatar said in November that China is now Doha`s third largest trade 

partner, as bilateral exports and imp orts totaled more than $10 billion (more than 8.8bn euros) in 

2017. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 03 -01 -19 

Taiwan`s unification with China inevitable, says Xi 

BEIJING: Taiwan`s unification with the mainland is `inevitable`, said President Xi Jinping on 

Wednesday, warning against any efforts to promote the island`s independence and saying China 

would not renounce the option of using military force to bring it into the fold. 

Xi`s comments provoked a swift response from Taipei, where President Tsai Ing -wen said 

Taiwan`s peop le would never willingly give up the kind of democratic freedoms unseen on the 

mainland. 

China sees Taiwan as part of its territory to be reunified, despite the two sides being ruled 

separately since the end of a civil war in 1949. 

`China must and will be united... which is an inevitable requirement for the great rejuvenation of 

the Chinese people in the new era,` Xi said in a speech commemorating the 40th anniversary of a 

message sent to Taiwan in 1979, in which Beijing called for unification and an end to military 

confrontation. 

`We make no promise to give up the use of military force and reserve the option of taking all 

necessary means` against Taiwanese separatist activities and `outside forces` that interfere with 

reunification, he said. 

In his speech, Xi described unification under a `one country, two systems` approach that would 

`safeguard the interests and well -being of Taiwanese compatriots`. 

Taiwan considers itself a sovereign state, with its own currency, political and judicial systems, 

but has nev er declared formal independence from the mainland. 86 

Relations have been strained since the 2016 election of President Tsai, who has refused to 

acknowledge Beijing`s stance that the island is part of `one China`. 

Though Xi`s speech takes a strong stance agai nst Taiwanese separatists and pushes for 

reunification, it is aimed mostly at domestic audiences, analysts say. 

`It`s rather empty and doesn`t have any new points except that cross trait unification would not 

affecttheinterests of other countries,` said Fa n Shipping, political analyst at National Taiwan 

Normal University, adding that Xi`s words may also be intended for the US. 

In 2018, the US sent multiple ships through the Taiwan Strait which China considers its territory 

but the US and others see as inter national waters open to all infuriating Beijing. 

Washington remains Taipei`s most powerful unofficial ally and its main arms supplier despite 

switching diplomatic recognition to Beijing in 1979. 

To accommodate differences in Taiwan`s political system and c ivil society, China has proposed 

adopting the `one country, two systems` policy which was implemented in Hong Kong after the 

British handed the city back to China in 1997. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 04 -01 -19 

China`s probe lands on far side of moon 

BEIJING: A Chinese lunar rover landed on the far side of the moon on Thursday, in a global first 

that boosts Beijing`s ambitions to become a space superpower. 

The Chang`e -4 probe touched down and sent a photo of the socalled `dark side` of the moon to 

the Quegiao satellite, which would relay communications to controllers on Earth, China`s 

national space agency said on its website. 

Beijing is pouring billions into its military -run space programme, with hopes of having a crewed 

space station by 2022, and of eventually sending h umans to the moon. 

The Chang`e -4 lunar probe mission named after the moon goddess in Chinese mythology was 

launched in December from the south -western Xichang launch center. It is the second Chinese 

probe to land on the moon, following the Yutu (Jade Rabbi t) rover mission in 2013. 

Unlike the near side of the moon that offers many flat areas to touch down on, the far side is 

mountainous and rugged. 

The moon is `tidally locked`to Earth in its rotation so the same side is always f acing Earth. 87 

Chang`e -4 is car rying six experiments from China and four from abroad, including lowfrequency 

radio astronomical studies aiming to take advantage of the lack of interference on the moon`s far 

side. 

The rover would also conduct mineral and radiation tests, the China Nation al Space 

Administration said. 

`It`s a very good start, ` said Wu Weiren, chief designer of China`s lunar exploration programme, 

in an interview with state broadcaster CCTV. `We are now building China into an aerospace 

power. 

Space dominance Beijing is plan ning to send another lunar lander, Chang`e -5, later this year to 

collect samples and bring them back to Earth. 

It is among a slew of ambitious Chinese targets, which include a reusable launcher by 2021, a 

super -powerful rocket capable of delivering payload s heavier than those Nasa and private rocket 

firm SpaceX can handle, a moon base, a permanently crewed space station,and a Mars rover. 

The People`s Liberation Army `looks at space as a new strategic high ground`, said Michael 

Raska, who studies security an d defense issues at the S. 

Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore. 

An enhanced presence in space will be vital for `anything for early warning, surveillance, 

reconnaissance, targeting... 

nearly every military mission out there is relying o n some sort of space capability`. 

But China`s aerospace industry still had a long way to go, especially compared to that of the US, 

said ShenDingli, a Shanghai -based international studies scholar. 

`Armstrong landed on the moon more than 50 years ago. 

Chinese people still have not landed on the moon even today. 

Extreme challenges It was not until 1959 that the Soviet Union captured the first images of the 

moon`s mysterious and heavily cratered `dark side`. 

No lander or rover has ever previously touched the surfacethere, and it is no easy technological 

feat. China has been preparing for this moment for years. 

A major challenge for the mission was communicating with the robotic lander as there is no 

direct `line of sight` for signals to the far side of the moon. 88 

As a solution, China in May blasted the Quegiao (Magpie Bridge) satellite into the moon`s orbit, 

positioning it so that it can relay data and commands between the lander and Earth. 

In another extreme hurdle, during the lunar night which lasts 14 Ear th days temperatures drop to 

as low as minus 173 degrees Celsius. During the lunar day, also lasting 14 Earth days, 

temperatures soar as high as 127 C. 

Adding to the difficulties, Chang`e -4 was sent to the Aitken Basin in the lunar south pole region 

known for its craggy and complex terrain. 

China`s previous moon rover Yutu also conquered those challenges, and after initial setbacks, 

ultimately surveyed the moon`s surf ace for 31 months. 

Its success provided a major boost to China`s space program .-AFP 

# Dawn N ews, 04 -01 -19 

ATC seeks CTD arguments for halting Chinese consulate attack case proceedings 

KARACHI: An antiterrorism court on Thursday summoned the investigating officer of the 

Counter -Terrorism Department for arguments on his `A` Class report, recommending suspension 

of the proceedings pertaining to the November 2018 terrorist attack on the Chinese consulate. 

The administrative judge of the antiterrorism court had sent the matter to the antiterrorism court 

concerned with the direction todispose of the same after the police investigating officer 

submitted an `A` class report in the case. 

Seven people, three heavily armed militants, two policemen and two visitors were shot dead in a 

gun -and -grenade attack by them on the Chinese consulate located in the `high security zone in 

Clifton`s Block -4. 

On Thursday, the case was fixed before the ATC -II judge, who is conducting trial in the judicial 

complex inside the Karachi Central Prison. 

The judge summoned the investigating officer to argue on the `A` clas s report submitted by him, 

on the next date and adjourned the hearing. 

In the progress report submitted to the administrative judge, the IO stated that the 

terroristsstormed the consulate building and started firing and throwing hand -grenades and also 

kill ed assistant sub -inspector Ashraf Dawood and police constable Mohammad Amir, who were 

posted at the first security checkpoint, while Muhammad Juman, who was posted at the entrance 

to the visa section, was injured by their firing. 89 

It further stated that aft er hearing shots the visitors as well as the staff went into the consulate 

and locked the doors from inside. 

Therefore, the attackers tried to plant an IED to blow up the irongate but failed to do so due to 

firing by the security forces personnel from the outside. A visa -seeker, Tahir Shah, and his 

father, Niaz Ahmed, were hit by the attackers` firing and died on the spot, it added.`The attackers 

were killed inside the reception area by the firing of the police and Rangers personnel in a very 

organized mann er,` the report said. `One of the attackers was killed in retaliatory Hiring by the 

police near the first checkpoint. 

The progress report stated that the three attackers were killed in theoperationbytheforces,adding 

that earlier the attackers had completel y burnt three vehicles by throwing hand -grenades, while 

two police mobile vans and nine other vehicles parked outside the consulate building were 

partially damaged. 

It added that a Hag of the banned Baloch Liberation Army was found in the possession of the 

terrorist identified as RazigBaloch, while a national ID card and another card, showing him asan 

employee of the irrigation department of the Balochistan government, was also found on him. 

The report further said that one attacker, Razig, was identified a s son of Din Muhammad through 

biometric verification by the National Database and Registration Authority, while no record of 

the two other attackers was found. 

It stated that the BLA had released pictures of the three terrorists and claimed responsibility of 

the `suicide attack` carried out by the outlawed FidayeenSarbaz of Majeed Brigade, adding that 

the BLA was supported by the Indian spy agency Research and Analysis Wing, or Raw. 

It mentioned that the `foiled` attack on the Chinese consulate in Karachi w as a failed attempt to 

vitiate the PakistanChina relations. 

The IO said the attackers were constantly in contact with HarbiyaarMarri, AslamBaloch alias 

Achhu, Bashir Zaib, Noor BuxMengal, Kareem Marri, Captain RehmanGul, commanders Nisar, 

Sheikhu, Gaindi, Sharif, Hamal, Munshi, Agha SherDil and others, who were the mas -terminds 

and facilitators of the terrorist attack. He also said the agencies had been approached to ascertain 

their whereabouts so that their arrest could be affected. 

The progress report sta ted that most of the suspects hailed to Balochistan, adding that letters 

were sent to the Balochistan government to check their criminal record, but the report in that 

regard was still awaited. 

It said four Kalashnikovs, two improvised explosivedevices, detonators, hand -grenades, 

explosive material and bullets were also seized from the possession of the three militants and the 

samples were sent to the forensic science laboratory for ballistic analysis. 90 

The samples of the remains of the policemen, private persons and terrorists had been sent to the 

Forensic Science Laboratory Lahore for DNA testing, the report said, adding that the analysis 

reports would be submitted to the court when received.It further stated that efforts were under 

way to find the eyewit nesses and record their statements, adding that the reports of the chemical 

analysis of the seized weapons and explosives, DNA and others had not yet been received. The 

IO said those reports would be submitted to the court as soon as received. 

It further m entioned that during the course of investigation the charges against the three killed 

terrorists and others, who had not yet beenarrested, had been proved. 

However, the IO requested the court to accept the `A` class report for halting the 

proceedingsinthec ase tillthe arrestof the suspects. 

A case under sections 353, 302,324,427,109 and 34 ofthe Pakistan Penal Code read with the 

Section 7 of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 and sections ¾ and 4/5 of the Explosives Act 1908 

and Section 23(i) -A of the Sindh Arms A ct, 2013 was registered at the CTD police station. 

# Dawn News, 05 -01 -19 

China slashes banks` reserve requirements 

BEIJING: China`s central bank said on Friday it was cutting the amount of cash that banks have 

to hold as reserves for the fifth time in a year, freeing up $116 billion for new lending as it tries 

to reduce the risk of a sharp economic slowdown. 

The cut comes amid mounting worries about the health of the world`s second -largest economy, 

which is f acing both slowing demand at home and punishin g US tariffs on its exports. 

Global stock markets sold off on Thursday after a warning from tech giant Apple Inc about 

slowing China sales, while data this week showed manufacturing activity shrank in December 

for the first time in more than two years. 

The announcement came just hours after Premier Li Keqiang said China would take further 

action to bolster the economy, including reserve requirement ratio (RRR) cuts and more cuts in 

taxes and fees, highlighting the urgency to cope with increasing headwinds. 

`This speedy RRR cut with great intensity fully demonstrates the determination of policymakers 

to stabilize growth,` said Yang Hao, an analyst at Nanjing Securities. 

`At present, the economy is facing very big downward pressure amid internal and external 

troubles.` -Reuters 91 

# Dawn News, 05 -01 -19 

China begins first surface exploration of moon`s far side 

BEIJING: A Chinese space rover explored the lunar terrain on Friday in the world`s first mission 

on the surface of the far side of the moon. 

Jade Rabbit 2 drove off a ramp the previous night and onto the soft, powdery surface after a 

Chinese spacecraft made the first -ever soft landing on the moon`s far side. A photo posted online 

by China`s space agency showed tracks left by the rover as it headed away from the spacecraft. 

`It`s a small step for the rover, but one giant leap for the Chinese nation,` Wu Weiren, the chief 

designer of the Lunar Exploration Project, told state broadcaster CCTV, in a twist of US 

astronaut Neil Armstrong`s famous comment when he be came the first human to walk on the 

moon in 1969. 

`This giant leap is a decisive move for our exploration of space and the conquering of the 

universe. 

Previous moon landings, including America`s six manned missions from 1969 to 1972, have 

been on the near side of the moon, which faces Earth. The far side has been observed many times 

from lunar orbits, but never explored on the surface. 

China`s space community is taking pride in the successful landing, which posed technical 

challenges because the moon blocks direct communication between the spacecraft and its 

controllers on Earth. China has been trying to catch up with the United States and other nations 

in space exploration. 

`The landing on the far side shows China`s technology is powerful, ` said He Qisong, a space 

expert at the East China University of Science and L aw in Shangh ai. While China`s space 

program still lags America`s, he said `China has already positioned itself at least as good as 

Russia and the European Union. 

The news cheered people on the s treets of Beijing on Friday, many of whom said it showed that 

China can now achieve or even surpass what the United States has done. 

`I think this is very good evidence that we are now able to compete with the Americans, ` said 

energy company employee Yao Dajun. `You can get on the moon and so can we I think this is 

very good. It means our science and technology ability is getting stronger and the country is 

becoming more powerful. 

The news inspired dreamier thoughts for advertising employee Shang Yuegang. `Probably after 

some years ordinary people like us can also travel up there to take a look,` he said. 92 

The Chinese rover has six powered wheels, allowing it to continue to operate even if one wheel 

fails. It has a maximum speed of 200 meters per hour and can climb a 20 -degree hill or an 

obstacle up to 20 centimeters (8 inches) tall. `The surface is soft and it is similar to that when you 

are walking on the snow,` rover designer ShenZhenrong of the China Aerospace Science and 

Technology Corporation said on CCTV. 

Exploring the cosmos from the far side of the moon could eventually help scientists learn more 

about the early days of the solar system and even the birth of the universe`s first stars. 

The far side is popularly called the `dark side` because it can` t be seen from Earth and is 

relatively unknown, no t because it lacks sunlight. -AP 

# Dawn News, 05 -01 -19 

Two Chinese firms hired to lift garbage in city 

KARACHI: The City administration launched a three -day cleanliness campaign on Thursday in 

those parts of the city where garbage was disposed of by the Sindh Solid Waste Management 

Board (SSWMB). 

Official sources said that a decision to this effect was taken at a meeting chaired by 

Commissioner IftikharShallwani in his office. 

They said the meeting was also at tended by representatives of SSWMB, Karachi Water and 

Sewerage Board, district municipal corporations, deputy commissioners concerned and both the 

Chinese companies awarded contract for garbage collection in districts South, West, Malir and 

East. 

The sourc es said that it was decided in the meeting that ChangyieKangjie Sanitation Company 

would collect waste in districts South and East districts, while Hangzhou Jinjiang Company 

would manage garbage in districts Malir and West. 

The two contractors were told in the meeting that they were bound to carry out manual sweeping, 

mechanical sweeping and mechanical washing of the streets and roads. 

They were also told that they were responsible for lifting of garbage from door to door free of 

cost in their assigned dist ricts and later its transfer to the designated stations for further disposal 

into the landfill sites. 

The companies are also bound to put the garbage containers and trash cans at various spots in 

their respective districts. 

The sources said that the meetin g decided that a three -day cleanliness campaign would be started 

in selected areas of the four districts in consultation with the respective deputy commissioners. 93 

They said that the commissioner asked the deputy commissioners to monitor the work of liftin g

and disposal of garbage as per contract made with the companies being carried out. 

The sources said that it was also decided that the deputy commissioners would submit their 

respective reports on the performance of the two Chinese companies with their co mments to the 

commissioner in next meeting to be held next week. 

They said that the deputy commissioners` reports and comments would be forwarded to the 

Chief Minister Syed Murad Ali Shah. 

350 more shops razed The Anti -enchrochement Estate & Enforcement de partment of the Karachi 

Development Authority continued its grand anti -encroachment operation on its land in Korangi 

No 5 ½ and razed 350 more shops illegally constructed on drains. 

Over 300 shops constructed illegally on KDA land and drains in the area we re demolished on 

Wednesday when the grand anti -encroachment operation to retrieve illegally occupied city land 

was launched in the neighborhood. 

Officials sources said that the operation against encroachments and illegal building constructed 

on the KDA lan d was continue under the supervision of Director General SamiuddinSiddiqui. 

They said that Director Estate and Enforcement DildarHussain Shah were monitoring the 

operation. 

# Dawn News, 06 -01 -19 

China package lifts sentiments on stock market 

KARACHI: The stock market started on a firm footing in the first week of the New Year with 

the benchmark KSE -100 index claiming gains of 380 points (0.13 per cent) and settles at 37,548. 

There was slight effect of fresh January buying while the positive trend that foll owed two earlier 

weeks of sluggish performance was underpinned mainly by the massive gains of 929 points that 

the index was able to notch up on Tuesday. 

That was due to investors` frenzied buying after reports of Chinese pledge to lend $2 billion to 

Pakist an to shore up dwindling foreign exchange reserves. To add icing to the cake, the Finance 

Minister Asad Umar proclaimed that the biggest investment in country`s history was about to 

arrive from Saudi Arabia. 

But for most of the other trading days, the inde x moved in wide intraday swings in essentially 

choppy trade as investors remained in search of triggers. The last two sessions erased the earlier 

day`s gains. 94 

On the political front, noises simmered down amid delay in the ex -president`s trial following the 

Supreme Court`s directive to review the list of people placed on the exit control list. The ruling 

party`s clarification that it had no intention of imposition of governor rule in Sindh helped the 

temperatures to decrease. 

US President expressed his desire to meet Pakistan`s new leadership soon in order to strengthen 

bilateral ties, which also set some of the concerns at rest. On macro side, there were mixed 

signals as the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics reported below expected inflation of 6.17pc for 

Dec`18 against the consensus estimate of 6.55pc. But the State Bank reserves fell by $170m 

during the week to $7.29bn, further pulling the country`s total reserves down to $13.84bn amid 

regular debt payments. 

Market participation improved as average daily t raded volume clocked in at 118m shares, up 

7pe, while traded value also increased by 14pc to $41m, representing movement in blue -chip 

stocks. 

Foreign selling of equity continued for the 35th weal (in succession with net outflows of $0.51m, 

mainly concentra ted in ban(in sector worth $0.14m and technology $0.08m. 

Meanwhile, most of the buying was witnessed in cement amounting to $0.45m and fertilizers 

$0.2m. Amongst the local participants, insurance companies turned out to be the biggest sellers 

of equity wor th $14.7m.1t was mainly absorbed by mutual funds ‘net buying of $13.4m and 

companies $3.5m. 

Sector -wise, the market was mainly driven by commercial banks, adding 244 points, on renewed 

buying interest while oil and gas exploration sector added 131 points l ed by 10pc rally in Brent 

to $57/bbl. On the flip side, sectors that contributed negatively included food and personal care 

products, decreasing by 53 points, auto assembler 27 points and oil and gas marketing companies 

26 points owing to decline in petrol eum sales. Fresh drug price notification released by the Drug 

Regulatory Authority of Pakistan during the end of the week failed to excite investors as 

pharmaceutical edged lower by 0.1pc. 

Major gaining scrips were Bank Al Habib, up 10.53pc, EngroCorporati on 5.22pc and Habib 

Bank 4.29pc, adding 288 points. Other gainers were the major exploration and production stocks: 

Oil and Gas Development Company, Pakistan Petroleum and Pakistan Oilfields. 

Going forward, market gurus pinned hopes on expected visit of th e UAE and Saudi Arabia`s 

crown princes in January and February, respectively, which were thought to yield potential 

lucrative agreements.1nvestor interest would be driven by the decision regarding International 

Monetary Fund programme anticipated during th e month. 95 

Market participants would focus on the presentation of a potential mini -budget in order to meet 

fiscal deficit target. 

Pakistan`s performance review under Financial Action Task Force is also due from Jan 8 -10 in 

Sydney which could lead to boom or bust in investor sentiments. 

# Dawn News, 07 -01 -19 

China says pace of Xinjiang `education` will slow, but defends camps 

URUMQI: China will not back down on what it sees as a highly successful de -

radicalizationprogramme in Xinjiang that has attracted global c oncern, but fewer people will be 

sent through, officials said last week in allowing rare media access there. 

Beijing has faced an outcry from activists, scholars, foreign governments and UN rights experts 

over what they call mass detentions and strict surv eillance of the mostly Muslim Uighur minority 

and other Muslim groups who call Xinjiang home. 

In August, a UN human rights panel said it had received credible reports that a million or more 

Uighurs and other minorities in the far western region are being h eld in what resembles a 

`massive internment camp`. Last week, the government organized a visit to three such facilities, 

which it calls vocational education training centers, for a small group of foreign 

reporters,includingReuters. 

In recent days, a similar visit was arranged for diplomats from 12 non -Western countries, 

including Russia, Indonesia, India, Thailand, Kazakhstan, according to Xinjiang officials and 

foreign diplomats. 

Senior officials, including ShohratZakir, Xinjiang`s governor and the r egion`s most senior 

Uighur, dismissed what they called `slanderous lies` about the facilities. Speaking in Xinjiang`s 

capital, Urumqi, Zakir said the centers had been `extremely effective` in reducing extremism 

byteachingresidents about the law and helping them learn Mandarin. `As time goes by, the 

people in the education training mechanism will be fewer and fewer,` he said. 

ShohratZakir said he could not say exactly how many people were in the facilities. `One million 

people, this number is rather frighten ing. One million people in the education mechanism that`s 

not realistic. 

That`s purely a rumor,` he said, stressing they were temporary educational facilities. 

DilxatRaxit, spokesman for the Munich -based exile group the World Uyghur Congress, told 

Reuters the Chinese government was using extremism as an excuse to lock people up. 96 

Inside the centers Human rights groups and former detainees have said that conditions in the 

camps are poor, with inmates subject to abuse. They said detainees did not receive vocat ional 

training. 

Seeking to counter that narrative, the government took reporters to three centers, in Kashgar, 

Hotan and Karakax, all in the heavily Uighur -populated southern part of Xinjiang, where much 

of the violence has taken place in recent years. 

In one class reporters were allowed to briefly visit, a teacher explained in Mandarin that not 

allowing singing or dancing at a wedding or crying at a funeral are signs of extremist thought. 

The students took notes, pausing to look up as report -errs and offic ials entered the room. Some 

smiled awkwardly. Others just looked down at their books. All were Uighur. None appear d to 

have been mistreated. 

In another class, residents read a Chinese lesson in their textbook entitled `Our motherland is so 

vast.` There wa s plenty of singing and dancing in other rooms reporters visited, including a 

lively rendition in English of `If You`re Happy and You Know It, Clap Your Hands, that seemed 

to have been put on especially for the visit. 

Several residents agreed to speak brie fly to reporters, though all in the presence of government 

officials. Reporters were closely chaperoned at all times. 

All the interviewees said they were there of their own accord after learning of the centres from 

local officials. 

Many answers used extrem ely similar language about being `infected with extremist thought`. 

Pazalaibutuyi, 26, told reporters at the Hotancentre that five years ago she had attended an illegal 

religious gathering at a neighbor’s house, where they were taught that women should cov er their 

faces. `At that time I was infected with extremist thought so I wore a face veil,` she said, 

speaking clear Mandarin after a year at the center. Government officials came to her village to 

talk to the villagers and after that, she said, `I discove red my mistake. 

In the Kashgarcenter, Osmanjan, who declined to give his age, said he had incited ethnic hatred, 

so vil -lage police suggested he go for re -education. 

`Under the influence of extremist thought, when non -Muslims came to my shop I was unwilling 

to serve them, ` he said in unsteady Mandarin. 

It was not possible to independently verify their stories. All the interviewees said they had not 

been forewarned of the visit. 97 

Residents said they can `graduate` when they are judged to have reached a certain level with 

their Mandarin, de -radicalization and legal knowledge. They are allowed phone calls with family 

members, but no cell phones. They are provided halal food. 

Only minimal security was visible at any of the three centers. 

Over a lunch of lamb kebabs, horse meat and naan, Urumqi party boss XuHairong told Reuters 

that `all of the reports are fake` when it comes to foreign coverage of Xinjiang. 

The government says its goal is for Uighurs to become part of mainstream Chinese society. 

ShohratZa kir said in parts of southern Xinjiang people couldn`t even say hello in Mandarin. 

Officials point to a lack of violence in the past tw o years as evidence of program `s success. 

`Only with a deeper understanding of the past can you understand the measures w e have taken 

today, ` Shi Lei, Xinjiang`s Communist Party committee deputy propaganda chief, told 

reporters. -Reuters 

# Dawn News, 08 -01 -19 

Chinese `education` camps 

ANY questions surround the fate of Chinese Uighur Muslims sent to `education` camps run by 

Beijing, apparently to deradicalise Xinjiang`s majority Turkic ethnic group. Among them is 

Chinese Muslim women married to Pakistani men, who have been separated from their families. 

There has been considerable criticism of Beijing`s treatment of its Uighu r population, with 

claims that the People`s Republic is trying to change the demographics of the region by settling 

Han Chinese. China insists it is countering `radicalization` in Xinjiang. The UN has criticized 

China for running a `massive internment camp ` for Uighur citizens, and U ighur activists say 

`deradicaliz ation` is being used as an excuse to make them forsake their religion and culture, and 

to embrace the Chinese `mainstream`. Over 1m Uighurs are said to be interned in the camps, a 

figure Chinese o fficials have contested. In response to the criticism, China has recently opened 

the `education` centers to foreign diplomats and journalists. Government officials say the camps 

will not be closed down, but the number of people being put th rough the re -edu cation program 

will be reduced. 

While Beijing may have a genuine problem with extremism Xinjiang has been restive for years 

holding people in such camps and `guiding` them towards renouncing their faith and culture is 

not the way to address it. China needs to be more transparent about the treatment of its native 

Uighur population, as such anti -extremism measures may only backfire and further alienate 

Xinjiang`s Muslims. 98 

Moreover, considering the close ties between Islamabad and Beijing, Pakistan needs to wo rk 

with China through diplomatic channels to resolve the issue of Chinese spouses of Pakistani 

citizens. Splitting up families is unacceptable, and there are reports that at least 200 spouses of 

Pakistani men are missing, and are most likely in the re -educ ation centers. The government must 

make greater efforts to reunite the women with their families, while the Chinese state should 

rethink its approach to the Xinjiang issue in a manner that does not violate fundamental rights. 

# Dawn News, 08 -01 -19 

Chinese in vestors flee Silicon Valley 

SAN FRANCISCO: New Trump administration policies aimed at curbing China`s access to 

American innovation have all but halted Chinese investment in US technology 

startups,asbothinvestor s andstartupfounders abandon deals amid scrutiny from Washington. 

Chinese venture funding in US startups crested to a record $3 billion last year, according to New 

York economic research firm Rhodium Group, spurred by a rush of investors and tech 

companies scrambling to complete deals before a n ew regulatory regime was approved in 

August. 

Since then, Chinese venture funding in US startups has slowed to a trickle, Reuter’s interviews 

with more than 35 industry player’s show. 

US President Donald Trump signed new legislation expanding t he government `s ability to block (

foreign investment in US companies, regardless of the investor`s country of origin. But Trump 

has been particularly vocal about stopping China from getting its hands on strategic US 

technologies. 

The new rules are still being finalized , but tech industry veterans said the fallout has been swift. 

`Deals involving Chinese companies and Chinese buyers and Chinese investors have virtually 

stopped,` said attorney Nell O`Donnell, who has represented US tech companies in transactions 

with fore ign buyers. 

Lawyers who spoke to Reuters say they are feverishly rewriting deal terms to help ensure 

investments get the stamp of approval from Washington. Chinese investors, including big family 

offices, have walked away from transactions and stopped taki ng meetings with US startups. 

Some entrepreneurs, meanwhile, are eschewing Chinese money, fearful of lengthy government 

reviews that could sap their resources and momentum in an arena where speed to market is 

critical. 

Volley Labs, Inc, a San Francisco -bas ed company that uses artificial intelligence to build 

corporate training materials, is playing it safe. It declined offers from Chinese investors last year 99 

after accepting cash from Beijing -based TAL Education Group as part of a financing round in 

2017. 

`W e decided for optical reasons it just wouldn`t make sense to expose ourselves further to 

investors coming from a country where there is now so much by way of trade tensions and IP 

tensions,` said Carson Kahn, Volley`s CEO. 

A Silicon Valley venture capitali st told Reuters he is aware of at least ten deals, some involving 

companies in his own portfolio that fell apart because they would need approval from the 

interagency group known as the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS). 

He decli ned to be named for fear of bringing negative attention to his portfolio companies. 

CFIUS is the government group tasked with reviewing foreign investment for potential national 

security and competitive risks. The new legislation expands its powers. Among them: the ability 

to probe transactions previouslyexcluded from its purview,includingattempts by foreigners to 

purchase minority stakes in US startups. 

China is in the crosshairs. The Asian giant has been an aggressive investor in technology deemed 

critica l to its global competitiveness and military prowess. Chinese investors have bought stakes 

in ride -haling firms Uber Technologies Inc and Lyft, as well as companies with more sensitive 

technologies including data center netw ork ing firm Barefoot Networks, a utonomous driving 

startup Zoox and speech recognition startup AISense. 

A dearth of Chinese money is unlikely to spell doomsday for Silicon Valley. Investors 

worldwide poured more than $84bn into US startups for the first three quarters of last year, 

exceeding any prior full -year funding, accordingto data providerPitchBook Inc. 

Still, Chinese funders are critical to helping US companies gain access to the world`s second -

largest economy. 

Volley`s Kahn acknowledged that rejecting Chinese investment may m ake his startup`s overseas 

expansion more difficult. -Reuters 

# Dawn News, 08 -01 -19 

China conditionally invites UN observers to Xinjiang 

BEIJING: China said on Monday it would welcome UN officials to its far western region of 

Xinjiang if they follow the `proper procedures`, amid global concern over Beijing`s de -

radicalization program there. 

Foreign Ministry spokesman Lu Kangm asked at a regular briefing about report s that China had 

invited UN expert s to Xinjiang, said that all parties, including the Uni ted Nations, were 100 

welcome, as long as they respected appropriate travel procedures. UN officials should also 

`avoid interfering in domestic matters` and adopt an objective and neutral attitude, he added. 

The top UN human rights official, Michelle Bachelet, in December said her office was seeking 

access to Xinjiang to verify `worrying reports` of re -education camps holding Muslim minorities, 

including the Turkic speaking Uighurs. 

In August, a UN human rights panel said it had received credible reports that a million or more 

Uighurs and other minorities in Xinjiang were being held in what resembled a `massive 

internment camp` In a rare move, a group of 15 Western ambassadors in Beijing, spearheaded by 

Canada, have sought a meeting with the top official in the region, Communist Party boss Chen 

Quanguo, for an explanation of alleged rights abuses against Uighurs. 

Beijing has launched an increasingly active publicity campaign to defend its actions in Xinjiang 

in the face of an outcry from activists, scholars, fore ign governments and UN rights experts. 

In the last two weeks, the Chinese government has arranged for diplomats from 12 non -Western 

countries to visit the region, as well as organizing a trip for a small group of reporters to three 

facilities, which it cal led vocational education training centers. In the centers, Uighur students 

learned in Mandarin about the dangers of extremist thought and sang and danced or 

reporters,including a rendition in English of `If You`re Happy and You Know it, Clap Your 

Hands`. 

Xinjiang officials said on the trip that the de -radicalization program had been highly successful 

but that fewer people would be sent through the system in future. 

Last year, media reported on harsh extrajudicial detentions and interrogations at the camps, 

which are at odds with Beijing`s claims, and tool (pictures of guard towers and barbed wire 

surrounding some. 

Reports of gross human rights violations targeting the Uighur ethnic minority in the region in 

China`s northwest, which shares a border with Pakis tan and Afghanistan, have leaked out in the 

past year. -Agencies 

# Dawn News, 08 -01 -19 

N. Korean train enters China, fuels talk of Kim visit 

SEOUL: A special North Korean train entered China late Monday, Yonhap news agency 

reported, raising speculation that l eader Kim Jong -un could be on his way to Beijing. The train 

crossed the border around 10:15pm local time (1315 GMT) and was expected in the Chinese 

capital on Tuesday morning, the Southern news agency reported, citing an informed source. 101 

None of Kim`s 2018 trips to China were announced in advance, and the earliest indications of 

the first one before Kim met either Moon or Trump came when his train was spotted in Beijing. 

In the Chinese border city of Dandong, dozens of security vehicles and officials blocke d the 

roads around the train station on Monday before the train passed through, Yonhap reported, 

before reopening them afterwards. It had not been confirmed whether a senior North Korean 

official was on board,it quoted its source as saying. 

But Japan`s Kyo do news agency said hotel guests in Dandong had not been allowed to enter 

rooms facing the river that forms the border on Monday afternoon, in what it cited sources 

describing as `an apparent move to prevent the train from being seen` Kim`s birthday is 

rep ortedly on Tuesday, although that has never been confirmed by Pyongyang, and a visit by him 

to China would be lil(ely to heighten speculation about a second Kim -Trump summit. 

Negotiations were underway on the location of their next meeting, Trump said on S unday, while 

remaining evasive on its timing. 

The US president said last week he had received a `great letter` from the North Korean leader but 

declined to reveal its contents. `We are negotiating a location,` he told reporters. `They do want 

to meet and w e want to meet and we`ll see what happens. 

Washington is demanding Pyongyang gives up its nuclear arsenal before any relief from 

economic sanctions is granted, while the North is insisting on immediate concessions from the 

US. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 09 -01 -19 

20 -me mber Chinese team visits historical sites in Peshawar 

PESHAWAR: A 20 -member delegation from China visited the Peshawar Museum and historical 

sites here on Tuesday. 

Members of the delegation took considerable interest in the findings and discoveries relating to 

Gandharacivilization and praised the directorate of archaeology and museums of Khyber 

Pakhtunkhwa for its efforts to protect Buddhist artef acts as well as sites. 

The general manager of the Tourist Information Centers, Mohammad Ali 

Syed,welcome dtheChinese guests. 

Curator Mohammad Asif briefed the delegation on the archaeological sites in Peshawar, said a 

press release issued by the Tourism Corporation of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 102 

The officials expressed the hope that the visit would provide an opportu nity to the Chinese 

guests to share their experiences and knowledge with archaeologists and researchers which could 

be beneficial for excavations on archaeological sites and historical buildings. 

The Chinese delegation also visited the historical Masjid -i-Mahabat Khan, QissaKhawani 

Bazaar, Sarafa Bazaar (AndarShehr), GhantaGhar, ChowkYadgar and other sites of interest in 

the city. 

Terming Peshawar a historic and safe city, the foreign visitors said the people of the city and 

other parts of KP were hospitabl e and friendly. 

The officials informed the visitors that there were over 6,000 archaeological and heritage sites in 

KP where research was being carried out. 

`The followers of Buddhism would find a treasure trove of Buddhist statues and heritage after 

thoro ugh research and revival of these sites `they said. 

Mr Syed said the visit of foreign dignitaries was meant to highlight the importance of heritage 

and archaeological sites related to Buddhism in KP, besides promoting religious tourism in the 

province. 

He said the government had taken a number of steps for attracting foreign tourists, scholars and 

researchers to the province. The official said a comprehensive policy had been evolved for 

preserving and protecting the archaeological sites and places. 

He said that initiatives were being taken to carry out excavation on archaeological sites with 

modern techniques and methods. 

# Dawn News, 09 -01 -19 

Learning from China 

PRIME Minister Imran Khan is fascinated by China`s miraculous feat of lifting 800 million 

people f rom poverty and he seeks to emulate that achievement. Then again, who does not? Every 

speech of his, whether at home or abroad, is invariably laced with profuse praise of the emerging 

superpower. But it seems that he has little understanding of how it happ ened. 

The rise of China is surely an amazing story, and its record in poverty reduction is without 

parallel in human history. It may not be possible for other countries to emulate the Chinese 

dream, yet there are lessons to learn from the country`s Great L eap Forward. The transformation 

of a country with around one fifth of the world`s population could not have come without the 

Communist Revolution in 1949 that destroyed the regressive social structure, thereby paving the 

way for a second revolution which l ed to phenomenal economic growth. 103 

Since the initiation of China`s reform and opening -up in 1978, it has achieved an annual average 

9.5 per cent growth rate, increasing almost 35 times in size within the last four decades. There is 

no precedent in history o f such sustained economic growth. This could not have been possible 

without political stability, a visionary leadership and stronginstitutions ofthe state. 

It was the second stage of the revolution headed by Deng Xiaoping, who was also one, the 

leaders of the 1949 revolution that led to the building of modern China. The principles 

enunciated by Deng guided Chinese policy since the 1980s. According to him, there are three 

criteria to judge whether or not a political system or policy is suitable or correct fo r a country, 

namely; is it beneficial for political stability, economic development and living standards? If it is 

for all three, then it is a good system or policy. 

With its phenomenal scale of economic growth, China also focused on improving the lives of 

ordinary Chinese people. The enormous improvement in living standards is, therefore, the most 

important achievement China has made since the reform and opening -up. For a country with 

huge numbers of poor people streaming into its cities, manyliving initia lly in conditions of abject 

misery, this has been an extraordinary success. 

Other factors that contributed to China`s economic and social development are the massive 

investments it made on education and population control. For almost four decades, China st rictly 

implemented a one -child policy that had helped the country achieve its anti -poverty drive. This 

policy has now been made more flexible to meet the demands of an expanding economy. 

More importantly, successive Chinese leaders recognized that economic development and 

political stability were intertwined. While its entire focus had been on economic development, 

China has 1(ept itself out of outside conflicts and avoided confrontation despite provocations. It 

has kept a relatively low profile, notwithsta nding its position as a superpower. 

When Imran Khan says that he wants to learn from China, he should understand that such 

societal transformation can only occur when one has a clear vision and the will to make tough 

decisions. It is indeed commendable tha t the PTI government places greater emphasis on human 

development, but the welfare of the people also depends on political stability and economic 

development. Catchy mantras alone will not take this country out of its current predicament. 

Sure, Pakistan ha s a different system of government and there is no revolutionary party at the 

helm, but it is not difficult to implement some radical reforms to put the economy on the tracl( of 

sustainable growth. There is also need for change in existing social and econo mic structures that 

are the biggest obstacles to the country`s transformation. But, notwithstanding Imran Khan`s 

grand idea of establishing `Naya Pakistan`, the PTI remains a party with no clear strategy for 

change. 

Almost five months into power, the gover nment is still unable to set a clear direction. 

There appears to be systemic failure in this country. While the PTI government is drifting 

without vision or purpose, growing political instability has rendered the system dysfunctional. 104 

One cannot hope getti ng the economy off the ground,let alone fighting poverty, in this 

environment of political confrontation. The country is not expected to move forward while 

depending on the financial support of friendly countries. It is disgraceful the way that bailout 

pac kages from Saudi Arabia and the UAE are being portrayed as diplomatic successes. In the 

absence of any clear agenda for reform, these kinds of temporary relief could become liabilities, 

further dragging the economy down. 

There is as yet no indication that the government is prepared to change its confrontationist 

policy. 

More alarming is that it does not have any clear strategy to deal with the challenges it faces. 

Undoubtedly, corruption is a serious problem, but the government seems to only focus on this 

one issue. Imran Khan`s claim that it is the main cause of all economic and political ills is 

exaggerated. 

The senseless campaign has increased economic and political uncertainty, making it more 

difficult to carry out any reform. Imran Khan often cites Chi na`s latest campaign against 

corruption. But what he has failed to understand is that China has been able to effectively 

counter the menace after it had consolidated its economy. 

Instead of learning from China how it emerged as an economic superpower in su ch a short span 

of time, Imran Khan has superficially picked some aspects of its history to point to. A major 

factor that has caused Pakistan`s economic and political slide is the absence of a long -term vision 

for development and social change. 

China`s model cannot be emulated, but one can, at least, learn some lessons from its success. 

Poverty eradication, which Imran Khan appears so fascinated with, did not come without 

economic development and social reform. The establishment of shelter homes for the homeless is 

indeed a positive step, but it cannot address the basic problem behind rampant poverty, 

unemployment and social backwardness. The writer is an author and journalist. 

zhussain100@yahoo.com Twitter: @hidhussain 

# Dawn News, 09 -01 -19 

KPT gets in lin e for slice of CPEC pie 

KARACHI: Mega projects of Karachi Port Trust (KPT) have been submitted for possible 

inclusion in the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) initiative, official sources said on 

Tuesday. 105 

Secretary Maritime Affairs Amir Khawaja, who recently attended the Joint Coordination 

Committee (JCC) meeting in China, has tabled some of the mega projects of Karachi Port for 

inclusion in CPEC, sources said. 

A Ministry of Maritime Affairs official, talking to Dawn on the condition of anonymity, sai d that 

major projects put before the JCC meeting included multi -billion freight corridors from KPT to 

Port Qasim for onward movement to upcountry of cargo and Special Economic Zone (SEZ) on 

the backwaters of Karachi port. 

Sindh Chief Minister Syed Murad Al i Shah, who was also part of the Pakistani delegation to the 

JCC meeting, has supported this incorporation, the same source said. In the second phase, these 

projects would be taken up for approval by the relevant Joint Working Group in theirmeeting to 

be h eld in March. 

The officials hope that the inclusion of freight corridor project under the CPEC umbrellawill help 

Karachi Port which has been struggling to get connectivity for Pakistan Deep Water Container 

Port at Keamari.Presently most of the port traffic passes through the city, aggravating traffic 

congestion. Failure to build road connectivitybetween the giant port and its own hinterland is the 

hurdle standing in the way of growing traffic volumes there. The pro posal to place the freight 

corridor before the JCC meeting for inclusion under CPEC is the latest attempt to crack this 

conundrum. 

A freight corridor stretching 40 -50km from KPT to Port Qasim is envisioned to have rail, road 

and oil pipeline connectivity along with LNG terminal and power plant. 

Sim ilarly, an SEZ adjacent to the port is ideally located for export oriented industry and Chinese 

had been always keen to keep such industry close to port areas, sources said. 

The Karachi Port has already earmarked an area of around 2,000 acres (to be reclai med) at the 

backwaters of the port. 

The other project, Khawaja proposed to be included in CPEC, is related to internally connecting 

both East and West wharves of KPT in order to keep the movement of heavy vehicles within port 

area. 

Connectivity has been a big problem for the deep water terminal ever since it was inaugurated. 

In 2005, KPT envisioned a harbor crossing bridge to connect the port directly to the Northern 

Bypass for transport link for up country traffic. But at an estimated cost of $1 billion, that plan 

proved prohibitively expensive. 106 

In this regard Plan B was an elevated expressway to run from Keamari to the Northern Bypass, 

over Jinnah Bridge, which had an estimated price tag of $500mn. Even that plan failed to 

materialize due to lack of funds .

# Dawn News, 09 -01 -19 

`US -China trade talks going very well` 

BEIJING: US President Donald Trump boasted on Tuesday that US -China trade negotiations 

were going `very well` as officials held talks in Beijing that will spill into a third day. 

A member of the US delegation said the two sides would resume talks on Wednesday as they 

continue their first face -to -face meetings since Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed 

to a tariff truce during a meeting in Argentina on Dec 1. 

The talks are taking longer th an expected as the Chinese commerce ministry had said last week 

that the meetings would take place on Monday and Tuesday. 

`Talks with China are going very well! ` Trump said on Twitter, but gave no further information. 

The meeting between the US delegation s led by Deputy US Trade Representative Jeffrey Gerrish 

and including officials from the Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture and Energy departments and 

the Chinese side ran late into Tuesday night. 

`I can confirm we are continuing tomorrow (Wednesday),` Steven Winberg, assistant secretary 

for fossil energy, told reporters after returning to his hotel in Beijing. 

He declined to provide more details. 

The Trump administration wants Beijing to abandon its strategy of seeking global industrial 

predominance through the alleged forced transfer and even the theft of American technology, 

and end massive state intervention in markets. 

The temporary ceasefire came after the two sides imposed import duties on more than $300 

billion of each other`s goods. 

US Commerce Secret ary Wilbur Ross said on Monday that China`s economy was more 

vulnerable to the fallout from the trade war. 

`It certainly has hurt the Chinese economy, ` Ross told CNBC, noting that China exports many 

more goods to the United States than the other way aroun d. 

Ross said there was a `very good chance` of reaching an agreement, although monitoring 

compliance would present a challenge. 107 

Without a resolution, punitive US duty rates on $200bn in Chinese goods are due to rise to 25pc 

from 10pc on March 2. 

The second day of trade negotiations coincided with an unannounced visit by North Korean 

leader Kim Jong UN for talks with Xi in Beijing, amid speculation of a second meeting between 

Kim and Trump. 

Some analysts say that China Pyongyang`s key diplomatically and main source of trade could 

use Kim`s visit as a bargaining chip in the US trade talks. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 09 -01 -19 

20 Chinese school children wounded in hammer attack 

BEIJING: A Chinese man attacked at least 20 young children at a Beijing primary school with a 

hammer on Tuesday, state television reported, in a rare act of violence in the capital. 

A 49 -year -old man, a former maintenance worker at the school, was detained after venting his 

anger on the children after his work contract was not renewed, state televi sion cited police as 

saying. 

Twenty were taken to hospital, the government in the Xicheng district of the capital said in a post 

on its social media account. Three sufferedheavy injuries but t heir condition was stable, it said. 

Parents waited outside for t heir children as the school day ended. Almost all of theparents 

Reuters approached declined to be interviewed. 

`I heard that children were attacked [by someone] with a knife, so I`m very anxious, said a 

woman surnamed Zhou as she waited for her child to fi nish school. 

The attacker, originally from northeastern Heilongjiang province, had been detained by police 

and an investigation was under way, state television said. 

Violent crime is rare in China but there has been a series of knife and axe attacks in rec ent years, 

many targeting children. 

In January 2017, a man in southern China stabbed and wounded 12 children with a vegetable 

knife. 

He was executed this month. -Reuters 108 

# Dawn News, 09 -01 -19 

North Korea`s Kim visits China ahead of expected Trump summit 

BEIJING: North Korean leader Kim Jong UN arrived on Tuesday on an unannounced visit to 

Beijing for talks with President Xi Jinping, as preparations ramp up for an expected second 

summit with Donald Trump. 

China is the key ally of isolated, nuclear -armed No rth Korea and its main source of trade and aid. 

After arriving in the Chinese capital, Kim met Xi for around an hour, Seoul`s Yonhap news 

agency reported on Tuesday, citing unnamed sources who said the talks focused on a possible 

summit with US President Trump and ways to deepen ties. 

Kim and his wife Ri Sol Ju then attended a dinner hosted by Xi and first lady PengLiyuan at 

Beijing`s Great Hall of the People, Yonhap reported. 

China`s foreign ministry earlier said Kim would meet Chinese leaders to discuss `relevant issues` 

but did not reveal more about his itinerary. 

The North Korean leader, accompanied by several senior officials, had left Pyongyang on his 

private train on Monday,the official Korean Central News Agency reported. 

The trip, at Xi`s invitatio n, is set to run until Thursday, according to KCNA and China`s official 

Xinhua news agency. 

Kim`s fourth visit to China comes a week after he warned in a New Year`s speech that 

Pyongyang may change its approach to nuclear talks if Washington persists with sanctions. 

`Both Xi and Kim see value in coordinating their positions in advance of Trump -Kim summits. 

That appears to be a pattern, Bonnie Glaser, a senior adviser at the Center for Strategic and 

International Studies, told AFP. 

`Kim also seeks Beijing`s help in getting international sanctions eased.` While China and Russia 

have both said the United Nations should consider relaxing sanctions on Pyongyang, Trump 

insisted on Sunday that they would remain `in full force` until the US sees `very positive` resu lts 

on the nuclear issue. 

Kim`s trip coincides with the second day of talks between US and Chinese officials in Beijing 

aimed at resolving their trade war, but China rejected the notion that it was using the North 

Korean issue as a bargaining chip in the n egotiations. 109 

`Xi also gains from a summit with Kim and the timing could not be any better,` said Harry 

Kazianis, director of defense studies at the Center for the National Interest, a US think tank. 

`With Chinese and US officials meeting to discuss how to end the growing trade war between the 

two superpowers, it shows Beijing clearly has a North Korea card to play if it sees fit.` The trip 

began under the usual veil of secrecy and Kim has not been spotted in public since a motorcade 

believed to be carrying the North Korean entourage left a Beijing train station under heavy 

security early on Tuesday. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 10 -01 -19 

Inconsistent policies keep Chinese investors at bay: envoy 

LAHORE: Chinese Ambassador Yao Jing says that inconsistent trade policies, hig h ratio of taxes 

and some other issues are reasons for the presence of fewer Chinese investors in Pakistan. 

`The main reasons behind fewer Chinese investors in Pakistan arepoor trade policies, high taxes, 

no tax incentives and lack of businessfriendly envi ronment,` a local news channel quoted the 

ambassador as having said while speaking to businessmen at the Lahore Chamber of Commerce 

and Industry (LCCI) on Wednesday. 

`Your policies lack consistency, keeping investors from China and elsewhere at bay,` he 

re sponded when the business community asked why Chinese companies, after relocating their 

businesses from the United States, were preferring investment in other countries, including 

Cambodia and India,instead of Pakistan that was already executing several pr ojects under the 

China -Pakistan Economic Corridor. 

The ambassador said that under the CPEC, projects relating to the Gwadar port, 

infrastructure,energy and special economic zones (SEZs) were to be completed. 

`Though the outgoing PML -N government paid full attention to the Gwadar port, infrastructure 

and energy projects, it neglected completion of the SEZs. Since there are no SEZs too, how 

Chinese investors can make investments, ` he said. 

Under the CPEC, Mr Yao said, the SEZs should be given priority becaus e they would boost joint 

ventures, specifically in manufacturing and socio -economic sectors of the country. 

`In SEZs and joint venture schemes, 70 -80 per cent priority would be given to Pakistan shares 

and exports of Pakistan would increase by 70 -80pc,` he maintained. He also revealed that the 

CPEC would soon be opened to the world for investment. 110 

The Chinese envoy said Pakistan was required to make its trade policies better, besides bringing 

down ratio of taxes and duties and making its products competitiv e`Improvement of 

competitiveness will help your country make trade balanced. 

He praised the Pakistan Tehreek -i-Insaf government for having export -oriented vision. 

`The new government has an export -oriented vision and looks determined to resolve various 

iss ues,` the ambassador said. 

# Dawn News, 10 -01 -19 

Chinese envoy seeks intellectual support for project 

LAHORE:ChineseAmbassador to Pakistan Yao Jing has urged academia to play their role in 

giving intellectual support for the success of Chinese projects. 

He said this in a meeting with Punjab University (PU) Vice Chancellor Prof Niaz Ahmed at his 

office on Wednesday. 

Chinese Consulate General Long Dingbing, PU Registrar Dr Muhammad Khalid Khan, Director 

External Linkages Prof Dr . KanwalAmeen, deans of facultie s and principals were present. 

The ambassador also expressed the desire to enhance bilateral relations among the academic 

institutions of both countries and stressed the need for promoting cultural and people -to -people 

relations. 

He said the Chinese govern ment was offering scholarships toPakistani students for their higher 

education in top Chinese universities. He said China was encouraging investment and promotion 

of technology in Pakistan and would also give more access to Pakistani products in China. 

He said the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor would play lead role in socio -economic 

development of Pakistan and the region. 

Prof Ahmad said the PU was playing active role in promoting Pakistan -China relations and 

recently granted admission to 15 Ch inese stude nts in PhD program while 3,500 students had 

completed Chinese language course from Confucius Centre. 

He said MoUs were signed with 30 Chinese institutions to enhance collaboration in different 

sectors. -Staff Reporter 111 

# Dawn News, 10 -01 -19 

New Order` in China 

WASHINGTON: `That part of the great nation of China which is occupied or controlled by the 

Japanese furnishes for the whole world an example of the abject failure of totalitarian regimes to 

accomplish the results they promised,` writes Admiral Harry O. Yarnell, former Commander -in -

Chief of the U.S. Asiatic Fleet. 

`The bondage and suffering in occupied China today are the direct result of the same organized 

conspiracy of greed and gore which the militarists of Japan and Germany carried on to occupy 

nat ions as far separated as Denmark and Burma. The war lords of Japan and the Nazi rulers of 

Germany worked separately. Indeed today they are completely isolated from each other, unable 

to cooperate in any way. But their goals and methods are almost identical .

`The striking fact about the philosophy of totalitarianism is that both Japan and Germany have 

had a chance to try it out thoroughly and its failure is a proved fact. There is no better illustration 

of this than occupied China. 

`It is now over 12 years s ince Japan first began her attempted conquest of China. Today the 

inhabitants of that part of China where the Japanese are in uneasy control are f ar worse off in 

every way than before. Their position has deteriorated daily since the Japanese invaded and t hey 

are only waiting the day when they can effectively strike against the Japanese to liberate 

themselves...` Dawn Delhi 

# Dawn News, 10 -01 -19 

Amid backlash, China allows ethnic Kazakhs to leave Xinjiang 

ALMATY: China is allowing more than 2,000 ethnic Kazakhs to abandon their Chinese 

citizenship and leave the country, the Kazakh Foreign Ministry said, in a sign that Beijing may 

be starting to feel a mounting backlash against its sweeping crackdown on Muslims in the far 

west region of Xinjiang. 

The deten tion of Uighur, Kazakh and other ethnic minorities in internment camps has been a 

touchy issue in Kazakhstan, a Central Asian country of 18 million people. 

China is a major trading partner, and Kazakhstan`s state restricted media had generally avoided 

repo rting on it. But activists say pressure for action has slowly built, following other 

international media coverage. 

The foreign ministry press office, in an email response, confirmed Kazakh media reports in 

December that China has agreed to let 2,000 -plus e thnic Kazakhs leave. It did not say who could 112 

leave or why. They will be allowed to apply for Kazakh citizenship or permanent residency after 

their arrival in Kazakhstan, the email said. The Chinese foreign ministry did not respond to a 

request for comment .

Chinese authorities in Xinjiang have launched a massive surveillance and detention campaign 

that has swept hundreds of thousands and possibly more than a million people into internment 

camps. Former detainees have said they were forced to renounce their culture and faith and 

subjected to political indoctrination. 

The detentions have sent a chill over a tight -knit community of Chinese -born Kazakhs living in 

Kazakhstan. Many had left China to pursue business opportunities in trade or educate their 

children in Kazakh schools as restrictions tightened in Xinjiang. 

Hundreds lost contact with relatives in Xinjiang, and many began writing letters and attending 

press conferences, hoping that greater publicity would help bring their loved ones home. 

SerikzhanBilash , head of the advocacy group Atajurt, senses a subtle shift in the Kazakh 

government`s position. 

He said he was warned by officials to halt his activities four times this summer but the warnings 

have stopped. Last month, he was invited onto a popular Kazak h talk show for an hour, 

indicating growing tolerance of his work publicizing the plight of detained Kazakhs. `I said that 

Chinese officials are dangerous for Central Asia, for Kazakhstan, Bilash said. `They a re starting 

to accept my opinion now. 

Though they`ve avoided criticizing China, Kazakh diplomats have worked to secure the release 

of their own citizens in Xinjiang. Foreign Ministry officials said in November that China had 

detained 29 Kazakh citizens, and 15 had since been released and allowed to return to 

Kazakhstan. 

Gene Bunin, an activist who has collected about 2,000 testimonies from relatives of detainees in 

Xinjiang, estimates that about 20 people, possibly more, were allowed to return to Kazakhstan 

last year. Bunin has tracked another 70 or s o who have been released from camps but confined to 

their home villages and prevented from leaving the country. -AP 

# Dawn News, 10 -01 -19 

China signs MoU with ICCBS 

KARACHI: The International Centre for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) of Karachi 

Univ ersity signed an MoU on Tuesday with China`s Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology 

(TIB), part of the Chinese Academy of Science. 113 

The agreement was signed by ICCBS director Prof Muhammad IqbalChoudhary and TIB 

director Prof Yanhe Ma on behalf of theirrespective institutions at a ceremony held at the TIB 

campus in China. 

`Both heads expressed the hope that the agreement would help strengthen academic and research 

initiatives between the two countries and bring them closer,` says a press release. 

As per the MoU, both institutions agreed to promote cooperation in the field of research on 

science and technology of natural products, biotechnology, molecular and cell biology and 

related fieldsthrough collaborative research. 

The agreement will be effectiv e for a period of five years. 

`ICCBS is one of Pakistan`s most prominent research and development centers in chemical and 

biological sciences. This MoU would further boost its research efforts and help tackle national 

challenges,` the press release says, q uoting ICCBS director Prof Choudhary. 

On TIB`s services, Prof Ma said that the facility was committed to support sustainable 

developmentof Tianjin municipality, Bohai Rim (a region playing a crucial role in Chinese 

economy) and China. 

`TIB is leading scien tific research in industrial biotechnology in China and striving to be a 

world -class research institution. 

The institution is a national public welfare scientific research institute focusing on fundamental, 

directional, and strategic scientific and technol ogical issues of industrial biotechnology in 

China,` the press release says, quoting Prof Ma. 

# Dawn News, 11 -01 -19 

Govt policies have made country US -China battleground, says Fazl 

PESHAWAR: Chief of his own f action of the JamiatUlema -i-Islam MaulanaFazlurR ehman on 

Thursday said Pakistan was being called a `battleground` between China and America due to the 

wrong policies of the government. 

`Regrettably, our country is being called a battlefield between China and US, `Mr . Fazl told a 

condolence reference hel d for the party`s provincial chief and parliamentarian, 

MaulanaAmanullah Khan, here. 

Awami National Party central general secretaryMianIftikharHussain,Pakistan Muslim League -

Nawaz provincial president Amir Muqam, Jamaat -i-Islami provincial chief and Senato r Mushtaq 

Ahmad Khan, Pakistan People`s Party provincial president Humayun Khan, QaumiWatan Party 114 

general secretary Hashim Babar, JUI -F general secretary Maulana Abdul GhafoorHaider i and 

leaders of other parties also spoke on the occasion. 

The speakers paid rich tribute to the deceased and eulogized his struggle for democracy and 

religion. 

Coming down heavily on the ruling PTI over its policies, the JUI -F chief said the government 

had wasted over $35 billion Chinese investment to get the US blessings. 

He said the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor project was a game changer for the country but 

the government made it controversial and that the government was safeguarding the interests of 

the US and Jewish lobby.MrFazl said former prime minister Nawaz Sharif was declared a friend 

of his Indian counterpart, NarendraModi, while the sitting prime minister was talking about 

peace and friendship with the country`s archrival. 

He said despite the opening of the Kartarpur Corridor, the government received a cold respo nse 

from New Delhi, who had rejected the offer of talks and friendship. 

The JUI -F chief said the National Accountability Bureau was being used as a tool to victimize 

political opponents of the government. 

He said the PTI had abolished its own Ehtesab Commi ssion in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 

Mr . Fazl said his party had demanded the abolition of the NAB during discussionon 18th 

Constitutional Amendment in 2010 but the PPP and PML -N did not support the demand. 

`Now, let these two parties bear the consequences,` he sa id in a lighter vein. 

The JUI -F chief said parliament could do away with the NAB if the KP government amended the 

law to abolish the Ehtesab Commission. 

He said military ruler Pervez Musharraf had created NAB to blackmail politicians and that he 

had opposed the move at that time, too. 

Mr . Fazl said a group of corrupt elements could not hold fair accountability of others. 

He said his party was fighting to liberate the country from foreign powers and their agents. 

`We will take our fight to its logical endto get real freedom,` he said adding that the successive 

governments did not make decisions independently and were dictated by foreign powers. 

He said the supremacy of the Constitution would bring social, political and economic stability in 

the country. 

The JUI -F chief said foreign agents were trying to distort the image of Pakistan. 115 

He alleged that Britain continued to treat Pakistan as its colony and that the acquittal of Christian 

woman Asia Bibi in a blasphemy case proved his apprehension in that res pect. 

Addressing the reference, ANP leader Main IftikharHussain alleged that the establishment was 

patronizing Prime Minister Imran Khan. 

He said the PTI government would collapse in the center if the establishment withdrew its 

support. 

The ANP leader call ed for unity among opposition parties, especially PPP and PML -N. 

He said all corrupt men had joined the PTI to protect their ill -gotten wealth and political careers. 

MrHussain said Premier Imran Khan had been installed to bring changes to the 18th 

Constitu tional Amendment. 

He demanded more autonomy for provinces to strengthen federation instead of the rollback if the 

18th Amendment. 

The ANP leader urged Pakistan, big powers and other neighbors to play their role for the 

political settlement of the Afghan is sue. 

He said neighbors and big powers should not waste the `golden opportunity` to end war in 

Afghanistan as the US had given clear indication of withdrawing its forces from the war -torn 

country. 

Mr . Hussain also appealed to MaulanaFazl and AsfandyarWali t o use their influence to pave the 

way for a peaceful solution of Afghan war. 

# Dawn News, 11 -01 -19 

Dock workers take out rally to highlight issues with Chinese firm 

KARACHI: Some 1,750 dock workers of the Port Qasim Authority on Thursday took out a 

peaceful rally from Regal Chowk to the Karachi Press Club to highlight their issues with their 

employers for which they have been protesting for the last 108 days. 

Social workers, human rights activists and trade unionists also joined in the rally to show their 

sol idarity with the workers` cause. 

Abdul Wahid, a dock worl(er, said that they did loading and unloading worl( at all the port berths 

but the problem occurred at berths three and four, which are coal terminals and whose 

management has been taken over by a Ch inese company, which was not paying them for their 

work. 116 

`We have not been paid for eight months now by them. When they were new, we also in good 

faith worked for them for free because we wanted to be nice to our Chinese brothers. Our 

countries have mainta ined very good relations over the years after all,` he said. 

`We had thought that they were just going through teething problems and that they would pay us 

sooner or later. 

But after it became clear to us that they had no intention of paying us our wages, we demanded 

it,` said Fareed Khan, another dock worker. `That`s when they also started firing us. 

Mukhtar Khan, who was also protesting at the rally, explained when asked how their families 

were coping with the situation: `we are earningfrom our work at th e other berths such as numbers 

one and two. But times are hard as that money is not enough after all to make two ends meet, ` 

he said. 

Mohammad Akbar said that there were many of them and all did not find worl( every day. 

`There are over 1,700 workers and each day they contract different men. For example on day one 

there will be one to hundreds of us who will be taken on for the work. Then on day two 101st to 

200th workers will be called to work. It is like a rotation system of work. So everyone doesn`t 

ear n wages daily. We depend then on our monthly salaries, which we have not got since June 

2018,` he said. 

About their income before the cri -sis, Abdul Ghaffar, another laborer, said that usually a 

common worker or loader would get Rs23, 000 and a crane operator Rs43, 000 a month. 

`Daily wages were like a bonus income and fluctuated between Rs1, 000, 1,500 and 2, 000, ` he 

said. 

HussainBadshah, the secretary general of the Workers Union of Port Qasim, told Dawn that they 

were surprised to learn of the int entions of the Chinese. `But if we raise our voice to point out the 

injustice, they tell us to go home. 

`Basically,` he said, `the Chinese need to be educated about Pakistan`s labor laws so that they 

take our charter of demands seriously. We have been work ing at the dockyard since 1981, we 

deserve some respect. 

Badshah also said that they had hadissuesin the pasttoolike in 2016 when their two -year contract 

had expired and politicians, including current Governor of Sindh Imran Ismail and Federal 

Minister of Maritime Affairs Ali Zaidi, were by their side making speeches in their favor as the 

Muslim League -N was in power then. `It was thanks to them that our contracts were renewed 

then. But now when they are in a position to do something for us and direct the C hinese to treat 

us right, they are looking the other way,` he said. 117 

`The Chinese say they will bring their own labor from China for the work here. Then where are 

we to go?` 

# Dawn News, 12 -01 -19 

China to import potatoes: envoy 

ISLAMABAD: China plans to import potatoes from Pakistan, said Ambassador Yao Jing on 

Friday. 

The envoy in a meeting with Minister for National Food Security and Research Sahibzada 

Mehboob Sultan said his country will shortly send a delegation to Islamabad to finalize 

arrangements a nd fulfilling the requirements sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS). 

He said that Beijing wants to import more from Pakistan, especially food items are cherries, 

potato, wheat, citrus, rice and mangoes. China wants to build stronger socio -economic tie s with 

Pakistan on the basis of reciprocity, he added. 

Pakistan`s annual potato yield currently st ands at around 4.2 million ton s as against domestic 

requirement is 3.75 m ton s leaving a sizable surplus. About 97 per cent of the vegetable is grown 

in Punjab while the rest in other provinces. 

The fresh crop of potato, which hit the local market in early December 2018, will be ready for 

export by the end of January prior to the visit of Chinese delegation. 

The country has already taken steps to promote the exp ort of cotton for which a facilitation 

center for exporters is already operational in Okara. 

The envoy informed Sultan that hybrid rice seed experts from Pakistan will soon be invited to 

see and monitor the facilities in China. 

The minister told Jing that the Pakistani government will soon make a decision on the import of 

Chinese hybrid rice seed. 

Over the recent past, 29 rice hybrids were received from the Hubei Provincial Seed Group of 

China by Pakistan Agriculture Research Council, and tested at the Rice Research Institute at 

Dokri, Larkana. Eight of them were found promising with paddy yield of more than 100 maunds 

per acre. 

At the institute, various local varieties were being converted for the development of indigenous 

rice hybr ids. The Rice Research Pr ogram has so far acquired more than 22,500 lines from the 

International Rice Research Institute in Philippines which are high -yielding with desirable grain 

quality. 118 

The establishment of foot and mouth disease (FMD) free zone in Pakistan was also discussed 

and Sultan invited Chinese experts to visit three districts of Punjab which have been identified as 

FMD -free. 

The minister informed the envoy that the first meeting of the joint working group created to 

implement the memorandum of understanding signed duri ng Prime Minister Imran Khan`s visit 

to China in November will take place in Islamabad next month to explore areas of cooperation 

between the two countries in agricultural sector. 

Chinese assistance to set up the FMD vaccine plant in Pakistan will be among the agenda of the 

group`s meeting, the minister said. 

Jing informed Sultan that Chinese companies are interested to come to Pakistan and set up 

special economic zones with agriculture being one of the six major areas identified by Chinese 

government. 

Sult an told the envoy that the two countries could identify and start working on areas of mutual 

benefit in the field of agriculture prior to the `Belt and Road Conference` scheduled to open on 

April 27 in China. 

# Dawn News, 12 -01 -19 

As world economy stumbles into 2019, eyes turn to China 

LONDON: Ten years after China helped stave off the threat of a global depression with a huge 

stimulus plan, investors are looking once again towards Beijing as the world economy heads for 

a slowdown, or worse, in 2019. 

Booming China has accounted for about a third of the growth in the global economy in recent 

years. 

So recent signs that it is losing momentum is unsettling when the US boom, turbo -charged by 

President Donald Trump`s tax cuts of 2017, seems to have peaked and Euro pe`s heavyweights 

are stalling. 

China`s slowdown is already being felt around the world, from Apple`s profit warning due to 

weaker sales of its iPhones to carmaker Jaguar Land Rover laying off workers, after a 22 per cent 

fall in sales in the country in 20 18. 

Policy sources told Reuters in Beijing on Friday that the government is planning a lower 

economic growth target of 6 -6.5pc for 2019 after an expected 6.6pc in 2018, which would be the 

slowest expansion since 1990. 119 

In the first few days of 2019, China r aised infrastructure spending with a $34 billion railway 

investment and its central bank loosened the screws on banks to encourage them lend more, its 

fifth such move in a year. 

`China, that`s what worries me most,` Joachim Fels, managing director and glob al economic 

advisor at bond giant Pacific Investment Management Company, said as he surveyed the outlook 

for the world economy in 2019. 

As well as cutting China`s appetite for imports, a deeper slowdown could weaken its yuan 

currency and fan the flames of the trade war between Beijing and Washington. 

However, Fels said his recession models for 2019 were flashing only orange warnings not red in 

part because the US Federal Reserve was likely to stop its run of interest rate hikes after one or 

two more increas es. 

China is expected to do more to help its economy too, although officials in Beijing say they do 

not plan a stimulus of the magnitude of the nearly $600bn package unleashed in 2008, shortly 

after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 

`I find it hard to look at it historically and bet against the Chinese authorities managing to 

stabilize their economy, Jim McCormick, global head of desk strategy for RBS division NatWest 

Markets, said. 

`When China wants to stabilize its economy, they tend to be successful.` -Reu ters 

# Dawn News, 12 -01 -19 

Poland charges Huawei worker with spying for China 

WARSAW: Poland has arrested a Chinese manager at tech giant Huawei in Poland and one of its 

own former counter -espionage officers and charged them with spying on Poland for China, state 

television and officials reported on Friday. 

The two men were arrested on Tuesday, according to Poland`s Internal Security Agency. Polish 

security agents also searched the Warsaw offices of Huawei and Orange, Poland`s leading 

communications provider, where the former Polish spy recently worked, seizing documents and 

electronic data. The homes of both men, also in Warsaw, were also searched, according to 

agency spokesman Stanislaw Zaryn. 

Huawei is a leader in the development of next -generation `5G` mob ile networks and a key player 

in building them in Europe. But a US dispute with China over its ban on Huawei is spilling over 

to Europe, the company`s biggest foreign market. 120 

Maciej Wasik, deputy head of Poland`s Special Services agency, said the operation that resulted 

in the arrests of the two suspects had been underway for a long time. He said `both carried out 

espionage activities against Poland`. 

Zaryn said that prosecutors have charged the two men with espionage, but that agents are 

continuing to coll ect evidence and interview witnesses, including sortingthrough what was seized 

earlier this week. Further indictments are expected, he said. 

`It`s not the beginning of this case but it`s also not the end,` he said. He also said no further 

details would be released now about the case because it is classified and the investigation is 

ongoing. 

If convicted, they could face up to 10 years in prison each. TVP, which is government -controlled 

media, identified the arrested Chinese man as Weijing W., saying he was a director in Poland at 

Huawei. It said the man also went by the Polish first name of Stanislaw and had previously 

worked at the Chinese consulate in Gdansk. 

A LinkedIn profile for a man named Stanislaw Wang appears to match details of the man 

described by Polish television. Wang`s resume said he worked at China`s General Consulate in 

Gdansk from 2006 -2011 and at Huawei Enterprise Poland since 2011, where he was first director 

of public affairs and since 2017 the `sales director of public sector. 

The resume said he received a bachelor`s degree in 2004 from the Beijing University of Foreign 

Studies. 

State TV identified the Polish man as Piotr D., and said he was a high -ranking employee at the 

Internal Security Agency until 2011, where he served as deputy dire ctor in the departm ent of 

information security. -AP 

# Dawn News, 13 -01 -19 

A Chinese `re -education` 

IN an interview with a Turkish television channel, Prime Minister Imran Khan completely 

sidestepped a question about the condition of Uighur Muslims in China`s western Xinjiang 

province. He admitted that he knew little about the issue, and, instead, preferred to focus on and 

highlight Chinese financial assistance and investment in Pakistan. 

China is under stiff criticism for its alleged persecution of religious a nd ethnic minorities, 

especially Uighur Muslims. Freedom House`s 2018 country report on China classified it as 

`religiously -not -free` on its freedom index. China is seriously concerned about this growing 

perception that hurts its efforts to promote a `soft image` of China for a successful execution of 

its Belt and Road Initiative and other global commercial and strategic projects. Last week, China 121 

said that it welcomed UN officials to visit Xinjiang provided that they stay out of its internal 

affairs. 

Pakis tan usually avoids commenting on China`s internal affairs. But many Pakistani men, 

married to Chinese Uighur women, claim their spouses are being held in so -called re -education 

camps and are demanding their release. The issue has put Pakistan an in a diffi cult position, 

mainly due to China`s huge investment in the country, as well as the extreme sensitivity of 

Chinese authorities to discussions on the subject. 

Mystery continues to shroud China`s re -education camps, with authorities least interested in 

openi ng them up to independent observers. 

However, Chinese scholars claim that they are a part of the country`s countering violent 

extremism strategy, which was not built in isolation from rest of the world. They assert that 

China has designed its re -education strategy after carefully examining CVE approaches in 

practice in the West and Muslim world, which also employ similar community engagement 

programmes. Though they tend to justify their muscular approach by quoting examples from the 

Gulf, and South and Sout heast Asian Muslim nations, the Chinese CVE strategy still appears 

highly politicized and opaque to Western practitioners and policymakers. 

Much of the information about China`s re -education centers comes from West. Though the 

criticism has forced Chinese authorities to `release` some information, it is insufficient to make a 

properassessment. Last year, a state -run news agency published an interview of ShohratZakir, 

the Xinjiang governor, describing the camps as `professional vocational training institutio ns` for 

people influenced by terrorism and extremism who have not committed an offence warranting 

criminal punishment. 

Similarly, in a seminar in China last November, local scholars explained China`s CVE 

approaches. 

Alluding to diverse and disparate CVE pr actices in different countries, they tended to conclude 

that no uniform or global CVE programme exists. One Chinese scholar presented a four -layered 

model based on the four principles of breaking, establishing, preventing and developing. 

`Breaking` referre d to isolating individuals from an extremist environment; `establishing` meant 

introducing them to the true spiritual values of religion; `preventing` was seen as educating; and 

`developing` was interpreted as a skill development programme. 

However, one of the best works available on the subject of China`s CVE strategy is by Zunyou 

Zhou, a Germany -based Chinese scholar. In a paper published in the Journal of Terrorism and 

Political Violence in 2017, he noted that the Chinese CVE strategy is based on multipl e

approaches and, interestingly, that they consulted Western CVE and deradicalisation approaches 

extensively and then built their own, more muscular model. The approaches include `five keys`, 122 

`four prongs`, `three contingents`, `two hands` a nd `one rule`. View these approaches point to 

legal, religious, cultural, ideological, and scientific aspects of the deradical iz ation effort 

implemented by governmental agencies, public institutions and non -governmental organizations 

in the region. 

The Xinjiang governmen t has developed several programmes to target different groups of 

people, including those who are `radicalized` as well as those who are not but considered 

vulnerable to recruitment. The five keysideological, cultural, customary, religious and legal give 

a long -sustaining solution to terrorism. The `four prongs` refer to a combination of four methods: 

`squeezing by correct faith`; `counteracting by culture`; `controlling by law`; and `popularizing 

science`. `Squeezing by correct faith` refers to clarifying p eople`s understanding of Islam while 

`counteracting by culture means seeking effective and practical solutions to thwart extremism 

and guiding people towards secularization and modernization. The `three contingents` refer to 

the policy of reinforcing three main groups of people the government can count on to maintain 

stability and security. The `two hands` refer to the one `firm hand` that cracks down on terrorists, 

and the other `firm hand` that educates and guides Uighur people, and the `one rule` means t he 

policy of ruling Xinjiang according to the law. 

The author also provides historical background on the evolution of the Chinese CVE strategy and 

mentions that it materialized in a policy document entitled Several Guiding Opinions on Further 

Suppressing I llegal Religious Activities and Combating the Infiltration of Religious Extremism 

in Accordance with Law, issued by Xinjiang`s CCP Committee in May 2013. The policy 

document was also referred to as `No. 11 Document`, and described the borders between ethni c

customs, normal religious practices and extremist manifestations. 

For the CVE strategy`s smooth implementation, the Xinjiang authorities have introduced new 

legal regimes, and the latest amendment (titled `Regulation on Anti -Extremism`) was introduced 

in April 2017 to ban a wide range of extremist behaviors. Under the new legal framework, 

authorities have l aunched many program including deradicaliz ation for p risoners, and social 

program for those who have engaged in terrorism or extremism but do not deser ve criminal 

punishment. 

The re -education camps or `rehabilitation centers `have been created as a part of China`s social 

programming. These centers run through civil society groups in Xinjiang or through `Fang 

HuiJu` working groups, dispatched by the regio nal government, comprising practitioners tasked 

with winning the hearts and minds of the people. 

For CVE practitioners, the Chinese model may have a lot of substance to learn from. But the 

Uighur problem is more complex than religious extremism, as it has added dimensions of ethnic, 

cultural and political rights. For Pakistan, the Chinese CVE model offers nothing to learn from 

except to find a way of resolving the issue of Pakistani citizens` spouses held in these camps.The 

writer is a security analyst. 123 

# Daw n News, 13 -01 -19 

Learning from China` 

APROPOS the article `Learning from China` (Jan 9). The key to China`s legend is rooted in 

Toynbee`s Challenge and Response Theory. 

Civilizations apathetic to their current environmental challenges vanish into antiquity. When 

challenges seem horribly insurmountable, nations become apathetic. 

A combination of factors, including religious fatalism, a confiscatory or predatory taxation 

system, feudal aristocracy and despotic governments accelerate the decline of a nation. At this 

point comes the role of a leader like Mao. 

Facing down the Yangtze River, Mao said, `Yangtze is a big river.` As people agreed, Mao 

proceeded, `It is big but not frightening. Is Imperialist America big? We challenged it, nothing 

happened. There are t hings in this world that are big but not frightening` (Philip Ball, The Water 

Kingdom, and p.41). 

What about our leaders and the led who regard an American visa as nirvana. 

Mohammad Sa`ad Islamabad 

# Dawn News, 13 -01 -19 

China`s premier says tax cuts support employment, economic stability 

SHANGHAI: China`s plans for tax cuts targeting smaller companies will help to support 

employment and economic stability, and will expand the country`s tax base over the long term, 

Premier Li Keqiang was quoted as saying on Saturday. 

`Implementing tax cuts for small and micro enterprises is mainly to support employment,` Li 

said in comments posted on the Chinese government`s website. 

Developing and strengthening small companies is linked to economic stability and stable 

emplo yment, he said. 

`Looking at the long term, this will continue toexpandthe taxbase,conserve tax resources and 

ultimately achievewins for mass employment, corporate profits and fiscal revenues,` he was 

quoted as saying, referring to the corporate tax cuts. 

Li`s comments come amid growing official concern over China`s slowing economic growth and 

its impact on the labor market. 124 

Chinese authorities plan to set a lower economic growth target of 6 -6.5 per cent in 2019, 

compared with `around` 6.5pc in 2018, sources told Reuters, as weakening domestic demand and 

a damaging trade war with the United States drag on business activity and consumer confidence. -

Reuters 

# Dawn News, 14 -01 -14 

Govt puts major CPEC power project on hold 

ISLAMABAD: The Pakistan Tehreek -i-Insaf (PTI) government has decided to shelve a major 

power project pushed by the Pakistan Muslim League -Nawaz regime under the China -Pakistan 

Economic Corridor (CPEC) and will axe hundreds of other schemes under the Public Sector 

Development Programme (PSDP)late r this month. 

Background discussions with government officials suggest that Islamabad has officially 

conveyed to Beijing that it is no more interested in the 1,320MW Rahim Yar Khan power project 

in view of sufficient generation capacity already lined up fo r the next few years. It has requested 

the Chinese friends to formally delete the project from the CPEC list. 

During the 8th Joint Coordination Committee (JCC) meeting held last month, a Pakistani 

delegation led by MinisterforPlanningandDevelopment Makhdoo mKhusroBakhtyar `proposed to 

remove the Rahim Yar Khan imported fuel power plant (1,320MW) from the CPEC list, in order 

to provide structure optimization space for the subsequent power market of Pakistan` said an 

official, quoting minutes of the Dec 20 JCC meeting. 

The Chinese side suggested that a joint study on optimization of energy mix be carried out at the 

earliest. 

The project was originally pushed as imported coal -based plant by Quaid -I Azam Thermal 

Company of the Punjab government led by Shahbaz Sha rif whoused to attend meetings of the 

Cabinet Committee on Energy led by then Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. A leading business 

tycoon had proposed the project and was expected to be one of the key sponsors. 

The project was removed from the CPEC priority lis t when then bureaucracy highlighted that 

surplus generation capacity had already been contracted and more contracts would lead the 

country to `capacity trap`. 

The government had already notified a ban on capacity addition on imported fuels as early as 

June 2016 and the Rahim Yar Khan and Muzaffargarh coal -based plants were removed from the 

CPEC priority list. 

Among other reasons, this led to unceremonious removal of the then power secretary and head of 

the National Transmission Company the system operator. 125 

The Punjab government hadpushed for revival of the plant which was included again in the 

priority list in subsequent CPEC negotiations, according to a federal secretary. It was not needed 

at all and would have been a burden on the already deteriorating fin ancial condition of the power 

sector, he said, adding that Diamer -Bhasha dam was also included in the CPEC list when the 

coal -based projects were removed, but the dam project could also not move forward under the 

CPEC for unrelated reasons. 

The official sa id the PTI government had already made up its mind to remove almost 400 

`politically motivated` projects from the development portfolio as part of a comprehensive mid -

year review of the PSDP later this month. Giving an example, the official said the last 

government had included hundreds of gas schemes in the PSDP and allocated funds even though 

therewas no additional gas available for new connections. Many of these schemes could not take 

off. 

`We are reviewing all such schemes in detail; we do not want to w aste public funds where lien 

has been created or sufficient progress achieved, but we definitely don`t like to throw good 

money after bad,` a cabinet member told Dawn, claiming that more than 20 seats went to the 

PML -N in the last elections due to constitu ency politics of gas connections. 

He said the mid -term review of the PSDP would be held in the last week of January and about 

Rs2 trillion worth of development projects would be revised. He said that most of the 

unapproved projects at the level of the Cent ral Development Working Party or the Executive 

Committee of the National Economic Council and unfunded schemes would be excluded from 

the PSDP. 

The cabinet member said that at least 400 projects included in the PSDP did not receive funding 

over the pastfou ryears and yet they were part of the programme. But he hastened to add that the 

Rs675 billion federal development budget approved by parliament in September this year would 

not be reduced further even though adjustments would be made where necessary to div ertfunds 

from problematic projects to more deserving ones for effective funding utilization. 

He said the PSDP used to get average Rs55bn additional funds over the past five years for 

development projects but most of them had not been given funds because th e overall 

development portfolio expanded significantly. He said that all secretaries would be asked to 

provide unnecessary schemes under the respective ministries and divisions during the midyear 

review so as to com -plete maximum projects in the minimum ti me period. 

The federal government`s overall development portfolio stood at about Rs6tr and with the 

current pace, allocation of funds would take 9 -10 years to complete even if no fresh development 

project was taken up, an official said. The PSDP size would remain unchanged at Rs675bn, but 

throw -forward would be significantly reduced through revision in the number of projects and 

their rationalized costs, he added. 126 

# Dawn News, 14 -01 -1

CPEC & apprehensions 

CHINA has been showing a great interest in the stability, development, and progress of Pakistan 

by investing lavishly in many projects, including China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). 

This project is considered a game changerfor servingtheinterestsofboth the countries, especially 

for the prosperity of Pakistan. 

Some analysts fear that China will seize control of Pakistan under these projects as East India 

Company did in the subcontinent. 

First, the colonial trend has been demolished globally and global institutions and organizations 

will never replay the old game. 

Second, China has never made any attempt to colonies another country throughout its history. It 

has also never interfered in the politics of countries in its vicinity. In addition, of all its 

neighbors, China has friendly relations with Paki stan. 

Last but not least, Pakistan has emerged as a nuclear power and continues to develop its nuclear 

program . No country, and hence China, will ever be careless enough to neglect mutually assured 

destruction. 

Besides, Pakistanis are a patriotic people, w ho have been proving their love and loyalty to the 

country since itsinception, even in the worst times of wars. 

These points ensure Pakistan and China`s territorial integrity. Both are working for their 

prosperity with high technological breakthroughs usin g all available resources. 

Fahad Khan Naudero 

# Dawn News, 14 -01 -19 

CPEC: govt seeks more joint ventures 

CHINA and Pakistan have made strides particularly in electricity and infrastructure projects in 

the first three -year phase of their cooperation under the multi -billion -dollar ChinaPakistan 

Economic Corridor (CPEC). Both countries have had good and not -so -good experiences and are 

learning about each other`s strengths and deficiencies as they try to build upon lessons learnt. 

At the conclusion of the recentl y held eighth meeting of the Joint Cooperation Committee (JCC), 

they agreed to conduct at least five in -depth sector studies for future investment cooperation 

under the framework as Islamabad pursues more financial support and Beijing seeks increased 

facil itation, improved security and a smooth repayment mechanism. In addition, `both sides 127 

agreed to make joint efforts to improve the overall media environment for CPEC cooperation`. 

Pakistan made a formal request to the JCC the highest decision -making body o n the CPEC for 

`more grant, investment, joint ventures and concessional loan arrangements to strengthen and 

fast track` transport infrastructure, industrial cooperation and socio -economic development. 

China`s focus during the meeting that ended on Dec 20 w as more on putting in place a 

mechanism that ensures smooth repayments given Pakistan`s financial constraints. It expects 

Islamabad to further strengthen the security structure and take targeted measures to reduce the 

threat of terrorism by speeding up the building and deployment of Special Security 

DivisionSouth. Beijing is also pushing more vigorously for the removal of irritants in the 

implementation of existing projects. 

Led jointly by NingJizhe, vice chairman of the National Development and Reform Comm ission 

of China, and MakhdoomKhusroBakhtiar, minister for planning, development reforms, meeting 

participants appreciated that the CPEC had achieved important milestones of early -harvest 

projects (EHP) and was now entering a new development stage. 

The in -depth studies will be on Pakistan`s power market, a cascade study for hydro -power 

projects all along the Jhelum River, optimization of overall energy mix, an oil and gas industry 

development plan and a five -year action plan for cooperation on the highway be tween China and 

Pakistan as part of the joint traffic density study. 

(The) results of a joint study on power market of Pakistan will be fundamental for deciding the 

next step of energy cooperation.` The working on the study has just begun. Pakistan has 

com mitted to putting into operation all transmission lines required for the evacuation of energy 

well before CPEC projects achieve commercial operations to avoid penalties. 

The payment of outstanding tariffs for the operational energy projects is a source of irritation for 

China. The two sides agreed to have scientific planning and amicable negotiations to address the 

issues arising from energy cooperation and create a common panel under the joint working group 

on energy for monthly formal and informal communi cations and consultations. 

Pakistan promised a timely recovery of bills from consumers as part of the ongoing campaign to 

reduce line losses and improve collection through reforms and new technology. But Pakistan also 

wanted Chinese technical support with respect to technology. A comprehensive technical study 

will also be carried out to increase the production capacity of the surface mine in the Thar 

coalfield. 

Pakistan has demanded that a major 1,320 -megawatt Rahimyar Khan project under CPEC be 

scrapped on the ground that its next -stage priority was using domestic sources of energy. Hence, 

the need for maximum benefits from the Jhelum River flows by optimizing the combined 

operation of all cascade projects there. 128 

On the industrial side, China asked Pakistan that the Board of Investment should act as lead 

agency for industrial development and ensure land, energy, taxation, customs, law and other 

services from the relevant departments to deal with land prices, park development models and 

infrastructure service s. 

Rashakai in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,Dhabeji in Thatta and M3 in Faisalabad have been selected as 

special industrial zones for the first phase of development. 

They will promote Chinese investments in key industries, like textile, petro -chemical and iron 

and s teel. 

In infrastructure, both sides are happy with the progress on two big projects: $8.2 billion 

Mainline (ML -1) from Karachi to Khyber and $2bn Karachi Circular Railway (KCR) besides 

Eastbay Expressway Gwadar and security arrangements for them. Pakistan has promised to 

ensure timely land acquisition and demolition for the project implementation. 

The preliminary design of ML -1 will be ready this month. The project will be implemented in 

line with the framework agreement signed in May 2017. This means China will provide up to 85 

per cent of the project cost as a loan as opposed to a `build -operate -transfer` model proposed by 

the PTl government to shift financial responsibility on to the private sector and keep government 

loans on the lower side. 

Beijing is a nnoyed about slow progress on KCR by the provincial government despite the project 

being critical and feasible for the growth and prosperity of the country`s largest city. Mass transit 

projects for Quetta and Peshawar have been put on the back burner for t he time being because of 

a lack of preparedness. These will be taken up once their PC -1s are approved by the relevant 

government forums. 

Noting full operational capability of the Gwadar Port, the two sides agreed to continuously pay 

high attention to it. W eekly container liner services are calling the port as coal trans -shipment 

and clinker export take place. The JCC appreciated progress on the Gwadar Free Zone. It agreed 

to jointly make more efforts to attract qualified companies to invest in the area. 

Pak istan was required to provide agreed tax and tariff mechanisms to create a good investment 

environment leading to the next phase. The two sides have failed so far to finalize the Gwadar 

Smart City Master Plan, but promised to hold the groundbreaking ceremo ny for the New Gwadar 

International Port before March 2019. • 129 

# Dawn News, 15 -01 -19 

China`s US trade surplus hit record in 2018 but tariffs bite 

BEIJING: China`s trade surplus with the United States hit a record high last year but the 

country`s imports and exports fell in December as the long -running trade war begins to bite in 

the world`s number two economy, data showed on Monday. 

The surplus with the US is a major source of anger within the Trump administration, which 

imposed tariffs on hundreds of bil lions of dollars’ worth of Chinese goods last year and has 

warned of more to come. 

Despite the levies, exports to the United States grew 11.3 per cent last year while imports rose 

0.7pc, expanding the surplus to a record $323.3bn from $275.8bn in 2017, cus toms data show. 

However, in a sign that the White House`s measures are having an impact, China`s exports to the 

US sank last month. 

The figures come after a US delegation held three days of talks in Beijing last week in the first 

face -to -face meeting since Donald Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping in December pledged a 

90 -day truce to resolve the crisis. 

Trump wants Beijing to buy more American goods to narrow the yawning trade gap and allow 

foreign players better access and protection in the Chinese marke t. 

China traditionally imports vast quantities of American soyabeans in the second half of the year, 

long making it the most valuable import from the US. 

Subdued import growth but the buying fell off last year after China imposed a 25pc retaliatory 

tariff on the commodity in the summer. 

Total imports of soyabeans fa ll 7.9pc last year to 88 million tonnes, customs data showed, with 

December imports down 40.1pc from a year earlier. 

`The overall development of China -US trade in 2018 was still relatively normal , but the trade 

surplus did expand slightly, ` said Li Kuiwen, spokesman for the customs administration. The 

country`s commerce minister told state media on Friday that China will work to straighten out 

trade frictions with the US this year. 

China`s exports to the world fell 4.4pc in December from a year earlier, while imports dropped 

7.6pc, reflecting sluggish demand at home and abroad. 130 

`With global growth set to cool further this year, exports will remain weak even if China can 

clinch a trade deal t hat rows back Trump`s tariffs,` said Julian Evans Pritchard of Capital 

Economics. 

The trade slowdown sent Chinese stocks lower on Monday. 

Rapidly falling exports could point to rising unemployment, said Nomura economist Lu Ting. 

`Beijing will perhaps be mo re eager to strike a trade deal with the US...policymakers will need to 

take more aggressive measures to stabilize GDP growth, Lu wrote in a note. 

`Hidden concerns` China`s global trade volume rose last year but its surplus with the world fell 

16.2pc to $3 51.76bn in 2018, as imports rose 15.8pc while exports gained 9.9pc. 

The customs administration will work to `improve the country`s business environment and 

expand foreign trade... in order to keep employment, the financial sector, foreign trade, foreign 

in vestment` stable, Li said, adding there are some `hidden concerns` and `uncertain external 

factors` for development. 

With US tariffs in place, the gloomy export picture has reinforced the need for Beijing to rely on 

its legion of consumers to grow its econ omy. 

But a slew of bad data has added to concerns about China`s economy, which is expected to have 

grown around 6.5pc in 2018, down from 6.9pc in 2017 and at its weakest rate in almost three 

decades. 

China`s annual passenger car sales fell last year for th e first time in more than 20 years, as the 

trade war with the US rocked consumer confidence and Beijing reined in car financing 

channels. -AFP 

# Dawn News, 15 -01 -19 

China sentences Canadian to death raises tension 

BEIJING: A Chinese court sentenced a Canadian man to death on Monday in a sudden retrial in 

a drug smuggling case that is likely to escalate tensions between the countries over the arrest of a 

top Chinese technology executive. 

The court in Liaoning province announced that it had given Robert Lloyd Sc hellenberg the death 

penalty after rejecting his plea of innocence and convicting him of being an accessory to drug 

smuggling. It gave no indication that the penalty could be commuted, but Schellenberg`s fate is 

likely to be drawn into diplomatic negotiati ons over China`s demand for the top executive`s 

release. 131 

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said in Ottawa that he is extremely concerned that 

China chose to `arbitrarily` apply the death penalty to a Canadian citizen. In his strongest 

comments yet against China, Trudeau said `all countries around the world` should be concerned 

that Beijing is acting arbitrarily with its justice system. 

Schellenberg was detained more than four years ago and initially sentenced to 15 years in prison 

in 2016. But sudde nly last month, an appeals court agreed with prosecutors who said the 

sentence was too lenient, and scheduled Monday`s retrial with just four days` notice. 

The Chinese press began publicizingSchellenberg`s case in December after Canada detained 

MengWanzhou , chief financial officer of the Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei, on Dec 

1 at the request of the US. 

Since then, China has arrested two Canadians in apparent retaliation for Meng`s arrest. Both 

Michael Kovrig, a former diplomat, and Michael Spavor, a businessman, were arrested on vague 

national security allegations. A Canadian teacher was detained but released. 

Schellenberg`s lawyer, Zhang Dongshuo, said his client now has 10 days to appeal. 

Zhang said he argued in the one -day trial on Monday that t here was insufficient evidence to 

prove his client`s involvement in the drug smuggling operation. He added that prosecutors had 

not introduced new evidence to justify a heavier sentence. 

`This is a very unique case, ` Zhang told The Associated Press in a phone interview. He said the 

swiftness of the proceedings with a retrial held so soon after it was ordered was unusual, but 

declined to comment on whether it was related to Meng`s arrest. 

The court said it found that Schellenberg was involved in an interna tional drug smuggling 

operation and was recruited to help smuggle more than 222kgs of methamphetamine from a 

warehouse in Dalian city to Australia. 

Earlier on Monday, a Chinese spokeswoman said Kovrig, the former Canadian diplomat detained 

in December, doe s not enjoy diplomatic immunity, rejecting a complaint from Trudeau that the 

man`s rights were being denied. 

Trudeau said last week that Chinese officials were not respecting Kovrig`s diplomatic immunity. 

However, Chinese foreign ministry spokeswoman HuaCh unying told reporters that Kovrig is no 

longer a diplomat and entered China on an ordinary passport and business visa. -AP 132 

# Dawn News, 15 -01 -19 

China to collect samples from moon this year 

Beijing: China will launch a probe to collect samples from the moon around the end of this year; 

a space official said on Monday, weeks after Beijing hailed the successful touch down on the far 

side of the moon. The Chang`e -4 lunar probe landed on Jan 3 and transmitted the first -ever 

`close range` image of the far side of the moon. 

The tasks of the Chang`e -4 include astronomical observation, surveying the moon`s terrain and 

mineral makeup and measuring the neutron radiation and neutral atoms to study the environment 

of its far side. 

The Change 5 mission will lay the ground work for fudher probes to be sent to the moon`s south 

pole and possibly to return samples from the far side of the moon, depending on the results 

collected in the upcoming mission, Wu said. 

Tests carried out by future missions could lay the groundwork for building on the moon`s 

surface, by testing technologies like 3D printing or the use of moon soil in construction, he said. -

Reuters 133 

# Dunya News 

# Dunya News, 01 -01 -19 

# Dunya News, 01 -01 -19 134 

Dunya News, 01 -01 -19 135 

Dunya News, 01 -01 -19 136 

# Dunya News, 02 -01 -19 137 

# Dunya News, 02 -01 -19 138 

# Dunya News, 04 -01 -19 139 

# Dunya News, 05 -01 -19 140 

# Dunya News, 06 -01 -19 141 

# Dunya News, 07 -01 -19 142 

# Dunya News, 09 -01 -19 143 

# Dunya News, 09 -01 -19 144 

# Dunya News, 12 -01 -19 145 

# Dunya News, 12 -01 -19 146 

# Dunya News, 14 -01 -19 147 

# Dunya News, 15 -01 -19 148 

# Express News 

# Express News, 02 -01 -19 149 

# Express News, 03 -01 -19 

# Express News, 03 -01 -19 150 

# Express News, 03 -01 -19 151 

# Express News, 03 -01 -19 152 

# Express News, 04 -01 -19 153 

# Express News, 04 -01 -19 154 

# Express News, 04 -01 -19 

# Express News, 06 -01 -19 155 

# Express News, 06 -01 -19 

# Ex press News, 06 -01 -19 156 

# Express News, 06 -01 -19 157 

# Express News, 07 -01 -19 158 

# Express News, 07 -01 -19 

# Express News, 07 -01 -19 159 

# Express News, 08 -01 -19 160 

# Express News, 08 -01 -19 

# Express News, 10 -01 -19 161 

# Express News, 10 -01 -19 162 

# Express News, 10 -01 -19 163 

# Express News, 11 -01 -19 164 

# Express News, 11 -01 -2019 165 

# Express News, 12 -01 -19 166 

# Express News, 13 -01 -19 167 

# Express News, 13 -01 -19 168 

# Express News, 13 -01 -19 169 

# Express News, 14 -01 -19 

# Express News, 14 -01 -19 170 

# Express News, 14 -01 -19 171 

# Express News, 15 -01 -19 172 

# Express News, 15 -01 -19 

# Express News, 15 -01 -19 173 

# Jang News 

# Jang News, 01 -01 -19 

# Jang News, 02 -01 -19 174 

# Jang News, 02 -01 -19 175 

# Jang News, 03 -01 -19 176 

# Jang News, 04 -01 -18 177 

# Jang News, 05 -01 -19 178 

# Jang News, 05 -01 -19 

# Jang News, 06 -01 -19 179 

# Jang News, 07 -01 -19 180 

# Jang News, 07 -01 -19 181 

# Jang News, 11 -01 -19 

# Jang News, 11 -01 -19 182 

# Jang News, 11 -01 -19 183 

# Jang News, 12 -01 -19 

# Jang News, 12 -01 -19 184 

# Jang News, 12 -01 -19 185 

# Jang News, 14 -01 -19 

# Jang News, 14 -01 -19 186 

# Jang News, 14 -01 -19 187 

# Jang News, 14 -01 -19 188 

# Jang News, 14 -01 -19 189 

# Jang News, 15 -01 -19 190 

# Pakistan Observer 

# Pakistan Observer, 01 -01 -19 191 

# Pakistan Observer, 01 -01 -19 192 

# The Express Tribune 

# The Express Tribune, 01 -01 -19 193 

# The Express Tribune, 02 -01 -19 194 

# The Express Tribune, 04 -01 -19 195 

# The Express Tribune, 06 -01 -19 196 

# The Express Tribune, 06 -01 -19 197 

# The Express Tribune, 09 -01 -19 198 

# The Express Tribune, 10 -01 -19 199 

# The Express Tribune, 10 -01 -19 200 

# The Express Tribune, 12 -01 -19 201 

# The Express Tribune, 13 -01 -19 202 

# The Express Tribune, 14 -01 -19 

# The Nation 

# The Nation, 01 -01 -19 

China’s Xi wishes happy New Year to Russia’s Putin 

MOSCOW - Chinese leader Xi Jinping has wished a happy New Year to Russia’s President 

Vladimir Putin and the nation, state media reported. 203 

In the message cited by the Xinhua new s agency, the Chinese president said next year would 

mark the 70th anniversary since the two nations established diplomatic relations. 

The Russian and Chinese national flags are seen on the table as Russia’s President Vladimir 

Putin (back L) and his China’ s President Xi Jinping (back R) stand during a signing ceremony at 

the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse in Beijing on November 9, 2014. 

China’s Xi Accepts Putin’s Invitation to Visit 2019 St. Petersburg Int’l Economic Forum 

Xi added he wanted to further develop the bilateral relationship across all areas for the sake of 

well -being and prosperity of both countries. 

In his New Year telegram to Xi, Putin wished praised the comprehensive and trusting partnership 

between the two nations, saying it had reached an unpre cedented level. 

# The Nation, 01 -01 -19 

China’s reform momentum to remain unabated 

BEIJING - China is set to usher in broader and more intensive reform in 2019 as reform, a policy 

the country adopted 40 years ago, has become a hallmark of the country. 

Starting January 1, a new personal income tax cut will take effect as part of China’s tax reform 

which also involves value -added tax reductions. 

These tax cut measures are expected to boost consumers’ spending power, optimize income 

distribution, grow the domestic market, encourage companies to engage in technical upgrading 

and innovation, and enhance the strength of the Chinese economy to pursue sustained 

development. 

At its bimonthly session last week, China’s top legislature, the National People’s Congre ss 

(NPC) Standing Committee, reviewed a draft foreign investment law and adopted the revised 

civil servant law as part of the country’s efforts to promote its civil service reform. 

Li Zhanshu, chairman of the NPC Standing Committee, said about one -third of the subjects 

covered in this session were closely connected to China’s reform, stressing the standing 

committee’s duty in implementing reform and ensuring that all major reform measures are taken 

in accordance with the law. 

As well as the legislature, Chi nese people have been passionately advocating reform. A grand 

exhibition to commemorate the 40th anniversary of China’s reform and opening -up, for instance, 

received over 2.2 million visits within 44 days. 204 

With historical photos, texts, videos, miniature m odels on display, and interactive activi ties, the 

exhibition at the National Museum of China in Beijing has seen the number of daily visits 

exceeding 60,000 on several days. 

A digital version of the exhibition launched about a month ago had been visited ne arly 265 

million times online as of Dec. 28. 

The public enthusiasm about reform and policymakers’ resolve to advance reform have mainly 

come from the country’s collective experience of turning China from a poverty -stricken country 

to the one with growing c ompetitiveness and influence across the world within 40 years. 

It is fair to say that China’s reform momentum has been particularly strong over the past five 

years after the Communist Party of China (CPC) decided to advance reform in all aspects at the 

third plenary session of the 18th CPC Central Committee in 2013. 

Since the third plenary session, Chinese President Xi Jinping, also general secretary of the 

Communist Party of China Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military 

Commission, has pr esided over at least 45 high -profile meetings on advancing reforms, during 

which 400 documents and 1,932 reform plans have been launched, according to official statistics. 

As a result, China’s reform has been expanded from the economic field to a broad sph ere 

including administrative management, culture, society, ecological conservation, Party building, 

and the military. And such reform momentum has been unabated. 

Despite rising protectionist sentiments overseas, China consistently expands its market to for eign 

investors through reform measures. After a pilot run of negative list in Shanghai and later other 

provinces since 2016, the Chinese government recently announced a negative list for market 

access nationwide, opening more industries, fields, and busine sses to all investors. 

The move is to implement the instruction of having the market play a decisive role in resource 

allocation as instructed by the third plenary session. 

A significant institutional breakthrough, as the government noted, is that all mark et players 

including state -owned firms, private companies, mixed -ownership enterprises, and foreign firms 

will be treated equally despite their size or other differences. 

According to the Central Economic Work Conference held in December, an annual tone -se tting 

meeting to make arrangements for next year’s economic work, the country’s reform will be 

advanced from a long -term perspective to better respond to the concerns of the people and for the 

good of China and the world at large. 

In the financial market, reform measures will be taken to improve the country’s monetary policy 

transmission mechanisms, increase the proportion of direct financing and make financing more 205 

accessible and affordable for the private sector and small businesses. Fair competition will be 

highlighted in next year’s reforms concerning state -owned enterprises, taxation and financing, 

land, market access, social management, and small and medium enterprises. 

Instead of using administrative orders, China will resort to more market -oriented a nd law -based 

means to advance the supply -side structural reform, especially when it comes to the downsizing 

of gutted industries and increasing the vigor of micro market entities. 

China is also expected to make more institutional reforms to promote technol ogical innovation 

and foster new industrial clusters, build a unified and open market system with orderly 

competition, and prompt the financial sector to better serve the real economy. 

# The Nation, 01 -01 -19 

China releases first short video AI production pla tform 

> CHENGDU -China's state -run Xinhua News Agency and internet giant Alibaba on Thursday jointly
> launched the country's first short video intelligent production platform to improve news reporting
> efficiency.

The platform, with the domain name "magic.shuwe n.com.", made its debut at the 6th China 

Emerging Media Industry Integration and Development Conference in Chengdu, capital of 

southwest China's Sichuan Province. 

As the first application of artificial intelligence (AI) technology in the field of media int egration, 

the platform is independently developed by Xinhua Zhiyun Technology Co. Ltd., a joint venture 

founded by Xinhua and Alibaba. 

At the conference, the platform gave a real -time demonstration of the short video intelligent 

production process. On Thur sday morning alone, it produced 186 short videos, among which 97 

were produced by AI and the other 89 by man -machine collaboration. 

Currently, all domestic media outlets can use the platform to produce high -quality short videos 

after applying for certifica tion via the website, according to the conference. 

With the advent of the 5G era, short videos will become the main carrier of news reporting in the 

future. Liu Siyang, vice president of Xinhua, said that the platform will help editorial staff 

produce more short videos that users are drawn to. 

Multiple news templates are set up on the platform, including politics, emergencies, sports, 

fashion and entertainment. The platform is able to analyze and capture information with high 

news value, such as fires, eart hquakes and other emergencies, so as to help journalists and editors 

save time when reporting. 206 

In specific fields such as sports live broadcasting and financial news, it realizes data 

visualization, data -to -video transformation and video production automat ion. 

The platform enables journalists and editors to devote themselves to more valuable reporting 

work where human beings cannot easily be replaced by machines, said Shao Xiaofeng, secretary -

general of the Alibaba group. 

# The Nation, 02 -01 -19 

Sabotaging CPEC: An Indo -US ploy? 

Pakistan’s Foreign Office spokesman, during his last week’s press briefing, made it just clear 

that the China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) had no military dimensions. “The CPEC is a 

bilateral economic project, which is not against any country”, he further clarified. He was 

commenting on a report published in a leading US newspaper alleging that the CPEC was not 

about economy and trade but had military dimensions as well. No doubt, there are strong military 

ties between China and Pakistan. The CPEC, however, has nothing to do with these ties. Both 

‘all -weather’ friends have been enjoying close diplomatic, strategic and military relations for 

decades, independent of, and prior to, the CPEC project. China and Pakistan, being two 

sovereign states, have the right to foster strong economic and military relations in accordance 

with their national interests. Therefore, any regional or global power is by no means justified in 

unnecessarily objecting to this bilateral relationship. 

Last week, Chinese embassy in Pakistan also refuted another media report which claimed that 

Pakistan would pay $40 billion to china in 20 years in shape of repayments of debt and dividends 

on Chinese investment under flagship CPEC. The embassy issued a stateme nt that the Chinese 

government provided concessional loans of $5.874 billion for Pakistan’s transportation 

infrastructure projects, with a composite interest rate of around 2 per cent in a repayment period 

of 20 -25 years. The embassy also clarified that al l the CPEC energy projects are investments in 

nature and the companies are responsible for their own profits and losses and repayments of loan. 

Therefore, both of the latest media reports on the CPEC are wrong and misleading, which appear 

to be only aimed at making the CPEC project controversial. 

As a matter of fact, there has been a systematic and persistent propaganda campaign against the 

CPEC since this project was formally announced in April 2015. Ever since, this mega project has 

also been the subject of numerous conspiracies and controversies, both domestically and 

internationally. In order to dispel similar domestic controversies, Pakistan had to conceive and 

announced the idea of the “Western Route” of the CPEC in addition to some Special Economic 

Zo nes (SEZs) along the CPEC route in different provinces in the country. Noticeably, a section 

of national media, and various so -called nationalist political parties and pressure groups have 

also been the ardent critic of this mega economic project. 207 

Terroris m has been a major tool to sabotage the ‘game changing’ CPEC project. We have 

observed a significant surge in the terror attacks across the country following the formal launch 

of this project. The province of Balochistan, which occupies a pivotal position in the entire 

CPEC project owing to deep -sea Gwadar Port, instantly became the hotbed of terrorism, 

militancy and insurgency. This troubled province has experienced most of the worst terror 

attacks in Pakistan during the last couple of years. According to official statistics, there have 

been some 1860 terrorist incidents in Balochistan during the last 7 years, leaving more than 2300 

people dead and many more injured. In this respect, Quetta, Mastung, Awaran, Khuzdar and 

Dera Bugti were the worst affected di stricts in the province. Gilgit -Baltistan, which hosts another 

important segment of the CPEC route, has also been under attacks by the terrorists. This region 

experienced the unfortunate 2013 Nanga Parbat massacre where 10 foreign tourists were shot 

dead. A large number of schools have also been torched by miscreants in this region. Many 

Chinese nationals, engineers and workers, who were working to complete various CPEC projects 

in Pakistan, have also been attacked and killed. The recent terror attack on Ch inese Consulate in 

Karachi is also being viewed as a conspiracy to sabotage CPEC. 

The United States and India, the two strategic allies in the post -9/11 era, are particularly known 

for their strong opposition to the CPEC as well as an anti -CPEC hostile pro paganda. Both 

countries have lunched a proactive diplomatic and media campaign against the CPEC for the last 

few years. We have noticed Indian PM Modi’s persistent anxiety over the CPEC project. He has 

openly hinted at supporting the separatist elements in Balochistan and Gilgit -Baltistan. In May 

2015, he readily visited China to persuade the Chinese government to abandon this project by 

maintain that the CPEC route was passing through the disputed territory of Gilgit -Baltistan. 

During the G -20 summit at Ha ngzhou in China in September 2016, PM Modi had expressed 

India’s concerns over the CPEC in his bilateral meeting with Chinese President, holding that the 

two countries needed to be “sensitive” to each other’s strategic interests. In October 2017, the 

Trump administration told the Senate Armed Services Committee that CPEC was passing 

through a disputed territory. Similarly, a senior Trump administration official has recently also 

remarked that the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) “is a made in China, made for China” initiative. 

Substantially shifting the focus of US foreign policy from the Middle East to the East Asia, the 

Obama administration ambitiously launched its ‘pivot to Asia’ regional strategy in 2012. Under 

this US foreign policy initiative, the US wil l endeavo r to increasingly relocate its extensive 

military and economic resources in the Asia Pacific region, realiz ing the utmost economic, 

political and military significance of this region in the twenty -first century. This US regional 

strategy includes actions like engaging wi th regional multilateral organiz ations, strengthening 

bilateral security alliances, forging an active broad -based military presence, deepening 

relationship with emerging powers, expanding trade and investment, and advancing democrac y

and human rights in the region. 208 

There is a general perception that the US pivot to Asia strategy is nothing but another important 

tool of its so -called China containment policy in this region. It only aims at minimiz ing or 

undermining the rising economic and political influence of China in the world. At present, the 

US economy is in trouble on account of the current global financial crisis and a number of 

domestic economic constraints. The long -term viability of the US economic model is also being 

questio ned. Therefore, the US is wary of the rapidly growing Chinese economy, which already 

has become world’s largest economy in terms of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP). China has also 

become the global hub for manufacturing, and the largest manufacturing economy as well as the 

largest export of goods in the world. 

Besides the East Asia, the South Asian region has also become the primary hub of US extensive 

strategic maneuverings in Asia over a period of time. Therefore, notwithstanding its typical 

‘pivot to Asia’ strategy, South Asia is now playing a pivotal role in articulating and realiz ing US 

strategic goals in the region. Bordering China, Iran, and Central Asian Republics, South Asia is 

bounded on the south by the Indian Ocean, which provides the major sea rou te connecting the 

Middle East, Africa, and Europe to East Asia and Australia. Thus this region is central to the so -

called One Belt, One Road plan. The flagship OBOR project of China Pakistan Economic 

Corridor (CPEC) is also located in this region. Therefo re, South Asia is by no means 

strategically less important to the US than East Asia. 

India and Afghanistan have occupied a central position in the US ‘pivot to South Asia’ strategy. 

On the pretext of fighting its War on Terror, the US has been staying in A fghanistan since 2001. 

Ever since, it has spent its enormous economic and military resources apparently to stabilise the 

volatile Hindukush state. However, its broader strategic interests demand its active presence in 

the region. The US has greatly helped India consolidate its position in Afghanistan. Now India is 

ambitiously desirous of replacing the US in Afghanistan as its ‘successor in interest’ in the 

region after the US exits Afghanistan. India, Afghanistan and Iran have also signed a tripartite 

agree ment to develop Iranian Chabahar port and a linked trade corridor. Many believe that the 

primary objective of this project is to undermine the strategic importance and relevance of 

Pakistan’s Gwadar port. 

At t he moment, Pakistan’s strategic security and ec onomic interests observably converge with 

that of China in this region. Both countries will certainly benefit from the CPEC. Therefore, both 

countries are currently determined to actively protect their shared interests. To provide security 

to Chinese natio nals working on the CPEC project in Pakistan, Pakistan Army has already 

established a Special Security Division (SPD), comprising some 15 thousand security personnel. 

Indeed, Pakistan and China need to be more active, vigilant and cautious to counter all C PEC -

related controversies and conspiracies being hatched in the region and beyond. 

The writer is a lawyer and columnist based in Lahore. 

mohsinraza.malik@ymail.com 209 

# The Nation, 02 -01 -19 

CPEC adds 300MW to national grid 

ISLAMA BAD - The China Pakistan Economi c Corridor (CPEC) has contributed 300MW of 

clean wind energy to the national grid through its four early harvest wind power projects. 

According to sources from embassy of China in Pakistan, the four wind projects that had been 

completed under CPEC and are connected with the national grid include Dawood wind power 

project (50 MW), Sachal Energy wind farm (50MW), three gorges second wind farm project 

(100MW), and UEP wind farm project (100MW). 

Dawood wind po wer project is a prioritized or early harvest project under CPEC, which installs 

33 wind turbine generators with the capacity of 1.5MW per unit and total capacity is 49.5MW on 

1,720 acres of land in the coastal area of Gharo wind corridor in Bhanbore, Dist rict Thatta, 

Sindh. 

This is a direct investment (FDI) project and total investment of Dawood wind power project is 

US $115 million. The rate of equity to loan is 30 percent:70 percent. 

Dawood wind power project achieved Commercial Operation Date (COD) on A pril 4, 2017 and 

annual electric power supply to the National Grid is more than 130GWh, which is sufficient for 

daily use of 100,000 Pakistan families and is effectively easing the crisis of electricity shortage 

in Pakistan. 

Sachal wind power project was c ompleted in April 2017 at a cost of $110 million. It is located in 

Jhimpir, Thatta district, Sindh province, about 100km northeast of Karachi. 

The total installed capacity of this project is 49.5MW, and 33 Gold wind brand wind turbine 

generators (WTGs) wit h a capacity of 1.5MW are installed. It is invested by Sachal Energy 

Development (private) Ltd., in which Arif Habib Corporation Limited holds 100 percent shares. 

HydroChina International Engineering Co., Ltd. is the engineering procurement construction 

(E PC) contractor. 

The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) provided a loan. The debt and equity ratio 

is 85 percent:15 percent. 

Three Gorges second wind power project (2 ×50MW) is located at Jhimpir, Thatta district, Sindh 

province, 90KM west from K arachi. This is a foreign direct investment (FDI) project, and is 

invested, developed and constructed by Three Gorges Second Wind Farm Pakistan Limited 

(TGS) and Three Gorges Third Wind Farm Pakistan Private Limited (TGT). 210 

The total investment amount is $224 million on the basis of Build -Own -Operate (BOO), with a 

construction period of 18 months and an operation period of 20 years. The total installation 

capacity is100MW, with an annual electricity output of 286.6 GWH. It was listed as actively 

promoted p roject in the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor in August, 2014. 

Pakistan Jhimpir UEP 100MW wind farm is located in Jhimpir, Thatta district, Sindh, 110km 

from Karachi. The total installed capacity is 100MW with the supply of 66 sets of Wind Turbine 

Generat ors (WTGs) of 1.5MW per set. It also includes construction of a 132KV substation and a 

control center. 

This is a foreign direct investment (FDI) project. It is developed by UEP Wind Power (Pvt.) 

Limited, a joint venture of Orient Group Investment Holdings Co., Ltd. (99%) and United 

Energy Group Co., Ltd. (1%). China Gezhouba Group Company Limited (CGGC) is the 

engineering, procurement, construction (EPC) contractor. 

The commercial contract of this project was signed on September 11, 2015. China Development 

Bank provided financing of $252 million to the project, with the debt and equity ratio of 75 

percent: 25 percent. The project became operation in May 2017. 

# The Nation, 02 -01 -19 

# News of $2b loan from China rejuvenates Index 

LAHORE - The KSE -100 index starte d the new year on a positive note, ending its 4 consecutive 

session close in the red, rallying by 930 points (or +2.51 percent), closing at 37,996 level. 

Positive sentiments were driven by reports that China has pledged to lend at least US$2bn to 

Pakistan to shore up its foreign exchange reserves. Moreover, Asad Umar’s recent statements 

that an incoming investment package from Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), which promises to 

be the biggest foreign investment in Pakistan history, also boosted investor sentim ents. 

International Oil prices rose more than 2 percent, resultantly, E&P’s closed in the positive led by 

POL (+5 percent), OGDC (+5 percent) and PPL (+3.9 percent). 

Out of the 323 scrips traded yesterday, 207 advanced, 98 declined and 18 remained unchange d. 

Investor participation decreased today as traded volumes fell by 57 percent to 97mn, while 

traded value decreased by 61 percent to US$31mn. 

Experts said that Stock Exchange welcomed new year with a bull run where KSE 100 index 

made an intraday high of + 980 points to close at 37,996 level. Volumes remained subdued as 

97mn shares changed hands during the day. PAEL (+4.7 percent) led volumes with 12mn shares 

traded. On the news front, Prime Minister Imran Khan rang in the new year saying that 2019 is 

the be ginning of Pakistan's golden era and vowed to continue his mission against the ills 211 

plaguing the country. Among major stocks, ENGRO (+5 percent), OGDC (+4.7 percent), PPL 

(+3.6 percent), UBL (+5 percent), LUCK (+4.7 percent), POL (+4.8 percent) and HBL (+2 .3 

percent) cumulatively contributed +457 points towards the close. Commercial banks closed in 

the green zone where big banks boosted the index by +140 points. UBL (+5 percent), HBL (+2.3 

percent), BAFL (+5 percent) and MCB (+1.3 percent) were the major mo vers of the mentioned 

sector. POL (+4.8 percent), PPL (+3.6 percent) and OGDC (+4.7 percent) from the E&P sector 

closed higher than its previous day close on back of increase in crude oil prices in international 

market. 

# The Nation, 02 -01 -19 

China building largest earthquake warning system 

BEIJING - China is building the world’s largest and most advanced earthquake alert system 

which is set to be completed in 2022. Engineers are setting up more than 15,000 sensors all over 

the country and wiring them into a web. 

When an earthquake happens, the sensors can send electrical pulses to the control center and then 

ordinary people’s smartphones, according to China Television Network (CGTN) on Tuesday. 

The signal travels at (almost) light speed and is much faster tha n the devastating earthquake 

shaking, giving local people a little bit time to prepare. 

The system can send messages to people less than two seconds after the earthquake happens. So 

the time between the warning and the actual impact might only be seconds o r a minute. But it’s 

proved to be life -saving because of every second matter in this situation. Similar systems can be 

found in other earthquake -prone places including Japan and U.S. west coast. 

But China’s system can be more advanced in many ways. “It wil l be the largest earthquake 

observation network in the world,” said Li Shanyou, deputy chief engineer of the system. 

The system can not only detect the movement of the continents but also calculate the possible 

impact of an earthquake. So it will automatic ally warn local people, making it much faster than 

human observation. The system, overseen by China’s Ministry of Emergency Management, is set 

to be completed in 2022. 

# The Nation, 03 -01 -19 

China to provide advanced warships to Pakistan 

BEIJING It said the ship is a version of the Chinese Navy’s most advanced guided missile 

frigate, without specifying its type. 212 

In late December it said the ship was under construction at its Hudong -Zhonghua shipyard in 

Shanghai, noting it will be equipped with modern detecti on and weapon systems and will be 

capable of anti -ship, anti -submarine and air -defense operations. 

According to the Pakistani Navy, the ship’s class is Type 054AP, which means it is based on the 

Type 054A of the People’s Liberation Army Navy. It previously said four such ships had been 

ordered. 

Once constructed, the warship will be one of the largest and technologically advanced platforms 

of Pakistan’s Navy and strengthen the coun try’s capability to respond to future challenges, 

maintain peace and stability and the balance of power in the Indian Ocean region. 

It will also support the Pakistani Navy’s initiative of securing sea lanes for international shipping 

by patrolling distant waters, it said in a statement on its twitter account. 

Type 054A is the best frigate in service with the PLA Navy. Military sources said the ship has a 

fully loaded displacement of about 4,000 metric tons and is equipped with advanced radars and 

missiles. About 30 Type 054As are in service with the PLA Navy, observers said. 

Cao Weidong, a senior researcher at the PLA’s Naval Military Studies Research Institute, said 

that in the past, the Pakistani Navy would ask its Chinese contractors to use Western radars or 

weapons on ships constructed by Chinese shipbuilders because it believed Western naval 

technologies were better than Chinese ones. 

“But it seems that all weapons and radars on the new ship will be Chinese products, which 

reflects our progress in the in dustry and the Pakistani Navy’s confidence in our technology and 

capability,” he said. 

Cao said there are many nations selling frigates in the market, so Pakistan must have made 

thorough comparisons in terms of combat capability and costs. 

“I believe the r eason they chose our type is that ours is one of the few that can carry out all of the 

air -defense, anti -ship and anti -submarine tasks,” he said, expecting the service of the Chinese 

frigate to substantially boost Pakistan’s defense capability. 

An insider in China’s shipbuilding sector with knowledge of the Type 054AP programme told 

China Daily on condition of anonymity that the ship is the largest and most powerful combat 

vessel China has ever exported. 

“Based on pictures circulating on the internet, the s hip will have vertical launch cells that can fire 

Chinese HQ -16 air -defense missiles and other kinds of missiles. Vertical launch cells will bring 

flexibility to the user in terms of weapons portfolio, thus giving it a stronger fighting capability,” 213 

he sai d, adding that the Type 054AP is the best frigate Pakistan can access in the international 

market. 

“The service of Type 054APs wills double the combat power of the Pakistani Navy’s surface 

fleet,” he said. 

# The Nation, 03 -01 -19 

China’s longevity city record s 440 centenarians 

NANJING - Rugao, a city renowned for the longevity of its residents in east China’s Jiangsu 

Province, has registered a record number of 440 centenarians, local authorities said Wednesday. 

This marked a yearly increase of 37 centenarians, according to the municipal working 

commission on aging. 

With a population of about 1.43 million, the city has 92 male centenarians and 348 women. The 

oldest is 110 years old. 

Healthy eating and sleeping habits as well as a favorable environment are believ ed to have 

contributed to longevity in Rugao. 

China has witnessed a rise in people’s average life expectancy over the years, from 74.83 years 

in 2010 to 76.7 years in 2017, according to the National Health Commission. 

# The Nation, 04 -01 -19 

China Moon mission lands Chang'e -4 spacecraft on far side 

BEIJING - China says it has successfully landed a robotic spacecraft on the far side of the Moon, 

the first ever such attempt and landing. 

At 10:26 Beijing time (02:26 GMT), the un -crewed Chang'e -4 probe touched down in the South 

Pole -Aitken Basin, state media said. It is carrying instruments to analyse the unexplored region's 

geology, as well to conduct biological experiments. 

The landing is being seen as a major milestone in space exploration. There have been numerous 

missions to the Moon in recent years, but the vast majority has been to orbit, fly by or impact. 

The last crewed landing was Apollo 17 in 1972. 

The Chang'e -4 probe has already sent back its first pictures from the surface, which was shared 

by state media. With no direct communication link possible, all pictures and data have to be 

bounced off a separate satellite before being relayed to Earth. 214 

Why is this Moon landing so significant? 

Previous Moon missions have landed on the Earth -facing side , but this is the first time any craft 

has landed successfully on the unexplored and rugged far side. Some spacecraft have crashed 

into the far side, either after system failures, or after they had completed their mission. Ye 

Quanzhi, an astronomer at Calt ech, told the BBC this was the first time China had "attempted 

something that other space powers have not attempted before". 

The Chang'e -4 was launched from Xichang Satellite Launch Centre in China on 7 December; it 

arrived in lunar orbit on 12 December. I t was then directed to lower itself toward the Moon, 

being careful to identify and avoid obstacles, Chinese state media say. 

The Chang'e -4 probe is aiming to explore a place called the Von Kármán crater, located within 

the much larger South Pole -Aitken (SP A) Basin - thought to have been formed by a giant impact 

early in the Moon's history. 

"This huge structure is over 2,500km (1,550 miles) in diameter and 13km deep, one of the largest 

impact craters in the Solar System and the largest, deepest and oldest ba sin on the Moon," 

Andrew Coates, professor of physics at UCL's Mullard Space Science Laboratory in Surrey, told 

the BBC. 

The event responsible for carving out the SPA basin is thought to have been so powerful, it 

punched through the Moon's crust and down i nto the zone called the mantle. Researchers will 

want to train the instruments on any mantle rocks exposed by the calamity. 

The science team also hopes to study parts of the sheet of melted rock that would have filled the 

newly formed South Pole -Aitken Bas in, allowing them to identify variations in its composition. 

A third objective is to study the far -side regolith, the broken up rocks and dust that make up the 

surface, which will help us understand the formation of the Moon. 

What else might we learn from this mission? 

Chang'e -4's static lander is carrying two cameras; a German -built radiation experiment called 

LND; and a spectrometer that will perform low -frequency radio astronomy observations. 

Scientists believe the far side could be an excellent place to perform radio astronomy, because it 

is shielded from the radio noise of Earth. The spectrometer work will aim to test this idea. The 

lander also carried a container with six live species from Earth - cotton, rapeseed, potato, fruit 

fly, yeast and arabidop sis (a flowering plant) - to try to form a mini biosphere. 

The arabidopsis plant may produce the first flower on the Moon, Chinese state media say. 215 

The mission is part of a larger Chinese programme of lunar exploration. The first and second 

Change’s missio ns were designed to gather data from orbit while the third and fourth were built 

for surface operations. 

Chang'e -5 and 6 are sample return missions, delivering lunar rock and soil to laboratories on 

Earth. 

Is there a 'dark side of the Moon'? 

The lunar far side is often referred to as the "dark side", though "dark" in this case means 

"unseen" rather than "lacking light". In fact, both the near and far sides of the Moon experience 

daytime and nighttime. 

But because of a phenomenon called "tidal locking", we s ee only one face of the Moon from 

Earth. This is because the Moon takes just as long to rotate on its own axis as it takes to complete 

one orbit of Earth. The far side has a thicker, older crust that is pocked with more craters. There 

are also very few of the "mare" - dark basaltic "seas" created by lava flows - that are evident on 

the near side. 

How will scientists keep track of the rover? 

In an article for the US -based Planetary Society in September, Dr Long Xiao from the China 

University of Geosciences ( Wuhan) said: "The challenge faced by a far side mission is 

communications. With no view of Earth, there is no way to establish a direct radio link." So the 

landers must communicate with Earth using a relay satellite named Queqiao - or Magpie Bridge -

launc hed by China last May. 

Queqiao orbits 65,000km beyond the Moon, around a Lagrange point - a kind of gravitational 

parking spot in space where it will remain visible to ground stations in China and other countries 

such as Argentina. 

What are China's plans i n space? 

China wants to become a leading power in space exploration, alongside the United States and 

Russia. In 2017 it announced it was planning to send astronauts to the Moon. 

It will also begin building its own space station next year, with the hope it will be operating by 

2022. The chief designer of China's lunar exploration programme, Wu Weiren, has described 

Thursday's landing as "an important milestone" for the country's space effort, state media report. 

The BBC's John Sudworth in Beijing says the propaganda value of China's leaps forward in its 

space programme has been tempered by careful media management. There was very little news 

of the Change 4 landing attempt before the official announcement it had been a success. 216 

But Fred Watson, who promotes Austra lia's astronomy endeavors as it astronomer -at -large, says 

the secrecy could simply be down to caution, similar to that shown by the Soviet Union in the 

early days of its competition with Nasa. "The Chinese space agency is a young organization, but 

perhaps in years to come, it will catch up," he told the BBC. 

Ye Quanzhisay China has made efforts to be more open. "They live stream the launch of Change 

2 and 3 as well as the landing of Change 3. PR skills take time to develop but I think China will 

get there," he said. 

China has been a late starter when it comes to space exploration. Only in 2003, it sent its first 

astronaut into orbit, making it the third country to do so, after the Soviet Union and the US. The 

far side landing has already been heralded by experts at Nasa as "a first for humanity an d an 

impressive accomplishment. 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

US, Chinese scientists develop potential therapy for breast cancer 

WASHINGTON - American and Chinese researchers developed an experimental therapy that 

can reduce the spread of a kind of hard -to -treat breast cancer in a mice study. 

The study, published on Thursday in the journal Cancer Cell, reported the therapeutic agent that 

blocks two of the main pathways by which breast cancer cells grow and migrate o ut of the 

primary tumor to spread to other organs in the body. 

The spread of triple -negative breast cancer is difficult to block, because "if you try one approach, 

the cancer cells compensate by finding a way to escape," according to the paper's senior aut hor 

Kang Yibin, professor of molecular biology at Princeton University. 

This kind of breast cancer is highly aggressive and it occurs in 12 to 17 percent of all breast 

cancer cases. It gets the name from the lack of three major biological targets that are used to find 

and kill cancer cells. 

Patients with triple -negative breast cancer have high rates of recurrence and fewer treatment 

options, according to the researchers. 

"With this new approach, the treatment blocks both pathways at the same time. It is lik e having 

one stone that kills two birds," said Kang. 

The researchers found that the new agent called Tinagl1 could inhibit distinctly two main 

pathways that contribute to triple -negative breast cancer's aggressiveness and ability to resist 

treatments. 217 

The agent can stop action of a tumor -promoting protein known as EGFR and also target 

molecules called integrin’s that are involved in regulating cellular transformation into tumors, 

according to the study. 

The researchers found that high expression of Tinagl1 in mouse cancer cells produced slower -

growing tumors that were less likely to metastasize to the lung. 

They also administered Tinagl1 protein to mice with breast cancer and found that treatment for 

seven weeks significantly inhibited primary tumor growth a nd spontaneous lung metastasis. 

Researchers from Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center and Rutgers Cancer Institute of 

New Jersey also contributed to the study. 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

Chinese loan package to be finalized in few days 

ISLAMABAD - Pakistan ex pects to receive loan package from the friendly country China within 

next two weeks that would help in building the country’s foreign exchange reserves. 

“China has not announced the loan package yet but we are expecting it will be finalized in next 

few day s,” said an official of the ministry of finance. He said that government is expecting to 

receive $2 -$3 billion from China. He has not disclosed the further details of the package by 

saying Chinese authorities had requested not to public the details before finalization of the 

package. 

China would be third country which would provide loan to Pakistan after Saudi Arabia and 

United Arab Emirates (UAE). Pakistan is expecting to receive one billion dollar from Saudi 

Arabia in mid -January, as it had already provid ed two billion dollars in last couple of months. 

Meanwhile, the UAE is likely to deposit the pledged amount of $ 3 billion in the State Bank of 

Pakistan (SBP)’s account next week. “Financing need for the current fiscal year is almost met 

due to the inflow from Saudi Arabia, UAE and China,” the official added. Financial gap for the 

ongoing financial year was projected at around $12 billion. 

The country’s foreign exchange reserves would go beyond $11 billion after receiving the loans 

from friendly countries. Currently, the reserves are sharply depleting every week. “During the 

week ending 28th December 2018, SBP’s reserves had decreased by US$170 million to 

US$7,287.5 million, due to external debt servicing and other official payments,” the SBP said in 

an offi cial handout. 

On the other hand, the pressure on foreign exchange reserves would start easing after 

government avail defer oil payment facility. The deferred oil facility with Saudi Arabia might be 

complete and ready for signature in January. Once the draft has been agreed at the technical 218 

level, it will be signed by the ministers of both countries. As per proposed agreement, Pakistan 

will receive up to $3 billion worth of oil with payment deferred for 365 days in the first year of 

the agreement in 2018 . The SBP will begin repayments to the Saudi Development Fund 12 

months later, with monthly payments. Meanwhile, talks with UAE government are in an 

advanced stage for a similar agreement of up to $3 billion. 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

US issues fresh travel war ning after China detentions 

NEW YORK - The US state department has urged Americans to “exercise increased caution” 

when travelling to China after a spate of high -profile detentions. 

Its updated advice says dual US -Chinese nationals are at particular risk from so -called exit bans 

that prevent them from leaving. Canada also revealed that 13 Canadians had been detained since 

1 December. On that day, a top Chinese executive was arrested in Canada at the request of US 

prosecutors. 

Huawei chief financial officer MengWanzhou was detained in Vancouver and faces extradition 

to the US to face fraud charges, which she denies, that are linked to allegations of avoiding US 

sanctions on Iran. 

China has dismissed the US travel warning as unjustified. “To be frank, the iss uance of such a 

travel advisory by the US side does not hold water,” foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang said. 

“From January to November 2018, 2.3 million visits to China were made by Americans, which 

means 70 per 10,000 American people made the trip, a rat io far higher than that of the Chinese 

visiting the US. “So, this figure is a testament to China’s safety.” 

The new advisory warns that dual US -Chinese nationals are at particular risk from so -called exit 

bans, which it says can be used to prohibit US citi zens from leaving China - in some cases 

keeping them in the country for years. 

The exit bans are also being used to try to lure other individuals back to China, it warns. It 

advises citizens travelling to China to use their US passport with a valid China v isa. They should 

ask officials to notify the US embassy immediately if they are detained or arrested. 

The state department says that as dual -citizenship is not recognized under Chinese law, “US -

Chinese citizens and US citizens of Chinese heritage may be su bject to additional scrutiny and 

harassment”. The advisory says exit bans are being used to “compel US citizens to participate in 

Chinese government investigations” and “to aid Chinese authorities in resolving civil disputes in 

favor of Chinese parties”. 219 

Three US citizens were accused of committing “economic crimes” and barred from leaving 

China in November. Victor and Cynthia Liu, who are the children of a fugitive businessman, and 

their mother, Sandra Han, have reportedly been detained since June. 

The bus inessman, Liu Changming, is wanted in a $1.4bn (£1bn) fraud case in China and the 

family has said their detention is an attempt to lure him back to face charges. Beijing has 

defended its decision to bar the three US citizens from leaving the country. 

A for eign ministry spokesman told reporters that they “all have... valid identity documents as 

Chinese citizens” and are “suspected of having committed economic crimes”. 

On Thursday, Global Affairs Canada revealed that 13 Canadians had been detained in China 

si nce 1 December, although eight have since been released. Among the Canadians who remain 

detained are former diplomat Michael Kovrig and businessman Michael Spavor. 

Canadian teacher Sarah McIver was reportedly released last week .she was held for “unlawfully 

working in China”. China and Canada both said the case was different to that of MrKovrig and 

MrSpavor who stand accused of harming national security. China insists the detention of both 

men is not linked to MsMeng’s arrest, but many analysts believe it wa s a tit -for -tat action. On 

Thursday, China’s prosecutor general said the pair had “violated our country’s laws and 

regulation s” and were being investigated. 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

China unveils footage of own ‘Mother of All Bombs’ dropped by H -6K Jet 

BEIJING - The China North Industries Corporation (Norinco) has showcased for the first time a 

video of the country’s own version of “Mother of All Bombs,” the Global Times newspaper 

reported. 

The aerial bomb was airdropped by an H -6K bomber causing a massive expl osion at an unknown 

location, the outlet said on Thursday, citing Norinco. 

In a comment to the newspaper, the company dismissed the suggestion that the bomb was also 

thermo baric, without providing further details. An H -6K bomber is reportedly capable of 

carrying only one such bomb at a time due to its huge weight. According to an expert, cited by 

the newspaper, the bomb is 5 -6 meters (16.4 -19.6 feet) long. 

On April 13, US military dropped the 22,000 -pound GBU -43 Massive Ordnance Air Blast 

(MOAB) bomb in Afghanistan’s Nangarhar province targeting a tunnel complex which, 

according to the US Central Command, was used by the Islamic State’s (outlawed in Russia) 

local affiliate. 220 

The MOAB, dubbed the “Mother of All Bombs,” is the largest non -nuclear bomb develop ed by 

the United States and had not been used in combat before the Nangarhar operation. 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

China names new moon rover “Yutu -2” 

BEIJING - China has chosen the name “Yutu -2”, or Jade Rabbit -2, for its new moon rover, the 

China National Spac e Administration (CNSA) announced late Thursday. 

The CNSA made the announcement after China’s Chang’e -4 probe, comprised of a lander and a 

rover, landed on the far side of the moon earlier in the day. 

In Chinese folklore, Yutu is the white pet rabbit of Ch ange, the moon goddess who lent her name 

to the Chinese lunar mission. Legend has it that Change, after swallowing a magic pill, took her 

pet and flew toward the moon where she became a goddess and has lived with the white jade 

rabbit ever since. 

Last Augu st, China launched a worldwide poll to name the rover. According to the CNSA, a 

total of 42,945 proposed names were submitted from Aug. 15 to Sept. 5, among which 3,192 

names were submitted by more than two participants. 

During the final round, Yutu -2 stoo d out from nine other names in online voting and a special 

committee discussion. The other names included “Tansuo” (Explore), “Guangming” (Light), and 

“Jintu” (Golden rabbit). 

The CNSA said that Yutu is a symbol of kindness, purity, and agility, and is ide ntical to the 

moon rover in both outlook and connotation. It also reflects China’s peaceful use of space. 

Yutu -2 faces more challenges than Yutu as its landing area, the Aitken Basin, is the largest, 

deepest and oldest crater in the solar system. “We hope Yutu -2 can make its exploration with no 

fear and have a more stable, wide and long journey,” said the CNSA in a statement. 

Like its predecessor, Yutu -2, capable of enduring vacuum pressure, intense radiation, and 

extreme temperatures is equipped with four scientific payloads, including a panoramic camera, 

infrared imaging spectrometer and radar measurement devices, to obtain images of the moon’s 

surface and detect lunar soil and structure. 221 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

China will have declining population around 2028 

BEIJING - A new report predicts that China will see a population decline around 2028, the 

Beijing Youth Daily reported Friday. 

Since 2010, the number of Chinese people age 65 and above has increased by 83.2 million, with 

an average annual growth of 2. 08 million. However, the population under the age of 15 has 

decreased by 90.17 million, with an average reduction of 2.25 million per year, said the report 

released Thursday by the Institute of Population and Labor Economics under the Chinese 

Academy of So cial Sciences in Beijing. 

China is aging rapidly. Its aging population has increased from 3.76 percent to 8.40 percent since 

2010, and the country’s total population will begin to show a negative growth around 2028, 

according to the report. 

However, data s hows that the number of newborn second children has risen significantly in 2016 

and 2017, accounting for 51.2 percent of all newborns. 

A total of 8.83 million babies born in 2017 have an older sibling, an increase of 1.62 million, or 

11 percentage points f rom 2016. 

The report also said that China would have a shrinking labor population. In 2017, the country’s 

working -age population (16 to 64) has declined by 5.78 million. 

The negative growth of the labor force will bring structural changes to the supply -dem and 

relationship of the labor market and put forward urgent requirements for the reform of related 

systems, said the report. 

# The Natio n, 05 -01 -19 

RAW paid $1m to Harbiyar for hit on Chinese Consulate: JummaMarri 

LAHORE - Overseas Pakistani Baloch Unity chief Dr .Jumma Khan Marri on Friday claimed that 

BLA leader HarbiyarMarri was paid one million dollars by RAW to attack the Chinese 

Consulate in Karachi. 

In an earlier post on the social media, Dr . Marri had claimed that AslamBaloch alias Achchu had 

execut ed the attack on Chinese consulate. 

In his latest post on his f acebook account, DrJumma asked the family of deceased AslamAchchu 

as to how much money they had received out of the one million dollars paid to HarbiyarMarri. 222 

DrJumma had also revealed last mon th that following series of attacks on Chinese Consulate in 

Karachi and Chabahar, Iran, India had reportedly shifted commander BLA Aslam alias Achchu 

to Kandahar, Afghanistan. He had then termed this development as an attempt by India to cover 

up its cover t support to the BLA since it had also cancelled the so -called human rights 

conference planned to be held in New Delhi. 

He later reported that mastermind of BLA attack on Chinese Consulate in Karachi – along with 

his six companions – had been killed in Kan dahar. 

The BLA militants had on November 23 attacked the Chinese Consulate in Clifton, Karachi, 

killing four people in an hour -long shootout. The victims included two policemen and two 

Pakistani civilians. No Chinese nationals were hurt in the attack thoug h. The three attackers were 

also killed. 

The BLA later claimed responsibility for the attack in a tweet that included a photo of three 

attackers identified as Azal Khan Baloch, RazikBaloch and RaisBaloch. 

Previously a Baloch nationalist leader, Jumma Khan Marri had announced his dissociation from 

the Baloch separatists in February this year. He had then also launched an organization, 

‘Overseas Pakistani Baloch Community’ for the Baloch living abroad. 

In a reiteration, DrJumma in his Friday post urged the Ba lochi people to wake up before it was 

too late. He also told them that India would soon dump all the Balochis now working for it. 

It may be recalled here that DrJumma had an important meeting with Balochistan Chief Minister 

Jam Kamal Khan last month in Mos cow when the latter was on official visit to Russia. 

DrMarri had then also suggested that Pakistan government should make a formal demand with 

United Kingdom to stop providing safe haven to BLA’s commander HarbiyarMarri. While 

pledging to voice his concern s on this issue in the European Parliament as he had done earlier, 

DrMarri had also asked the Pakistan government to raise this issue at the United Nations. 

DrMarri believes that some prominent Baloch leaders would soon be joining the mainstream 

Pakistani politics by declaring disassociation with anti -Pakistani forces. 

He also says that his new organization would confront and expose the evil designs of disgruntled 

Baloch leaders such as BrahamdaghBugti, MehranMarri and HarbiyarMarri who, according to 

him, a re on the Indian payroll. 223 

# The Nation, 05 -01 -19 

Chinese experts set foot in 6G research 

NANJING: Southeast University in eastern China's Jiangsu Province said Thursday that a team 

has begun to research 6G mobile networks. You Xiaohu, a professor with the university and the 

team leader, said they have set sights on the early research and development of 6G mobile 

networks, based on the 5G technologies. You said that compared with 5G technologies, 6G will 

cover a wider range of fields with higher speed and g reater security. –Xinhua 

The early research and development will mainly focus on intelligent mobile communications, 

massive wireless communications, millimeter wave/sub millimeter wave wireless 

communications, optical wireless communications and broadband satellite mobile 

communications. 

"There's still a long way to go in applying 6G technologies into our daily life. Experts predict 

that 6G technologies will go into commercial operation by 2030. However, the 6G competition 

has already begun am ong many enterprises," You said 

# The Nation, 06 -01 -19 

Pak -China ‘Warrior VI’ drill ends 

ISLAMABAD – Pakistan and China Joint Military Exercise ‘Warrior VI’ culminated near 

Kharian on Saturday. According to a notification issued by Inter Services Public Relations 

(ISPR), “Troops from Special Forces of Pakistan Army and Chinese People’s Liberation Army 

(PLA) participated in the joint military exercises.” The four -week long joint exercise aimed at 

sharing respective experiences in the field of counter terrorism opera tions and learn from each 

other’s, it added. 

“This is the sixth joint exercise of the series as part of bilateral military cooperation between both 

the countries,” said the notification. 

Inspector General Training and Evaluation (IGT&E) Lieutenant General SherAfgun was the 

chief guest on the occasion, it added. 

# The Nation, 06 -01 -19 

Chinese hegemony 

Some media reports allege ‘Pakistan is building a city for half a million Chinese nationals at a 

cost of US$150 million in port city of Gwadar. Only Chinese citi zens will live in this gated zone, 224 

a China’s colony within Pakistan’. They surmise ‘CPEC could turn into another East India 

Company’. 

Wherever the Chinese go, they prefer to set up and live in China towns, even in the USA. Their 

lifestyle and notion of ‘ha lal (religiously valid food and drinks) is different from Muslim, 

Christian and Jewish (kosher). Not long ago (April 4, 2018), Chinese engineers scuffled with 

police when it prevented them to go to red -light area in Khanewal (Punjab). Affluent foreigners 

and overseas Chinese are accustomed to enjoying Karaoke clubs in China. ‘In 2001, a count of 

the out -of -wedlock children produced by Shenzhen’s working women and mistresses over two 

decades numbered 5,20,000 (Ted C. Fishman, China, Inc., p. 98). 

China has t ime and again assured that she ‘was not seeking to bide time so as to gain he gemony’ 

(Alvin Y. So & Yin Wah t he global rise of China ). 2016. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK. p.214). 

the writer point out ‘China did not intend to dominate Asia or to displace the United States as the 

world’s preeminent power’. ‘Even as there was an apparent increase in military tensions between 

China and Japan over Diaoy/Senkaku Islands after September 2012, the Chinese administration 

as well as the Chinese Liberation Army remaine d adamant on the country’s commitment to 

peace and harmony. Chinese Liberation Army made it very clear that China’s main objective is 

economic growth, not war’. ‘Regardless of Germany’s real purposes, once Germany succeeded 

in building a powerful navy, thi s would present an objective threat to Britain…formal assurance 

from Germany was hardly sufficient to dispel the suspicions’ (ibid., p. 215). Henry Kissinger 

(On China, 2011, New York: Penguin) says ‘China would push American power as far away as it 

could, circumscribing the scope of American naval power and reduce America’s weight in 

international diplomacy’. 

MOHAMMAD ASAD MALIK, 

Rawalpindi, December 22. 

# The Nation, 06 -01 -19 

Trumps says China woes help US in trade talks 

WASHINGTON/BEIJING - President Donald Trump on Friday downplayed a revenue warning 

from Apple Inc that cited slowing sales in China and said China’s weakening economic growth 

puts the United States in a strong position as negotiators from the world’s two largest economies 

prepare for tr ade talks next week. 

Trump has slapped import tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars of Chinese goods as he seeks 

concessions from Beijing on issues ranging from industrial subsidies to hacking, sparking 

retaliation by China. The measures have disrupte d trade, hurt manufacturing, roiled international 

markets and slowed the global economy. 225 

U.S. officials are heading to Beijing next week for the first face -to -face talks since Trump and 

China’s President Xi Jinping in December agreed to a 90 -day truce in t he trade war as they 

sought to strike a deal. 

“I think we will make a deal with China,” Trump told reporters at the White House after a 

meeting with Democratic and Republican lawmakers about the U.S. government shutdown. “I 

really think they want to. I thi nk they sort of have to.” 

Beijing on Friday cut bank reserve requirements for a fifth time this year amid slowing growth at 

home and the punishing U.S. tariffs on exports. 

“China’s not doing well now. And it puts us in a very strong position. We are doing very well,” 

Trump said. “I hope we’re going to make a deal with China. And if we don’t, they’re paying us 

tens of billions of dollars’ worth of tariffs — not the worst thing in the world.” 

Official data this week showed manufacturing has slowed in both Chi na and the United States, 

though the U.S. Labor Department on Friday reported a surge in new jobs in December along 

with higher wages. 

The president downplayed the effects of the economic woes on U.S. technology giant Apple Inc 

(AAPL.O), which this week bl amed slowing iPhone sales in China for a rare reduction in its 

quarterly sales forecast. 

When asked if he was concerned about Apple’s revenue cut and share price drop, Trump said: 

“No, I’m not. I mean look, they’ve gone up a lot.” 

TRUMP TELLS APPLE TO BUIL D AT HOME 

Shares of Apple rebounded on Friday after a 10 percent nosedive on Thursday on the revenue 

warning. The shares closed at $148.26 on Friday, down about 5.1 percent for the week. For the 

2018 full year, Apple shares fell 7 percent, though they are up about 24 percent since Trump 

took office in January 2017. 

“They’re going to be fine. Apple is a great company,” Trump said, adding he had told Apple 

Chief Executive Officer Tim Cook to build his company’s products at home in the United States, 

something he has harped on previously. 

“Apple makes its product in China. China is the biggest beneficiary of Apple, more than us, 

because they build their product mostly in China,” Trump said. “I want Apple to make their 

iPhones and all of the great things that th ey make in the United States. And that’ll take place.” 226 

Apple’s lowered revenue outlook along with a double -digit drop in earnings at commodities 

giant Cargill Inc [CARG.UL] on Thursday may be among the clearest warning signs yet that the 

trade war’s effect s have begun to hit U.S. companies. 

A team led by Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Jeffrey Gerrish will travel to China for talks, 

China’s commerce ministry and USTR said. That news that helped boosts global markets. The 

talks begin on Monday. 

USTR said th e U.S. delegation would also include undersecretaries from the U.S. Departments 

of Agriculture, Commerce, Energy and Treasury, as well as senior officials from those agencies 

and the White House. 

While Trump and other officials have said talks between the two sides are progressing well, they 

have given few details on concessions that China has made. Some U.S. demands would require 

structural reform that may be unpalatable for Chinese leaders. 

China would deepen reform but will not yield on issues it deems t o be its core national interests, 

a commentary in the ruling Communist Party’s official newspaper said on Wednesday. 

“We know what sort of changes we need,” White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow said in 

an interview with Fox Business on Friday. “Now, t he question is can we negotiate these changes 

and can we do so with enfo rcement (and) with timetables.” 

# The Nation, 07 -01 -19 227 

# The Nation, 08 -01 -19 

CPEC and Balochistan       

> China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) is going to take Pakistan towards a bright future. Its
> construction is ongoing in Balochistan the largest and richest province of Pakistan, but unfortunately,
> Balochistan is not getting any significant from the CPEC construction. Though Balochistan ’s people
> facing major problems. It has made their lives in troubles. Recently, many ideas were described by the
> PM for only other three provinces of Pakistan and the Capital, didn’t discuss for the improvement of
> Balochistan’s education, healthcare sectors, industrial sectors and many more. When CPEC was about to
> be in construct, then all unemployed graduated Baloch got hope for being employed, but not, foreign
> engineers are working on this project and Baloch are only seeing the work and getting more problems. I
> plea the government to focus on Balochistan’ s problems and try to solve them as soon as possible.

MUHAMMAD ADNAN, 

Balochistan, January 2. 

# The Nation, 08 -01 -19 

China has ‘good faith’ to fix trade issues as talks with US resume 

BEIJING - China has the “good faith” to work with the United States to resolve trade frictions, 

the Foreign Ministry said on Monday, as the world’s two largest economies resumed talks in a 

bid to end their trade dispute. 

U.S. officials are meeting their counterparts in Beijing this week for the first face -to -face talks 

since U.S. President Donald Trump and China’s President Xi Jinping agreed in December to a 

90 -day truce in a trade war that has roiled global markets. 

Trump said on Sunday that trade talks with China were going very well and that weakness in the 

Chinese economy gave Beijing a reason to work toward a deal. 

The two sides agreed to hold “positive and constructive” dialogue to resolve economic and trade 

disputes in accordance with the consensus reached by the countries’ leaders, Foreign Ministry 

spokesman Lu Kang tol d reporters at a regular news briefing. 

“From the beginning we have believed that China -U.S. trade friction is not a positive situation 

for either country or the world economy. China has the good faith, on the basis of mutual respect 

and equality, to resol ve the bilateral trade frictions,” Lu said. 

Trump imposed import tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars of Chinese goods last year and 

has threatened more to pressure Beijing to change its practices on issues ranging from industrial 

subsidies to intell ectual property to hacking. China has retaliated with tariffs of its own. 228 

“As for whether the Chinese economy is good or not, I have already explained this. China’s 

development has ample tenacity and huge potential,” Lu said. “We have firm confidence in th e

strong long -term fundamentals of the Chinese economy.” 

Lu also said that Vice President Wang Qishan would attend the World Economic Forum in 

Davos, Switzerland in late January, but added that he had not yet heard of any arrangements for a 

meeting with Tr ump there. By Monday afternoon, few details had emerged of the talks, which 

were scheduled to run through Tuesday. 

The U.S. delegation, led by Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Jeffrey Gerrish, includes 

undersecretaries from the U.S. Departments of Agricult ure, Commerce, Energy and Treasury, as 

well as senior officials from the White House 

# The Nation, 08 -01 -19 

Muslims enjoy freedom in Xinjiang: China Islamic Association 

URUMQI - President, China Islamic Association, AbdulRaqib has said that Muslims from Uygu r

and other ethnic groups were enjoying complete religious freedom and living in harmony in 

Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region of China as the constitution and law of the land protected 

rights of the people with religious beliefs. 

“The Chinese government al ways protects freedom of religious beliefs of people in Xinjiang as 

well as other parts of the country while the constitution and regulations relating to religious 

affairs protect rights of the people with religious beliefs,” he said while talking to APP 

Correspondent who visited several mosques, and vocational education and training centers in 

Urumqi, Kashgar and Hotan in Xinjiang along with a group of foreign journalists. 

He informed there were over 24,000 mosques in Xinjiang and all the Muslims were free to offer 

five times prayers and recite Holy Quran besides observing fasting in the month of Ramazan. 

Abdul Raqib, also head of Islamic Institute in Urumqi said, the institute spread over 150 acres 

had a history of 32 years and accommodated over 1,500 stud ents. 

He said the religious classes were started in the year 2014 and at present, the students were 

studying religion, politics and common national language. In the religious classes, the students 

were studying the Quran, Hadith and other Islamic teachings .

“We provide scholarships, accommodation, and food to students and award diplomas and 

certificates upon completion of their courses,” he added. 

He said around 238 professional clerics were also enrolled for training and they would be sent to 

other mosques to perform religious duties. About duration of courses, he informed the institute 

had organized short -term courses as well as a five -year -long graduation program. 229 

About spread of extremism, he said it was because of multiple factors and the government had 

made a series of measures including vocational education and poverty alleviation programmes to 

get the people involved in terrorism and extremism back to their normal life. In Kashgar, Imam 

of historical Etigar Mosque, MuhamitJuma said the Muslims were en joying religious freedom 

and performing their religious obligations without any fear. 

He informed the mosque was built in the 15th century and recently renovated with the financial 

assistance from the provincial government. The imam said the five prayers, as well as Juma 

prayer, were held at the mosque, the largest in the city. 

He informed his father, the grand imam of the mosque, was killed by the terrorists in the year 

2014 and after then necessary arrangements were made for the security of people coming to offer 

prayers. In Hotan, Imam of Jamia Mosque, Abul Hassan also shared that all the Muslims in the 

city were enjoying the freedom of religious beliefs. 

He said the local government also provided financial assistance for day to day needs and 

renovation o f the mosque. More than 2,000 faithful attend Juma congregation. Muslims were 

free to offer daily prayers and observe fasting in Ramazan while Halal meat was ava ilable all 

across the province. 230 

# The Nation, 08 -01 -19 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

China Sets up no -coal zones to curb pollution 

TAIYUAN - A total of 11 prefecture -level cities in China’s coal hub Shanxi Province have 

established no -coal zones in its urban districts to tackle air pollution, local authorities said. The 

storage, sales and use of coa l are all banned in the no -coal zones, according to the Shanxi 

Provincial Department of Ecology and Environment. The exceptions are made for coal -fired 

electricity generators, large -scale heat providers and industries that use coal as a raw material. 

The a uthorities said the area covered by the no -coal zones will be gradually expanded. 

Meanwhile, the sale or burning of low -grade coal among residents has been banned in the whole 

province. For those who violate the rules, market regulators above the county le vel will order 

them to make rectifications and will confiscate raw materials, coal products and illegal gains. A 231 

fine up to three times the value of the goods will be imposed. Shanxi is under big pressure to 

curb air pollution. In the first three quarters of last year, 7 out of 20 cities with the worst air 

quality were in Shanxi. 

With a quarter of China’s proven coal reserves, Shanxi shut down 36 coal mines in 2018, cutting 

23.3 million tonnes of production capacity. 

According to a plan regarding the reduct ion and reconstruction of the coal mining industry in the 

province, coal mines with an annual output below 600,000 tonnes will be closed by 2020. 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

Co -op only right option for China -US ties: Envoy 

NEW YORK - The China -U.S. relationship has been a shared success story over the past four 

decades, while cooperation is the only right option for the future development of bilateral ties, 

Chinese Ambassador to the United States Cui Tiankai said here on Monday. “China remains 

committed to expand ing cooperation with the United States on the basis of mutual benefit, 

managing our differences on the basis of mutual respect, and developing a relationship with the 

United States based on closer coordination, cooperation and greater stability,” Cui said while 

addressing the annual New Year gala of the China General Chamber of Commerce -- USA 

(CGCC -USA). Cui told the 450 -strong gala guests that China -U.S. ties have to evolve with time 

in light of the profound changes that have taken place in both countries and in the world over the 

past decades. “But all this is only understood as the need for closer China -U.S. cooperation,” he 

stressed. 

Pointing to the fact that the normalization and development of China -U.S. relations have 

benefited countries and the enti re world, the Chinese envoy emphasized the need for both parties 

“to look forward to the coming decades and plan our work together for even greater success.” 

The seasoned diplomat also said China will continue to carry out reform and opening -up and 

seek pe ople -centered development, sustainable development and peaceful development, which 

will create more opportunities for the world. 

Cui urged business communities of both countries to keep the big picture in mind, remain open 

and have a clear stand on what is right and what is wrong. 

The New Year gala, which was also dedicated to the celebration of the 40th anniversary of the 

normalization of China -U.S. relations, was hosted by CGCC -USA as part of its annual tradition. 

Founded in 2005, CGCC -USA has been recogn ized as the largest and most influential non -profit 

organization representing Chinese enterprises in the United States, with the total number of its 

members exceeding 1,500. 232 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

CPEC to create 700,000 direct jobs by 2030 

ISLAMABAD - As man y as 700,000 new job opportunities for local people are estimated to be 

created by 2030 under the mega project of China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). 

“So far various CPEC projects have provided direct job opportunities to around 75,000 people 

across t he country, according to documents from China Embassy here. 

A recent study conducted by CPEC Centre of Excellence, Ministry of Planning, Development 

and Reform of Pakistan showed that indirectly, CPEC could help create even 1.2 million jobs 

under its prese ntly agreed project. 

In order to promote economic development and employment of Pakistan, Chinese companies 

also subcontract a large number of projects to local Pakistani companies. 

This also develops relevant upstream and downstream industries, such as ra w material 

processing and catering industry which also provide more employment opportunities for the local 

people. 

Chinese companies have engaged themselves in three areas to fulfill their social responsibilities 

in collaboration with the Chinese governmen t. 

The Chinese side has proposed to conduct social cooperation on agriculture, education, medical 

care, poverty ~ alleviation, water supply and vocational training. 

The Chinese companies shared advanced techniques and successful experience to help Pakistan 

transform its human resources into advantages. 

The Chinese companies have sponsored thousands of Pakistani students to study in China and 

sent hundreds of Pakistani engineers and professionals to China for training on scholarships. 

Chinese universities ha ve set up two vocational training centers with local universities in Lahore 

and Quetta. 

China Fund for Peace and Development (CFPD) has built the Faqeer Primary School in Gwadar, 

which is known as “Chinese Pakistan Friendship School”. 

The school was comple ted and started classes in September 2016 with 500 students, more than 

double of its designed capacity. 233 

Since the operation of the school, the Chinese company has donated books, schoolbags, 

stationery, uniforms and 3 school buses for the students. The Chin ese Embassy has also made 

donations to the school. 

CPEC emergency medical Centre was set up in Gwadar port in May, 2017. It was donated and 

run by the Chinese Red Cross Foundation with a top class Chinese medical team working there, 

providing local residents with necessary first aid treatment and free medical examinations for 

local primary school students. 

Many Chinese companies have also donated medicines to residents near the project, and 

provided free medical examinations to the local people. 

The Chinese companies are actively exerting their own advantages to build bridges and drill 

wells for residents to help them solve water and travel problems. 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

China deepens reform on judicial, social systems 

BEIJING: - China has achieved all -round progress in deepening reform in its judicial and social 

systems since the Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party 

of China (CPC), which was held in 2013. Zhang Jun, procurator -general of the Supreme People’s 

Procur atorate (SPP), announced on Thursday that the SPP will form 10 new procuratorial 

departments and implement a new mechanism to allow the same department to handle both the 

arrest and prosecution processes of criminal cases. –Xinhua 

“The old mechanism lowers efficiency because one department handles the arrest process and 

the other department has to learn about the case all over again when it handles the prosecution 

process,” Zhang said at a press conference organized by the Information Office of the State 

Cou ncil. 

Over 90,000 procurators and 120,000 judges have been re -elected under the judicial reform 

aimed at improving their professional competence. They will take on lifelong responsibilities for 

specific cases in an effort to boost their enthusiasm and sens e of responsibility. 

Previously, China’s judicial selection and management system was based on the public servant 

management system, which did not suit the profession well. 

Citizens can now establish legal cases by simply getting registered instead of goin g through 

inspections. Currently, over 95 percent of the cases are registered and established on site. 234 

In May 2018, the Legal Services of China website started operation, collecting data from over 

380,000 legal service institutions and 1.39 million profess ionals nationwide. It selected 475 

institutions and 925 professionals to form a counseling team to serve the public. 

“These unprecedented reforms and changes stemmed from the Party’s people -centered 

governance philosophy to make the people actually feel eq uality and justice,” said XuHanming, 

a professor with Zhongnan University of Economics and Law. 

On Sept. 1, 2018, the Ministry of Public Security rolled out 20 reform measures to streamline 

traffic management. The measures included information sharing and online settlement of claims 

of accidents. 

The country also issued documents on reforming the registered permanent residence system and 

loosening restrictions on rural residents settling in urban areas. 

Major universities have also raised their ratio of rec ruited students from rural families. Over 90 

percent of handicapped children now have access to education resources. 

As of the end of 2017, the number of cities with hierarchical medical systems had increased to 

321 and average life expectancy rose to 76.7 .

The supply of elderly care continues to grow. By September 2018, 29,300 institutions across the 

country offered elderly care wi th more than seven million beds 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

South Korea welcomes DPRK leader’s visit to China 

SEOUL - South Korea’s presidential Blue House on Tuesday welcomed the visit by Kim Jong 

Un, top leader of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) to China, as it was 

anticipated to contribute to building peace on the Korean Peninsula. 

Kim Eui -keum, the Blue House spokesman, told a press briefing that Kim’s visit to China was 

anticipated to contribute to the complete denuclearization of the peninsula and the settlement of 

permanent peace. 

The spokesman said exchanges were underway between th e two Koreas, between China and the 

DPRK, and between the DPRK and the United States, noting that each exchange was anticipated 

to advance others by creating a virtuous cycle among them. He noted that South Korea hoped the 

exchange between China and the DP RK would become a stepping stone for the second DPRK -

U.S. summit. 235 

The DPRK leader and U.S. President Donald Trump met in Singapore in June last year, holding 

the first -ever DPRK -U.S. summit. Kim and Trump expressed their hopes to meet again in the 

near fut ure. 

The Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee’s International Department 

spokesperson said in Beijing that Kim is vi siting China from Jan. 7 to 10. 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

Xi honours two academicians with China’s top science award 

BEIJING - Presid ent Xi Jinping presented China’s top science award to Liu Yongtan and 

QianQihu on Tuesday for their outstanding contributions to scientific and technological 

innovation. 

Xi, also general secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and 

chairman of the Central Military Commission, granted award medals and certificates to them at 

an annual ceremony held in Beijing to honor distinguished scientists, engineers, and research 

achievements. Liu Yongtan, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the 

Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE), is from the Harbin Institute of Technology, and 

QianQihu, a CAE academician, is from the Army Engineering University of the People’s 

Liberation Army. Xi shook hands with them and expressed congr atulations. Other leaders, 

including Li Keqiang, Wang Huning, and Han Zheng, all members of the Standing Committee of 

the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, were also present. 

Tuesday’s ceremony honored 278 projects, with 38 winning the State Natural Science Award, 

67 the State Technological Invention Award, and 173 the State Scientific and Technological 

Progress Award. 

Five foreign experts won the International Science and Technology Cooperation Award. 

On behalf of the CPC Central Committee an d the State Council, Premier Li Keqiang extended 

congratulations to the award winners and thanked foreign experts for their support to China’s 

science and technology development. 

Li said China has achieved remarkable progress in science and technology sinc e the country’s 

reform and opening -up four decades ago, and the past year again witnessed excellent 

performance in science and technology innovation. 

He called on scientific and technological workers to follow the guidance of the Xi Jinping 

Thought on Soci alism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, grasp the new trend of 

science, technology revolutions and industrial transformation, and further implement the 236 

innovation -driven development strategy, so as to speed up the building of an innovative countr y

and a leading power in science and technology. 

Basic research should be given more priority, and receive more long -term and stable support, Li 

said, adding that the development of basic research, applied research, and industrialization 

should be integrat ed to build an open, coordinated and efficient research platform. 

“We should deepen the reform on the scientific and technological system, innovate the scientific 

and technological investment policy and the fund management system, as well as expand the 

de cision -making rights of scientists and researchers in choosing technological routes, utilizing 

funds, and transforming their research achievements,” Li said, while urging for the more flexible 

and diversified payment incentives. 

He stressed the need to str engthen the role of enterprises as the main players of innovation and 

the integration of industries, universities and research institutes, noting that more market -driven 

means should be applied to encourage entrepreneurship. 

China will step up building the system for IPR creation, protection, application and services, and 

cracking down on IPR infringement and counterfeiting, Li pledged. 

Vice Premier Han Zheng presided over the ceremony, which was attended by about 3,300 

people. 

Before the ceremony, Xi and o ther leaders met with representatives of the winners. 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

Cooperation only right option for China -US ties: Chinese ambassador 

NEW YORK - The China -U.S. relationship has been a shared success story over the past four 

decades, while cooperation is the only right option for the future development of bilateral ties, 

Chinese Ambassador to the United States Cui Tiankai said here on Monday. 

“China remains committed to expanding cooperation with the United States on the basis of 

mutual benefit, managing our differences on the basis of mutual respect, and developing a 

relationship with the United States based on closer coordination, cooperation and greater 

stability,” Cui said while addressing the annual New Year gala of the China General Chamber of 

Commerce -- USA (CGCC -USA). Cui told the 450 -strong gala guests that China -U.S. ties have 

to evolve with time in light of the profound changes that have taken place in both countries and 

in the world over the past decades. “But all this is onl y understood as the need for closer China -

U.S. cooperation,” he stressed. 237 

Pointing to the fact that the normalization and development of China -U.S. relations have 

benefited countries and the entire world, the Chinese envoy emphasized the need for both pa rties 

“to look forward to the coming decades and plan our work together for even greater success.” 

The seasoned diplomat also said China will continue to carry out reform and opening -up and 

seek people -centered development, sustainable development and peac eful development, which 

will create more opportunities for the world. 

Cui urged business communities of both countries to keep the big picture in mind, remain open 

and have a clear stand on what is right and what is wrong. 

The New Year gala, which was also dedicated to the celebration of the 40th anniversary of the 

normalization of China -U.S. relations, was hosted by CGCC -USA as part of its annual tradition. 

Founded in 2005, CGCC -USA has been recognized as the largest and most influential non -profit 

organiz ation representing Chinese enterprises in the United States, with the total number of its 

members exceeding 1,5000. 

# The Nation, 09 -01 -19 

China to strengthen cultural relic protection 

BEIJING: -The National Cultural Heritage Administration will work out a plan to better protect 

cultural relics and speed up the creation of a safety oversight platform in 2019. Stressing the 

importance of such protection, Liu Yuzhu, head of the administration, said lax enforcement is a 

prominent problem that endangers cultural relics, at a meeting attended by cultural heri tage 

administrators nationwide. 

# The Nation, 10 -01 -19 

China car sales fall for the first time in 20 years 

CHINA -GN - Car sales in China, the world’s biggest vehicle market, have seen their first annual 

fall in twenty years. Sales fell 6% to 22.7 million units in 2018, according to the China Passenger 

Car Association (CPCA). 

The deceleration comes amid a slowdown in China’s economy which has hit performance at car 

manufacturers around the world. The news comes af ter Apple warned that sales would be hit by 

slowing iPhone demand in China. 238 

Meanwhile, the country’s most successful carmaker, Geely, is forecasting flat sales this year. 

Foreign car makers such as Ford, Volkswagen, Jaguar Land Rover and General Motors hav e all 

reported falls in sales over the last few months in China. The China Association of Automobile 

Manufacturers (CAAM), a government -backed industry group, last month blamed the sales 

slowdown on economic shifts and “international reasons”, referring to China’s trade war with the 

US. Last year, both countries imposed billions of dollars’ worth of tariffs on each other’s goods. 

CAAM said it expected the market to be unchanged in 2019 and added that although demand for 

diesel and petrol cars was falling, r ising sales of electric cars would probably help the overall 

market to avoid another slump. 

Government subsidies for car buying also ended last year reducing consumer incentives to buy 

new cars. 

However, the China National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) says it plans to 

introduce policies to boost consumer spending on cars as well as home appliances. 

NDRC vice -chairman NingJizhe told China’s state broadcaster that there was still potential for 

more car sales. He said policies such as the introduct ion of a rural car purchase programme, or a 

cut in taxes on ca r sales could help drive sales. 

# The Nation, 10 -01 -19 

Chinese military to open online enlisting service 

BEIJING - Candidates who want to enlist in the Chinese armed forces will be able to submit 

application documents through a website from Thursday, the Ministry of National Defense said 

Wednesday. 

The website, www.gfbzb.gov.cn, will also allow users to register their enlisting records and 

search for relevant policies, said a statement from the min istry’s conscription office. 

The ministry aims to recruit the majority of new service personnel from universities, the 

statement said. 

The priority of this year’s recruitment campaign will be college graduates and students of leading 

universities, it added .

The country currently h as 2 million service personnel. 239 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

China gifts four snow removing machines to FWO 

Gilgit - The Chinese government has gifted four latest machineries for cutting and clearing of 

snow from upper Hunza and Khunjerab Top in GilgitBal tististan, Frontier Works Organiz ation 

(FWO) sources told APP here Thursday. 

An FWO official said that machines have been handed over to FWO authorities which included 

two machines for cutting snow and two clearing snow from roads . The snow clearing process 

from Karakorum Highway has been started. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

CM, Chinese envoy discuss CPEC initiatives 

LAHORE - Chinese Ambassador Yao Jing called on Punjab Chief Minister SardarUsmanBuzdar 

at his office here on Thursday. 

Matt ers of mutual interest including promotion of Pakistan -China relations and CPEC related 

initiatives came under discussion. Both agreed to take collectives measures to initiate public -

private partnership for giving new dimensions to bilateral relations, est ablishment of special 

economic zones and development of social sector. 

Talking on the occasion, Chief Minister said that China was the most trustworthy country and 

added that we appreciate Chinese cooperation in the development of a new Pakistan. A new 

cha pter of Pakistan -China friendship has been written in the tenure of Prime Minister Imran 

Khan. Work has been started on the new dimensions of Pakistan -China economic relations while 

the CPEC project carries vital importance in the durable development of Pa kistan. He said that 

Punjab government was establishing new special economic zones where Chinese investors will 

be given incentives and facilities. The public -private partnership will further boost Pakistan -

China economic relations, he said. 

Chief Minister said that durable development of social sector was a priority of the government 

and Chinese cooperation in this regard would be welcomed. He announced that people -to -people 

contacts between Pakistan and China will be further strengthened and we will move forward by 

identifying the future strategy while considering the new dimensions of CPEC project. He 

appreciated Chinese cooperation in energy, infrastructural development and other sectors and 

added that government is desirous of benefiting from latest Chi nese technology in agriculture 

and farming sectors. A conducive atmosphere is provided for investment in Punjab and Chinese 

investors should take benefit of it, he added. 240 

Chinese ambassador appreciated the establishment of special economic zones by the Pun jab 

government and hoped that Pakistan -China economic relations will be further strengthened and 

both the countries will benefit from public -private partnership initiative. We want to further 

extend our cooperation with the Punjab government for the develo pment of social sector. He said 

that joint steps will be taken to boost public level contracts and China is siding with Pakistan in 

its journey of development and prosperity. 

Chinese Consul General Mr. Long Dingbin, MD Punjab Mass Transit Authority, Princi pal 

Secretary to CM, Secretaries of industry, P&D and energy departments as well as high -level 

Chinese offici al were present in the meeting. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

China -Russia trade volume tops $100b 

BEIJING: Trade volume between China and Russia exceeded 100 billion U.S. dollars by mid -

December 2018, a record high, the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) announced Thursday. Sino -

Russia trade growth outpaced those between China and its other major trade partners, according 

to MOC spokesperson GaoFeng, calling 2018 a "genuinely fruitful year" for bilateral economic 

and trade cooperation. China remains Russia's largest trade partner, while Russia is China's tenth 

largest trade partner. Bilateral trade structure also improved in 2018. Trade in mechanical and 

electrical products, high -tech products and agricultural produce rose 15 percent, 29 percent and 

31 percent respectively in the first 11 months of 2018. –Xinhua 

The two countries also partnered on energy, nuclear, aerospace, cross -border infrastructure and 

other field s. 

China is willing to work with Russia to lift bilateral economic and trade ties to a new phase on a 

larger scale with deeper dimension and higher levels, as 2019 marks the 70th anniversary of the 

establishment of diplomatic relations betwe en the two countries, Gao said. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

CPEC can play key role in generating jobs in Pakistan 

BEIJING - The China -Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) can play a better role in yielding 

employment benefits for local people if the Pakistani gove rnment keeps improving the business 

environment for the manufacturers. 

Approximately 1.2 million jobs could be created indirectly in Pakistan because of agreed projects 

under the CPEC, according to report published by Global Times here on Thursday. The CPE C

has proved that the recent surge in Chinese investment is yielding employment benefits in 

Pakistan. 241 

This is a hard -won achievement, but 1.2 million jobs aren’t enough. While the first phase of the 

CPEC concentrated on infrastructure projects, the second part should focus on employment 

creation by setting up special economic zones (SEZs) and supporting economic integration. The 

CPEC needs to accelerate the shift of its focus to provide more jobs for Pakistani people. 

The construction of transportation infr astructure under the CPEC framework has created many 

jobs for local people. This is obviously good news for the country’s poverty alleviation 

campaign. 

However, infrastructure work provides mainly limited -term employment. It takes time to 

complete infrastr ucture construction, but the country will see a substantial decrease in job 

creation in the future if it relies heavily on infrastructure construction to generate employment. 

With about 200 million people, Pakistan needs long -term employment opportunities. 

The CPEC also offers unique advantages as it is designed to connect Gwadar Port in southwest 

Pakistan with China’s inland areas, offering another shipping option for Chinese importers and 

exporters. 

Working on the CPEC’s SEZs should be stepped up to promo te Pakistan’s manufacturing sector 

and its industrialization, making the country a new important exporter to China. This will 

provide more long -term j obs for local Pakistani people. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

Pak -China mutual trade has great potential to grow fu rther 

LAHORE - Ambassador of China to Pakistan Yao Jing has said that that mutual trade can be 

enhanced through people to people direct contact. Businessmen of both the countries should play 

their role to further increase bilateral trade. He said that g ood trade policies, low rate of taxes, tax 

incentives and business -friendly environment in Pakistan can attract huge Chinese investment. 

He was speaking at the Lahore Chamber of Commerce & Industry. 

The Chinese Ambassador said that under Joint Coordination Committee meetings, they are 

working on several projects under the China -Pakistan Economic Corridor like power plants, 

Railways, Metro train, road infrastructure and Gwadar port. He said that Chinese government is 

also focusing on health, education, agric ulture, water, poverty alleviation and socio economic 

development of less developed areas like Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 

He said that Special Economic Zones are also underway which should be given priority. 

When LCCI President Almas Hyder informe d that the LCCI delegation is visiting China in 

March, the Ambassador ensured full cooperation and support to the delegation. “There is a dire 242 

need to find ways to develop consistent policies and stable economic relations with each other. 

Our present level of trade seems to be the result of lack of knowledge about the mutual potential 

of Pakistani and Chinese economies”, the Ambassador added. 

LCCI President Almas Hyder said that Pakistan and China being steady geo -political partners 

have very cordial relati ons. CPEC which is part of the Belt and Road Initiative promises even 

greater fortunes for us. It will certainly prove to be a game changer. “Be it electricity generation, 

infrastructure development, technology transfer, knowledge sharing or joint venture projects with 

Chinese firms, Pakistan knows that tomorrow is bound to get better than today”, he added. 

It is worth mentioning that bilateral trade figures are following increasing trend from the last four 

years in particular. From 2014 on, the average inc rease in imports from China is almost dollar 2 

billion per year. In contrast to that Pakistan’s exports are constantly di pping for the last three 

years. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

Chinese naval escort fleet concludes visit to Cambodia 

China: - China’s missile frigate “Wuhu” arrives at Sihanoukville Autonomous Port, 

Cambodia. The 30th Chinese naval escorting fleet, composed of missile frigates “Wuhu” and 

“Handan”, and supply ship “Dongpinghu”, arrived Wednesday at the Sihanoukville Autonomous 

Port for a four -day fri endly visit to Cambodia. –Xinhua 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

China -Russia trade volume tops 100 bln USD 

BEIJING - Trade volume between China and Russia exceeded 100 billion U.S. dollars by mid -

December 2018, a record high, the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) announced Thursday. 

Sino -Russia trade growth outpaced those between China and its other major trade partners, 

according to MOC spokesperson GaoFeng, calling 2018 a “genuinely fruitful year” for bilateral 

economic and trade cooperation. 

China remains Russia ’s largest trade partner, while Russia is China’s tenth largest trade partner. 

Bilateral trade structure also improved in 2018. Trade in mechanical and electrical products, 

high -tech products and agricultural produce rose 15 percent, 29 percent and 31 perc ent 

respectively in the first 11 months of 2018. 243 

The two countries also partnered on energy, nuclear, aerospace, cross -border infrastructure and 

other fields. 

China is willing to work with Russia to lift bilateral economic and trade ties to a new phase on a

larger scale with deeper dimension and higher levels, as 2019 marks the 70th anniversary of the 

establishment of diplomatic relations betwe en the two countries, Gao said. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

Kim leaves China with ‘backing for second Trump summit’ 

Beijin g - After his surprise visit to China, North Korean leader Kim Jong -un left with backing 

for a possible second summit with US President Donald Trump, state media said. 

Trump and Kim first met last June, but progress over denuclearization has since stalled. 

Chinese President Xi Jinping said he hoped the two leaders “meet each other halfway”, Xinhua 

news agency reported China is the North’s main ally and key trade partner. 

Xi said China supported North Korea and the US “holding summits and achieving results, and 

supports relevant parties resolving their respective legitimate concerns through dialogue”. 

He also said China would be ready to play a “positive and constructive role” towards 

maintaining peace and achieving denuclearization on the Korean peninsula, r eported Xinhua. 

Kim made what is believed to be his first official trip outside North Korea to China last year, 

even before meeting South Korea’s President Moon and Trump. The recent visit is Kim’s fourth 

to China in less than a year. 

During his three -day visit to China, Kim and his wife Ri Sol -ju were welcomed by Xi and his 

wife with a banquet and an art performance. He also visited a pharmaceutical plant specializing 

in Chinese medicine. 

The trip is believed to have taken place over Kim’s 35th birthday. 

Xi accepted an offer to visit North Korea, state media said. It is still unclear when this would 

take place. 

Kim had said in his annual new year’s speech in January that he remained committed to 

denuclearization, but warned that he would change course if US sanctions remained. 

According to North Korean’s official KCNA agency China supported the North’s position. 244 

“Xi Jinping said that the legitimate issues raised by the DPRK are rightful demands and that he 

fully agrees that the DPRK’s reasonable interests should be justly resolved,” it said, using the 

official country name the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 

It is not clear when or where a possible second Kim -Trump summit would take place, though 

South Korean president Moon Jae -in has said it will ha ppen “soon”. 

Moon, who has over the past year played mediator between North Korea and the US, said at a 

news conference on Thursday that Seoul would cooperate with the US in resolving the issue of 

sanctions on North Korea. 

There has been little progress ma de between the US and North Korea since the historic 

Singapore summit in June - the first ever meeting between a North Korean leader and a sitting 

US president. 

Both parties signed a pledge at the time to denuclearize the Korean peninsula, though it was 

ne ver made clear what this would entail. 

Pyongyang wants Washington to lift the sanctions the United Nations imposes on the country 

because of its nuclear and missile programmes. 

North Korea argues that the US needs to match the steps it has taken towards de nuclearization, 

namely dismantling a nuclear testing site and a key missile engine facility. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

China to intensify crackdown on data fraud 

BEIJING -China's top statistical regulator will step up efforts to prevent and punish data 

falsifica tion and other fraudulent practices, in an effort to ensure data authenticity. 

A supervision campaign on statistical work will be launched this year, the first time in history, to 

promote fulfillment of duties, punish illegal practices and improve statisti cs quality, said 

NingJizhe, head of the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). The NBS would enhance 

inspection and law enforcement, expand exposure of wrong -doers and hold them 

accountable;Ning told a national meeting on statistical work.The country expos ed 27 illegal 

statistical cases, disclosed information and imposed punishments on 118 firms found guilty of 

serious data doctoring, according to Ning. 

China introduced an updated detailed guideline for implementing statistics laws in 2017 to 

prevent data f raud. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 245 

Chinese researchers use AI to explore diabetes classification 

BEIJING -Chinese researchers are using artificial intelligence (AI) to classify different types of 

diabetes, which may help patients obtain more precise treatment. 

Diff erent types of diabetes require diverse treatment. The current diabetes classification system, 

which has been used for more than 20 years, is based on cause and pathological features, which 

has limitations in guiding clinical treatment. 

Researchers from Pe king University People's Hospital are working on a more elaborate 

classification of diabetes that may support individualized treatment. They conducted research on 

diabetes classification based on the data of 2,316 Chinese people newly diagnosed with diabet es 

and 815 Americans. Using the AI clustering method, they separate the two groups into four 

diabetes subtypes based on five variables including age, BMI, blood glucose levels and insulin 

resistance indexes. 

According to ZouXiantong, one of the researcher s, a previous study from Northern Europe has 

used similar methods to divide diabetes into five subgroups and demonstrated that the subgroups 

have different clinical manifestations and corresponding treatments. However, all cases involved 

in the study were from Northern Europe, and it is unknown whether it is applicable to other 

populations. 

"We hope our research may provide data support for more accurate typing and treatment of 

diabetes in the Chinese population," Zou said. 

The data analysis showed that the main clinical features of the four subtypes were basically 

consistent in the Chinese and U.S. groups, which also coincided with the subtype characteristics 

of the Northern Europe research. The research was published in the journal The Lan cet Diabetes 

and Endocrinology. 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

Experts identify 20 health problems in China 

BEIJING -A group of top Chinese medical and health experts recently identified the 20 most 

important and most preventable health problems for the next 20 years in China. The 20 health 

problems are comprised of diseases, unhealthy behaviors, environmental pollution, food 

contamination and road injuries. 

Diabetes and hypertension are ranked as the top two, along with seven major chronic diseases 

including coronary heart disease and stroke, as well as lung, liver and breast cancers. Risk factors 

for chronic diseases, such as air and water pollution, smoking, an unhealthy diet, as well as 246 

contamination with pesticides, antibiotics and hormone residues are all among the 20 health 

problems. 

AIDS, Alzheimer's disease, depression and obesity are also on the list. The results were recently 

published in the American Journal of Public Health. 

Wu Yangfeng, the lead author of the study and researcher with the Peking University Clinical 

Rese arch 

Institute, said the results were a consensus from a panel of 70 top Chinese experts working 

mainly in the field of public health, clinical medicine and medical resea rch, with an average age 

of 64 w ith each contributor having been engaged in their prof ession for more than 15 years. 

Panelists could choose from a list provided of 106 diseases and could also add new items. Then, 

they w ere asked to rate two aspects for each health problem: the degree of importance and the 

degree of 

Prevent ability. 

They als o considered other characteristics of health problems, such as the number of people 

affected, its importance in the future and their personal beliefs regarding its consequences. "The 

ranking of the top 20 health problems indicates that thepanelists priorit ized health problems 

where intervention could prevent disease worsening or the development of other serious 

conditions and focused more on chronic than on infectious diseases," Wu said. 

China faces shifting health challenges, with chronic diseases now acco unting for the vast 

majority 

of all deaths. Wu believes the study could help set up national priorities to improve health and 

prevent Disease. 

Researchers also found that the diseases identified on the list accounted for 61 percent of total 

deaths 

in China , showing that the experts' choices are in line with national statistics. 

Jonathan Fielding, professor at the University of California in the Fielding School of Public 

Health, said the study highlighted the role of expert opinions in health policy making, instead of 

relying on statistics alone. 

"The results could help establish research priorities, and invite collaboration among nations faced 

wi th similar challenges," he said. 247 

# The Nation, 11 -01 -19 

Training classes for Muslim clerics held in Xinjiang 

BEIJING -China's Northwest Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region recently held training classes 

for Muslim clerics, which is aimed at guiding them to resist extremism and contribute to regional 

stability and prosperity. 

The class was recently held in Urumqi, the capit al city of Xinjiang, according to a statement 

released on the website of the United Front Work Department of the Communist Party of China 

Central Committee. 

Muslim clerics are required to have a comprehensive understanding of Xinjiang's stability and 

development, the statement said and added the religion department should strengthen their 

politics, law and religious education. 

The training sessions require the Muslim clerics to study traditional Chinese, the history of the 

country and the Party, esp eci ally the modern history of th e country and of Xinjiang. They also 

need to learn Putonghua. 

Xinjiang is home to 24,400 mosques and about 29,000 Muslim clerics. Since 2001, the State 

Administration for Religious Affairs has held 12 training sessions for Musl im clerics and has 

trained approximately 500 clerics for the region. 

"Muslim clerics generally refer to imams, who are respected by Muslims. Trained imams can 

help tens of thousands of believers nurture patriotism and national unity," GaoZhanfu, a vice 

dea n of the 

Beijing -based China Islamic Institute, told the Global Times.The China Islamic Association is 

about to compile textbooks for Muslim clerics around the country, which will further standardize 

their training. Professors who specialize in a certain s ubject are usually invited t o train the 

clerics, Gao noted 

# The Nation, 12 -01 -19 

China to import potato, cherry, wheat from Pakistan 

ISLAMABAD - Chinese Ambassador to Pakistan Yao Jing here on Friday said that China was 

interested to enhance its import o f potato, cherry, wheat besides increasing its investments in 

other sectors of economy to further cement the bilateral trade and investment relations between 

both the countries. 248 

The Ambassador of China called on Federal Minister for National Food Security and Research 

Sahibzada Muhammad Mehboob Sultan and discussed the matters relating to promote bilateral 

trade and cooperation in different sectors of economy including agriculture and livestock’s. 

The Ambassador said that Chinese government would also forma lly invite Pakistani experts to 

monitor the hybrid rice seed expertise of China and monitor the facility to enhance its local 

output of the crop and promoting its exports. 

Speaking on the occasion, Federal Minister said that Pakistan and China were members of 

various organizations and being member of Shanghai Cooperation Organization, Pakistan had 

endorsed agreement on cooperation in agriculture between the governments of the member states 

of the organization. 

China, he said produces food for 20 percent of the world’s population and it also imports huge 

quantity of food for its population. China was a strong force in South Asian region and CPEC 

opened up new venues of cooperation between two friendly neighbors. 

The minister said that China is the 4th largest export market of Pakistan, adding that it was 

heartening that both countries have signed free trade agreement (FTA) which has facilitated to 

expand bilateral trade. 

Federal Minister Mehboob Sultan said that government was moving ahead to collaborate in 

ac hieving foot and mouth disease free zone and a memorandum of requirements for the 

establishment of FMD free zone is currently negotiated by both sides. 

He added that we believe in ease of doing business and if we collaborate for the elimination of 

FMD it w ill boost our meat export to China. 

Mehboob Sultan extended his invitation to Chinese experts to visit the three districts of Punjab 

which are identified as FMD free zone 

# The Nation, 12 -01 -19 

43 Chinese companies listed on US bourses in 2018 

BEIJING: The number of Chinese firms listed on the U.S. bourses increased in 2018, as more 

companies mull going public driven by the country's fast economic development, Securities 

Daily reported Friday. A total of 43 Chinese companies were newly listed in the U.S. mar ket last 

year, higher than the 24 firms in 2017 and 10 in 2016, according to data from Wind, a financial 

data provider. Chinese A -shares' high threshold contributed to the overseas listings, said Cen 

Saiyin, vice president of Cornerstone Capital. If a comp any wants to be listed on the A -share 

market, it should meet certain requirements including profitability before approval, according to 

Ge Shoujing, a financial researcher. The number of IPOs on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock 249 

markets fell to a five -year l ow of 105 in 2018, compared with 436 in 2017, partly due to the 

China Securities Regulatory Commission's stricter review process, according to the PwC. 

Though the IPO reviews have become stricter than before, continuous reforms have made it 

easier for comp anies to access financing on the capital market, according to Tong Chuanjiang, a 

Deloitte China representative in charge of A -share IPO business for northern China. 

New listings on the A -share market are likely to get a boost from factors such as the 

gover nment's decision to launch a science and technology innovation board in Shanghai and 

experiment with a registration system f or listed companies, Tong said. 

# The Nation, 12 -01 -19 

Siberian tiger family spotted in northeast China 

CHANGCHUN -A tiger family consi sting of five members has been spotted in northeast China's 

Jilin Province. 

The wild Siberian tigers were caught on tape by an infrared camera in Jilin's Hunchun City in 

May last year, according to the management bureau of the Northeast China Tiger and Leopard 

National Park. The park covers two Chinese provinces and borders Russia and the Democratic 

People's Republic of Korea. It covers an area of more than 1.46 million hectares. 

In the 50 -second video, the mother tiger could be seen taking care of her f our playful tiger cubs. 

China has intensified protection efforts for Siberian tigers, which led to rising numbers of the big 

cat. In 2018, three families of Siberian tigers were spotted in Hunchun alone, including seven 

tiger cubs. Siberian tigers, otherwi se known as Amur or Manchurian tigers, mainly live in 

eastern Russia, northeast China and the northern part of the Korean Peninsula. By the end of 

2017, at least 27 adult tigers and 42 Amur leopards had been reported to roam in Jilin Province ,

and their nu mbers are stable. 

# The Nation, 13 -01 -1

China attends more exhibitions in B&R countries in 2018 

BEIJING (Xinhua): China attended and organized more exhibitions in countries along the Belt 

and Road Initiative last year as industrial exchanges heated up. Chine se exhibitors attended and 

organized 718 events in 33 countries in the regions by mid -November 2018, up 14.3 percent and 

involving about 26,000 Chinese firms, according to a report by the China Council for the 

Promotion of International Trade (CCPIT). Mach inery was one main theme of these exhibitions, 

the report stated. Russia was the most popular destination for China's exhibitors, followed by 

India, the United Arab Emirates and Turkey. Chinese exhibitors attended and organized 1,672 

overseas events during this period, up 4.89 percent year on year. For the domestic exhibition 250 

market, CCPIT expected more industrial events this year focusing on emerging sectors like 

artificial intelligence, energy conservation, and new generation information technology as wel l

as themes of regional development like the Guangdong -Hong Kong -Macao Greater Bay Area. 

# The Nation, 13 -01 -19 

China’s book retail sales up 11.3 pct 

BEIJING - China’s book retail sales totaled 89.4 billion yuan (13.1 billion U.S. dollars) in 2018, 

up 11.3 percent year on year, said a report issued at the Beijing Book Fair. 

A total of 57.3 billion yuan was spent via online channels, increasing by 24.7 percent from 2017, 

while sales through bookstores dropped by 6.69 percent. 

According to the report, there we re 1.94 million different types of books in the retail market last 

year, including 203,000 new books. 

First held in 1987, this year’s annual book fair centers its exhibition on the achievements the 

publishing industry has made over the course of the countr y’s reform and opening -up. 

It also shows the new trends in the new development phase of the publishing industry and 

focuses on the new forms of the industry, people’s various needs in all forms of reading, 

according to Liu Binjie, head of the Publishers As sociation of China. 

“Reform and opening -up has brought significant changes to the industry’s opening -up, with 

publishing outlets carrying out international cooperation and telling more Chinese stories,” said 

Liu, who asked for deeper reform and further inn ovation within the industry. 

# The Nation, 13 -01 -19 

Chinese cities open direct flights to Thailand, Myanmar 

GUIYANG - Two major cities in southwest China opened direct passenger flights to Thailand 

and Myanmar respectively on Friday to boost bilateral exchan ges. 

9 Air, a privately -owned budget airline in China, opened its direct flight linking Guiyang, capital 

of Guizhou Province, and Phuket, Thailand, a popular tourist destination. 

Outbound flights of the company’s new route depart from Guiyang Longdongbao I nternational 

Airport at 10:05 p.m. on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday each week. 

Return flights take off from Phuket International Airport at 1:30 a.m. local time on Monday, 

Thursday and Saturday. 251 

Also on Friday, Sichuan Airlines launched a direct flight betw een Chongqing Municipality and 

Mandalay, Myanmar’s second largest city. Round trips are scheduled for Monday, Wednesday 

and Friday. The direct flight takes about 2.5 hours and is expected to boost bilateral trade, 

tourism, and exchanges. 

# The Nation, 14 -01 -19 

Xi calls for ‘greater strategic achievements’ in party governance 

BEIJING - Xi Jinping, general secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central 

Committee, called for efforts to advance Party building, and demanded “greater strategic 

achiev ements” in full and strict governance over the Party. 

Xi, also Chinese president and chairman of the Central Military Commission, made the remarks 

at the third plenary session of the 19th Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI) of 

the CPC. He called for consolidating and developing a “sweeping victory” in the fight against 

corruption. 

Efforts should be made to make sure officials don’t dare to, are unable to and have no desire to 

commit corruption, to improve Party and state oversight systems, and to ensure the spirit of the 

19th CPC National Congress and major decisions of the CPC Central Committee are resolutely 

implemented, so as to greet the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of 

China (PRC) with great achievements, Xi said. 

Members of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee Li 

Keqiang, Li Zhanshu, Wang Yang, Wang Huning and Han Zheng attended the meeting. 

The meeting was presided over by Zhao Leji, also a member of the Standing Commit tee of the 

Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and head of the CCDI. 

Noting achievements in Party building since the 19th CPC National Congress that included the 

“sweeping victory” in fighting corruption, Xi said the Party is now “radiating with more vitality 

in the new era.” 

He summed up some of the invaluable experience in disciplinary inspection and supervision over 

the past 40 years of reform and opening -up. 

The authority of the CPC Central Committee and its centralized, unified leadership mus t be 

firmly upheld, and the governance over the Party must precede the governance of the country 

and it must be strict, Xi said. The people -centered approach must be upheld, Xi continued, 

adding that it was also necessary for cadres to continue innovating, keep working hard, and fight 

against inaction and corruption. 252 

Xi called for continuous efforts to advance full and strict governance over the Party as this year 

marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the PRC and is key in finishing building a 

moder ately prosperous society in all respects to achieve the first centenary goal. He laid out six 

tasks: 

The spirit of the 19th CPC National Congress needs to be further implemented. The Party’s 

political work must be strengthened to ensure unity of the whole Party and strict implementation 

of its orders. Excellent conduct must be encouraged to ensure joint efforts for building a 

moderately prosperous society. Fight corruption with strong resolve to consolidate and develop 

the “sweeping victory.” Improve the su pervision systems and strengthen the sense of 

responsibility. 

Address corruption and malpractices that occur on people’s doorsteps to safeguard the people’s 

immediate interests. 

Xi urged officials to correctly uphold the authority of the CPC Central Commit tee, and firmly 

resist illicit intervention and profit -seeking by central -level leaders’ family members, their work 

staff, and people who claim to have connections with them. 

He stressed maintaining healthy comradeship within the Party and enforcing the sy stem of 

democratic centralism. 

Officials should also take the lead in establishing a healthy working relationship and not use 

public resources as a tool of building clout or underhand connections to seek illicit gains. 

Those who play a key role in this reg ard, Xi said, are members of the Political Bureau of the 

CPC Central Committee and the CPC Central Committee. 

Xi also stressed building an “iron army” of disciplinary inspection and supervision officials who 

are loyal, clean and have strong sense of respon sibility and removing the “bad apples” from 

them. 

Presiding over the meeting, Zhao called on Party organizations at all levels to unify their 

thinking and action with the spirit of Xi’s speech. 

On behalf of the CCDI standing committee, Zhao delivered a wor k report titled “faithfully fulfil 

the obligations stipulated in the CPC Constitution and the Constitution of the country, and strive 

for high -quality development of disciplinary inspection and supervision work in the new era.” 

“Although China’s campaign a gainst corruption has made sweeping victory, it is not the time to 

lie back,” said Xin Ming, a professor at the Party School of the CPC Central Committee. 253 

Last year, the list of “tigers” -- referring to senior officials taken down on corruption charges --

continued to expand. 

Fifty -one officials at or above the provincial/ministerial level were among a total of 621,000 

people punished by CCDI and the National Supervisory Commission. 

And increasing attention was paid to minor offenses of officials. About 1.1 million officials were 

interviewed and cautioned for slight violations, about 63.6 percent of the total cases disciplinary 

inspectors handled in 2018. 

Last year, 1,335 fugitives were sent back to China. Among them, 307 were former Party 

members and offici als, mostly involved in graft cases. 

“The tough stance against corruption should not and will not e ase,” Xin, the professor said. 

# The Nation, 14 -01 -19 

Chicago to celebrate Chinese New Year  

> CHICAGO -Chicago is preparing to celebrate the Chinese New Year, which falls on Feb. 5 this year, with
> cultural, culinary and music events, organizers said Saturday.

"The atmosphere of celebrating Chinese New Year is getting heavier in the United States, 

particularly in cities with a big Chinese population," Liu Jun, ac ting consul general of the 

Chinese Consulate General in Chicago, said at a press conference. Liu said dozens of programs 

have been organized for the upcoming Chinese New Year, in which cultural and artistic troupes 

from China will work with the local Chine se community to provide a glimpse of Chinese cultural 

traditions. 

"Chicago has more wonderful celebration programs this year, and I believe all of you will enjoy 

a happier Chinese New Year here," Liu said. Chicago is the first city in the United States to 

launch a Chinese New Year celebration in the name of the city government, and 2019 will be the 

sixth year for the city to mark the Chinese New Year. 

On Feb. 4, the China National Peking Opera Company will kick off the Year of the Pig with a 

performance at the Chicago Cultural Center. 

The Hubei Opera and Dance Drama Theater and Shanxi Cultural Troupe will also join in 

celebrating the Chinese New Year with a festive display of Chinese dance, music, and traditional 

food. 

Chicago is paying a lot of attention to obtaining Chinese investments and at tracting more 

Chinese tourists. 254 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -1

Conspiracies and controversies against CPEC 

Undoubtedly, the CPEC project has remained under a systematic and persistent propaganda 

campaign since its formal announcem ent in April 2015. A large number of conspiracies and 

controversies have been made against this project. Recently, a report published in a leading US 

newspaper alleged that the CPEC was not about the economy and trade but had military 

dimensions as well. H owever, the project is a bilateral economic one, which is of course not 

against any country. 

Besides, terrorism has also been an essential tool in failing and sabotaging the project. 

Baluchistan and Gilgit -Baltistan that occupy a pivotal position in the en tire project have suffered 

from severe terror attacks during the last couple of years. 

As a matter of fact, Pakistan and China will surely benefit from CPEC. It’s high time both 

countries needed to be more active and cautious to counter all controversies a nd conspiracies 

against the CPEC project. 

SHEERAZ AKHTAR BHUTTO, 

Sindh, December 6. 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

China’s natural gas imports hit record high 

BEIJING: China’s imports of natural gas climbed to a new high last year in part due to 

government support f or clean energy. 

Some 90.39 million tonnes of natural gas were transported to China in 2018, 31.9 percent higher 

than a year ago, the General Administration of Customs said Monday. The growth rate picked up 

from a 26.9 -percent increase in 2017. In December , the country’s natural gas imports came in at 

9.23 million tonnes. China’s appetite for natural gas has swelled rapidly in recent years, in part 

driven by environmental policies to replace dirtier coal -fired electricity generation. It surpassed 

the Republ ic of Korea to become the world’s second -largest liquefied natural gas importer in 

2017, after Japan. Monday’s data also showed import increases in other commodities including 

crude oil and copper, while imports of iron ores and soybeans went down. 

# The Nat ion, 15 -01 -19 

China, Finland vow to write new chapter in bilateral ties 

BEIJING - Chinese President Xi Jinping and his visiting Finnish counterpart SauliNiinisto 

agreed to work together to write a new chapter in bilateral ties during their talks on Monday. 255 

Hailing that China and Finland have been committed to forging a future -oriented new -type of 

cooperative partnership in recent years, Xi said it is not only in line with both countries’ and 

people’s interests but also conducive to world peace, stability an d prosperity that China and 

Finland enhance dialogue and cooperation. 

The two countries need to adhere to mutual respect and trust, be open -minded and inclusive, 

respect each other’s development path and take each other’s core interests into consideration so 

as to promote the steady development of bilateral ties, Xi told Niinisto during the talks held at 

the Great Hall of the People. Xi encouraged both countries to expand cooperation in new areas 

driven by innovation. 

China appreciated Finland’s support to the Belt and Road Initiative, said Xi, adding that the 

country is ready to work with Finland to enhance Belt and Road cooperation. 

He suggested the two countries make the best use of the China Railway Express and other 

facilities to boost two -way trade, co nduct third -party cooperation, discuss opportunities for 

cooperation on the Arctic shipping routes and jointly build the Polar Silk Road. 

Xi also called for enhanced cultural and people -to -people exchanges as the two presidents would 

jointly launch the 201 9 China -Finland Year of Winter Sports in the hope of forging a model of 

winter sports cooperation. 

The two countries need to jointly promote the reform on global governance, enhance cooperation 

on international affairs, push forward the establishment of th e open world economy, safeguard 

the multilateral trading system, and implement the Paris Agreement on climate change, Xi said. 

Stressing that China has always supported the European integration, Xi said China hopes Europe 

will maintain unity, stability, op enness and prosperity and play an active and constructive role in 

the international arena, calling on Finland to continue contributing to China -Europe ties. 

On the Arctic affairs, Xi said China stands ready to work with Finland to enhance cooperation 

under the framework of the Arctic Council and boost the sustainable development in the Arctic 

region. 

China will also maintain close contact with Nordic countries and the Nordic Council of Ministers 

to develop cooperation between China and Nordic countries, Xi said. 

Hailing the rapid development of bilateral ties, Niinisto said that Finland speaks highly of 

China’s achievements, values China’s role in international affairs and cherishes its friendship 

with China. 256 

The Belt and Road Initiative proposed by Xi is ve ry important, he said, adding that Finland is 

willing to play a positive role to better align this initiative with the European Union (EU) to 

promote the connectivity of the Eurasian continent. 

During Niinisto’s visit to China, the two sides are scheduled to publish a joint action plan (2019 -

2023) on promoting the future -oriented new -type cooperative partnership between China and 

Finland. 

Finland is ready to work with China to implement the action plan, strengthen pragmatic 

cooperation in areas including tr ade, innovation, environment, tourism, and Arctic affairs, boost 

people -to -people exchanges and cement cooperation on sports, particularly winter sports, 

Niinisto said. 

It is important for the two countries to maintain close communication and coordination on 

international affairs under the current situation, he said, adding that Finland applauds China’s 

positive role in tackling climate change and safeguarding the multilateral trading system. 

Finland will assume the rotating presidency of the EU in the seco nd half of this year. The 

country will take this as an opportunity to promote closer ties between the EU and China, 

Niinisto said. 

After the talks, the two presidents witnessed the signing of cooperation agreements and attended 

the inaugural ceremony of th e 2019 China -Finland Year of Winter Sports. 

During the 1952 Helsinki Olympic Games, the People’s Republic of China made its debut at the 

Olympic Games, and for the first time China’s national flag was raised at the Olympic arena, Xi 

said. 

There is huge pot ential for cooperation on winter sports between the two countries given the high 

complementarity, Xi said while addressing the inaugural ceremony. 

“I believe the 2019 China -Finland Year of Winter Sports will boost the two countries’ sports 

cooperation, inj ect new vitality to people -to -people exchanges, and further advance the future -

oriented new -type cooperative partnership between China and Finland,” Xi said. 

Finland supports China in hosting the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympic Games, Niinisto said, 

adding tha t he is glad Finland will be the first country to launch the Year of Winter Sports with 

China and he believes this will further promote friendship between the two countries. 

China is on its way of becoming a big power in winter sports and Finland is willin g to lend a 

helping hand, Niinisto said. Niinisto is paying a state visit to China from Sunday to Wednes day 

at the invitation of Xi. 257 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

China’s record high foreign trade volume highlights economic resilience 

BEIJING - China’s import and export volume hit a historic high in 2018, a sign that the economy 

remained resilient despite growing external uncertainties. 

“China effectively tackled profound changes in the external environment last year, and the 

foreign trade maintained steady and pos itive growth, reaching a historic high in import and 

export volume,” the General Administration of Customs (GAC) spokesperson Li Kuiwen said 

Monday. 

China’s foreign trade rose 9.7 percent year -on -year to a historic high of 30.51 trillion yuan 

(about 4.5 tr illion U.S. dollars) in 2018. 

The value was 2.7 trillion yuan higher than in 2017, according to the GAC. 

Exports rose 7.1 percent year -on -year to 16.42 trillion yuan last year, while imports grew 12.9 

percent to 14.09 trillion yuan, resulting in a trade su rplus of 2.33 trillion yuan, which narrowed 

by 18.3 percent. 

“China is expected to keep its number -one position in the world in terms of trade in goods,” Li 

Kuiwen told a press conference. 

Li attributed the growth to sound and steady economic fundamentals and a number of policies 

and measures boosting steady foreign trade growth, including lower import tariffs, higher export 

tax rebates and improvement in the business environment. 

In 2018, China maintained stable economic growth and remained a top performer in the global 

economic arena. 

Its GDP rose 6.7 percent in the first three quarters of 2018, putting the economy on track to meet 

the government’s targeted growth of around 6.5 percent for 2018. 

To boost imports, China has cut tariffs for an array of produ cts including automobiles, consumer 

products and medicine this year, lowering the overall tariff rate on imported goods from 9.8 

percent to 7.5 percent. 

A total of 172 countries, regions and international organizations, and more than 3,600 enterprises 

part icipated in the first China International Import Expo, which was held last year from Nov. 5 to 

10 in Shanghai. 258 

Behind the strong foreign trade figures, China’s shifting engines of economic growth are well 

told. 

Exports and imports of products under the gen eral trade category, which has a higher added -

value than processing trade, surged 12.5 percent year -on -year to 17.64 trillion yuan, accounting 

for 57.8 percent of total foreign trade, 1.4 percentage points higher than 2017. 

China’s trade with the European Union, the United States and ASEAN increased 7.9 percent, 5.7 

percent and 11.2 percent respectively, with their combined trade volume accounting for 41.2 

percent of China’s total foreign trade. 

Trade with countries along the Belt and Road registered faster -than -average growth, with the 

trade volume standing at 8.37 trillion yuan, up 13.3 percent year on year. 

“Trade cooperation with Belt and Road countries has become new driving force of China’s 

foreign trade development,” Li said. 

Private enterprises playe d a bigger role, accounting for 39.7 percent of the total foreign trade, up 

1.1 percentage points compared with 2017. 

“Private enterprises contributed more than half to China’s foreign trade growth in 2018, a bright 

spot of China’s foreign trade developmen t,” the spokesperson said. 

Electro -mechanical products remained a pillar of exports, with some high value -added products 

doing well. Exports of metal -working machines, cell phones and automobiles grew 19.2 percent, 

9.8 percent and 8.3 percent respectively. 

Trade growth is more balanced among regions. Less developed regions, including central and 

western China and northeast China, all outpaced the national average. 

Monday’s data also showed China’s trade with the United States totaled 4.18 trillion yuan in 

2018, up 5.7 percent year on year. 

Exports to the U.S. rose 8.6 percent year on year to 3.16 trillion yuan last year, while imports 

from the U.S. dropped 2.3 percent to 1.02 trillion yuan, resulting in a trade surplus of 2.14 

trillion yuan, which widened by 14.7 percent. 

“The widened trade surplus in 2018 shows China and the U.S. are in different development 

stages and both are economically complementary,” Li said. 

For China’s foreign trade outlook in 2019, Li said the biggest challenge was the severe and 

co mplicated external environment, rising protectionism and unilateralism, and slowed global 

economic growth that will drag down multinational trade and investment. 259 

“China’s foreign trade growth would slow in 2019 off a high base due to the complicated and 

severe external environment,” Li told the press. 

But generally speaking, Li said, China’s steady and positive growth momentum would lay a solid 

foundation for the development of foreign trade this year. 

As the country continues to push forward supply -side structural reform and opening up, the 

structure of China’s exports and imports will be further optimized with both quality and 

efficiency improved, according to Li. 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

China sentences Canadian mule to death 

CHINA - A court in China has se ntenced a Canadian to death for drug smuggling, a verdict 

likely to reignite a diplomatic row between the two countries. 

Robert Lloyd Schellenberg was originally given a 15 -year jail term in 2018 but after an appeal 

the court said the sentence was too leni ent. 

Monday’s ruling comes weeks after Canada arrested MengWanzhou, a top official at Chinese 

telecoms giant Huawei, on a request from the US. 

Canada condemned the latest ruling. 

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said: “It is of extreme concern to us as a gove rnment, as it should 

be to all our international friends and allies, that China has chosen to begin to arbitrarily apply 

the death penalty, as in this case facing a Canadian.” 

China was angered by the arrest of MsMeng, 46, the daughter of Huawei’s founder, and the case 

has soured its relations with both Canada and the US. She was granted bail in December. 

China has since detained two Canadian nationals, accusing them of endangering national 

security. 

Life of Huawei’s high -flying heiress What’s going on with Huawei? 

What is Schellenberg’s case? 

He was arrested in 2014 and accused of planning to smuggle into China almost 500lb (227kg) of 

methamphetamine. 

He was sentenced to 15 years in prison in November 2018. But following an appeal, a high court 

in the north -eastern city of Dalian on Monday sentenced the Canadian national to death. 260 

The court also ruled that all of his financial assets must be confiscated. 

“I am not a drug smuggler. I came to China as a tourist,” Schellenberg said just before the verdict 

was a nnounced, the AFP news agency reports. 

He has 10 days to appeal. 

China has denied that it is using its legal system to take hostages as bargaining chips in the 

Huawei case. But for whatever reason China has suddenly begun working hard to push 

Schellenberg’ s case to international prominence, taking the highly unusual step of inviting 

foreign journalists into the court, the BBC’s John Sudworth in Beijing reports. 

And despite the Canadian’s insistence that he is innocent, his retrial lasted just a day, with hi s

death sentence coming barely an hour after its conclusion, our correspondent says. 

What about MengWanzhou? 

She was arrested in Vancouver on 1 December, but was granted bail by a Canadian court several 

days later. A judge in Canada’s western city ruled th at she would be under surveillance 24 hours 

a day and must wear an electronic ankle tag. 

MsMeng is accused in the US of using a Huawei subsidiary called Skycom to evade sanctions on 

Iran between 2009 and 2014. 

She denies any wrongdoing and says she will contest the allegations. US President Donald 

Trump has said he is willing to intervene in the case. 

The arrest came against the background of an increasingly acrimonious trade dispute between the 

US and China. 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

China’s foreign trade hit s historic high in 2018 

BEIJING - China’s foreign trade rose 9.7 percent year on year to a historic high of 30.51 trillion 

yuan (about 4.5 trillion U.S. dollars) in 2018, the General Administration of Customs (GAC) said 

Monday. 

The value was 2.7 trillion y uan higher than that of 2017, according to the GAC. “China 

effectively tackled changes of the external environment last year, and the foreign trade 

maintained stable and positive growth, reaching a historic high in import and export volume,” 

GAC spokesman Li Kuiwen told a press conference. 261 

Exports rose 7.1 percent year on year to 16.42 trillion yuan last year, while imports grew 12.9 

percent to 14.09 trillion yuan, resulting in a trade surplus of 2.33 trillion yuan, which narrowed 

by 18.3 percent. Exports a nd imports of products under the general trade category surged 12.5 

percent year on year to 17.64 trillion yuan, accounting for 57.8 percent of the total foreign trade, 

1.4 percentage points higher than 2017. China’s trade with the European Union, the Unit ed 

States and the ASEAN countries increased 7.9 percent, 5.7 percent and 11.2 percent, 

respectively, with their combined trade volume accounting for 41.2 percent of China’s total 

foreign trade. 

Trade with countries along the Belt and Road registered faster -than -average growth, with the 

trade volume standing at 8.37 trillion yuan, up 13.3 percent year on year. 

“Trade cooperation with Belt and Road countries has become new driving force of China’s 

foreign trade development,” said Li. 

Private enterprises playe d a bigger role, accounting for 39.7 percent of the total foreign trade, up 

1.1 percentage points compared with 2017. 

“Private enterprises contributed more than half to China’s foreign trade growth in 2018, a bright 

spot of China’s foreign trade de velopmen t,” said the spokesman. 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

Beijing city to reinforce greening efforts 

BEIJING - The mayor of Beijing said Monday that more efforts would be made to green the city 

in the new year, including creating more parks, planting more trees and expanding greenbelt 

areas downtown. 

The annual government work report, delivered by Chen Jining at the opening meeting of the 

annual session of the Beijing Municipal People’s Congress, said 1,600 hectares of land would be 

vacated for greening purposes in 2 019. 

The city has planned to add 16,667 hectares of forest this year, in addition to the 17,933 hectares 

completed in 2018, according to the report. 

A total of 1,683 hectares of land were vacated for greening in the last year, Chen said. Another 

28 city le isure parks and 121 mini parks were added, bringing the coverage of parks within a 

radius of 500 meters to 80 percent citywide. 

An area of 66.7 hectares of the “green core” of the city, located in Tongzhou District, has been 

greened in the past year, toget her with the creation of several other wetland parks in and around 

the city, Chen said. 262 

Suburban districts including Yanqing, Huairou and Miyun will step up applications to be 

national -level forest cities through the establishment of a green development fu nd and green 

bonds to attract socia l capital, the report said. 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

Millions of Chinese CVs exposed on cloud server 

CHINA -A database containing resumes of more than 200 million Chinese people has been found 

exposed online. Security firm Hackenproof said the "very detailed" information lacked even the 

most basic security protections. 

Names, mobile phone numbers, email addresses, education histories and many other personal 

details were included in the data trove. Analysis suggested the info rmation was built up by 

"scraping" several Chinese job sites. 

Breach list 

Writing in a blog, Hackenproof research director Bob Diachenko said he initially thought the 

data had been taken from large, classified advert site BJ.58.com. However, in a statement given 

to Hackenproof, BJ.58.com denied it had let the data escape. 

"We have searched all over the database of us and investigated all the other storage, turned out 

that the sample data is not leaked from us," it said. 

"It seems that the data is leaked fro m a third party who scrapes data from many CV websites," it 

added. 

Soon after Mr . Diachenkopublicized the existence of the data cache via Twitter, it was removed 

from the Amazon cloud server where it had been stored. Later analysis suggested it had been 

co pied at least 12 times before being deleted. The data loss is the latest in a series that have 

exposed information about Chinese people. In early January, Beijing police arrested a man who 

was allegedly stole data on five million rail trave lers. The hacker is believed to have targeted the 

widely used 12306 online rail booking system. 

In August 2018, Chinese police were reportedly investigating a data breach that involved 500 

million records about customers of the Huazhu Group, which operates hotels across t he country. 

The data lost included customer registration information, booking records and personal data. 

About 19% of Chinese net users had social media and other accounts hacked or lost passwords, 

reported the Internet Society of China in its 2018 look at online life in the nation. Phishing 

attacks crafted to look like they come from friends were widely used to cat ch people out, said the 

report. 263 

# The Nation, 15 -01 -19 

Rare robin in Beijing spurs Brexit Jokes 

BEIJING -The rare appearance of a European robin in Beijing has caused a stir among Chinese 

nature fans. 

Hundreds of bird -watching photographers flocked to the Beijing Zoo last Friday after word 

spread that a European robin had been spotted there. 

The red -breasted bird is common across Europe but is rarely seen in Beijing - it's only the third 

time one has been recorded in the capital. 

Some birdwatchers have joked the robin might be a "Brexit refugee". 

"It's very rare to see [the European robin] in Beijing," Terry Townshend, founder of Birding 

Beijing told the BBC. 

"Almost 200 photographers camped out for it. I think a lot of people want to [capture it] because 

it's a very photogenic bird and it has that sort of exotic feel." Mr Townshend was among the 200 

photographers who camped out at Beijing Zoo last Fri day. 

Hundreds of photographers camped out for a chance to catch the bird 

He said he found out about the sighting through bird watching groups on WeChat - a messaging 

app in China. 

"A lot of people associate the bird with Britain... [so] someone in the WeCh at group called the 

bird a 'Brexit refugee' because [they joked that it was] escaping the political chaos in the UK," 

said Mr Townshend. 

"Then the name kind of just caught on really." It is not common for robins to migrate and it is 

unclear how this one mi ght have landed so far away from home. 

"It normally lives in Europe [and] Beijing is at least 1,500 miles off where it should normally 

be," said Mr Townshend. "But it's likely that this bird is from the eastern part of Europe and not 

Britain." 

The European robin is, as its name suggests, normally only found in Europe. "We don't really 

know why birds sometimes turn up in odd places, it might be related to weather, when they are 

migrating they could be blown by strong winds." 

However it got there, the Europea n robin is expected to stay in Beijing for some weeks to come. 264 

Mr Townshend said a robin would normally only leave for home at the end of winter. 

"So we would expect it to stay in Beijing for the rest of winter and it would probably disappear 

in March." 

The European robin was in 2015 chosen as UK's first national bird in a po ll of more than 

200,000 people. 

# The News 

# The News, 01 -01 -19 

China Gezhouba, Descon to build Mohmand Dam 

ISLAMABAD: In major development, the Joint Venture of Pakistani Company — Desco n

owned by Adviser to PM on Commerce, Textile, Industry & Production and Investment Abdul 

RazakDawood and Chinese company — China Gezhouba has won the bid for construction of 

Rs309 billions Mohmand Dam with capacity to generate 800MW of electricity on Dece mber 31, 

2018. 

Mohammad Dam is basically the flood control dam and after its construction the dam will be 

able to store 300,000 cusecs of water, and will save Charsadda, Peshawar and Nowshera. The 

cost of the said project in 2003 stood at $1 billion which has now swelled to $3 billion because 

of the inordinate delay in Musharraf regime. 

The said dam if completed on time, the 2010 flood could have been averted and the loss of $10 

billion incurred on account of the flood could have been minimized. During the Musharraf 

regime, the said dam was handed over to a US company – AMZO which did nothing for 8 years 

and inflicted the huge loss of Rs152 billion to Pakistan economy. However, in PPP era the 

project was handed over to Wapda. Soon after that the Wapda arrang ed $6 million from Afd, a 

French development agency for detailed engineering of the project. The construction of Japanese 

and Australian firm carried out the detailed engineering of the project and handed it over to 

Wapda in 2014. 

Wapda Chairman General (R) MozammilHussain confirmed to The News that the Joint Venture 

Descon and China Gezhouba have won the bid and to this effect the contractor will mobilize to 

the site of the project with 10 weeks. “The international competitive bidd ing was held in single 

bid mode and the Joint Venture of Descon and China Gezhoubahas qualified for the project. 

Other joint venture of FWO with Power China also participated the bid which could not win the 

project,” chairman said. 

Wapda has also moved to the site for civil works including carrying out the geo tech, seismic and 

installing the weather stations and constructing the access road. Apart from it, Wapda will itself 265 

construct the colony and basis facilities that will accommodate 6000 employees. Wit h Wapda’s 

this initiative, the construction on the project will be kicked off during the low water flows 

period from December to May of the Swat River. Wapda will also make the Kuafer Dam. “This 

will help reduce the cost of the project as earlier the final ized bidder used to do all such works.” 

Hussain did not stop here rather further said in the same breath disclosing that with this initiative, 

dam will be completed 6 months earlier in April -May 2023. “We are in the process to negotiate 

the winning bidder for further cut in the bid and hopefully Pakistan will be able to make this vital 

project on a very competitive price,” the chairman said, adding that “You can say that Wapda has 

achieved the comfort level for initiating the construction of the project aft er the successful bid of 

the project.” 

On the issue of financing of the project, he said that 37 percent will be given by the federal 

government through PSDP and 63 percent will be arranged through Wapda equity and 

commercial loans. The government in every year will provide Rs17 billion for 6 years’ time for 

Mohmand Dam and Rs30 billion in every year for DiamerBhasha Dam and Wapda will also 

generate the amount of Diamer -Basha dam. “So funding is no more issue for Mohmand Dam.” 

When asked for the acquisition of the land, he said that Wapda has referred Rs864 million to 

KPK after the go -head of the KPK government, tribal leaders, the MNAs of the said 

constituencies wherein the dam side is proposed. He said over 8000 acres of land are required for 

the project a nd the process of purchasing the land is underway. 

The consultancy firm will be finalized soon as its bidding has also taken place and it is in the 

process of evaluation. This will ensure the 60 percent recruitment of local engineers and 40 

percent from ab road. 

However, the top officials in the Ministry of Water and Power said that the project is being 

initiated in haste as its financial closure is yet to be achieved. Its land has not yet been acquired 

and consultancy firm is yet to be finalized. “Moreover the revised PC -1 of the project based on 

the bid of the project is yet to be approved and in the absence of the said pre -requisites the haste 

groundbreaking of the project is beyond our comprehensions.” 

# The News, 02 -01 -19 

China to lend Pakistan $2b 

ISLAMABAD: China has agreed to lend at least $2 billion to Pakistan for helping it boost its 

dwindling foreign exchange and tanking currency, Financial Times reported. 266 

“China’s promise to Pakistan is an indication of their commitment to help us avoid a cri sis. If the 

rupee falls sharply and we need to prevent its slide, we can turn to China,” a senior government 

official in Islamabad was quoted as saying by FT. 

According to Jang reporter, the loan will be commercial and Pakistan will have to pay 8 percent 

interest on it. China has decided in principle that an economic package will be given to Pakistan. 

Discussions are going on in this regard. 

In November, Geo News quoted sources as saying that Pakistan is expected to receive a $6 

billion economic package fro m China during Prime Minister Imran Khan’s visit in November. A 

loan of $1.5 billion and a grant of $1.5 billion are expected to be offered, along with an 

additional package of $3 billion for CPEC. 

Pakistan is also in talks with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a financial bailout 

package 

# The News, 02 -01 -19 

Stocks up 2.5pc as China vows to loan $2bln to troubled Pakistan 

Equities staged grand recovery on first day of the New Year after mutual funds and some of the 

leading investors placed fresh dea ls on undervalued stocks over expectations from China and 

other brotherly countries that showed interest in lending support to boost the reeling economy, 

dealers said. 

Salman Ahmad, director equity sales at Aba Ali Habib, said the market desperately wanted some 

positive development to change gear. 

“Investors heard that China has announced to lend $2 billion for Pakistan to shore up foreign 

exchange reserves and support falling rupee. Another factor which cemented the sentiment was 

the government move to coo l down the political temperature which gave ease to investors,” 

Salman added. 

Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX) benchmark KSE -100 shares index gained 2.51 percent or 929.10 

points to close at 37,995.77 points level. KSE -30 shares index followed suit with a hig h of 3.37 

percent or 579.33 points to end at 17,753.05 points level. 

Of 339 active scrips, 233 moved up, 88 retreated, and 18 remained unchanged. The ready market 

volumes stood at 96.662 million shares, as compared with the turnover of 226.060 billion shar es 

in the previous session. 

Analyst Ahsan Mehanti from Arif Habib Corporations said, “Stocks showed sharp recovery amid 

speculations after China’s financial commitment to lend $2 billion to support falling rupee.” 267 

Ove rsold oil, banking, and fertiliz er scraps outperformed. Investor concerns for political 

uncertainty invited mid -session pressure. 

UAE announcement to deposit $3 billion in SBP, reduction in local POL prices and government 

agreement with banks over issue of Rs200 billion sukuk to resolve cir cular debt crisis played a 

catalytic role in the bullish close, Mehanti added. 

The capital market stayed in green since the start of the session on the first day of 2019, as 

buying spread to all counters because of hefty declines witnessed in the shares du ring the last 

year. 

Though the overall index declined by merely 8.4 percent, the scra ps belonging to all the sectors 

had plunged between 30 and 40 percent, which was e vident from the market capitaliz ation 

declining by $26 billion in 2018. 

The market was bo und to move up after receiving encouraging news that countries like China, 

Saudi Arabia, and UAE wanted to invest $30 billion in coming three years. 

Moreover, sentiment further strengthened on report of foreign newspaper that Pakistan would get 

financial a ssistance from China amounting to $2 billion to boost foreign exchange reserves and 

support falling rupee. 

The highest gainers were Nestle Pakistan, up Rs400.00 to close at Rs9,400.00/share, and 

Pakistan Tobacco, up Rs99.00 to finish at Rs2,999.00/share. 

Companies that booked highest losses were Colgate Palmolive, down Rs80.01 to close at Rs2, 

210.00/share, and Abbott Laboratories down Rs16.97 to close at Rs614.08/share. 

Pakistan Elektron recorded the highest volumes with a turnover of 11.992 billion shares . The 

scrip gained Rs1.16 to close at Rs26.06/share. 

The lowest volumes were witnessed in Millat Tractors Limited, recording a turnover of Rs47,450 

shares, and losing Rs11.51 to end at Rs820.48/share. 

# The News, 03 -01 -19 

China to provide all -round support t o Pakistan 

BEIJING: China has reassured that it will continue to provide all -round support to Pakistan for 

its socio -economic development. 268 

Commenting on the Wednesday media’s reports regarding $ 2 billion aid to Pakistan, the 

spokesperson of the Foreign Mi nistry Lu Kang said, China and Pakistan are all -weather strategic 

partners. 

“China has been and will continue to provide support and assistance to Pakistan's economic and 

social development through assistance, trade, investment and all -round pragmatic coop eration. 

The two sides have actually maintained close communication on relevant cooperation, “he 

added. 

Meanwhile, Chinese media reported that China recently started construction of an export version 

of one of its advanced warships and will deliver it to P akistan as part of a major arms deal, 

according to China State Shipbuilding Corp, a large State -owned defense contractor. 

It said the ship is a version of the Chinese Navy's most advanced guided missile frigate, without 

specifying its type. 

In late Decembe r it said the ship is under construction at its Hudong -Zhonghua shipyard in 

Shanghai, noting it will be equipped with modern detection and weapon systems and will be 

capable of anti -ship, anti -submarine and air -defense operations. 

According to the Pakistan i Navy, the ship's class is Type 054AP, which means it is based on the 

Type 054A of the People's Liberation Army Navy. It previously said four such ships had been 

ordered. 

Once constructed, the warship will be one of the largest and technologically advanced platforms 

of Pakistan's Navy and strengthen the country's capability to respond to future challenges, 

maintain peace and stability and the balance of power in the Indian Ocean region. 

It will also support the Pakistani Navy's initiative of securin g sea lanes for international shipping 

by patrolling distant waters, it said in a statement on its twitter account. 

Type 054A is the best frigate in service with the PLA Navy. Military sources said the ship has a 

fully loaded displacement of about 4,000 me tric tons and is equipped with advanced radars and 

missiles. About 30 Type 054As are in service with the PLA Navy, observers said. 

# The News, 04 -01 -19 

Pak -China ties not to be affected by negative reports 

BEIJING: Officials from Pakistan and China have categorically stated that the misleading 

media’s reports about the debt could never affect the two countries’ growing socio -economic 

partnership under the economic corridor project. 269 

Hoping that the media will show positivity and due care in their reporting , the officials from both 

sides in their separate statements issued in Islamabad and Beijing reiterated that the CPEC is 

meant to ensure better future of their people. It could never be a burden on their economy, as was 

being portrayed by some media’s circ les. Chinese newspaper, the Global Times quoting the 

officials said Pakistan; China relations will never be affected by an imaginary debt trap. It was 

reported by a section of the press that Pakistan owes $40 billion to China to repay debt and 

dividends on the latter's investments made under the CPEC, raising concerns about a "debt trap," 

whereas the actual figure is only $6.017 billion. The Chinese Embassy in Islamabad stated last 

week that China provided concessional loans of $5.874 billion for major Paki stani transportation 

projects. The Pakistani government will repay only $6.017 billion, including interest, to China. 

This was also confirmed by the Pakistan’s Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Planning and 

Development. The officials, while clarifyin g the facts noted recent media reports questioning the 

viability of CPEC, claiming that it would create an unbearable debt burden for Pakistan. Such 

media reports are often one -sided, distort facts, and are based on irresponsible statements by 

individuals who either have no understanding of CPEC or are driven by ulterior motives. They 

pointed out that the CPEC projects are financed through a composite financing package 

comprising long -term government -to -government concessional and preferential loans, as wel l as 

grants from the Government of China. Repayments on these loans would not commence in the 

immediate future. It is because of the favorable financing arrangements that Pakistan opted for 

Chinese investment under CPEC. China stepped forward to support Pa kistan’s development at a 

time when foreign investment had dried up, and economic activity was being crippled by energy 

shortages and infrastructure gaps. According to the officials, the CPEC has provided enormous 

opportunities for Pakistan to grow economi caly. 270 

# The News, 04 -01 -19 271 

# The News, 06 -01 -19 

# Xi orders China armed forces to enhance combat readiness 

BEIJING: President Xi Jinping on Friday ordered the Chinese armed forces to enhance their 

combat readiness from a new starting point and open new ground for developing a strong 

military. 

Xi, also General Secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee and 

Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC), made the instruction at a CMC meeting 

held here. 

Hailing the landmark, pionee ring and historic military achievements since the 18th CPC National 

Congress, Xi said the armed forces had resolutely safeguarded national sovereignty, security and 

development interests and withstood complex situations and severe struggles. 

"The world is facing a period of major changes never seen in a century, and China is still in an 

important period of strategic opportunity for development," he said, warning that various risks 

and challenges were on the rise. 

The entire armed forces should have a correc t understanding of China's security and 

development trends, enhance their awareness of danger, crisis and war, and make solid efforts on 

combat preparations in order to accomplish the tasks assigned by the party and the people, Xi 

said. 

Regarding combat ca pability as the only and fundamental criterion, Xi ordered all work, forces 

and resources to focus on military preparedness and ensure a marked progress in this regard. 

He emphasized the armed forces' ability to respond quickly and effectively to contingen cies, 

asking them to upgrade commanding capability of joint operations, foster new combat forces, 

and improve military training under combat conditions. 

The party and government departments and agencies at the central and local levels are required 

to suppo rt the defense and military development. 

XuQiliang, a CMC Vice Chairman, presided over the meeting, and Zhang Youxia, the other 

CMC Vice Chairman, announced the decision to give awards to 10 model units and 20 model 

individuals. They received awards from l eaders, including Xi. 

Xi also signed a mobilization order for the training of armed forces, the CMC's first order in 

2019. 272 

# The News, 06 -01 -19 

‘China could put reforms on hold to boost economy’ 

Beijing: President Xi Jinping hailed China´s "reconstructive reforms" in a speech, but the sorely 

needed changes could be put on ice in favor of averting a potentially devastating economic 

downturn. The way ahead is further complicated by a volatile trade dispute with the United 

States that -- if unresolved -- will add to the burden of Beijing´s policymakers as they seek to 

fuel an economy that is running out of steam. 

Beijing has for years come under pressure to introduce much -needed reforms to the country´s 

infrastructure and lumbering state -owned enterprises as pa rt of a drive to tackle a burdensome 

debt mountain and transform its growth engine from investment and exports to domestic 

consumption. 

But Gene Fang from ratings agency Moody´s told AFP: "When trade -offs between reforms and 

growth arise, we expect that th e priority will more often be given to supporting growth." 

Ten years ago China unleashed the full power of its financial arsenal by introducing massive 

stimulus measures, which helped Beijing avert the worst of the financial crisis engulfing the rest 

of th e world. However, that helped sow the seeds of today´s economic troubles, with debt at 

alarming levels and necessary economic reforms not addressed as leaders focused on maintaining 

stable growth and employment. 

Now, with the global economy stuttering, a slowdown in key export markets is denting a crucial 

source of income while the country is also struggling with a plethora of structural problems such 

as an ageing -- and now shrinking -- population, a dwindling pool of rural workers, overcapacity 

and air p ollution. 

And then there is the trade war with the United States, which has magnified the problems while 

sending shudders through global markets. 

"The Chinese economy is struggling, the debt mess is unresolved and the impact from the US 

tariffs has barely begun," said Bill Bishop, an expert on China, who added the Communist Party 

will do "everything it can to juice the economy" with "multiple forms of stimuli". 

"Whether or not significant economic reforms will now also be forthcoming, and not just more 

prom ises, is the trillion -dollar question," he said. 

Xi and US President Donald Trump may have agreed a temporary truce in their multi -billion -

dollar stand -off -- and Beijing Friday announced face -to -face talks will begin next week -- but 

there is little optim ism the row will be brought to an end any time soon. 273 

In the absence of a breakthrough in current negotiations, "the US -China trade conflict will weigh 

on growth in China and on the wider Asia -Pacific region, via a slowdown in Chinese demand", is 

according to analysts Oxford Economics. 

The impact of the trade row came in to full view this week when Apple announced a shock cut in 

its revenue forecast for the December quarter blaming the steeper -than -expected "economic 

deceleration" in China and emerging marke ts and citing the China -US frictions. 

While analysts still believe China -- which last month celebrated 40 years since opening up to the 

world -- should still achieve its growth target of 6.5 percent for 2018 that would be the weakest 

rate in almost three decades. That after an average growth rate of 9.7 percent a year between 

1978 and 2015. 

# The News, 06 -01 -19 

‘Democratic allies should rally to protect Taiwan from China’ 

TAIPEI: Taiwan’s president called on allies to help defend its sovereignty on Saturday, accusing 

China of waging a "deliberate campaign" to undermine the island’s democracy by refusing to 

talk to her government. 

Relations between Taiwan and China have been at a low since Tsai came to power in 2016, 

refusing to acknowledge that the self -ruled island is part of "one China". 

Beijing unilaterally cut off communication with her administration and stepped up military drills 

around the island as well as poaching several of its dwindling diplomatic allies. 

Tsai’s comments capped a week of escalating rhetoric between the two neighbors, sparked by a 

landmark speech from Chinese president Xi Jinping on Wednesday. 

Xi described Taiwan’s unification with the mainland as "inevitable" and reiterated Beijing’s 

willingness to use force if necessary, especially if Taiwan ever declares formal independence. 

He also said Beijing was willing to talk to political parties and groups in Taiwan that recognized 

their "one China" principle -- a reference to the main opposition parties. 

Tsai hit out at Beijing’s willingness to bypass her elected government as "a continuation of its 

deliberate campaign to undermine and subvert our democratic process and create division in our 

society". 

"At a time when we are exhausting efforts to avoid provocation and miscommunication, China’ s

actions are unhelpful and contrary to democratic practices," she said in a briefing with foreign 

media on Saturday. 274 

China still sees Taiwan as part of its territory to be reunified, despite the two sides being ruled 

separately since they split in 1949 af ter a civil war. 

The schism is one of profound geopolitical importance. 

The United States diplomatically recognizes China over Taiwan but it remains Taipei’s 

staunchest political and military ally. 

Tsai said China’s increasingly muscular rhetoric towards Taiwan was a test of whether 

democratic allies would protect each other. 

"If the international community fails to speak up for and assist Taiwan under the circumstances 

we face today, I have to ask which country will be next?" she asked. 

Xi has been touting the "one country, two systems" model for Taiwan. 

A version was implemented in Hong Kong after Britain handed the city back to China in 1997 as 

a way to guarantee the kind of liberties and government unseen on the authoritarian mainland. 

But sliding freedo ms in Hong Kong in recent years have done little to endear the Taiwanese 

people to the idea of a similar deal for them from Beijing. 

Tsai said it would be impossible for her government or any Taiwanese politician to accept Xi’s 

recent remarks "without betr aying the trust and will of the people of Taiwan". 

Taiwanese frustration has also been compounded recently by allegations from the government 

that Beijing is not doing enough to inform its neighbor about an outbreak of African swine fever 

on the mainland. 

Taiwan’s livestock exports have in the past been hammered by disease outbreaks from the 

mainland. 

The discovery this week of infected pig carcasses on a Taiwanese island close to China’s 

shoreline -- which authorities believed floated over from the mainlan d -- has only added to a 

sense of urgency and anger in Taipei. 

"I urge the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) to intervene and call on countries in the 

region to engage in outbreak prevention," Tsai said. 275 

# The News, 07 -01 -19 

In space, the US sees a rival in China 

WASHINGTON: During the Cold War, US eyes were riveted on the Soviet Union´s rockets and 

satellites. But in recent years, it has been China´s space programs that have most worried US 

strategists. 

China, whose space effort is run by the Peop le´s Liberation Army, today launches more rockets 

into space than any other country, 39 last year, compared to 31 by the United States, 20 by 

Russia and eight by Europe. On Thursday it landed a space rover on the dark side of the Moon, a 

first by any count ry, and plans to build an orbiting space station in the coming decade. In the 

decade after that, it hopes to put a Chinese "taikonaut" on the Moon to make the first moonwalk 

since 1972. China now spends more on its civil and military space programs than do Russia and 

Japan. Although opaque, its 2017 budget was estimated at $8.4 billion by the Organization for 

Economic Cooperation and Development. That´s far less than the $48 billion the United States 

spends on its military and civilian space programs, says analyst Phil Smith of consulting firm 

Bryce Space and Technology. But it is more than double Russia´s civilian space budget, which 

has been slashed to $3 billion. Overcoming a lag of several decades, China´s leaders have very 

methodically replicated the st ages of space development achieved by other great nations: a first 

satellite in 1970, its first manned space mission in 2003, the first docking of a manned spacecraft 

to an orbiting module in 2012, and activation of the BeiDou satellite navigation system, China´s 

answer to GPS."If they continue on this trajectory, they´re going to quickly eclipse Russia in 

terms of their space technology capabilities," said Todd Harrison, an expert on military space 

programs at the Center for Strategic and International Stu dies in Washington.China currently 

poses no threat to the commercial satellite launch market, which remains dominated by 

companies including US -based SpaceX and Europe´s Arianespace, and Russia. Nor has China´s 

progress in space exploration eclipsed that o f the US.NASA´s head congratulated China on its 

Chang´e -4 Moon landing but a 2011 US law bars space cooperation with Beijing, although 

Congress could lift that restriction. 

The real rivalry is in two areas: in the short term, military uses of space; and lo ng -term, the 

exploitation of resources in space. The mining of minerals or water on the Moon or on asteroids, 

notably to produce fuel for rockets, is still a long way off, but American start -ups are already 

working on it. Unlike the Cold War, the new conqu est of space is unfolding largely in a legal 

vacuum. 

In the 1960s and ´70s, Washington and Moscow negotiated several treaties on space, principally 

to guarantee scientific cooperation and to ban weapons of mass destruction in space. "The 

treaties are too v ague to be really certain what the legal result is for something like space 

mining," said Frans von der Dunk, a professor of space law at the University of Nebraska -

Lincoln. 276 

Moreover, they have been overtaken by new military technologies: anti -satellite la sers, 

cyberattacks, electronic jamming, and land -based anti -satellite missiles -- like the one China 

tested in 2007. Laws of war govern conflicts on Earth, but there is no equivalent for space. And 

unanswered questions abound. If one satellite collides wit h another in space, does that constitute 

an "attack"? What would be a proportional response? Civilian satellites should be protected from 

reprisals but what about satellites with dual civilian and military uses? How does a nation 

respond to a cyberattack o f uncertain origin? -

# The News, 08 -01 -19 

China, Pakistan back early settlement of Afghan issue 

BEIJING: China and Pakistan are consistently engaged in bringing Taliban on negotiating table, 

seeking peace and stability in the region. 

According to a report, published in the Chinese officials newspaper, the Global Times on 

Monday, China, Pakistan being close friend worked together for the negotiated settlement of the 

Afghan issue. Both are availing all possible opportunities for the early settlement of the iss ue, the 

report said quoting diplomatic sources. 

China's role as a facilitator will be acceptable to the government and the Taliban because it has 

always seen Afghanistan as a partner country. A stable Afghanistan is also inevitable for China's 

security and economy. Unrest in Afghanistan is a threat to the entire region and China cannot 

afford such instability in its neighborhood. It ought to engage in Afghanistan for its own national 

and economic stability. 

The added, "Instability in Afghanistan has a direc t impact on the security of China's western 

provinces, especially Xinjiang. The East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM), which seeks 

independence for Xinjiang, is believed to be running training camps in the Wakhan Corridor and 

entering Xinjiang through Afg hanistan's Wakhan to radicalize Uyghurs Muslims or stage attacks 

in China. 

The ETIM, which is also linked to the Taliban, is a serious threat to China's security. Currently, 

China is Afghanistan's biggest investor. During 2002 -13, China gave $240 million i n aid to 

Afghanistan. In 2014, it gave $80 million in aid and promised an additional $240 million over 

the next three years. In September 2017, China extended $90 million for development projects in 

Afghanistan's Badakhshan Province. 277 

# The News, 08 -01 -19 

Abraaj nears dealto offload K -Electric stake to Chinese group 

DUBAI: Abraaj is close to reaching an agreement with the Pakistan government that will allow 

the failed emerging markets private equity firm to sell its 66 percent stake in Karachi -based K -

Elec tric to a Chinese group, the Financial Times reported. 

Two years ago, the company’s sale price to Shanghai Electric Power was set at about $1.8 

billion, which would have earned Abraaj about $450 million. Now the deal, which had been held 

up by regulatory a pprovals, is being renegotiated, probably at a lower price, according to senior 

people at Abraaj and people close to the transaction. 

The proposed sale is still likely to prove the biggest source of recovery funds for Dubai -based 

Abraaj’s creditors and wil l also provide some money to investors, the people added. 

“There is more momentum than ever before,” one Abraaj executive said. Abraaj was once the 

Middle East’s largest buyout fund with close to $14 billion of assets under management. It was 

sent into a d eath spiral last year after investors accused the indebted firm of misusing funds. 

The company and its Pakistani -born founder, ArifNaqvi, have denied any wrongdoing. 

Liquidators have since been negotiating to sell assets to recover $1.1 billion in debts. 

In recent months, Naqvi has been using his connections with the new Pakistan government of 

Prime Minister Imran Khan to salvage the transaction, even though it comes too late to save 

Abraaj itself. 

Naqvi has described as erroneous claims that he was one of the biggest funders of Khan’s 

unsuccessful 2013 election campaign. 

“The bureaucracy under the previous administration was the biggest obstacle to closing the 

deal,” says one person with direct knowledge of the matter. “But this government is stronger.” 

At the end of December, Shanghai Electric informed the Pakistan Stock Exchange that it 

intended to make a revised offer for a majority of the utility, which is a critical supplier of 

electricity to Karachi, a city with a population of nearly 15 million and ri sing. 

That announcement followed a meeting between Shanghai Electric, Khan and Naqvi in 

Islamabad. 278 

The reduced valuation is in part due to a change in the tariffs that utilities are allowed to charge 

introduced before the original sale was agreed. In recen t months, Chinese engineers have started 

work at K -Electric amid fears there could be more power cuts when demand overwhelms supply, 

especially in the hot months. 

“They are terrified if there is a lack of improvement in the technical infrastructure,” the person 

adds. The sale is part of an ever -growing number of transactions between Chinese interests and 

Pakistani companies. Chinese infrastructure companies are building ports, power plants, roads 

and railways as an initiative, which is expected to see abou t $65 billion in spending over five 

years. 

—An a rrangement with Financial Times. 

# The News, 09 -01 -19 

Chinese delegation visits museum, historic sites 

PESHAWAR: A 20 -member delegation from China on Tuesday visited the Peshawar Museum 

and other historic places in the provincial capital. 279 

They evinced a keen interest in the findings and discoveries of Buddhism and Buddhist heritage. 

General Manager Tourist Information Centers (TICs) Muhammad Ali Syed welcomed the 

Chinese delegation and garlanded the visitin g guests. Curator Muhammad Asif briefed the 

visiting dignitaries on the archaeological sites in Peshawar, Buddhism, a gallery of Buddhist 

statues, antiques and artifacts. They said there were over 6,000 archaeological and heritage sites 

in Khyber Pakhtunkh wa, where research was being carried out to revive these sites properly. 

“The followers of Buddhism would find a treasure trove of the Buddhist statues and heritage 

after thorough research and revival of these sites,” Muhammad Asif told the delegation. 

He said the visit of foreign dignitaries was meant to highlight the importance of heritage and 

archaeological sites related to Buddhism in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa besides promoting religious 

tourism in the province. He added that the government had taken a number of steps for attracting 

foreign tourists, scholars and researchers to the province. The official said a comprehensive 

policy had been evolved for preserving and protecting the archaeological sites and places in 

Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 

He said that the initiati ves were being taken to carry out the excavation on archaeological sites 

along modern techniques and methods. 

The official mentioned the latest discoveries and the rich Gandhara heritage in various parts of 

the province. 

The delegation also visited histori c Masjid Mahabat Khan, QissaKhwani Bazaar, Sarafa Bazaar 

(AndarShehr), GhantaGhar, ChowkYadgar and other sites in the city. 

The foreign visitors said that Peshawar was a historic and safe city. They said the people of 

Peshawar and elsewhere in Khyber Pakht unkh wa were hospitable and friendly. 

# The News, 11 -01 -19 

CPEC plays key role in generating jobs for Pakistanis 

BEIJING: Approximately 1.2 million jobs could be created indirectly in Pakistan because of 

agreed projects under the China -Pakistan Economic Corri dor (CPEC), experts said here on 

Thursday. 

The CPEC has been blamed for causing a debt trap and economic distress in Pakistan, but facts 

have proved that the recent surge in Chinese investment is yielding employment benefits. 

This is a hard -won achievement , but 1.2 million jobs aren't enough. While the first phase of the 

CPEC concentrated on infrastructure projects, the second part should focus on employment 

creation by setting up special economic zones (SEZs) and supporting economic integration. 280 

According to the report, the CPEC needs to accelerate the shift of its focus to provide more jobs 

for Pakistani people. Although there has been much controversy about the CPEC over issues 

such as an uneven distribution of interests among Pakistani people, the projec t can only move 

forward. But it won't be plain sailing due to challenges such as Pakistan's foreign exchange crisis 

and security problems, and people should be prepared for potential setbacks. However, as long as 

the CPEC creates a lot of jobs, it will win the favor of Pakistani people. 

The construction of transportation infrastructure under the CPEC framework has created many 

jobs for local people. This is obviously good news for the country's poverty alleviation 

campaign. However, infrastructure work provides mainly limited -term employment. 

It takes time to complete infrastructure construction, but the country will see a substantial 

decrease in job creation in the future if it relies heavily on infrastructure construction to generate 

employment. With about 200 million people, Pakistan needs long -term employment 

opportunities. -

# The News, 12 -01 -19 

Trade wars 

The past three days US and China negotiators have met in Beijing to try one last time before a 

true trade war erupts between them in March 2019. Hig her level trade negotiators will follow up 

in Washington in coming weeks. 

What follows is the first of a 2 -part history and analysis of Trump trade strategy, which 

addresses events from the initiation of Trump’s trade offensives in March 2018 to December 

2018, with predictions for 2019. In part 1, US trade policy under Trump in 2018 is compared 

with similar US trade offensives under Nixon in the 1970s, targeting Europe, and Reagan in the 

1980s targeting Japan. The historical parallels situate US trade polic y as an important, often 

over -looked element in the evolution of US Neoliberalism. 

“Trade War! Trade War! When Trump pre -announced on March 2 his plan to impose tariffs on 

steel and aluminum imports, the mainstream press immediately began hyping the line t hat trade 

war was looming on the horizon. Panicking, investors ran like lemmings over the stock market 

cliff after the steel tariff announcement; US allies huffed and puffed, promising tit -for -tat tariff 

responses on US agricultural goods or commercial air craft; Trump’s traditional elite advisors, 

like Gary Cohn, former CEO of Goldman Sachs investment bank and head of Trump’s economic 

council, resigned later that week – no doubt in part due to frustration and disagreement over 

Trump’s unilaterally announced tariff. 

At week’s end, on March 8, 2018, Trump proposed to implement steel and aluminum tariffs 

universally, across the board, affecting all importers to the US.: 25% tariffs on steel imports and 281 

10% on Aluminum. The big 5 US steel importers are Canada, M exico, South Korea, Brazil, and 

Germany –collectively responsible for $15 billion a year in steel imports. Canada, Russia and the 

United Arab Emirates are the major aluminum importers. (Worth noting, for 2017 steel imports 

China is well down the pack, tenth or eleventh on the list, contributing only 2.2% of US steel, 

importing in the millions of dollars annually – not billion – and mostly semi -finished steel goods 

used by US manufacturers for fabricating final goods produced in the US.) When announced on 

Mar ch 8, Trump argued there would be no countries exempted from the 25% tariffs on steel and 

10% on aluminum. That quickly changed. 

By mid -March, Canada and Mexico were temporarily exempted from the tariffs, even though 

they were among the top four largest st eel importers to the US, with Canada largest and Mexico 

fourth largest. Thereafter, Brazil (second largest steel importer), Germany, and others steel 

importers were exempted. And Canada, by far the largest aluminum importer to the US, 

accounting for 43% of US aluminum imports, was exempted as well. 

South Korea, the third largest steel importer last year, was exempted from steel tariffs 

permanently, as it quickly renegotiated its 2012 free trade deal with the US. Moreover, no other 

significant tariffs were i mposed on South Korea as part of the bilateral treaty revisions. What the 

US got in the quickly renegotiated US -South Korea free trade deal, was more access for US auto 

makers into Korea’s auto markets. And quotas on Korean truck imports into the US. 

Korea n auto companies, Kia and Hyundai, had already made significant inroads to the US auto 

market. US auto makers have become dependent on US truck sales to stay afloat; they didn’t 

want Korean to challenge them in the truck market as well. Except for these au to agreements, 

there were no major tariffs or other obstructions to South Korea imports to the US. Not 

surprising, the South Koreans were ecstatic they got off so easily in the negotiations. Clearly, the 

US -South Korea deal had nothing to do with Steel or Aluminum. If anything, it was a token 

adjustment of US -Korea auto trade and little more. 

So if the Korean deal was a ‘big nothing’ trade renegotiation, and if virtually all the US major 

steel and aluminum importers have been exempted worldwide, what’s Trum p’s new trade policy 

aggression all about? US steel and aluminum imports combined make up only $47 billion – a

fraction of total US imports of $2.36 trillion in 2017. 

Was the steel -aluminum tariffs announcement just another example of Trump bombast, launch ed 

via tweets from the second story of the White House at 3am, to be followed by a quick retreat? 

Was the South Korean agreement a template and a big ‘softball’ for later negotiations with US 

trade allies – Mexico, Canada, Europe? Was it Trump shooting off his mouth and then retreating 

following pressure from his advisors and US business interests? Was the tariff announcement a 

‘stalking horse’ for something bigger? Perhaps the tariffs were a cover for domestic political 

objectives – aimed either at agitati ng and mobilizing Trump’s political base in ‘red state’ 

America in preparation for midterm US elections in November 2018 or even a Trump decision to 282 

fire special investigator counsel Mueller in coming weeks? Playing the ‘economic nationalist’ 

card and mobi lizing his base, by initiating new tariffs and talking of a ‘trade war’, would serve 

both Trump domestic political objectives. 

For polls show Trump’s steel -aluminum tariffs announcement played well in the Midwest, the 

great plains states and the South; and especially in those steel and mining towns of Michigan, 

Ohio, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Minnesota – i.e. those key swing states that gave him the 

narrow margin of victory in the 2016 elections! Even if he quickly shelved the tariffs, the media 

hype sen t the message Trump wanted to his base: he was doing something about the decades -

long loss of steel and mining jobs in those regions since the 1980s. In short, how much of the 

steel -aluminum tariffs were for domestic political consumption and how much not? 

That question applies as well to the subsequent trade actions by the Trump administration. By the 

end of March, given all the exemptions, it became clear the real target of Trump’s trade offensive 

was China and not the rest of US allies. 

A closer look at Trump administration statements since March 2018 reveals that Trump’s anti -

China trade offensive has had less to do with China general imports to the US and more about 

US next generation technology transfer by US corporations to China. Next gen technologie s like 

Artificial Intelligence (AI), G5 wireless networks, and similar cyber -security and militarily 

strategic tech now in development. 

As Trump’s new chair of his Economic Council, Larry Kudlow, put it in March, “There’s no 

trade war. All we’re trying to do is protect US technology”. Kudlow added a month later, in early 

April, “Sometimes you have to use tariffs to bring countries to their senses”. Tariffs are the 

tactic, not the strategic policy objective. And if trade deficits are not the primary issue, a nd tariffs 

are only the tactic, then what is the strategic objective? Its technology transfer and domestic 

politics. Perhaps the US defense sector, in particular the NSA and Trump’s military generals -

heavy administration, are playing a greater role in the US -China trade war in the background 

than is thus far noted by the media. And not enough attention is being given to the role of 

domestic political events as well. 

Put another way, at the level of appearance, the US trade deficit and China imports to the U S

may be the target for purposes of public opinion. But behind the appearance, it’s more likely that 

US domestic politics plus US long term military planning are the two more important drivers 

behind Trump’s emerging trade war. All of Trump’s tariffs and s ubsequent trade measures are 

being invoked based on an obscure ‘national security’ clause in US trade legislation. And China 

is increasingly the target, as tariffs and other measures are suspended and reduced for US trading 

partners – with the exception of China – as the US pursues a soft trade ‘offensive’ against all its 

other trading partners. 

This article has been excerpted from: ‘Trump’s Deja Vu China Trade War’. 283 

# The News, 12 -01 -19 

China’s moon rover prepares for a rough ride on the dark side 

BEIJING: China on Friday hailed its historic mission to the far side of the moon as a "complete 

success" so far but said new challenges await its rover as it explores rugged terrain. 

The Chang´e -4 probe, named after a moon goddess, made the world´s first soft landi ng on the 

moon´s "dark side" on January 3, a major step in China´s ambitions to become a space 

superpower. A rover dubbed Yutu -2, or Jade Rabbit, the name of the moon goddess´s pet --

successfully separated from the lander and drove onto the moon´s surface about eight hours after 

landing. The mission sent the first panoramic image of its landing site Friday, showing the grey 

moonscape it is exploring and the track marks left by the rover in the lunar soil. 

"From the panorama, we can see the probe is surroun ded by lots of small craters," said Li 

Chunlai, commander -in -chief of the ground application system for the Chang´e -4 mission, 

according to the official Xinhua news agency. Chang´e -4 landed in the Von Karman Crater 

within the South Pole -Aitken Basin. 

The c raters close to the rover, including one that was 20 meters wide with a depth of about four 

meters (13 feet), will pose great challenges when planning its route, Li said. The China National 

Space Administration (CNSA) said the initial stage of the mission was a "complete success" after 

the lander and the rover sent back images via the Queqiao relay satellite that beams data b ack to 

Earth. 

# The News, 12 -01 -19 

Karzai lauds China, Pakistan for Afghan peace efforts 

BEIJING: Former Afghan President Hamid Karzai s aid China and Pakistan have been making 

sincere efforts over the years for seeking a negotiated settlement of the Afghan issue. 

Karzai who is currently in China echoed President Xi Jinping's opinion, saying China has been a 

steadfast friend and a very good neighbor to the Central Asian nation. "China has contributed to 

Afghanistan's well -being and stability, giving us economic assistance," he said. "We value very 

highly the decades of Afghan -China relationship, and especially China's contributions in 

Afghan istan in the past 18 years, which have been very significant. In their neighbor, they highly 

value the role of China and Pakistan in the peace process. 

In an interview with the Chinese media, Karzai added that Afghanistan sees China as having an 

extremely important role in peace and reconciliation in the country as China has all three 

elements required for this role. 284 

"China is a neighbor. China is a friend of both Afghanistan and Pakistan. China is a major world 

power," he said, adding that China has the ca pacity, means, and connections to contribute to 

Afghan peace and stability. 

Karzai said he believed the trilateral dialogue mechanism between China, Afghanistan and 

Pakistan will play an important role in easing the situation in Afghanistan, improving rela tions 

between Afghanistan and Pakistan and promoting regional peace by controlling terrorism and 

extremism.The Afghan side welcomed the trilateral mechanism and appreciated the Chinese 

government's efforts to make it work. 

"Since there is now a new effort by the United States to bring peace to Afghanistan, we hope that 

the US will seek China's assistance in this and work together with China, our other big 

neighbors, and major power Russia," he said. "So, the three joining hands will surely make 

contribution s to Afghan peace and stability." 

Karzai also spoke highly of the Belt and Road Initiative proposed by Xi. Afghanistan was one of 

the earliest countries to support the initiative. Chinese businesses have been involved in the 

mining and the oil and gas sect ors in Afghanistan. In 2008, a consortium launched by China 

Metallurgical Group and Jiangxi Copper won the contract to recover resources from the Mes 

Aynak copper mine in Afghanistan, which Afghan authorities said contains the world's second -

largest copper deposit. Afghanistan welcomes China's investment in Afghanistan, and the 

country is seeking more Chinese involvement in the Afghan economy, he said. Karzai also 

welcomed Xi's proposal to build a community with a shared future for mankind, saying that it i s

a "tremendously good vision". 

# The News, 12 -01 -19 

China declares region bordering Pakistan an open place 

ISLAMABAD: Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang has announced that its far western 

region’s Xinjiang is an open place. 

The spokesman this said in a briefing in Beijing. The region is bordering with Pakistan. He 

cautioned those who would visit to “abide by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and 

refrain from interfering in others’ internal affairs or undermining others’ sovereignty.” The y

should adopt an objective and unbiased attitude and avoid buying one -sided stories or making 

preconceptions. “We would like to remain in contact with the relevant UN agencies and meet 

each other halfway,” he said. Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Hua Chunying also hit 

back against fifteen ambassadors to China who expressed concerns over Xinjiang in a November 

letter, calling their actions “rude and unacceptable.” A small group of foreign journalists were 

taken to Xinjiang as part of China’s plan to sh owcase the far western region’s social and 285 

economic progresses amid increasing international criticism of a systematic crackdown against 

Muslim minority Uyghurs. 

According to reports China recently took diplomats from a dozen countries, including Pakistan, 

with large Muslim populations to Xinjiang where members of the Uyghur community have been 

interned in camps. 

# The News, 13 -01 -19 

China steps up fight against corruption 

BEIJING: President Xi Jinping announced that China will make greater efforts to root out 

corruption from the society and to ensure good governance at all levels. 

He made the announcement at the third plenary session of the 19th CPC Central Commission for 

Discipline Inspection in Beijing. 

The sweeping victory that has been secured in the an ti -graft campaign must be consolidated by 

strengthening deterrence so that officials "don't dare to, are unable to and have no desire to" 

commit acts of corruption, Xi said. 

To this end, anti -corruption efforts in financial fields should be stepped up, par ticularly in key 

projects, areas and positions that concern the overall development and security of the country, he 

said. 

Xi summed up the experiences drawn from 40 years of reform and opening -up in Party building, 

saying the authority and central and unif ied leadership of the CPC Central Committee as well as 

a people -centered approach must be upheld. 

Decisions and plans made by the CPC Central Committee should be implemented in full by each 

and every Party organization, he said, adding that people's intere sts must be safeguarded. 

Stating this year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, 

and is a crucial year for securing a victory in building a moderately prosperous society in all 

respects, Xi added that the country mus t continue to advance full and strict Party self -governance 

and the anti -graft drive. 

He call for improving intra -Party political culture and fi rmly fighting against formality and 

bureaucratic. 

Xi urged leading officials of the CPC Central Committee to scr utinize them and resolutely hold 

back attempts of their family, relatives and others with close connections to them to seek benefits 

by misusing their powers. 286 

Reform of the national supervision system must be strengthened, and Party committees at 

various l evels should hold major responsibility in this regard, he added. 

At the 19th CPC National Congress, Xi vowed to fight graft, saying, "No place has been out of 

bounds, no ground left unturned and no tolerance shown in the fight against corruption." 

# The News , 13 -01 -19 

Chinese Embassy donates four scanners to Customs 

Islamabad: Chinese Embassy in Pakistan has donated four scanners to the Custom Wing of 

Federal Board of Revenue here on Friday. 

According to the statement issued by the FBR, the scanners were handed over by Mr. Chen Wei, 

Counselor of the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Islamabad to DrJawwadUwais 

Agha, Member Customs (Operations), Federal Board of Revenue in the presence of other senior 

officers of Pakistan Customs. The donated scan ners, having value of One million RMB, shall be 

instrumental in supporting the Customs authorities at the airports to effectively utilize non -

intrusive technology in preventing smuggling of contrabands especially currency. The gift of 4 

X-Ray scanners will reaffirm the immutable bonds of friendship and brotherhood between the 

people of Pakistan and China, to strengthen the unbreakable and timeless China -Pakistan 

friendship, and to promote Customs clearance facilitation in Pakistan. 

# The News, 14 -01 -19 

CM wan ts work on hydra l power generation projects expedited 

PESHAWAR: Chief Minister Mahmood Khan has directed for the accelerated execution of 

hydel power generation projects in the province. 

He was presiding over a meeting at the Chief Minister’s Secretariat, said an office handout. 

Advisor to chief minister on Energy Himayatullah Khan, Head of the Strategic Support Unit 

SahibzadaSaeed, Secretary Energy & Power, commissioner Peshawar and other relevant officers 

were there. 

The chief minister said the government would set up a separate model institution for the China -

Pakistan Economic Corridor -related projects in the province. 

He said the Chashma Lift Irrigation Scheme would boost agriculture productivity and self -

sufficiency in food requirement and promote agro -economy. 287 

Mahmood Khan directed to get approval from EPA for 36 megawatt Dral, 17 Mega Watt 

Ranolia, 2.6 Mega Watt Machia. 

He asked the departments to own projects and ensure timely completion of these projects. The 

chief minister said the importance of CPE C should not be overshadowed by other consideration, 

therefore, CPEC would be the focus of our all times attention. 

He directed to continue working on CPEC related projects round the clock as we have to work 

harder for the growth in all sectors in the prov ince. 

Mahmood Khan directed for the early execution and timely completion of hydropower 

generation projects to strengthen the economic base of the province. 

He gave guidelines for the use of electricity to be generated through hydel power projects in the 

province for the industrialization within the province on cheap prices that will attract mass scale 

investment and in the process; this province would record mass scale investment, 

industrialization, jobs creation and overall prosperity. 

The chief minister assured to launch own transmission company. The Gadoon Industrial Estate 

would get 28 megawatt of electricity produced through Pehur hydropower projects of the 

province that would make the industries in the Gadoon industrial estate viable. 

He assured to take up NTDC and CCPA related issues with the federal government. He directed 

for a comprehensive research -oriented plan for the hydel power generation including Chitral 

where 3000 megawatt of electricity could be generated from Chitral alone. 

The chief mi nister also directed for the rapid execution and completion of government to 

government projects that included FWO, Korean projects, Syno -Hydro and KHNP project. 

Widow of Pashto poet appeals to PAL: The widow of noted Pashto poet Azam Khan aka Azam 

Da Kurw ai, 

Has asked the Pakistan Academy of Letters (PAL), Islamabad not to stop her quarterly stipend, 

which she feared may be discontinued because she could not fill in a form sent by the authorities 

concerned. 

ZarPariBibi, 66, told The News that she had recei ved a quarterly stipend on behalf of her 

husband. 

She said she couldn’t fill out a form sent to her by PAL, Islamabad, asking for details of her 

properties and manuscripts of her late husband. 288 

According to her, the form warned that if she did not fill it, her stipend would be stopped from 

next quarter. 

Noted Pashto poet Azam Khan had contributed to Pashto literary magazines and Pashto 

newspapers including Olas, Jamhoor -i-Islam, Laar, Baang -i-Haram and Shahbaz. 

He also wrote features for Radio Pakistan, Peshawar on various social issues. He was 

contemporary of Hamza Baba, Dost Mohammad Khan Kamil, QalandarMomand, and 

AjmalKhattak. 

“My husband Azam Khan was a known Pashto poet and writer and one of his Pashto poetry 

collections titled ‘Da GhalbailZrrahFari yad’ way back in 1963, and another ‘Da WatanMeena’ 

was ready for publication but couldn’t be published owing to his poverty and illness. On 

December 10, 2018, I received two forms from PAL, each asking for details of my husband’s 

manuscripts and properties ,” Pari recalled. She feared she would lose the quarterly stipend, with 

which she could only afford to buy medicines. The elderly woman appealed to the director 

general and PAL Islamabad chairman to take notice of her problem in the wake of her old age 

and sickness and also conduct verification of her husband’s publications and literary 

contributions on its own. 

# The News, 14 -01 -19 

CPEC’s new triumph 

CPEC – the signature project of China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) – is attaining new 

heights. Continuity and expansion in its base are the two elements that have paved the way for 

the success of this multibillion -dollar economic corridor. 

The development voyage was essentially revitalized with the visit of the Chinese foreign 

minister in September, expanded during Prime Minister Imran Khan’s visit to China in 

November, and entered a new phase as the 8th Joint Cooperation Committee (JCC) meeting in 

Beijing was concluded in December. The recent statement of the Chinese Embassy with respect 

to CPEC is a manifest ation of the achievements and mutual trust enjoyed by both countries. 

During PM Imran Khan’s visit to China, the leadership of both countries has reaffirmed their 

complete consensus on CPEC’s future trajectory, the timely completion of its ongoing projects 

and the expansion of mega projects. Correspondingly, the 8th JCC meeting on December 20 

concluded successfully, with the resolve “to make CPEC the heart and soul of mutual 

cooperation and take it forward to the next level” wherein cooperation can be diver sified to 

further trade and industrial cooperation, socioeconomic development, agricultural modernization, 

the development of the maritime sector, people -to -people interaction and knowledge -sharing 

under the ambits of the vision set by our respective gover nments. 289 

The incumbent government accords top priority to the socioeconomic development of Pakistan 

and primarily focuses on uplifting the less -developed regions of the country, which have been 

neglected over the decades. In accordance with the same vision, the scope of CPEC was 

broadened by establishing a separate joint working group (JWG) on “social and economic 

development”. 

Its first meeting was held in Beijing on the sidelines of the JCC meeting that prepared an action 

plan underlining cooperation in ag riculture, education, healthcare, poverty alleviation, water -

supply management and vocational training. The JWG has identified pilot projects to be 

implemented with the Chinese grant in less -developed areas of Pakistan, particularly in 

Balochistan and sout hern Punjab, the northern part of Sindh, the southern parts Khyber 

Pakhtunkhwa, and Gilgit -Baltistan. 

Details that have been revealed so far paint an encouraging picture that highlights agricultural 

cooperation in areas of biotechnology; research in oil cr ops, rice, and wheat; and disease -control 

technologies. In the field of education, it focuses on providing scholarships to Pakistani students 

and building schools. Moreover, the JWG envisages the construction of vocational institutes in 

Gwadar and other pa rts of Pakistan to provide state -of -the -art skills and job opportunities to the 

youth. 

The health -sector initiative involves building Gwadar Hospital and telemedicine support to 

hospitals in Pakistan by means of remote diagnosis and treatment. In addition, China will 

collaborate to install tubewells and solar -powered water filtration plants to provide safe and 

stable water for locals. More importantly, the group aims to learn and emulate China’s rich 

experiences in poverty alleviation by promoting pilot pro jects at the village level. 

The socioeconomic development planned under this JWG will be beneficial on many fronts. We 

should be clear about the fact that CPEC is not a substitute to the Public -Sector Development 

Programme (PSDP). Nevertheless, a healthy c ompetition has lasted and will continue among the 

provinces to hold its proper share in the form of various development projects. With further 

expansions in CPEC’s portfolio, it has now become easier to address a wide range of areas and 

regions across dive rse sectors that impact people’s wellbeing. 

The implementation of socioeconomic projects will specifically bring people to the center of 

economic policies. By setting a clear vision of inclusive development, this mega -regional 

initiative will prove instrum ental in uplifting less -developed areas that were left out deliberately 

or ignored due to its remoteness. People -centric projects would garner popular support for 

CPEC, thereby creating a favorable and friendly environment wherein win -win cooperation 

would jointly flourish. 

Cooperation in the agricultural sector is another milestone achieved during the meeting of the 

CPEC apex body. Pakistan and China have agreed to hold the first meeting of the newly -290 

established Joint Working Group for Agriculture in the f irst quarter of 2019. The agro -

cooperation focuses on attracting investment in the agricultural sector by Chinese agricultural 

and food companies. Investments would be made in Pakistan for input supplies as well as for 

food production, processing, logistic s, marketing and exports in a vertically -integrated way on 

their own or in joint ventures (B2B) with Pakistani companies. This cooperation will help 

Pakistan to accrue a maximum share in China’s food imports worth $58 billion. 

Following the 8th JCC meeting , CPEC has moved towards the implementation of much -needed 

industrialization, with the signing of a framework to attract investment in key industries, 

including textile, petrochemical, iron and steel and automobile. The cooperation will ensure the 

developm ent of special economic zones (SEZs), including the Rashakai SEZ in Khyber 

Pakhtunkhwa, the Dhabeji SEZ in Thatta, the Punjab M3 SEZ in Faisalabad, and the IT SEZ in 

Islamabad. Industrialization will help overcome the trade deficit and expand the export ba se to 

make CPEC a sustainable project. 

Above all, both countries are working on a mechanism that encourages pragmatic planning and 

due financial diligence in selecting projects to optimize the cost -to -benefit ratio and ensure that 

the benefits of CPEC are yielded by everyone in Pakistan. We must all work together to make 

CPEC a gateway for progress and prosperity under the umbrella of “one corridor, many doors”. 

# The News, 15 -01 -19 

Pakistani diplomat visits Xinjiang 

BEIJING: Diplomats from Pakistan and other regional countries visited Xinjiang region last 

week, and got highly impressed by the recent measures taken by the Chinese government for 

ensuring peace and prosperity for their people. 

The regional government of the region has invited diplomatic envoys a nd representatives from 

Pakistan, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, 

Afghanistan, Thailand and Kuwait. 

According to the Chinese media's reports, they visited local markets, farmers, educational 

institutions, mosques, factories and vocational education centers. 

Throughout the trip, members of the group interacted with local vendors, students and workers in 

Xinjiang and learned about the region's progress in maintaining social stability, improving 

people's live lihoods and developing the local economy. They said they expected to cooperate 

with Xinjiang in the fields of culture, tourism, economy and trade. 

At the Grand Bazaar in the regional capital, Urumqi, Mumtaz Zahra Baloch, charge d'affaires at 

the Pakistan e mbassy in China, said Xinjiang's cultural vitality and people's hospitality had 291 

impressed her deeply. A Pakistani businessman at the bazaar told Baloch that he had married a 

Uygur woman and is happy with his life and work in Urumqi. 

At the Xinjiang Islamic Institute, which offers three -year bachelor programs and religious 

training, SameehJohar Hayat, Kuwait's ambassador to China, encouraged the students to learn 

more and contribute what they learn to the development of their country. 

# The News, 15 -01 -19 

Chin a’s US trade surplus hit record in 2018 but tariffs bite 

Beijing: China's trade surplus with the United States hit a record high last year but the country´s 

imports and exports fell in December as the long -running trade war begins to bite in the world's 

nu mber two economy, data showed Monday. 

The surplus with the US is a major source of anger within the Trump administration, which 

imposed tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of Chinese goods last year and has 

warned of more to come. 

Despite the levies, exports to the United States grew 11.3 percent last year while imports rose 0.7 

percent, expanding the surplus to a record $323.3 billion from $275.8 billion in 2017, customs 

data show. 

However, in a sign that the White House´s measures are having an impact, China´s exports to the 

US sank last month. 

The figures come after a US delegation held three days of talks in Beijing last week in the first 

face -to -face meeting since Donald Trump and Chinese leader Xi Jinping in December pledged a 

90 -day truc e to resolve the crisis. 

Trump wants Beijing to buy more American goods to narrow the yawning trade gap and allow 

foreign players better access and protection in the Chinese market. China traditionally imports 

vast quantities of American soybeans in the se cond half of the year, long making it the most 

valuable import from the US. 

But the buying fell off last year after China imposed a 25 percent retaliatory tariff on the 

commodity in the summer. Total imports of soybeans fell 7.9 percent last year to 88 mil lion 

tonnes, customs data showed, with December imports down 40.1 percent from a year earlier. 

"The overall development of China -US trade in 2018 was still relatively normal, but the trade 

surplus did expand slightly," said Li Kuiwen, spokesman for the cus toms administration.
