Title: 'A source of French pride'? Louvre museum's poor conditions prompt outcry

URL Source: https://www.france24.com/en/europe/20250128-source-french-pride-louvre-museum-poor-conditions-prompt-outcry-france-art

Published Time: 2025-01-28T11:58:11+00:00

Markdown Content:
What will become of the Louvre? The prestigious Paris museum has, since last week, been at the heart of a controversy after a private memo detailing the dilapidated state of the building written by the Louvre’s director, Laurence des Cars, leaked to the press.

Des Cars described damage, deterioration and overcrowding in her memo sent to France’s culture minister.

Read more'Saturation point': Louvre boss says leaky, crowded museum needs upgrade

Employees have witnessed such problems first hand. “On a daily basis, we have a lot of problems with water infiltration via rooves and broken pipes,” says Élise Muller, a security guard at the Louvre and national secretary of the Sud Culture union.

“When there is heavy rain, water run off sometimes reaches paintings on display. We have to close off rooms every day. More and more, elevators are also out of order,” she adds. “All our warnings have not been listened to.”

To combat the leaks, staff often “end up putting buckets in offices”, Christian Galani says, representative for the museums’ CGT union and a member of its national board.

But sometimes that is not enough. “It’s not unusual for us to make emergency calls to conservationists so that they can take artworks down,” Muller says.

Particularly bad water leakage in 2023 caused the shutdown, four days after opening, of an exhibition dedicated to French painter Claude Gillot.

Overcrowding
------------

The world’s largest museum is supposed to be able to accommodate 4 million annual visitors after “major work” carried out on the building under former president François Mitterrand’s “Grand Louvre” project from 1981-1993

In 2024, visitor numbers were more than double that, with 8.7 million visitors, 80% of whom were foreign tourists.

President Emmanuel Macron reacted swiftly to the Louvre’s current controversy, announcing a visit to the museum on Tuesday during which he is expected to make announcements about its future.

“The Louvre is a symbol of France. It is a source of French pride. It would be a mistake to remain deaf and blind to the risks that face the museum today,” a statement from his office said on Friday.

It’s a symbolic visit from a president who has himself embraced the symbolism of the Louvre’s iconic setting at the heart of the French capital. In 2017, Macron celebrated his election victory in front of the glass pyramid in the museum’s courtyard.

There is also an irony to the presidential visit. The glass pyramid is the main entrance for the thousands of daily visitors to the museum, and one of its major saturation points, according to the museum director.

“We have a have a real problem with saturation due to the organisation of the reception area, with the dogma established in the 80s of a single entrance via the pyramid,” des Cars told radio station France Info in 2023.

She suggested creating another entrance to the Louvre at the building’s most westerly point, opposite the Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois de Paris church, to ease crowd flows. She also proposed creating a room dedicated to the Louvre’s most famous – and popular – artwork, the Mona Lisa, which draws huge crowds every day.

But both projects would cost money which, despite high visitor numbers and a general admission fee of €22, the Louvre does not have.

Money matters
-------------

Bids for public funding for improvements by the museum have not been successful “because of the state of public finances”, Muller says.

France currently faces a yawning public deficit which, according to former prime minister Michel Barnier, necessitated €200 million in budget cuts. Current Prime Minister François Bayrou has yet to pass a 2025 budget.

For the Louvre, “the 2025 provisional budget presented to the Board of Directors in November envisaged a deterioration of _€_ 52 million compared with the initial 2024 budget”, says Galani.

The museum’s management declined to comment to a request for more information prior to Macron’s visit.

But without public funding, options for bringing more money into the museum are likely to come down to either increasing sponsorship or admission prices.

Culture Minister Rachida Dati has opted for the latter, saying on Thursday said that a differentiated ticketing system will come into place in 2026, meaning visitors from outside the EU will pay more than the €22 entrance fee.

While the CGT describes the new system as “discriminatory”, Dati says it will “help finance this new museum project”.

Meanwhile, the Louvre’s workforce is unsure what to make of the president’s visit on Tuesday, and whether it will bring positive change.

After their complaints about the state of the museum have been ignored for so long, Muller fears Macron will champion the French cultural institution in a bid to boost his reputation, much as critics say he did with the restoration of Notre Dame Cathedral.

“I find his approach deplorable, because it gives the impression that he is taking advantage of serious difficulties,” she says

But Galani hopes more noble motivations will prevail. “I can't bring myself to believe that the president is coming to restore his image because he's losing popularity. We have to think first and foremost about the institution's reputation, because the works of art will outlive us all,” he says.

**_This article was adapted from the original in French._**
