Title: True and False Immigration Narratives

URL Source: https://patriotpost.us/articles/116725-true-and-false-immigration-narratives-2025-04-28

Markdown Content:
Immigration was a driving issue in the 2024 election. Donald Trump won in large part because voters trusted his promises to end the “invasion on our southern border” created by his two opponents, Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Now, the Leftmedia views its mission as undermining his credibility on the issue.

First, a true narrative: Trump has effectively closed the border. Border Czar Tom Homan says illegal crossings are down 96%. That’s incredible success. According to The Daily Wire, Team Trump achieved it “through a combination of policy changes, arrests and deportations, sanctions, and coordination with foreign governments.” One critical policy change was reinstating Remain in Mexico, which requires migrants to wait for asylum claims to be processed _before_ crossing the border instead of after, which is how Team Biden did it.

Another component is actually arresting and deporting illegals, especially criminals. Just over the weekend, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement teamed up with other enforcement agencies to arrest 114 illegals at a Colorado Springs nightclub that Attorney General Pam Bondi says was “frequented by [Tren de Aragua] and MS-13 terrorists.” They’re now on track for deportation.

Remember JD Vance’s master class on handling Leftmedia misinformation? “Martha, do you hear yourself?” he asked ABC News’s Martha Raddatz. “Only a handful of apartment complexes in America were taken over by Venezuelan gangs,” he accurately paraphrased her as saying regarding a case in Colorado. Say hasta luego to some of that gang’s members.

There are many other policy and enforcement facets to Trump’s success, but, ironically, another key ingredient has been the Leftmedia’s false narratives. For years, the media downplayed Biden’s crisis. Now, with each report of Trump’s supposedly heartless deportations and court battles over them, a message is being sent to would-be migrants: Don’t come.

In the last couple of weeks, it’s been the media and Democrats going all in to support the “Maryland man” (read: MS-13 gang member) deported to El Salvador, his home country. Yet another perfect example came over the weekend with the deportation of a couple of illegal aliens. Two mothers were deported to Honduras, and their three birthright citizenship children went with them.

But first, let’s back up to Tom Homan. “Is there a way to carry out mass deportation without separating families?” a very concerned Cecilia Vega asked him on “60 Minutes” not long ago. “Of course there is,” he responded. “Families can be deported together.”

“Promises made. Promises kept,” he now says.

Here’s how NBC News headlined it: “U.S. citizen children, including 4-year-old with cancer, taken to Honduras on mother’s deportation flight, legal advocates say.” Could it get any more heartless than deporting a four-year-old U.S. citizen with cancer?

That’s the reaction the media propagandists want.

“No U.S. citizen child was deported,” Homan said. “Deported means ordered by an immigration judge.” He explained, “The children aren’t deported. The mother chose to take the children with her.” Besides, he added, “Having a U.S. citizen child after you enter this country illegally is not a get out of jail free card.”

Secretary of State Marco Rubio provided context. “If someone’s in the country unlawfully, illegally, that person gets deported,” he said. “If that person is with a two-year-old child, or has a two-year-old child, and says, ‘I want to take my child with me,’ well then what—? You have two choices. You can say, ‘Yes, of course you can take your child, whether they’re a citizen or not, because it’s your child.’ Or you can say, ‘Yes, you can go, but your child must stay behind.’”

He also noted the Leftmedia game of “gotcha,” saying, “And then your headlines would read, ‘U.S. holding hostage two-year-old, four-year-old, seven-year-old, while mother deported.’”

Instead of reporting the truth, he said, the media “make it sound like ICE agents kicked down the door and grabbed the two-year-old and threw him on an airplane. That’s misleading. That’s just not true.”

> .@SecRubio nukes @kwelkernbc on the latest misleading Fake News hoax: “Three U.S. citizens ages 4, 7, and 2 were not deported — their mothers, who were illegally in this country, were deported. The children went with their mothers! … The parents make that choice.” pic.twitter.com/IJt1Lz1xWN
> 
> — Rapid Response 47 (@RapidResponse47) April 27, 2025

When it comes to crime, the Left says what matters most isn’t the law but the victimhood hierarchy. _Ah, you stole the bread because you were hungry. Oh, well, you looted that TV because you felt really oppressed by racism. You came here (illegally) for asylum, had a kid, and now you get to stay no matter what. No worries; carry on._

No. If you don’t want to be deported, don’t come here illegally. _That’s_ Rule of Law. _That’s_ due process.

Fortunately, even as hard as the Leftmedia pushes the propaganda, a majority of Americans still back President Trump. A CBS News poll shows that by a 12-point margin (56%-44%), Americans approve of “the Trump administration’s program to find and deport immigrants who are in the U.S. illegally.” That could change, of course, and the media will keep trying to change it on behalf of Democrats who really want power back in 2026.

_Follow Nate Jackson on X/Twitter._
