Title: The anti-Muslim hate directed at Zohran Mamdani is not about defeating him-it’s about inciting violence against him

URL Source: https://deanobeidallah.substack.com/p/the-anti-muslim-hate-directed-at

Published Time: 2025-10-25T15:03:18+00:00

Markdown Content:
Share

In a time of increased political violence, we’ve heard people on the right and the left loudly call for bringing down the heated rhetoric to avoid inciting a horrible attack against political figures. But apparently that does not apply to Muslims.

That is the message I take from watching the bone-chilling spike in anti-Muslim hate being directed at New York City’s Democratic mayoral nominee, Zohran Mamdani. This time, though, it’s by both Republicans and some Democratic officials. And let me be even more blunt, their goal at the point is no longer about defeating Zohran at the ballot box. No, their objective in dehumanizing Zohran and describing him as a terrorist is to incite violence so that Zohran never serves as mayor.

I know that is jarring to hear—but it’s the truth. We are all adults. We get that the numerous Republican leaders and handful of Democratic figures spewing this bigotry see the same polls we do which tell us Zohran is leading his closest opponent by on average 17 points--with early voting starting today (October 25.)

Zohran is going to win and they know it. Yet like Donald Trump’s back up plan to overturn the 2020 election was his Jan. 6 violent attack on the Capitol, their back up plan is to incite violence to stop Zohran. If I’m wrong, the same people spewing the hate can make it clear there is no place for violence, denounce the dangerous hate they have spewed against Zohran and instead focus on policy issues. But I can 100% assure you they will not.

There was of course anti-Muslim bigotry being directed at Zohran before this week. But in the past, it was exclusively from Republicans. Examples include New York GOP Rep. Elise Stefanik who in June labeled Zohran a “jihadist” while GOP Rep. Andy Ogles of Tennessee urged the Justice Department to denaturalize and deport Mamdani. And people like the late Charlie Kirk posted after Zohran won the nomination, “24 years ago a group of Muslims killed 2,753 people on 9/11. Now a Muslim Socialist is on pace to run New York City.”

But none of that compares to what we’ve seen in the past ten days--and especially 48 hours. **GOP Rep. Elise Stefanik upped her vileness last week saying Zohran is “a full-blown jihadist** who has called for the genocide of Jews.” GOP’s Larry Elder, who is radio host, shared on Twitter a cartoon depicting a red plane with the word “Mamdani” written on the side heading into a building that is reminiscent the World Trade Center’s Twin Towers. And on Wednesday, during the final mayoral debate, Curtis Sliwa, the Republican mayoral nominee accused Zohran of supporting “global jihad.”

Then came the Democrats. Democratic Rep. Laura Gillen, a Democrat from Long Island who has opposed Mamdani’s candidacy, said this week he was “pro-Hamas” and “unfit to hold any office in the United States.”

On Thursday, Andrew Cuomo—the disgraced former Democratic governor--appeared on WABC radio with Trump loving host Sid Rosenberg, who has in the past described Zohran as an “animal” and a “terrorist.” (Says so much Cuomo would go on a show hosted by an open anti-Muslim bigot.) During the interview, Cuomo stated, “God forbid, another 9/11 – can you imagine Mamdani in the seat?” Rosenberg replied, “He’d be cheering.” Cuomo said with a laugh, “That’s another problem.”

The idea that a Muslim would cheer a 9/11 type terrorist attack is not a joke. It’s how you dehumanize Zohran and all Muslims. In reality, more than 1,000 Muslims currently serve in the NYPD protecting the people of New York City on a daily basis. But Cuomo didn’t push back—he instead agreed because he believed it scored him political points to join in the anti-Muslim hate.

On Thursday, a super PAC supporting Cuomo—funded in part by Trump/Netanyahu supporting Bill Ackman-- began running an advertisement featuring a photo of Zohran smiling with an African American imam as the words “Jihad on NYC” passed on the screen.

Then came current NYC Mayor Eric Adams-a Democrat—who on Thursday endorsed Cuomo by directly linking Zohran to Islamic terrorists. Adams first mentioned how disappointed he was that he couldn’t be the one taking on Zohran. Then he went full anti-Muslim bigot stating about Zohran, “**New York can’t be Europe, folks.” He continued, “I don’t know what is wrong with people. You see what’s playing out in other countries because of Islamic extremism.”**

Adams then ratcheted up his fearmongering, declaring, **“You see what’s playing out in other countries because of Islamic extremism**— not Muslims, let’s not mix this up. But those Islamic extremists that are burning churches in Nigeria, that are destroying communities in Germany.” Adams despicably wants people to believe that if Zohran wins, he will bring that type of terrorism to New York City. (See clip below of NYC’s sitting Mayor tying Zohran to terrorism simply because he’s Muslim.)

This is why Zohran gave an emotional yet defiant statement on Friday afternoon where he slammed the fact that weaponizing anti-Muslim hate for political gain is one of the few things that united Democratic and Republican officials. Zohran stated, “In an era of ever-diminishing bipartisanship, it seems that islamophobia has emerged as one of the few areas of agreement.” He added that in our politics, “Islamophobia is not seen as inexcusable.”

Zohran is 100% right. These politicians see no downside to peddling anti-Muslim bigotry—only a potential upside.

But there was something Zohran left out. And that is that this type of hate speech leads to violence. We saw that after 9/11. And worse, during Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign, he made anti-Muslim hate a staple of his campaign from claiming Muslims in New Jersey cheered on 9/11 to saying “Islam hates us” to calling for total ban of Muslims entering the United States. The result was hate crimes against Muslims in 2016 actually reached a higher level than in the year after 9/11.

Given that history, I’m deeply concerned because the target has been squarely placed on Zohran’s back. In fact, I’ve never seen this much anti-Muslim hate directed against any one person for such an intense period of time.

Keep in mind, during this campaign, the police have reported that Zohran has been subject to numerous death threats. And just last month, a Texas man was arrested and charged in a 22-count indictment for making death threats versus Zohran that included anti-Muslim bigotry.

On the positive though is we have seen a good number –although not all--New York Democratic officials stand up to this anti-Muslim BS. New York Gov. Kathy Hochul wrote, “Time to get out of the gutter. Fear-mongering, hate speech and Islamophobia are beneath New York — and everything we stand for as a state.” Rep. Jerry Nadler, who is New York’s senior Jewish member of Congress, wrote Thursday on social media, “Imagine if this kind of bigotry was used against any other faith − Jewish or Christian New Yorkers,” Nadler said. “Would we roll over and accept it?” And Friday, Rep. Hakeem Jeffries finally endorsed Zohran—although he didn’t touch on the hate being directed at him.

There are only about ten days until election day. The NYPD is the best police force in the country. I believe they will keep Zohran safe. But we should never forget the Republicans-- and those Democrats--who spewed this hate with the goal being to incite violence against the next mayor of New York City.

Below you can watch the powerful closing of Zohran’s statement from Friday in fighting anti-Muslim hate:

Share
