Title: US Tariffs: What’s the Impact? | J.P. Morgan Global Research

URL Source: https://www.jpmorgan.com/insights/global-research/current-events/us-tariffs

Published Time: Thu, 16 Oct 2025 18:52:11 GMT

Markdown Content:
Since taking office, President Trump has enacted a growing list of tariffs on specific countries and commodities — a move aimed at protecting American interests. While the rollout was initially marred by delays and reversals, the latest announcements have ignited an international response, increasing market volatility and creating material headwinds that J.P.Morgan Global Research believes will weigh on growth.

Read the latest on U.S. tariffs and their impact on consumers, markets, and the global economy. **Bookmark this page for regular updates and analysis from J.P.Morgan Global Research.**

The Trump administration has announced that branded or patented pharmaceutical products will be subject to a 100% tariff, unless the company involved is building a manufacturing plant in America. On paper, this means that the prices of certain imported drugs could double for U.S. importers and consumers. Details — including on when the levy will take effect — are still scarce, however, as the Trump administration continues to negotiate with pharma firms.

Overall, the impact on U.S. large-cap biopharma companies is expected to be minimal. “While there are very limited details, we note that this will likely lead to a majority of pharma products being excluded from any tariffs, given that our large-cap names have already started or are in the process of increasing U.S.-based manufacturing,” said Chris Schott, a senior analyst covering the U.S. Diversified Biopharma sector at J.P.Morgan. “In addition, inventory builds across the large-cap group should result in no or minimal exposure through mid-2026 or later, which gives companies time to start manufacturing buildouts if they haven’t already.”

The Trump administration has announced new tariff rates for several countries, slated to come into effect on August 7. These include 35% tariffs on Canadian goods, 30% on South African goods and 20% on Vietnamese goods.

“Our updated estimate of the average effective U.S. tariff rate stands at 15.8% — a significant increase from the 2.3% rate at the end of 2024, but roughly six percentage points lower than the 22% recorded on Liberation Day,” said Nora Szentivanyi, senior global economist at J.P.Morgan. “Based on our expectation that sectoral tariffs will be imposed later this year, we still anticipate that the U.S. effective tariff rate will approach 18–20%, while the observed tariff rate (based on actual customs duties) is likely to level off slightly higher than 15%.”

Uncertainty still surrounds currently exempt sectors, notably pharmaceuticals and electronics. The Trump administration has signaled that tariffs on pharmaceuticals could potentially rise toward 200% by mid- to late-2026.

In addition, regulatory risks remain. “An eventual court ruling against the administration’s reliance on the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) as the basis for these tariffs could significantly alter the implementation path. If the IEEPA is deemed inadmissible, the legal status of the trade deals themselves could come into question,” Szentivanyi noted.

U.S. tariffs on South Korean imports could result in a possible negative income effect, but will leave J.P.Morgan Global Research’s GDP growth forecast intact. The new average effective tariff rate is estimated to be 13.5%, calculated based on a 15% universal tariff rate, a 50% tariff rate on steel and aluminium and an exemption on tech products. “The effective tariff rate is now roughly similar to the U.S. overall effective tariff rate — as a result, the issue for Korean exporters’ performance would not be a relative price shock in the U.S. market, but a possible negative income effect, if there is any,” said Seok Gil Park, chief Korea economist at J.P.Morgan.

The data ahead of the tariff deal suggested a mixed outlook.Notably, PMI softened in July, possibly due to concerns regarding headwinds from U.S. tariff hikes. “The data indicated a slowing trend into the third quarter,” Park added. “We continue to expect a payback in third quarter manufacturing GDP growth, with industrial production growth likely to decline further. We believe third quarter real GDP growth is on track for a modest rise of 2% quarter-over-quarter, at a seasonally adjusted annual rate.”

Recent moves have seen tariff rates climb higher than J.P.Morgan Global Research had anticipated, with the U.S. effective tariff rate now expected to be approaching 20%**.**This estimate has been nudged higher by 2 percentage points, taking the Global Research team’s estimate from 16-18% to 18-20%.

Based on the latest announcements and J.P.Morgan Global Research’s expectations that sectoral tariffs will be imposed later this year, it is anticipated that the U.S. effective tariff rate (based on the 2024 spending basket) will approach 20%.

While global growth is still expected to experience a downshift in the second half of 2025, J.P.Morgan Global Research expects less impact on supply chains and household purchasing power than was initially expected based on Liberation Day tariffs. “Tariff hikes are being implemented in a gradual fashion, and U.S. policymakers have eschewed potentially disruptive barriers to trade within North America and with China,” said Bruce Kasman, chief global economist at J.P.Morgan. “The anticipated retaliation to higher U.S. tariffs has not materialized, reducing the drag on global growth. In addition, the trade war has depressed business sentiment, but the risk that this prompts retrenchment is being tempered by easier global financial conditions.”

After months of negotiations, the U.S. and EU have agreed on a 15% tariff. This will apply to most EU goods entering the U.S. except for aircraft and aircraft parts, certain chemicals, semiconductor equipment, some agricultural products and all natural resources and critical raw materials. However, steel and aluminum will continue to be taxed at 50%.

“While tariffs will likely settle somewhat higher than assumed in our forecast, other factors remain relevant. First, the deal avoids the EU being singled out compared with other countries, which means EU exporters to the U.S. are not disadvantaged in a relative sense. Second, uncertainty may arguably have declined somewhat, which is key as sentiment effects can be much larger than direct effects,” said Greg Fuzesi, chief euro area economist at J.P.Morgan. In addition, growth in the euro area has held up better than expected so far.

Despite greater clarity, the overall impact of the new tariffs remains to be seen. “Tariffs may at first squeeze the margins of some EU exporters to the U.S., but could eventually fall on U.S. importers and customers, while EU export volumes may fall only if U.S. demand weakens or if U.S. producers can boost production to replace imports,” Fuzesi noted.

All factors considered, J.P.Morgan Global Research still sees euro area growth slowing modestly in the second half of 2025, and expects the European Central Bank (ECB) to cut rates once more this year.

The Trump administration has reached a trade agreement with Japan, one of the U.S.’s largest trading partners. Tariffs on Japanese goods, including automobiles, will be set at 15% — significantly below the 25% figure that was previously floated.

This could spell good news for the Japanese stock market, with J.P.Morgan Global Research estimating the decrease in tariffs could lift corporate earnings by 3 percentage points or GDP by 0.3 percentage points on a year-over-year basis. “Beyond the direct impact on the economy and corporate earnings, the decrease in tariffs will likely pave the way for another wage increase next year. This is positive for the Japanese markets and economy,” said Rie Nishihara, head of Japan Equity Strategy at J.P.Morgan.

The new tariff agreement could support the yen, too. “This deal increases the likelihood of a Bank of Japan rate hike in October. If the market starts pricing in more rate hikes due to an upward revision in the inflation outlook, this should support the JPY,” said Junya Tanase, chief Japan FX strategist at J.P.Morgan.

Over the weekend, the Trump administration announced new reciprocal tariff rates for several countries, most notably 50% for Brazil and 35% for Canada. President Trump also stated that the EU and Mexico could both see rates rise to 30%. This could take the total effective tariff rate close to 17% — excluding the effects of future sector-specific tariffs and the possibility of renewed higher rates for other countries not mentioned in the announcement.

“The rates announced over the weekend, if fully passed through, would add about 0.4 percentage points to the PCE price level. Given imperfect pass-through and margin compression, a more likely estimate is 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points. We think this bolsters the case for the Fed to take a very cautious approach to rate cuts,” noted Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P.Morgan.

However, these calculations assume that the rates on Canada and Mexico will continue to apply only to non-USMCA-compliant goods. “Were the administration to begin applying these tariff rates to USMCA-compliant goods, then overall tariff rates would be materially higher,” Feroli added.

President Trump has announced plans for a 30% tariff on EU goods shipped to the U.S., arguing that a trade deficit was a potential threat. This would take effect from August 1; however, the EU has not retaliated and is willing to continue negotiating. A 10% universal tariff rate has been in place since April 5, with higher tariffs at the sector level, and the announcement of a 30% tariff rate comes as something of a surprise.

Tariffs have already had a significant impact on euro area activity. “Front-loading was at play in the first months of the year, but looking through the noise, activity has been running at an annualized rate (ar) of 0.9% in the first half of 2025,” said Raphael Brun-Aguerre, senior economist at J.P.Morgan.

“We expect activity to moderate in the second half of the year, with a negative direct and indirect impact from tariffs,” Brun-Aguerre added. “We forecast GDP growth of 0.5%ar in the third quarter and 0.75%ar in the fourth quarter. We are not making changes to our forecast now, as there is room, in our view, for U.S. tariffs to settle at a lower level than mentioned this weekend.”

President Trump has announced 50% tariffs on Brazilian exports, effective August 1 — significantly exceeding the 10% rate set on Liberation Day. This follows several issues being monitored by the Trump administration — from the legal situation of former president Jair Bolsonaro to the “very unfair” trading relationship between the U.S. and Brazil.

Currently, Brazil’s exports to the U.S. account for slightly less than 2% of its GDP, and the countries have roughly balanced trade. “Given the experience of other countries in abrupt changes to tariffs and uncertainty over Brazil’s response, we are not adjusting our forecasts right now. That said, the risk to our already downbeat growth forecast for the second half of 2025 and beyond is further weighed down,” said Vinicius Moreira, an economist on the Emerging Markets Research team at J.P.Morgan. “If this 50% tariff scenario becomes long-lasting, with an effective tariff of around 40%, Brazil’s GDP could potentially be reduced by 0.6% to 1.0%, though this impact could be mitigated by diversifying exports to other countries.”

With only a couple of tentative trade frameworks agreed ahead of the administration’s July 9 deadline for a tariff rate reset, President Trump this week announced a new date of August 1. In addition, he has imposed new tariff rates on 14 countries — including Japan and South Korea — that will take effect from then. There were other sector-specific announcements too, with President Trump suggesting that copper could be taxed at 50% and that pharmaceutical products could face tariffs as high as 200% — though he signaled implementation could be delayed by 12 to 18 months.

“After all this news, and given our expectations for future actions, we continue to see the average effective tariff rate settling in the mid- to high-teens, and still see this weighing on growth and boosting inflation in the second half,” said Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P.Morgan.

Despite President Trump’s declaration that no extensions will be granted, the outlook for tariff rates remains uncertain. “It is possible that some trading partners could agree to a trade deal ahead of August 1, and that some deadlines could be extended,” Feroli added.

President Trump intends to impose a 50% tariff on copper according to statements made at a cabinet meeting and press conference, which would likely come into effect by August 1.

“With greater certainty around tariffs and an accelerated timeline for implementation, the copper market is transitioning to a ‘period of payback,’ after fundamentals were tightened by a very sharp pull-forward in U.S. imports,” said Gregory Shearer, head of Base and Precious Metals Strategy at J.P.Morgan.

A 50% tariff would exceed J.P.Morgan Global Research’s previous estimates. However, the timing aligns with expectations. “This leaves us more cautious on LME copper prices over the balance of the year,” Shearer added. “We forecast LME copper prices will slide toward $9,100/metric tonne (mt) in the third quarter of 2025, before stabilizing around $9,350/mt in the fourth quarter.”

A U.S.-Vietnam trade deal has been struck one week before the end of the 90-day reciprocal tariff pause. A 20% tariff will now apply to all Vietnamese exports to the U.S. – below the 46% announced on Liberation Day, but well above the prior rate of 3.3%.

“Assuming exemptions are removed, the deal raises the effective tariff rate on Vietnam from 11.7% to 20% and lifts the overall U.S. effective tariff rate from 13.1% to 13.4%, based on 2024 trade volumes. This outcome is in line with our expectation of a moderate increase in the U.S. average tariff rate to 14-18% as deals are finalized, rather than a return to Liberation Day levels,” says Nora Szentivanyi, senior global economist at J.P.Morgan.

However, some goods that are transhipped (or intentionally routed) through Vietnam could be subject to a 40% tariff, though it remains to be seen how this measure will be enforced.

The surprise tariff increase on steel and aluminum imports into the U.S. — doubling the rate from 25% to 50% — is causing significant uncertainty for the U.S. Midwest premium (MWP) market. “We think the MWP market is currently in a state of paralysis,” said Gregory Shearer, head of Base and Precious Metals Strategy at J.P.Morgan. “Tariffs could be walked back, or key exemptions may come through that would reduce the need to fully price in the tariff in future.”

A 50% tariff on aluminum points to an MWP of around 70 cents per pound (c/lb) or higher, which would be necessary to incentivize enough imports to meet U.S. demand. “Current spot prices of around 60 (c/lb) are barely high enough to cover the tariff alone,” Shearer added. “If U.S. tariffs don’t change and the MWP remains in stasis, any shipper with flexibility on delivery location is incentivized to send aluminum elsewhere, with a focus on Europe. Eventually, the stasis would have to break.”

The Court for International Trade (CIT) has ruled that tariffs imposed under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) are unlawful, which encompasses the Liberation Day reciprocal tariffs and drug trafficking tariffs on China, Canada and Mexico. If IEEPA tariffs were to cease, the effective tariff rate would fall from 13-14% to roughly 5%, double the level in 2024. “A tariff rate permanently at 5% would imply a material upgrade to our growth forecast for the second half of 2025, and would likely reduce our 2025 core CPI forecast by close to a percentage point,”said Abiel Reinhart, U.S. economist at J.P.Morgan.

Even if the administration loses this case, it does not necessarily spell the end of tariff hikes as they could still be pursued through a number of other channels. “Sector tariffs are a more likely longer-term solution, such as those applied to autos, steel and aluminum. There are also tariffs that remedy trade practices deemed to be unfair, which were already being used to set some tariffs on China,” Reinhart added.

“The court order makes tariff scenarios murkier in the short term,” said Bruce Kasman, chief global economist at J.P.Morgan. “However, tariffs are a central pillar of this administration’s economic agenda. The path and the distribution across countries and sectors are uncertain, but we continue to believe that the average effective tariff rate should eventually settle around 15-18%.”

In a de-escalation of trade tensions, both countries have announced they will slash tariffs for a period of 90 days as they negotiate a broader deal. From May 14, additional U.S. tariffs on Chinese imports will fall to 30% (from 145%), and China’s additional tariffs on U.S. goods will decrease to 10% (from 125%). Stocks rallied as a result, with the Dow, the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite notching their biggest single-day gains in over a month.

“The magnitude of the temporary tariff reduction is larger than expected. We welcome the positive outcome; meanwhile, risks are two-sided. On the one side, there is room for further reduction of tariffs, especially the 20% fentanyl-related tariff. On the other hand, the bar for a potential deal between China and the U.S. is high and it could take much longer than 90 days, so we should not rule out the possibility of a resurgence of tariff increase,” said Haibin Zhu, chief China economist for J.P.Morgan.

If this temporary tariff reduction stays in place for the rest of 2025, it could have a large impact on China’s growth prospects. It could also make additional fiscal stimulus less likely. “On the monetary policy front, we maintain our forecast of a rate cut of 30 basis points (bp) and a required reserved ratio (RRR) cut of 100 bp in 2025, as lower tariffs should mitigate CNY depreciation pressure,” Zhu said. “We also raise our full-year growth forecast to 4.8%, up from 4.1% previously.”

The U.S. and the U.K. have announced a trade framework that includes reducing import taxes on 100,000 British cars and implementing a tariff-free quota on 13,000 metric tons of beef. However, the baseline 10% tariff on all other goods remains.

“The upside may be limited for an economy with no material goods trade imbalance with the U.S., where average tariffs were low to start off with and where political relations are reasonably warm,” said Allan Monks, chief U.K. economist at J.P.Morgan. “This could be read as a negative signal for other countries still engaged in negotiations with the U.S. While they potentially have more concessions to offer, the outstanding areas of dispute are generally greater. Also, larger economies such as China and the EU have more leverage and are likely to take a harder stance in the negotiations.”

Thus far, there is no firm indication of an exemption from any future tariff increases on pharmaceuticals, or an agreement on remaining reciprocal tariffs. “Going forward, it would appear that the potential for a more meaningful rollback of tariffs is limited in the absence of a removal of the 10% baseline,” Monks added.

Tariffs and trade policy uncertainty could have a negative impact on U.S. and global GDP through 2026.

**Get more insights sent directly to you with J.P.Morgan’s In Context newsletter.**

Related insights

*   Global Research

Is US exceptionalism here to stay?

February 28, 2025  
Discover the factors contributing to U.S. exceptionalism and how this is playing out across markets. Could recent developments including tariffs and the rise of DeepSeek undermine American outperformance? 
*   Global Research

Will gold prices break $4,000/oz in 2026?

June 10, 2025  
Gold prices have continued to surge in 2025 due to trade uncertainty and geopolitical risks. What is the gold price forecast for this year and beyond? 
*   Global Research

Global Research 
Leveraging cutting-edge technology and innovative tools to bring clients industry-leading analysis and investment advice. 

This material (Material) is provided for your information only and does not constitute: (i) an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or a recommendation for any investment product or strategy, or (ii) any investment, legal or tax advice. The information contained herein is as of the date and time referenced in the Material and J.P.Morgan does not undertake any obligation to update such information. J.P.Morgan disclaims any responsibility or liability, whether in contract, tort (including, without limitation, negligence), equity or otherwise, for the quality, accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this Material, and for any reliance on, or uses to which, this Material, is put, and you are solely responsible for any use to which you put such information. Without limiting any of the foregoing, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, in no event shall J.P.Morgan have any liability for any special, punitive, indirect, or consequential damages (including lost profits or lost opportunity), in connection with the information contained in this Material, even if notified of the possibility of such damages. Any comments or statements made herein do not necessarily reflect those of J.P.Morgan, its subsidiaries or its affiliates.

All materials and information shared with you are, unless otherwise indicated to you, proprietary and confidential to J.P.Morgan. You are hereby notified that any disclosure, dissemination, copying, distribution, or use of the information provided to you, in whole or in part, other than as expressly permitted by J.P.Morgan, is STRICTLY PROHIBITED. You are permitted to disclose the materials and information to your officers and employees on a need to know basis. Should you have any questions regarding this, please contact your usual J.P.Morgan contact. For further information please visit: Sales and Trading Disclaimer.

© 2025 JPMorgan Chase & Co. All rights reserved. J.P.Morgan is a marketing name for businesses of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its subsidiaries and affiliates worldwide. JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A. (member of FDIC), J.P.Morgan Securities LLC (member of FINRA, NYSE and SIPC), J.P.Morgan Securities plc (member of the London Stock Exchange and authorized by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the PRA) and J.P.Morgan SE (authorised by the BaFin and regulated by the BaFin, the German Central Bank and the European Central Bank) are principal subsidiaries of JPMorgan Chase & Co. For legal entity and regulatory disclosures, visit:www.jpmorgan.com/disclosures. For additional regulatory disclosures, please consult:www.jpmorgan.com/disclosures.​
