Title: Microsoft Word - Justice_Dissertation_Trump Rallies 3-17-2020 - Copy

URL Source: https://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/9f88955f-1d33-4cc0-b846-e2bba4b8a97b/content

Published Time: Mon, 22 Jul 2024 10:54:45 GMT

Markdown Content:
# We Alone Can Fix It: Donald Trump’s Campaign Rallies and the 

# Rhetoric of Community 

By 

© 2020 

Jacob William Justice 

M.A., The University of Kansas, 2016 

B.A., Wayne State University, 2014 

Submitted to the graduate degree program in Communication Studies and the Graduate Faculty 

of the University of Kansas in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of 

Philosophy. 

Chair: Dr. Robert C. Rowland 

Dr. Brett Bricker 

Dr. Jay Childers 

Dr. David Farber 

Dr. Scott Harris 

Date Defended: March 18 th , 2020 ii 

The dissertation committee for Jacob William Justice certifies that this is 

the approved version of the following dissertation: 

# We Alone Can Fix It: Donald Trump’s Campaign Rallies and the 

# Rhetoric of Community 

Chair: Dr. Robert C. Rowland 

Date Approved: March 18 th , 2020 iii 

Abstract 

In this project, I employ rhetorical fieldwork methods to explore community construction at 

President Trump’s campaign rallies. Since Trump’s election, rhetorical scholars have analyzed 

Trump’s rhetoric to discern recurring themes and explain his appeal despite his unconventional 

style and violation of norms. Based on a holistic analysis of Trump rallies that is informed by my 

firsthand experiences conducting rhetorical fieldwork at four rallies, I argue that explaining 

Trump’s appeal requires attention to his supporters, who are often overlooked in analyses that 

focus upon Trump himself. This project explores not only Trump’s rhetoric, but also more 

vernacular rhetorical activities that have becoming defining features of Trump rallies. I argue 

that rallies are a key site where identification is co-constructed between Trump and his 

supporters, through an analysis of the populist outsider persona constructed in Trump’s rally 

rhetoric, the rituals performed by supporters at rallies, the violence that often occurs at these 

events, and the circulation of conspiracy theories at rallies. These findings improve 

understanding of the affective bond between Trump and his supporters, the rhetorical process of 

identification-building, and campaign rhetoric, while explaining the capacity of populist rhetoric, 

ritual, violence, and conspiracy theories to contribute to group-identity formation. 

Keywords: Donald Trump , Rhetorical Fieldwork , Identification , Political Rhetoric , Campaign 

Communication .iv 

Acknowledgements 

This dissertation represents the conclusion of a 6 year-long academic journey that I 

started at the University of Kansas in 2014, and hopefully the beginning of another adventure. I 

am indebted to too many people to name but hope to use this space to recognize several people 

who have inspired me along the way. 

I would first like to thank each member of my committee for their guidance. Dr. 

Rowland’s passion for the study of rhetoric and for mentoring Communication Studies graduate 

students is infectious, and I would not be where I am today without his inexhaustible patience 

with me and his endlessly helpful feedback. In a profession where it is easy to become “burned 

out” or demotivated, Dr. Rowland always pushed me to improve and reminded me of the 

importance of what we study. If every professor in the nation had Dr. Rowland’s boundless 

enthusiasm for their area of study, and for helping students achieve their potential, the world 

would be a better place. Dr. Harris and Dr. Bricker changed my life. They represent the pinnacle 

of what educators can be: accomplished scholars and thinkers, but also selfless instructors who 

will do anything to help students achieve their goals. I will be forever grateful for the chance 

they gave me to work with the greatest debate team in the nation and for all the time they have 

spent helping me with my research and imparting wisdom about how to thrive as a debate coach 

and academic. Although I will never match the impact that they have had on multiple generations 

of KU debaters, their example inspires me to treat every interaction that I have with students, no 

matter how small, as precious. I am also thankful for the instruction of Dr. Childers, whose 

seminar on rhetoric and violence sparked my interest in studying Trump’s campaign rallies, and 

Dr. Farber, whose seminar on twentieth century history is perhaps the best course I have ever v

taken. Both Dr. Childers and Dr. Farber were immense resources to me and helpful in refining 

this project’s argument. 

I am also indebted to every teacher who ever believed in me along the way. Not only at 

the University of Kansas, but at Wayne State University and other places. At both the University 

of Kansas and Wayne State University, the open-door philosophy of George Ziegelmueller is 

alive and well. I am a direct beneficiary of this philosophy. My debate coaches at Wayne State 

University—Kelly Young, Ron Stevenson, John Koch, Bruce Najor, Craig Hennigan, Avery 

Henry, Noriaki Tajima, and many others—pushed me to grow as a thinker and led by example, 

demonstrating the sense of accomplishment that can come from studying communication and 

coaching debate in a way that made me want to follow in their footsteps. The path I have 

followed to this point began in a high school debate classroom in Dexter, Michigan, where 

Debora Marsh gave me a shot to travel to tournaments and melded my vague interest in arguing 

into both a skill that I have relied upon ever since and the object of my scholarly pursuits. I have 

been blessed to encounter so many devoted educators and I have tried to pay forward this good 

fortune in what little way I can. My time coaching at the University of Kansas has been one of 

the most rewarding experiences of my life, and I am thankful to have crossed paths with many 

excellent debaters and watched with pride as they accomplished great things. My fellow coaches 

at KU have also been invaluable to my personal growth and have helped me learn the value of 

teamwork. 

Last, but not least, I have immense gratitude for the unconditional love of my family. I 

am thankful for my parents, for sparking my interest in politics and encouraging me to develop 

opinions and be an active citizen. I am thankful for my brother and sister, for being pillars of 

support. No person has been more instrumental to my success at KU and to the completion of vi 

this project than my fiancé Talya Slaw, who helped me with my dissertation every step of the 

way, and had the patience to proof read each chapter multiple times and listen to me rant verbally 

about the project ad nauseum. Talya even made my fieldwork possible by accompanying me on 

my road trips to Green Bay and Minneapolis. You keep me sane in a world that is frequently 

perplexing and infuriating. Finally, I would like to thank Quincy, Lucy, Linus, Marcy, George, 

Lenny and even Mitzy, along with anyone else I might have forgotten. I love you all. vii 

Table of Contents 

Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................... vii 

Chapter I: Introduction .................................................................................................................... 1 

Chapter II: Rhetorical Fieldwork at Trump Rallies ...................................................................... 29 

Chapter III: The Populist Outsider Persona .................................................................................. 51 

Chapter IV: Congregating at the Church of Trump: How Community is Constituted at Rallies . 81 

Chapter V: “Get ‘Em Out”: The Constitutive Violence of Trump Rallies ................................. 120 

Chapter VI: “It’s All Very Simple”: Conspiracy Theory Rhetoric at Trump Rallies ................. 157 

Chapter VII: Conclusion ............................................................................................................. 195 

References: Chapter I, Introduction ............................................................................................ 211 

References: Chapter II, Methodology ......................................................................................... 224 

References: Chapter III, Populist Outsider Persona ................................................................... 232 

References: Chapter IV, Church of Trump ................................................................................. 244 

References: Chapter V, Violence ................................................................................................ 257 

References: Chapter VI, Conspiracy Theory .............................................................................. 272 

References: Chapter VII, Conclusion ......................................................................................... 291 1

This doesn’t feel like second place. 

- Donald Trump, at a rally in Grand Rapids, during the early hours of November 8 th , 2016. 

Chapter I 

Introduction 

Inside the packed arena, anticipation builds. Before me sprawls a crowd of thousands, 

overflowing with red hats and stars and stripes, buzzing with excitement. The palpable energy 

belies the fact that many in attendance spent the day standing in line or making a pilgrimage 

across state lines to be here, all for a chance to see their hero. Suspense builds as lesser speakers 

tantalize the crowd. Sporadic chants of “lock her up!” and “U.S.A.!” erupt as the crowd senses 

that the festivities will soon commence in earnest. The throng of more than 10,000 devotees 

unleashes its most boisterous cheers yet as a security agent dutifully places the Presidential Seal 

on the lone podium found in the middle of the sea of red hats. Moments later, Lee Greenwood’s 

“God Bless the U.S.A.” blasts from the loudspeakers at top volume, announcing the arrival of the 

President of the United States. The roar of the crowd is now thunderous. As cameras flash and 

the crowd jumps to their feet to applaud the President’s arrival, Donald Trump meanders out of a 

tunnel and onto the stage. His profile is unmistakable, even from a distance: a large, hunching 

man with yellow hair, in an oversized suit with a bright red necktie, basking in the crowd’s 

adulation. The spectacle is overwhelming, filling me with both awe and dread. How does one 

man command the loyalty of these masses? 

Donald Trump’s victory took many analysts by surprise, raising questions that elude easy 

answers. Candidate Trump “crashed through the guardrails of traditional politics” by attacking 

“the family of a soldier killed in Iraq,” inviting “Russian hackers to meddle in American 

politics,” joking “about gun lovers assassinating Hillary Clinton,” and linking his opponent 

“Senator Ted Cruz’s father to the Kennedy assassination, among other lowlights” (Tur, 2017, p. 2

202). Political analysts have struggled to explain both the success of Trump’s convention-

shattering campaign and the fierce loyalty of his core supporters despite the numerous 

outrageous comments and gaffes that would have doomed almost any previous presidential 

candidate (Kruse & Gee, 2016; Struyk, 2017). The durability of Trump’s base support continued 

into his scandal-ridden presidency, as he consistently posted about 90% approval among 

Republicans, a figure comparable to George W. Bush’s popularity after the September 11 th 

attacks (Coaston, 2019; Peters, 2018). Additional evidence of this resiliency can be found in data 

that shows “nearly half of Mr. Trump’s voters have exceptionally warm views toward him: 45 

percent rated their feeling toward him as a 90 or higher out of 100, a figure that is virtually 

unchanged since his election” (Cohn & Parlapiano, 2018, para. 21). 

Although there continues to be debate about which factors were most influential in 

causing Trump’s victory, “top political operatives” agree that the “seemingly unbreakable bond 

with his core supporters, no matter how provocative his words or deeds” was an essential 

variable (Lauter, 2016, para. 4). Fording and Schram (2017) argued that the unshakeable loyalty 

of Trump supporters remains an “understudied topic,” and called for further exploration into 

why: 

Trump’s base was so loyal to him during and after the campaign in spite of his profligate 

lying, reliance on outlandish conspiracy theories, constant name-calling and demonizing 

of his opponents, and his continual smearing of various “out groups” who he sought to 

denigrate for political effect. (p. 674) 

Echoing this sentiment, Bostdorff (2017) recognized that a basic puzzle of the Trump presidency 

concerns the fact that, somehow, “enough voters in the right states were willing to take a chance 

on an outsider with no political experience—a billionaire with a track record in obvious 3

contradiction to his populist claims—as the means toward political transformation” (Bostdorff, 

2017, p. 698). Curiously, Trump accomplished all of this while lacking a consistent ideological 

platform. Many Trump voters remained “unwavering in their support” despite Trump’s uneasy 

appropriation of traditional conservative proposals such as tax reduction and deregulation and 

heterodox ideas such as trade protectionism (Chaput, 2018, p. 195). Trump’s key proposals “only 

tenuously” connected (p. 195) with the interests of his white working-class supporters, raising 

the question of how he energized those “who share few, if any, economic interests” with both 

Trump and those whom his policies aid (p. 200). Trump’s ability to maintain “such a stubbornly 

loyal political base despite what a majority of Americans regard as overwhelming evidence of 

his inconsistencies and incompetence” remains “one of the most puzzling, enduring and 

intriguing questions about the Trump presidential phenomenon” (Malcolm, 2018, para. 1). 

Existing explanations of Trump’s appeal remain unsatisfactory. To explain Trump’s 

shocking win, scholars and commentators have often resorted to two seemingly competing 

explanations. Since Trump’s victory, “a heated debate broke out among political commentators 

over the source of Donald Trump’s support. Was it driven primarily by economic anxiety, as the 

early conventional wisdom often argued, or more by racism and other cultural factors?” 

(Casselman, 2017, para. 1). 

Defenders of the economic explanation point out that “Trump won millions of working-

class white voters in the Midwest, the constituency and the region hit hardest by globalization, 

who had previously voted for Barack Obama” (Douthat, 2018, para. 4). In its most reductive 

form, this perspective insists that many Trump voters could not possibly have been driven by 

racial prejudice if they “voted twice for the first black president” (para. 4). Economic 

explanations of Trump’s appeal therefore downplay the importance of racial attitudes and point 4

instead to “economic anxiety.” To defend this position, proponents cite data that Trump “beat 

Hillary Clinton in counties with slower job growth and lower wages” and that he “far 

outperformed her in counties where more jobs are threatened by automation or offshoring” 

(Kolko, 2016, para. 2; Monnat & Brown, 2017). The economics perspective credits Trump’s 

victory to “a massive wave of voter discontent with the governing classes” and notes that similar 

dynamics propelled the candidacy of Senator Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primaries (Oliver 

& Rahn, 2016, p. 189). Although some acknowledge that actual “economic hardship doesn’t 

explain Trump’s support,” defenders posit that Trump voters were linked by a shared pessimism 

about the country’s future economic prospects (Casselman, 2017, para. 5). Economic theories of 

Trump’s victory correctly identify that Trump’s success was enabled by broad discontent with 

the establishment factions of the Democratic and Republican parties, and the unevenness of the 

post-2008 economic recovery, but ultimately offer only partial explanatory power. 

Conversely, racial and cultural explanations of Trump’s appeal emphasize how negative 

attitudes towards immigrants and minorities predict support for Trump while minimizing 

economic factors. This perspective holds that Trump’s “explicitly racist and sexist appeals 

during the campaign, coupled with the presence of an African American president and the first 

major-party female nominee, made racism and sexism a dividing line in the vote in this election” 

(Schaffner, Macwilliams, & Nteta, 2018, p. 10). At a fundraising event in September of 2016, 

Hillary Clinton herself articulated an over-simplified version of this view when she remarked 

that: “you could put half of Trump's supporters into what I call the basket of deplorables . . . 

they're racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic, you name it” (qtd. in CBS News, 

2016). 5

Clinton would ultimately express regret for this comment, but a significant body of 

research confirms that anxieties about the nation’s ongoing demographic changes were powerful 

drivers of support for Trump. Schaffner et al.’s (2018) study found that “while economic 

considerations were an important part of the story, racial attitudes and sexism were much more 

strongly related to support for Trump” (p. 10). Similarly, Hooghe and Dassonneville’s (2018) 

multivariate analysis of survey data suggested that “negative attitudes toward ethnic minorities 

and immigrants swayed independents and some Democrats to opt for candidate Trump, thereby 

considerably strengthening his electoral-support base” (p. 532). Smith and Hanley’s (2018) 

multivariate logistic regression led the authors to conclude that “most Trump voters cast their 

ballots for him with their eyes open, not despite his prejudices but because of them” (p. 207). 

Racial/cultural explanations are important because they elucidate the persistence of racism and 

other prejudices in American life, but risk overlooking how the interlocking crises of economic 

inequality, industrial decline, and opioid addiction may have primed certain working-class white 

voters for Trump’s exclusionary appeals (Atkins, 2017). 

The stakes of this debate are high and far “more than an academic exercise” (Casselman, 

2017, para. 3). Each diagnosis suggests drastically different approaches for how Trump’s 

reactionary nationalism should be confronted. Paralleling the debate over whether support for 

Trump is economically-driven or racially-driven, political strategists and activists have waged a 

heated argument about whether Trump’s opponents should prioritize “firing up” a multicultural 

coalition of progressives to overwhelm Trumpism at the ballot box through sheer demographic 

force, or whether Trump’s opponents should prioritize “win[ning] back the white Midwestern 

voters who helped elect Mr. Trump” (Vogel, 2018, paras. 1-3). The economics perspective holds 

out hope that Trump voters could be convinced to support Democratic candidates if they become 6

disillusioned with Trump or if liberals forward “well-crafted and appealing initiatives” that 

create new economic opportunities for those who feel left behind by globalization (Smith & 

Hanley, 2018, p. 207). In contrast, extreme versions of the racial/culture perspective hold that 

attempts to persuade Trump voters are largely futile due to the entrenched nature of their 

prejudiced attitudes (Waldman, 2018). 

Compelling evidence supports both the economic and racial/cultural explanations for 

Trump’s appeal, yet this dichotomy is not always useful. Both theories rest on a “somewhat 

artificial” distinction that overlooks how “economic inequality and cultural backlash” may 

interact because “structural changes in the workforce and social trends in globalized markets 

heighten economic insecurity” which may stimulate “a negative backlash among traditionalists 

towards cultural shifts” (Inglehart & Norris, 2016, p. 3). Just as economic inequality may 

contribute to the scapegoating of minorities, racial attitudes can shape voters’ perception of the 

economy. Research demonstrates that “racial resentment plays an especially large role in 

negative views of the economy,” and can help explain the “chasm between the economic views 

of racial liberals and conservatives” (Smith & Hanley, 2018, p. 206). Pitting economic anxiety 

and racial anxiety against each other may be “misleading” if these phenomena are reinforcing 

rather than separate (Fording & Schram, 2017, p. 673). Because determining the sources of 

Trump’s appeal has significant implications for how the regressive forces he activated should be 

addressed, and because economic anxiety and cultural anxiety are interlinked, the task for 

scholars must be to craft an explanation of Trump’s appeal that can incorporate insights from 

both perspectives. 

In this essay, I contend that Trump’s rallies are the key rhetorical artifact that offer a way 

out of this deadlock. I develop this argument in three parts. First, I explain why campaign rallies 7

are crucial for comprehending the Trump phenomenon, arguing that rallies are a vital aspect of 

Trump’s relationship with his core supporters that have not received sufficient attention from 

rhetorical scholars. Second, I outline the insights that stem from this analysis. These findings 

improve our understanding of the puzzling loyalty of Trump supporters and the rhetorical 

process of identification-building more generally. Third, I conclude by detailing how I will 

conduct this rhetorical analysis of Trump rallies in subsequent chapters of this project. 

Campaign Rallies: The Key to Understanding the Trump Phenomenon 

It is somewhat counterintuitive to argue that a closer look at Trump’s rallies will 

illuminate the sources of his appeal; after all, coverage of his rallies saturated the airwaves 

during the 2016 campaign. On one occasion, major cable news networks were reduced to 

broadcasting a live video feed of an empty podium prior to a rally (Grynbaum, 2016). Trump’s 

longtime advisor Roger Stone (2017) described rallies as “the focal point of his entire campaign, 

amplified by the cable news networks that carried his rally speeches around the clock” (pp. 11-

12). The capacity of Trump rallies to serve as “an identity festival,” or a “dramatic enactment of 

a specific vision of America” deserves further analysis (Reicher & Haslam, 2017b, para. 6). 

Although media commentators correctly “dismissed Trump’s obsession with the size of his 

rallies,” Trump intuitively “understood that the crowd – activated and entrained in just the right 

way – made possible a self-sustaining affective conflagration” (Richardson, 2017, p. 753). It is 

this highly emotional, collective bonding experience that warrants exploration. 

The Indispensability of Rallies to the Trump Campaign 

A simple comparison of the Trump and Clinton campaigns illustrates that rallies were 

crucial to Trump’s outreach efforts. By most metrics, Hillary Clinton ran a superior campaign to 

Trump. Clinton’s campaign was more disciplined and professional, boasted a “ground game 8

advantage . . . as large as the one Obama had over Mitt Romney in 2012,” and “spent almost 

twice as much money” as the Trump campaign (Silver, 2017, paras. 8-9). The Clinton campaign 

“was arguably the most data-driven in American history,” whereas the Trump campaign’s digital 

operations were “less sophisticated” and not deployed until late in the campaign (“The role of 

technology,” 2016, paras. 1-4). Trump’s campaign consisted of “a bare-bones team, debilitated 

by infighting, poor coordination with allies, and a message that change[d] with Trump’s whims” 

(Tur, 2017, p. 172). Indeed, Trump arguably “had no real campaign beyond rallies” (Roberts, 

2016, para. 36). 

Given these weaknesses, Trump’s rallies stand out as “the cornerstone of an 

unconventional, star-powered presidential campaign that eschewed traditional organizing and 

defied every expectation” (Colvin, 2018, para. 6). My argument is not that Trump’s rallies are a 

silver-bullet explanation for his victory, given the litany of variables (the economy, racism, 

sexism, FBI director James Comey, Russian interference, etc.) that played a role in the outcome 

of the 2016 election. Rather, I argue that the rallies are important for understanding the 

relationship between Trump and his base. Given that Trump made little use of traditional “get 

out the vote” techniques, the hundreds of rallies he held throughout 2015 and 2016 are of great 

interest to those seeking clarity about the sources of his appeal. Michael Glassner, Trump’s 

campaign chief operating officer, described rallies as “the driving force behind this movement” 

(qtd. in Bender, 2019, para. 7). 

As President, rallies have remained central to Trump’s public outreach efforts (Glasser, 

2018). Rallies “played a central role to his first victory” and “are in many ways more important 

than ever” as President Trump has faced multiple investigations and impeachment (Bender, 

2019, para. 3). These rallies are illuminating to those interested in the relationship between 9

Trump and his supporters, even though rallies are attended by only a fraction of the more than 60 

million Americans who voted for him in 2016. Trump rallies are physically attended by 

thousands, but their reach is considerably enlarged by the extensive media coverage that they 

receive. Trump’s competence as a public official and businessman is questionable, but he is 

undoubtedly a “master of media spectacle,” and rallies are a key means through which he 

captures the national spotlight and forces himself into public consciousness (Kellner, 2016, p. 1). 

Local and national newspapers cover Trump’s visits in the days before and after a rally, while 

the speech itself generates significant attention from cable news networks, who typically show at 

least portions of the speech live and then debate the latest offensive remark made by Trump at 

the rally afterwards (Cook, 2017; Kellner, 2016). Trump’s rallies “become statewide media 

events, drawing local reporters and camera crews” to “report on thousands who show up to see 

the president, including many who camp outside the arena a day or two in advance” (Bender, 

2019, para. 40). 

Rallies represent a pivotal component of Trump’s efforts to communicate with the public 

and are accordingly useful texts for analysis. Beyond the people in the room with him, Trump 

rallies command attention from users of Twitter and Facebook, sparking conversations among 

both Trump supporters and opponents worldwide. Social media platforms allow millions of 

people on a global scale to react to Trump’s speech in real time, further expanding Trump’s 

audience. After the crowd at a 2019 rally in North Carolina chanted “send her back” about 

Congresswoman Ihlan Omar (D-MN), Twitter erupted with discussions of the rally. The phrase 

“send her back” was echoed by thousands of accounts while competing hashtags of 

“#IStandWithIlhan” and “#IStandWithPresTrump” were among Twitter’s top trending phrases 

and were repeated more than a hundred thousand times (Gstalter, 2019; Jasper & Murphy, 2019). 10 

Thanks to amplification from both traditional media sources and social media, Trump 

rallies reach considerably more people than the immediate audience of around 10,000-20,000. 

Through an overarching mobilization strategy that combines “rallies and [Trump’s] physical 

presence at them,” “constant attacks on the media” and subsequent media “reporting of his 

attacks,” Trump produces “an echo effect” that ensures widespread circulation of his rally 

rhetoric (Agnew & Shin, 2019, p. 88). Understanding Trump’s rhetoric therefore requires 

attention to his rallies. 

Prior Research on Trump’s Rhetoric 

Despite their centrality to the Trump campaign, rallies have not received sufficient 

attention as holistic rhetorical events. It is clear that rallies were an essential element of Trump’s 

attempts to connect with the several thousand voters in a handful of states that would ultimately 

afford him a path to victory in the electoral college; less clear is exactly what occurred at these 

events that made them such a rhetorically potent force. During the 2016 election race, “Trump 

rallies were reported on primarily in terms of the violence that would sometimes break out at 

them or the falsehoods, misstatements, and attacks Trump would utter” (Allott & Allott, 2018, 

para. 11). Trump’s rallies, and the rituals associated with them, remain poorly understood and 

have been dismissed as circuses or reality-free spectacles (Stiehm, 2016, para. 7; Lemon, 2018; 

Rubin, 2018). Although these criticisms of Trump rallies have merit, rhetorical critics cannot 

afford to neglect their centrality in how Trump directly engaged his supporters. 

There is no shortage of literature describing the characteristics of Trump’s rhetoric, but 

oftentimes these analyses create taxonomies categorizing themes in Trump’s rhetoric itself, 

rather than considering the situations and contexts in which audiences encountered this rhetoric. 

In The Twitter Presidency: Donald J. Trump and the Politics of White Rage , Brian Ott and Greg 11 

Dickinson (2019) explored the same critical puzzle that I have posed here, musing that “given 

the unwavering loyalty of his base, one cannot help but wonder what makes Trump so appealing 

to his followers” in spite of his outrageous behavior (p. 2). To explain this puzzle, Ott and 

Dickinson argued that “it is primarily Trump’s style” that “account[s] for his appeal” (p. 2). 

Throughout the book, the authors link Trump’s appeal to his followers to his unique personal 

“rhetorical style” (p. 2), “paying particular attention to its principal manner (i.e., white rage) and 

modality (i.e., Twitter) of expression” (p. 20). 

Similarly, Appel (2018) applied “the rhetorical elements of burlesque drama to the 

primary and general election campaign rhetoric of Donald J. Trump” (p. 158). Appel, drawing 

upon Burkean theories, argued for the existence of five generic features of burlesque drama: (1) a 

morally disordered scene, (2) a guilt-obsessed agent, (3) a guilty counteragent, (4) a sacrificial 

act, and (5) redemptive purposes and means (p. 159). Appel then proceeded to chart the 

emergence of these rhetorical properties in Trump’s rhetoric, but without extensive consideration 

of how audiences experienced these themes. 

Several other existing rhetorical analyses of Trump employ a taxonomical approach. 

Johnson (2017) characterized Trump’s rhetoric as a type of demagoguery seeped in white, 

victimized, toxic masculinity, and noted the centrality of “repeated invocations of disturbing 

concepts and images, such as death, destruction, humiliation, submission, and rape” (p. 236) and 

“masculine charisma” to his appeal (p. 237). According to Johnson, Trump himself 

“manufactures precarity through four key, interlocking themes: felt powerlessness as a sign of 

agency, democracy as danger, raced and gendered hostility toward otherness, and charisma as 

compensatory for lack” (p. 238). Stuckey (2017) attempted to make sense of the events of 2016 

by outlining “the rhetoric of political change,” or the “kinds of rhetorical action” that “signal that 12 

change may be on the way” (p. 676). Stuckey then identified these “rhetorical markers” as “a 

dependence upon hyperbole; an accompanying tendency toward incivility; a certain vagueness 

regarding means and ends; and a reliance on hope and nostalgia” (p. 676) and argued that these 

themes were present in Trump’s rhetoric during the 2016 campaign. Theye and Melling (2018) 

also observed that Trump’s willingness to eschew norms of political correctness contributed to 

his perceived authenticity. 

Rowland’s (2019) analysis of Trump’s nationalist and populist rhetoric emphasized a 

number of the same themes that I describe in Trump rallies, but focused almost exclusively on 

Trump’s speeches, as opposed to the rally itself. Kelly (2020) argued that Trump engages in the 

rhetoric of ressentiment to create “fantasies of persecution that ennoble both him and his 

audience” (p. 9). Although Kelly acknowledged that Trump’s “post-election rallies are 

spectacular, emotionally-charged events,” he analyzed primarily “the agonistic drama that 

unfolds in Trump’s address to his supporters” rather than other elements of these events (p. 9). 

Moreover, analyzing rallies holistically reveals important ways in which Trump’s message is 

reinforced by aspects of these events other than Trump’s address. 

Other analyses highlight Trump’s capacity to evoke various emotions. Richardson (2017) 

highlighted the “centrality of disgust to Trump’s rhetoric and affect” (p. 748), forwarding that a 

desire to cleanse the nation of filth links Trump’s calls to fortify the U.S.-Mexico border, expel 

foreigners, “drain the swamp,” and bring the country back to a glorious, imagined past. Wahl-

Jorgensen’s (2018) analysis of Trump centered the emotion of anger, arguing that “the particular 

brand of exclusionary populism cultivated by Trump depends on the performance of anger as a 

way of dramatizing grievances” (p. 774). Studies such as these aptly chart recurring patterns in 

Trump’s rhetoric and its corrosive effect on public discourse but would benefit from a greater 13 

consideration of how actual audiences witnessed and consumed such rhetoric. The problem with 

these taxonomies is not that they are inaccurate or inflexible, but that they are incomplete 

because they assign Trump’s supporters a less prominent place in the picture. When the medium 

or venue of Trump’s messaging is considered, it is usually Trump’s Twitter account that is given 

the spotlight (Ott, 2017; Ott & Dickinson, 2019). Although Trump’s use of social media during 

the campaign was indeed novel, his rallies were another important venue where a great deal of 

concrete interactions between the candidate and his followers occurred. 

The taxonomical approach has the effect of focusing on Trump while neglecting the 

active participation of his supporters in the rhetorical processes being analyzed. Since building 

shared political identity is always a matter of co-construction between rhetor and audience 

(Hauser, 2011, p. 164), neglect of how Trump supporters engage in this process amounts to a 

denial of their agency. I argue that Trump supporters are not merely passive listeners who are 

moved to fanaticism by Trump’s demagogic rhetoric; they subscribe to his political movement to 

obtain real psychological benefits such as a feeling of membership in a larger community. 

Rallies are the key rhetorical sites that illustrate how Trump supporters were enthusiastic 

participants in the co-construction of the besieged community described in Trump’s rhetoric. 

Moreover, taxonomical analyses may misdiagnose Trump’s resonance as a matter of 

charismatic leadership or rhetorical skill, overlooking the role of audiences in building 

identification (Johnson, 2017; Oliver & Rahn, 2016; Ott & Dickinson, 2019). Charisma is indeed 

“the outcome of careful craftsmanship” by a speaker, but also involves a co-constructive process 

where “the group being led is on equal footing with the leader” (Haslam & Reicher, 2012, p. 44). 

Analyzing Trump’s rhetoric in a vacuum without attention to contextual dynamics hinders our 

understanding of how Trump supporters made sense of Trump’s appeals and the issues at stake 14 

in the 2016 campaign. This approach replicates an oft-criticized flaw of public address studies, 

which is that scholars focus so obsessively upon the speaker as a “great man of history” that they 

overlook everyday rhetorical practices and impoverish “our understanding of public address as 

significant human activity” (Zarefsky, 2010, p. 74; Morris 2007). With regards to the Trump 

phenomenon, the unlikely bond built between the candidate and his core supporters was not 

solely a unidirectional transmission from speaker to listener but was ritualistically enacted at 

campaign rallies. Taxonomical analyses of Trump’s public addresses need to be supplemented 

with rhetorical criticisms that delve into the ways that identification was co-constructed between 

Trump and his supporters. 

Trump rallies deserve to be taken seriously by rhetorical scholars, and not merely because 

they hosted Trump speeches that were ostensibly the main attraction. Reicher and Haslam 

(2017a) posited that “a Trump rally is about more than a Trump speech” (p. 29). Through several 

recurring features – the speeches, the long lines that formed hours in advance, the chants, the 

music, the merchandise, and the sometimes violent interactions between Trump and his audience 

and between various members of the audience – these rallies constituted “the performance of a 

particular worldview” and should be analyzed accordingly (Reicher & Haslam, 2017a, p. 29). To 

understand Trump and his unique relationship with his followers, rhetorical critics must “start by 

looking at what went on inside a Trump event” (Reicher & Haslam, 2017b, para. 3). Rallies 

demand attention in toto , or as a whole or a rhetorical totality: the rhetorical performances of 

rally-goers that became habitual features of these events should be analyzed just as rigorously as 

Trump’s verbal remarks. 15 

Implications of a Holistic Study of Trump Rallies 

The analysis of Trump rallies that follows produces several important scholarly benefits. 

These insights not only improve our understanding of the Trump phenomenon, but also extend 

previous rhetorical scholarship regarding campaign rhetoric, presidential rhetoric, and the 

process of identification-building. In conducting this analysis, I investigate not just Trump, but 

the phenomenon known as “Trumpism.” At times, I use the term “Trumpism,” “rather than 

Trump, to de-emphasize the President himself, while acknowledging the particular, and to some 

extent unprecedented, alliance of forces that have coalesced around his campaign” (Chinn & 

Entin, 2018, p. 3). Trumpism therefore refers to the broader political movement and ideas 

associated with Donald Trump as opposed to the man himself. 

As an ideological framework, Trumpism represents a departure from previous iterations 

of conservatism, by substituting Reagan’s “optimistic and inclusive brand of conservatism” with 

“dystopian nationalism” (Justice, 2018, p. 30). However, there is also significant continuity: 

“Perhaps the most fundamental point to make about Trumpism is that it is a rebranding, a 

repackaging of far right-wing ideas, mixed in with a little inspiration from Trump himself” 

(Morris, 2019, p. 22). Lee (2017) highlighted the fluid nature of conservative political identity 

and noted that Trumpism represents a “redefinition” of conservatism rather than a total 

repudiation (p. 721). Farber (2016) argued that Trumpism contains some deviations from 

traditional conservative orthodoxy (such as trade protectionism) but nonetheless relies on tried-

and-true tactics utilized by conservatives to gain power, such as the stigmatization of outgroups 

and defense of hierarchies. In many respects, Trumpism is a radical “entelechialization,” or 

symbolic over-extension, of patterns of nativist, reactionary thought that have long existed within 

conservatism (Rowland & Frank, 2002, p. 303). Data showing a “dramatic uptick in incidents of 16 

racist and xenophobic harassment across the country” following Trump’s victory indicates that 

certain violence-prone Trump supporters have taken the President’s exclusionary rhetoric to its 

logical extreme by resorting to violence against the scorned enemies commonly railed against in 

Trump’s rally speeches (Okeowo, 2016, para. 1). It is precisely Trumpism’s capacity to foster 

such anti-democratic and dangerous practices that creates an exigency for scholarly 

investigation. 

Importantly, Trumpism is a phenomenon that is interrelated with international 

developments. Paralleling Trump’s rapid rise in the United States is the ascendance of 

authoritarian populist movements across the world. Although “right-wing populism across 

Europe and the United States does not come with uniform, clearly defined characteristics” and 

“takes different forms depending on nationally specific factors such as political history, system 

and culture,” Trump and his international counterparts nonetheless share a similar rhetorical 

frame (Greven, 2016, p. 4). Authoritarian populism, which has arisen in a variety of international 

contexts, is an illiberal, anti-pluralist variant of populism that explains politics as a competition 

between pure, ordinary citizens and corrupt elites (Norris & Inglehart, 2019; Zürn, 2018). The 

United Kingdom’s Brexit movement, France’s Marie Le Pen, and Prime Minister Viktor Orbán 

of Hungary, and Trump all espouse a similar worldview that “directs tribal grievances ‘upwards’ 

toward elites” and “‘outwards’ toward scapegoat groups” (Norris & Inglehart, 2019, p. 7). Aside 

from these rhetorical similarities, the rise of populism in the United States, Europe, and other 

places is in part a reaction to the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis and the West’s foreign 

policy failures in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, and elsewhere (Cox, 2017, p. 16). Investigating 

Trumpism may therefore provide limited, but nonetheless valuable, insights into the 

phenomenon of authoritarian populism generally. In what follows, I argue that applying a 17 

rhetorical perspective to Trump rallies will provide key insights into the nature of Trump 

supporters, the sources of Trump’s appeal, and the process of identification. 

A More Holistic Portrait of Trump Supporters 

First and foremost, a closer look at rallies will improve our understanding of Trump’s 

ironclad relationship with his base of core supporters and our comprehension of his supporters 

themselves. By Trump’s “base” I refer generally to the 80-90% of Republican voters who 

consistently express approval of Trump, but also more specifically to the dedicated few that 

attend rallies to celebrate Trump and signal their loyalty to him. Johnson (2017) noted that 

Trump’s ideological and rhetorical “incoherence is opaque to his critics but meaningful to his 

adherents” (p. 230). Similarly, Katy Tur, a frequent attendee of Trump rallies during her time as 

NBC’s embedded reporter covering the Trump campaign, described the confusing nature of 

these rallies in her book Unbelievable . According to Tur (2017), Trump supporters are a difficult 

group for outsiders to make sense of, since 

they seem divided between people who believe all they see and hear, and those who 

know it’s partially a performance. The scariest thing about being at a Trump rally is that 

you don’t know who believes it and who doesn’t. (p. 96) 

Media commentary has often attempted to make sense of Trump supporters by caricaturing them 

in sweeping terms as an angry mob, “deplorables,” and simpletons, or conversely, as a 

downtrodden class of blue-collar everymen populating rust belt diners who are deserving of 

sympathy (Uberti, 2017). 

Rhetorical scholars have also participated in such stereotyping. Ott and Dickinson (2019) 

articulated a distinction between “Trump voters” who “exercised poor judgement” but have “no 

particular allegiance” to Trump, and “Trump followers” who “blindly support Trump” (p. ix). 18 

The latter group, according to Ott and Dickinson, are defined by “their mindless, cult-like 

response to Trump” (p. ix). This characterization not only disparages Trump supporters but casts 

them as essentially passive: the targets of his demagoguery but not rhetorical or political agents 

themselves. Such crude stereotypes are neither accurate nor useful for understanding Trumpism. 

The millions of Americans who voted for Trump are not going away; even factoring in 

demographic change, they will continue to influence American politics for years to come. Rather 

than dismissing them as “mindless,” those concerned by Trump’s rise would do well to consider 

their point of view. Even if one considers Trump’s followers beyond persuasion (a debatable 

proposition), it is still instructive to study what motivates their support. Both caricatures – Trump 

followers as working-class heroes and Trump followers as bigoted lemmings – are unhelpful if 

the goal is to gain a fuller understanding of Trump and his actually-existing supporters. To 

understand the resonance of Trump’s message for his supporters, it is important to “rescue 

Trump supporters from caricature” (Younge, 2018, para. 10). The Trump phenomenon, and the 

loyalty of his supporters, will continue to appear unintelligible so long as critics focus primarily 

upon Trump himself rather than the ground-level rhetorical interactions associated with his 

campaign, which is where much of the hard work of group-identity formation occurs. Rather 

than analyze Trump’s rhetoric from the outside-looking-in as many rhetorical analyses have, 

critics must attempt to understand the inner workings of the Trump movement. 

In his prescient analysis of Hitler’s Mein Kampf , Kenneth Burke defended his focus on 

such a scorned text as necessary for reasons comparable to those I have outlined here. The 

distinctions between Trump and Hitler are many and significant, but Burke’s justifications for 

study are nonetheless worth detailing. Burke argued that Hitler’s ability to “[swing] a great 

people into his wake” made it urgent for scholars to “watch it carefully . . . to discover what kind 19 

of ‘medicine’ this medicine-man has concocted, that we may know, with greater accuracy, 

exactly what to guard against” (Burke, 1957, p. 164). Similarly, dismissing Trump rallies or 

otherwise failing to take them seriously would contribute “more to our gratification than to our 

enlightenment” (p. 164). Burke attributed the resonance of Hitler’s message to Hitler’s ability to 

craft a comprehensive worldview “for people who had previously seen the world but piecemeal,” 

arguing that “much of his lure derive[d] . . . from the bad filling of a good need” (p. 187). 

To extend Burke’s medicinal metaphor, the societal sicknesses that facilitated Trump’s 

rise – declining faith in the two major political parties, political gridlock, burgeoning inequality, 

racism and other cultural tensions – are unlikely to dissipate soon, ensuring that Trumpism will 

not recede when Donald Trump departs the office of presidency. Regardless of Trump’s fate, 

there will be demand for political figures who promise alluringly easy fixes to various real and 

imagined needs. There is, for example, a strong possibility that “Trump’s strategy of using 

explicitly racist and sexist appeals to win over white voters may be followed by candidates in 

future elections” (Schaffner et al., 2018, p. 31). 

A hypothetical successor to Trump, who claims his populist mantle and stokes a similar 

set of anxieties in their supporters, may enjoy more success in shepherding the nation toward 

revanchist authoritarianism if they can avoid the dysfunction and self-inflicted wounds that have 

bedeviled the Trump administration: “A more cunning populist would be far more dangerous” 

(Boot, 2019, para. 6). To “forestall the concocting of similar medicine” by a future demagogue, 

we must look closely at the perceived needs of Trump supporters and the way campaign rallies 

have emerged as a means of coping with them (Burke, 1957, p. 164). Rallies are the key 

rhetorical text that promise keen insights into the Trump phenomenon: “There is no 

understanding Donald Trump without understanding his rallies. They are the crucible of the 20 

Trump revolution, the laboratory where he turns his alternative reality into a potion to be sold to 

his followers” (Pilkington, 2018, paras. 1-2). 

Transcendence of the Economics Versus Racism Debate 

Second, a rhetorical analysis of Trump rallies can test the economic and racial/cultural 

explanations of Trump’s appeal. Trump’s supporters are not a monolith and cast their ballots for 

him for a multitude of reasons. Given that Trumpism threatens to outlive the Trump presidency, 

it is “vital that we understand” what “attracted Americans to the real estate mogul in the first 

place” (Jacobs, 2018, para. 1). Further investigation is needed to improve our understanding of 

what motivates Trump supporters beyond dualistic notions of “economic anxiety” or “racism.” 

Although a complete profile of Trump supporters is beyond the scope of any single project, an 

investigation into Trump’s campaign rallies will help illuminate what motivates the devotion of 

Trump’s most diehard loyalists. 

Trumpism is driven by both economic changes and nativist anxiety about the influence of 

demographic changes on “American identity” (Childers, 2013, p. 192). Through an analysis of 

Trump rallies, one can discern the multifaceted nature of Trump’s appeal, and the way that his 

narrative of American decline simultaneously resonated with his audiences’ fears of economic 

stagnation and their various prejudices. At any given Trump rally, attendees witnessed Trump 

delivering jeremiads against entrenched corporate interests that would sound more at home in a 

Bernie Sanders or Elizabeth Warren speech, and also encountered arguments consonant with the 

hateful bile of white supremacists such as David Duke and Richard Spencer. In addition, Trump 

rallies featured recurring rituals wherein participants reaffirmed their status as members of a 

victimized community, whose perceived marginalization is experienced in both economic and 

cultural terms. This study will demonstrate that the economic and racial/cultural dimensions of 21 

Trump’s appeal are more interconnected than many analyses would suggest. Reconciling the 

contradictory data that shows economic and racial/cultural factors to drive support for Trump is 

crucial: “correctly assessing the forces that led to Trump’s victory is . . . central to figuring out 

what happens next” and determining what “counter-measures would be effective” (Casselman, 

2017, para. 3). These findings, which are based on multiple first-hand accounts of Trump rallies, 

may therefore serve as a humanistic complement to the more scientific profiles of Trump 

supporters that have been produced by psychologists (Crowson & Brandes, 2017; Pettigrew, 

2017). 

Enhanced Understanding of How Trump Bonds with His Supporters 

Third, this analysis provides a deeper account of the multidimensional bond between 

Trump and his supporters than has been provided to date. A significant amount of research has 

established that Trump appealed to his supporters by dividing, excluding, and demonizing. For 

example, Oliver and Rahn (2016) described how Trump’s “construction of a ‘we’ [was] 

facilitated also by the invocation of the people’s enemies, both internal and external—the 

‘people’ often come to know who they are by who they are not” (p. 191). Although it is 

undeniable that Trump built identification with his supporters by defining their imagined 

community in opposition to external enemies, an important dynamic that many “Trump critics 

have missed so far” is that “Trumpism, like many forms of non-secular worship, makes its 

believers feel good” (Wagner, 2018, para. 20). Aspects of Trump rallies that build identification 

in positive terms remain poorly understood. 

Trump rallies have often been framed by observers as frightening events full of vitriol 

and hatred. Complicating these negative accounts are descriptions of Trump rallies that describe 

a positive, affirming atmosphere. Molly Ball, a writer for the Atlantic who attended a Trump 22 

rally in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina in 2015, remarked that the rally did “not feel dark and 

aggressive and threatening,” or “like a powder keg about to blow, a lynch mob about to rampage. 

It [felt] joyous ” (para. 31). Similarly, Ed Pilkington, a reporter for the Guardian who attended 

five rallies in the Fall of 2018, admitted to being “confronted by an uncomfortable truth . . . you 

have to acknowledge the love. It may not be pure and selfless. It may be narcissistic and at times 

even threatening. But love is very much in the air” (para. 7). 

These accounts, and others like them, provide texture to our understanding of the Trump 

phenomenon by demonstrating that Trump rallies were not solely a site of negative 

“identification against ” a vilified “other.” Trump rallies were also a site of community-formation 

in positive terms, of “identification with ,” and therefore a site of hope. These events provided 

their attendees a sense of identity by supplying scapegoats such as immigrants and corrupt 

politicians; but they also fostered a sense of belonging during a time of cultural fragmentation 

through rituals that affirm the value of those participating in them. At Trump rallies, attendees 

had no shortage of foes to rail against; but they also learned “the strange joy inherent in the 

shouts of self-designated ‘deplorable’ status” (Wagner, 2018, para. 19). 

This finding helps reconcile the tension between accounts that describe Trump rallies as 

events defined by toxic rage and other accounts detailing a hopeful atmosphere by reminding us 

that these rallies were simultaneously sites of both great love and great fear, anger, and hate. 

More broadly, the uneasy mix of emotions present at Trump rallies indicates that building 

political identification requires that members are provided a coherent worldview containing clear 

friends and clear enemies. An enemy is necessary to provide the community self-understanding, 

so that they can better comprehend themselves by reference to what they are not; but members 

must also find some tangible benefit to subscribing to this community, rooted in a “perceived 23 

‘sameness’” and “shared values, interests, and beliefs” (Vigil, 2015, p. 23). Certain political 

narratives, when reinforced by rituals, offer such a benefit by affirming the community’s values 

and the self-worth of its members. 

This in turn demonstrates the growing power of partisan political affiliation for creating 

community at a time when traditional religiosity is declining in the United States (Wagner, 

2018). In the chapters that follow, I argue that the rise of Trumpism has been enabled in part by 

the breakdown of common frameworks that provided a modicum of stability to American life. 

Ideological enclaving and hyper-partisanship have exacerbated longstanding divisions along 

lines of religion, race/ethnicity, gender, and other axes of identity. Liberals and conservatives 

inhabit segregated information ecosystems, consuming news media that increasingly portrays the 

state of the nation in irreconcilable ways (Matsa, Mitchell, Gottfried, & Kiley, 2014; Justice & 

Bricker, 2019). Simultaneously, trust in institutions such as the media and Congress has 

markedly declined (Friedman 2017, 2018). Alongside these trends, national myths that once 

contributed to social cohesion have frayed. The civil religion of the American Dream, a narrative 

that holds that any person can succeed in America with work ethic and initiative, has been 

shaken by burgeoning inequalities (Gass, 2015; Graham, 2017). Rituals where Americans 

commemorate foundational stories or national heroes are now scarce. Cumulatively, widening 

societal divisions and the breakdown of mythic systems has produced a widespread feeling that 

Americans are strangers to each other: sharing a common physical location but lacking shared 

values. In such a “fragmented age,” “fellowship is a valuable feeling” and a “lucrative 

commodity” (Serazio, 2019, p. 152). Protecting against future demagogues and healing the scars 

left by partisan battles will be made easier if these yawning divides are narrowed. 24 

How this Analysis Proceeds 

Theoretical Lens 

This analysis utilizes several theoretical tools to explain the rhetorical potency of Trump 

rallies. First and foremost, the investigation into Trump rallies that follows is heavily informed 

by Kenneth Burke’s concept of “identification.” In A Rhetoric of Motives , Burke (1969) argued 

that rhetoric’s power comes not only from its ability to persuade, but from its ability to induce 

unlike individuals to perceive a likeness of interests. According to Burke, one of rhetoric’s chief 

functions is to construct a unity of interests between a rhetor and audience that might otherwise 

be divided in some sense. Burke viewed division as an inevitable aspect of the human condition 

and isolated rhetoric as a means by which identification between disparate individuals can be 

built in the interest of advancing cooperation. 

In the analysis that follows, I posit that identification, or the dissolution of divisions 

between a rhetor and audience, is the key concept needed to understand the relationship between 

Trump and his base. I explain how various aspects of Trump rallies facilitated creation of an 

identificatory bond between Trump and his supporters. In doing so, I extend previous scholarship 

that outlines the capacity of populist rhetoric, rituals, violence, and conspiracy theories to 

contribute to group-identity formation. 

Selection of Texts 

In the process of analyzing Trump rallies, I draw upon a wide variety of texts to gain 

broad perspective regarding the identification-building that occurs at these events. Pundits and 

commentators who have analyzed Trump from the outside-looking-in have characterized Trump 

and his arguments as incoherent, unintelligible, and nonsensical (Johnson, 2017, p. 231). This 

project helps makes Trump’s appeal more intelligible by synthesizing the perspectives of 25 

scholars, journalists, and citizens who have attended Trump rallies and created vivid accounts of 

their experiences (such as: Ball, 2015; Glasser, 2018; Guilford, 2016; Homans, 2018; Palmeri, 

2018; Pilkington, 2018; Saunders, 2016; Schumacher, 2018; Stelter, 2018; Terrill, 2017; Tur, 

2017). By drawing upon a broad range of accounts, as well as my own experience, the 

shortcomings, biases, and partialities of each individual recollection can be minimized. 

Analyzing multiple Trump rallies is necessary to explain these events as a genre of discourse 

defined by a “recurring occasion,” perceived needs, limiting purposes, and societal limitations, in 

order to make generalizations about their characteristics, rituals, and functions (Rowland, 1991, 

p. 143). In conducting this analysis, I follow Burke’s (1973) suggestion that rhetorical critics 

“use all that there is to use” (p. 23) by making use of a collection of accounts from a diverse 

group of witnesses, as well as my own experience, looking for recurring patterns in the rhetorical 

behaviors of Trump and his audiences. 

Two accounts of Trump rallies stand out as particularly useful for this analysis and are 

referenced extensively. First, I utilize Katy Tur’s (2017) book Unbelievable , which contains 

invaluable first-person descriptions of multiple Trump rallies, spanning from the earliest, most 

amateurish days of his campaign in the Summer of 2015 to election night of 2016. Tur was a 

fixture at Trump rallies throughout the campaign and earned a Walter Cronkite Award for 

Excellence in part for providing “unique insight into Trump voters” while covering the campaign 

for more than five hundred days (Norman Lear Center, 2017, para. 8). Tur’s (2017) recollections 

in Unbelievable are derived from “thousands of pages of reporting,” cross-referenced against the 

experiences of “those who experienced the same moments alongside” her, in addition to her 

extensive field notes, all of which were examined by “a professional fact-checker” to ensure 

rigor (p. xi). Second, I also lean upon journalist Gwynn Guilford’s (2016) ethnographic account 26 

of three Trump rallies in Ohio during March of 2016. Guilford’s account is notable for the great 

depth and detail of its observations and was also the basis for Reicher and Haslam’s (2017a; 

2017b) psychological research on Trump rallies. I also make extensive use of transcripts of 

Trump’s remarks at rallies, video footage of these events, as well as my extensive field notes 

from attending multiple Trump rallies. 

Methodology 

To supplement and build upon previous accounts of Trump rallies, this project is 

additionally informed by my experiences as a “participant observer” of Trump rallies (Tracy, 

2013). In the interest of encountering Trump supporters as living, breathing human agents rather 

than distant “others,” I conducted “rhetorical fieldwork,” hoping to gain insight into the affective 

bond between Trump and his followers (Endres, Hess, Senda-Cook, & Middleton, 2016). Given 

that the rhetorical power of Trump’s rallies stems from their capacity to serve as a highly-

emotional communal bonding experience, ethnographic methodologies are useful for gaining a 

greater understanding of what motivates support for Trump: “it is through actually engaging in 

the activities and environments we wish to learn about that we come to know them” (Pink, 2015, 

p. 105). Rhetorical fieldwork allowed me to witness and participate in the rites of passage that 

Trump rallies are organized around. I detail this methodology further in chapter II. 

Conclusion 

This analysis provides a window into Trumpism by highlighting not only Trump’s 

campaign rhetoric, but the concrete activities that Trump supporters habitually engaged in at 

rallies to constitute a community. One might reasonably object that this argument misdiagnoses 

the causes of Trump’s durable popularity with his core supporters, by overstating the importance 

of rallies and understating the importance of the nation’s atmosphere of hyper-polarization and 27 

“negative partisanship,” which in turn fosters “stronger party loyalty,” “straight-ticket voting,” 

and “more nationalized voting” (McRainey, 2018, para. 13). There is merit to this point, 

especially given the tendency of conservatives to consume partisan news media sources 

(Jamieson & Cappella, 2008). The influence of extreme partisanship is so significant that it is 

difficult to see how Trump could have emerged without the existence of Fox News and a 

polarized electorate. 

Nonetheless, to attribute the bond between Trump and his supporters to these dynamics 

alone would be deterministic. This argument ignores that some conservative media opinion 

leaders on Fox News initially opposed Trump’s candidacy in favor of more traditional candidates 

such as Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio (Matthews, 2016; Mayer, 2019; Sherman, 2016; Silver, 2015). 

Trump’s success in overcoming opposition to his campaign and then transforming the 

Republican Party into the party of Trump is consistent with Baldassarri and Goldberg’s (2014) 

research, which argues that “beneath the ideologically dichotomized rhetoric promoted by 

politicians and the media lies an ideationally heterogeneous public” that is receptive to rhetorical 

appeals (p. 77). Political bonds between a candidate and his/her supporters are not an automatic 

outcome of partisan affiliation or consumption of partisan media, but instead result from an 

interplay of factors including political rhetoric, which “plays an important role” in activating 

certain belief systems and “building the cognitive framework within which people operate” (p. 

80). Since identification with a certain candidate is not preordained by partisanship, it makes 

good sense to study how Trump cultivated such sturdy bonds with his supporters through 

campaign rallies. My argument is not that Trump rallies entirely explain the durable bond 

between Trump and his base, but rather to utilize rallies as “representative anecdotes” for 

analyzing that relationship (Burke, 1945, p. 60). 28 

There is clearly a need for rhetorical analysis of Trump’s campaign rallies. Despite 

voluminous literature debating the sources of Trump’s appeal, the seemingly unshakeable bond 

between Trump and his core supporters remains mysterious. Because rallies are one of the key 

mechanisms by which Trump’s followers enact devotion to Trumpism, an analysis of Trump’s 

campaign rallies is vital to improve our understanding of this phenomenon. Given that political 

identification is constructed through rhetoric, applying a rhetorical perspective to rallies is 

particularly important: “understanding [Trump’s] appeal is the province of rhetoric and, thus, 

rhetorical scholars are uniquely well positioned and equipped to assess Trump’s improbable 

political success” (Ott & Dickinson, 2019, p. 2). My rhetorical analysis of Trump rallies 

proceeds through six subsequent chapters. Chapter II explains the rhetorical fieldwork 

methodologies that inform this analysis. Chapter III argues that Trump, through his addresses at 

rallies, constructs a populist outsider persona that insulates him from critiques delivered by the 

media and elites. Chapter IV argues that Trump supporters use recurring rituals at Trump rallies 

to constitute a community. Chapter V argues that violence at Trump rallies contributes to the 

constitution of this community and activates the authoritarian personality of certain supporters. 

Chapter VI argues that conspiracy theory is another tool through which Trump supporters build 

community and make sense of politics. In chapter VII, I conclude by explaining the implications 

that this project has for the study of rhetoric, campaign communication, and American politics. 29 

Chapter II 

Rhetorical Fieldwork at Trump Rallies 

In this analysis of Donald Trump’s campaign rallies, I employ a methodological approach 

that applies elements of rhetorical criticism and fieldwork methods that have been developed in 

rhetorical studies of environmental communication (Pezzullo, 2007; Pezzullo & de Onís, 2018), 

space and place (Blair, 2001; Dickinson & Aiello, 2016), and activism (Middleton, 2014a, 

2014b; Paliewicz, 2019). Fieldwork methodologies are designed to allow critics to discuss the 

experience of “being there” in the field where rhetoric is enacted. Since conducting a holistic 

analysis of Trump rallies and their attendees demanded that I observe such events from start to 

finish, as opposed to analyzing rallies from afar, this analysis is informed by my firsthand 

experiences conducting “rhetorical fieldwork” at Trump’s rallies (Endres, Hess, Senda-Cook, & 

Middleton, 2016). 

Communication and argumentation scholars have outlined the need for such an 

ethnographic approach to Trumpism. While delivering the keynote address at the National 

Communication Association’s (NCA) 2019 Summer Conference on Argumentation, Ronald 

Greene noted that rhetorical fieldwork approaches have been frequently applied by 

communication scholars to study vulnerable populations and activist groups (see: Dunn, 2016; 

Endres, Sprain, & Peterson, 2008; Middleton, 2014a, 2014b; Na’puti, 2019; Paliewicz, 2019; 

Poirot & Watson, 2015). However, Greene noted the comparative dearth of similar research 

about conservative groups and argued that understanding Trump’s affect may require physically 

attending his rallies. 

In an essay published in the NCA’s Communication Currents newsletter, Rick Cherwitz 

(2019) also called for scholars to study Trumpism up close and personally. Cherwitz argued in 30 

favor of research that is “intimate, personal, and grounded in the lived experiences of his 

audience” rather than “analyzing Trump’s discourse from a safe distance” (para. 3). Given that 

persuasion is a bidirectional process that involves a rhetor and an audience, Cherwitz called for 

scholars to spend “less time on analyzing and critiquing Trump’s speeches and Tweets” and to 

instead spend “more time attending the president’s rallies and recording what is happening from 

the perspective of audience members” (para. 11). According to Cherwitz, such an ethnographic 

approach may give the public “a sharper image of America’s political culture” and “a more 

enriched understanding of the rhetorical significance of audiences in the current political 

environment” (paras. 11-12). 

This project answers these calls for ethnographic research of the Trump phenomenon. 

Studying the relationship between Trump and his base while outlining the community-building 

function of Trump’s campaign rallies required me to adopt a specific theoretical lens and 

methodological approach that I outline in this chapter. This chapter proceeds in two parts. First, I 

argue that a rhetorical fieldwork approach to the study of Trump rallies will improve 

understanding of Trumpism. Second, I explain how I conducted this fieldwork while reflexively 

accounting for my “goals, interests, proclivities, and biases” (Tracy, 2013, p. 25). 

Benefits of a Rhetorical Fieldwork Approach 

Research informed by rhetorical fieldwork can serve as a useful supplement to existing 

scholarship about the Trump phenomenon. As a methodological approach, fieldwork takes as 

axiomatic that “the study of rhetoric is both enriched and perplexed by being present, being 

there , in the places where rhetoric does its work” (Rai & Druschke, 2018, p. 1). Rhetorical 

fieldwork can be defined as “a set of approaches that integrates rhetorical and qualitative inquiry 

toward the examination of in situ practices and performances in a rhetorical field” (Endres et al., 31 

2016, p. 514). This methodology affords the critic “flexibility to respond to a diverse range of 

rhetorical experiences” through the “incorporation of useful elements of qualitative research into 

rhetorical studies” (Middleton, Senda-Cook, & Endres, 2011, p. 386). Field methods are 

particularly useful for analyzing “situations in which meanings depend on places, physical 

structures, spatial delineations, interactive bodies, and in-the-moment choices” (p. 388). 

Trump rallies are one such rhetorical situation ripe for analysis using field methods, for 

three primary reasons. First, field methods allow for “thick description” of these events 

(Cherwitz, 2019; Geertz, 2000). Second, field methods enable dynamic analyses of rally 

attendees as rhetorical agents rather than passive listeners. Third, field methods allow for insights 

into the affective dimensions of the relationship between Trump and his supporters. 

Thick Description 

Field methods are a valuable tool for analyzing rallies because they enable granular 

insights into the inner workings of the Trump movement. Geertz (2000) described ethnography 

as an “intellectual effort” defined by “thick description” (p. 6). This approach can help “give 

rhetoricians an insider perspective on the lived advocacy of individuals and organizations” and 

offers “scholars firsthand knowledge and experience” of the communities they study (Hess, 

2011, p. 128). In particular, such an approach is invaluable for documenting and analyzing 

“ephemeral rhetorics” (McHendry, 2016, p. 549) by shifting “the role of the critic” to that of an 

“archivist cataloging fleeting rhetorical practices that would otherwise fail to be preserved as 

sources of rhetorical insight, as well as the creator of rhetorical texts through field notes that will 

be the object of the rhetorician’s critical focus” (Senda-Cook, Hess, Middleton, & Endres, 2019, 

p. 2). Accordingly, “being there” is “essential to one of the core practices of fieldwork: the 

production of thick descriptions that richly narrate the dynamics of everyday life within a field 32 

site” (Rai & Druschke, 2018, p. 4). Insofar as “being there” requires a “physical journey” where 

the critic comes into direct contact with “the place” and is in “the presence of other” persons 

interacting with the rhetorical text being analyzed, fieldwork methods are more conducive to 

thick description than “the act of seeing reproductions” (Blair, 2001, p. 275). Watching a 

“televised reproduction” of a “presidential speech” has the effect of distancing critics “from the 

bodily experience of going through security checkpoints to be present” and “the reactions of 

other audience members” (p. 276). 

A “thin description simply reports facts,” whereas “thick description” provides context 

for an act, states the “meanings that organize the action” and “presents the action as a text that 

can then be interpreted” (Denzin, 1989, p. 33). Thick description is a powerful way to bring 

“lived experience before the reader” that “permits a willing reader to share vicariously in the 

experiences that have been captured” by presenting “detail, context, emotion, and the webs of 

social relationships that join persons to one another” (p. 83). Understanding of Trump rallies— 

which remain under-analyzed from a rhetorical perspective and are at times misrepresented by 

the media—will be enhanced by thick descriptions derived from rhetorical fieldwork. Creating 

thick descriptions of Trump rallies entails devoting attention to conversations, music, 

merchandise, early speakers, applause and other audience reactions, interactions with protestors, 

and other rhetorical incidents both mundane and peculiar. In creating such detailed, textured 

accounts of Trump rallies I answer questions such as: what is the “mood” of the rally? What 

sights, sounds, and feelings can be found at the rally? How do attendees make sense of Trump, 

fellow Trump supporters, protestors, and the nation? What is it about Trump’s rhetoric and the 

rallies that creates a shared sense of community and motivates strong supporters? 33 

Audience Agency 

A rhetorical fieldwork approach is additionally beneficial in this context because it allows 

scholars to analyze Trump supporters as rhetorical agents. Trump supporters are frequently 

caricatured as “mindless mobs led by primitive urges and stirred up by a narcissistic demagogue” 

(Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 29), including by rhetorical scholars (Ott & Dickinson, 2019, p. ix). 

Current analyses of Trump perpetuate the tendency of rhetorical scholars to focus upon 

“historically significant moments of public oratory” (Endres et al., 2016, p. 513). Such 

scholarship is “predominantly focused on larger discourses, such as presidential rhetoric or 

massively disseminated messages, at the expense of the everyday discourses” (Hess, 2011, p. 

128). This top-down approach, which treats Trump’s supporters as inert spectators rather than 

rhetorical agents, may “obscure our ability to appreciate” how “those who are present [at Trump 

rallies] see the world” (Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 29). 

Field methods can provide a more holistic account of Trumpism than critical analysis of 

speeches alone by accounting for the contributions of everyday persons to the process of 

rhetorical community-building and supplementing existing scholarship about Trump. A 

rhetorical fieldwork approach reminds scholars that even “everyday micro-practices” such as 

standing in a line may become symbolically charged activities that create “grand narratives” and 

“systems of stories” about a community (Tracy, 2013, p. 222, p. 23). Indeed, anthropologists 

have explained how “waiting has been, and is increasingly used as, an instrument to elicit 

particular forms of subjectivities” and have called for scholars to engage in “ethnographic 

waiting” to reveal how seemingly mundane behaviors may carry political significance (Bandak 

& Janeja, 2018, p. 3, p. 22). A fieldwork approach can help reconceptualize “what constitutes a 

rhetorical practice” and “account for the ways in which everyday, mundane rhetorical practices 34 

are developed” in “the spaces of vernacular rhetorical performances” (Senda-Cook et al., 2019, 

p. 2). Field methods are a way to expand the textual material available to critics and ensure that 

the vernacular rhetoric of Trump supporters receives attention befitting their significant role in 

co-constructing consubstantiality. By explaining the multiple ways that Trump supporters 

actively participate in the rhetorical creation of the marginalized community described in 

Trump’s rhetoric, this fieldwork-driven project challenges the notion that Trump supporters are 

mere listeners or a mindless mob. 

Affective Insights 

Rhetorical fieldwork also allows recognition and appreciation of the affective dimension 

of Trumpism. By affect I refer to “a visceral mode of experience, consisting of bodily energy and 

intensity” (Cisneros, 2015, p. 248). Affect is interrelated with emotion, which is “the ‘capture’ of 

affect in the process of cognition and signification” (Cisneros, 2015, p. 248) and is the 

consequence of affect being “actualized or concretized in the flow of living” (Gould, 2009, p. 

20). Although distinguishing between affect and emotion can be difficult, Landau (2016) 

described affect as “a visceral bodily sensation” and emotion as “a symbolic attempt at capturing 

an intensity of affect” (Landau, 2016, p. 76). Importantly, it is through rhetoric that “certain 

things become invested with affective and emotional value,” as affect “can be channeled, 

mobilized, or ‘stuck’ to particular objects through the circulation and sedimentation of public 

discourse and in the service of particular interests” (Cisneros, 2015, p. 250). Rhetoricians have 

for centuries recognized the centrality of emotional appeals to persuasion, as Aristotle defined 

emotions as “all those feelings that so change men as to affect their judgements” (Aristotle, 

2010, p. 60). Scholars from a variety of disciplines have corroborated Aristotle’s arguments 

highlighting the importance of emotion for persuasion, demonstrating that humans “are not 35 

purely rational, and instead rely on values and emotions” to guide decision-making (Justice, 

2019, p. 4; Kahneman, 2011; Lobel & Loewenstein, 2005; Westen, 2008). 

Affect and Trump. After conducting rhetorical fieldwork at Trump rallies, my post-rally 

reflection process included a review of media coverage of the events to compare and contrast my 

experiences to those of other observers. While reading media accounts of a Trump rally I 

attended in Green Bay, Wisconsin in April of 2019, I came across a puzzling anecdote. A Los 

Angeles Times article discussing the 2020 campaign quoted Tracy Steinhoff, “a 46-year-old 

nurse” who “traveled three hours” to attend Trump’s rally in Wisconsin, but, mere days later, 

also attended one of former Vice President Joe Biden’s campaign events in Iowa (Halper, 2019, 

para. 32). Steinhoff told the Los Angeles Times that Biden “would be the only Democrat I would 

vote for; no one else is even close” (para. 32). I found it confusing that one person would feel 

compelled to support both candidates. At the Wisconsin rally, Trump and other speakers engaged 

in extensive attacks on both Biden and the Obama administration; conversely, the core argument 

of Biden’s campaign is that Trump’s presidency represents an affront to American values and 

that a return to the values (and normalcy) of the Obama administration is needed. Some readers 

may be tempted to dismiss Steinhoff’s comments as the product of ignorance or misinformation. 

However, her story points to a deeper conundrum in American politics. How could somebody 

find both Biden and Trump appealing, given their divergent political platforms and arguments? 

How do we make sense of individuals that voted for Obama in 2008 and 2012 but then cast their 

ballot for Trump in 2016, the candidate who campaigned on undoing the legacy of the nation’s 

first African American president? How could voters be attracted to two candidates with starkly 

different visions for the nation? 36 

The answer is that candidate selection is often driven by affect rather than a reasoned 

consideration of policy alone. Although in an ideally functioning democracy voters would select 

their preferred candidates by considering their qualifications, policy platforms, and temperament, 

psychologists have shown that voting is an area where emotions reign supreme (Fitzduff, 2017, 

p. 6). Indeed, “studies indicate that fact-based assessments or ideological stands apparently have 

a less decisive role in the preference for leaders” and that “electing leaders in political campaigns 

is not necessarily a result of a thorough analysis” for many voters (Popper, 2017, p. 65). 

Nowhere is this more evident than with regards to Donald Trump, who utilizes “an instinctual 

form of communication that outpaces evidence-based models” (Chaput, 2018, p. 206). Trump’s 

resonance “lies not in well-reasoned arguments, as he is clearly neither articulate nor cogent” and 

neither can it be attributed to his “beliefs or policy positions, as he demonstrates no allegiance to 

either” (Ott & Dickinson, 2019, p. 2). Trump’s appeal is “not based on the policies that he 

defended” but is instead “tied to the affective connection he created with his supporters” 

(Rowland, 2019, p. 350). 

Given that Trump’s durable relationship with his core supporters is grounded in affect, 

rhetorical field methods will prove particularly insightful. The body is “an important participant 

observation tool” that enables researchers to “engage the scene with their whole person, taking 

notes on the details of activities as well as on their own emotional insights and gut reactions” 

(Tracy, 2013, p. 76). Through “feeling rhetorical criticism” researchers may analyze “emotion 

words captured by rhetorical critics” via fieldnotes and “bodily sensations that are felt by 

rhetorical critics” in the field (Landau, 2016, pp. 77-78). A rhetorical fieldwork approach can 

help reveal how “certain behaviors, objects, symbols, or practices become routinized and 

sedimented with emotional meaning” (Cisneros, 2015, p. 250). Field methods provide “access to 37 

and insight into a wider range of texts, perspectives, and experiences than we might otherwise 

discover,” including “the extra-textual aspects of persuasion and rhetorical performance that 

require our sensory facilities to perceive” and “situated rhetorical forces that can only be 

observed through inhabitation” (Rai & Druschke, 2018, p. 3). To more fully comprehend the 

affective bond between Trump and his supporters, rhetoricians should consider the perspective 

and feelings of ordinary Trump voters. 

Navigating the Field at Trump Rallies 

This analysis is informed by my experiences at four Trump campaign rallies. In the 

spring of 2019, I attended two Trump rallies in states that were formerly considered part of the 

Democratic “blue wall” in the upper-Midwest: a rally in Grand Rapids, Michigan on March 28 th 

and another rally in Green Bay, Wisconsin, on April 27 th . These rallies are particularly 

appropriate events to study, given that Michigan and Wisconsin were instrumental to Trump’s 

upset victory in 2016. Trump voters in the Midwest, and particularly Michigan, have remained 

an object of popular fascination, as Michigan is the home of the storied “Reagan Democrats” of 

the 1980s and now the fabled “Obama to Trump” voters that supported Obama in 2008 and 2012 

but flipped to Trump in 2016, delivering him Michigan’s crucial 16 electoral votes (“Long-time 

Democratic pollster,” 2018). Attending these rallies offered a rare chance to observe a pivotal 

group of Trump supporters. 

Each rally I attended was contextually unique. Grand Rapids, an upscale city in Western 

Michigan, is traditionally conservative but began to trend towards the Democrats during the 

Trump era, as college educated voters and the suburbs have drifted away from the Republicans. 

By contrast, Green Bay, a blue collar, industrial town in Northern Wisconsin, remained a pro-

Trump stronghold at the time of my visit. Both rallies were dominated by discussion of Special 38 

Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into links between Russia and the Trump campaign, 

which was concluded shortly before Trump’s visit to Grand Rapids. Although the Grand Rapids 

rally was met with large organized protests by liberal and anti-Trump activists, I encountered no 

protestors at the Green Bay rally. 

Several months and countless news cycles later, I attended two more rallies. On October 

10 th , Trump visited Minneapolis, Minnesota, a city geographically nearby Grand Rapids and 

Green Bay but vastly different. As an urban area containing a college campus and a diverse 

population, Minneapolis was far less welcoming to the Trump campaign than either Grand 

Rapids or Green Bay. The Minneapolis rally had by far the heaviest security presence of any 

rally I attended, owing to the thousands of protestors who demonstrated nearby the venue where 

Trump spoke. Trump’s speech was repeatedly interrupted by protestors being ejected from the 

arena and riot police had to physically separate Trump supporters and protestors after the rally. 

The Minneapolis rally represented the Trump campaign on the offensive, entering a Democratic 

stronghold to make inroads into a state that Clinton had won by a surprisingly narrow margin. 

Exactly a week after I attended Trump’s rally in Minneapolis, I saw Trump on the 

defensive in Dallas, Texas, campaigning in a state that has traditionally been a conservative 

stronghold, but where the Democrats made gains in the 2018 midterm elections. The Dallas rally 

was by far the most diverse of any Trump rally I had attended to that point. Although the 

attendees were still overwhelming white and middle-aged, there was a visible contingent of 

“Latinos for Trump” in attendance. Both the Minneapolis and Dallas rallies were dominated by 

discussion of the House of Representatives’ impeachment inquiry into whether Trump 

improperly pressured the Ukrainian government into investigating his rival Joe Biden, which was 

initiated only several weeks prior. 39 

Studying Trump rallies from within required me to negotiate a basic tension between the 

need for extensive, rigorous documentation of my experiences and the need to assimilate into the 

crowd, so as to not attract attention to myself and alter the behavior of other attendees and thus 

corrupt my observations. In his account of a Trump rally, Pilkington (2018) drew attention to this 

fraught dynamic, justifying his choice to blend in with the crowd by stating: 

I chose not to go to the rally as a card-carrying member of the media, given at this point – 

and this truth was borne out repeatedly over the course of the day – Trump supporters, 

like Trump himself, are exceedingly distrustful of the media. If I had a notebook or 

microphone out, asking questions, the answers would be guarded or rehearsed, if anyone 

spoke to me at all. Instead, I decided I’d stand in line with everyone else, knowing that 

the six or seven people around me would be my window into at least a small portion of 

the Trump supporter’s mentality. (para. 7) 

Following the example of Pilkington and other observers of Trump rallies (Guilford, 2016), I 

wore inauspicious clothing and did my best to present myself as just another face in the crowd 

rather than an academic researcher. Attending the rallies was simple: I printed off a free ticket 

from the Trump campaign’s website, waited in line outside the venue for about 5-6 hours, went 

through security checkpoints, waited inside the venue for Trump to appear for about 2 more 

hours, then listened to Trump and the other featured speakers. Throughout each day, I had 

several interactions with other rally attendees. I made note of these interactions, and other 

“everyday rhetorical practices” that I witnessed by taking notes on my cellphone (Endres et al., 

2016, p. 515). I took photographs throughout the day and made video recordings of parts of the 

speeches, chants, and other intriguing interactions that I witnessed, also on my cellphone. 

Consistent with Tracy’s (2013) metaphor that ethnographers should act “like quilters, borrowing 40 

and interweaving viewpoints and multiple perspectives,” my recollections are supplemented by 

other transcripts, videos, and accounts that I found available online afterwards (p. 26). In 

conducting rhetorical fieldwork, I first and foremost endeavored to listen to the speeches, 

conversations, chants, and other snippets of talk that “illuminate understandings” of the Trump 

phenomenon (Cramer, 2016, p. 35). Ultimately, “for the task of figuring out why people think 

what they do,” there is “no better substitute than listening to them” (p. 20). 

In documenting and interpreting my experiences in the field, I strived to achieve 

“reflexivity” (Endres et al., 2016, p. 518). This entailed acknowledging that my social position 

renders me less than a purely objective observer. My perspective is necessarily limited by my 

own perceptual constraints and prior attitudes, although I have done my best to account for this 

by supplementing my recollections with other accounts of the rallies I attended and other 

accounts of Trump rallies generally. My interpretations of the material I gathered are necessarily 

colored by the subjective nature of my recollections, which has led me to treat my experiences 

not as an authoritative history but rather as an incomplete, “emplaced,” and embodied 

perspective that is only one piece of the puzzle in the effort to develop a fuller understanding of 

the Trump phenomenon (Endres et al., 2016, p. 514). 

Reflexivity requires “accounting for the critic’s political commitments” (Endres et al., 

2016, p. 514) and awareness “of issues of their own embodiment and of ephemeral rhetorics 

during the act of criticism” (McHendry, 2016, p. 549). My prior political commitments and 

personal history both enabled and complicated my rhetorical fieldwork. At the Midwestern 

Trump rallies, I was able to assimilate into the crowd on the basis of my Michigan upbringing. I 

lived in Michigan for more than twenty years and am familiar with the state, its culture, customs, 

and people, including the immediate area where the Grand Rapids rally was hosted. This shared 41 

background made it possible to engage with Trump supporters in both Michigan and neighboring 

Wisconsin—which sits on the opposite shore of Lake Michigan and is physically connected to 

Michigan’s Upper Peninsula—without seeming out of place. My social position as a cis-

gendered, able-bodied, heterosexual, middle-class, white, male additionally helped in this regard. 

Since the crowd largely shared these characteristics, my presence was not seen as unnatural. 

Although in certain contexts involving vulnerable populations such a privileged subject position 

may be an impediment to field-based research, in this case it made my task easier. 

On the other hand, my political beliefs are starkly different from most of those who 

attended this rally. Each rally was filled with about ten thousand passionate Trump supporters, 

which, suffice to say, I am not. This analysis reflects my best efforts to consider the rhetorical 

interactions I witnessed on their own terms, without imposing my own terministic screen, 

prejudging the Trump supporters, or otherwise allowing my political views to unduly influence 

my interpretations of the material I collected. I did not attend Trump rallies to judge, condemn, 

or celebrate other attendees. I attended to gain a modicum of understanding about the Trump 

phenomenon. In the process of conducting fieldwork, I witnessed exchanges that challenged my 

preconceived notions of Trump supporters and was often treated with familial kindness and 

warmth by strangers. Above all, I witnessed the complexity of the Trump phenomenon, and 

walked away from my fieldwork finding it more difficult to mentally shoehorn Trump voters into 

various rigid boxes and categories. At the ground level of rallies where quotidian interactions 

between ordinary Trump supporters occur, Trumpism is a messy, complicated phenomenon 

consisting of real, living, breathing people who contain contradictions and idiosyncrasies. 

My age also influenced my fieldwork. Although I was 27 years old at the time of 

attending my first Trump rallies, at times I stood out among the crowd of predominantly older 42 

attendees. Being a relatively young person at a Trump rally sets you apart; on multiple occasions 

I saw older Trump supporters fawn over younger members of the audience, favorably contrasting 

young Trump supporters with their allegedly “brainwashed” peers at universities. At the 

Minneapolis rally, a group of middle-aged Trump supporters nearby me in line praised nearly 

every young rally attendee who passed by, beaming: “way to go kids,” “millennials, we love it,” 

and “yay! Young people for Trump!” To older Trump supporters concerned about the leftward 

shift of younger generations, the presence of young Trump supporters at rallies served as a 

heartening sign that all may not be lost with regards to the future of conservatism in America. 

My experiences at Trump rallies would have undoubtedly been different were I older or younger. 

My approach “acknowledges and reflects the interconnection between researchers, 

what/who we study, and the production of knowledge” and recognizes that “no study is 

exhaustive” (Pezzullo & de Onís, 2018, pp. 116-117). The test of quality rhetorical fieldwork is 

not whether such research achieves perfect objectivity, since the very act of engaging in 

participatory fieldwork to create a record of fleeting rhetorical performances entails a degree of 

subjectivity. Rather, rhetorical fieldwork should be measured by its ability to “generate 

understanding and knowledge” of rhetorical phenomena and communities through “watching, 

interacting, asking questions, collecting documents, making audio or video recordings, and 

reflecting after the fact” (Tracy, 2013, p. 65). By this metric, I believe my ventures into the field 

were enlightening and fruitful. 

Integrating Fieldwork into Rhetorical Criticism 

After venturing into the field to observe Trump rallies, I used the material I generated in 

the field to document my experiences —field notes, videos, and photographs—as the basis for a 

rhetorical analysis of these events and for drawing conclusions about the Trump phenomenon 43 

and what it reveals about American politics. During the analysis stage, I first conducted an 

inductive consideration of fieldwork material to “conceptualize general patterns from these 

observations” and discover recurring themes and key terms that emerged from the data as well as 

rhetorical strategies that were utilized by both Trump and his audience (Tracy, 2013, p. 22). This 

reflective process allowed me to make “tentative claims” about the rhetorical functions of Trump 

rallies that I could then subsequently re-examine and refine during subsequent trips into the field 

(p. 22). While analyzing the rhetorical patterns I discerned in the fieldwork material, I searched 

for overriding principles that explain the resonance of Trump rallies, incorporating existing 

rhetorical scholarship to identify the proper theoretical framework. Three theoretical concepts 

emerged that from the data that seemed particularly relevant for understanding the rhetorical 

functions of Trump rallies: (1) identification, (2) terministic screens, and (3) narrative. 

Identification 

Identification is central to rhetoric that creates a sense of shared identity (and therefore 

community) and was for Kenneth Burke (1951) the “key term for the ‘new’ rhetoric” (p. 203). 

Burke (1969) described identification as the state of two or more persons perceiving an 

alignment of interests, wherein people become “both joined and separate, at once a distinct 

substance and consubstantial with another” (p. 21). Identification is the counterpart of division 

and entails the transcendence of difference on the basis of “common sensations, concepts, 

images, ideas, attitudes” held by persons in a consubstantial relationship (pp. 21-22). Through 

identification, a person feels belonging in a “special body” such as a “family, race, profession, 

church, social class, nation” or other collective (Burke, 1973, p. 268). Although “identification 

always is provisional and incomplete because people can never completely share substance,” 44 

appeals to a shared essence are an important means of influencing audiences and creating 

communities (Jasinski, 2001, p. 305). 

Rhetorical scholars have outlined many ways of achieving identification. Burke (1973) 

recognized a distinction between building identification “by the stressing of sympathies held in 

common” and “identification by antithesis,” which paradoxically entails “congregation by 

segregation” where identification is created through the creation of a common enemy (p. 268). 

Subsequent rhetorical scholars have further developed this distinction between positive and 

negative identification. Positive identification stresses unity and common ground, as in 

President’s Kennedy famous phrase “Ich bin ein Berliner” (Fay & Kuypers, 2012, p. 199). 

Another example of positive identification can be found in Jones and Rowland’s (2007) analysis 

of President Reagan’s 1988 address at Moscow State University, where the authors argued that 

Reagan “created a strong sense of identification” between the citizens of America and the Soviet 

Union “by describing the values and goals they shared in common” and stressing their “essential 

similarity” (p. 79). 

Scholars have also recognized the power of identification that is created in negative, 

divisive terms. Negative identification unites through division, by “keeping people and their 

interests separated or segregated” (Watts, 2007, p. 13). Division is a powerful method for 

constituting community, as individuals “who can unite on nothing else can unite on the basis of a 

foe shared by all” (Burke, 1957, p. 165). While analyzing legal discourses that posit piracy as the 

antithesis of sovereignty, Mills (2014) argued that negative identification requires “the ongoing 

presence of an antagonist to maintain structural coherence” (p. 108). Similarly, Goehring and 

Dionisopoulos (2013) argued that the white supremacist novel The Turner Diaries fosters 

negative identification “by offering the target audience portrayals of the ‘other’ against which to 45 

unite,” including “generalized others like the government and the media, and specific others like 

blacks and Jews” (p. 374). These studies of positive and negative identification illustrate 

rhetoric’s power to both unite and divide, and the complementary relationship between 

identification and division. 

A related concept that extends Burke’s theory of identification is “constitutive rhetoric.” 

Constitutive rhetoric theory holds that no public exists a priori to discourse; any given group 

“becomes real only through rhetoric” (Charland, 1987, p. 137). Constitutive understandings of 

rhetoric emphasize the ability of rhetoric to “constitute identity,” concurring with Burke that 

rhetoric serves not only persuasive functions but also identity-building functions (Stillion 

Southard, 2007, p. 413; Stein, 2002). By addressing an imagined audience, constitutive rhetoric 

can “call into being” a public by collectivizing otherwise isolated subjects (Charland, 1987, p. 

134). Through narrative, “rhetors constitute audiences,” linking the individual experiences of 

their audiences with the struggle of a broader community (Zagacki, 2007, p. 275). In doing so, 

the rhetor “constructs a persona” for herself or himself that audiences can refer to when 

fashioning their own self-identities, encouraging “fundamental changes in the way they conceive 

themselves and are conceived by others” (Leff & Utley, 2004, p. 49). As such, rhetoric plays a 

vital role in shaping community identity. 

Identification-building is an especially significant component of presidential 

campaigning. In her analysis of national convention addresses, Vigil (2015) argued that the 

creation of identification is crucial to a presidential candidate’s success, and “can mean the 

difference between winning an election and becoming a barely remembered ‘also-ran’ 

candidate” (p. 16). Vigil elaborated that: 46 

any candidate hoping to win election to the presidency must work long and hard to 

convince a sufficient number of members of the public that the candidate shares the 

hopes, dreams, interests, concerns, and values of the electorate. Today’s 

communication media climate requires candidates to demonstrate a perspective . . . 

that convinces those citizens to perceive a consubstantial bond with the candidate. 

Not being able to do so makes winning, and holding, the presidency considerably 

more challenging. (pp. 11-12) 

According to Vigil, modern campaigns must simultaneously build “identification with the 

preferred party and its candidate” while blocking “bond building with the opposition” (p. 9). 

Vigil linked identification to President Obama’s re-election in 2012, arguing that “a close 

reading of the 2012 convention speeches shows that the Democrats . . . present a wealth of 

attempts to highlight consubstantiality between the public and the nominee that the GOP 

speakers lack” (p. 398). 

Taylor’s (2016) analysis of Barry Goldwater’s 1964 campaign also emphasized the role 

of identification in the resonance of a candidate’s message. Taylor stated that “constitutive 

rhetoric must be both polarizing (critical of the way things were currently ordered) and 

synthesizing (creating a new electoral coalition),” and further argued that Goldwater’s 

unsuccessful campaign “succeeded in the former” but “failed at the latter” (p. 243). Causality 

between identification and a candidate’s success or failure cannot be definitively established, but 

clearly, it is incumbent upon office-seekers to convince voters that they share some common 

“substance” (Burke, 1969, p. 21). Analyses such as Vigil and Taylor’s are useful but neglect the 

contribution of supporters to the building of identification. A fuller picture of how identification 47 

is collaboratively constructed in modern campaigns demands consideration of actors besides the 

candidate. 

The concept of identification is particularly relevant for understanding Trump rallies. To 

explain the “the high levels of tolerance many of his supporters exhibited to the arguably 

unprecedented levels of mendacity in [Trump’s] campaign” (Fording & Schram, 2017, p. 674), it 

is crucial to consider how the rallies cement identification between Trump and his supporters. 

Scholars have acknowledged that Trump “cultivates very specific kinds of identification, both 

conscious and otherwise” (Rudden & Brandt, 2018, p. 44). For his supporters, this identification 

manifests itself in a feeling that Trump “understands their situation” and “uniquely tells their 

truth” (Rudden & Brandt, 2018, p. 45). This remarkable identificatory relationship has been 

acknowledged, but its roots deserve further investigation. 

Presidential campaigning is, by necessity, an impersonal business (Simon 2011; Stromer-

Galley, 2014), with voters only seeing their preferred candidate from a distance. Candidates are 

required to travel to important electoral battlegrounds, make media appearances, and address 

large crowds, with opportunities for direct engagement with millions of potential voters few and 

far between. Developing a sturdy bond with supporters in these circumstances is not easy, and 

many candidates struggle to do so. How then did Trump align “multiple constituencies” with 

“disparate interests” under his banner (Chaput, 2018, p. 204)? This is a key question explored by 

this project that I answer in subsequent chapters. 

Terministic Screens 

Trump rallies are a powerful force for building identification because they provide 

attendees a coherent worldview, although not a coherent ideology. Reicher and Haslam (2017) 

contended that “Trump succeeds by providing a categorical grid—a definition of groups and 48 

intergroup relations—that allows many Americans to make sense of their lived experience” (p. 

37). Another term for this phenomenon is “terministic screen” (Burke, 1966). Terministic 

screens are lenses or filters through which humans interpret and make sense of the symbolic 

world around them. According to Burke, “different screens” entail different “ways of directing 

the attention and shaping the range of observations implicit in the given terminology” (p. 50). A 

terministic screen is simultaneously “a reflection of reality,” “a selection of reality,” and “a 

deflection of reality” (p. 45). In communication as in photography, applying different filters to 

the same object will reveal vastly different qualities, textures, and details. 

Trump rallies are rhetorically impactful because they provide attendees a shared 

terministic screen through which they can interpret the world, organized around mutual values, 

heroes, villains, and rituals. Because a terministic screen is the “perceptual filter through which 

an individual receives and interprets external events,” a particularly ingrained screen can protect 

individuals from opposing viewpoints or alternative perspectives, as all screens “include some 

possibilities of meaning and action and exclude others” by “deflect[ing] attention from other 

possible selections of reality” (Simpson, 2007, pp. 147-148). I will explore how a shared 

worldview—that includes certain interpretations of reality while excluding others—is 

rhetorically constructed by Trump and his supporters at rallies. 

Narratives 

Walter Fisher (1985, 1987), rhetorical scholar and proponent of the “narrative paradigm,” 

forwarded that humans are storytelling animals who communicate through narratives rather than 

rational argument alone. Subsequent scholars have extended Fisher’s argument by demonstrating 

that narrative is a powerful mode of communication because of its “capacity to invite others to 

identify with characters in the story, despise villains, get caught up in the drama, and end up 49 

sharing the narrative’s conclusions about shared values and knowledge” (Cloud, 2018, p. 43). 

Political campaigns have been identified as an area of discourse where narrative is particularly 

crucial: “No presidential election has taken place since the early nineteenth century without an 

infusion of stories about the candidate’s life and that individual’s quest for the White House” 

(Gupta-Carlson, 2016, p. 71; Rowland & Jones, 2007). Throughout presidential campaigns, 

candidates “tell stories about themselves, members of their families, important moments in 

America’s history, and average Americans,” as “one of the most common means of identification 

construction is the use of narratives” (Vigil, 2015, p. 26). Indeed, “apart from other factors, the 

narrative presented throughout a political campaign is a decisive element for a successful run” 

(Hammer, 2010, p. 287). In the course of persuading voters to cast their ballot a certain way, 

candidates make an argument about the nation’s past, it’s present state, its future trajectory, and 

the role of both the candidate and ordinary Americans in the quest to fulfill the nation’s destiny 

(Smith, 2015, p. 15). Narratives serve a valuable role for political campaigns by reminding “the 

electorate that it shares meaningful values with the potential new leader” and illustrating “in a 

personal fashion the candidate’s understanding of the concerns and experiences of those he or 

she wishes to govern” (Vigil, 2015, p. 26). 

To understand the Trump phenomenon, attention to narrative is critical: “Trump is one of 

the best storytellers in recent political memory” and (DeVega, 2019, para. 1) and “the Trump 

campaign was successful because its narrative practices motivated its target audience to 

participate” (Medvedev, 2017, p. 329). Trump rallies are meaningful to attendees because these 

events serve a narrative function, operating as a “dramatic enactment of a particular vision of 

America” that makes real the imagined community that “Trump and his followers would like 

America to be” (Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 29). During my ventures into the field, I witnessed 50 

the centrality of narrative storytelling to the Trump phenomenon. Each Trump speech contains a 

recurring collection of protagonists, antagonists, and threatening “others” that each play a role in 

a narrative of national decline and utopian restoration. Trump supporters craft and circulate 

stories of their own at these rallies, building upon Trump’s “Make America Great Again” 

narrative and making it their own through conservations, interactions, and rituals that they 

perform with fellow attendees. Trump rallies are rhetorically powerful because they construct a 

coherent narrative, containing clear friends and enemies, that explains the position of Trump 

supporters in the world and offers a “politics of hope” (p. 29). 

Moving Forward 

With this theoretical and methodological approach outlined, I next proceed to conduct a 

holistic rhetorical analysis of Trump rallies. Rather than focusing upon a single dimension of 

these events alone, such as Trump’s address, I take care to devote attention to several important 

components of Trump rallies that are often overlooked by rhetoric critics. In the chapters that I 

follow, I analyze a specific aspect of rallies to explain its contribution to community-building, 

including Trump’s populist rhetoric, communal rituals performed by supporters, violent 

confrontations with protestors, and the spread of conspiracy theories. 51 

Chapter III 

The Populist Outsider Persona 

At a campaign stop in Sioux City, Iowa in January of 2016, Donald Trump made an off-

the-cuff comment that would define his unusual relationship with his core supporters. Trump 

mused, “the polls, they say I have the most loyal people . . . I could stand in the middle of Fifth 

Avenue and shoot somebody and I wouldn’t lose any voters” (CNN, 2016). Trump is a known 

exaggerator, but so far this statement has been prescient. The list of scandals and offensive 

comments Trump has subsequently added to his resume is long, yet his base remains unmoved: 

“Politically speaking, the president is standing with his guns blazing in the middle of Fifth 

Avenue, and he’s not losing anyone” (Wagner, 2018, para. 3). NBC’s Katy Tur (2017a) observed 

that “the more Mr. Trump’s candidacy was said to flatline, the more life I saw in his crowds” 

(para. 9). Ominously, a rally held three days after the release of the Access Hollywood tape, 

where Trump bragged about committing sexual assault, was described by Tur (2017b) as “just as 

big as ever and even rowdier” than those that came before (p. 243). 

These stories underscore a deeper truth. In the Trump era, the “organising principle” of 

the Republican Party is loyalty, not to “an ideal, a vision or a legislative programme, but to just 

one man—Donald J. Trump” (The Economist, 2018, para. 2). Although the stubborn loyalty of 

Trump supporters has become a cliché in media coverage, credible evidence exists to support the 

notion. A series of interviews conducted by The New York Times involving dozens of 

“Republican voters at 11 rallies across eight states” revealed several recurring reasons for 

supporting Trump: that Trump feels their pain, fights on their behalf, and is trustworthy despite 

his flaws and penchant for spreading falsehoods (Shear, 2018, para. 5). Polls of Trump 

supporters continually attest to the “resilience” of this sense of loyalty (Peters, 2018, para. 5). 52 

Trump’s approval among his voters has been remarkably stable. A 2018 Pew Research Center 

report showed that “enthusiasts,” who “gave Trump warm ratings . . . in both April 2016 and 

March 2018,” continue to “make up the largest share of Trump voters” (p. 7). A 2017 Monmouth 

University poll similarly found that among those who approve of Trump’s performance, 61% 

“cannot see Trump doing anything that would make them disapprove of him” (para. 9). Another 

poll conducted two years and many scandals later by Monmouth found that “62% of people who 

approve of the job Donald Trump is doing as president say they can't think of anything he could 

do that would cause him to lose their support” (Allassan, 2019, para. 1; Monmouth University, 

2019; see also: Jones et al., 2019, p. 22). Election results further illustrate Trump’s firm grip on 

his base: Republican primary voters have punished politicians who criticize Trump, such as 

former Representative Mark Sanford of South Carolina, and rewarded those who demonstrate 

allegiance (Alberta, 2019; Kamarck, Podkul, & Zeppos, 2018). 

This phenomenon is both interrelated with and distinguishable from the general trend of 

hyper-partisanship in American politics. Americans have always mythologized their political 

heroes, but “Trump has taken it further. To his supporters, he can do no wrong, regardless of his 

willingness to mangle the truth, make racially charged statements, ignore diplomatic traditions 

and viciously attack his adversaries” (Shear, 2018, para. 19). This situation is nearly 

unprecedented in American history, as Trump has transformed the Republican Party into “a cult 

of personality exceeding anything the modern American system has ever produced” (Chait, 

2018, para. 3). The fierce devotion of Trump supporters represents the realization of what 

presidential scholars have fearfully described as the “cult of the presidency,” wherein citizens 

invest faith into their preferred presidential candidate as a messianic figure capable of 53 

singlehandedly resolving the nation’s crises (Burk, 1981; Healy, 2009; Koch, 2016; Nelson, 

2008). 

The cult of the presidency is corrosive on American democracy, mirroring the 

monarchism that the American Revolution overthrew, by aggrandizing the imagined powers of 

the president and miniaturizing the influence of citizens (Nelson, 2008, pp. 69-70). Within this 

framework, political disagreements become militarized. Political opponents “are not continuing 

interlocutors: they’re enemies, to be exiled from the goods of the system” (p. 197). Trumpism 

may have emerged from this atmosphere of acute polarization, but it is not reducible to 

partisanship. Trumpism is more than a partisan identity; in many ways, it resembles a religious 

identity that provides its adherents a coherent set of “god” and “devil” terms to organize their 

existence around (Burke, 1970, p. 128; Weaver, 1970, p. 212). 

Comprehending how Trump maintains the loyalty of his supporters requires attention to 

his rhetoric, as it is Trump’s rhetoric that constructs and reinforces an “us versus them” narrative 

featuring recurring protagonists and antagonists. I argue that this narrative is encapsulated in the 

populist outsider persona, a rhetorical image-construction technique that synthesizes (1) fear 

appeals to a corrupt elite and threatening out-groups, (2) nostalgic appeals to a bygone golden 

age, and (3) appeals to the outsider as a decisive “man of action.” Importantly, persona 

construction involves audience participation. Trump’s populist outsider persona was crafted 

predominantly through the rhetoric of the candidate himself, but the collective ascription of this 

persona to Trump by his supporters and their subsequent re-circulation of this persona 

throughout other mediums was crucial to its persistence. 

I develop this argument in three parts. First, I extend existing rhetorical theory on 

populism and persona-construction by outlining the three qualities of the populist outsider 54 

persona. Second, I conduct a rhetorical analysis of Trump’s rally rhetoric, arguing that Trump 

enacts these elements of the populist outsider persona in his rally addresses. Third, I conclude by 

explicating the implications derived from this analysis. 

The Populist Outsider Persona 

In American politics, few rhetorical moves are more powerful than pitting an authentic 

“people” against a corrupt elite. Presidential candidates dating back to Andrew Jackson in 1824 

and 1828 have recognized this and attempted to craft public images as crusaders against the 

political establishment. By defining their candidacies as an outlet for populist sentiments, 

presidential hopefuls can position themselves as leaders of a folk movement against technocratic 

subjugation. I label this rhetorical technique the “populist outsider persona.” Rhetorical scholars 

have extensively analyzed populism and have also recognized that certain politicians present 

themselves as “outsiders,” but further investigation is needed to explain how such a persona is 

constructed (Gibson & Heyse, 2010; Serazio, 2016). 1

Rhetors, with the cooperation of their audiences, often construct public images to 

enhance their ethos . In doing so, rhetors craft personas, which can be defined as “a role or roles 

that a rhetor takes on for strategic purposes” (Campbell & Burkholder, 1997, p. 21; Ware & 

Linkugel, 1982). Persona is not synonymous with “personality traits” but is better understood as 

“a textual creation—a phenomenon manifested in rhetorical artifacts” (Hogan & Williams, 2000, 

p. 2). Crafting a rhetorical persona is not exclusively the province of individuals, but instead 

necessitates “active participation of particular authority figures and audience members in the 

process” (Harrel, Ware, & Linkugel, 1975, p. 251). A persona is always built in relation to a 

specific audience, and it is this audience that renders judgement on whether or not a candidate 55 

can credibly masquerade as an outsider, insider, or other character. Moreover, a candidate’s 

supporters are responsible for disseminating the persona throughout the broader public. 

Persona-building has been an enduring phenomenon across American history, as “sizable 

publics can rarely get to know social leaders and have always relied on preferred constructions of 

a persona to make decisions about character in leadership” (Mahaffey, 2010, p. 501). When 

assessing a persona, it is crucial to recognize that “what is believed to be true” about a candidate 

“often displaces the truth itself,” as Parsons (2009) observed about the image-centered (rather 

than issue-centered) contest between Jackson and John Quincy Adams in 1828 (p. 110). There is 

inevitably a gap between a candidate’s preferred persona and the candidate themself. Critics of 

George W. Bush, for example, pointed out the contradiction between Bush’s folksy, cowboy 

image and his Ivy League education. Well-constructed personas minimize this gap and favorably 

highlight a candidate’s admirable qualities. 

This analysis concerns the populist outsider persona. A multitude of significant figures 

such as Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln, Barry Goldwater, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton, and 

even Barack Obama have been described as outsiders because they campaigned against broken 

Washington D.C. politics (see: Donald, 1996; Foer, 2017; Ifill, 1992; Kamarck, 2016; Zelizer, 

2016). “Populist” is a similarly flexible term that has been applied to a wide range of public 

figures that bear little in common, from democratic socialist Bernie Sanders to Trump. Lee 

(2006) noted that populist rhetoric has “chameleonic qualities” (p. 356). Consequently, 

designations such as “outsider” and “anti-establishment” are “both politically useful and 

empirically unverifiable” (Serazio, 2016, p. 191). The careless use of such labels points to the 

need to distinguish the populist outsider persona from other variations. 56 

The populist outsider persona builds identification between the rhetor and audience by 

highlighting three interwoven qualities of the candidate. First, the populist outsider is framed as a 

corrective to deep-rooted political corruption. Second, the outsider serves as the symbolic 

embodiment of the nation’s past virtues, building upon the rhetor and audience’s shared nostalgic 

longing for a mythic past. Third, the outsider is understood as a metonymic stand-in for the 

“people,” capable of acting decisively to single-handedly fix the nation’s woes. 

Purity 

To don the guise of populist outsider, a candidate must first define themselves in 

opposition to an ineffectual political establishment. This involves crafting a stark Manichean 

binary between the “the pure people” whose interests are being trampled upon and “the corrupt 

elite” whose vices and intrigues are driving the nation toward ruin (Mudde & Rovira Kaltwasser, 

2017, p. 43; Duffy, 2015; Maddux, 2013). Populist rhetoric has a long history in the United 

States. Kiewe (2019) argued that “the rhetoric of populism” helped “elect [Andrew] Jackson 

president” (p. 37). Jackson’s populist rhetoric, developed in his campaigns and refined during his 

presidency, cast himself as “the people’s president” by “pitting the few rich who abused public 

money against the majority of hardworking people who lacked such privileges and advantages” 

(Kiewe, 2019, p. 163). Agrarian populists of the late nineteenth century utilized a similar 

rhetorical style, envisioning themselves as a people’s movement aligned against the forces of 

concentrated wealth and monopoly (Goodwyn, 1978). 

Lee (2006) characterized populism as an empty “argumentative frame that awaits specific 

content” (p. 363), that nonetheless “has an enduring structure despite its elasticity and 

promiscuity” (p. 362). Lee identified four themes that compose this frame: (1) the celebration of 

ordinary citizens as the virtuous defenders of the nation’s sacred values, (2) the naming of a foe 57 

bent on destroying these values, (3) the portrayal of “the system” as perverted by elites against 

the will of “the people,” and (4) a call for confrontation between pure citizens and corrupt elites. 

Although a “binary moral classification” that juxtaposes “a corrupt elite with a morally virtuous 

people” is endemic to populist rhetoric, “the identities of the vilified elites vary” considerably 

(Bonikowski, 2016, p. 10). Politicians and corporations are common villains in populist 

narratives, but also journalists, academics, and “outgroups, such as ethnic, racial, or religious 

minorities” that are accused of having “co-opted the elites for their own nefarious ends” (p. 10). 

After it was first employed to great effect by Jackson, this iconic image of the “outsider, 

separated from the intrigues of Washington, became the model for many presidential campaigns 

well into the twenty-first century” (Parsons, 2009, p. 195). Because populism is an empty frame 

awaiting a rhetor to supply specific enemies and policy aims, it has been used and abused by 

figures across the political spectrum. Populism’s malleability renders it dangerous at times, as 

Hofstadter (1955) linked populist agitation to provincialism, nativism, nationalism, conspiratorial 

thinking, and bigotry (p. 61; see also: Johnston, 2007). The reason for populism’s ideological 

flexibility—and the reason that a rhetorical perspective is useful for understanding populism—is 

that populism is a “speech-level phenomenon rather than an actor-level one” (Bonikowski, 2016, 

p. 14). Populism is not “an essential attribute of certain political actors” or “an ideology” but is 

instead “a form of political speech” (Bonikowski, 2016, pp. 14-15) and “a style of rhetoric 

reflecting first-order principles about who should rule” that does not commit to “second-order 

principles” such as “what should be done, what policies should be followed, what decisions 

should be made” (Norris & Inglehart, 2019, p. 4). 58 

Nostalgia 

Populist outsiders are also defined by a second quality: their symbolic linkage to a mythic 

past. The outsider is associated with nostalgic longing for a romanticized, bygone era, locating 

“political victory in the resurrection of a simpler idealized history” (Lee, 2006, p. 358). This 

aspect of the populist outsider persona takes the form of a “republican jeremiad” that blames 

present-day suffering on ignorance of “the virtues of the past” and identifies salvation in a return 

to the nation’s “roots of egalitarian principle and the harmony of all social classes” (Kazin, 1995, 

p. 29). Appeals to a “golden age” when “beneficent nature provided abundantly for all” have 

been a mainstay in the rhetoric of populist outsiders across historical periods (Erlich, 1977, p. 

143). Long before Trump promised to “drain the swamp” or to “Make America Great Again,” 

Andrew Jackson pledged to “cleanse the Augean stable,” alluding to a Greek myth where 

Hercules, through sheer strength, rerouted rivers to wash away filth created by thousands of 

cattle (Bromwich, 2017). 

Nostalgic rhetoric serves an important function for citizens who perceive that a rapidly 

changing world is “undermining their settled notion of identity born in more stable, more settled 

times” (Cox, 2017, p. 14). This quality of the populist outsider persona is comforting to 

audiences frightened by the direction of the country and the accelerating pace of socioeconomic 

changes, reassuring citizens that the solution to present struggles is not an untested or radical 

departure from the current order. The public need only trust the outsider to act on the wisdom of 

the past and thus absolve the sins of the present. Nostalgic appeals can therefore “foster 

identification” with an audience through “emotion-filled renderings” of an idealized, collectively 

yearned-for, golden age (Parry-Giles & Parry-Giles, 2000, p. 428). This nostalgia is not 59 

necessarily benign, as “a politics based on an idealized version of the nation’s past relies on 

significant erasures” of historical injustices (Stuckey, 2017, p. 685). 

Decisiveness 

A third quality of the populist outsider is decisiveness. Capitalizing on popular demand 

for forthright, masculine leadership, outsiders draw “upon anti-intellectualism and a sense of 

urgency” to craft “an image of a man of action, rather than words, who is not afraid to take 

difficult and quick decisions, even against ‘expert’ advice” (Mudde & Rovira Kaltwasser, 2017, 

p. 64). By emphasizing their quickness to action, the populist outsider persona combats the 

audience’s feelings of despair and “powerlessness” by inviting followers to invest hope in the 

outsider as an instrument for redeeming the nation and confronting elites (Rohler, 1999, p. 320). 

Mudde (2004) has noted that supporters of populist parties and candidates “do not want to be 

ruled by ‘the man in the street’” (p. 559). Instead, they desire representation by “a remarkable 

leader” who will act on their behalf and navigate the maze of intrigue and special interests 

currently contaminating the political system (p. 560). Because the populist outsider is viewed as 

an integral component of the “people” generally, the persona encourages identification through 

transcendence, wherein the audience mistakes the rhetor’s “powers for [their] very own” (Burke, 

1973, p. 269). 

Cumulatively, these three qualities of the populist outsider persona – immunity to 

corruption, linkage to a nostalgic past, and decisive leadership – foster identification between the 

rhetor and audience. The populist outsider persona offers audiences a messianic figure capable of 

implementing simple solutions to the nation’s complicated problems. Even though this outsider 

might not hail from the same social class as the audience, the outsider and audience are bound by 

a shared mission to rescue the nation from corruption. Mutual yearnings for a lost golden age in 60 

turn reinforce the notion that the outsider and their followers are linked by common values and 

interests. By decisively acting on behalf of the interests of the “people” and not elites, the 

populist outsider additionally encourages audiences to view the candidate’s political power as an 

extension of their own will. These three qualities of the populist outsider persona facilitate the 

transcendence of divisions between rhetor and audience. 

Populist Persona-Building at Trump Rallies 

Trump unifies his audience through their shared revilement of political elites. To exploit 

the growing disenchantment with both major political parties, Trump used his rally speeches to 

enact the three previously described themes of the populist outsider persona, thereby inviting 

collective investment of faith in him as a savior and representative of ordinary Americans against 

a corrupt and indifferent elite. Because Trump’s appeal is inseparable from his reputation as a 

real-life enactment of the “American dream,” persona is one of the key concepts necessary for 

understanding Trumpism. Years before Trump descended the escalator at Trump Tower to 

announce his candidacy, communication scholar Daniel Lair (2011) recognized that Trump’s 

celebrity owed more to persona-building than business acumen, arguing that “Trump’s fame lies 

in his embrace of the excess of image” and “mastery of personal branding” (p. 84). 

Research shows that “large swaths of the public,” including both Democrats and 

Republicans alike, “believe the Trump myth” constructed by The Apprentice , which presents 

Trump as a self-made billionaire and minimizes the role of his family’s inherited wealth 

(McDonald, Karol, & Mason, 2019, para. 3). The myth of Trump as a self-made success is 

contradicted by his actual financial track record; the New York Times reported that Trump 

incurred “$1.17 billion in losses from his core businesses from 1985 through 1994,” a feat that 

gives Trump the ignominious distinction of having “lost more money than nearly any other 61 

individual American taxpayer” (Paybarah, 2019, para. 4). Nonetheless, “Trump was propelled to 

the presidency, in part, by a self-spun narrative of business success and of setbacks triumphantly 

overcome” (Buettner & Craig, 2019, para. 2). Trump’s glamorous celebrity image—crafted 

through years of media attention, branding, and reality TV stardom—distinguished him from his 

opponents in the Republican primaries and general election. Counterintuitively, Trump was able 

to build upon his pre-existing image as a real estate mogul to define himself as the presidential 

candidate best-positioned to confront the nation’s elites, through several rhetorical moves that he 

performed repeatedly at his rallies. Through appeals to his immunity to corruption, nostalgic 

invocations of a lost golden age, and insistence on the need for decisive, masculine leadership, 

Trump cultivated for his supporters an image of a “man of action” who could both revitalize the 

nation and punish enemies. 

Purity 

Rhetors who hope to make a persuasive claim to being “anti-establishment” must clearly 

position themselves in opposition to the nation’s political and economic elites. Before they can 

accomplish this, however, outsiders must rhetorically craft an exigence justifying a break from 

establishment rule. Trump accomplished this by cultivating a sense of threat and anxiety among 

the attendees of his campaign rallies. At rallies, Trump articulated a vision of “American 

carnage,” wherein the promise of upward mobility at the heart of the American dream is dead 

and the nation finds itself terminally declining on multiple fronts (Justice, 2018, p. 30). 

Domestically, Trump described a nation in turmoil. At a 2016 rally in Des Moines, 

Trump declared inner city violence as “a national crisis,” and decried “high crime and crushing 

poverty,” “bad schools, no jobs . . . and no hope” thanks to “failed Democratic policies – the 

policies of Hillary Clinton” (Trump, 2016b, paras. 52-54). Cities were not the only places 62 

suffering from misfortune, according to Trump. He criticized the nation’s “rigged economy,” 

which leaves veterans “to die waiting for the care they need” and suffocates the prosperity of 

small farmers through over-regulation (paras. 27-32). This narrative of decline was bolstered by 

repeated use of unscientific yet powerful anecdotes. During his 2016 address at the Republican 

National Convention (RNC), Trump used the story of a young women killed in a drunk driving 

incident involving an undocumented immigrant to accuse the Obama administration of being 

callously indifferent to the safety of citizens: “to this Administration, their amazing daughter was 

just one more American life that wasn’t worth protecting. One more child to sacrifice on the altar 

of open borders” (Trump, 2016a, para. 18). Although statistical analyses demonstrate that the 

supposed link between immigration and crime is a myth (Flagg, 2018), “vivid” anecdotal horror 

stories of criminal immigrants have “staying power” in the minds of many Americans, especially 

when amplified by conservative media, and contribute to the misperception that crime levels are 

increasing (Myers, 2019, p. 85). 

In Trump’s view, the nation was faring no better internationally. Trump’s foreign policy 

rhetoric consistently described a nation humiliated and emasculated abroad thanks to Obama’s 

supposed weakness and Hillary Clinton’s tenure as Secretary of State. Trump rallies were rife 

with descriptions of international embarrassments due to the incompetent deal-making of the 

nation’s leaders. At a 2015 rally in Hilton Head, South Carolina, for example, Trump remarked 

that China and Mexico’s “leaders are too smart for us” (Federal News Service, 2016, para. 166). 

Trump frequently depicted an international scene characterized by a rising threat of terrorism, 

and pinned instability in key regions on a bipartisan preference for military intervention abroad, 

calling for a new foreign policy focused on defeating “Islamic terrorism, not nation-building” 

(Trump, 2016c, para. 118). 63 

After painting this grim picture of terminal decline, Trump would next stake out a vision 

for how he would address these crises, albeit in impressionistic rather than concrete terms. In 

doing so, Trump enacted the first characteristic of the populist outsider persona by emphasizing 

his own purity and adopting the populist argumentative frame. While competing against 

candidates with stronger financial support during the Republican primaries, Trump repeatedly 

emphasized that “I’m the only one self-funding my campaign,” contrasting himself from other 

politicians who can allegedly be “bought” by corporate donors (Federal News Service, 2016, 

para. 64). By this logic, Trump’s elite status, rather than making him beholden to the political 

establishment, gave him the independence necessary to defy elites. During his 2016 RNC 

address, Trump further distinguished himself from an ineffectual political establishment by 

asserting that “the problems we face now – poverty and violence at home, war and destruction 

abroad – will last only as long as we continue relying on the same politicians who created them” 

(Trump, 2016a, para. 30). 

At rallies, Trump portrayed himself as a symbolic stand-in for “the people” who would 

represent their interests while waging war against “the swamp.” These populist themes 

manifested themselves in Trump’s repeated assertions that he was “the voice of the people.” In 

his RNC address, appealing to Americans who felt abandoned by the political establishment, 

Trump declared “I AM YOUR VOICE” (Trump, 2016a, para. 37). In Des Moines, Trump 

echoed President Richard Nixon’s “silent majority” motif by aligning himself with “everyday 

people,” who “work hard but who don’t have a voice” (Trump, 2016b, para. 9). By contrast, 

Clinton was “all about protecting the powerful” and no more than a puppet for “Big Banks and 

Wall Street donors” (paras. 21-22). To support his claim to immunity from special-interest 

influence, Trump recounted his experiences consoling “crying mothers who have lost their 64 

children because our politicians put their personal agendas before the national good,” stating 

plainly that “I have no patience for injustice, no tolerance for government incompetence, no 

sympathy for leaders who fail their citizens” (Trump, 2016a, para. 38). Trump built identification 

through these statements, by portraying “himself as a clean actor, who is able to be the voice of 

the ‘man in the street’ since there are no intermediaries between him and ‘the people’” (Mudde 

& Rovira Kaltwasser, 2017, p. 44). In addition, the direct, immediate nature of rallies further 

broke down barriers between Trump and his audience. 

In their examination of presidential campaign discourse from 1952 to 1996, Bonikowski 

and Gidron (2016) found that “representatives of an incumbent party are far less likely to rely on 

populist claims than those belonging to a challenger party” (p. 1608). At all four of the rallies I 

attended in 2019, Trump defied this expectation by reprising the populist rhetoric of his 

campaign as an incumbent president, railing against government corruption despite wielding the 

levers of government power. Although Trump’s party controlled the presidency, the Senate, and 

had recently solidified a conservative Supreme Court majority, Trump portrayed himself and his 

followers as victimized and besieged by a ruthless elite-led conspiracy to overturn the public 

will. 

Each rally was preoccupied with the political drama of the moment: in Grand Rapids and 

Green Bay, Trump excoriated Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation, and later that year 

in Minneapolis and Dallas, Trump inveighed against the impeachment inquiry launched by the 

Democratic-controlled House of Representatives. In Grand Rapids, Trump denounced the 

Mueller investigation as “nothing more than a sinister effort to undermine our historic election 

victory and to sabotage the will of the American people” (“Rally in Grand Rapids,” 2019). 

Extending this theme while speaking in Green Bay, Trump asserted that “this witch hunt was 65 

never really just about me. It was always about stopping you, the millions and millions of 

freedom loving citizens who rose up on that incredible November day . . . and demanded a 

government that puts American first” (“Live in Green Bay,” 2019). In Minneapolis, this 

dichotomy between the virtuous people and anti-democratic elites was encapsulated by Trump’s 

salvo against the growing push to impeach him: 

Our bold pursuit of this pro-American agenda has enraged . . . the failed ruling class in 

Washington . . . these corrupt politicians and the radical leftists got rich bleeding America 

dry, and they knew that my election would finally end their pillaging and looting of our 

country . . . that is why from day one, the wretched Washington swamp has been trying to 

nullify the results of a truly great and democratic election . . . they want to erase your 

vote like it never existed, they want to erase your voice, and they want to erase your 

future. But they will fail because in America, the people rule again. (“Rally in 

Minneapolis,” 2019) 

Trump’s rhetoric recognizes no distinction between his own interests and those of the nation’s. 

According to this logic, which amounts to “a quasi-religious doctrine of infallibility,” no 

institution, be it “Congress, the courts, or the press,” can “be considered legitimate if they defy 

Trump, the only legitimate vessel of popular will” (Serwer, 2019, para. 14). Through this 

rhetorical move, Trump cast the various investigations into his conduct as a threat not only to his 

administration, but to the agency of “the people.” In this narrative, Trump is the sole bulwark 

protecting the rights of ordinary Americans from an anti-democratic, elite conspiracy to strip 

their power. This narrative built identification by portraying a fundamental convergence of 

interests between Trump and his audience, a convergence so tightly interlocked that Trump 66 

constitutes nothing less than the public’s will incarnate and a champion for the people in the 

battle against corruption. 

Nostalgia 

One of the key rhetorical developments of the Reagan era was the transformation of 

conservatism, a political philosophy ostensibly dedicated to defending the status quo, into a 

forward-looking and optimistic posture that co-opted progressive values (Jones & Rowland, 

2015). By contrast, the Trump campaign was perpetually backwards-looking, as emblemized by 

its core mantra “Make America Great Again,” which ironically was used previously by Reagan 

during the 1980 presidential campaign. Accordingly, Trump rallies were sites for nostalgic 

mourning of the nation’s lost glory, enacting the second characteristic of the populist outsider 

persona. Trump’s narratives of decline were accompanied by promises to restore the golden age 

that came before. On the economic front, Trump promised to “make our country rich again” and 

“bring our jobs back to Ohio and to America” by undoing allegedly misguided trade deals. 

(Trump, 2016a, paras. 72-75). He also pledged to “repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare” so 

that Americans “will be able to choose your own doctor again” and assured that his 

administration would “completely rebuild our depleted military” (para. 83). For each, often 

imaginary, problem bedeviling Americans in the present, Trump identified a solution rooted in 

the past. 

Trump’s restoration narratives centered on icons such as “the great miners and steel 

workers of our country,” who symbolize a bygone era of widespread blue-collar manufacturing 

jobs (Trump, 2016a, para. 81). The repeated invocations of coal miners, steel workers, 

automobile manufacturers, and similar professions served as wistful reminders of America’s 

halcyon days as a producer, rather than consumer, economy. Trump’s rhetoric honored the 67 

American tradition of producerism, an economic ideology that stretches back to Thomas 

Jefferson and Andrew Jackson’s celebration of the modest yeoman farmer (Hofstadter, 1955, pp. 

24-25). Producerism lionizes citizens who tangibly produce material goods with their labor, in 

contrast to the idle, speculative classes, whose labors do not result in the “making of something 

concrete” (Farber, 1994, p. 305). Trump’s rhetoric linked to this focus on production through 

constant reminders of his real-estate prowess, references to his personal experience “as a builder” 

of great skyscrapers (Trump, 2016b, para. 45), and frequent promises to build walls and restore 

America’s tradition of producing its own cars, steel, and energy. Even before seeking the 

presidency, Trump publicly lamented that America doesn’t “build things anymore” (Farley, 

2011). In doing so, Trump symbolically linked himself to the nation’s producer heritage for 

citizens traumatized by the fast economic and cultural changes brought on by globalization in the 

second half of the twentieth century. 

Trump’s rallies further solidified the nostalgic connection between Trump and the 

producerist economy of the twentieth century through video messages played for audiences by 

the campaign. At the rallies I attended in Green Bay and Dallas, these brief videos were shown 

repeatedly throughout the day on a large screen located in front of where the Trump supporters 

and I waited in line to enter the venue. The videos, which portray Trump as a champion of blue-

collar workers and small business owners, feature Lara Trump (daughter in law of Donald 

Trump Sr. and wife of his son Eric Trump) touring the production facilities of a brewery and a 

coin manufacturer, discussing how the Trump administration created economic opportunity with 

the owners and employees (Trump, 2017, 2018). Both videos are teaming with industrial 

imagery: images of employees plying their trades and working with heavy machinery and raw 

materials, and then admiring the finished products of their labor. 68 

One video features an entrepreneurial husband and wife who co-founded Shortway 

Brewing in North Carolina. Matt Shortway credits Trump’s policies for creating business 

confidence and describes his brewery as “the embodiment of the American dream” (Trump, 

2018). Later in the video, Shortway thanks Trump for “fighting for us, on our side, so that we 

can make things here in America again, with jobs, with things that are grown in America, 

whether it be the grains that we use, the hops, or now the American steel that is going into our 

production facility, and the equipment that we make.” Another video touts an executive order 

signed by Trump to expand apprenticeships and vocational training by highlighting the successes 

of Medalcraft Mint, a coin and commemorative item manufacturer. An apprentice at the 

company is shown praising the Trump administration’s focus on apprenticeships, stating “not 

everyone sits at a desk, we need trades. That’s what makes this country great . . . it’s people 

being plumbers, people being pressmen” (Trump, 2017). Later in the video, an engraver beams 

that his job “gives me a sense of pride every day.” 

These video messages dovetailed with a core theme of Trump’s rhetoric that was 

reinforced later in the rally when Trump spoke. At campaign rallies, Trump and his supporters 

co-constructed Trump as a tireless advocate for the virtuous “real” Americans whose labor 

creates tangible things that other citizens can use and enjoy, as opposed to immaterial laborers 

who spend their time at a desk or on a computer. This theme resonates with Trump supporters— 

like the plumbers and steelworkers I stood in line with at a rally in Minneapolis—who remember 

an economy of yesteryear where employment in such fields was plentiful, rewarding, and 

capable of sustaining a comfortable standard of living, without requiring a college degree. 69 

To keep this desire for national renewal front and center, Trump’s rally speeches 

concluded by reinforcing these nostalgic themes through parallel structure and repetition. 

Trump’s RNC address, for example, ended with his signature slogans: 

To all Americans tonight, in all our cities and towns, I make this promise: We Will Make 

America Strong Again. 

We Will Make America Proud Again. 

We Will Make America Safe Again. 

And We Will Make America Great Again. (Trump, 2016a, paras. 101-104; Trump, 

2016b). 

At every rally I attended, Trump’s address ended with a variation of this repetitive nostalgic 

coda, followed by Trump’s departure to the tune of “You Can’t Always Get What You Want” by 

the Rolling Stones. Trump rallies provide an opportunity for supporters to reminisce upon more 

economically stable times, but also offer supporters a chance to denounce political correctness 

and commemorate a mythic past before the nation became consumed with cultural battles related 

to race, gender/sexual equality and immigration. Trump’s nostalgic appeals were laced with both 

racism and sexism, “mobilizing supporters to be outraged . . . in defense of white cultural worlds 

that, in this formulation, are perceived to be under constant attack” and in the process defining 

“white male workers as the virtuous majority whom Trump claims to represent” (Maskovsky, 

2017, p. 435). Despite the drastically different social stations of Trump and his supporters, 

identification was built by their shared investment in a lost golden age of producerism and white 

male dominance. 70 

Decisiveness 

Importantly, Trump presented himself as the only individual capable of delivering a 

national restoration through decisive action, enacting the third characteristic of the populist 

outsider persona. At rallies throughout the campaign cycle, Trump excoriated a lethargic political 

establishment that had grown unresponsive to the people’s needs and incapable of addressing the 

crises facing the nation in a timely manner, ridiculing Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton as “low 

energy” (Federal News Service, 2016, paras. 67-68). Trump’s insults were applause lines but 

also drew a contrast between himself, unshackled by norms of political correctness, and 

calculating, dithering politicians. The visual dynamics of Trump’s campaign rallies further 

reinforced claims about his unique leadership capacities by centering him among the masses: 

Trump stands alone on a long platform, surrounded by a rapturous throng. Below and 

behind him—sitting on bleachers and standing on the floor—they fill this city’s 

cavernous, yellow-beige convention center by the thousands. (Ball, 2015, para. 3) 

Similarly, Trump’s tendency of theatrically traveling to rallies aboard his private Boeing 757 jet 

(branded with his name in block letters) in 2016 or Air Force One during his presidency both 

flaunted his wealth and made plausible his claims to exceptional leadership skills (Guilford, 

2016). Through careful staging and rhetoric that encouraged populist agitation against sluggish 

elites and their self-inflicted crises, Trump rallies illustrated the need for a decisive style of 

leadership that only outsiders possess. 

Trump defined his decisive leadership in sexist and anti-intellectual terms, distinguishing 

himself from his opponents by performing aggressive masculinity and advocating blunt solutions 

such as a border wall and “bombing the shit out of ISIS.” Instead of repeating rehearsed talking 

points, Trump made it clear he would “go with his gut,” rather than listen to experts, signaling an 71 

“utter lack of self-restraint” as “a refreshing antidote to the rote, superficial remarks” of 

conventional candidates (Todd, 2016, para. 10). This strategy initially allowed Trump to separate 

himself from his opponents in the Republican primaries but was even more pronounced during 

the general election where his opponent was a woman. Trump’s appeals to his own stamina 

capitalized on the tendency of Americans to think of “political — especially presidential — 

leadership” as “male, and especially masculine” (Conroy, 2018, p. 120). This strategy is 

encapsulated by a moment at a campaign event in Cleveland on Labor Day of 2016, where 

Trump remarked: “Does she look presidential, fellas? . . . Give me a break” (qtd. in Benen, 2016, 

para. 1). Tur (2017b) also noted how Trump lionized masculinity while associating Clinton’s 

leadership style with weakness and femininity, a move that was not lost on supporters who sold 

and wore T-shirts bearing phrases like “TRUMP THAT BITCH” and “HILLARY SUCKS BUT 

NOT LIKE MONICA” at campaign rallies (p. 239). Trump’s claims to decisive leadership were 

therefore facilitated by the widespread misogynist conception of the presidency as a 

fundamentally masculine, paternal office (Nelson, 2008, p. 44). 

Trump’s construction of himself as a singularly effective dealmaker both divided and 

united. In perhaps the most infamous line of his RNC address, Trump proclaimed that “nobody 

knows the system better than me, which is why I alone can fix it. I have seen firsthand how the 

system is rigged against our citizens” (Trump, 2016a, para. 43). This statement is crucial to the 

speech’s persona-building functions, as Trump appealed to his “business acumen to construct 

[his] status as a political outsider” (Mudde & Rovira Kaltwasser, 2017, p. 71). In this passage, 

Trump “defined himself as a bedrock figure in American culture: the figure who faces danger 

alone, who follows his own code of conduct . . . he is the man who uses his great wealth to 

protect the powerless from evil” (Greenfield, 2016, para. 6). Through Trump’s assertion that “I 72 

alone can fix it” he presented himself as a messianic figure who could deliver the nation from 

ruin. Yet, this statement also provided ground for identification, by allowing supporters to 

imagine Trump’s leadership as an extension of their own, combatting feelings of marginalization 

and despair. By investing faith in Trump as a savior, supporters were afforded an opportunity to 

“strike back symbolically at their enemies,” fostering a sense of collective identity (Rohler, 1999, 

p. 321). 

Collaborative Persona Construction at Trump Rallies 

The populist outsider persona fostered identification between Trump and his supporters 

through three interrelated means. Trump’s adoption of the populist argumentative frame, pitting 

him and his supporters against a corrupt elite, constituted a community defined by shared 

economic interests and enemies, even if they occupied disparate socioeconomic stations. 

Trump’s claims to be a mouthpiece for populist discontent were particularly compelling to his 

supporters because he could plausibly claim that his opponent, Hillary Clinton, was 

compromised by her longstanding membership in the nation’s political establishment. The 

nostalgic themes of Trump’s campaign additionally created consubstantiality, as Trump assumed 

an outsized symbolic significance for his supporters by embodying their desire for a return to the 

nation’s mythic past as a homogenous, producer society. Finally, Trump’s pledge to exercise 

decisive leadership on behalf of his supporters created a perceived alignment of interests, 

wherein empowering Trump would empower ordinary Americans as well. 

Rhetorical fieldwork afforded me an opportunity to verify the claims made in this essay 

regarding Trump’s persona. During my fieldwork at Trump rallies, I heard and interacted with 

Trump supporters who echoed and reinforced the populist outsider persona constructed in 

Trump’s rhetoric. Many supporters viewed Trump’s unconventional resume as an unqualified 73 

good, believing that his business experience made him more effective than allegedly out-of-

touch politicians. Others viewed Trump’s wealth, and gestures such as the choice to donate his 

salary as president, as evidence that he was not prone to corruption or manipulation like typical 

politicians. Supporters frequently contrasted Trump with conventional politicians, describing 

Trump as less susceptible to the influence of big money and possessing a more straightforward 

leadership style. Variations on the phrase “Trump says what he means and means what he says” 

were among the favorite adages of the Trump supporters I encountered across the country. 

At the Green Bay rally, several men sitting near me in the arena as we waited for 

Trump’s arrival dismissed Obama as an “empty suit” with a “silver tongue,” and derided Scott 

Walker, the former two-term Republican Governor of Wisconsin, as too much of a “boy scout.” 

These supporters, and others I encountered at the rallies, appreciated that Trump’s speaking style 

was blunt and unpretentious, as, in their view, this very crassness signified authenticity, sincerity, 

and proximity to ordinary Americans. In Minneapolis, a supporter described Trump as an equal 

opportunity offender who “doesn’t care who he angers,” unlike many politicians. Another 

supporter in Green Bay more bluntly asserted that “sometimes you need an asshole” to get 

results, describing Trump’s style as superior to Obama’s “lead from behind” method. Although 

Trump’s economic station is drastically different from the average Trump rally attendee, his 

coarse speaking style intimated to these supporters that he was one of them. 

At the Minneapolis rally, several supporters expressed similar sentiments. Two men 

standing next to me in the line to enter the arena commiserated about their loathing of 

conventional Republican figures such as Mitt Romney and the late John McCain. One supporter 

wished that he could “take back” his votes for Romney and McCain, expressing a feeling of 

betrayal that the former Republican nominees would criticize Trump. These Trump supporters 74 

didn’t associate Trump with the establishment Republican party, but rather viewed Trump as an 

outsider “fighting both sides” of the political aisle, locked in a struggle with the political 

establishment and “deep state” rather than a particular political party. While accepting the 

Republican nomination for Vice President in 2016, Mike Pence stated: “I'm a Christian, a 

conservative, and a Republican, in that order” (qtd. in Garcia, 2016, para. 2). Based on my 

fieldwork, I believe many Trump supporters would hierarchize their allegiances very differently. 

One supporter in Minneapolis described himself as politically inactive until Trump’s emergence, 

while another woman I talked to described herself as a lifelong Democrat. Many Trump voters 

seemed loyal first and foremost to Trump rather than conservatism or the Republican Party. 

Furthermore, these encounters illustrate the collaborative nature of persona-construction. 

Charismatic leadership is not “exclusively a top-down process” but instead emerges “out of a 

symbiotic relationship between leaders and followers” (Reicher, Haslam, & Platow, 2007, pp. 

24-25; Parry, Cohen, Bhattacharya, North-Samardzic, Edwards, 2019). That is to say, persona-

construction is not “an I thing,” but “is actually a we thing” (Haslam & Reicher, 2016, p. 22). 

Trump’s populist outsider persona is credible for his audience because he integrates “the group’s 

history, hopes and values into a coherent story” about the nation, the community, and their 

shared foes (Haslam & Reicher, 2012, p. 44). This persona does more than describe Trump’s 

qualities; the persona’s populist themes explain the role of ordinary Americans in the nation’s 

historical narrative and provide a terministic screen for understanding political conflicts, 

exploiting widespread disillusionment from both political parties and governing institutions 

generally. Importantly, this persona has proven durable in the imaginations of Trump supporters 

because it is consonant with their values and because they re-appropriate and re-circulate this 

understanding of Trump in their own interpersonal interactions. 75 

Implications and Conclusion 

Enhanced Understanding of the Trump-Base Relationship 

Several implications from the analysis of Trump’s rallies that I have conducted here 

should be apparent. First, the analysis makes clear how rallies facilitate creation of a shared 

worldview, in turn creating a durable relationship between Trump and his core supporters. The 

populist outsider persona provides audiences a clear set of friends and enemies, locates the 

sources of suffering in deviation from the lessons of the nation’s glorious past, and suggests 

means of recovering this past through the outsider’s decisive leadership. The cumulative effect is 

to create thick rhetorical insulation, as audiences become trained to scrutinize and disregard 

“insider” knowledge. The outsider is shielded from criticism by establishment figures, through 

“the rhetorical production of skepticism toward concentrated power and institutional structures 

of governance” (Lee, 2006, p. 362). This explains why “attacks by heavyweights of the 

Republican establishment—Mitt Romney, George Bush—only served to increase [Trump’s] poll 

ratings,” because “to be rejected by the political class only serves to consolidate a candidate's in-

group status” (Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 36). Focus group research and polls have confirmed 

this, showing that Trump’s status as “the anti-elite candidate . . . made him more or less immune 

to criticism from the mainstream parties or the mainstream media” (Guo, 2015, para. 18; 

Newport & Saad, 2016). 

By framing society’s conflicts through the prism of a populist, “us versus them” 

mentality, Trump and his supporters co-constructed a “device that unifies all those who share the 

same enemy” (Burke, 1966, p. 51). When the outsider/insider dualism is established as the 

interpretative lens or terministic screen through which candidates are evaluated, the chief 

advantages of insider candidates – experience, temperament, and attention to policy detail – 76 

become serious liabilities in the eyes of those frustrated with the status quo. Efforts at 

constructing a shared identity were no doubt assisted by the country’s hyper-polarization and the 

tendency of conservatives to consume partisan news media sources (Jamieson & Cappella, 

2008). 

Reconciliation of the Intractable “Economics vs. Racism” Dispute 

The explanation for Trump’s appeal that I have forwarded here is particularly important 

because it accounts for alternative interpretations. After Trump’s victory, “commentators have 

devoted dozens of essays and think pieces to the question of whether Trump’s rise is primarily a 

function of economic insecurity or racial anxiety” (Vance, 2016, para. 25). The argument 

developed here can be used to incorporate both perspectives. The first aspect of the populist 

outsider persona responded to widespread frustration with the political establishment and a 

feeling that elites had forgotten the economic plight of ordinary people, recurring themes of anti-

establishment discourse. The second aspect of the persona, the rhetorical longing for an idealized 

past, drew on cultural fears about loss of white dominance and simple racism. Trump’s call to 

return the country to a mythic past had great resonance, “especially for older white men” who 

fondly remembered an era when “American society was less diverse” (Inglehart & Norris, 2016, 

p. 16). The persona also took advantage of widespread sexist attitudes that equate old-school 

masculinity with decisive leadership, casting Trump’s opponents as too feminine to create lasting 

change. In the populist outsider rhetoric of Trump, one can discern “the equation of toughness, 

maleness, and whiteness” (Kazin, 1995, p. 21). This analysis therefore accounts for both of the 

seemingly contradictory economic and cultural explanations of Trump’s appeal. 77 

Implications for Rhetorical Analyses of Populism 

The analysis of Trump’s persona also clarifies the meaning of terms such as “populist” 

and “outsider,” which are uncritically lobbed in political debates to describe a vast range of 

figures. Oliver and Rahn (2016) pointed out that the populist label has recently been applied to 

both “a Jewish, Democratic socialist senator from Vermont whose central concern is the 

billionaire class and a billionaire New York real estate developer whose central concern is illegal 

immigration” (p. 190). For these terms to have any meaning, the anti-establishment rhetoric of 

Trump must be distinguished from the likes of Sanders, Obama, Reagan, and others who utilized 

somewhat similar themes. Conceptual confusion regarding populism, which is often conflated 

with “nationalism, social and economic conservatism, and anti-immigrant discourse,” has a real 

“analytical cost” by making it more difficult to comprehend populism’s “implications for 

political change” (Bonikowski, 2016, pp. 9-10). This is an important task as populist factions 

gain influence in both the Democratic and Republican party, expressing “competing versions of 

populism” that could become a major dividing line in American politics (Burns, 2019, para. 5). 

The populist outsider persona that I have theorized here contributes to this goal by 

distinguishing between various brands of populism. The populist outsider persona requires 

adoption of the populist argumentative frame by presenting a narrative featuring ordinary 

Americans pitted against an unaccountable class of elites. However, the populist rhetoric of 

Andrew Jackson and Donald Trump can be distinguished from other variants of populism on 

several grounds. All populist rhetoric positions virtuous ordinary citizens as the nation’s true 

heroes; Trump’s populist narrative, however, contains explicitly racialized antagonists, 

“combining the longstanding grievances of the white working class with a newer, darker angst 

about immigration and cultural change” (Burns, 2019, para. 5). In addition, the role of nostalgia 78 

is important for distinguishing Trump’s populist rhetoric from that of Senators Bernie Sanders or 

Elizabeth Warren. Future rhetorical research should focus on other manifestations of the outsider 

persona, such as the progressive populist persona (adopted by Sanders and Warren) which 

expresses enmity towards elites (defined in economic and not purely cultural terms) but is future-

oriented (as opposed to predominantly nostalgic) and advocates for grassroots mobilization 

against the political establishment and community-based solutions rather than presenting the 

outsider as a messianic figure capable of single-handedly fixing the nation’s problems. 

In addition, although “populism” has been reduced to “the go-to term for scholars and 

journalists alike to describe the emergent authoritarianisms of our time,” populist politics can be 

inclusive or exclusionary to varying degrees (Frank, 2018, para. 3). Reagan and Obama 

advanced populist-style critiques of broken Washington D.C. politics, but presented a 

fundamentally inclusive worldview, maintaining faith that the American Dream can be made 

available to all. Both Reagan and Obama shared the goal of “growing the pie” and expanding 

opportunity while disagreeing about the proper role of government in accomplishing this (Jones 

& Rowland, 2015; Rowland & Jones, 2007; Rowland, 2019). In Reagan and Obama’s narrative, 

American identity is “uniquely permeable” and defined by shared values rather than blood or soil 

(Chait, 2017, para. 40). By contrast, Trump’s “hoard-the-pie, pull-up-the-drawbridge” populism 

reduces to politics a zero-sum game where a host of frightening Others threaten to take away the 

American Dream from “real” Americans (Friedman, 2019, para. 14). Sanders and Warren offer a 

worldview that is distinct altogether from that of Reagan, Obama, and Trump, advocating 

“redivide-the-pie,” redistributionist populism as a solution to stagnating wages and growing 

inequality while rejecting Trump’s xenophobic appeals and divisive rhetoric towards minorities 

(para. 11). Trump, on the other hand, offers a vision of energetic government used in service of a 79 

circumscribed American public, promising to build walls, expel foreigners, and bring back 

outsourced jobs in the name of restoring a lost American community. Greater scholarly attention 

to the specific characteristics of these competing strands of populism will be necessary now more 

than ever as non-traditional political candidates and populist movements emerge all around the 

world. 80 

Notes 

1. It is important to note that Rowland (2019) also focuses on how Trump assumes an outsider 

persona. This analysis of how Trump constructs a populist outsider persona through rallies 

moves beyond the analysis in Rowland’s essay. In this essay I employ a similar 

theoretical/methodological approach to Rowland, but incorporate insights derived from my 

rhetorical fieldwork at Trump rallies. 81 

Chapter IV 

Congregating at the Church of Trump: How Community is Constituted at Rallies 

Donald Trump’s campaign rallies are among the most high-profile and publicized 

political events in contemporary politics, unique in their ability to spark discussion and attract 

media attention. Yet, as widely debated as these events are, Trump’s rallies also remain poorly 

understood and are frequently caricatured as circuses (Continetti, 2019), “mere spectacle[s]” 

(Glasser, 2018, para. 5), or as full of “mindless zombies” (Flood, 2016). Perhaps no text better 

encapsulates popular understandings—and misunderstandings—of Trump’s campaign rallies 

than a 2019 comedy sketch from the popular television program Saturday Night Live (SNL ). The 

sketch accurately recreates the visual dynamics of a Trump rally: Trump, portrayed uncannily by 

Alec Baldwin, is shown looming over a podium surrounded by adoring fans—all of them 

white—wearing red hats, Trump gear, and holding “Women for Trump” signs. Trump is front 

and center in the sketch, with his supporters relegated to the background, bearing pleasant yet 

vacant facial expressions as Baldwin’s Trump rattles off various falsehoods and malapropisms 

for comedic effect. The crowd is portrayed as purely reactive: either nodding in agreement, or 

chanting “witch hunt,” “no collusion” and “no quid pro quo” in unison upon Trump’s command 

(Saturday Night Live, 2019). 

When given an opportunity to speak, Trump’s fans are portrayed as backwards dunces. A 

woman named Christine is shown wearing a shirt bearing the caption “KEEM AMARICA 

GREAB AGRAIN” (Saturday Night Live, 2019). When Trump mentions the obvious spelling 

errors, Christine, with a look of perplexed frustration, bellows oafishly that the words cannot 

possibly be misspelled because they are copied verbatim from one of Trump’s tweets, and 

therefore must be correct. Christine then performs a military salute and exits the stage. Later in 82 

the sketch, another woman wearing a denim jacket and a “Women for Trump” shirt approaches 

Trump at the podium and says: “I love you and I worship you as the one true white lord.” After 

pulling out a handgun and giving Trump permission to use it, she exits the stage by saying “the 

Earth is flat and Beyonce is white.” In this sketch, several popular perceptions about Trump 

rallies are assembled in one place. Trump rallies are portrayed as empty spectacles, as devoid of 

meaningful political content, and attended only by bigots and unthinking drones. 

I contend that this popular perception sells short the political significance of Trump 

rallies by dismissing them as a playground for the brainwashed and simple-minded. To be clear, 

my aim is not to defend Trump rallies as venues for sophisticated intellectual exchanges. These 

rallies are indeed full of falsehoods. Nor do I aim to defend the racist and sexist behavior of 

Trump and his supporters at these rallies, which is very real and not merely a liberal stereotype. 

Rather, in this essay, I take Trump rallies seriously as sites for identity formation. Bean’s (2014) 

ethnographic study of evangelical Christian communities highlights the risks of describing 

certain voters as brainwashed, “hijacked,” or “co-opted” by “top-down” forces (pp. 1-2). 

Analyses that attribute outsized influence to movement leaders may obscure more than they 

reveal by failing to capture how “rank-and-file” members “experience the political climate” (p. 

2). Bean argues that “the coalition between evangelicals and the Republican Party is not just 

constructed from the top-down, by political elites who frame conservative issues in religious 

language” (p. 2). Rather, Bean’s study demonstrates that the Christian Right has become a 

politically homogenous voting bloc because a politicized “evangelical identity” has become 

entangled with “partisanship at the level of religious practice” and in “the lived religion of rank-

and-file evangelicals” (p. 226). 83 

A similar dynamic is apparent with Trump supporters, a group that closely overlaps with 

religious conservatives but is distinct. Support for Trump does not stem solely from top-down 

forces such as Trump’s rhetoric or Fox News . Contrary to popular understandings, a fieldwork-

based rhetorical analysis of Trump rallies reveals that these events are communal undertakings 

where ordinary attendees emerge as impactful political agents rather than the two-dimensional 

bystanders depicted in the SNL sketch, nodding and smiling in the background. To comprehend 

the worldview of Trump supporters, rhetorical critics must delve into the tangible ways that 

Trump supporters enact their membership in a collective identity. In this essay, I demonstrate 

that rallies are crucial to forging the “deep, personal connection” between Trump and his 

supporters through a rhetorical process of community-building (Haberman, 2018, para. 8). This 

analysis of Trump’s campaign rallies illustrates the collaborative process between the candidate 

and supporters that underlies any effort to co-construct identificatory bonds. Trump rallies are 

rich textual artifacts because identification was fostered through multiple rhetorical processes, all 

of which required varying levels of active participation from Trump and his supporters. 

I develop this argument in three parts. First, I theorize rhetorical activities that when 

enacted by a collective, enhance group identity. Second, I draw upon rhetorical fieldwork to 

argue that Trump rallies are a powerful means of forging identification among Trump supporters 

because these three activities—political rituals, scapegoating, and fandom—are tangibly 

performed by attendees. Third, I conclude by outlining the implications derived from this 

analysis. 

Constructing Community through Campaigns 

In recent years, communication scholars have extensively analyzed the changing ways 

that political campaigns make use of the Internet and social media (Abroms & Lefebvre, 2009; 84 

Ott, 2017; Ott & Dickinson, 2019; Smith, 2015; Stromer-Galley, 2014). Barack Obama’s 2008 

and 2012 campaigns, which utilized digital communication technologies in novel ways to 

mobilize supporters, “created a wave of interest in how communications technologies were 

reshaping elections” (Karpf, 2017, p. 198). Scholarly interest in the intersection between social 

media and presidential campaigns has continued into the Trump era. Ott (2017), analyzing 

Trump’s twitter usage during the 2016 campaign, declared that “Trump’s election marks the 

beginning . . . of the Age of Twitter,” or “the Age of Social Media,” a period that can be defined 

in contrast to “Age of Typography and the Age of Television” (p. 66). Similarly, Woods and 

Hahner (2019) investigated “the influence of memes as they appeared on President Trump’s 

Twitter feed” and the “correspondence between memes and the publicity of the Alt-right” (p. 

17). 

This analysis supplements accounts of how digital communication technologies have 

altered political campaigning by emphasizing the continuing importance of non-digital 

mobilization methods, such as rallies, for building identification. Analyses of how emerging 

technologies are influencing political campaigns are invaluable, but digital mediums are 

ultimately only one of several ways that voters interact with campaigns. An important way that 

“Trump supporters experienced the [2016] campaign” was “rally attendance,” harkening back to 

“the in-person communities of fate that provided the bedrock for previous eras of collective 

action” (Karpf, 2017, p. 205, 202). For over a century, rallies—large, in-person gatherings of 

politically like-minded persons featuring speeches, entertainment, and strategizing—have been a 

vital component of political campaigns. Cheathem (2018) noted that “one of the most striking 

characteristics of the 1840 campaign was the spectacle of public events” and “large enthusiastic 

rallies,” that were inspired by “the religious fervor” of the “Protestant revivals that swept the 85 

nation during the early 1800s” (p. 141). These rallies, which were lengthy and well-attended, 

“helped to build the crowd’s emotional investment in the message, binding them to the . . . 

candidate and to the party” (p. 143). Trump’s campaign rallies, continuing this tradition, have 

similarly fostered identification between Trump and his supporters by blending politics, 

partisanship, religion, entertainment, and fandom. 

Importantly, rallies are crucial sites for identification-building because they are where 

membership in a community is tangibly “enacted.” Enactment has been recognized as “a 

rhetorical strategy which . . . can have rhetorical force” (Campbell, 1988, p. 259) and “the 

process whereby a rhetor illustrates by embodying the point she or he is making” (Daughton, 

1995, p. 22). The paradigmatic example of enactment as a rhetorical strategy is Barbara Jordan’s 

1976 keynote address to the Democratic National Convention, whose very presence at the 

podium as a woman of color provided concrete proof for her argument that anyone “can rise to 

power within the democratic system” and achieve the American Dream (Daughton, 1995, p. 23). 

Enactment is “a unique rhetorical form because it rests on performative features that can be . . . 

literally embodied physically” (p. 23). This analysis demonstrates that enactment may be 

employed by not only individual rhetors, but collectives. Trump rallies, through several rituals 

that involve the physical presence of thousands of persons, take the silent majority of 

downtrodden patriots alluded to in Trump’s rhetoric out of the realm of abstraction and into the 

real world through the material enactment of community. I argue that rallies contribute to 

community-building through three interrelated means. Campaign rallies are vital means for 

constructing identification because they (1) are a key site where political rituals may be 

performed, (2) offer an opportunity to concretely confront and scapegoat outgroups, and (3) 

serve as a venue where supporters can celebrate the candidate as part of a larger “fandom.” 86 

Political Rituals 

Scholars from a variety of fields have noted the constitutive functions of ritual, and its 

capacity to affirm group identity. Lukes (1975) defined ritual as “rule-governed activity of a 

symbolic character which draws the attention of its participants to objects of thought and feeling 

which they hold to be of special significance” (p. 291), and noted that “ritual need not be 

inherently religious” (p. 290). Although the purpose and form of rituals varies greatly depending 

on historical and cultural context, they are still prevalent in modern societies and “continue to 

fulfill physical, psychological, mental, social, and spiritual needs of the society in which they are 

performed” (Heinze, 2000, p. 3). 

Ritual has been described as transformative and perspective altering (Grimes, 2000, p. 7). 

For example, Burke (1959) noted that rituals can be symbolically charged and effectuate a 

“change in identity” (p. 211). A ritual, if effective, “energizes the participants and attaches them 

to each other” (Alexander, 2004, p. 527). Ritual allows reenactment of a group’s foundational 

stories in a participatory fashion, by taking people out of the “here-and-now” and transporting 

them into “the land of myth,” which in turn reinforces the group’s “mythic system” (Rowland & 

Frank, 2002, pp. 304-305). Because of this, rituals promote “social cohesion,” as “humans 

perform rituals not only to celebrate an already present or guaranteed unity, but also—or perhaps 

primarily—to regain such unity when it is lost or threatened” (Doty, 2000, p. 357). Rituals are 

sites of both identification and division: “communities’ comparisons of themselves with others 

and their efforts to communicate among themselves contribute to the efficacy of rituals,” 

rendering them a “privileged social arena in which the outlines of countless social relations are 

shaped” (de Coppet, 1992, p. 8). Moreover, because rituals are “designed in order to be 

repeated,” they have “a special capacity to affect our memory” (Bergmann, 2012, p. 85). 87 

“Political rituals” are especially important for the creation of publics. Political ritual can 

be defined as “repeated and culturally standardized activity related to a political sphere or (and) 

performed by political actors” that “expresses and communicates feelings, concerns, and ideas 

central for and shared by the community” (Stępińska, & Kołodziejczak, 2016, p. 1). What 

distinguishes political ritual from mere repetitive activity is that political rituals are tied to a 

community’s most cherished values and the stories that enact those values; they give participants 

a sense of collective identity, helping them to make sense of the world around them. Political 

rituals have both “internal” and “external” functions, as these activities contribute to the 

coherence of a political group while also expressing the group’s beliefs to outside audiences 

(Peterson & Reiter, 2016, p. 2). Most relevant for this analysis are the internal functions of 

political rituals, and the “social or communicative psychological effects” they have on 

participants and members of the in-group (Moore & Myerhoff, 1977, p. 15). 

Political rituals are particularly powerful means of constituting community in a time 

defined by hyper-partisanship and cultural fragmentation. The second half of the twentieth 

century witnessed rapid changes in American life. In his landmark book, Bowling Alone , Putnam 

(2001) persuasively documented the startling decline of “tens of thousands” of community 

groups “across America,” which contributed to a growing sense of isolation and alienation (p. 

16). According to Putnam, “social capital” of all kinds has plummeted since the 1950s, 

manifesting in reduced rates of participation in religious organizations, labor unions, parent-

teacher associations, civic and fraternal organizations, and even bowling leagues (Putnam, 1995). 

Without these social networks, community norms, and a sense of trust, society becomes 

dysfunctional and unable to pursue shared objectives (Putnam, 1996). The result has been a 88 

withdrawn and politically disengaged citizenry, with deleterious consequences for the health of 

democracy. 

It is within this bleak context that the community-building capacities of political ritual 

should be understood. Contemporary American society has “shed old rituals without coming up 

with new ones,” weakening the “social architecture” and contributing to alienation (Brooks, 

2019, para. 17). As participation in religious and civic rituals declines, explicitly partisan 

political rituals are an alternative means for citizens to enact membership in a community. 

Political rituals, which bring otherwise disparate individuals into communion, are a form of 

constitutive rhetoric that asserts “the existence of an ideological subject” and combats alienation 

(Charland, 1987, p. 137). 

Rituals are rhetorically powerful because affect is a social phenomenon rather than the 

sole province of individuals (Ott & Dickinson, 2019, p. 30). Rituals provide participants an 

affectively charged experience, as “emotion is the pivot upon which political ritual turns” 

(Berezin, 2002, p. 43). Political rituals, by virtue of their public and performative nature, “are 

communities of feeling that serve as arenas of emotion . . . where citizens enact and vicariously 

experience collective national selfhood” (p. 44). Through rituals, participants produce “a feeling 

of solidarity,” as they appreciate that: “we are all here together, we must share something” (p. 

45). Political rituals can therefore create a sense of community at a time when civic bonds are 

fraying: “feeling political together creates a bond, a union that feels good; that good feeling feeds 

the desire to be political together; that desire binds those who feel it to the collective and its 

vision” (Blackett, 2017, p. 23). These fleeting moments of identification are no small matter in 

an era of declining social capital and increasingly privatized citizenship (Somers, 2008). 89 

Scapegoating 

Engels (2009) noted that “it is sometimes difficult to see where identification ends and 

division begins” (p. 38), precisely because scapegoating an Other can produce both division and 

identification within a community. In Burke’s dramatistic theories, division is closely linked to 

guilt and victimage. According to Burke, the very structure of linguistics combined with the 

impossibility of adhering to all a society’s commandments makes guilt an inevitable feature of 

the human condition (Burke, 1970; Mackey-Kallis & Hahn, 1994). With this guilt comes an 

impetus towards purification. One of the chief means by which societies purge guilt is 

“scapegoating,” wherein problem-ridden communities absolve themselves by externalizing 

blame onto an outside enemy. Scapegoating involves “a campaign of vilification” where “the 

scapegoat victim is purged from society and the fragmented social order (which yesterday 

seemed unable to unite for anything positive) is healed” (Braden, 2000, p. 5). 

Scapegoating is a powerful means of binding individuals into a community through 

rhetoric by allowing for “common participation in victimage” (Mackey-Kallis & Hahn, 1994, p. 

4). This cathartic process can displace blame/guilt on an Other, thereby cleansing the community 

and creating a strong sense of identification, as “society is united through the act of casting from 

their midst a common enemy” (Braden, 2000, p. 5). One particularly cogent analysis of 

scapegoating was conducted by Engels (2010), who applied Burke’s guilt/victimage framework 

to President Nixon’s rhetorical construction of a “silent majority” defined in opposition to anti-

war activists, student protestors, and other progressive groups that were allegedly destabilizing 

the country. According to Engels, Nixon’s presidential campaigns illustrate that resentment is a 

“potent rhetorical force for winning elections” (p. 306), because “naming an enemy who is 

framed as aggressor and victimizer” makes it possible “to transform” a group of otherwise 90 

privileged individuals “into the victim” (p. 304). Scapegoating can have perverse effects: if 

blame for society’s ills is misidentified for the sake of convenience, the underlying causes of 

guilt will go unaddressed, creating a need for ever more scapegoats. These divisive tactics are 

particularly dangerous when utilized in an atmosphere of racial, ethnic, or religious tension. 

Fandom 

Campaign rallies can serve as sites for community-building through the celebration of 

political figures as objects of fandom. The term “fan,” which inevitably evokes the closely 

related and more derogatory term “fanatic,” “came into widespread use in the early twentieth 

century, when mass consumerism, based on new systems of marketing and communications, was 

transforming the industrial West” (Cavicchi, 2007, p. 247). Fans are defined by their 

“emotional/affective tie to their object of fandom,” their “specialization of knowledge regarding 

their object of fandom,” their participation “in a community of fans,” and their production of 

materials such as “literature, crafts, clothes, and music about their object of fandom” (Hinck, 

2019, pp. 9-10). DeLuca (2018) defined “fandoms” as “passionate publics” or “subcultures, 

groups, and/or communities of fans, revolving around a particular and unifying interest, whether 

a sports team, television show, book series, or film” (p. 77). Fandoms commonly center around 

sports or popular culture texts but can also develop around politicians, as “the texts, artifacts, and 

media that make up the center of public culture and discourses of citizenship are increasingly 

blurring the boundary between entertainment and politics” (Hinck, 2019, p. 8). 

Through political fandom, candidates are transformed into objects of passionate adoration 

and representatives of a political movement. Campaign rallies can therefore serve both as sites 

for identifying villainous scapegoats and as sites for hero worship. This is not an entirely new 

development. Cheathem’s (2018) study of presidential campaigning in the nineteenth century 91 

showed that “what sounded and looked like entertainment, things such as music, public events, 

and cartoons, held important political meaning in the first few decades of the United States’ 

existence” (pp. 2-3). Through “material culture,” or “objects invested with political meaning,” 

nineteenth century Americans were able to “tangibly touch and own pieces of the political 

process” (p. 12). These “material culture objects,” such as buttons, ribbons, or other items 

symbolically linked to a candidate such as the hickory sprigs worn by supporters of Andrew 

Jackson, were used to “identify political loyalty” and “deliver intentional partisan campaign 

messages” (pp. 57-58). Jamieson (1996) noted that the 1840 presidential campaign “functioned 

as a form of national jamboree replete with orchestrated parades, banners, torches, 

transparencies, and flags,” and that supporters of William Henry Harrison expressed their 

admiration through “omnipresent log cabins and hard cider” and by wearing “coonskin caps” (p. 

9). The rise of social media has further facilitated the emergence of political fandoms by 

allowing supporters to interact and communicate with both fellow partisans and candidates 

themselves in innovative ways (Erikson, 2008). 

Since campaign rallies can sometimes function as the political equivalent of comic 

book/science fiction conventions that fans attend to flaunt their memorabilia and commune with 

the likeminded, they can be powerful tools for fostering identification: “identification, both with 

the object of fandom (e.g., a celebrity) and the community of fans, is central to the experience of 

fandom” (Soukup, 2006, p. 322). In his analysis of Star Trek fans, Jindra (1994) argued that fan 

communities “are often a response to the breakdown of traditional structural communities” (p. 

38). Fandom can “provide safe spaces for shared identification” organized around “shared 

rituals” and “a sense of belonging and an affinity for a group and subject matter” (DeLuca, 2018, 

p. 78). In this way, fandoms serve as “a communal glue” that links otherwise disparate 92 

individuals together (Proctor, 2013, p. 199). Large gatherings of fans at conventions or rallies 

can therefore operate as a secular version of religious revivals (Anijar, 2000, p. 9). 

Importantly, “fandom is not simply an intense adoration for the candidate or a passive 

form of spectatorship” (Erikson, 2008, p. 14). Fandom is a “participatory experience” that 

enables fans to “actively create publicly mediated texts” and “construct meanings associated with 

the celebrity” or other fan-object (Soukup, 2006, p. 323). Given the participatory nature of 

fandom, “fan studies researchers have long used fieldwork and autoethnography to investigate 

fandom” and learn about a “fan community’s history, practices, and values” (Hinck, 2019, p. 42). 

In the remainder of the essay, I argue that one key to understanding the Trump 

phenomenon is to explain how rallies co-constructed a sense of strong identity as a “Trumper,” 

an identity and relationship that made Trump immune from criticism for core supporters. Three 

interrelated techniques for identification-building – political ritual, scapegoating, and fandom – 

were present at Donald Trump’s campaign rallies. In the analysis I follows, I pay careful 

attention for moments where Trump and his followers allude to a sense of shared identity or 

define themselves in opposition to various scapegoats. In doing so, I apply Burkean principles to 

the rhetorical performances of Trump and his supporters, reading the proceedings of the rallies 

through the lens of theoretical concepts such as identification and division. The approach 

developed here extends rhetorical theories related to identification, while outlining the novel 

ways that Trump rallies foster community. 

Trump Rallies as Sites for the Enactment of Community 

Donald Trump’s rallies are best understood as the material enactment of Trumpism as a 

quasi-religious community, defined by a stable set of heroes and villains and organized around 

recurring rituals. In what follows, I draw upon my rhetorical fieldwork at multiple Trump 93 

campaign rallies to outline how political rituals, scapegoating, and fandom activities contributed 

to community-building between Trump supporters. My rhetorical fieldwork entailed attending 

four Trump rallies—in Grand Rapids, Michigan, Green Bay, Wisconsin, Minneapolis, 

Minnesota, and Dallas, Texas—from start to finish. This involved paying close attention not only 

to Trump’s speech, but to the activities that unfolded all day at these campaign events. Each rally 

proceeded in largely the same way. I waited from about 9 AM to 4 PM outside the rally venue to 

be admitted, observing and conversing with Trump supporters. I then passed through a security 

checkpoint and found a seat in the rally. After another waiting period, the rally would kick off 

with speeches from local political figures, and, on several occasions, speeches from Trump’s 

children or Vice President Mike Pence. Finally, at around 7:30 PM, Trump himself would speak. 

Throughout my fieldwork, I created fieldnotes and photographic/video material to document my 

experiences and use as the basis for a rhetorical analysis of these events. Close attention to the 

multifaceted co-construction of consubstantiality at rallies illuminates the underlying reason 

behind the stubborn loyalty of Trump’s core supporters and demonstrates that rally attendees are 

not merely brainwashed passive observers, but rather active participants in the construction of 

identification. 

Trumpism, Ritualized 

Through participation in rituals, Trump supporters co-constructed identification from the 

bottom-up and enacted their membership in a marginalized but defiant community. Although 

Trump’s willingness to flout political scripts is central to his outsider appeal, his rallies have 

proven to be highly formulaic (Rogers, 2018). Trump’s campaign rallies have followed a stable 

script organized around Trump’s speech, but also recurring ritualistic activities performed by 

core supporters. These rituals may have seemed trivial or strange to outsiders but were highly 94 

meaningful to participants because they transformed these events into participatory affairs where 

attendees could feel part of a larger community. 

The pre-rally line. If a Trump rally follows a script as if it were a theatrical play, the 

opening act is the gathering of supporters outside of the venue hours before the festivities 

officially commence. Observations of Trump rallies commonly emphasize the ritualistic nature 

of pre-rally lines. Sam Gringlas (2016), reporting on a Trump rally in Muscatine, Iowa, wrote: 

“the first thing you notice is the line” (para. 1). Although these lines sometimes contain 

thousands of people and “wrap around blocks,” their size is not what makes them rhetorically 

significant (Tur, 2017, p. 51; Rogers, 2018). The congregation of Trump supporters old and 

young, some of whom have traveled great distances to be there, marks the initiation of the 

communal bonding experience. The most hardcore Trump loyalists arrive the night before the 

rally to camp out and secure an optimal spot in the line (Rogers, 2018). Trump supporters amuse 

themselves while waiting in line, by playing picnic games such as cornhole, listening to music, 

or taking advantage of the ample opportunities to buy merchandise. Ed Pilkington (2018) of the 

Guardian described the pre-rally line as “ablaze with red Make America Great Again hats and 

national flags draped over shoulders amid a festive mood not unlike a carnival” (para. 12). 

Ott and Dickinson (2019) argued that Trump “performs an emergent populist style of 

‘white rage’” that has “demonstrated remarkable sway among Trump’s followers” (pp. 93-94). 

Although the authors correctly identify rage as an important element of Trumpism, anger and 

rage are far from the only emotions that link Trump supporters to one another. During my 

fieldwork, I encountered a broad range of emotions. Perhaps most frequently, I witnessed Trump 

supporters enjoying themselves. At each rally, hundreds of Trump supporters passed the time by 

having what amounted to a massive picnic or tailgate party. Families and friends conversed 95 

while sitting in folding lawn chairs and sharing food. A supporter in Grand Rapids compared the 

pre-rally wait in line to “a day at the beach” while another supporter in Minneapolis claimed the 

rally was “more fun than a guy can stand.” In Green Bay and Dallas, the Trump campaign 

provided live music, performed by local bands specializing in country and classic rock covers, 

leading to mass sing-a-longs and dancing. Opportunistic food vendors that set up shop nearby the 

crowds further cemented the tailgate-like atmosphere of Trump’s rallies; supporters ate stock 

carnival foods such as pizza, French fries, chicken wings, hamburgers, and, in Dallas, Mexican 

dishes served by a taco truck. Critics often disparagingly compare Trump rallies to circuses, but 

it is worth remembering why circuses were once a key source of entertainment for Americans: 

circuses provide an opportunity to gather the family, eat tasty food, and witness rare and 

entertaining spectacles. 

Once attendees reached the inside of the venue, the rally looked less like a picnic or 

tailgate party and more like a rock concert: supporters energetically danced to the song “YMCA” 

and, as certain songs played loudly through the arena’s sound system, used the flashlight 

function of their cell phones to simulate the experience of waving a lighter at a concert. Trump 

rallies are true community events that supporters flock to not only to have feelings of rage 

validated, but to have fun .

Yet, the pre-rally line was not always idyllic. At times, the waiting experience was taxing 

on Trump supporters. At a 2018 rally in Topeka, supporters waited “in line in the cold and rain 

for two hours” (Schumacher, 2018, para. 3; Stelter, 2018). At the rally I attended in Green Bay, 

supporters spent all day in bitterly cold weather waiting in line. At another rally I attended in 

Dallas, medical professionals struggled to navigate their way through the crowded lines of 

Trump supporters to reach a person who had apparently collapsed from the heat and needed 96 

medical attention. The pre-rally proceedings and their hardships are not incidental to the 

rhetorical function of these events. The waiting period is “part and parcel of the performance” 

and creates “a norm of devotion in the crowd and a sense of shared identity among crowd 

members” (Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 29). At several of the rallies I attended, supporters 

thanked me for traveling such a great distance to attend the rally. Trump himself often affirmed 

the devotion of his supporters during his rally speeches. In Green Bay, Trump praised his 

supporters for their weathering the elements to see him speak: 

They said there’s a big, big storm, it’s going to be hitting Green Bay, we may have to 

cancel . . . I said: like hell we’re going to cancel . . . People are standing out 24 hours ago, 

32 hours ago, outside. Who stood out there for 24 hours? Thank you, we love you . . . 

And you’re rewarded with the best seats in the house, right, that’s the way it’s supposed 

to work, right? (“Live in Green Bay,” 2019) 

Such remarks reassure supporters that their faithfulness and perseverance does not go unnoticed 

by their hero. They are akin to a blessing from a high priest for completing a religious ritual. 

The discomfort and inconvenience of waiting in line for extended periods and then going through 

a burdensome security screening procedure adds to, rather than detracts from, the bonding 

experience: “the shared sense of self-sacrifice reinforces the experience’s value” (Guilford, 2016, 

para. 19). 

Another unpleasant aspect of Trump’s rallies is the ritual of passage through security 

checkpoints, as “Trump’s security and clearance measures are consistently more rigorous than 

those of any other candidate, including former first lady Hillary Clinton” (Guilford, 2016, para. 

9). Prior to entering the venue, attendees were required to pass through metal detectors and other 

searches, creating an invasive experience akin to going through airport security (Gringlas, 2016; 97 

Guilford, 2016). Gwynn Guilford’s (2016) ethnography described how the stringent security 

process encouraged the pro-Trump faithful to fear for their safety and vigilantly keep watch for 

potential disturbers of the peace. The security checkpoints divided rally-goers from the 

opposition while uniting them with their allies, as the “feeling of being in danger and under 

threat intensifies the shared identity that forms among supporters” (Guilford, 2016, para. 23). 

The prolonged waits and arduous passage through security checkpoints constituted a ritual of 

initiation, which “expresses” or “dramatizes” a person’s transformational “movement through 

the social structure” (Schwartz & Merten, 1968, p. 1118). Attendees entered the sprawling lines 

for admission as an undifferentiated mass but emerged on the other side as genuine Trump 

loyalists. 

On the surface, waiting in line at a Trump rally might appear to be unremarkable 

behavior, not unlike waiting in line at the post office. Yet it is in these lines, hours before Trump 

takes the stage that the building of consubstantiality begins. Unlike more mundane waiting 

experiences, standing in line for a Trump rally is a political act that brings potent values such as 

patriotism into play. Attending a Trump rally requires attendees to publicly announce themselves 

as Trump supporters, which, given the community’s narrative of marginalization, can be a 

double-edged sword. On one hand, during my fieldwork I saw supporters relishing the attention 

associated with attending a Trump rally. Supporters jockeyed to get in front of television 

cameras, and in Dallas, they waved and cheered at a helicopter flying over the rally and 

presumably filming the massive crowd. However, Trump supporters often described themselves 

as societal outcasts. In Grand Rapids, a woman bemoaned that you “can’t be supportive of your 

president without being harassed.” In Dallas, supporters were shown a video where Lara Trump 

remarked that “it takes a lot of guts to get out there and be a Trump supporter these days.” Their 98 

identities as Trumpers were cemented in part through negation of elites and dangerous Others. 

While waiting in line, the pro-Trump faithful greeted the numerous protestors who gather near 

rallies with chants such as “U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!” (Rogers, 2018, para. 16). Such experiences 

lend credence to the “us versus them” narratives that Trump will regale attendees with later in 

the rally. 

Religious and patriotic rituals. After waiting in line all morning and afternoon, Trump 

supporters were usually admitted into the rally arena around 4 PM. Another waiting period 

followed, which also constituted identity. Each rally I attended officially began after the 

execution of three rituals: a group prayer, the recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance, and the 

performance of the national anthem. The performance of these religious and patriotic rituals prior 

to the delivery of political speeches mirrors standard procedures in amateur and professional 

athletics, where the national anthem and other rituals are performed prior to the game beginning. 

These three rituals are familiar to virtually all Americans, but in this context, they took on a 

distinctly partisan and Trumpian tone. 

The group prayers that marked the official start of the rally—often presided over by local 

clergy—blended traditional Christian themes with partisanship, praise of Trump, and forays into 

thorny issues such as abortion. Many observers may find the alliance between Donald Trump—a 

profane, serial womanizer who is demonstrably ignorant regarding scripture and religious 

culture—and the evangelical right to be laughable and hypocritical, but at the rallies I attended, 

Trump was portrayed by supporters and speakers as nothing less than fierce ally of religious 

conservatives and an instrument of God’s will (Fea, 2018). In Dallas, Jack Graham, a Baptist 

pastor and member of Trump's Religious Advisory Council, engaged in Trump-style hyperbole 

while leading the crowd in prayer by declaring that “no administration has seen such 99 

humanitarian work done” (“Rally in Dallas,” 2019). Elsewhere in the prayer, Graham asked the 

crowd to “pray against the all the darkness that comes against us . . . for the darkness of 

socialism, and the darkness of liberalism, and the darkness of secularism that would destroy our 

country.” The explicitly partisan “gospel of Trump” espoused at rallies may depart from the 

gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, but these themes rung true for citizens who view 

support for Trump as an “expressive outlet for the perceived religious backsliding of the United 

States” (Whitehead, Perry, & Baker, 2018, p. 165). 

At the rallies I attended, Trump supporters took these prayers seriously. The din of the 

crowd would fade, supporters would remove their hats, and bow their heads and close their eyes. 

Supporters cheered at the mention of Trump by the preacher and engaged in call and response 

with spontaneous cries of “amen.” The ritualistic prayer that occurred at each rally briefly 

transformed the events from a massive communal picnic or tailgate into megachurch sermons or 

religious revivals, demonstrating that “the appeal and purpose of rallies go well beyond securing 

future votes: they are meant to provide both the audience and Trump with a kind of communion” 

(Dwyer, 2019, para. 11). 

At each Trump rally I attended, the conclusion of the group prayer was followed by two 

patriotic rituals: The Pledge of Allegiance and the national anthem. During these rituals, the 

audience’s attention and bodies would gravitate as though by magnetism toward a massive 

American flag display—perhaps 50 feet tall, and as wide as a section of stadium seating— 

provided by the campaign. The Pledge of Allegiance is one of the “key rituals in American life” 

and “a very visible, indeed, perhaps the most ubiquitous, instance of American civil religion” 

(Kao & Copulsky, 2007, p. 123, 125). Given its central role as one of the most prominent rituals 

in American society, the Pledge “reinforces patriotic myths, it organizes individuals into a 100 

political community, and it communicates values that provide individuals with important aspects 

of their sense of reality” (Nahmod, 2005, p. 798). During my fieldwork, the experience of 

reciting the pledge of allegiance in unison with thousands of other people transported me back to 

my childhood where this ritual was a daily feature of my elementary school years. The Pledge, in 

its simplicity, evokes unity and shared identity. Similarly, the Star-Spangled Banner is another 

foundational national ritual that has become “a deeply engrained facet of U.S. culture” and is 

featured frequently in “concerts, sporting events, military functions, patriotic holidays, and 

school days” (Abril, 2007, p. 72). 

The Pledge of Allegiance and Star-Spangled Banner are omnipresent rituals across 

American society that nonetheless assume new meanings at Trump rallies. At rallies, these 

rituals are infused with a conservative view of American identity in which protest is sacrilege. It 

is impossible to separate the solemn passion with which Trump supporters perform these 

patriotic rituals at rallies from the ongoing debate in American society over national anthem 

protests. Beginning in the 2016 and 2017 National Football League seasons, American athletes 

have protested racial inequality and anti-black police brutality by kneeling during the pre-game 

performance of the national anthem. The protests prompted a vocal backlash from Trump and 

other conservatives who questioned the protestors’ patriotism and accused them of disrespecting 

the nation and the flag (Yglesias, 2017). This debate—over whether the national anthem 

protestors are un-American or simply performing the consummately American act of standing up 

to injustice to work toward a more perfect union—is important context for understanding why 

these rituals contribute to the construction of identification at Trump rallies. 

Trump rallies are awash with patriotic imagery and symbols. During my fieldwork, 

supporters shared a commitment to displaying nothing less than the utmost respect to the 101 

American flag at all times. Trump supporters frequently wore clothing critiquing the national 

anthem protests, bearing captions such as “Stand for the flag, kneel for the cross” and “Stand up 

for Betsy Ross.” In Minneapolis, a Trump supporter near me in line talked at length about why 

he had quit watching the NFL during the 2017 season due to the protests. Trump supporters saw 

this controversy to be one of the dividing fault lines in society that separates “real” Americans 

from the nation’s internal enemies. At a 2017 rally in Alabama, Trump utilized the controversy 

to rhetorically divide the nation between patriots and ungrateful protestors by stating: “But you 

know what’s hurting the game more than that? When people like yourselves turn on television 

and you see those people taking the knee when they are playing our great national anthem” (qtd. 

in Jenkins, 2017 para. 7, emphasis added). The ritualistic performance of the Pledge of 

Allegiance and the national anthem—which are already symbolically charged rituals—therefore 

assumed added rhetorical significance at Trump rallies. Through enactment of these rituals, 

Trump supporters rhetorically constituted a virtuous community of patriots and implicitly 

critiqued those who allegedly disrespect the flag and the nation through inappropriate protests. 

The racial dimensions of these rituals cannot be ignored, as the incessant performance of 

patriotism at rallies—through rituals, clothing, chants of “U.S.A!” and other means—allowed the 

predominately white audience to define their proudly patriotic community in opposition to the 

“ungratefulness and lack of patriotism” supposedly displayed by black athletes and their liberal 

allies (Kusz, 2017/2018, p. 120). 

Ritualistic chants. After the performance of the national anthem, additional ritualistic 

activities commenced. The infamous chants associated with Trump rallies – “lock her up,” 

“CNN sucks,” “build that wall,” “drain the swamp,” or “Trump! Trump! Trump!” – are a means 

for attendees to experience “the strange sea-change that turns 20,000 individuals into one being,” 102 

all bellowing a slogan in unison (Guilford, 2016, para. 4). At the rallies I attended, supporters 

could hardly contain their desire to perform these chants. On several occasions, the crowd’s pent-

up energy burst forth at the slightest provocation by one of Trump’s warm-up speakers, leading 

to energetic chants of “lock her up” and “build that wall” despite the unremarkable nature of the 

speeches from various local political figures. These chants are often caricatured as the crowd 

pliantly following Trump’s lead, but they also serve as a “celebration of shared values,” an 

emotional “release,” and a means for the audience to transgress norms of political correctness in 

a safe setting (Bouie, 2019, paras. 2-3; Dwyer, 2019). 

The “lock her up” chant has become such a ritualized mainstay of Trump rallies, as 

predictable as the 7 th inning stretch at a baseball game, that it often erupts at the mere mention of 

Clinton’s name (Stevenson, 2016). Long after Clinton’s email controversy slid out of the 

headlines and it became clear that President Trump’s Department of Justice would not prosecute 

her for any supposed wrongdoing, supporters found ways to keep the “lock her up” chant in 

circulation by using it in reference to other Trump adversaries such as Senator Dianne Feinstein 

(Cummings, 2018). At the rally I attended in Minneapolis, the chant was repurposed into “lock 

him up” after Joe Biden was mentioned. If Trump rallies are a religious gathering of sorts where 

adherents gather together to “create a certain energy” and connect themselves to a larger whole, 

then these chants operated as the hymns of Trumpism, creating consubstantiality at a time of 

societal breakdown (Wagner, 2018, para. 20). Although audiences followed Trump’s lead by 

booing enemies as Trump named them or cheering his signature talking points, “the relationship 

is reciprocal” as Trump “[drew] energy from the crowd” and would often step back from the 

podium to allow the audience to chant until they were contented (Guilford, 2016, para. 4). 

Through these chants, supporters are offered a unique opportunity to experience the “psychic 103 

cleansing that comes from 90 minutes of participating in the same chants and cheering the same 

applause lines as 20,000 other people” (Bender, 2019). 

Scapegoating 

A second means by which Trump rallies constituted rally-goers into a community is the 

channeling of audience rage and resentment toward scapegoats who are blamed for the nation’s 

decline. Trump rallies provided audiences a host of villains, both abstract and concrete, to scorn. 

The list of enemies at which Trump directed his vitriol is long, and includes prominent 

Democrats such as Hillary Clinton and Nancy Pelosi, but also Trump’s critics within the 

Republican Party, such as the Bush family, Mitt Romney, and John McCain. Trump’s tirades 

also targeted foes such as “coastal elites” and “radical Islamic terrorists.” The capacity of 

Trump’s rhetoric to produce negative identification directed against external enemies has been 

amply documented by scholars (Johnson, 2017; Oliver & Rahn, 2016; Wahl-Jorgensen, 2018). 

The liberal media is a particularly important rhetorical punching bag that Trump used to 

define the contours of his anti-establishment movement. At a 2015 rally in Hilton Head, Trump 

accused the media of wanting “to marginalize us” through collusion with his opponents and 

constant bad publicity (Federal News Service, 2016, para. 22). As President, Trump escalated his 

attacks on perceived media unfairness by denouncing the media as “the enemy of the people” 

(Stewart, 2018). At rallies, the process of division and identification was supported by more than 

Trump’s words. The very physical layout of rallies tangibly demonstrated the divisions alluded 

to in Trump’s speeches and afforded a role for audience participation in the scapegoating 

process. Through careful spatial organization and staging, Trump divided the “real Americans” 

(his supporters) from “the fake news media.” An unforgettable aspect of these rallies, described 

in NBC reporter Katy Tur’s (2017) memoir Unbelievable , are the “press pens”: 104 

Yes, we are in a pen: a makeshift enclosure made of bicycle racks and jammed full of 

desks, reporters, and camera equipment. We’re in the middle of the [aircraft] carrier, 

slammed against the right side wall. As usual, almost all of Trump’s supporters are white 

and a lot of them are looking at us, not exactly kindly. The campaign and Secret Service 

force us to stay inside the pen while Trump is onstage. They even discourage bathroom 

breaks. None of them have a good explanation for why we’re kept separate from the 

supporters. Are we the threat or are they? (p. 64) 

Tur speculated that “Trump likes us penned in, because it makes it easier to point and yell at us 

all at once” (p. 140). 

Victimage operates by “transferring our guilt to an outside agent or agents who are made 

to suffer in our place” (Mackey-Kallis & Hahn, 1994). Trump rallies so potently constituted a 

besieged community precisely because attendees were provided a flesh-and-blood, physically-

present scapegoat to direct feelings of resentment at. The “liberal media elites” that Trump 

constantly rails against, and that might otherwise seem abstract, were made manifest in their 

holding pens. Attendees tangibly participated in the expulsion of media elites from the ranks of 

their patriotic community. For Trump supporters who view the media as condescending or 

hostile to their way of life, seeing actual reporters herded into cages like prisoners reversed the 

perceived power differential between the two groups. 

Crucially, scapegoating was a collaborative effort between Trump and his followers. The 

media, once neatly rounded into press pens, became easy targets for rhetorical division. While 

inveighing against media unfairness at rallies, Trump transformed individual reporters into 

synecdoches for his antagonists at the New York Times , Washington Post , CNN , and MSNBC 

generally. Tur’s (2017) memoir abounds with incidents where Trump singled out individual 105 

reporters, including herself, as objects of derision (p. 81). Guilford (2016) also recounted how 

Trump would scowl “at the media cattle pen in the back of the room . . . pantomiming his disdain 

with an elaborate sneer before goading his supporters to turn and glare too” (para. 67). With an 

enemy identified, the audience relished an opportunity to jeer at a scapegoat. Stelter (2018) of 

CNN detailed the ostracization this creates: 

When you're in that pen, you really do feel like a zoo animal. Rallygoers gawk at you, 

take pictures of you, and sometimes sneer while they walk by, saying things like, “You're 

fake news” and “enemy of the people.” (para. 8) 

During my fieldwork, I often observed Trump supporters gleefully participating in such 

ritualistic scapegoating. Anti-CNN clothing and signs were mainstays of these events, as was the 

“CNN sucks” chant. The mere mention of the media by Trump and other speakers would cause 

supporters to turn their attention and bodies toward the media press pen and issue a thunderous 

chorus of boos and shouts of “fake news” aimed directly at media personnel, in an unnerving and 

authoritarian display of anti-media animus. In the Bible, the scapegoating ritual entailed forcibly 

exiling a live animal from the community, to symbolically “bear the sins of Israel into the 

wilderness” and thus redeem the community (Maclean, 2007, p. 313). At Trump rallies, 

supporters enacted a twenty-first century variation of this ancient rite, wherein collective guilt 

was alleviated through displacement onto the “enemy of the people,” the press. 

Ridiculing reporters does more than provide Trump and his supporters a good laugh. The 

ritualized resentment expressed at the media is “constitutive of civic identity” (Engels, 2010, p. 

306). Through the confluence of several factors – the carefully-staged physical environment of 

the rallies, Trump’s anti-media rhetoric, and his supporters’ vengeful performances – Trump 

rallies divided virtuous rally-goers from the “fake news media,” and therefore solidified a 106 

beleaguered community. As what Burke (1957) would term a “medicine,” the scapegoating ritual 

may temporarily numb the pain Trump supporters felt as a result of their perceived exclusion 

from society. However, this medicine prolongs, rather than cleanses, feelings of alienation and 

guilt, by (1) misidentifying the true causes of Trump supporters’ suffering and (2) keeping 

Trump supporters perpetually outraged at their media victimizers. Trump “rallies may be 

cathartic, as he screams and yells at conjured enemies,” but the emotional release is short-lived, 

as his message amounts to “an exercise in pointing the finger at someone else” (Vance, 2016, 

para. 30). Ultimately, the scapegoating ritual “does nothing to cure one’s pain, which is a product 

of more structural causes” (Engels, 2010, p. 312). 

Fandom 

Supporters are not necessarily drawn to rallies by a shared commitment to a fixed set of 

ideological positions. Rather, supporters attend rallies to celebrate Trump, their hero and fan-

object, and in the process constitute a fandom community. Stelter (2018) gestured towards this 

when he described a pre-rally gathering of Trump supporters as having “the look and feel of a 

political concert” (para. 2). The “Front Row Joes”—the loyalest of the loyal Trump supporters 

that have attended 30-50 Trump rallies each and caravan in mini-vans from rally to rally like 

Grateful Dead fans, waiting in line for days in advance of Trump’s speech—are inscrutable if 

one approaches Trumpism as an ideological, rather than cultural phenomenon (Bender, 2019). 

Since at least the nineteenth century, political rallies have blended partisanship and 

entertainment, with supporters characterizing their preferred candidate as not just the right 

person for the job but also a heroic symbol and representative of a group of people, a culture, or 

a certain way of life. Barack Obama, with his deft use of social media to promote his historic 

campaign and considerable charisma, arguably “cemented the merging of politics and culture,” 107 

but “Donald Trump has exploded it” (Herndon, 2019). Since Trump was a pop-cultural figure 

decades before he emerged as a serious political candidate, his rallies are part of a “cultural 

phenomenon that sometimes looks more like a concert or a megachurch worship experience 

rather than a traditional political rally” (Herndon, 2019). 

The pre-rally lines illustrate the capacity of these events to constitute a fandom. To find 

similar examples of hordes of people braving the elements and gathering in anticipation of some 

spectacle, one normally needs to look outside of the political context towards the realm of 

popular culture or sports. On a practical level, Harry Potter and Star Wars fans line up in 

costume for the midnight release of a new novel or film so that they can be among the first to 

experience it, but these events are also an important venue for communing with likeminded 

individuals and signaling one’s authenticity as a fan by wearing costumes or memorabilia 

(Zubernis & Larsen, 2012). Similarly, Trump supporters line up hours in advance in red “Make 

America Great Again” hats to performatively demonstrate their commitment to the cause, like 

NFL fans might paint their faces and brave harsh conditions to position themselves as “true” 

fans. At Trump rallies, thousands of “like-minded people” commune in a manner “not unlike an 

Ohio State Buckeye game, where you bring together all of these people from different walks of 

life but all with a shared purpose and a shared interest” (Bender, 2019). 

During my fieldwork, I observed Trump supporters engaging in another omnipresent 

activity associated with fandom: the exchange of “material culture,” or objects invested with 

political symbolism (Cheathem, 2018). Fandom is rooted in “concrete practices and artifacts” 

such as “costumes and collectibles” and “shrines and pilgrimages,” and the Trump fandom is no 

exception (Rehak, 2014). At the rallies I attended, I was struck by the sheer volume of Trump-

related merchandise, collectibles, and clothing that was available for purchase or brought to the 108 

rally by supporters: endless variations on the classic red hat, flags, bobble-head dolls, pins, 

buttons, scarves, shirts, and much more, almost all bearing Trump’s visage or his signature 

phrase “Make America Great Again.” Local Trump fans at each rally put their own regional spin 

on the fandom: in Minneapolis, supporters wore “MAGAsota” gear, while the rally in Dallas was 

flooded with “Trump 2020” cowboy hats. Supporters in Minneapolis even passed out fake dollar 

bills bearing Trump’s image, while a vendor in Dallas sold flags with a sensationalized image of 

a superhuman-looking Trump leaning onto a machine gun while riding on a tank, as fireworks 

explode across an American flag backdrop. Trump memorabilia, like Trump himself, seems to 

operate according to the principle of “the gaudier the better.” 

The ubiquity of such merchandise served obvious commercial imperatives but also 

afforded an outlet for friendly competition among supporters, over who could claim to be the 

most passionate and most diehard Trump fan. The outfits and memorabilia worn and displayed 

by rally attendees seemed to be primarily targeted at an internal audience of fellow Trump 

supporters, and it was common to witness supporters complimenting each other’s clothing and 

gear. In Green Bay, a supporter dressed in the garb of a revolutionary war-era soldier and walked 

up and down the line of supporters making remarks such as “the liberals are coming,” while 

other supporters wore “cheese head” hats (usually associated with the Green Bay Packers 

fandom) bearing pro-Trump phrases. In Dallas, a supporter wore a suit with a red brick pattern 

and claimed to represent Donald Trump’s border wall. In Minneapolis, one woman wore two 

remarkable articles of clothing. Despite the frigid and rainy weather outside, she wore a tank top 

featuring an Andy Warhol-style pattern of Trump making a sneering expression. In lieu of pants, 

she wore a costume meant to create the illusion that she was piggyback riding on top of Trump, 

featuring a fake pair of legs resting over Trump’s shoulders. At several rallies, supporters wore 109 

shirts and socks bearing Trump’s image, with yellow fuzzy hair-like material dangling from 

Trump’s signature combover for fellow Trump fans to jokingly stroke and yank upon. Supporters 

who wore certain fan favorite shirts—such as one bearing the 2016 electoral college map and the 

caption “Impeach This” and another featuring images of Trump, Obama, and Bill Clinton with 

the captions “More Jobs, No Jobs, Blow Jobs”—were often approached by other supporters for 

photographs. The rallies I attended were as much fan conventions as political events, defined by 

enthusiasts gathering to celebrate their fan-object and revel in each other’s company. 

Rallies as Community Events 

Trump rallies, which draw thousands of Americans from across the nation to celebrate a 

shared hero, provide supporters a sense of communal identity. Trump “constitutes his audience 

around” feelings of “marginality to the political system” and “powerlessness” (Johnson, 2017, p. 

239, 234). However, a key aim of rallies is to boost the audience’s perception of political self-

efficacy to ensure that they cast ballots for Trump rather than disengage from the electoral 

process. Although Trump supporters may feel stigmatized and marginalized by various 

threatening forces (both real and imagined) in their everyday lives, at rallies, this community 

affirmed its strength and resilience. 

At each rally I attended, supporters marveled and obsessed over the size of the turnout. 

From the moment I arrived at each rally and throughout the day, Trump supporters constantly 

walked up and down the line, taking photographs or filming the crowd and expressing awe at 

how many people were in attendance and making remarks such as “you won’t see this on CNN” 

while doing so. In the meantime, pro-Trump social media accounts would post photos and videos 

of these hundreds and thousands of supporters waiting in line to be admitted, occasionally 

leading Trump to acknowledge the massive lines in a post from his official Twitter account (see: 110 

Trump, 2019). The obsession with crowd size was fueled by the speakers, especially Trump 

himself, who frequently boasted about turnout, bemoaned how many supporters were unable to 

enter the venue due to capacity constraints, disparaged the crowd sizes of his rivals’ events, and 

framed the crowd’s size as evidence of his movement’s strength and momentum. The physical 

presence of large numbers of Trump supporters served as tangible evidence of this community’s 

influence and coherence, combating feelings of alienation and providing material support for 

Trump’s claim to speak on behalf of “the people.” As one supporter in Minneapolis put it, the 

Democrats and their impeachment investigations may represent everything “bad in our country,” 

but “everyone here is the good in our country.” 

While exiting the rally after the conclusion of Trump’s speech, I witnessed supporters 

bidding each other farewell by exchanging hugs in a surprisingly sentimental fashion. At a 

Trump rally, “you’re there for him, but you’re also there for each other” (Herndon, 2019). A 

consideration of Trump rallies in toto reveals that much of the work of community-building is 

undertaken with the involvement of ordinary Trump supporters, despite the tendency of many 

rhetorical analyses of identification in political campaigns to forefront the candidate alone. The 

hour or two spent listening to Trump’s speech is small in comparison to the long hours some 

Trump supporters spend waiting in line and mingling with their fellow enthusiasts. These 

moments of communion, and not particular policy proposals, form the core of Trumpism and 

give supporters a reason to come back for more. It is in this context that the stubborn loyalty of 

Trump supporters should be understood. For rally goers, rejecting Trump after a new scandal or 

controversy would not just violate their perceived political interests, but would amount to denial 

of a community that gives meaning and coherence to their lives. In an epoch defined by growing 

isolation where alienation is growing and a sense of community declining, the motives of Trump 111 

loyalists are not opaque, unintelligible, or otherwise impossible to deduce. From the perspective 

of the faithful, rallies offer “the brief but ecstatic experience of becoming the single-mouthed 

crowd-creature,” in a state of near-seamless consubstantiality with your surroundings (Guilford, 

2016, para. 102). That is not something to be sacrificed lightly. 

The role of enactment in building identification is crucial. Trump rallies are powerful 

events because they are organized around concrete activities—political rituals, scapegoating, and 

the circulation of material culture objects in the vein of a fandom—that constitute a coherent 

community by providing heroes to celebrate and villains to scorn. Importantly, the consubstantial 

bond constructed between Trump and his audience was given a strong material dimension 

through several recurring rituals that supporters could tangibly participate in. At rallies, the 

division between media elites and ordinary citizens was physically enacted, through the shrewd 

tactic of herding reporters into pens. The long waits in pre-rally lines further made attendees feel 

part of a dedicated community of faithful Trump supporters, creating a sense that initiation into 

this community was a reward for their endurance. These vignettes confirm the capacity of 

political ritual to transform discrete individuals into a larger collective, especially when these 

activities are tied to affectively charged, embodied experiences. This identification is sturdy 

enough to withstand Trump’s endless stream of controversies precisely because it is tied to 

strong emotions forged through rituals. Although the constitutive functions of Trump rallies offer 

a respite from feelings of isolation that are now endemic in American society, they have other 

deleterious consequences for civic discourse in the United States. In the next section, I conclude 

by explaining the implications that this analysis has for the study of Trump-era politics and 

rhetorical analyses of political campaigns. 112 

Implications and Conclusion 

Donald Trump’s campaign rallies are part picnic, part tailgate, part rock concert, part 

wrestling match, part fan convention, and part religious revival. Although all the activities have 

roots elsewhere in American culture, the coalescence of all these community-building activities 

in one place is unlike any other phenomenon in contemporary American politics. The fieldwork-

driven analysis of Trump’s campaign rallies that I have conducted here reveals three key 

findings. First, this analysis demonstrates the rhetorical agency of audiences and the need for 

analyses of campaign rhetoric to attend to not only the rhetoric of candidates, but their 

supporters. Second, this analysis illustrates the need for scholars to analyze conventional, offline 

dimensions of political campaigning in addition to emerging digital techniques. Third, this 

analysis highlights a need for rhetorical scholars to analyze identification in both its positive and 

negative forms while revealing several risks to U.S. democratic culture posed by Trump’s rallies. 

Implications for the Study of Audience Agency 

The analysis of Trump rallies has significant implications for future studies of political 

candidates and their audiences. On Saturday Night Live and elsewhere in American culture, 

attendees of Trump rallies are portrayed as unthinking drones. In media coverage, Trump rallies 

have been defined primarily in terms of their chaos and Trump’s falsehoods (Allott & Allott, 

2018). Regrettably, these assumptions are implicitly present in some rhetorical scholarship about 

Trump. In attempting to unwind the puzzle posed by Trump’s remarkably durable identificatory 

bond with his supporters, rhetorical scholars have characterized these supporters as 

fundamentally passive. Rhetorical scholars have labeled Trump’s followers as “mindless” (Ott & 

Dickinson, 2019, p. ix) or have tended to focus on “Trump’s persuasive capacities” (Johnson, 

2017, p. 230), attributing the strong relationship between Trump and his supporters to Trump’s 113 

own rhetorical techniques. This is part of a broader trend in rhetorical scholarship analyzing 

political campaigns and identification. Scholars have often adopted a top-down approach that 

emphasizes the concerted rhetorical strategies of the candidate to build consubstantiality with a 

targeted demographic (Taylor, 2016; Vigil, 2015). In the Trump era, critics have continued this 

approach by taxonomizing themes in Trump’s rhetoric and explaining their rhetorical impact 

(Appel, 2018; Johnson, 2017; Stuckey, 2017; Wahl-Jorgensen, 2018). In this essay, I have 

proposed an alternative frame, informed by rhetorical fieldwork, that understands Trump 

supporters as rhetorical agents themselves. 

The words of the candidate matter and demand close analysis. However, “successful 

constructions of social identity require more than skillful rhetoric” by movement leaders 

(Reicher, Haslam, & Hopkins, 2005, p. 561). Building identification requires that group identity 

be “structured into the practices of the social movement” itself (p. 561). Rhetorical analyses of 

candidates are incomplete without consideration of the everyday, granular ways that non-elite 

actors constitute political communities. At rallies, Trump supporters party together, sing 

together, dance together, chant together, and even pray together. These experiences produce 

meaningful feelings of camaraderie between individuals who would otherwise be strangers to 

each other. The approach utilized here emphasizes the agency of supporters in forging rhetorical 

bonds rather than treating audiences as mere targets for persuasion. Rhetorical fieldwork 

methodologies can serve as a valuable corrective to the tendency of scholars to focus upon 

“grand historical moments as seen through the speeches of world leaders” (Endres, Hess, Senda-

Cook, & Middleton, 2016, p. 513) by emphasizing “the symbolic means through which people 

produce meaning, generate social energy, and coordinate action in everyday life” (Rai & 114 

Druschke, 2018, p. 1). Furthermore, political rituals are a powerful and often overlooked way 

that campaigns can create consubstantiality without direct participation of the candidate. 

Since identification is indeed a fulcrum upon which presidential campaigns rise or fall, 

scholars must continue to closely observe the diffuse means through which strangers become a 

political community with strong consubstantial bonds. Rhetorical scholars should employ 

fieldwork methodologies to “broaden the analytic focus to include not only leaders but also 

followers” when analyzing political campaigns (Reicher et al., 2005, p. 551). Such an approach 

will not only help correct the perception that Trump supporters are fundamentally passive— 

rather than the enthusiastic co-architects of Trump’s America—but will provide a more holistic 

picture of contemporary U.S. politics. This essay is one needed step toward that goal. 

Implications for the Study of Campaign Rhetoric 

Donald Trump’s rallies have changed the way that presidential hopefuls campaign 

(Bender, 2019). Despite Hillary Clinton’s “clear advantages in areas like field staffing, 

communications, and data” (Karpf, 2017, p. 198), she was defeated by Trump, whose “entire 

campaign” hinged upon rallies (Bender, 2019). Viable candidates must not only develop 

sophisticated digital operations, but must now answer questions from the media and voters 

regarding whether they can generate enthusiasm sufficient to match that of Trump’s base: 

Once widely regarded as an interesting but ultimately inconsequential novelty of political 

campaigns, crowd size is now a potentially meaningful metric of electability — one that 

can translate into volunteers, donors and, as Trump demonstrated in 2016, actual 

momentum. Ever since, Trump has consistently drawn large audiences to his rallies, 

many of them held in less populated parts of the country and attracting supporters who 

often drive hours, across multiple states, to attend. (Parker & Linskey, 2019, para. 5) 115 

Joe Biden, for example, received media scrutiny for failing to generate large crowds in the early 

stages of his 2020 primary campaign despite maintaining a strong position in polls (Nuzzi, 

2019). 

These concerns are in part unfair: Trump lost the popular vote to Clinton by millions of 

votes and has maintained poor overall approval ratings despite consistently generating large 

turnout at his rallies. Yet, the renewed public attention to rallies points to a need for 

communication scholars to supplement studies of how emerging techniques of digital 

communication are altering campaigns with analyses that account for the reemergence of in-

person rallies as potentially significant campaigning tools. Campaign rallies and the rituals 

associated with them, because of their capacity to engage the physical senses and memory in a 

visceral way, are powerful means for fostering identification (Berezin, 2002; Bergmann, 2012). 

It is not the size of Trump rallies that makes them rhetorically significant, although their size 

does amplify their impact. Rather, Trump rallies are impactful in the ways that they engage 

audiences affectively. Digital campaign methods may allow candidates to micro-target voters in 

new and innovative ways, but the emotional experiences associated with in-person campaign 

events are valuable for candidates seeking to create a core base of loyal and highly motivated 

supporters. 

There is “political value” in the “energy” generated at Trump rallies; Trump’s opponents 

“will have to motivate their base in a way that matches or exceeds that level of energy” 

(Herndon, 2019). Candidates are beginning to understand the power of ritual and are actively 

searching for tangible ways to generate excitement around their campaigns. Senator Elizabeth 

Warren’s campaign rallies, for example, are defined by the post-rally ritual of supporters lining 

up by the thousands for an opportunity to take a “selfie” photograph with the candidate. At her 116 

rallies, Warren will pose for photographs for up to four hours at a time, until every single person 

in line has had a chance to meet her (Jennings, 2019). The selfie-line ritual, because it enables 

direct personal interaction between the candidate and supporters and signifies the strength, depth, 

and devotion of their movement, is arguably “just as important as anything else that happens in 

the rally” (Barbaro, Toeniskoetter, & Cowett, 2019). Regardless of the ultimate fates of the 

Biden, Warren, and Trump campaigns, communication scholars must devote serious attention to 

rituals such as these moving forward, in the interest of providing a fuller picture of how 

campaigns operate both online and offline. 

Implications for the Study of Identification and the State of U.S. Political Discourse 

This analysis of Trump rallies in toto reveals that Trumpism resonates not only because it 

appeals to adherents on the level of both culture and class, but because it builds identification in 

both positive and negative terms. Above all, Trumpism makes its disciples feel good . Across 

history, even the vilest of political organizations—such as the National Socialists in Germany 

and the Ku Klux Klan in the United States—have maintained followers not through pure hatred 

alone but by building feelings of community (Blee, 1993; Hagen & Ostergren, 2006). Indeed, “a 

systematic analysis of ISIS propaganda shows that . . . most of the images in ISIS propaganda 

show scenes of group cohesion, of group triumph, and of members fixing sewage systems and 

providing health care and education” (Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 28). Trump rallies are 

similarly sites for building “identification with ” a community in addition to “identification 

against ” scapegoats. This analysis reconciles the conflicting accounts of Trump rallies as 

dangerous and threatening, but also joyous and affirming, through the application of Burkean 

theories of identification and division. 117 

The findings of this essay also challenge assertions that Trump “lacks anything 

resembling a positive message” (Burns, Martin, & Haberman, 2019, para. 20). The rush by many 

commentators to treat Trump’s base as “mindless mobs led by primitive urges and stirred up by a 

narcissistic demagogue” obscures the real feelings of belongingness that rallies bring to attendees 

(Reicher & Haslam, 2017, p. 29). Rhetorical scholars repeat this error when they focus solely on 

Trump’s divisiveness while neglecting the rituals that bind his followers together in a 

community. Mills (2014) noted that “in Charland’s original essay, the negative dimensions of 

constitutive rhetoric are a recessive strain in the argument” (p. 108). Discussions of Trump, both 

inside and outside of academia, have reversed this dynamic by emphasizing the construction of 

negative identification against immigrants and liberal elites while overlooking feelings of 

solidarity between Trump supporters. This tendency to emphasize negative identification is 

problematic for generating accurate and holistic accounts of Trumpism, as the definition of “the 

ingroup is as crucial, if not more crucial, than definitions of the outgroup” in fostering collective 

identity (Reicher, Haslam, & Rath, 2008, p. 1327). The analysis I have conducted here strikes the 

correct balance by illustrating the indispensability of both positive and negative identification for 

successful political campaigns. 

This in turn points to another sobering insight about the state of political discourse in the 

United States: Trumpism could not have arisen without the precipitous collapse of national 

comity and the associated decline of feelings of identification that reach across partisan lines. 

Regional declines in economic opportunity have been accompanied by a broad-based national 

decline in civic organizations of all kinds: “the struggling parts of Middle America have seen not 

only their factories and coal mines shut down, they’ve also seen churches and sports leagues 

wither and die” (Carney, 2019, para. 13). Dwindling rates of weekly church-going and church 118 

membership have left Americans searching for ways to satisfy their religious impulses by other 

means (Putnam, 1995). Compounding this crisis of community is the decline of America’s civil 

religion and the accompanying “absence of secular ritual” in American society (Rowland & 

Frank, 2002, p. 304). With the Fourth of July and other displays of national unity reduced to 

nothing more than hollow consumerism, there are virtually no “ritual occasions in which the 

basic American mythology is celebrated” (p. 305). In contemporary society, “the centrality of 

such ritual processes has been displaced” as political conflicts now involve “parties who do not 

necessarily share beliefs, frequently do not accept the validity of one another’s intention, and 

often disagree even about the descriptions that people offer for acts” (Alexander, 2004, p. 528). 

Americans have understandably “dismantled many of our myths,” as the ongoing diversification 

of the country has forced a reevaluation of pivotal figures in the national mythos such as the 

Founding Fathers, “but [we] have not yet formed new [myths] to replace them” (Sullivan, 2017, 

para. 19). 

In the vacuum left by declining bonds of affiliation across the country, Trumpism 

emerged, providing rituals that serve as a crude substitute, or in Burke’s terms “medicine,” for 

the loss of community. Humans are storytelling creatures who are psychologically driven to find 

an underlying purpose to their lives through social connections: “our brains are wired such that 

we cannot help but search for meanings in the randomness of life” (Johnson, 2016, p. 3; Fisher, 

1985). As Americans turn away from organized religion and the national mythology as methods 

of making sense of their day-to-day existence, they are increasingly finding meaning through 

partisan affiliation (Huddy & Bankert, 2017). With partisanship now the key terministic screen 

through which many individuals interpret the world, “the cult of the presidency” risks being 119 

taken to its logical extreme, as one’s favored candidate assumes sacred status and one’s 

disfavored candidate becomes a stand-in for the profane. 

Political ideologies that rely upon “fundamentally religious patterns of thought” are 

dangerous (Burke, 1957, p. 188). The perils of a society where partisan identities bind stronger 

than national identities are plainly clear in remarks made by Texas Lieutenant Governor Dan 

Patrick at the Trump rally in Dallas I attended. While warming up the crowd for Trump, Patrick 

pontificated that “the progressive left, they are not our opponents. They are our enemy” (qtd. in 

Hooks, 2019, para. 10). My heart sunk as Patrick’s vitriol was received warmly by the audience. 

Inflammatory remarks such as these make it all but impossible to imagine a more perfect union 

where citizens can disagree while nonetheless relating to each other in a respectful and non-

violent way. If partisan politics becomes an outlet for religious impulses, it becomes “harder to 

imagine not only how to make democratic community together but even how to picture why we 

would want to” (Nelson, 2008, p. 183). The “Fifth Avenue shooting” problem, of how to 

persuade Trump supporters of the mismatch between their interests and those of Trump’s and 

thus weaken this durable bond, will not be resolved until Trump’s opponents devise alternative, 

powerful means of making Americans feel part of a team. 120 

“The president in no way, form or fashion has ever promoted or encouraged violence.” 

- White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders 

Chapter V 

“Get ‘Em Out”: The Constitutive Violence of Trump Rallies 

Oceans of ink have been spilled describing the manifold ways that Donald Trump 

violated political norms en route to becoming President of the United States. Perhaps the most 

disturbing violation was Trump’s eschewal of the norm against “explicitly condoning and 

encouraging violence” (Lind, 2016, para. 10). Although violence was almost non-existent at the 

events of other 2016 presidential hopefuls, violent incidents occurred often at Trump rallies 

throughout the election cycle. Despite occasional condemnations (see: Jackson, 2016), Trump 

repeatedly encouraged the use of force against protestors. In 2015, when reporters asked Trump 

about an incident where a Hispanic man was brutally beaten by “two Boston men, one of whom 

told the police that he was inspired by [Trump’s] anti-immigrant message,” he remarked, “people 

who are following me are very passionate. They love this country and they want this country to 

be great again” (qtd. in Rappeport, 2015, paras. 1-5). Later in the campaign, at a rally in Iowa in 

February of 2016, Trump remarked that somebody should “knock the crap out of” a protestor 

and promised to “pay for the legal fees” of whoever did it (qtd. in Jacobs, 2016, para. 4). The 

Trump campaign’s attempts to distance the candidate from violence were undermined by the 

candidate’s tendency to excuse and egg on the violence of his supporters. As President, Trump 

maintained his uneasy relationship with violence by posting a doctored video to his Twitter 

account in which he was portrayed wrestling and beating a person with the CNN logo 

superimposed over their head (Grynbaum, 2017). 121 

Although the Trump campaign’s stance on violence was marked by decided ambiguity, 

there is strong evidence suggesting a link between Trump rallies and violence. Morrison et al.’s 

(2018) analysis of publicly available incident report data found that “cities experienced 2.3 

additional assaults on days when hosting [Trump] campaign rallies” (pp. 492-493). The authors 

noted that “Trump’s rallies were associated with increased assault incidence,” but found no 

similar association between violence and the campaign events of Hillary Clinton (p. 492). 

Morrison and colleagues concluded by postulating “that the violent language employed by 

candidate Trump affected the mood and behavior of other rally attendees, as well as those 

exposed to the rally through news reports and digital social media, contributing to increased 

violence” (p. 493). Edwards and Rushin’s (2018) statistical analysis provided further evidence 

that “Trump’s inflammatory rhetoric” and the subsequent validation of this rhetoric through his 

successful “election as President of the United States” may have had violent consequences, 

finding that “the recent spike in hate crimes was concentrated close in time to the election of 

President Trump in the fourth quarter of 2016” and that “counties that voted for President Trump 

by the widest margins in the presidential election also experienced the largest increases in 

reported hate crimes” (p. 3). 

These statistics confirm what anecdotal evidence suggests: that the threat of violence is 

an integral feature of Trump rallies, which have been described as “synonymous” with violence 

(Nelson, 2016, para. 1). Ben Mathis-Lilley of Slate (2016) compiled a list of 20 violent incidents 

that occurred at Trump rallies between October of 2015 and June of 2016, many of which 

involved bloody clashes between Trump supporters and protestors (see also: Swaine & Adolphe, 

2019). The threat of violence forced Trump to cancel a campaign event in Chicago in 

anticipation of dangerous confrontations between his supporters and the hundreds of protestors 122 

who planned to attend (Lind, 2016). The judiciary has also recognized a link between Trump 

rallies and violence. Although the decision was ultimately reversed by the Sixth Circuit court of 

appeals, a district court found in Nwanguma v. Trump that “Trump's statement, ‘Get 'em out of 

here,’ was likely to incite violence when a crowd of Trump supporters subsequently began 

physically attacking a group of Trump protestors” at a rally in Louisville (Hamby, 2018, p. 300). 

The violent clashes did not abate after Trump’s victory and continued into the early days of 

Trump’s 2020 re-election campaign. A rally in El Paso during February of 2019, for instance, 

was interrupted by a Trump supporter attacking a cameraman for the BBC (Sopel, 2019). Later 

that year at a rally in Cincinnati, a man was arrested and charged with assault for punching an 

anti-Trump protestor in the face (Elfrink, 2019). Audiences have come to expect such incidents. 

Guilford’s (2016) interactions with Trump supporters at campaign rallies revealed that many 

rally-goers had a tacit understanding that attending a Trump rally entailed putting one’s self at 

risk of violence (para. 12). Violence was therefore not an aberration at Trump rallies, but rather, 

a ritualistic, expected part of the festivities. Statistical analyses and an abundance of anecdotal 

evidence illustrate that a relationship of some kind exists between Trump rallies and violence. 

Rhetorical criticism can elucidate the nature of this relationship. 

Accepting the premise that violence was a recurring feature of Trump rallies raises the 

question of: “why?” Were these violent outbursts the inevitable and predictable result of the 

tinderbox created by the volatile mixture of demagoguery, pro-Trump loyalists and anti-Trump 

protestors at rallies? Or, were these violent incidents completely random, without any underlying 

symbolic significance? Early analysts of crowd psychology argued that “violence . . . lies in the 

very nature of the crowd” as crowd action dissolves individual responsibility and lowers self-

control (Reicher, 2001, p. 187). Yet, crowds may also affirm and consolidate “a social order” (p. 123 

202). Rhetorical theory can clarify why violent confrontations became such a recurring event at 

Trump rallies and establish whether these episodes are mere senseless acts or whether they serve 

an identity-building function. The argument that I develop – that violent incidents at Trump 

rallies acted as “constitutive rhetoric” by solidifying the group identity of Trump supporters – in 

turn points to new ways of understanding the relationship between violence and rhetoric 

generally (Charland, 1987). Rhetoric, conceived of as reasoned deliberation, has often been 

theorized as an antidote to violence, as in the adage “the pen is mightier than the sword.” This 

understanding of rhetoric, as the path to “a politics purged of violence,” is “deeply ingrained in 

rhetorical studies” (Engels, 2013, p. 180). Although rhetoric has historically been characterized 

as “the great other to violence,” the relationship is more complicated than a binary opposition 

(Crosswhite, 2014, p. 134). Scholars have noted the way that rhetoric can encourage or 

legitimize violence (Engels, 2015). The “relationship between speech and violence” has been 

frequently analyzed by rhetorical scholars (Stahl, 2016, p. 377), but the capacity of violence to 

operate as a “rhetorical device” for building identification remains underexamined (Olson, 2013, 

p. 474). 

Violence is an inescapable dimension of the Trump phenomenon and has accordingly 

received some attention from rhetorical critics. Scholars have amply documented cases where 

Trump’s rhetoric was violent, in the sense that it contained graphic depictions of physical harm. 

Mendes (2016), while advancing the argument that Trump is a pioneer of “digital demagoguery,” 

noted that “Trump employs violent imagery, graphically describing the beheadings perpetrated 

by ISIL, and has advocated for the use of waterboarding and other forms of torture” (p. 66). 

Johnson (2017) similarly explained that Trump frequently constructs “scenarios of violence and 

humiliation as proof of White masculinity’s marginalization,” therefore allowing his followers to 124 

imagine themselves as oppressed by the dominant liberal culture (p. 231). Scholars have also 

described Trump’s rhetoric itself as a form of violence, in the sense that it excludes or denigrates 

certain people. Saramo (2017) explained that Trump waged “rhetorical violence” against 

immigrants and women to bolster his political fortunes and drive a “wedge in U.S. society” (pp. 

8-9). 

Although scholars have established that Trump’s rhetoric itself is violent, what is less 

clear are the rhetorical functions of the violent acts that have become indelible features of Trump 

rallies. Instead of focusing solely upon Trump’s rhetoric as violence, I analyze Trump-related 

violence as rhetoric, filling a gap in rhetorical scholarship about the Trump phenomenon. I read 

the violent incidents at Trump rallies as rhetorical texts to argue that the recurring violent 

confrontations between Trump supporters and protestors at rallies are not merely random, 

senseless, or the inevitable result of putting political enemies in close physical proximity to one 

another. Rather, this violence operates rhetorically to construct identification, by solidifying an 

in-group and an out-group, and lending credence to Trump’s authoritarian narratives of a crime-

ridden nation in need of a “strongman” to restore law and order. This analysis of violence— 

which is informed by my firsthand experiences at Trump rallies—helps de-mystify the stubborn 

loyalty of Trump’s core supporters to him, by uncovering how Trump rallies bind attendees into 

a collective. By demonstrating the powerful community-building functions of violent acts, I 

further unravel the puzzle of how “Trump defied pretty much every rule not just of electoral 

politics, but of contemporary civil discourse” while maintaining the fervent support of his base 

(Guilford, 2016, para. 2). 

Aside from improving our understanding of Trumpism, this essay advances the study of 

violence from a rhetorical perspective by shedding new light on the ways that violence can be 125 

used to communicate, persuade, and shape social relations. These findings help explain why 

demagogues from across history have turned to violence as a tool for building political 

constituencies. An investigation into the rhetorical properties of violence is urgent at a time when 

the combination of “polarized politics” and declining trust in political institutions has heightened 

the risk that Americans will turn to violence to settle intractable political disputes (Freeman, 

2018, para. 18). 

There has been a national debate about President Trump’s responsibility for the uptick in 

racially motivated violence that occurred after his election (Levine, 2018). In opposition to those 

who deny any connection between Trump’s words and the violent deeds committed in his name, 

I argue that the words of presidents (and presidential candidates) matter and shape the contours 

of acceptable political discourse (Skowronek, 1993). Restoring the norm against political 

candidates embracing violence requires an exploration into why so many voters found 

themselves willing to support a candidate who discards this norm. I develop this argument in 

three parts. First, I theorize ways that violence may function as rhetoric. Second, I analyze a 

selection of violent incidents at Trump rallies and argue that these events constructed 

identification between Trump and his supporters. Third, I conclude by explaining the 

implications derived from this analysis. 

Rhetorical Dimensions of Violence 

Prior to theorizing the rhetorical functions of violence, it is first necessary to define what 

is meant by “violence,” which is an expansive term that encompasses a variety of meanings. This 

essay concerns several forms of violence, including acts where “physical force” was applied by 

one individual or group against another (Ray, 2011, p. 8). Such “direct violence,” in contrast 

with psychological, structural, or cultural violence, “is an event ” (Galtung, 1990, p. 294), and 126 

involves “an actor that commits the violence” (Galtung, 1969, p. 170). However, I also consider 

episodes where violence, or the threat of violence, operated as “a general ‘atmospheric’ 

condition” in situations involving a climate of latent tension, “regardless of whether hostilities 

are ever directly experienced” (Bratton, 2008, p. 624). Such a broad perspective, that includes 

both physical violence and atmospheric violence, allows critics to consider interactions where 

tensions stopped short of erupting into physical violence that nonetheless carried rhetorical 

weight. 

Rhetorical scholars have established that the power of violence stems not only from its 

ability to destroy, but from its propensity to create rhetorical possibilities (Jorgensen-Earp, 

2008). Rhetorical scholars note that violence “actually stimulates the production of rhetoric” 

(Rand, 2009, p. 466) and is “constitutive of discourse itself” (Browne, 1996, p. 55). In this sense, 

rhetoric can be “generated from, by, or through violence” (Foley, 2013, p. 191). When 

understood as a medium through which persuasive messages may be communicated, violence 

“delivers itself to human community in ways that may be both destructive and productive” 

(Browne, 2000, p. 328). Alongside its destructive consequences, violence may produce “a 

repertoire of images, arguments, and appeals,” which are ripe to be put to use “for inventional 

purposes” (Browne, 1996, pp. 55-56). While responding to violence, rhetors may “use their 

interpretations of violence as an inventional resource to persuade audiences of both what the 

violence means and what, if anything, should be done in response to it” (Childers, 2016, p. 575). 

I argue that one rhetorical function of violence is to foster identification. Violence may be 

exploited by rhetors to facilitate formation of group identity by (1) serving as a mechanism for 

social bonding and delineating between an in-group and out-group, and (2) lending credence to 127 

authoritarian “us versus them” narratives that place faith in a strongman as an instrument for 

restoring law and order. 

Social Bonding 

Collective violence is often destructive, but it also can “constitute” and regulate social 

relationships (Fiske & Rai, 2015, p. 17). Research across several disciplines confirms that 

violence can serve community-building functions by creating feelings of shared membership in a 

collective and drawing lines between friends and enemies. Certain violent offenses are 

committed not only to inflict pain or punish, but because they are “message crimes” that 

communicate “a message of hostility and exclusion” to “whole communities” (Ray, 2011, p. 

158). In this way, violence can serve as a technique for “group production” of collective identity 

(p. 165). Violence, especially when inflicted upon “those who become symbolic substitutes for a 

community’s inner and unacknowledged humiliation and conflict” is a powerful “medium of 

social bonding” (p. 194). Punishing and dominating a scapegoat can give “the in-group a sense 

of power and identity” and further cohere collective identity through reference to a demonized 

other (p. 163). 

Several case studies confirm the link between violence and community formation. In his 

analysis of homophobic crimes, criminology professor Stephen Tomsen (2001) argued that such 

violence served a “dual purpose of constructing a masculine and heterosexual identity through a 

simultaneous involvement with violence and by establishing homosexuals as social outsiders” (p. 

7). The capacity of violence to distinguish friend from foe is particularly salient in sociopolitical 

contexts defined by alienation or dislocation. While discussing xenophobic attitudes in Europe, 

German sociologist Wilhelm Heitmeyer (1994) argued that violence is a potent means for 

individuals to combat feelings of powerlessness or estrangement by creating “clarity in unclear 128 

situations” and “solidarities” (p. 24). For example, while summarizing the historiography on 

football-related violence in post-war Britain, Bebber (2016) noted that violence committed by 

football spectators can be understood as “an expression of social cohesion and community 

loyalty” and an attempt to “reclaim community within fractured class relationships” (pp. 3-4). 

Most striking is Blee’s (2007) qualitative analysis of hate violence committed by racist 

groups in the United States, which demonstrated that violence “ makes a group” (p. 263). 

According to Blee, violence is not merely the inevitable end product of individuals creating a 

group defined in racial terms but can in fact facilitate the formation of such a group in the first 

place by joining people together “through the practice of violence” (p. 264). Blee differentiates 

this identity-building violence from “strategic violence” aimed at achieving particular goals, 

arguing that certain “acts of violence” may appear outwardly meaningless while nonetheless 

strengthening “racial hierarchies and majority group solidarities . . . to shape connections of 

solidarity among perpetrators and between perpetrators and onlookers and to deepen boundaries 

between groups” (p. 264). Importantly, these identificatory effects of violence may be 

experienced by both participants and observers of violence (p. 267). This collection of studies 

confirms that violence can operate rhetorically to spur identification and division, illustrating that 

violence is “fundamental to forming boundaries and identities” (Ray, 2011, p. 195). Collective 

violence is a recurring feature across human history in part because “carrying out violence on 

behalf of the group increases members’ identification with the violent group” (Littman & Paluck, 

2015, p. 80). 

Authoritarianism 

Aside from cementing in-group/out-group boundaries, violence may operate rhetorically 

by serving as an inventional resource for opportunistic rhetors seeking to create a narrative of 129 

societal chaos that demands re-imposition of law and order by a strongman. Demagogues across 

history have turned violent spectacles to their advantage by arguing that such incidents create 

exigence for authoritarian leadership to squelch unrest and restore stability. In doing so, the 

rhetor invokes the specter of anarchy as the “dangerous end of too much democracy,” cultivating 

a desire for forceful action to suppress the threat (Childers, 2013, p. 157). Several historical 

episodes illustrate the power of violence as an inventional resource. 

A paradigmatic example of this phenomenon is pre-World War II Nazi Germany. Adolf 

Hitler’s rise to power was marked by several high-profile violent incidents, including the failed 

Beer Hall Putsch of 1923 and the Reichstag fire of 1933, but also significant were the more 

mundane street fights between rank-and-file members of the Nazi party and their enemies that 

became regular occurrences during this era. Historians have forwarded that “political violence” 

was “a staple of Nazi mobilization strategy” (Childers & Weiss, 1990, p. 481) and that “there can 

be little doubt that violence played an important role in the rise of the Nazi movement” (Bessel, 

1986, p. 131). A key tactic utilized by Hitler in the 1920s was “disrupting the meetings of his 

foes . . . by use of force” (Abel, 1938/2012, p. 61). Storm troopers and other paramilitary forces 

also frequently used violence to defend Nazi rallies against disruptions by unwanted protestors 

(Merkl, 1975, p. 419). Violence persisted throughout “the turbulent period from 1930 to 1932,” 

which featured clashes in the streets between “well-trained” and “armed units” representing the 

National Socialists, Social Democrats, and communists (p. 99, 107). Such violence offered 

ordinary Nazis a chance build comradery, “an outlet of inner tensions, a chance to march and 

fight for a cause” and “a good excuse for barbarous aggressions against victims ‘who had it 

coming’” (Merkl, 1975, p. 314). 130 

The regularity of such violence had the effect of bolstering Hitler, who capitalized upon 

the chaos by portraying his movement as the key to restoring order. Even as they decried 

Germany’s decline into partisan warfare, Hitler and his followers stoked violence for political 

gain. The Nazis understood that violence could serve as a tool for recruiting followers and 

building identification, and accordingly used violent tactics “less as part of a strategy aimed 

directly at seizing power than as propaganda” (Bessel, 1986, p. 135). Nazi leaders often 

intentionally provoked confrontations with their political opponents and portrayed the ensuing 

skirmishes as “heroic acts of self-defense against a savage and unscrupulous enemy” (Childers & 

Weiss, 1990, p. 492). Widespread violence allowed Nazis to present themselves as “tough 

characters who – in contrast to the men leading other political parties – were not afraid to back 

up words with deeds” (Bessel, 1986, p. 131). 

In part through such violence, the Nazis convinced “millions of people that they indeed 

were defending German civilisation against the ‘Marxist’ onslaught” and “that their violent 

struggle was essentially defensive in nature” (Bessel, 1986, p. 141). The Nazi movement’s 

violent activities “both demonstrated a readiness to challenge the Left on the streets and held out 

the promise of a restoration of order” (p. 141). Abel’s (1938/2012) study of more than six 

hundred autobiographies of Nazi party members revealed that Hitler’s ideology was highly 

appealing “to those who deplored the internal disunity of the German people” (p. 142). To 

ordinary Germans frightened by the nation’s descent into civil war-like conditions, Nazism 

presented a simple but alluring solution: “submission to a leader acting for the common good” 

who can “weld the nation into a unit, eliminate injustices and internal strife” (p. 147). Writing in 

the 1930s before the horrors of the Third Reich had been fully realized, Abel presciently 

observed that “a prolonged, severe crisis favors the rise of a leader. Pained, bewildered people . . 131 

. readily acknowledge any strong, aggressive individual who proposes a definite course of 

action” (p. 151). 

Experiences in Fascist Italy likewise reveal the potency of violence as an inventional 

resource for authoritarians. Benito Mussolini realized the strategic utility of violence as a tactic 

for building political support while obtaining dictatorial power several years prior to Hitler’s 

ascent. In the events leading up to Mussolini’s capture of Italy’s Prime Minister post, hundreds 

of thousands of members of Italy’s fascist movement mobilized into squads for the purposes of 

terrorizing their socialist opponents and accelerating the collapse of Italy’s failing liberal state 

(Ebner, 2010). After the Italian King gave Mussolini the title of Prime Minister, Mussolini 

“occasionally decried” the political violence waged by these squads, “but they operated as the 

motor that drove his government along the road to dictatorship” (Ebner, 2010, p. 37). A key 

justification for Mussolini’s eventual assumption of dictatorial powers was that “a Fascist 

organized state” could best “assure law and order” (Iodice, 2018, p. 7). These historical events 

establish that violence is not only dangerous in the sense that it kills and maims, but also poses 

the rhetorical danger of giving weight to claims that authoritarianism is needed to restore the 

social order. 

Similar dynamics have emerged in the American context, albeit moderated and tempered 

by the relative strength of America’s liberal-democratic institutions and the lack of heavily 

armed civilian militias. Gunn’s (2007) analysis of Huey Long’s demagoguery forwarded that a 

key component of demagogic rhetoric is that it “ hystericizes audiences by claiming to bring order 

to chaos, thereby representing strength, resolve, and absolute autonomy” (p. 6). The societal 

upheavals of the 1960s and 1970s accordingly created a demand among many Americans for 

figures capable of restoring the imagined stability of previous eras. One such figure was George 132 

Wallace, the segregationist governor of Alabama who sought the presidency multiple times as 

both a Democrat and as an independent candidate. Rohler (1999) noted that Wallace capitalized 

upon the presence of protestors at his rallies “by portraying them as the ‘other’—as 

representatives of the very forces undermining the traditional values of his faithful supporters” 

(p. 321). These showdowns between Wallace and hecklers “became a highly stylized feature of 

every Wallace rally,” allowing him to muster the faithful “to the cause and fight against the 

satanic foe” (p. 321). Wallace turned the presence of demonstrators at his campaign events into a 

rhetorical advantage, as it provided “the best evidence” for his claim that liberalism had 

produced anarchy and disorder (Hogan, 2016, p. 92). By transforming dissidents into tangible 

symbols that “personified all that was wrong with America,” Wallace persuasively articulated 

the perils of “social experimentation” to his audiences and favorably contrasted his eagerness to 

confront and fight the protestors head-on with the corrupt “establishment that allegedly 

encouraged them” (p. 92). 

Richard Nixon perfected and mainstreamed the vengeful style of politics developed by 

George Wallace and “put the issue of law and order front and center in his 1968 campaign for the 

presidency” (Farber, 2006, p. 238). Nixon intuitively “understood how to tap” the feelings of 

marginalization and resentment that Wallace had exploited, and “knew how to lure enough 

working people who felt left out of the cultural code . . . to put together a winning campaign” 

(Farber, 1994, p. 310). The turbulent atmosphere of the period lent credence to Nixon’s call for 

law and order. Multiple high-profile violent spectacles, such as the riots following the 

assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and the bloody clashes between protestors and the 

Chicago police at the 1968 Democratic National Convention, gave conservatives an opening to 

argue that “such violence only indicated the need for far greater law and order in a too tolerant 133 

society that was fast losing its moral compass” (Farber, 2006, p. 236). In the aftermath of the 

tumultuous summer of 1968, “white voters fled the Democratic Party” and “aligned themselves 

with the ‘law and order’ candidacies” of Nixon and Wallace (Farber, 2016, para. 12). Nixon saw 

highly visible expressions of discontent by liberals as an inventional opportunity and “planted 

war protestors at his campaign events so that there would be images of him confronting crazies 

on the evening news” (Engels, 2010, p. 317; Lichtman, 2009, p. 289). Speaking at the University 

of Tennessee with Reverend Billy Graham in 1970, Nixon made interruptions by student 

demonstrators “the text for his sermon,” by contrasting unruly demonstrators with his civil, god-

fearing supporters (Perlstein, 2008, p. 502). The theme of re-imposing law and order to suppress 

“riots and student protests” became “dominant topics in [Nixon’s] presidential rhetoric,” fueling 

“the resentment Americans felt for lawbreakers and criminals” with the help of “carefully 

choreographed political performances of anarchy” (Engels, 2010, p. 316). 

Although the rhetoric and deeds of Richard Nixon and Adolf Hitler are in no way 

equivalent, both figures grasped the persuasive power of violence. These historical episodes, 

from several distinct political and social contexts, demonstrate the potential for rhetors to exploit 

violent spectacles for persuasive effect. This corroborates the conclusion that violence can 

operate as rhetoric, by instilling a “fear of the unrestrained demos” which demagogues use to call 

for a return to law and order (Childers, 2013, p. 175). This strategy facilitates identification, by 

positing an anarchic enemy whose use of violence is illegitimate and a virtuous in-group on 

whose behalf violence may be legitimately waged to restore the social order. 

Violence as Constitutive Rhetoric at Donald Trump’s Campaign Rallies 

In this section, I argue that the violent spectacles that became recurring fixtures at Trump 

rallies served community-building functions. Consistent with the theoretical principles described 134 

previously, the frequent violent incidents at Trump rallies illustrate the rhetorical potential of 

violence. For rally-goers who participated in these violent confrontations or witnessed them 

firsthand, along with broader national audiences that subsequently viewed these clashes on 

television or social media, violence was a means through which Trump built identification with 

supporters and thus created a constituency for strongman politics. I first explain how violent 

clashes reinforced in-group and out-group dichotomies for Trump supporters. Second, I argue 

that, far from discouraging such violence, Trump goaded violence and then capitalized upon it by 

framing skirmishes between his supporters and protestors as tangible evidence of an alleged 

breakdown in law and order that demanded decisive leadership to restore stability. Third, I show 

that rhetorical violence activates authoritarian personality characteristics of certain audience 

members, further contributing to the goal of identification-building and Trump’s strongman 

appeal. 

Constructing In-Groups and Out-Groups at Trump Rallies 

For several weeks in spring of 2016, discussions of violent protests at Donald Trump 

rallies “commandeered the campaign news cycle” (Hackman, 2016, para. 1). After several 

widely publicized incidents involving Trump supporters physically clashing with protestors, and 

the cancellation of a planned rally in Chicago due to the threat of violence, Trump received 

criticism not only from Democrats, but from fellow Republicans. Ohio Governor John Kasich 

criticized Trump for creating a “toxic environment” where supporters “come together in 

violence” (qtd. in Miller & Reilly, 2016, para. 2). Florida Senator Marco Rubio stated that 

Trump should “take responsibility for the fact that some of the rhetoric he has used could 

potentially be contributing to this environment that is growing increasingly disturbing,” and 

noted the lack of violence at other candidates’ rallies, including those of Democratic candidates 135 

Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders (qtd. in Miller & Reilly, 2016, paras. 5-6). Senator Ted Cruz 

of Texas similarly stated that the Trump campaign “bears responsibility for creating an 

environment when the candidate urges supporters to engage in physical violence, to punch 

people in the face” (qtd. in Weigel, 2016, para. 10). Yet, despite extensive negative media 

publicity stemming from these violent incidents and the sharp critiques of his competitors, the 

Trump campaign suffered no discernable consequence. A Monmouth University poll of Florida 

Republicans conducted “as the events in Chicago unfolded” found that “eighty-eight percent of 

those who replied” said that Trump’s handling of the violent confrontations in Chicago “made no 

difference” for their support of him, or “made them support Trump more” (Bump, 2016, paras. 

4-5). Encouraging violence, rather than harming Trump’s campaign, reinforced his campaign 

themes and assisted community-building efforts. 

In March of 2016, a Trump rally in Louisville, Kentucky became a site for violent 

confrontation between the pro-Trump faithful and anti-Trump demonstrators, spawning years of 

litigation. The incident encapsulates the community-building potential for violence and followed 

a script similar to the other violent outbursts at Trump rallies throughout the spring and summer 

of 2016. The rally was described as: “a fiery campaign speech, interrupted by protests and 

heckles. Then scuffles and shouts in the crowd — and Trump repeatedly saying, ‘Get them out’” 

(Selk, 2017, para. 2). This particular incident involved three protestors—Molly Shah, Henry 

Brousseau, and Kashiya Nwanguma—and two perpetrators: Matthew Heimbach, a Neo-Nazi and 

co-founder of the white supremacist Traditionalist Worker Party, and Alvin Bamberger, a 75-

year old member of an association for veterans. All three protestors were attacked by audience 

members, including Heimbach and Bamberger, after Trump interrupted his speech to point out 136 

the protestors and repeatedly shout “get them out” and other variations of this phrase (Selk, 

2017). 

The removal of Nwanguma, a 21-year old black woman and college student, was 

particularly violent. Her expulsion from the rally captured that nation’s attention and went viral 

on social media, thanks to video footage showing an oceanic mass of white men spewing vitriol 

at her while shoving and hassling her, as Trump is audible offscreen bellowing “get them out” 

(Associated Press, 2016). While being ejected, Nwanguma claimed that audience members 

called her a “n*gger” and a “c*nt” (Lenz, 2016, para. 2). In the aftermath of this incident, 

Nwanguma, Shah, and Brousseau filed lawsuits against Heimbach, Bamberger, and the Trump 

campaign. The Neo-Nazi, Heimbach, plead guilty to disorderly conduct but argued that he had 

“acted pursuant to the directives and requests of Donald J Trump,” and that liability should 

therefore be shifted to Trump or his campaign, citing Trump’s command to “get ‘em out of here” 

(Beckett, 2017, para. 12). The elderly Bamberger denied the assault charges, but in a court filing 

his lawyers stated that: “Bamberger would not have acted as he did without Trump and/or the 

Trump Campaign’s specific urging and inspiration” (Pence, 2017, p. 4). Bamberger later released 

an apology letter for his actions, stating that he “was caught up in the frenzy” of the crowd and 

Trump’s incitement (qtd. in Selk, 2017, para. 43). Both Heimbach and Bamberger’s defenses 

included (potentially self-interested) charges that Trump was responsible for the incident. The 

Louisville rally incident therefore produced a rare area of agreement between Trump’s 

supporters and his protestors: that Trump’s words had spurred violence. 

In an opinion that “ruled against efforts by Trump's attorneys to throw out” the 

Nwanguma lawsuit (Blake, 2017, para. 2), Judge David Hale (2017) wrote that Trump’s 

comment to “get ‘em out of here” was “an order, an instruction, a command” to use violence, 137 

and thus not constitutionally protected (p. 5). Although Hale’s ruling was eventually invalidated 

by a federal appeals court, the court’s reasoning hardly dispelled the link between Trump rallies 

and violence. Even as they ruled that Trump’s statements did not legally rise to the level of 

inciting a riot and were constitutionally protected by the First Amendment, a trio of judges 

acknowledged that “in the ears of some supporters, Trump’s words may have had a tendency to 

elicit a physical response” and concluded by issuing a stern warning that “speech is powerful” 

(McKeague, Griffin, & White, 2018, p. 10). 

The Louisville rally vividly illustrates the community-building functions of violence. 

Audience members reacted to the presence of potential disruptors by acting as a unit to expel 

them, in the process reinforcing divisions between the white pro-Trump in-group and “others” 

such as Nwanguma. Video footage of the Louisville incident shows Trump supporters chanting 

“U.S.A! U.S.A! U.S.A.!” in the faces of protestors as they are being removed, alongside violent 

pushing and shoving (“Senior citizen veteran,” 2016). Tur (2017) described a similar scene at a 

rally in New Orleans, observing how “the crowd seemed to circle and seethe,” reacting to 

protestors’ “black lives matter” chants with a counter-chant of “all lives matter” (p. 175). These 

violent crowd dynamics amplified and enacted Trump’s message of division. 

In addition, the broader media reaction further solidified group identities. For instance, 

local news coverage of the Nwanguma lawsuit featured an interview with a Trump supporter, 

Jeff Klusmeier, who distinguished peaceful rally-goers from allegedly violent protestors, stating: 

“these people showed up, they incited violence in their own right, and they went to disrupt the 

rally, so it’s kind of ridiculous that they’re actually filing a lawsuit when they were the 

instigators” (“Lawsuit filed by Louisvillians,” 2016). Trump’s apparent incitement of violence 

was treated as a gaffe (Lee, 2016; Miller, 2016), but in the end it worked to “actually help 138 

Trump” and unify Republicans by spurring a negative “reaction against the protestors,” who 

have been a perennial scapegoat and target for conservative resentment since the 1960s (“Trump 

rally violence becomes trend,” 2016). Although such violent episodes did not create the “us 

versus them” dynamics that animate the worldview of Trump supporters, violence clearly had the 

potential to heighten and sharpen group boundaries. 

Upon assuming the presidency, one could be forgiven for expecting that Trump’s 

approach to rallies would change, as presidents are required to govern not just their core political 

base, but the entire nation. This did not occur. Trump’s presidential rallies continued in the same 

divisive manner as his campaign, featuring antagonistic and confrontational encounters between 

supporters and protestors. My fieldwork revealed that the threat of violent confrontation remains 

a key feature of Trump rallies. 

The encounters between Trump supporters and protestors that I observed during 

fieldwork were framed by a public service announcement that seems to be a stock feature of 

Trump rallies (Guilford, 2016). The audio message, which was played over loudspeakers as 

Trump supporters waited in line for admittance, featured a female voice (belonging to Lara 

Trump, the President’s daughter-in-law, I believe) instructing attendees about how to react to 

potential protests. The announcer of this message characterized Trump as a strong supporter of 

the First Amendment and the right to protest but claimed that protestors “take advantage” of 

Trump’s respect for the First Amendment by using disruptive tactics to promote their agenda. 

The message explained that the campaign had set aside an area reserved for demonstrators but 

warned that “some individuals may still seek to disrupt our patriotic event” despite this 

accommodation and then enlisted ordinary supporters in the project of maintaining of security by 

stating that “President Trump needs your help in maintaining a peaceful atmosphere.” The 139 

message instructed attendees not to “touch or harm” protestors, but to instead alert law 

enforcement officers to the presence of protestors by chanting “Trump! Trump! Trump!” In this 

way, the message encouraged Trump supporters to react to protestors by asserting their political 

identity through chants of “Trump!” and primed the crowd to treat protestors as interlopers and 

threats in need of removal. At the rally I attended in Dallas, a Trump supporter reacted to the 

instruction to not touch or harm protestors by sarcastically remarking “I’ll do my best,” 

provoking a round of laughter from nearby supporters. 

During fieldwork at a Trump rally hosted in Grand Rapids, I saw firsthand how the threat 

of violence can build group identity. During the hours-long wait in line to be admitted into the 

Van Andel Arena, rally-goers were repeatedly heckled by passersby. These hecklers did not 

appear to be part of the organized counter-protest that was occurring in another part of the city, 

but rather seemed to be ordinary people going about their daily routines who took offense at the 

massive gathering of Trump supporters and associated disruption of traffic. Throughout the 

course of the day, the pro-Trump faithful and I were met with insults along the lines of “Trump 

sucks,” “Trump loves Russia,” and assertions that Trump supporters were members of the Ku 

Klux Klan, among others. During my wait in line, I interacted with Trump supporters of various 

dispositions. Several groups nearby me in the line treated the pre-rally line as a sort of picnic, 

passing the time by sharing food and telling stories from the comfort of lawn chairs. Two 

middle-aged white men standing behind me in the line, however, were of a less sunny 

disposition. Although they were amiable to me and other Trump supporters, they reacted with 

fury to insults and signaled a willingness to confront hecklers. 

At about 12:40 PM, several hours into the wait, a black man stood across the street from 

the line of Trump supporters and shouted, “Trump sucks” and “Russia” repeatedly. I was 140 

surprised that the heckler would choose to focus on the Russia scandal, as this event was the first 

campaign rally held by Trump after the completion of the Mueller investigation, which 

throughout the day was explained by Trump and his supporters to be an unequivocal vindication 

of the president. Many Trump supporters reacted by chanting “U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A.!” while a 

woman sitting in front of me in line taunted “Trump is your president.” One of the men standing 

behind me behaved much more belligerently. Yelling at the top of his lungs with an aggressive 

tone, he bellowed insults such as “beta boy,” “little girl,” and “Nancy” at the heckler. At the 

time, I feared that these attacks on the heckler’s masculinity could escalate the precarious 

situation. What ensued was a tense standoff and further exchange of insults between the Trump 

supporter next to me and the heckler across the street, and at one point the man next to me began 

to walk across the street to confront the heckler until his friend reminded him of the heavy police 

presence nearby. Several minutes later, the risks of a violent outbreak appeared to be once again 

heightened as the second man, who had previously restrained his friend, left his spot in the line 

and walked across the street to confront the heckler. A short, contemptuous conservation 

between the two men ensued and ended when the heckler boarded a nearby bus and departed the 

scene. No physical violence occurred, but I was struck by how quickly the Trump supporters 

mobilized into a group in response to the presence of the dissenter through organized counter-

chants and expressing desire for confrontation. 

I left the Grand Rapids rally finding it difficult to characterize the atmosphere. One 

Trump supporter compared it to “a day at the beach.” Yet, the threat of violence always seemed 

to be lurking beneath the surface. Angry and profane shouting matches with hecklers were 

recurrent, contributing to a feeling of latent tension throughout the event. One of the men next to 

me mentioned that his wife had discouraged him from attending the event, for fear that his safety 141 

would be compromised by some sort of violent clash. Trump supporters were dressed in ways 

that signaled a willingness to use force. Members of “Bikers for Trump” were present, wearing 

black leather. Seeing these individuals reminded me of a minor controversy Trump created about 

two weeks prior to the rally, by implying that Bikers for Trump and other groups might be 

willing to use violence on his behalf. In an interview with Breitbart , Trump stated: 

I have the support of the police, the support of the military, the support of the Bikers for 

Trump – I have the tough people, but they don’t play it tough until they go to a certain 

point, and then it would be very bad, very bad. (qtd. in Blake, 2019, para. 5) 

Many analysts interpreted this comment as offering tacit support for Trump’s supporters to use 

violence in the event of his electoral defeat. Some of the rally-goers I saw while waiting in line 

seemed to embrace such an association between supporting Trump and openness to violence. 

Aside from the ubiquitous military paraphernalia and camouflage, National Rifle Association 

clothing featuring guns was prevalent. One supporter wore a black shirt bearing an illustration of 

a gun and the statement “I am comfortable with violence.” Another young supporter wore a 

“BOMB THE SHIT OUT OF ISIS” pin. During the Trump speech itself, security personnel 

forcibly escorted a protestor from the venue, who departed by flashing two middle fingers to the 

crowd. The Grand Rapids police described the event as “peaceful,” noting that only two arrests 

were made for “disorderly behavior” (Tunison, 2019, paras. 1-2). Yet, if the event was peaceful, 

it was a tenuous cold peace that was maintained by minimizing opportunities for Trump 

supporters and protestors to directly interact with each other. The uneasy atmosphere seemed to 

make Trump supporters respond to protestors by reacting in near unison with chants and other 

shows of solidarity. 142 

Although the general public may have reacted to scenes of violence at Trump rallies with 

disapproval or dismay, these incidents were received differently by supporters. By clearly 

demarcating between an in-group and out-group, the threat of violence enhanced feelings of 

community among Trump supporters. From this perspective, those who clashed with protestors 

at rallies were not necessarily aggressors but were instead acting in self-defense against 

treacherous infiltrators. The atmosphere of violence at rallies encouraged supporters to seek 

safety in numbers by affirming collective identity and rallying to each other’s defense, in 

opposition to the threat of disruptive protestors. 

Rally Violence as an Inventional Resource for Strongman Politics 

Violent spectacles also opened rhetorical opportunities for Trump, by creating a 

perceived exigence for a strongman to quell instability. The Louisville incident illustrated that 

although Trump’s tirades against protestors did not necessarily rise to the level of incitement in a 

legal sense, his rhetoric added fuel to the fire. Regardless of the precise causal relationship 

between Trump’s words and his supporters’ violent deeds, Trump strategically capitalized on the 

disorder to bolster his narrative of societal chaos and decline. In doing so, Trump demonstrated 

the “interpretive possibilities” unlocked by violence (Browne, 1996, p. 56). 

The 2016 rally in Louisville is illustrative. In the speech itself, Trump emphasized the 

“law and order” themes that dominated his primary and general election campaign discourse. He 

decried illegal immigration, crime, and the incompetent politicians who are incapable of 

addressing these perceived crises. Throughout the speech, Trump reserved special praise for 

authority figures in law enforcement and the military. He expressed his admiration for Generals 

Patton and MacArthur and promised to increase military spending to ensure that “nobody is 

going to be messin’ with us” (“Louisville International Convention Center, 2016”). He boasted 143 

about receiving an endorsement from “Sheriff Joe” Arpaio of Arizona, a controversial figure 

accused of police misconduct and racial profiling in the process of implementing a harsh 

crackdown on undocumented immigration. Trump then bragged that he is “toughest on the 

border . . . Trump is best on ISIS, Trump is best on military, Trump is best on security.” Trump 

criticized the weakness of European countries on the issue of immigration, blaming their 

inattentiveness for terrorist attacks in Paris in November of 2015. Across a variety of policy 

areas, Trump painted a picture of chaos, uncertainty, and the need for a leader ruthless enough to 

impose order. 

As described earlier, Trump’s address in Louisville was frequently interrupted by violent 

confrontations between protestors and the audience. Trump reacted to these disruptions in a 

consistent pattern. He would abruptly stop speaking, sometimes while in the middle of telling a 

story or developing an argument. Trump would then make a scowling expression of disbelief or 

disgust, and shout: “get them out.” Roughly 30 minutes into the speech, Trump reacted with 

scorn as the violent incident involving Nwanguma and Bamberger unfolded on the convention 

center floor. As Nwanguma was being shoved towards the exits by angry audience members, 

Trump mused: “you know, in the old days, which isn’t so long ago, when we were less 

politically correct, that kind of stuff wouldn’t have happened. Today we have to be so nice, so 

nice” (“Louisville International Convention Center,” 2016). He then used the incident to segue 

into a broader critique of political correctness, slamming his primary opponents for being 

unwilling to wholeheartedly endorse the practice of waterboarding. Elsewhere in the address, 

Trump chanted “U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A!” in tandem with the crowd as a protestor was being 

ejected, and led the audience in applauding the police, who he expressed “love” for. Trump 

utilized the violence unfolding before him as a rhetorical resource, transforming Nwanguma and 144 

other protestors into a symbolic stand-in for the chaos threatening the nation, and presented 

himself as strong leader undeterred by norms of political correctness, who was willing to 

aggressively deploy the police and military to tame these imagined crises. 

This rhetorical move, of wistfully reminiscing upon less politically correct times when 

protestors could be forcefully suppressed with impunity, was a staple of Trump’s rally addresses 

throughout the campaign. First, Trump’s speech would be interrupted by a protestor. Second, 

Trump and his audience’s attention would be captivated by (occasionally violent) jostling among 

the crowd as the protestors were removed. Third, Trump would use the spectacle as an 

opportunity to advocate violent suppression of protests to applause, laughter, and cheers from the 

audience. Importantly, Trump would use a joking tone and ambiguous language to maintain 

deniability that he had explicitly encouraged violence. At a rally in Nevada, Trump taunted: 

“we're not allowed to punch back anymore. I love the old days. You know what they used to do 

to guys like that when they were in a place like this? They'd be carried out on a stretcher, folks” 

(qtd. in Deaton, 2016, para. 3). Trump continued by marveling that the police had managed to 

handle the protestor gently, stating that “I'd like to punch him in the face” (para. 3). Although the 

police were obligated to avoid unnecessarily violent responses to protestors, Trump stated that he 

would not use a similar degree of restraint in such situations. 

Variations on this theme abounded in Trump’s rally rhetoric during the spring of 2016. In 

Oklahoma, Trump remarked that “in the good old days, they'd rip him out of that seat so fast. But 

today, everybody's politically correct. Our country's going to hell with being politically correct” 

(qtd. in Lopez, 2016, para. 6). In Michigan, Trump told supporters not to hurt protestors, but “if 

you do, I'll defend you in court. Don't worry about it” (para. 9). In North Carolina, Trump 

bemoaned that “in the good old days, this doesn't happen because they used to treat them very, 145 

very rough . . . But today . . . they get away with murder, because we've become weak” (para. 

10). In St. Louis, Missouri, just a few miles away from where massive anti-racism protests in 

Ferguson occurred about two years earlier, Trump asserted that “there are no consequences to 

protesting anymore. There used to be consequences. There are none anymore” (para. 11). 

In 2016, as in 1968, the image of a violent, crime-ridden Chicago played a prominent role 

in conservative law and order narratives. Chicago took center stage of the presidential race in 

March of 2016, when the Trump campaign abruptly cancelled a rally scheduled in the city, 

minutes before Trump was set to speak, citing the threat of violence. Despite security personnel’s 

best attempts to weed out protestors, “large groups of protesters . . . waited in line for seats” and 

“engaged in tense disputes with Trump supporters,” escalating into several violent skirmishes on 

the floor of the convention center and on the city streets (Davey & Bosman, 2016, para. 5). The 

clashes, which filled Americans’ television screens with images of rebellious young protestors, 

became fodder for Trump’s strongman routine in subsequent rallies (Cheney, 2016). The 

Chicago brawl moved Trump’s “idea of fighting to take the country back” from the realm of the 

“figurative to literal,” and transformed Trump into “the victim of disgruntled blacks and 

Latinos—a development that [made] him even more relatable to his base,” who sometimes 

imagine themselves as marginalized by cultural and demographic trends (Cobb, 2016, para. 6). 

For Trump supporters, the disruptive protests justified Trump’s arguments about the decline of 

law and order and the need for a strongman. The Chicago spectacle, and Trump’s reaction to it, 

was a prime example of the Trump campaign’s uneasy relationship with violence. 

The same pattern continued in Trump’s presidential rhetoric. Trump only mildly toned 

down his flirtation with violence after assuming the presidency. In 2017 while meeting with 

Long Island police officers, Trump joked that officers should not “be too nice” when dealing 146 

with criminals (Rosenthal, 2017, para. 4). While holding a rally in Montana in 2018, Trump 

offered praise for Representative Greg Gianforte, who had recently pled guilty to assaulting a 

reporter. To loud cheers, Trump beamed: “any guy who can do a body slam is my kind of guy” 

(Griffiths, 2018). In December of 2019 at a rally in Hershey, Pennsylvania, Trump “lamented 

that security wasn’t rougher” with a protestor, remarking that “that particular guy wanted to be 

so politically correct. Ahhh! Ahhh! We don’t want to be politically correct” as arena security 

personnel ejected a protestor (qtd. in Rupar, 2019, para. 15). Through these comments, Trump 

simultaneously distinguished himself from rabble-rousing protestors and portrayed himself as a 

strongman unafraid to use violence to restore law and order. 

At the rally I attended in Minneapolis, the authoritarian undercurrents of Trumpism were 

crystallized for all to see. The Minneapolis rally was the most heavily protested rally I attended, 

featuring thousands of protestors and a massive security detail including the secret service, 

private security forces, and local police. Also in attendance were members of the right-wing 

militia group the Oath Keepers, who claimed to be providing “protection for Trump supporters 

from what they consider far-left violent extremists” (Garcia, 2019, para. 2). In the words of the 

Trump supporters I observed that day, rallying in Minneapolis—a diverse, Democratic 

stronghold city that also hosts a nearby college campus—required Trump to venture out of 

“MAGA country” and into “the belly of the beast.” While protestors gathered by the thousands 

outside of Minneapolis’ Target Center, Trump supporters were herded into a skywalk tunnel 

connecting a parking garage to the arena. Throughout the day, Minneapolis police officers 

patrolled the hallways to ensure an orderly division between supporters and protestors. 

Two ongoing feuds created a particularly combustible atmosphere at the Minneapolis 

rally. First, in the days leading up to the rally, Trump took aim at the Democratic Mayor of 147 

Minneapolis for charging the Trump campaign with a $500,000 security bill due to high policing 

costs associated with the rally (Smith & Clark, 2019). In a series of posts on Twitter, Trump 

accused Mayor Jacob Frey of violating his First Amendment rights and being anti-law 

enforcement. At the same time, the Minneapolis Police Department was undergoing a heated and 

public debate over a new dress code mandating that off-duty officers refrain from wearing 

official uniforms at political rallies (Smith & Clark, 2019). Trump and his supporters interpreted 

this policy as an attempt to suppress pro-Trump views among the police (Daugherty, 2019). In 

the eyes of Trump supporters, these disputes pitted the city’s liberal government and protestors 

against Trump supporters and the police. 

Praise for law enforcement is a common feature of Trump rallies. “Thin blue line” 

baseball caps, featuring a black and white American flag with a lone blue stripe through the 

middle, are staples of these events. The black, white, and blue version of the American flag that 

appears on these hats has become an emblem of the “Blue Lives Matter” cause, which emerged 

as a reaction to the “Black Lives Matter” movement and posits that protestors of racial inequality 

have fueled a “war on cops,” which in turn bestows “the status of a victim class on police” and 

dovetails with Trump’s 2016 campaign theme that the social order is collapsing (Smith, 2017, 

para. 36). At the Minneapolis event, adoration of the police was constant and ubiquitous. 

Throughout the day, as officers of the Minneapolis police department patrolled the skywalk halls 

that hundreds of Trump supporters were packed into, supporters greeted law enforcement 

officials with standing ovations and applause. Several police officers gave the Trump supporters 

high fives and some even stopped to take “selfie” photographs with Trump supporters clad in 

campaign gear. 148 

Trump supporters took pride in these expressions of warmth toward the police, 

remarking: “you think this happens at a Bernie rally?” and “at a Democrat rally, they’d be 

booed.” At the rally, the police served as a literal buffer between Trump’s allies and opponents, 

enacting visually the division between police-respecting Trump supporters and disorderly liberal 

protestors often constructed in Trump’s rhetoric. This dynamic culminated in a standing ovation 

for local police officers who were brought on stage during Trump’s speech while wearing “Cops 

for Trump” shirts, as nearly the entire crowd stood on their feet and gave extended applause at 

Trump’s behest. 

The Minneapolis rally was also the most heavily disrupted Trump rally I attended. On at 

least six occasions, there was a dramatic scene as a protestor was ejected by security personnel. 

The ejections followed a familiar pattern. The surrounding crowd would identify a protestor by 

pointing at them, usually after the protestor made their presence known by blowing a whistle or 

screaming. Shortly after this, the audience’s attention would shift to the unfolding confrontation 

between a protestor and nearby Trump supporters, leading to a loud round of booing. These boos 

would turn to cheers as security personnel identified the protestor and escorted them out of the 

arena. Trump offered commentary on several of the ejections by exclaiming: “get ‘em out,” “go 

home to mommy” and “man, do the cops act fast. He’s already gone” (“Rally in Minneapolis,” 

2019). After the latter exclamation, Trump changed the subject from Democratic climate change 

proposals to his love of law enforcement and the need to defeat Minneapolis’s “rotten mayor.” In 

Minneapolis, Trump transformed the spectacle of protestor ejections into material proof of the 

imperative to reinforce the “thin blue line” that separates law-abiding citizens from lawless 

protestors, in turn positioning himself as the “law and order” president. 149 

Trump rallies, through lionization of both Trump and the police as panaceas for disorder, 

cultivate an attitude of uncritical and undemocratic deference toward law enforcement 

institutions in their disputes with minority communities. The role of violence is crucial, as the 

visible scenes of unruly protestors that accompany Trump rallies provide justification for 

Trump’s argument that order must be re-imposed by a strongman. By night’s end at the rally in 

Minneapolis, such violent scenes were plentiful and broadcasted around the country. Media 

coverage noted the flaring tensions between Trump supporters and protestors as rally attendees 

flooded out onto the streets after Trump’s speech, the police’s use of “pepper spray in an effort to 

quell one disturbance,” the burning of Trump memorabilia by protestors, and an arrest of a 

person made by police “in connection with the rally and the protesting” (Walsh, 2019, paras. 5-

12). 

Violence as an Activator of the “Authoritarian Personality” 

These rhetorical properties of violence—its capacity to foster social bonding and stoke 

anxieties about crumbling law and order—facilitated identification between Trump and his core 

supporters, by playing into the tendency of humans to seek safety within an in-group when 

confronted by situations of threat. Violence may therefore activate what psychologists have 

described as “the authoritarian personality,” which is “a stable, learned, social attitude with three 

facets: submission to authority, staunch conventionalism, and anger and aggression toward out-

groups” (Borum, 2014, pp. 287-288; Altemeyer, 1996). Authoritarianism in this case does not 

refer to a political ideology and is not a synonym for totalitarian governance, although in some 

circumstances people with an authoritarian personality may support such government. 

Authoritarianism is a cognitive framework characterized by antipathy towards out-groups, 

idealization of an in-group, deference to authority figures, and an impetus towards conformity 150 

(Vials, 2017). Authoritarians “obey,” “seek order,” follow leaders, “eschew diversity, fear ‘the 

other,’ act aggressively toward others, and, once they have identified friend from foe, hold tight 

to their decision” (MacWilliams, 2016, p. 717). 

Extensions of Theodor Adorno’s original authoritarian personality concept, which 

described authoritarianism as a kind of inherited trait (see: Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Sanford, 

& Levinson, 1951/2019), have instead emphasized that the mental structures of authoritarianism 

are cultivated through “nurture” rather than “nature” (Borum, 2014, p. 288). Authoritarian 

attitudes can “be ‘acquired’ through social learning processes” but remain dormant “unless and 

until the ‘right’ conditions emerge” (Morgan & Shanahan, 2017, p. 427). For instance, Feldman 

and Stenner’s (1997) research demonstrated that “the manifestations of authoritarianism— 

intolerance, prejudice, punitiveness, and the like—will be more pronounced under conditions of 

threat” (p. 765). Violence can be one mechanism for generating threat perceptions and activating 

authoritarian sentiments. This analysis of violence at Trump rallies shows starkly that violence 

fuels “us versus them” logic, triggering the “latent potential” for authoritarian inclinations 

(Roiser & Willig, 2002, p. 91). These violent spectacles allowed Trump’s audiences to 

experience “vicarious participation in the domination and punishment of out-groups,” which “is 

a core part of the authoritarian wish to follow a domineering leader” (Smith & Hanley, 2018, p. 

196) 

The connection between Trumpism and authoritarian characteristics is well-documented 

(Cox, Lienesch, & Jones, 2017). MacWilliams’ (2016) national poll of 1,800 registered voters 

found a statistically significant relationship between authoritarian sentiments and support for 

Trump. This explains why, during the Republican primaries, Trump was “the main beneficiary” 

of media focus on the Paris and San Bernardino terrorist attacks, and other “law and order” 151 

issues relating to immigration and crime (MacWilliams, 2016, p. 717). Chattopadhyay’s (2018) 

analysis of election survey data also found that “the authoritarian predisposition of voters played 

a prominent role in predicting favorability for Trump” (p. 413). Womick, Rothmund, Azevedo, 

King, and Jost’s (2018) study showed that Trump supporters “were significantly more likely to 

exhibit group-based dominance and authoritarian aggression than backers of other Republican 

candidates” (p. 7). Similarly, McAdams (2017) argued that “Trump holds a deep and primal 

appeal for millions of Americans . . . because of how effectively he channels the psychology of 

dominance” (p. 11). 

Indeed, the authoritarian personality manifests itself in plainly undemocratic views held 

by some Trump supporters. A poll conducted by Ipsos and the University of Virginia Center for 

Politics found that 31% of Republicans believed that “the president’s term should be extended 

two years” to compensate for “Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference in the 

2016 election” (UVA Center for Politics, 2019, para. 2). At the rally I attended in Dallas in 

October of 2019, Trump supporters made light of fears that Trump would unduly prolong his 

presidency by chanting “8 more years” and “12 more years” (see also: Lizza, 2020). Investment 

of faith in a strongman capable of dominating out-groups and quelling chronic insecurity was a 

potent means for Trump supporters to bring a sense of certainty and stability to their lives during 

a time of economic and cultural transition. Violence, at Trump rallies as well as other places, 

helped make such a strongman narrative believable by creating a perceived need for domineering 

leadership and by clearly defining the in-group and out-group. 

Conclusion 

In this essay, I have synthesized my firsthand experience at Trump rallies with those of 

other observers and demonstrated that violence was a ritualistic feature of Trump rallies that 152 

helped construct a beleaguered community. This is not to say that Trump supporters consciously 

waged violence for the intended purpose of community-building. Rather, at heavily protested 

rallies where rival social groups collide, violence functioned as a mechanism for enforcing in-

group/out-group divisions. For Trump supporters, violence enhanced solidarity among in-group 

members and articulated a scorned out-group. Violence offered a positive means to demonstrate 

fealty to other community members, while building negative identification against protestors, 

who served as a scapegoat against which a group identity can be defined. This finding adds 

further depth to our understanding of the fraught relationship between rhetoric and violence, as 

Trump rallies exemplify violence’s capacity to function as constitutive rhetoric (Charland, 1987; 

Crosswhite, 2014; Engels, 2013). 

I also clarified why Trump maintains an ambiguous relationship to violence, alternatingly 

condemning and encouraging it. Trump thrives in situations of chaos and unrest. He “wants 

voters stirred up, angry and afraid,” which ironically makes “disorderly and confrontational 

protesters” an unwitting ally in his efforts to present himself as a stabilizing strongman figure 

(Farber, 2016, para. 15). Visible displays of dissent are vital to his strongman narrative. There is 

scant evidence for Trump’s argument that America faces an epidemic of crime, and by many 

measures, the nation is much safer than it was in the 1980s and 1990s (Baer, 2016). Moreover, 

data shows that Trump supporters do not typically live in areas with significant immigrant 

populations (Ojeda, Wynn, & Chen, 2016); nor is there any evidence that immigrants are 

associated with greater rates of crime (Flagg, 2018). Since Trump’s narrative of a violent, 

immigration-fueled crime wave is not true, he is at a loss to produce tangible evidence of a 

breakdown in law and order. In this context, rowdy protestors serve as material proof that 

political correctness has run amok, allowing Trump to persuasively argue to his supporters that 153 

American society has become too permissive and requires a top-down imposition of order. 

Although it is not clear if Trump has actively taken steps to choreograph the presence of 

protesters at his events as Nixon did (Lichtman, 2009; Perlstein, 2008), Trump’s repeated 

expressions of nostalgia for “the good old days” when protestors were violently suppressed and 

the ritualized ejections of protestors and associated violent scuffles are a welcome inventional 

resource, illustrating the supposed lawlessness of his opponents and allowing Trump to 

demonstrate his own toughness. 

This analysis also helps explain why demagogues across a variety of historical contexts 

have found strategic value in violence. Trump is often conceived of by his opposition as an 

aberration, a singular figure unlike any who has come before, and “a dangerous outlier whose 

removal would restore America to normality” (Heer, 2017, para. 9). Although Trump has indeed 

upended many conventions of American politics and has a resume unlike any other occupant of 

the White House, when it comes to violence, he is following a familiar playbook. Trump’s 

demonization of political protestors and use of violence as an inventional resource is a strategy 

that can be traced back to at least the era of Richard Nixon and George Wallace, and also has 

parallels to tactics used in Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. These historical episodes confirm the 

rhetorical potential of violence. The recurring violence of Trump rallies, when considered 

alongside past experiences with strongman figures, also serves as a warning that violence can 

activate latent authoritarian sentiments in audiences, by creating a perception of threat that 

demands in-group consolidation and identification with a forceful leader. Discovering the 

scenarios under which authoritarian personality types may be activated should therefore be an 

urgent priority for scholars across a variety of disciplines. 154 

Another implication relates to the state of political discourse in the United States. As is 

apparent after a review of Trump’s remarks during the 2016 election and afterwards, the norm 

against political figures endorsing violence has been shattered. Trump’s frequent remarks 

goading his supporters to rough up protestors did not derail his presidential bid and likely 

improved his standing with certain authoritarian voters. The consequences of the deterioration of 

this norm are dire. Every year since Trump’s victory has witnessed a steady increase in the 

frequency of hate crimes (Eligon, 2018). 

Several incidents stand out as potentially influenced by the vitriolic climate of the Trump 

era. In 2017, a white man from Kansas shot two Indian immigrants, after calling them terrorists 

and yelling “get out of my country” (Burch, 2017). Later that year in Charlottesville, Virginia, 

white supremacists wearing the same red “Make America Great Again” hats found at Trump 

rallies murdered an activist in a vehicular attack, prompting Trump to issue a statement 

denouncing the violence but praising the “very fine people on both sides” of the white 

supremacist “Unite the Right” rally. The Charlottesville rally was organized in part by none 

other than Matthew Heimbach (Goggin, 2017). In October of 2018 as the nation prepared to vote 

in the midterm election, Cesar Sayoc, “a fervent Trump supporter” who owned a van covered in 

pro-Trump bumper stickers, mailed pipe bombs to a long list of the scapegoats pilloried at 

Trump rallies, including Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, and CNN , which Trump has called part 

of the “fake news media” and the “enemy of the people” (Weiser, 2019). Later that month, a 

white nationalist killed 11 people at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh. Based on social 

media posts, the killer apparently targeted Jews because of his obsession with “a conspiracy 

theory insinuating that the migrant caravan . . . which President Donald Trump and conservative 

media have treated as an existential threat to the United States, is a Jewish plot” (Lind, 2018, 155 

para. 5). The following spring in New Zealand, another mass shooter killed 49 Muslims in a 

place of worship. In an online manifesto posted shortly before the attack, the shooter used the 

same language of immigrant “invasion” that has been used by the Tree of Life shooter and by 

Donald Trump while discussing the migrant caravan and border security (Ward, 2019). 

At a rally in Florida during May of 2019, Trump, referring to undocumented migrants, 

asked the audience: “how do you stop these people?” (qtd. in Rieger, 2019, para. 1). In response, 

a supporter shouted: “shoot them.” Trump acknowledged the comment by pausing and smirking, 

before responding “only in the Panhandle can you get away with that statement” (para. 3). 

Trump then paused his speech for about 10 seconds, allowing the audience to cheer. Through 

this exchange, and his failure to condemn his supporters’ call for violence, Trump “gave tacit 

approval to the use of violence against immigrants” (Goldberg, 2019, para. 1). Several months 

later, “a 21-year-old white man,” who had posted an online manifesto with passages that “closely 

mirror Trump’s rhetoric” on immigration, entered a Walmart in El Paso armed with a semi-

automatic rifle and murdered 22 civilians while wounding dozens more (Rucker, 2019, paras. 3-

8). Like Trump and the perpetrator of the massacre in New Zealand earlier that year, the El Paso 

shooter likened immigration to an “invasion” (Baker & Shear, 2019). The massacre ranks among 

the deadliest mass shootings in American history (Lawler, 2019). 

Trump is not directly culpable for any individual attack, but his rhetoric contributes to a 

toxic political atmosphere where racist sentiments and threats of violence are casually 

exchanged. Although “it is notoriously difficult to demonstrate effect,” it is abundantly “clear” 

that “rhetoric can create an environment in which violence can seem logical, necessary, 

justifiable, and even righteous” (Engels, 2015, pp. 15-16). Trump’s repeated jokes about 

assaulting protestors have further normalized violent rhetoric. In a nation where deadly weapons 156 

are widely accessible but treatment for mental illness is often unavailable, such statements pose a 

clear safety risk. To say Trump bears no blame for such hate crimes is to willfully ignore the vast 

reach and unrivaled influence of presidential rhetoric, which has the power to define “political 

reality” (Zarefsky, 2004, p. 611). Restoring the norm against political leaders condoning violence 

requires reversing the group identity dynamics described in this essay. Violence needs to be 

transformed from an activity that bears a positive social valence and connotates membership in a 

political community, into something taboo. This is a Herculean task with no easy solutions, but 

at a minimum requires building “a culture where the words of a maniacal bully no longer 

energize the most susceptible” (Mattson, 2018, p. 121). To restore this norm and work toward a 

more peaceful public sphere demands that political leaders consistently condemn, rather than 

condone, violence. 157 

Chapter VI 

“It’s All Very Simple”: Conspiracy Theory Rhetoric at Trump Rallies 

On July 31 st , 2018, President Donald Trump held a campaign rally in Tampa, Florida to 

promote the gubernatorial candidacy of Ron DeSantis, a Republican member of the House of 

Representatives. The contents of Trump’s speech were unremarkable. He bragged about the 

economy, declared himself the most popular person in the history of the Republican Party, and 

“took aim at his usual list of piñatas, boogeymen and political targets” (Rogers, 2018, para. 3). 

Yet, for certain Trump supporters, this rally was a watershed moment. As DeSantis delivered 

remarks introducing the President, television cameras captured “a peculiar sign” held by a Trump 

supporter (Carter, 2018, para. 1). Clearly visible in the foreground of television broadcasts of the 

rally was a homemade paper sign containing only the caption: “WE ARE Q.” 

The sign was a reference to the far-right “QAnon” conspiracy theory that holds Trump is 

waging a crusade against a powerful network of child sex traffickers who are plotting a coup 

against his administration. In this moment, a fringe theory that had been gestating since October 

of 2017 “surged into public view” (McNeill, 2020, para. 9; Barkun, 2018). Several prominent 

media outlets, scrambling to explain the surprising number of supporters at the rally with “Q” 

clothing and signs, devoted airtime to detailing the QAnon community’s origins and beliefs 

(Ohlheiser, 2018). The morning after the Tampa rally, when a reporter asked White House Press 

Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders about the theory, she deflected (“Press Briefing,” 2018). 

Later that year, Vice President Mike Pence shared on social media, and later deleted, an image of 

him with Florida law enforcement members, including one Sergeant wearing “a red and black 

patch” with “a bold letter Q and the phrase ‘Question the Narrative’” (Haag, 2018, para. 1). 

Since these incidents, the QAnon community has established itself as a visible fixture at Trump’s 158 

campaign rallies. Reveling in their newfound attention, one believer in the theory used “a 

livestream to 45,000 YouTube subscribers” to triumphantly declare: “This is the moment!” 

(Ohlheiser, 2018, para. 3). This series of events makes it imperative to explain how such an 

outrageous theory could attract such a large following. 

Widespread belief in conspiracy theories is not a new phenomenon in American politics. 

At several crucial junctures in the nation’s past, including as far back as the revolutionary era, 

conspiracy theories have been widely believed and influenced events (Gruber, 1969; Walker, 

2013). Nonetheless, Donald Trump’s election remains a striking development. Conspiracy 

theories have gone mainstream (Barkun, 2017). According to presidential historian Douglas 

Brinkley, “we’ve never had a president who trades in conspiracy theories, who prefers lies 

instead of fact” as Trump does (qtd. in Nicholas, 2019, para. 4). Trump’s engagement in 

conspiracy rhetoric is well-known. Alongside other egregious examples, Trump has: 

publicly dabbled with JFK conspiracy theories, accused investigations into his 

administration as being part of a “deep state,” alleged that he was wiretapped by Barack 

Obama, claimed that his voice on the infamous “Access Hollywood” tape was faked, and 

that he lost the popular vote in the 2016 election due to voter fraud. (Neville-Shepard, 

2018, p. 130) 

Donald Trump, after all, “emerged on the political scene” by stoking the racist conspiracy theory 

that Barack Obama was not born in America in an effort to delegitimize the nation’s first black 

president (Prokop, 2016, para. 1). Trump’s reliance on conspiracy theories was also evident in 

the decision to conclude the 2016 campaign with a final advertisement that identified billionaire 

donor George Soros as part of a network of global elites profiting at the expense of ordinary 

Americans (Vogel, Shane, & Kingsley, 2018). As with many of his claims, there was no 159 

evidence to support it. During his presidency, Trump has drawn upon conspiracy theories to 

explain away the various controversies and investigations he has confronted. For example, 

Trump has alleged that a “deep state” of unelected bureaucrats has set their will against his and 

sought to thwart his administration. 

More broadly, conspiracy theory animates Trump’s worldview and infects nearly every 

aspect of his rhetoric, including his most basic economic arguments. Trump’s conspiracy rhetoric 

can be “boiled down to a single unifying claim: Political elites have abandoned the interests of 

regular Americans in favor of foreign interests” (Atkinson, DeWitt, & Uscinski, 2017, p. 175). 

Consider two of Trump’s core campaign themes: that immigration and lop-sided free trade 

agreements have economically weakened the nation. Even these simple anti-immigration and 

anti-trade arguments are expressed by Trump in terms of a conspiracy to benefit elites at the 

expense of hardworking citizens. Since 2016, Trump has argued that the United States 

immigration system has been consciously designed by corrupt politicians to engineer “open 

borders” and enrich powerful elites while impoverishing ordinary Americans, all with the 

cooperation of the media who are allegedly participating in a cover up of these facts (Trump, 

2016). Similarly, on the issue of free trade, Trump has constructed a narrative where “corrupt 

elites” have “conspired to send manufacturing jobs out of America” and “colluded” with foreign 

trade partners “in this betrayal of America” to serve the interests of corporate campaign donors 

(“How Donald Trump,” 2016, para. 4). According to Trump’s “free trade conspiracy theories,” 

initiatives such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) are part of a “China-backed plot” to 

weaken the United States (Palen, 2016, paras. 5-10). Importantly, Trump integrates both the anti-

immigration and anti-trade sentiments into a single unifying conspiratorial argument. Trump 

explains the alleged harms of both immigration and free trade as stemming from the ideology of 160 

“globalism,” which by premeditated design allows “shuttered factories” and “unchecked 

immigration” as part of “an economic and political system rigged against the American people 

for the benefit of shadowy forces in the news media, the banks and the government” (Stack, 

2016, paras. 1-3). Conspiracy theories are therefore fundamental to the rise of Trump. 

Trump’s conspiracy theories clearly resonate with many supporters. After conducting 

immersive research on Tea Party enthusiasts in Louisiana for five years, Hochschild (2016) 

concluded that this group overwhelmingly supports Donald Trump “ because of his penchant for 

conspiracies, not in spite of it” (para. 2). A study conducted by researchers at the University of 

Cambridge supported this thesis, finding that voting for Trump was “associated with a wide 

range of conspiratorial beliefs – from science denial to takeover plots by Muslim migrants” 

(“Brexit and Trump voters,” 2018, para. 1). Among Trump’s most passionate supporters, who 

organize themselves online and through channels separate from the mainstream Republican 

party, conspiracy theories thrive (Herndon, 2019). Moreover, Trump’s campaign rallies play a 

role in spreading conspiracy theories. While conducting rhetorical fieldwork at Trump rallies, I 

observed how these rallies regularly attract not only passionate supporters of Trump, but also a 

sizeable and visible contingent of QAnon believers. Trump supporters at these rallies brandish 

“Q” clothing and memorabilia, discuss the QAnon theory and other conspiracy narratives, 

distribute literature, and share information about where to read more about these theories online. 

Alongside their other functions, Trump rallies activate and mobilize a grassroots network of 

conspiracy theorizers. 

Normalization of conspiracy theorizing poses a unique set of risks. Conspiracy theories 

can lead individuals to “act on dubious information, engage in scapegoating and, worse, attempt 

and commit violence and murder” (Atkinson et al., 2017, p. 165). The FBI now considers 161 

“conspiracy theory-driven domestic extremists,” including believers in QAnon and “Pizzagate,” 

to be a domestic terrorism risk (Collins, 2019). In December of 2016, a believer in the Pizzagate 

conspiracy theory entered a pizzeria in Washington D.C. and fired a rifle, prompting widespread 

panic and a police lockdown of the area (Lipton, 2016). The man claimed to be investigating 

unfounded claims that the restaurant was part of a child sex-slavery ring led by Hillary Clinton 

(Haag & Salam, 2017). In another frightening incident, in January of 2020, a Colorado woman 

was arrested for formulating a “plot to kidnap her son” from protective custody “through a raid 

conducted by QAnon believers” (Shammas, 2020, para. 4). Alarmingly, the QAnon theory has 

been embraced not only by those on the margins of the Internet, but by Republican congressional 

candidates (Kaplan, 2020; McIntire & Roose, 2020). As leader of the Republican Party, Trump 

has encouraged rather than discouraged the growing conspiratorial sentiment on the political 

right by using his Twitter account to amplify users who “portray [Trump’s] political opponents 

as satanist pedophiles” (Rupar, 2020). 

Given the prominence of conspiratorial thinking in contemporary American politics, 

there is an urgent need to understand such thinking and better comprehend how conspiracy can 

drift from the fringes into the political mainstream. The stakes are high: “Understanding why 

people believe in such conspiracies is vital,” as the normalization of conspiracy theorizing may 

hinder informed political decision-making (Suessenbach & Moore, 2019, p. 1). Fringe theorizers 

may find unexpected influence in an era where the president “pays close attention to information 

circulated via social media and partisan news sources to an unprecedented degree” (Justice & 

Bricker, 2019, p. 410). In such an environment, conspiracy theories may have a real impact on 

government policy. Notably, Trump’s attempt to leverage security assistance as part of a 

“pressure campaign on Ukraine,” which eventually raised concerns about abuse of presidential 162 

powers and sparked his impeachment, “began as an effort” by Trump “to vindicate the 

conspiracy theory” that “Ukraine stole Democratic emails in 2016 and framed Russia for the 

crime” (Chait, 2019, paras. 1-6; Bertrand, 2020; Shuster & Bergengruen, 2019). Further 

illustrating the influence of these theories on government policy, Attorney General Bill Barr 

appointed a federal prosecutor to investigate “right-wing conspiracy theories” about the origins 

of Robert Mueller’s probe into links between Russia and the Trump campaign (Kirby, 2019, 

para. 1). Since conspiracy theorizing is not solely the province of those on the margins of society 

but appears to influence the decision-making of those whose hands are firmly on the levers of 

governmental power, it is imperative to understand how such thinking achieves widespread 

appeal. 

Unfortunately, existing literature on conspiracy theories often explains how elite rhetors 

employ conspiracy rhetoric for strategic purposes, neglecting how conspiracies function for 

adherents. Neville-Shepard’s (2019) study of the conspiracy rhetoric of Trump, for instance, 

sought “to better understand the ‘supply side’ of conspiracy theories, or how they function not 

for their adherents but for the elite rhetors who rely on them” (p. 180). Kelley-Romano and 

Carew (2019) also adopted a top-down focus by analyzing Donald Trump’s role as an advocate 

of the birther conspiracy and his strategic use of conspiracy rhetoric to enhance his “political 

advantage” (p. 37). Similarly, Matheson’s (2016) study of conspiracies theories involving the 

Jade Helm military exercises utilized a press release from Representative Louie Gohmert (R-TX) 

as its primary object of analysis. 

Yet, the story of the rapid spread of conspiracy theories such as QAnon is in part a story 

of “grass-roots organizers flexing their muscle to get a message out,” rather than only a story of 

top-down influence (View, 2018, para. 18). The spread of the QAnon theory demonstrates the 163 

power of diffuse conspiratorial networks to “drive national conversations” (para. 5). The QAnon 

theory has obtained a large following despite efforts by pro-Trump media personalities and the 

institutional Republican Party to distance Trump from the theory, fearing that association with 

QAnon could damage Trump’s image (Herndon, 2019; Sommer, 2018). Rhetorical scholarship 

on conspiracy must therefore account for the fact that conspiracy theories are often “the product 

of a relatively decentralized, ‘grassroots’ sense-making effort” (Wood, 2018, p. 488) and “are 

just as likely to be generated and spread horizontally as they are to be transmitted from elites to 

the masses” (Miller, Saunders, & Farhart, 2016, p. 824). 

In addition, many studies examine conspiracy theorization as primarily a digital 

phenomenon, overlooking how networks of conspiracy theorizers may be grown through offline 

exchanges. Atkinson et al. (2017) likened the Internet to “the modern-day water cooler” and 

explained how conspiracy theories are disseminated online (p. 173). Similarly, Warner and 

Neville-Shepard’s (2014) study approached conspiracy theories as a phenomenon enabled by 

online media echo chambers, arguing that “it is the nature of information dissemination in the 

digital age that allows conspiracies to continue to thrive” despite the existence of a “digital 

media environment that facilitates easy fact checking” (pp. 1-2). It is undeniable that new media 

platforms have facilitated the spread of misinformation, but attention to how conspiracy theorists 

mobilize offline is also needed in an era where believers in “conspiracy theories are increasingly 

making their presence known offline, including at President Donald Trump's campaign rallies” 

(Relman, 2019). Moreover, conspiracy theory played an important role in American politics long 

before the Internet existed (Walker, 2013). 

Large-scale, physical gatherings of conspiracy theorists may be a particularly powerful 

means of spreading conspiratorial knowledge that is overlooked by digital accounts. Donald 164 

Trump’s campaign rallies draw conspiracy theorists out of the shadowy corners of the Internet 

and into the presidential spotlight, demonstrating the strength and vibrance of these communities 

to external audiences and combatting feelings of powerlessness and marginalization held by 

conspiracy theory adherents (Abalakina-Paap, Stephan, Craig, & Gregory, 1999; Hofstadter, 

1964, p. 85; Imhoff & Bruder, 2014; Relman, 2019). Rallies also offer a prime opportunity to 

expand the conspiracy network’s reach, by recruiting new believers through face-to-face 

encounters and circulating ideas and information about how to access additional content online. 

Clearly, attention to the offline dimensions of conspiracy theorizing is needed to supplement 

existing accounts of online dissemination of conspiracy theories. In this essay, I extend existing 

scholarship on conspiracy rhetoric by providing an account of how conspiracy theories are 

disseminated through rallies. 

In what follows I argue that the conspiracies circulated by Donald Trump and his 

supporters can be illuminated based on the functions these theories perform for adherents. I 

develop this argument in four parts. I first outline the recurring forms that conspiracy theories 

take and the basic functions that conspiracy theories fulfill, arguing that existing literature on 

conspiracy rhetoric struggles to account for situations where conspiracies achieve widespread 

endorsement. Second, I argue that in situations where conspiracy theories resonate widely, 

scholars should closely examine the functions that these theories perform for adherents. Third, I 

integrate insights derived from rhetorical fieldwork at Trump rallies to argue that conspiracy 

theories perform three unique functions for Trump supporters: blame absolution, reassurance that 

dramatic changes to society are unneeded, and community-building. Finally, I conclude by 

explaining the implications derived from this analysis. 165 

The Form of Conspiracy Theories 

The basic formal characteristics of conspiracy theories have been clearly articulated by 

scholars from a variety of fields. Conspiracy theories are “commonly defined as explanatory 

beliefs about a group of actors that collude in secret to reach malevolent goals” (van Prooijen & 

Douglas, 2018, p. 897). Since conspiracy theories often assume the form of stories of “good 

versus evil,” they “by their very nature, are communicated narratively” (Desantis & Morgan, 

2004, p. 320). Conspiracy rhetoric is characterized by several recurring “formal elements” 

including “the heroes, the villains, the relationships between heroes and villains, and the 

dominant narrative theme of infiltration” (Kelley-Romano, 2008, p. 110). Bricker (2013) further 

noted formal qualities that most conspiracy theories share, such as: “an alleged truth hidden 

by [the] existing order; a heroic investigative reporter; and, although the underlying truth remains 

hidden, anyone with enough fortitude can find the evidence” (p. 222). Such rhetoric commonly 

posits a shadowy, secretive network of elites as the villains behind a nefarious plot, while 

ordinary citizens are relegated to victim status. 

Importantly, the malleability of this basic narrative template allows conspiracy rhetoric to 

resonate for people with very different views. Conspiracy narratives can feature a variety of 

antagonists, including: “societal leaders,” “governmental institutions,” corporations such as the 

fossil fuel or pharmaceutical industries, and “stigmatized minority groups,” such as Jews or 

Muslims (van Prooijen & van Vugt, 2018, p. 771). Progressives may subscribe to conspiracy 

theories because of “their skepticism towards the motives of corporations,” while conspiracy 

theories also “manipulate conservative fears of invasive government run amok” and cultural 

anxieties about out-groups (Bricker & Justice, 2019, p. 179). 166 

Scholars have also outlined recurrent functions served by conspiracy theories. On a 

fundamental level, “conspiracy theories are born from uncertainty” (Miller, 2002, p. 50) and 

operate as an “ongoing sense-making procedure,” explaining anomalous or frightening events by 

exploiting the basic human tendency to engage in pattern-seeking (Wood, 2018, p. 485; Ellis, 

2018; van Prooijen & Douglas, 2018, p. 901). Conspiracy theories function to reduce uncertainty 

by creating the illusion of order and control in a world that is frequently random (Douglas, 

Sutton, & Cichocka, 2017, p. 539). This helps conspiracy believers preserve the notion that 

history unfolds in a predictable manner, as tragic or world-changing events are portrayed as not 

mere chance occurrences or accidents, but as the results of orchestrated plots. For example, 

understanding the assassination of President John F. Kennedy as part of a secret scheme by elites 

to gain power may make the world seem less chaotic compared to alternative explanations 

(Miller et al., 2016, p. 825). 

Conspiracy theories also serve a “scapegoating function” by outlining friends and 

enemies (Landes, 2007, p. 14), responding to and creating “a strong ingroup identity and a sense 

of outgroup threat” (van Prooijen & Douglas, 2018, p. 902). In this context, conspiracy theories 

“valorize the self and the in-group by allowing blame for negative outcomes to be attributed to 

others” (Douglas et al., 2017, p. 540). Donskis (1998) noted that conspiracy theories appear 

wherever “there is the need either for overgeneralized and simplified explanation of social evil or 

for the quest for enemies” (p. 356). 

The conspiracies circulated by Donald Trump and his supporters possess these familiar 

formal qualities and fulfill these basic functions, but unlike many conspiracy theories that have 

remained fringe, several Trump-related conspiracy theories have achieved widespread 

endorsement. Trump’s conspiracy-driven views on immigration and trade now have a 167 

meaningful constituency in the Republican Party, as the Republican base’s “hostility” to 

“internationalist big business,” “big finance,” “the international economy more generally,” and 

“immigrants” has weakened the GOP’s traditional support for free trade and liberalized 

immigration (Frieden, 2019, p. 46). 

Beyond the Republican Party’s acceptance of Trump’s skepticism towards “globalism,” 

several other conspiracy theories enjoy growing support among Republicans. These theories, 

rather than fading into obscurity, have been repeated by Republican officials on national 

television and in the halls of Congress (Hudson, 2019; Knutson, 2019; Panetta, 2019). Strong 

evidence indicates that many Republican voters now endorse Trump’s narrative that his 

administration has been beset by sinister forces acting as a “deep state” to thwart his agenda. A 

2018 Monmouth University Polling Institute poll found that 31% of Republicans believe that a 

deep state consisting of “unelected government and military officials who secretly manipulate or 

direct national policy” “ definitely exists” (“Public troubled,” 2018, para. 8). Similarly, in an 

Economist /YouGov poll about the impeachment inquiry into Trump, “70 percent of 

Republicans” responded that “the ‘deep state’ is trying to overthrow Trump” (Frankovic, 2019a, 

para. 5). Another Economist /YouGov poll found that “among Republicans who have heard of the 

term ‘Deep State,’ 83 percent believe it is trying to undermine Trump” (Frankovic, 2019b, para. 

13). A poll conducted by Oliver and Wood (2019), both professors of political science, found 

that 51% of Republicans believe a related theory propagated by Trump that Russia’s interference 

into the 2016 election was “a story planted by CrowdStrike, a security company that was hiding 

Ukrainian efforts to aid the Clinton campaign.” 

Although conspiracy theories are found in all cultures (van Prooijen & van Vugt, 2018, p. 

785), only certain conspiracy theories gain significant endorsement (Howell, 2012; Warner & 168 

Neville-Shepard, 2014). These resonant conspiracy theories stand out by maintaining a stubborn 

following among a sizeable minority of Americans. Such resonant conspiracy theories are more 

dominant in the rhetoric of Trump and his supporters than in any other mainstream political 

movement in decades. It is important to understand why Trumpian conspiracy theories have been 

so much more powerful than the thousands of other conspiracies “circulating in public 

discourse” that “exhibit these formal characteristics” yet are not “widely believed” (Bricker, 

2013, p. 222). 

Unfortunately, the formal approach to analyzing conspiracy theories initially developed 

by Hofstadter, who traced the recurrence of the paranoid style throughout American history, 

“falls short in explaining the ways that producers of these narratives successfully appeal to those 

outside the extremist fringe” (Neville-Shepard, 2018, p. 120; Bricker, 2013, pp. 221-222). Focus 

on the form of conspiracy theories alone may tempt scholars into dismissing believers as 

backwards, pathological, and irrational, as Hofstadter did, rather than considering what benefits 

these beliefs provide for adherents (Neville-Shepard, 2018, p. 120; Olmsted, 2018). I argue that 

“understanding the broad appeal” of resonant conspiracy theories requires “moving past the 

obvious formal characteristics of the paranoid style” and examining the functional qualities of 

these narratives (Neville-Shepard, 2018, p. 129). Assessing the state of research on conspiracy, 

van Prooijen and Douglas (2018) argued that: 

Much is still unknown about how social influence shapes conspiracy beliefs. For 

instance, what determines if conspiracy theories spread to a large audience, and what 

makes them persuasive? (p. 904) 

In what follows, I extend existing research on conspiracy rhetoric and explain “why the paranoid 

style resonates widely in some cases but not in others” (Howell, 2012, p. 432). 169 

The Functions of Resonant Conspiracy Theories 

Trump’s conspiracy theories contain the general formal characteristics outlined by 

Hofstadter (1964) and other scholars but may be distinguishable from other theories on the basis 

of function. Beyond the most elemental functions performed by many conspiracy theories—such 

as uncertainty reduction and scapegoating (Howell, 2012; Landes, 2007)—certain conspiracy 

theories may become “particularly viral” when they offer potential adherents additional benefits 

(Neville-Shepard, 2018, p. 124). Miller (2002) noted that “desire for explanation is not the only 

reason that audiences accept conspiracy theories” (p. 50) and that audiences overlook logical 

inconsistencies and “accept conspiracy theories because they are interested in more than just 

facts – they are interested in judgements of the institutions and actors involved” (p. 52). Miller 

additionally argued that conspiracy theories can operate as “coded social critiques” that “serve as 

a way for non-expert citizens to critique the placement and administration of power” (p. 53). 

In what follows, I outline three additional, interrelated characteristics of certain resonant 

conspiracy narratives. Conspiracy theories may achieve widespread resonance by: (1) advancing 

a blame-absolving narrative of in-group innocence, (2) suggesting reassuring solutions to 

structural problems, and (3) providing grounds for identification among believers. These factors 

do not explain why conspiracy theories succeed or fail in every case, as there are other 

contextual variables that influence the resonance of a theory. Nonetheless, outlining these 

functions contributes to our understanding of why conspiracy theories are appealing to many 

individuals. 

First, conspiracy theories may resonate because they allow particular social groups to 

cleanse their hands of responsibility for society’s ills. Consistent with Burke’s (1970) 

observation that “there is guilt intrinsic to the social order,” necessitating cycles of victimage and 170 

redemption (p. 224), scholars have noted how conspiracy theories can be used to scapegoat out-

groups (Howell, 2012). A function closely related to externalizing blame is the capacity of these 

theories to generate feelings of righteousness among believers. Certain conspiracy theories may 

resonate if they contain a compelling “narrative of innocence,” wherein a virtuous community 

suffers some great tragedy or injustice, setting “the stage for both nostalgia and paranoia over 

how that innocence was lost” (Sturken, 1997, p. 72). Conspiracy theories of this type function 

“defensively, to relieve the self or in-group from a sense of culpability for their disadvantaged 

position” (Douglas et al., 2017, p. 540). According to such logic, “average people . . . can never 

assume responsibility for their fate, since the world is dominated by the big and powerful” 

(Donskis, 1998, p. 351). 

Second, certain conspiracy theories may resonate because they make the world seem like 

a safer, simpler place. Such theories reassure believers that major changes to society are 

unnecessary, because restoring the “mythic time of innocence” requires only foiling conspirators 

who threaten the myth (Sturken, 1997, p. 72). Hofstadter (1964) noted that conspiracy theories 

feature a “distinctly personal” “interpretation of history”: “decisive events are not taken as part 

of the stream of history, but as the consequences of someone's will” (p. 85). Donskis (1998) 

labeled this theme the “personification of history,” which entails explaining historical change in 

terms of premeditated choices by specific elite individuals rather than underlying economic and 

social processes (Donskis, 1998, p. 349). 

Through the “simplistic presentation of a small but powerful elite at the core of the 

problem” these theories occlude “the structural nuances involved in any given situation” and 

instead suggest alluringly straightforward fixes to societal crises (Miller, 2002, p. 54). The 

gratification provided by this type of thinking is clear. For instance, the parent of an autistic child 171 

is likely to find more reassurance in the belief that blame for autism lies with vaccines, and 

therefore the pharmaceutical industry and government regulators—who can presumably be 

defeated or otherwise influenced by sufficient public awareness and pressure—than the 

mainstream scientific belief that autism is a complex disorder caused by both genetic and 

environmental factors that offers no obvious solution (Bricker & Justice, 2019). 

Not all conspiracy theories offer such reassurance. Some theories posit the existence of 

hostile forces so all-powerful that believers logically conclude they have no capacity to 

“influence or change the state of affairs” (Donskis, 1998, p. 358). These theories can engender “a 

sense of fatalism” by imagining history as “a grandiose scheme plotted out by extrahistorical 

forces” that are “following a teleological course toward some unavoidable catastrophe” (Popp, 

2006, pp. 267-268). In contrast, conspiracy theories may resonate if they offer believers hope for 

“an easy solution out of the crisis” through the defeat of a readily identifiable set of perpetrators 

(Neville-Shepard, 2018, p. 121). 

Third, resonant conspiracy theories may function as “as a tool of community-building” 

(Bricker & Justice, 2019, p. 179). Conspiracy theories, by outlining a victimized community and 

a scapegoat, presuppose the existence of an in-group and out-group, but can also reinforce a 

sense of identification. Certain theories may achieve widespread appeal by fostering a 

community of believers. Conspiracy theories “are not only spread from person to person; they 

generate communities of believers and both draw from and contribute to political culture,” giving 

“concrete form to otherwise inexpressible social concerns” (Edy & Risley-Baird, 2016, p. 588). 

Kelley-Romano (2008) noted that a “function of conspiracy rhetoric” is that “it provides a 

community with which the individual can identify,” in turn fulfilling “psychological functions in 

that it compliments believers by affirming they have knowledge of which most other Americans 172 

are oblivious” (p. 117). Flat Earth believers, for example, maintain a vibrant online community 

that also meets together offline at conventions, reaffirming their status as an enlightened 

community that possesses special truths that non-members remain ignorant of (Moshakis, 2018). 

These conventions reinforce the community’s worldview while allowing believers to interact in 

greater depth with fellow “Flat Earthers.” 

Crucially, the community-building function of conspiracy rhetoric can operate 

independently of facticity or even plausibility. Although the theory may seem dubious, “saying 

Pizzagate” is a way to “communicate a lot of information about who you are, who you listen to, 

and who you are in a coalition with” by implying that the believer is antagonistic toward the 

mainstream media and political establishment (Atkinson et al., 2017, p. 174). The community-

building function helps explain why some conspiracies prove impervious to fact-checking and 

persist long after being debunked: 

In spreading outrageous stories . . . people may have been seeking less to persuade 

recipients (by way of the plausibility of the story) than to strengthen their membership in 

the group (by way of their disclination to question the plausibility of the story). The use 

value of the story in reinforcing a partisan political identity was more important than its 

truth value. (Polletta & Callahan, 2019, p. 66) 

Regardless of form or accuracy, resonant theories may retain adherents by spurring a community 

devoted to debating and defending the conspiracy theory. In this way, conspiracy theories serve a 

social function by providing believers an enlightened community with which they can identify. 

Trump Rallies as Conspiracy Theory Conventions 

Endorsement of conspiracy theories by Trump supporters serves several functions that 

fortify the community’s worldview. In this section, I draw upon my rhetorical fieldwork at 173 

Trump rallies to explain the resonance of conspiracy theories for Trump supporters. I develop 

this argument in four parts. First, I briefly review conspiratorial beliefs that are commonly 

expressed by Trump supporters. Second, I argue that conspiracy theories allow Trump supporters 

to absolve themselves of responsibility for their perceived marginalization. Third, I explain how 

conspiracy theories allow supporters to place hope in simple solutions to structural problems, 

reconciling their faith in Trump’s negotiating prowess with the reality that the problems affecting 

his core supporters in the white working-class are structural in nature. Fourth, I demonstrate that 

these conspiracy theories foster feelings of community. 

Summary of Conspiracy Theories 

Trump and his supporters frequently utilize conspiracy theory as a sense-making tool in a 

variety of contexts. As described above, Trump’s basic anti-trade and anti-immigration 

arguments assume the form of a conspiracy theory, wherein liberalized trade and immigration 

policies are a globalist Trojan horse, sacrificing the nation’s wellbeing on behalf of corrupt 

foreign interests. Perhaps the most commonly discussed conspiracy theory at Trump rallies 

relates to the “deep state.” Deep state theories allege a conspiracy led by unelected bureaucrats 

within the government to thwart the popular will and sabotage Trump’s administration 

(Michaels, 2017). For Trump, the deep state has proven a flexible antagonist that explains many 

of his administration’s struggles. Who or what exactly constitutes the deep state has often been 

unclear, as the term has been used to refer to a multitude of actors. At various points, the deep 

state has been alleged by Trump and his defenders to include the Department of Justice (Lucey, 

& Superville, 2018), former President Obama and federal employees loyal to him (Weigel, 

2017), Special Counsel Robert Mueller (Breuninger, 2019), the intelligence community 

(Kendall-Taylor, 2019), federal judges (Newkirk & Stohr, 2018), the whistleblower who raised 174 

concerns about Trump’s attempt to leverage aid to Ukraine (Wolf, 2019), the military industrial 

complex (Gingeras, 2019), and John Bolton, Trump’s former National Security Advisor (Klein, 

2020). 

Trump is the most vocal proponent of the theory that a cabal of unelected bureaucrats has 

sought to stifle him, but the theory has also been propagated by other prominent elected 

Republicans (McCarthy, 2018). Although the deep state theory has been widely debunked 

(Ingber, 2017), its appeal to Trump and his supporters is clear. The theory exonerates Trump 

from any responsibility for his impeachment or other wrongdoing, pinning blame on perennial 

scapegoats such as Obama and Hillary Clinton, who are envisioned as manipulating the federal 

bureaucracy from afar. Consistent with Bricker’s (2013) argument that “a conspiracy charge will 

be more likely to resonate if it is consistent with existing ideology,” deep state theories tap into 

long-standing anti-government animus and antipathy towards federal bureaucrats among 

conservatives while dovetailing with Trump’s campaign theme of “draining the swamp” (p. 226). 

The president’s supporters have appropriated the basic narrative of the deep state theory 

and made it their own in ways Republican elites could hardly have foreseen. The most prominent 

example of this is the QAnon theory, which is an offshoot both of deep state theories and the 

Pizzagate theory which asserted that Hillary Clinton runs a sex trafficking ring that engages in 

Satanic rituals from the basement of a pizza parlor in Washington D.C. The QAnon theory 

centers upon an anonymous person named “Q” who claims to be a government insider with 

security clearances and is privy to Trump’s battles against the deep state (Bank, Stack, & Victor, 

2018). Cryptic posts from Q, that supposedly contain classified information, appear on the 4chan 

and 8chan message boards and are subsequently shared by believers across the Internet on 

popular platforms like YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter (Bank et al., 2018). The theory’s 175 

detractors believe these posts may be the work of leftist “trolls” seeking to mock gullible Trump 

supporters (Chang, 2018). 

There is one unique plot detail of this theory that sets QAnon apart from the deep state 

theories proffered by Trump and Republican officials. QAnon narratives assert that Trump and 

Robert Mueller, who was charged with investigating collusion between Russia and Trump’s 

campaign, are actually working hand-in-glove “against a pedophile ring filled with celebrities 

and political elites who have been covertly running the United States government for decades” 

(Collins, 2018, para. 4). This theory has achieved startling reach: a message board devoted to 

QAnon, before being banned, once boasted 49,000 followers (Bank et al., 2018). Moreover, 

YouTube videos about the topic have been viewed millions of times and a cell phone application 

devoted to the theory “was among the 10 most downloaded paid iOS apps in the Apple Store, 

according to an NBC report” (Bank et al., 2018, para. 26). QAnon is no longer “limited to a 

fringe corner of the internet” and has at times assumed a “front-and-center presence” at Trump’s 

campaign rallies (para. 13). The theory has become increasingly visible. For example, during my 

drive to Dallas to attend a rally, I saw a pro-QAnon billboard along the highway with URL 

information for a popular QAnon website, “DoUKnowQ.com” (see also: Bort, 2018). The 

sudden public visibility of the QAnon community and polling showing that Republicans fear the 

influence of a malignant deep state (Frankovic, 2019a, 2019b; “Public troubled,” 2018), 

demonstrate the appeal of conspiracy theory to Trump supporters. Rhetorical fieldwork and 

analysis can help explain this resonance. 

Blame Absolution 

The blame absolving functions of conspiracy theories regarding the deep state are clear. 

Through these theories, every scandal or misstep involving the Trump administration—the 176 

Mueller investigation, the impeachment crisis over Trump’s attempt to pressure Ukraine into 

aiding his re-election effort, difficulties in implementing policy and exerting control over the 

federal bureaucracy—are dismissed as a part of a concerted attempt to thwart Trump by 

bureaucrats, rather than the consequences of Trump’s conduct. A passage from Trump’s speech 

at the rally I attended in Grand Rapids is illustrative. Trump conspiratorially characterized the 

Mueller investigation as a “sinister effort” launched “by those who lost the election to try and 

illegally regain power by framing innocent Americans” through an “elaborate hoax” (“Rally in 

Grand Rapids,” 2019). Trump only reluctantly acknowledged any shortcoming of his 

administration but explained that to the extent there were any problems with his administration, 

such as national division and poisonous debates, blame rested with treacherous investigators: 

“think of the time wasted and yet despite this terrible cloud, this phony, corrupt, disgusting cloud 

we have done more together in the first two years than any administration in the history of our 

country” (“Rally in Grand Rapids,” 2019). 

On Twitter, Trump (2018) has complained that “while my (our) poll numbers are good, 

with the Economy being the best ever, if it weren’t for the Rigged Russian Witch Hunt, they 

would be 25 points higher!” For Trump, conspiracy rhetoric offers a tidy way to present himself 

as the persecuted victim of partisan overreach. Yet, conspiracy is more than a convenient means 

for Trump to explain away investigations. Trump also uses conspiracy rhetoric to absolve his 

supporters of any responsibility for difficulties in their lives. The blame absolving function of 

conspiracy theory is evident in Trump’s economic rhetoric. 

At the campaign rallies I attended in Michigan and Wisconsin, two traditionally 

Democratic “rust-belt” states that unexpectedly flipped to Trump and were crucial to his victory, 

Trump emphasized the sense of loss felt by these communities. In Grand Rapids, Trump echoed 177 

the “American Carnage” vision of his inaugural address, describing the nation’s “crumbling 

infrastructure,” and “broken trade deals,” and bemoaning to the audience that “your empty 

factories are still all over the place, they still haven’t recovered from NAFTA” (“Rally in Grand 

Rapids,” 2019). At the rally I attended in Green Bay, Trump recounted the devastation allegedly 

wrought by NAFTA, lamenting that if “you look around Wisconsin, you still see the scars, empty 

buildings” (“Live in Green Bay,” 2019). Crucially, Trump utilized conspiracy narratives to 

absolve white working-class voters of responsibility for regional economic decline. In his 

inaugural address, for instance, Trump (2017) blamed the struggles of the postindustrial regions 

upon the schemes of elites: 

For too long, a small group in our nation’s Capital has reaped the rewards of government 

while the people have borne the cost. 

Washington flourished – but the people did not share in its wealth. 

Politicians prospered – but the jobs left, and the factories closed. 

The establishment protected itself, but not the citizens of our country. 

Their victories have not been your victories; their triumphs have not been your triumphs; 

and while they celebrated in our nation’s Capital, there was little to celebrate for 

struggling families all across our land. (paras. 7-11) 

Through conspiracy theory, Trump helps supporters in electorally important states make sense of 

their loss of a “privileged” position (McQuarrie, 2017, p. S133). 

Although Midwestern states suffered from the decline of manufacturing and recovered 

more slowly from the 2008 recession than other states (Schweitzer, 2017), the actual causes of 

the economic stagnation experienced by the post-industrial Midwest are complex. A statistical 

analysis conducted by researchers at Ball State University found that “almost 88 percent of job 178 

losses in manufacturing in recent years can be attributable to productivity growth” spurred by 

automation, with foreign trade playing a smaller role (Hicks & Devaraj, 2015, p. 6; Miller, 

2016). U.S. manufacturing industries are also highly sensitive to variables almost entirely 

beyond the president’s control, including energy prices and upswings or downturns in the 

broader global economy (Van Dam, 2019). To the extent that foreign trade plays a role in job 

losses, NAFTA, “one of Trump’s favorite punching bags,” is not a primary factor (Spagat, 2017, 

para. 2). The decline of American manufacturing began decades prior to the enactment of 

NAFTA, when postwar politicians implemented trade policies that “permitted discrimination 

against American goods because of Europe and Japan’s fragile economic and political 

circumstances,” prioritizing foreign policy goals over the concerns of domestic manufacturers by 

allowing the American market to become “the safety valve for the export industries of U.S. 

allies, who quickly became economic competitors” (Stein, 2010, pp. 7-8). The choice by 

policymakers such as Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy to use trade policy to 

promote “international economic stability” contributed to the contraction of American 

manufacturing, not solely the trade policies of Trump’s preferred scapegoats, Presidents Clinton 

and Obama (Farber, 2018, p. 40). 

Moreover, as automation decreases opportunities for manufacturing employment, the 

path to a “good job and concomitant dignity” increasingly “runs through higher levels of 

postsecondary education” (Austin, 2019, para. 3). Citizens struggling in an economy that places 

a premium upon obtaining a college degree have often suffered “not only wage stagnation and 

the loss of jobs” but “the loss of social esteem” and “humiliation” (Sandel, 2019, para. 40). 

Trump’s conspiracy narratives explain these dispiriting trends as the work of the ill-defined—but 

rhetorically powerful—figure of “the establishment” (Trump, 2017). Corrupt politicians, 179 

“globalism and international cooperation” have proven to be “useful scapegoats” for these 

economic woes (Rohac, 2019, p. 4). Citizens in struggling regions harbor suspicions that 

“globalization has taken opportunities away from them” (Goldberg, 2019, para. 8) and are 

therefore “receptive” to Trump’s nationalist narrative that a “globalist elite class” has preyed 

upon them (Finley & Esposito, 2019, p. 9). 

Through displacement of blame onto globalist elites, Trump’s conspiracy rhetoric tells 

white working-class voters that their loss of status is not of their own making. This narrative of 

innocence—“that everything wrong in your life is someone else’s fault” (Vance, 2016, para. 

27)—not only provides a scapegoat (in the form of elites and immigrants) but relieves feelings of 

guilt and “helps them to understand why they lack the power to control their own lives” 

(Abalakina-Paap et al., 1999, p. 644). Although Trump’s blame-displacing conspiracy narrative 

does not correspond with realty, its simplicity offers more comfort than alternative explanations 

that attribute responsibility for deindustrialization to diffuse economic processes. 

Reassuring Solutions 

Framing the nation’s economic struggles as the product of a vast conspiracy also allows 

Trump and his supporters to place faith in silver bullet solutions. If the decline of American 

manufacturing has been deliberately engineered by corrupt elites (rather than being the 

byproduct of automation and economic variables beyond the control of any single 

decisionmaker) reversing these losses and restoring the lost golden age is only a matter of 

selecting the right leader. At the rally in Grand Rapids, Trump said precisely this, and reassured 

the audience: 

I don't know if you know it or not Michigan but Mexico took about 30 percent of your 

car business. Not when I was here. When I'm here they are not . . . It's all very simple. 180 

People try and make it too complicated. It's all very simple. (“Rally in Grand Rapids,” 

2019) 

The conspiracy theories circulated by Trump and his supporters personalize history, by 

portraying politics as a battle of wills between powerful individuals: Trump vs. elites, or Trump 

vs. the deep state. This individualistic frame is consistent with Trump’s core theme that he is a 

superb dealmaker: “The deal is the lens through which Trump makes sense of the world” (Kane, 

2016, para. 3). Johnson (2017) argued that this rhetorical frame “offers his supporters refuge 

from multiple problems, ranging from trade to terrorism, by configuring each of these problems 

as flowing from the lack of authoritative, masculine leadership,” noting that “no matter the topic, 

Trump’s solutions return to his leadership and negotiating savvy” (p. 245). The emphasis on 

Trump’s legendary deal-making skills obscures inconvenient facts about “how politics works” 

by inflating “the capacity of ‘great men’ to effect” change “by force of personality” (Zelizer, 

2015, p. 7). 

During his 2016 Republican National Convention address, Trump boasted that “I alone 

can fix” the many problems supposedly afflicting the nation. As President, Trump’s deal-making 

abilities have not proven sufficient to fulfill his campaign pledge to repeal the Affordable Care 

Act, avert two separate government shutdowns, negotiate superior diplomatic agreements with 

Iran and North Korea, address the infrastructure crisis or a host of other problems (Olorunnipa & 

DeBonis, 2019; Sullivan, 2019). Notably, his promised border wall remains unbuilt and he has 

been unable to stem job losses due to outsourcing (Greenwood, 2017; Rizzo, 2019; Sainato, 

2019). The economic story is largely one of continuity with the final years of the Obama 

administration (Chait, 2018; Ponnuru & Strain, 2018), yet the government’s budget deficit has 

ballooned to almost $1 trillion (Long & Stein, 2019). Internationally, polling shows declining 181 

respect for the United States abroad under Trump (Drezner, 2018). Although the Trump 

administration passed corporate tax cuts and confirmed judicial appointments at an impressive 

rate, his overall record remains one of promises unfulfilled. 

How then do Trump supporters reconcile Trump’s reputation for deal-making with the 

gridlock, policy failure, and continuous scandal that has largely characterized his administration? 

At the rallies I attended, Trump supporters fiercely resisted this characterization of the state of 

the nation, arguing that the economy is “booming” and that the border wall is being built, likely 

owing to the insulated conservative media ecosystem that they inhabit. Yet, through my 

fieldwork I also gained insight into how conspiracy theory helps Trump supporters to reconcile 

the myth of Trump’s deal-making prowess with the realities of the American political system. 

Rather than concede that the U.S. government is too complex and difficult for one individual, 

even the president, to dominate – which would negate Trump’s “I alone can fix it” narrative – 

Trump and his supporters posit the existence of an amorphous antagonist, almost as powerful as 

Trump, that is thwarting him. 

The antagonist of these conspiracy narratives is often an amalgamation of Democrats, the 

media, and the deep state (Shear, 2018). While warming up the crowd for his father in Grand 

Rapids, Donald Trump Jr. asserted that allegations of collusion between Russia and the Trump 

campaign were “funded by Hillary Clinton and the DNC” and “perpetrated by . . . 95% of the 

mainstream media” (“Rally in Grand Rapids,” 2019). In Green Bay, Trump Jr. described “the 

Mueller investigation” as part of “the Democrat funded war on Trump” (“Live in Green Bay,” 

2019). Trump Jr. then lionized his father as the singular solution to corruption, but noted the 

resistance he has faced in implementing his agenda, describing the president as “a full frontal 

assault on the establishment—on both sides—he’s the sledgehammer that needed to be brought 182 

to Washington . . . we’re draining the swamp, but the swamp’s been there for a long time” (“Live 

in Green Bay,” 2019). Trump supporters I observed viewed Trump’s relationship with the 

Washington establishment in similar terms. At the Minneapolis rally, a Trump supporter touted 

supposed progress made toward building the wall, the low unemployment rate, and successes in 

combatting the illicit drug trade, and attributed the investigations into Trump to the deep state. 

The supporter characterized the deep state as encompassing “politicized” elements of the CIA 

and FBI and accused these forces of acting as an arm of the Democratic Party by launching a 

“coup” against Trump out of desperation, because they know he cannot be defeated at the ballot 

box by the likes of Joe Biden and Elizabeth Warren. At the rallies I attended, Trump supporters 

treated this narrative not as a conspiracy “theory” but more as an established, taken for granted 

truth. 

Conspiracy narratives secure a worldview where “great men” such as Trump are the 

engine of change, inhibited only by readily identifiable antagonists rather than complex 

problems. This serves a reassuring function, as creating desired societal changes and remedying 

the sense of loss felt by many Trump supporters is only a matter of empowering Trump, the 

master dealmaker and sledgehammer, and foiling his deep state antagonists. Moreover, these 

theories preserve Trump’s reputation as a heroic leader and expert negotiator. According to this 

narrative, Trump has been plagued by scandal and struggled to implement campaign promises 

because he has been stabbed in the back by deep state renegades, not because of any lack of 

competence on Trump’s part. The stakes of this argument are high. If Trump supporters can 

cling to the myth of Trump’s masterful deal-making, they can also cling to the notion that there 

are easy solutions to stubborn problems such as offshoring and the decline of manufacturing. 183 

Conspiracy theories allow supporters to reconcile the claim that Trump possesses mythic 

negotiating skills with his actual governing track record. 

Trump’s conspiracy narratives take complicated situations—such as the decline of 

American manufacturing, or Trump’s struggles to overcome legislative and bureaucratic 

resistance to his agenda—that might otherwise inspire pessimism and resignation, and instead 

offer “the promise of redemption and victory” (Hofstadter, 1964, p. 85). In reality, Trump’s lack 

of accomplishments stems from the nature of the U.S. political system, which is by design 

cumbersome and contains numerous chokepoints where reforms may stall or die altogether, as 

well as his own ego-centric and often simply incompetent management style (Sullivan, 2019). 

Conspiracy theory allows Trump supporters to continue to view Trump as an ultra-successful 

dealmaker, a comforting view that helps them cope with “feelings of uncertainty and fear” (van 

Prooijen, Krouwel, & Pollet, 2015, p. 571). 

Community-Building 

Conspiracy theory also reinforces bonds of identification shared by Trump supporters, 

while framing believers as part of an enlightened community that is wise to the schemes of “the 

swamp.” Trump’s campaign rallies serve as conventions for this community: a judgment-free 

space where believers in theories such as QAnon can commune with the likeminded. At the first 

Trump rally I attended in Grand Rapids, I was struck by the prevalence of conspiracy theories. 

Beyond the numerous individuals wearing QAnon gear, Trump rallies attracted conspiracy 

theorists as though by magnetism. At the rally in Grand Rapids, a “Flat Earther” waited in line 

with supporters and recorded conversations about the theory. 1 Also present in the pre-rally line 

were representatives of the LaRouche movement, a network dedicated to promoting the work of 

the conspiracy theorist Lyndon LaRouche, who died a little more than a month prior to the rally. 184 

These individuals offered literature to Trump supporters and called for Trump to “investigate the 

investigators.” 

Opportunistic purveyors of conspiracy sensed a chance to recruit new believers for their 

pet theories at the rally, and not without reason. Trump rallies are a breeding ground for 

conspiracy, and not only because Trump and his surrogates (such as Donald Trump Jr.) have a 

tendency to spread conspiracies during their primetime speeches. Trump supporters use 

conspiracy narratives to explain problems of all shapes and sizes. At the rallies I attended, 

supporters claimed that: pictures taken of supporters at rallies could be used by Facebook facial 

recognition software to identify supporters and destroy their lives, “pedophiles run the world,” 

the National Security Agency has proof that Obama is a Muslim, Hillary Clinton only won 

Minnesota during the 2016 election because of rampant voter fraud in Minneapolis, activists 

demonstrating against Brett Kavanaugh’s appointment to the Supreme Court were “paid 

protestors,” and that Representative Ilhan Omar of Minnesota married her brother and is a 

“national security risk.” Although each of these theories is false, the act of sharing such theories 

serves as grounds for bonding and signals a shared hostility to establishment politicians and the 

mainstream media (Atkinson et al., 2017). 

For Trump supporters, conspiracy theorizing is a collective enterprise rather than an 

activity performed by isolated individuals. The communal sentiment is encapsulated by the 

signature slogan of the QAnon community, which I saw emblazoned across clothing and hats at 

every rally I attended and is one of the community’s favorite hashtags on Twitter: “Where We 

Go One, We Go All” (#WWG1WGA). The QAnon believers I encountered emphasized the 

sense of identification that underpins the theory. A believer in Green Bay described QAnon as a 

“movement” and “information dump” aimed at taking the country back, while a proponent of the 185 

theory in Dallas described QAnon as “an alliance of Trump supporters.” Bricker (2013) noted 

that conspiracy narratives commonly feature a “heroic investigative reporter” (p. 222). The 

QAnon community positions ordinary Americans in this role, portraying believers as noble truth-

seekers who by researching and circulating QAnon content and recruiting new believers help 

break the control of sinister elites over politics. The QAnon conspiracy theory is therefore a 

participatory and cooperative effort, where ordinary believers are given a role to play in 

investigating the battles between Trump and the deep state, combatting the fatalism that is 

sometimes associated with conspiracy theories (Donskis, 1998; Popp, 2006). QAnon narratives 

occasionally adopt religious overtones. At the rallies I attended, believers wore QAnon clothing 

with the captions “The Great Awakening” and “The Storm is Here.” For QAnon believers, the 

prophesized day of salvation when thousands of sealed indictments against corrupt Democrats 

and pedophiles are announced by the Trump administration is always, and perpetually, imminent 

(Barkun, 2018; Sommer, 2019). 

A conversation I had with a QAnon believer in Dallas illustrates how the theory 

constructs an enlightened and empowered community. The man, who along with his wife was 

wearing Q clothing, boasted that QAnon believers are “a year ahead of everyone else” because 

they learn about breaking news far in advance of ordinary citizens, and declared that “we are the 

news now.” He asserted that the theory explains seemingly unrelated events such as the arrest of 

Jeffrey Epstein, who was charged with sex trafficking, and the controversy over the Biden 

family’s business dealings in Ukraine; according to Q, these developments are both part of 

Trump’s efforts to root out deep state corruption. In an attempt to raise awareness about the 

theory, he suggested a slew of sources to consult and expressed excitement that I would soon 

discover the community’s secrets for the first time. The believer described QAnon as “something 186 

you get interested in, then obsessed with” and stated that “Q is my life.” At several points during 

the day, the man had similar conversations with other Trump supporters. For believers, the 

QAnon theory combats the feeling of powerlessness that is associated with belief in conspiracy 

theories by portraying adherents as having unique insights into reality while non-believers 

remain deluded or brainwashed (Abalakina-Paap et al., 1999; Hofstadter, 1964; Imhoff & 

Bruder, 2014). In the theory’s narrative, believers are positioned as the guardians of secret 

knowledge that society writ large remains ignorant of and are tasked with the special mission of 

raising awareness and spreading the truth. 

At rallies, supporters also use conspiracy theories to construct an alternative information 

network that operates outside of mainstream channels. Trump’s rallies are used by the campaign 

to collect data about supporters, including cell phone numbers and email addresses, so that the 

campaign can remind them to register to vote and send them Trump-friendly news updates 

(Bender, 2019). It is also common for Trump to use his rally address to praise his favorite media 

personalities and thereby recommend their television and radio programs to his followers. Yet, 

supporters play a role in the process of constituting an alternative information network, which is 

often a misinformation network. In Grand Rapids, the supporters of a “real news” newsletter 

walked up and down the line holding clipboards, registering Trump supporters for their news 

service. In Minneapolis, representatives of “MAGA Media,” a pro-Trump website with a well-

trafficked Facebook page, advertised the availability of “content no one else will break” to 

supporters. At each rally, supporters distributed physical literature containing information about 

how to access Trump-friendly media sources. At the rally in Minneapolis, I was handed a card 

instructing Trump supporters to “STOP viewing and listening to the misinformation and 

disinformation – fake news – of the Mainstream Media” and to “START getting your daily news 187 

from truthful news websites” including Whatfinger News, WorldNetDaily, and the Daily Caller. 

All three of these sites espouse a far-right worldview and traffic in conspiracy theories. 2 At the 

rally I attended in Dallas, QAnon believers distributed hundreds of bright blue rubber wristbands 

– in the style of the yellow “Livestrong” bracelets designed to raise awareness about cancer – 

bearing the captions “qmap.pub,” the URL to a QAnon website that aggregates Q’s posts on 

4chan/8chan, and “@StormIsUponUs,” a Twitter account that posts QAnon content. 

At Trump rallies, conspiracy theory believers both forged connections with fellow 

members of the enlightened community and brought new followers into the network. In this way, 

the “secrets” exchanged between QAnon believers generated “a sense of community” through 

“the invention of mystery and intrigue” (Gunn, 2008, p. 246, p. 269). This process of 

community-building through conspiracy theory operated independent of the official Trump 

campaign and was in fact resisted by the campaign, as the QAnon community maintains a 

tenuous relationship with the Trump campaign. Although QAnon believers lionize Trump, 

Trump’s campaign does not always reciprocate this admiration. At the rally I attended in Dallas, 

security officials ejected supporters who brought homemade QAnon signs into the arena for 

violating the campaign’s rule that only approved official signs be brought into the venue (see 

also Bump, 2019). The startling reach of the QAnon theory, and the spread of this theory at 

Trump’s rallies, illustrates the capacity of loose grassroots networks of conspiracy theorists to 

build identification and gain national recognition while acting outside of mainstream political 

institutions. 

Conclusion 

In this essay, I demonstrated the centrality of conspiracy theory to Trump’s appeal. 

Conspiracy theorizing is more than a strange quirk of Trump’s personality that leads him to 188 

make outlandish claims tying Senator Ted Cruz’s father to the JFK assassination or suggesting 

that Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia was murdered. Conspiracy theory is fundamental to 

the worldview of Trumpism, underpinning its most basic economic arguments regarding free 

trade and immigration while explaining the Trump administration’s testy relationships with the 

other branches of government and the bureaucracy. By incorporating rhetorical fieldwork 

methodologies into an analysis of this community’s conspiracy rhetoric, I revealed three key 

implications. First, I demonstrated the exigency for rhetorical analyses of conspiracy rhetoric that 

emphasize the functions that these narratives perform for their adherents. Second, I provided 

insights into how conspiracy theories spread throughout American culture. Third, I illustrated 

contextual factors that contribute to conspiracy theories becoming a pervasive and stubborn 

phenomenon. 

The Need for a Functional Approach 

This essay demonstrates the value of a functional approach to conspiracy rhetoric. 

Discussions of conspiracy theories often reflect Hofstadter’s “penchant for pathologizing the 

opposition, and thereby simultaneously stigmatizing and underestimating the appeal of the 

resurgent American right” (Olmsted, 2018, p. 42). Through rhetorical fieldwork conducted 

among believers, I explained that belief in conspiracy theories is not necessarily a sign of 

irrationality or an underlying mental pathology. In fact, using conspiracy as a lens for 

understanding politics offers adherents several clear benefits. Conspiracy theories help Trump 

voters make sense of their perceived marginalization, absolve blame for this situation by offering 

a scapegoat, and provide believers with a sense of community during a polarized age defined by 

isolation and alienation. These theories resonate not because of their accuracy, but because they 

provide an implicit critique of American society and perform a reassuring function, dispelling 189 

fears that the current state of affairs is intractable by offering Trump’s mythic deal-making skills 

as a silver bullet (or sledgehammer) solution that can undo the world’s injustices and defeat 

shared enemies such as the deep state. 

Moreover, conspiracy theory is the glue that holds the worldview of Trumpism together. 

Conspiracy theory is necessary for Trump because much of his worldview is false. Trade deals 

such as NAFTA are not solely responsible for deindustrialization, which is a complex process 

driven by multiple factors that do not lend themselves to easy panaceas (Hicks & Devaraj, 2015; 

Miller, 2016; Van Dam, 2019). Similarly, the United States is not experiencing a massive influx 

of immigrants, and the economic effects of immigration are largely positive (Dalmia, 2019; de 

Brauw, 2017; Sullivan, 2017). Although the causes are difficult to identify and quantify 

precisely, certain regions that were important in deciding the 2016 election have indeed suffered 

from economic decline in spite of the positive economic climate in much of the country 

(Schweitzer, 2017). To explain these disparate economic outcomes, Trump uses conspiracy 

theory to simplify the situation, reassuring supporters that their marginalization isn’t their fault 

(it’s because of elites, NAFTA and immigrants) and that he can fix it. Trumpism intuitively 

identifies that many voters would rather endorse a simple story that reaffirms their pre-existing 

worldview than be told a complicated, albeit more accurate, story without clear heroes and 

villains. 

The functional approach developed here explains how conspiracy theories can foster 

community and illustrates why certain theories remain persistent in the face of discrepant 

information and fact-checking. Indeed, the QAnon theory shows no signs of fading despite the 

conclusion of Mueller’s investigation and the failure of its prophecies to come true (Coaston, 

2019). Individuals “rationally endorse conspiracy theories not only because they believe they are 190 

true but also because conspiracy theories can effectively discriminate between individuals with 

conventional versus fringe views” and create feelings of belonging (Atkinson et al., 2017, p. 

177). Given that conspiracy “communities face a threat to their existence” when confronted by 

fact-checking efforts, adherents respond with “psychological resistance” and counter-arguments 

to defend the core beliefs of a community that provides a sense of empowerment and stability 

(Edy & Risley-Baird, 2016, p. 591). These feelings of community facilitated by conspiracy 

theories may be just as important as “the actual content” of the conspiracy theory for believers 

that become emotionally invested in a theory and its community of defenders (Gunn, 2008, p. 

251). To enhance understanding of the changing role of conspiracy theories in society, a 

functional approach that examines “the complex relationship between audiences, symbols, and 

environments” is needed (Bricker, 2013, p. 224). Rhetorical scholars, when analyzing conspiracy 

theory, should seek to not only detail the patterns and forms these narratives take, but also 

explain the sense-making, ideological, and constitutive functions these theories perform for those 

that embrace them. 

How Conspiracy Theories Spread 

In this essay, I also provided an account of how certain conspiracies spread and take root. 

Contrary to the tendency of some rhetorical scholars to focus on elites as the key purveyors of 

conspiracy theories, this analysis illustrated the capacity of decentralized communities to 

circulate conspiracy theories throughout the broader public, using both online and offline 

methods. My fieldwork revealed several ways that far-right conspiracy theories spread at Trump 

rallies, from both the top-down and from the bottom-up. In their much-anticipated addresses, 

Trump and his surrogates—who command great credibility from their audience—routinely 

outlined shadowy plots aimed at thwarting the will of the people. While Trump supporters 191 

waited in line during the hours leading up to the speeches, conspiracy theories spread through 

old-fashioned word of mouth, from supporter to supporter in everyday conversation. Moreover, 

rallies reinforced a sealed information loop, by introducing non-initiated Trump supporters to 

online information networks where additional conspiratorial content can be accessed. 

Trump rallies may therefore enable what far-right online communities have termed “red-

pilling” on a potentially large scale. The term red-pilling refers to a scene in the film The Matrix ,

where the protagonist is given the “choice to either take the red pill and see the truth or choose 

the blue pill and remain in a manipulative sleep” (Schwarzenegger, 2020, p. 365). To be red-

pilled is to experience an awakening or revelation, by encountering a piece of knowledge that is 

suppressed by the mainstream society, altering one’s perception of the world, such as belief in 

“white supremacy, Holocaust denial, the danger that immigration posits for white Americans, the 

oppression of men by feminists, and so forth” (Lewis & Marwick, 2017, p. 19). The language of 

“awakening” is ubiquitous in the rhetoric of the QAnon community, and a woman at the rally in 

Minneapolis, for example, described herself as a lifelong Democrat until she researched 

Wikileaks and the Pizzagate conspiracy theory. Trump rallies, by gathering large numbers of 

believers in a single venue and providing them ample opportunity to engage with potential 

recruits, reinforce and expand information networks that circulate conspiracy theories. Through 

rallies, attendees are introduced to new theories and are taught where to seek out additional 

information about these theories online from sources that are likely to fortify a conspiratorial 

mindset. 

Why Conspiracy Theories Spread 

This essay also illuminates contextual factors that allow certain conspiracy theories to 

resonate. Van Prooijen and Douglas (2018) noted that “belief in conspiracy theories is highly 192 

sensitive to social context” (p. 898). Although conspiracy theories are pervasive across human 

cultures, individuals are more open to endorsing them during “times of social strain” (Zarefsky, 

1984, p. 73), or in situations where trust in institutions is low and there is a “decline in widely 

accepted social authority” (Edy & Risley-Baird, 2016, p. 600). It has also been recognized that 

“in order to resonate, conspiracy theories must have a ‘kernel of fact’” (Bricker, 2013, p. 227). 

Indeed, beneath even the wildest assertions of the QAnon theory is an uncomfortable truth: “that 

certain elite networks of influence, complicity and blackmail have enabled sexual predators to 

exploit victims on an extraordinary scale” (Douthat, 2019, para. 16). That certain elites—such as 

Jeffrey Epstein and Harvey Weinstein—have engaged in reprehensible behavior with little 

consequence undoubtedly lends credibility to theories such as QAnon for individuals already 

feeling alienated from society. 

In the contemporary climate of plummeting trust in the media and other institutions, 

especially among conservatives, a small sliver of truth may be all that is needed for a conspiracy 

theory to resonate (Ingram, 2018). Donskis (1998) warned that “whenever the conspiracy theory 

is resurgent, it is therefore a symptom that a moral order of a given society fails to encompass the 

Other” (p. 360). As the basic narratives that once provided social cohesion, such as the American 

Dream, break down for many citizens (Dickerson, 2016), it becomes easier for some individuals 

to imagine one’s fellow citizens not just as political opponents, but as enemies willing to engage 

in the unspeakable acts described in theories such as QAnon and Pizzagate. Some conspiracy 

theories are relatively harmless or are even accurate. Other theories – such as the theory 

espoused by the gunman who fired a rifle at a pizzeria while investigating a sex ring on the 

flimsiest of suspicions – “may serve as radicalization multiplier” (van Prooijen, 2018, p. 92). 

Yet, the state of affairs is not bereft of hope. Miller et al.’s (2016) study “identified trust as a 193 

mitigating factor” on belief in conspiracy theories (p. 838). To the extent individuals “believe the 

world is a trustworthy place, they are less able to convince themselves that political rivals are 

engaging in nefarious, secretive plots” (p. 838). Offering appealing alternative narratives to 

conspiracy theories must therefore begin with rebuilding trust in institutional knowledge sources 

that have become increasingly discredited in the eyes of many Americans. 194 

Notes 

1. Trump supporters reacted to the Flat Earth theory with skepticism. Some attendees feared 

the Flat Earther, who held a recording device, was trying to obtain tape of Trump 

supporters endorsing the theory to make them look crazy or stupid. These supporters, in 

essence, claimed that the presence of a conspiracy theorist was part of a conspiracy to 

discredit them. 

2. Whatfinger News is a news aggregation website (similar in style to the Drudge Report) 

that expresses a far-right worldview and circulates conspiracy theories. WorldNetDaily is 

another website that traffics in conspiracy theories, infamous for spearheading 

“Birtherism” by publishing hundreds of articles supporting the debunked theory (Roig-

Franzia, 2019). Faris et al.’s (2017) study of social media coverage of the 2016 election 

found that the Daily Caller “legitimated and normalized the paranoid style that came to 

typify the right-wing ecosystem in the 2016 election” (p. 17). 195 

“President Obama thinks the nation is not as divided as people think. He is living in a world of 

the make believe!” 

- Donald J. Trump, July 10 th , 2016, via Twitter. 

Chapter VII 

Conclusion 

In this dissertation, I have conducted a rhetorical analysis of Donald Trump’s campaign 

rallies, detailing from start to finish how Trump and his supporters collaboratively build 

consubstantiality at these events. Rallies are an integral component of the Trump 

administration’s public outreach strategies and the centerpiece of his 2016 and 2020 presidential 

campaigns. This project supplements existing rhetorical research on Trump by illuminating why 

this rhetoric resonates for his supporters and why the bonds between Trump and his core 

supporters have proven so durable. Trump rallies are impactful because they contain much more 

than just a Trump speech. This dissertation outlined the multifaceted and powerful ways – 

Trump’s populist outsider persona, political rituals, scapegoating, fandom activities, violence, 

and conspiracy theories – that Trump rallies constitute a community. 

Importantly, my rhetorical fieldwork revealed a more complex portrait of Trump 

supporters than is typically offered in rhetorical scholarship or media accounts. Through 

fieldwork research I contested the assumption, prevalent in some rhetorical scholarship and in 

public discourse, that Trump supporters are a “mindless” mob or passive listeners (Ott & 

Dickinson, 2019, p. ix). Rather, Trump supporters are rhetorical agents who, at rallies, 

collaboratively enact a vision of America as they would like it to be. These insights serve as a 

reminder that rhetoric is the province of not only politicians and elites, but ordinary citizens who, 196 

through “everyday rhetorical practices” build identification (Endres, Hess, Senda-Cook, & 

Middleton, 2016, p. 515). 

Considering what motivates Trump supporters is an important goal. Although Trump will 

eventually depart office, the tens of millions of people who voted for him will remain a force to 

be reckoned with in American politics for decades to come. Throughout this project, I have 

highlighted how this community’s support for Trump cannot be reduced to either economic 

anxiety or cultural/racial anxiety. It is the interactive combination of these factors, crystallized in 

the sentiment that Trump is the sole defense preventing a fast-changing nation from slipping 

through their fingers, that motivates many supporters. Trump offers his supporters a coherent, if 

largely false, narrative that frightening economic and cultural changes both stem from the failed 

policies of the establishment. Rallies are important because they offer supporters an opportunity 

to invert this narrative of loss and marginalization, by turning out in large numbers to reassert the 

strength of their community and scapegoat the community’s enemies. 

In addition to elucidating the roots of Trump’s appeal and the reasons for the special 

bond between Trump and his core supporters, this study has broader implications for 

understanding contemporary American political rhetoric. I identify four key insights provided by 

this project. First, this research underscores the decline of the American Dream myth. Second, 

this study of Trump rallies highlights the power of narrative in political campaigns. Third, this 

project points towards rhetorical strategies for countering authoritarian populism. Finally, this 

project demonstrates benefits of a rhetorical fieldwork approach. 

The Decline of National Myth Systems 

I have highlighted how anxiety over demographic change, economic pessimism, 

Americans’ heroic expectations for presidential candidates (otherwise known as the cult of the 197 

presidency), the decline of social capital, and the atmosphere of hyper-partisanship, among other 

factors, gave power to Trump’s message. This project also highlights the collapse of the mythic 

system that underpinned American life, the American Dream. The American Dream is a sacred-

secular myth that can be defined as “the promise that all Americans have a reasonable chance to 

achieve success as they define it – material or otherwise – through their own efforts, and to attain 

virtue and fulfillment through success” (Hochschild, 1995, p. xi). This myth serves as the 

nation’s “guiding mythology” (Samuel, 2012, p. 1) and as an “ideological system” that fulfills 

“axiological, epistemological, and identity functions” (Rowland & Jones, 2011, p. 132). 

Although the nation has struggled to make the dream available to all, the myth nonetheless acts 

as a cultural anchor that provides “meaning, identity” and “a comprehensive understandable 

image of the world” (Fisher, 1973, p. 161). Moreover, the myth holds that Americans are united 

by their shared pursuit of this dream regardless of creed, race, gender, ethnicity, and other 

identity characteristics. 

Trump has scrambled the traditional ideological divide over how to interpret the 

American Dream myth. For at least a half century, conservatives advanced an individualistic 

interpretation where “enactment of personal values ensures fulfillment of the American Dream” 

while liberals advanced a community-oriented interpretation presenting “societal values (and 

policies flowing from them) as the key to achievement of the American Dream” (Rowland & 

Jones, 2007, p. 432). In Donald Trump’s narrative, he is the key to achieving the American 

Dream. Trump’s retelling of the American Dream myth accepts the premise of the community-

oriented variant that individuals cannot always succeed on their own in an imperfect system, 

breaking from the conservative interpretation that emphasizes individual initiative and a small 

government. Rather than offering traditional conservative solutions to problems or outlining 198 

ways that Americans can band together to work towards the common good, Trump presents his 

expert leadership as the key to unlocking opportunity and appeals to fear instead of hope. 

The resonance of Trump’s “strongman” politics is a bellwether indicating declining faith 

in the American Dream. In Trump’s telling of the story, the American people are victims in need 

of a savior. It may be that the “cult of the presidency” – the tendency of Americans to assign 

messianic expectations to the president (Burk, 1981; Healy, 2009; Koch, 2016; Mercieca & 

Vaughn, 2014; Nelson, 2008) – and the American Dream myth cannot coexist indefinitely. The 

American Dream is a narrative “about ordinary people who accomplish extraordinary things” 

(Rowland & Jones, 2007, p. 430). By contrast, “the mesmerizing power of presidentialism . . . 

encourages citizens to believe that their democratic agency depends on presidential power, 

instead of the other way around” (Nelson, 2008, p. 4). 

Trump’s narrative resonated in part because, in the aftermath of the 2008 economic crisis, 

many Americans doubted their ability to succeed on their own: “Survey after survey finds that 

when asked about the next generation, Americans are pessimistic, saying that it will be harder 

and take more effort for the next generation to get ahead” (Cooper, 2015, para. 5; Dickerson, 

2016). A 2015 survey by the MacArthur Foundation, for example, found that 79% of Americans 

believe downward mobility is more common than upward mobility (“Prolonged Housing Crisis,” 

2015). Challenging the notion that Americans optimistically maintain faith in the possibility of 

upward mobility despite living in a society where such mobility is rare, Cheng and Wen (2019) 

found that Americans are in fact “pessimistic about the equality of economic prospects” and 

skeptical that hard work alone can propel them up the ladder of opportunity (p. 13914). In this 

climate, many Americans find Trump’s “strongman” politics, exemplified by his assertion that “I 199 

alone can fix it,” more appealing than traditional interpretations of the American Dream myth 

that have come under strain in light of ongoing inequality. 

At Trump rallies, the fraying of the American Dream myth is plain to see. Donald Trump, 

of course, descended the escalator at Trump Tower and announced his presidential candidacy in 

2015 by declaring: “the American dream is dead” (Trump, 2015). Given Trump’s overriding 

divisiveness, his subsequent assertions that the American Dream has been revived by his 

administration ring hollow. The Trump supporters I observed during my fieldwork didn’t claim a 

sense of shared identity with Americans that they disagree with. Texas Lieutenant Governor Dan 

Patrick, who spoke at the Trump rally in Dallas I attended, labeled Americans with opposing 

viewpoints the “enemy” rather than “opponents” (qtd. in Hooks, 2019, para. 10). At the rallies I 

attended, Democrats and progressives were charitably described by Trump supporters as 

“brainwashed” or “zombies”; deluded, but perhaps not altogether evil. Supporters and speakers 

who were feeling less charitable described Trump’s opponents as radically anti-American, pro-

terrorism, and pro-infanticide. A basic premise of the American Dream myth – that Americans 

are united by shared values – has fallen by the wayside for a considerable group of Americans. 

Moreover, previous presidents such as Obama and Reagan spoke about the need to make 

the American Dream available to all. In 1981, Reagan called the United States “a nation of 

immigrants,” declaring that “more than any other country, our strength comes from our own 

immigrant heritage and our capacity to welcome those from other lands” (para. 1). Later that 

decade in his farewell address, Reagan (1989) likened America to a “shining city on a hill” and 

said that if the shining city had to have walls, “the walls had doors and the doors were open to 

anyone with the will and the heart to get here” (para. 33). Similarly, Obama, then a state Senator 

from Illinois, burst onto the national political scene in his 2004 Democratic National Convention 200 

address by emphasizing the essential commonalities of all Americans, proclaiming: “there's not a 

liberal America and a conservative America — there's the United States of America. There's not 

a black America and white America and Latino America and Asian America; there's the United 

States of America” (paras. 12-13). Trump, by contrast, told a rally crowd in Florida that 

Democrats “want to destroy you and they want to destroy our country” (qtd. in Allen, 2019, para. 

2) and has labeled undocumented immigrants “animals” (Davis, 2018). Trump’s rhetoric, rather 

than arguing that the American Dream should be made available to all, stokes anxieties about the 

crumbling of this dream and tells Americans that the dream needs to be protected from unworthy 

and dangerous outsiders. 

Declining faith in this mythic system is an alarming development. Scholars have 

rightfully criticized the American Dream myth for overlooking structural inequality in the United 

States and implying that initiative and grit are enough to achieve upward mobility in a nation 

where racism, sexism, and other systems of oppression remain persistent obstacles to success 

(Cloud, 1996; Winslow, 2017). Nonetheless, the disappearance of any shared national narrative 

for politicians and ordinary Americans to draw upon threatens to exacerbate worrying trends in 

American politics, such as polarization, hyper-partisanship, and alienation. 

The Limits of Rational Argument and Power of Narrative 

This analysis additionally illustrates the limits of rational argument in the context of 

political campaigns, and the power of narratives that tap into audience values and affect for 

building identification. Since Trump’s election, there has been a public debate about why many 

working-class Americans seemingly voted against their own interests by voting for Trump 

despite his regressive economic agenda (Sartwell, 2019; Zeitz, 2017). Critics have highlighted 

Trump administration policies that cut against the interests of his own voters, such as efforts to 201 

undermine the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid. Metzl (2019), for example, argued that “the 

policies at the core of the Trump agenda function similarly to [hu]man-made risk factors like 

second-hand smoke, pollution, or asbestos—shortening lifespans for the most vulnerable persons 

in his base” (para. 4). Despite President Trump’s implementation of policies that actively worsen 

his supporters’ quality of life, his supporters have remained loyal (Page, Behrmann, & Santucci, 

2019). What explains this seeming contradiction? 

The answer to this puzzle is that voters conceive their “interests” to encompass more than 

just policy positions: “even the most informed voters” tend to select candidates “not on the basis 

of policy preferences or ideology, but on the basis of who they are—their social identities” 

(Achen & Bartels, 2016, p. 4). Voters are not irrational, but rather make sense of politics using a 

form of narrative rationality where the values and emotions activated by a candidate are weighed 

alongside policy and ideology (Fisher, 1985). In searching for a candidate to support, policy is 

only one factor among many that voters consider when determining if an alignment of interests, 

or a sense of consubstantiality, exists with regards to a candidate. Once a voter develops an 

affective bond with a candidate, the salience of policy positions is lowered. Political science 

research has shown that “in elections all across the world, voters tend to pick a candidate or party 

first — and then adopt the ideological positions that rationalize their choice” (Levitz, 2017, para. 

34). That voters first and foremost look for a candidate they can identify with, with policy as a 

secondary concern if it is a concern at all, helps explain the puzzling behavior of individuals who 

voted for Obama in 2012 and Trump in 2016. 

This project is valuable because it helps explain how such sturdy bonds between 

candidate and supporter are formed in the first place. The analysis of Trump rallies conducted 

here not only reveals the limits of rational argument: it illustrates that emotionally powerful 202 

narratives, when linked to audience values, may resonate even when these narratives are false, 

especially in age of polarization and partisan echo chambers. Trump’s narratives speak to the 

anxieties of his core constituents. Although the United States has not experienced an 

immigration-fueled crime wave and undocumented immigration and trade deals such as NAFTA 

are not primarily responsible for the economic struggles that Trump describes, these narratives 

nonetheless resonate for Trump supporters because of the functions they perform—scapegoating, 

blame absolution, and sense-making—and the values and emotions they activate, such as fear, 

anger, resentment, patriotism, and nostalgia. Through communal rituals, Trump rallies also 

activate positive emotions and values—joy, friendship, and community—that further bind 

supporters to Trump. The activation of these emotions and values is what motivates many people 

to vote in a way that seemingly betrays their material self-interests. 

Explaining and Countering Authoritarian Populism 

While conducting rhetorical fieldwork at Trump rallies, I was puzzled by a basic tension 

in how Trump and his supporters described the world. On the one hand, the rallies often had a 

triumphal atmosphere, and served as an opportunity for Trump supporters to celebrate that their 

movement had, in defiance of expert prognostications, successfully elevated the unlikeliest of 

candidates to the highest office in the land. Years after the 2016 election, the rallies still felt like 

an extended victory lap commemorating Trump’s improbable win. Donald Trump Jr., for 

example, fired up the crowd in Grand Rapids by asking: “are you guys sick of winning yet?” 

(“Rally in Grand Rapids,” 2019). 

Yet, despite all the winning allegedly underway, the rallies also had melancholic 

undertones. At times, Trump supporters seemed like sore winners. Despite the Republican 

Party’s control of the Presidency, the Senate, a majority of governorships, and successful efforts 203 

to reshape the federal judiciary for a generation, Trump supporters still felt as though they were 

losing. Trump supporters described themselves as marginalized by society and the media, 

expressing fear that public knowledge of one’s status as a Trump supporter could carry negative 

consequences and sharing stories about family members they had alienated by supporting 

Trump. Supporters worried that an ascendant generation of young, liberal voters could alter the 

nation for the worse and expressed bitterness at (what they perceived as) the growing 

politicization of popular culture and sports, longing for a time when celebrities and athletes were 

not uniformly on the opposite side of the culture wars as them. Unassimilable immigrants, and 

their potential to become a reliable Democratic voting bloc and dilute the voting power of 

current citizens, were another source of anxiety. At each rally, Trump and his surrogates painted 

a dismal picture where Trump was the only buffer standing between innocent Americans and a 

resurgent, godless, oppressive liberalism. Despite the Republican Party being near the zenith of 

its power, these Trump supporters still felt they were losing their country. 

This sense of impending loss, stoked by fears of rapid cultural and economic change, has 

been capitalized upon by opportunistic populists across the globe. Prime Minister Narendra Modi 

of India, for example, has stoked fears about India’s growing Muslim population to activate a 

sense of anxiety for his Hindu supporters (Filkins, 2019). Similarly, many citizens of the United 

Kingdom who voted in favor of the country exiting the European Union were motivated by 

“nostalgic nationalism” and longed for a return to Britain as it was in the twentieth century 

(Campanella & Dassù, 2019, p. 109). Elsewhere in Europe, Viktor Orbán rose to prominence by 

“galvanizing his base via a ruthless deployment of identity politics rooted in nostalgia for 

Hungary’s lost glory” (Schwartzburg & Szijarto, 2019, para. 32). A similar theme has emerged 

in the rhetoric of Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, who presents the era of military dictatorship in Brazil 204 

as a lost golden age of stability and order (Tharoor, 2019). In a variety of contexts, right-wing 

politicians have exploited fear of change to support their agenda. This is an alarming 

development: 

When the forces of authoritarian populism rise to power, it is widely feared that they are 

likely to close borders to refugee families fleeing conflict zones, to erode alliances and 

multilateral cooperation . . . to embolden bigots and extremist hate groups in society, to 

corrode social trust and ethnic tolerance, and to replace pluralistic give-and-take in 

politics with the divisive and polarized politics of animosity, hatred, and fear. (Norris & 

Inglehart, 2019, p. 23) 

How then should opposition groups counter reactionary populist leaders? Rhetorical critics are 

“responsible for providing alternative constructive rhetorics that can be used to at least try to 

counter some of the effects of these pernicious mythic structures” (Hasian, 1997, p. 207). This 

dissertation suggests avenues for counterarguments that may be fruitful. 

One promising strategy for countering authoritarian populism is to sever the perceived 

sense of consubstantiality between the demagogic populist leader and “the people.” Trump, like 

other populists around the world, portrays himself as a bulwark protecting ordinary people from 

the dangerous forces of globalism. According to this narrative, Trump is the living embodiment 

of the will of the people and is aligned totally with their interests. Given that many Trump voters 

actively embrace Trump’s crude language and braggadocios behavior, viewing it as a sign of his 

authenticity as an outsider, there are limits to the Clinton campaign’s strategy of criticizing 

Trump’s unconventional style and personality (Stein, 2017). 

Although the Clinton campaign’s frequent attacks on Trump’s temperament and vulgarity 

were ineffective, focus group research suggests that undermining his populist credentials may be 205 

more powerful (Foer, 2017). Rather than attacking authoritarian populists as rude or offensive, 

opponents might find more success by arguing that the populism of these figures is hollow. This 

could be accomplished by highlighting biographical details that contradict the notion of a shared 

identity between the supposed populist and their supporters, or by arguing that their policy 

agenda serves the needs of rich elites. In the Trump era, it is common for liberals to argue that 

the Republican Party has betrayed its core principles, by allowing Trump to strong-arm the Party 

into adopting his preferred stances on free trade, immigration, foreign policy, and other issues. A 

more compelling line of argument would be to highlight the ways that Trump has capitulated to 

the Republican Party on the stated principles of his first campaign. 

Candidate Trump, after all, distinguished himself from his rivals in the Republican 

primary by declaring “we’re going to take care of people who are dying on the street” (Kamisar, 

2016, para. 7) and promising to protect Social Security and Medicare while providing health 

insurance coverage to all (Becker, 2016). As President, Trump betrayed these pledges by 

allowing conventional Republicans such as Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell to dictate his 

domestic agenda, resulting in healthcare policies that worsened, rather than expanded, access to 

care (Pradhan, 2019). Opponents should cast authoritarian populists as tools of elites rather than 

heroes of the working class, undermining a crucial element of their narrative. The aim would be 

to use policy-based arguments to invoke an emotional reaction through a narrative that makes 

plain the chasm between the authoritarian populist’s values and the values of their voters. The 

potential power of this strategy is evidenced by the fact that Trump’s approval ratings hit their 

nadir as the public and media scrutinized Republican proposals on healthcare and tax cuts during 

late 2017 (Yglesias, 2020). 206 

Opponents of authoritarian populism should also emphasize shared values as a means of 

dampening cultural anxieties. During his presidential campaigns, Obama activated a diverse 

coalition in part because he minimized racial tensions by explaining “feelings of anger present in 

both the black and white communities” as stemming from “the larger failure of the nation to 

make the American Dream available to all” (Rowland & Jones, 2011, p. 146). Countering 

movements that appeal to fear of change will to some degree require opponents to reassure 

racially and economically anxious parts of the public that these changes need not threaten their 

livelihoods or that the worrying consequences of such changes can be addressed without 

regressive and xenophobic policies. This is not a simple task. In the United States, the 

conservative media apparatus complicates efforts to advance such a message. In other places 

where authoritarian populism has arisen abroad, weak or non-existent press and speech freedoms 

are another obstacle. The messenger matters as well; these themes may not resonate if articulated 

by a divisive or uninspiring standard-bearer. Regardless, opponents of authoritarian populism 

must challenge the narrative advanced by reactionary movements and insist on a more inclusive 

interpretation of “the people.” 

Benefits of Rhetorical Fieldwork 

At the rally I attended in Minneapolis, I witnessed an exchange that encapsulated the 

bitterness of American politics. In the hours leading up to the rally, Trump supporters and 

protestors were physically separated for their own safety. The Trump supporters and I waited in a 

long skywalk tunnel that connected a parking garage and the Target Center, where Trump was 

scheduled to speak. Within the skywalk, Trump supporters were confined by caution tape so that 

police and security personnel could easily walk through the hall. The arrangement resembled an 207 

online enclave brought to life, where political homogeneity is mandatory and alternative 

perspectives are excluded. 

After hours of waiting in line, we eventually reached a stretch of the skywalk consisting 

of large glass windows overlooking the city streets below us. Predictably, the presence of 

hundreds of Trump supporters in this transparent glass skybridge did not go unnoticed by 

passersby below. Eventually, two protestors carrying “Impeach Trump” signs and a balloon 

depicting Trump as an orange baby in a diaper stopped to wave their signs at Trump supporters. 

One Trump supporter standing nearby me reacted by yelling at the protestors and pressing a shirt 

he purchased earlier that day against the glass. The shirt bore the caption “IMPEACH THIS” and 

featured a picture of the electoral map from Trump’s 2016 victory, showing large swathes of red 

in the heart of the country with tiny blue areas bunched together on the coasts and several cities. 

This moment struck me as an apt illustration of the nation’s basic predicament: two parties, both 

convinced of their righteousness and exchanging angry insults while physically separated by a 

glass barrier. In such a context, communication is all but futile. 

My rhetorical fieldwork, and the Trump era in general, has taken place against a 

backdrop of “cultural fragmentation” and “political polarization” (Serazio, 2019, p. 4). In the 

past half century, “the Democratic and Republican coalitions have sorted by ideology, race, 

religion, geography and psychology” (Klein, 2020, para. 5). As a result, Republicans and 

Democrats increasingly operate according to disparate facts and understandings about the nation. 

This trend toward polarization and fragmentation is in part due to the divergent information 

streams of Democrats and Republicans (Justice & Bricker, 2019). Geography also plays a role: 

Democrats and Republicans now “live in different worlds,” both figuratively and literally (Zitner 

& Chinni, 2019). The clustering of Democrats in urban and suburban areas while Republicans 208 

dominate in “working-class and rural districts” has made the “urban-rural divide” a “defining 

feature of politics” (paras. 1-6). This geographic and cultural distance manifests itself in 

heightened negative partisanship. Pew Research Center (2016) polling has shown that “sizable 

shares of both Democrats and Republicans say the other party stirs feelings of not just 

frustration, but fear and anger” (“Partisanship and Political Animosity,” para. 2). 

Polarization not only alienates citizens from one another; left unchecked, widening 

partisan divides tear at the fabric of democracy itself. Extreme polarization encourages rival 

political factions to “perceive the ‘Other’ in such negative terms that a normal political adversary 

with whom to engage in a competition for power is transformed into an enemy to be vanquished” 

(McCoy, Rahman, & Somer, 2018, p. 19). These dynamics hinder effective governance, fueling 

chronic gridlock as “communication and trust break down” and ruling parties seek “to overturn 

the predecessor’s policies at every chance” (p. 19). In the long term, “perceptions of the out-

party as a threat to the nation” may “lead to violation of democratic norms” and weaken the 

constitutional foundations of the nation itself (p. 25). For democracy to flourish, citizens must 

adopt a “comic” (rather than “tragic”) frame that depicts political opponents “not as vicious , but 

as mistaken ” (Burke, 1959, p. 41). 

What can be done to mitigate polarization? There are no simple solutions, as polarization 

is a complex process driven by changing patterns of media consumption, demographics, 

geography, institutional design, and psychology (Hibbing, Smith, & Alford, 2014). Nonetheless, 

a rhetorical fieldwork approach may help reduce polarization, if only slightly, by making 

Americans seem less foreign to each other. To the extent that this project provides a more 

nuanced account of Trump supporters than the usual stereotypes seen in media coverage, or 

helps readers better understand the motivations of Trump supporters, the cause of de-polarization 209 

will be bolstered. Of course, greater outreach cannot by itself alleviate polarization. Vulnerable 

populations should not be expected to reach out to political adversaries who demean them, and 

efforts by academics to step outside of their political comfort zones may not amount to much if 

individuals on both sides of the partisan divide do not also muster the courage to venture beyond 

the comfortable confines of their “bubbles” (Thornton, 2016). Reducing polarization will also 

require political leaders who emphasize common values rather than constantly highlighting 

division. 

Yet, confronting polarization—and all its attendant risks for the future of democracy— 

requires individuals to undertake good faith efforts to understand opposing viewpoints. 

Institutional and political solutions to polarization deserve thorough examination and debate, but, 

at a fundamental level, citizens must take the initiative to reach across partisan divides in their 

everyday lives for the sake of the nation’s civic health. Social-psychological research 

demonstrates that increased contact between different groups can dampen prejudice and conflict 

(Allport, 1954). Communication scholars have provided further support for this theory, showing 

that “the tools developed in intergroup communication can be adapted to political 

communication as interventions to improve the health of our democratic culture” (Warner & 

Villamil, 2017, p. 461). Outreach efforts that involve “being exposed to ‘the other side’ of an 

argument, or to members of an out-group, can be invaluable” (Bond, Shulman, & Gilbert, 2018, 

p. 4334), because intergroup contact “not only . . . leads to improvements in how we treat each 

other, it also nourishes attitudes that are vital for the survival of a robust democratic culture” 

(Warner & Villamil, 2017, p. 461). Absent such exposure to opposing viewpoints, “people 

remain ignorant of others’ beliefs and experiences, and instead rely on false, stereotypic, or 210 

logically flawed perceptions of the other point of view” (Bond, Shulman, & Gilbert, 2018, p. 

4334). 

Fieldwork methodologies not only allow unique insights into how ordinary Americans 

practice politics; they offer an opportunity to listen to those who we disagree with, which is 

necessary for the survival of democracy. Making an effort to leave one’s bubble and encounter 

opposing viewpoints is an intrinsic good, “since it is always good to better appreciate those with 

whom we are sharing the planet” (Hibbing et al., 2014, p. 252). Rhetorical fieldwork, along with 

broader efforts on the part of Americans to understand each other, can help chip away at 

polarization by encouraging “openness to the life experiences of others” (Tracy, 2013, p. 233). 

Fieldwork methodologies that attend to emotional, “sensory embodied experiences” are 

particularly valuable for “learning about other people’s worlds” and “understanding other 

people’s experiences, values, identities and ways of life” (Pink, 2015, pp. 25-26, p. 53). The 

openness towards alternative perspectives that is inculcated by rhetorical fieldwork can “generate 

politically transformative experiences out of ordinary interactions among strangers” (Allen, 

2004, p. 171). In 1858, a Republican from Illinois warned that “a house divided against itself 

cannot stand.” More than a century later, the nation once again confronts a period of great 

division. Rhetorical fieldwork, although incapable of fully healing such divides, can if nothing 

else build understanding about the nature of these divides. 211 

References: Chapter I, Introduction 

Agnew, J., & Shin, M. (2019). Mapping populism: Taking politics to the people . Lanham, MD: 

Rowman & Littlefield. 

Allott, D., & Allott, J. (2018). The enduring power of a Trump rally. Washington Examiner .

Retrieved from https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/the-enduring-power-of-a-

trump-rally 

Appel, E. C. (2018). Burlesque, tragedy, and a (potentially) “yuuuge” “breaking of a frame”: 

Donald Trump’s rhetoric as “early warning”? Communication Quarterly , 66 (2), 157-175. 

doi: 10.1080/01463373.2018.1439515 

Atkins, D. (2017). It was prejudice. It was economics. It was both. The American Prospect .

Retrieved from https://prospect.org/article/it-was-prejudice-it-was-economics-it-was-both 

Baldassarri, D., & Goldberg, A. (2014). Neither ideologues nor agnostics: Alternative voters’ 

belief system in an age of partisan politics. American Journal of Sociology , 120 (1), 45-

95. 

Ball, M. (2015). The ecstasy of Donald Trump. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/11/the-ecstasy-of-donald-

trump/417870/ 

Bender, M. C. (2019, October 22). Trump’s rallies aren’t a sideshow. They are the campaign. 

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/trumps-rallies-

arent-just-part-of-his-campaign-they-are-the-campaign-

11571753199?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=1 

Boot, M. (2019). A look back on two dismal years of the Trump administration. The Washington 

Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/a-look-back-on-two-212 

dismal-years-of-the-trump-administration/2019/01/19/c1878508-1b4b-11e9-9ebf-

c5fed1b7a081_story.html?utm_term=.d564ae2e5ed2 

Bostdorff, D. M. (2017). Obama, Trump, and reflections on the rhetoric of political change. 

Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 20 (4), 695–706. 

Burke, K. (1945). A grammar of motives . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 

Burke, K. (1957). The rhetoric of Hitler’s “battle.” In The philosophy of literary form: Studies in 

symbolic action (pp. 164-189). New York, NY: Vintage Books. 

Burke, K. (1969). A rhetoric of motives . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 

Burke, K. (1973). The philosophy of literary form . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 

Casselman, B. (2017). Stop saying Trump’s win had nothing to do with economics. 

FiveThirtyEight . Retrieved from https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/stop-saying-trumps-

win-had-nothing-to-do-with-economics/ 

CBS News. (2016). Hillary Clinton says half of Trump's supporters are in a "basket of 

deplorables" [Video file]. Youtube . Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PCHJVE9trSM 

Chaput, C. (2018). Trumponomics, neoliberal branding, and the rhetorical circulation of affect. 

Advances in the History of Rhetoric , 21 (2), 194-209. doi: 

10.1080/15362426.2018.1474051 

Childers, J. P. (2013). The democratic balance: President McKinley's assassination as domestic 

trauma. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 99 (2), 156-179. doi: 

10.1080/00335630.2013.775701 213 

Chinn, S., & Entin, J. (2018). Introduction: Teaching and resistance in the time of Trumpism. 

Radical Teacher , 111 , 1-5. Retrieved from 

http://radicalteacher.library.pitt.edu/ojs/index.php/radicalteacher/article/viewFile/530/328 

Coaston, J. (2019). The problem with primarying Trump. Vox . Retrieved from 

https://www.vox.com/2019/8/27/20833259/walsh-weld-sanford-trump-primary-gop 

Cohn, N., & Parlapiano, A. (2018). How broad, and how happy, is the Trump coalition? The New 

York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/08/09/upshot/trump-voters-how-theyve-

changed.html 

Colvin, J. (2018). Trump has held more than 2 dozen rallies as he kicks into high gear ahead of 

the high-stakes midterms. Business Insider . Retrieved from 

https://www.businessinsider.com/trump-rallies-increase-ahead-of-midterms-2018-10 

Cook, R. (2017). Presidential primaries: A hit at the ballot box. In L. Sabato, K. Kondik, & G. 

Skelley (Eds.) Trumped: The 2016 election that broke all the rules (pp. 83-96). Lanham, 

MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 

Crowson, H. M., & Brandes, J. A. (2017). Differentiating between Donald Trump and Hillary 

Clinton voters using facets of right-wing authoritarianism and social-dominance 

orientation: A brief report. Psychological Reports , 120 (3), 364–373. 

Cox, M. (2017). The rise of populism and the crisis of globalisation: Brexit, Trump and beyond. 

Irish Studies in International Affairs , 28 , 9-17. 

Douthat, R. (2018). A defeat for white identity. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/10/opinion/sunday/racism-economics-trump-

midterms.html 214 

Endres, D., Hess, A., Senda-Cook, S., & Middleton, M. K. (2016). In Situ rhetoric: Intersections 

between qualitative inquiry, fieldwork, and rhetoric. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical 

Methodologies , 16 (6), 511–524. 

Farber, D. (2016). American conservatism: Fear and anger in the making of the modern 

Republican Party, Insitut für Demokratieforschung, University of Gottingen, Gottingen, 

Germany [Video file]. Youtube . Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HB0Hdq8qc3E 

Fording, R. C., & Schram, S. F. (2017). The cognitive and emotional sources of Trump support: 

The case of low-information voters. New Political Science , 39 , 670-686. doi: 

10.1080/07393148.2017.1378295 

Friedman, U. (2017). Why Trump is thriving in an age of distrust. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2017/01/trump-edelman-trust-

crisis/513350/ 

Friedman, U. (2018). Trust is collapsing in America. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2018/01/trust-trump-america-

world/550964/ 

Gass, N. (2015). Poll: Half of millennials say the American dream is dead. POLITICO . Retrieved 

from https://www.politico.com/story/2015/12/poll-millennials-american-dream-216632 

Glasser, S. B. (2018, October 12). I listened to all six Trump rallies in October. You should, too. 

The New Yorker . Retrieved from https://www.newyorker.com/news/letter-from-trumps-

washington/i-listened-to-all-six-trump-rallies-in-october-you-should-too 

Graham, C. (2017). Is the American dream really dead? The Guardian . Retrieved from 

https://www.theguardian.com/inequality/2017/jun/20/is-the-american-dream-really-dead 215 

Greven, T. (2016, May). The rise of right-wing populism in Europe and the United States. 

Friedrich Ebert Stiftung . Retrieved from https://library.fes.de/pdf-files/id/12892.pdf 

Grynbaum, M. M. (2016). Television networks struggle to provide equal airtime in the era of 

Trump. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/31/business/media/television-networks-struggle-to-

provide-equal-airtime-in-the-era-of-trump.html 

Gstalter, M. (2019). #IStandWithIlhan trends after crowd at Trump rally chants 'send her back.' 

The Hill . Retrieved from https://thehill.com/homenews/house/453655-istandwithilhan-

trends-after-crowd-at-trump-rally-chants-send-her-back 

Guilford, G. (2016). Inside the Trump machine: the bizarre psychology of America’s newest 

political movement. Quartz . Retrieved from https://qz.com/645345/inside-the-trump-

machine-the-bizarre-psychology-of-americas-newest-political-movement/ 

Haslam, S. A., & Reicher, S. D. (2012). In search of charisma. Scientific American Mind , 23 (3), 

42-49. 

Hauser, G. A. (2011). Attending the vernacular: A plea for ethnographical rhetoric. In C. Meyer 

& F. Girke (Eds.) The rhetorical emergence of culture (pp. 157-172). New York, NY: 

Berghahn Books. 

Homans, C. (2018). The post-campaign campaign of Donald Trump. The New York Times 

Magazine . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/09/magazine/donald-

trump-rallies-campaigning-president.html 

Hooghe, M., & Dassonneville, R. (2018). Explaining the Trump vote: The effect of racist 

resentment and anti-immigrant sentiments. PS: Political Science & Politics , 51 , 528-534. 216 

Inglehart, R. F., & Norris, P. (2016). Trump, Brexit, and the rise of populism: Economic have-

nots and cultural backlash. Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Research Working Paper 

Series . Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2818659 

Jacobs, T. (2018). Inside the minds of hardcore Trump supporters. Pacific Standard Magazine .

Retrieved from https://psmag.com/news/inside-the-minds-of-hardcore-trump-supporters 

Jamieson, K. H., & Cappella, J. N. (2008). Echo chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the conservative 

media establishment . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Jasper, S., & Murphy, B. (2019). ‘Ashamed’ or ‘proud’? NC trends on Twitter after Trump rally, 

setting off fiery debate. The News & Observer . Retrieved from 

https://www.newsobserver.com/news/politics-government/article232830367.html 

Johnson, P. E. (2017). The art of masculine victimhood: Donald Trump’s demagoguery. 

Women’s Studies in Communication , 40 (3), 229–250. 

Justice, J. W. (2018). From communist nightmare to American dream: Hybrid rhetoric in Senator 

Marco Rubio’s 2016 tribute to José Fernández. Southern Communication Journal , 83 (1), 

28-40. doi: 10.1080/1041794X.2017.1398778 

Justice J., & Bricker, B. (2019). Hacked: Defining the 2016 presidential election in the liberal 

media. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 22 (3), 389-420. 

Kellner, D. (2016). American nightmare: Donald Trump, media spectacle, and authoritarian 

populism . Rotterdam, the Netherlands: Sense Publishers. 

Kelly, C. R. (2020). Donald J. Trump and the rhetoric of ressentiment . Quarterly Journal of 

Speech , 106 , 2-24. 217 

Kolko, J. (2016). Trump was stronger where the economy is weaker. FiveThirtyEight . Retrieved 

from https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/trump-was-stronger-where-the-economy-is-

weaker/ 

Kruse, M. & Gee, T. (2016). The 37 fatal gaffes that didn’t kill Donald Trump. Politico .

Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/09/trump-biggest-fatal-

gaffes-mistakes-offensive-214289 

Lauter, D. (2016). Even elite campaign aides still aren't sure why Donald Trump succeeded. Los 

Angeles Times . Retrieved from http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-campaign-

aides-harvard-20161202-story.html 

Lee, M. J. (2017). Considering political identity: Conservatives, Republicans, and Donald 

Trump. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 20 (4), 719–730. 

Lemon, D. (2018). Lemon: Trump's rallies not the reality. CNN . Retrieved from 

https://www.cnn.com/videos/politics/2018/10/19/donald-trump-rally-vs-reality-dons-

take-monologue-ctn-vpx.cnn. 

Malcolm, A. (2018). Inside the mystery of Donald Trump’s stubbornly loyal political base. 

Miami Herald . Retrieved from https://www.miamiherald.com/article221164105.html 

Matsa, K. E., Mitchell, A., Gottfried, J., & Kiley, J. (2014). Political polarization & media habits. 

Pew Research Center . Retrieved from https://www.journalism.org/2014/10/21/political-

polarization-media-habits/ 

Matthews, D. (2016). 3 winners and 2 losers from Thursday night's Fox News Republican 

debate. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/3/4/11159644/winners-losers-

fox-news-debate-detroit 218 

Mayer, J. (2019). The making of the Fox News White House. The New Yorker . Retrieved from 

https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/03/11/the-making-of-the-fox-news-white-

house 

McRainey, M. (2018). Political polarization paved way for Trump, will continue into 2020 race. 

Emory News Center . Retrieved from 

https://news.emory.edu/stories/2018/06/er_abramowitz_great_alignment/campus.html 

Monnat, S., & Brown, D. L. (2017). How despair helped drive Trump to victory. Institute for 

New Economic Thinking . Retrieved from 

https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/how-despair-helped-drive-trump-

victory 

Morris III, C. E. (2007). Introduction: Portrait of a queer rhetorical/historical critic. In C. E. 

Morris III (Ed.) Queering public address (pp. 1-17). Columbia, SC: University of South 

Carolina Press. 

Morris, E. K. (2019). Inversion, paradox, and liberal disintegration: Towards a conceptual 

framework of Trumpism. New Political Science , 41 (1), 17-35, DOI: 

10.1080/07393148.2018.1558037 

The Norman Lear Center at the USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism. 

(2017). With news under fire, 2017 Walter Cronkite awards for excellence in tv political 

journalism celebrate legitimacy, urgency of quality reporting. PR Newswire . Retrieved 

from https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/with-news-under-fire-2017-walter-

cronkite-awards-for-excellence-in-tv-political-journalism-celebrate-legitimacy-urgency-

of-quality-reporting-300422107.html 219 

Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2019). Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit, and authoritarian 

populism . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Okeowo, A. (2016). Hate on the rise after Trump’s election. The New Yorker . Retrieved from 

https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/hate-on-the-rise-after-trumps-election 

Oliver, J. E., & Rahn, W. M. (2016). Rise of the Trumpenvolk: Populism in the 2016 Election. 

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , 667 , 189-206. 

Ott, B. L. (2017). The age of Twitter: Donald J. Trump and the politics of debasement. Critical 

Studies in Media Communication , 34 , 59-68. doi: 10.1080/15295036.2016.1266686 

Ott, B. L., & Dickinson, G. (2019). The twitter presidency: Donald J. Trump and the politics of 

white rage . New York, NY: Routledge. 

Palmeri, T. (2018, August 5). At Trump rallies, an uneasy mix of hate, friendliness toward the 

media: Reporter's notebook. ABC News . Retrieved from 

https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/trump-rallies-uneasy-mix-hate-friendliness-media-

reporters/story?id=57042236 

Peters, J. W. (2018). As critics assail Trump, his supporters dig in deeper. The New York Times .

Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/23/us/politics/republican-voters-

trump.html 

Pettigrew, T. F. (2017). Social psychological perspectives on Trump supporters. Journal of 

Social and Political Psychology , 5(1), 107–116. 

Pink, S. (2015). Doing sensory ethnography (2 nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 

Pilkington, E. (2018). Feel the love, feel the hate – my week in the cauldron of Trump's wild 

rallies. The Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-

news/2018/nov/01/trump-rallies-america-midterms-white-house 220 

Reicher, S. & Haslam, S. A. (2017a). The politics of hope: Donald Trump as an entrepreneur of 

identity. In M. Fitzduff (Ed.) Why irrational politics appeals: Understanding the allure of 

Trump (pp. 25-40). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Reicher, S. D. & Haslam, S. A. (2017b). Trump’s appeal: What psychology tells us. Scientific 

American . Retrieved from https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/trump-rsquo-s-

appeal-what-psychology-tells-us/ 

Richardson, M. (2017). The disgust of Donald Trump. Continuum , 31 , 747-756. doi: 

10.1080/10304312.2017.1370077 

Roberts, D. (2016). Everything mattered: lessons from 2016's bizarre presidential election. Vox .

Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-

politics/2016/11/30/13631532/everything-mattered-2016-presidential-election 

Rowland, R. C. (1991). On generic categorization. Communication Theory , 1(2), 128-144. 

Rowland, R. C. (2019). The populist and nationalist roots of Trump’s rhetoric. Rhetoric & Public 

Affairs , 22 (3), 343-388. 

Rowland, R. C., & Frank, D. A. (2002). Shared land/conflicting identity: Trajectories of Israeli 

and Palestinian symbol use . East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press. 

Rubin, J. (2018). Trump’s Tampa circus proves you can’t reason with his base. The Washington 

Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/right-

turn/wp/2018/08/01/trumps-tampa-circus-proves-you-cant-reason-with-his-base/ 

“The role of technology in the presidential election.” (2016). The Economist . Retrieved from 

https://www.economist.com/united-states/2016/11/20/the-role-of-technology-in-the-

presidential-election 221 

Saunders, G. (2016). Who are all these Trump supporters? The New Yorker . Retrieved from 

https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/11/george-saunders-goes-to-trump-rallies 

Schaffner, B. F., Macwilliams, M., & Nteta, T. (2018). Understanding white polarization in the 

2016 vote for president: The sobering role of racism and sexism. Political Science 

Quarterly , 133 , 9-34. 

Schumacher, A. (2018). Observations from a Trump rally. Medium . Retrieved from 

https://medium.com/@schumaal/observations-from-a-trump-rally-e8712d4ee602 

Serazio, M. (2019). The power of sports: Media and spectacle in American culture . New York, 

NY: New York University Press. 

Sherman, G. (2016). Why Rupert Murdoch decided to back Donald Trump. New York Magazine 

Intelligencer . Retrieved from http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2016/05/why-rupert-

murdoch-decided-to-support-trump.html 

Silver, N. (2015). Donald Trump won’t win a war against Fox News. FiveThirtyEight . Retrieved 

from https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/donald-trump-wont-win-a-war-against-fox-

news/ 

Silver, N. (2017). Clinton’s ground game didn’t cost her the election. FiveThirtyEight . Retrieved 

from https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/clintons-ground-game-didnt-cost-her-the-

election/ 

Smith, D. N., & Hanley, E. (2018). The anger games: Who voted for Donald Trump in the 2016 

election, and why? Critical Sociology , 44 , 195-212. 

Stelter, B. (2018, October 28). Inside a Trump rally: Stelter's view from the press pen. CNN .

Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2018/10/28/media/trump-rally-stelter-

essay/index.html 222 

Stiehm, J. (2016). A yuuuge media failure. U.S. News . Retrieved from 

https://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/jamie-stiehm/articles/2016-03-14/the-media-

failed-at-covering-donald-trump 

Stone, R. (2017). The making of the President 2016: How Donald Trump orchestrated a 

revolution . New York, NY: Skyhorse Publishing. 

Struyk, R. (2017). 6 in 10 people who approve of Trump say they'll never, ever, ever stop 

approving. CNN . Retrieved from http://www.cnn.com/2017/08/17/politics/trump-

approvers-never-stop-approving-poll/index.html 

Stuckey, M. E. (2017). American elections and the rhetoric of political change: Hyperbole, 

anger, and hope in U.S. politics. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 20 (4), 667–694. 

Terrill, R. E. (2017). The post-racial and post-ethical discourse of Donald J. Trump. Rhetoric & 

Public Affairs , 20 (3), 493–510. 

Theye, K., & Melling, S. (2018). Total losers and bad hombres: The political incorrectness and 

perceived authenticity of Donald J. Trump. Southern Communication Journal , 83 (5), 

322-337. doi: 10.1080/1041794X.2018.1511747 

Tracy, S. J. (2013). Qualitative research methods . Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 

Tur, K. (2017). Unbelievable: My front-row seat to the craziest campaign in American history .

New York, NY: HarperCollins. 

Uberti, D. (2017). Drive-by journalism in Trumplandia. Colombia Journalism Review . Retrieved 

from https://www.cjr.org/united_states_project/trump-voters-media-coverage.php 

Vigil, T. R. (2015). Connecting with constituents: Identification building and blocking in 

contemporary national convention addresses . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 223 

Vogel, K. P. (2018). Midterms aside, big donors see a leftward path to beating Trump. The New 

York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/17/us/politics/democratic-

donors-2020.html 

Wagner, A. (2018). The church of Trump. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2018/08/the-church-of-trump/567425/ 

Wahl-Jorgensen, K. (2018). Media coverage of shifting emotional regimes: Donald Trump’s 

angry populism. Media, Culture & Society , 40 (5), 766–778. 

Waldman, P. (2018). Why Democrats can’t win the ‘respect’ of Trump voters. The Washington 

Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/plum-

line/wp/2018/05/15/why-democrats-cant-win-the-respect-of-trump-

voters/?utm_term=.d65f74f1addd 

Younge, G. (2018). Trump’s base may not like him, but they’re not about to ditch him. The 

Guardian . Retrieved from 

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/aug/24/donald-trump-voters-

impeachment-legal 

Zarefsky, D. (2010). Public address scholarship in the new century: Achievements and 

challenges. In S. J. Parry-Giles & J. M. Hogan (Eds.) The handbook of rhetoric and 

public address (pp. 67-85). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Zürn, M. (2018). How the taming of the class conflict produced authoritarian populism. Items: 

Insights from the Social Sciences . Retrieved from https://items.ssrc.org/democracy-

papers/how-the-taming-of-the-class-conflict-produced-authoritarian-populism/ 224 

References: Chapter II, Methodology 

Aristotle. (2010). Rhetoric (W. R. Roberts, Trans., W. D. Ross, Ed.). New York, NY: Cosmo 

Classics. 

Bandak, A., & Janeja, M. K. (2018). Introduction: Worth the wait. In M. K. Janeja & A. Bandak 

(Eds.) Ethnographies of waiting: Doubt, hope and uncertainty (pp. 1-39). New York, NY: 

Bloomsbury. 

Blair, C. (2001). Reflections on criticism and bodies: Parables from public places. Western 

Journal of Communication , 65(3), 271-294. 

Burke, K. (1951). Rhetoric—old and new. The Journal of General Education , 5(3), 202-209. 

Burke, K. (1957). The rhetoric of Hitler’s “battle.” In The philosophy of literary form: Studies in 

symbolic action (pp. 164-189). New York, NY: Vintage Books. 

Burke, K. (1966). Language as symbolic action . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 

Burke, K. (1969). A rhetoric of motives . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 

Burke, K. (1973). The rhetorical situation. In L. Thayer (Ed.) Communication: Ethical and moral 

issues (pp. 263-275). New York, NY: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers. 

Chaput, C. (2018). Trumponomics, neoliberal branding, and the rhetorical circulation of affect. 

Advances in the History of Rhetoric , 21 (2), 194-209. doi: 

10.1080/15362426.2018.1474051 

Charland, M. (1987). Constitutive rhetoric: The case of the peuple Québécois. Quarterly Journal 

of Speech , 73 (2), 133-150. 

Cherwitz, R. (2019). What ethnographic research might reveal about the rhetorical significance 

of audiences. Communication Currents . Retrieved from 225 

https://www.natcom.org/communication-currents/what-ethnographic-research-might-

reveal-about-rhetorical-significance 

Cisneros, J. D. (2015). Affect, emotion, and immigration rhetoric, or what happens when a 

minuteman lives with unauthorized immigrants? In E. J. Hartelius (Ed.), The rhetorics of 

US immigration: Identity, community, otherness (pp. 247-274). University Park, PA: The 

Pennsylvania State University Press. 

Cloud, D. L. (2018). Reality bites: Rhetoric and the circulation of truth claims in U.S. political 

culture . Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press. 

Cramer, K. J. (2016). The politics of resentment: Rural consciousness in Wisconsin and the rise 

of Scott Walker . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Denzin, N. K. (1989). Interpretive interactionism . Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

DeVega, C. (2019). Trump the storyteller: His gift for narrative is why he may win again. Salon .

Retrieved from https://www.salon.com/2019/07/13/trump-the-storyteller-his-gift-for-

narrative-is-why-he-may-win-again/ 

Dickinson, G., & Aiello, G. (2016). Being through there matters: Materiality, bodies, and 

movement in urban communication research. International Journal of Communication ,

10 , 1294–1308. 

Dunn, J. C. (2016). Going to work at the Moonlite Bunny Ranch: Potentials of rhetorical and 

ethnographic methods for cultural studies. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical Methodologies ,

16 (6), 525–535. 

Endres, D., Hess, A., Senda-Cook, S., & Middleton, M. K. (2016). In Situ rhetoric: Intersections 

between qualitative inquiry, fieldwork, and rhetoric. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical 

Methodologies , 16 (6), 511–524. 226 

Endres, D., Sprain, L., & Peterson, T. R. (2008). The imperative of praxis-based environmental 

communication research: suggestions from the Step It Up 2007 national research project. 

Environmental Communication , 2(2), 237-245. 

Fay, I. & Kuypers, J.A. (2012). Transcending mysticism and building identification through 

empowerment of the rhetorical agent: John F. Kennedy’s Berlin speeches on June 26, 

1963. Southern Communication Journal , 77 (3), 198–215. 

Fisher, W. R. (1985). The narrative paradigm: An elaboration. Communication Monographs , 52 ,

347–367. doi:10.1080/03637758509376117. 

Fisher, W. R. (1987). Human communication as narration: Toward a philosophy of reason, 

value, and action . Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press. 

Fitzduff, M. (2017). Introduction: All too human: The allure of Donald Trump. In M. Fitzduff 

(Ed.) Why irrational politics appeals: Understanding the allure of Trump (pp. 1-24). 

Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Fording, R. C., & Schram, S. F. (2017). The cognitive and emotional sources of Trump support: 

The case of low-information voters. New Political Science , 39 , 670-686. doi: 

10.1080/07393148.2017.1378295 

Geertz, C. (2000). The interpretation of cultures . New York, NY: Basic Books. (Original work 

published 1973) 

Goehring, C., & Dionisopoulos, G. N. (2013). Identification by antithesis: The Turner Diaries as 

constitutive rhetoric. Southern Communication Journal , 78 (5), 369-386. 

Gould, D. B. (2009). Moving Politics: Emotion and ACT UP’s Fight Against AIDS . Chicago, IL: 

University of Chicago Press. 227 

Greene, R. (2019, August 1). Keynote address . Paper presented at the 2019 NCA/AFA Summer 

Conference on Argumentation, Alta, Utah. 

Guilford, G. (2016). Inside the Trump machine: the bizarre psychology of America’s newest 

political movement. Quartz . Retrieved from https://qz.com/645345/inside-the-trump-

machine-the-bizarre-psychology-of-americas-newest-political-movement/ 

Gupta-Carlson, H. (2016). Re-imagining the nation: Storytelling and social media in the Obama 

campaigns. PS: Political Science & Politics , 49 , 71-75. 

Halper, E. (2019). Iowa voters flock to Joe Biden, but out of practicality, not passion. Los 

Angeles Times . Retrieved from https://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-biden-iowa-

debut-20190501-story.html 

Hammer, S. (2010). The role of narrative in political campaigning: An analysis of speeches by 

Barack Obama. National Identities , 12 , 269-290. 

Hess, A. (2011). Critical-rhetorical ethnography: Rethinking the place and process of rhetoric. 

Communication Studies , 62 , 127–152. 

Jasinski, J. (2001). Sourcebook on rhetoric: Key concepts in contemporary rhetorical studies .

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Jones, J. M., & Rowland, R. C. (2007). Reagan at Moscow State University: Consubstantiality 

underlying conflict. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 10 , 77-106. 

Justice, J. (2019). Fantastic visual argument and the Food and Drug Administration’s The Real 

Cost campaign. Argumentation and Advocacy , 55 , 230-249. doi: 

10.1080/10511431.2019.1608741 

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow . New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, and Girioux. 228 

Landau, J. (2016). Feeling rhetorical critics: Another affective-emotional field method for 

rhetorical studies. In S. L. McKinnon, R. Asen, K. R. Chávez, & R. G. Howard (Eds.) 

Text + field: Innovations in rhetorical method (pp. 72-85). University Park, PA: The 

Pennsylvania State University Press. 

Leff, M. & Utley, E. A. (2004). Instrumental and constitutive rhetoric in Martin Luther King Jr.’s 

“letter from Birmingham jail”. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 7(1), 37-52. 

Lobel, J., & Loewenstein, G. (2005). Emote control: The substitution of symbol for substance in 

foreign policy and international law. Chicago-Kent Law Review , 80 (3), 1045–1090. 

Long-time Democratic pollster takes another look at the Obama-Trump voters of Macomb 

County. (2018). Michigan Radio . Retrieved from 

https://www.michiganradio.org/post/long-time-democratic-pollster-takes-another-look-

obama-trump-voters-macomb-county 

McHendry, G. F. (2016). Thank you for participating in security: Engaging airport security 

checkpoints via participatory critical rhetoric. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical 

Methodologies , 16 (6), 548–559 

Medvedev, S. (2017). Narratives of change and citizen participation in modern political 

campaigning: The origins of the Trump movement. International Journal of Digital 

Television , 8(3), 321–334. 

Middleton, M. K. (2014a). Housing, not handcuffs: homeless misrecognition and “SafeGround 

Sacramento’s” homeless activism. Communication, Culture & Critique , 7, 320–337. 

Middleton, M. K. (2014b). “SafeGround Sacramento” and rhetorics of substantive citizenship. 

Western Journal of Communication , 78 (2), 119-133. 229 

Middleton, M. K., Senda-Cook, S., & Endres, D. (2011). Articulating rhetorical field methods: 

Challenges and tensions. Western Journal of Communication , 75 (4), 386–406. 

Mills, R. E. (2014). The pirate and the sovereign: Negative identification and the constitutive 

rhetoric of the nation-state. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 17 , 105-136. 

Na’puti, T. R. (2019). Archipelagic rhetoric: remapping the Marianas and challenging 

militarization from “A Stirring Place.” Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies ,

16 (1), 4-25. 

Ott, B. L., & Dickinson, G. (2019). The twitter presidency: Donald J. Trump and the politics of 

white rage . New York, NY: Routledge. 

Paliewicz, N. S. (2019). Making sense of the People’s Climate March: Towards an aesthetic 

approach to the rhetoric of social protest. Western Journal of Communication , 83 (1), 94-

112. 

Pezzullo, P. (2007). Toxic tourism: Rhetorics of pollution, travel, and environmental justice. 

Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama. 

Pezzullo, P. C. & de Onís, C. M. (2018). Rethinking rhetorical field methods on a precarious 

planet. Communication Monographs , 85 , 103-122. 

Pilkington, E. (2018). Feel the love, feel the hate – my week in the cauldron of Trump's wild 

rallies. The Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-

news/2018/nov/01/trump-rallies-america-midterms-white-house 

Poirot, K., & Watson, S. E. (2015). Memories of freedom and white resilience: Place, tourism, 

and urban slavery. Rhetoric Society Quarterly , 45 (2), 91-116. 230 

Popper, M. (2017). Leadership and followership: Trump—an adaptive mismatch? In M. Fitzduff 

(Ed.) Why irrational politics appeals: Understanding the allure of Trump (pp. 57-70). 

Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Rai, C., & Druschke, C. G. (2018). On being there: An introduction to studying rhetoric in the 

field. In C. Rai & C. G. Druschke (Eds.), Field rhetoric: Ethnography, ecology, and 

engagement in the places of persuasion (pp. 1–21). Tuscaloosa, AL: University Alabama 

Press. 

Reicher, S. & Haslam, S. A. (2017). The politics of hope: Donald Trump as an entrepreneur of 

identity. In M. Fitzduff (Ed.) Why irrational politics appeals: Understanding the allure of 

Trump (pp. 25-40). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Rowland, R. C. (2019). The populist and nationalist roots of Trump’s rhetoric. Rhetoric & Public 

Affairs , 22 (3), 343-388. 

Rowland, R. C., & Jones, J. M. (2007). Recasting the American Dream and American politics: 

Barack Obama's keynote address to the 2004 Democratic National Convention. Quarterly 

Journal of Speech , 93 , 425-448. 

Rudden, M., & Brandt, S. (2018). Donald Trump as leader: Psychoanalytic perspectives. 

International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies , 15 , 43-51. 

Senda-Cook, S., Hess, A., Middleton, M. K., & Endres, D. (2019). General introduction. In S. 

Senda-Cook, A. Hess, M. K. Middleton, & D. Endres (Eds.) Readings in rhetorical 

fieldwork (pp. 1-4). New York, NY: Routledge. 

Simon, R. (2011). Campaigns get impersonal. Politico . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/story/2011/07/campaigns-get-impersonal-059938 231 

Simpson, P. L. (2007). Copycat , serial murder, and the (de)terministic screen narrative. In David 

Blakesley (Ed.) The terministic screen: Rhetorical perspectives on film (pp. 146-162). 

Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Smith, C. A. (2015). Presidential campaign communication , 2 nd edition. Malden, MA: Polity 

Press. 

Stein, S. R. (2002). The “1984” Macintosh ad: Cinematic icons and constitutive rhetoric in the 

launch of a new machine. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 88 (2), 169-192. 

Stillion Southard, B. A. (2007). Militancy, power, and identity: The Silent Sentinels as women 

fighting for political voice. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 10 (3), 399–418. 

Stromer-Galley, J. (2014). Presidential campaigning in the internet age . Oxford, UK: University 

of Oxford Press. 

Taylor, A. (2016). Barry Goldwater: Insurgent conservatism as constitutive rhetoric. Journal of 

Political Ideologies , 21 , 242–260. 

Tracy, S. J. (2013). Qualitative research methods . Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 

Vigil, T.R. (2015). Connecting with constituents: Identification building and blocking in 

contemporary national convention addresses . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 

Watts, R. B. (2007). Contemporary southern identity: Community through controversy . Jackson, 

MS: University Press of Mississippi. 

Westen, D. (2008). The political brain: The role of emotion in deciding the fate of the nation .

New York, NY: Public Affairs. 

Zagacki, K. S. (2007). Constitutive rhetoric reconsidered: Constitutive paradoxes in G. W. 

Bush's Iraq war speeches. Western Journal of Communication , 71 (4), 272-293. 232 

References: Chapter III, Populist Outsider Persona 

Alberta, T. (2019). Who will betray Trump? Politico . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2019/11/08/trump-impeachment-republicans-

congress-229904 

Allassan, F. (2019). Poll: 62% of Trump supporters say nothing he could do would change 

opinion. Axios . Retrieved from https://www.axios.com/monmouth-poll-trump-approval-

a05b8144-1d1b-4296-a0d4-6ca0390b05ee.html 

Ball, M. (2015). The ecstasy of Donald Trump. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/11/the-ecstasy-of-donald-

trump/417870/ 

Benen, S. (2016). What does it mean to ‘look presidential’? MSNBC . Retrieved from 

http://www.msnbc.com/rachel-maddow-show/what-does-it-mean-look-presidential 

Bonikowski, B. (2016). Three lessons of contemporary populism in Europe and the United 

States. Brown Journal of World Affairs , 23 , 9-24. 

Bonikowski, B., & Gidron, N. (2016). The populist style in American politics: Presidential 

campaign discourse, 1952–1996. Social Forces , 94 (4), 1593–1621. 

Bromwich, J.E. (2017). The wild inauguration of Andrew Jackson, Trump’s populist 

predecessor. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/20/us/politics/donald-trump-andrew-

jackson.html?_r=0 

Buettner, R., & Craig, S. (2019). Decade in the red: Trump tax figures show over $1 billion in 

business losses. The New York Times . Retrieved from 233 

https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/05/07/us/politics/donald-trump-

taxes.html?module=inline 

Burk, R. F. (1981). New perspectives for presidential libraries. Presidential Studies Quarterly ,

11 , 399-410. 

Burke, K. (1966). Language as symbolic action . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 

Burke, K. (1970). The rhetoric of religion: Studies in logology . Berkeley, CA: University of 

California Press. 

Burke, K. (1973). The rhetorical situation. In L. Thayer (Ed.) Communication: Ethical and moral 

issues (pp. 263-275). New York, NY: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers. 

Burns, A. (2019). Warren and Trump speeches lay out competing visions of populism. The New 

York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/17/us/politics/elizabeth-

warren-trump-populism.html 

Campbell, K. K., & Burkholder, T. R. (1997). Critiques of contemporary rhetoric (2 nd ed.). 

Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company. 

Chait, J. (2017). Donald Trump’s race war. New York Magazine . Retrieved from 

http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/04/trump-is-failing-at-policy-but-winning-his-race-

wars.html 

Chait, J. (2018). The GOP is Trump’s personality cult. Could democrats do the same? New York 

Magazine . Retrieved from http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/06/trump-made-the-gop-

a-personal-cult-could-democrats-do-that.html 

CNN. (2016). Trump: I could shoot somebody and not lose voters. Youtube [Video file]. 

Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iTACH1eVIaA 234 

Conroy, M. (2018). Strength, stamina, and sexism in the 2016 presidential race. Politics & 

Gender , 14 , 116-121. 

Cox, M. (2017). The rise of populism and the crisis of globalisation: Brexit, Trump and beyond. 

Irish Studies in International Affairs , 28 , 9-17. 

Donald, D. H. (1996). The outsider from Illinois. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

http://www.nytimes.com/1996/02/12/opinion/the-outsider-from-illinois.html 

Duffy, C. (2015). States’ rights vs. women’s rights: The use of the populist argumentative frame 

in anti-abortion rhetoric. International Journal of Communication , 9, 3494–3501. 

Erlich, H.S. (1977). Populist rhetoric reassessed: A paradox. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 63 ,

140-151. 

Farber, D. (1994). The silent majority and talk about revolution. In. D. Farber (Ed.) The sixties: 

From memory to history (pp. 291-316). Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina 

Press. 

Farley, R. (2011). Trump: U.S. doesn't build bridges anymore. PolitiFact . Retrieved from 

https://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2011/may/03/donald-trump/trump-

said-us-doesnt-build-bridges-anymore/ 

Federal News Service. (2016). Transcript of Donald Trump’s Dec. 30 speech in Hilton Head, 

S.C. The Kansas City Star . Retrieved from https://www.kansascity.com/news/local/news-

columns-blogs/the-buzz/article55604115.html 

Flagg, A. (2018). The myth of the criminal immigrant. The Marshall Project . Retrieved from 

https://www.themarshallproject.org/2018/03/30/the-myth-of-the-criminal-immigrant 235 

Foer, F. (2017). What’s wrong with the Democrats? The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/07/whats-wrong-with-the-

democrats/528696/ 

For most Trump voters, ‘very warm’ feelings for him endured. (2018). Pew Research Center .

Retrieved from http://www.people-press.org/2018/08/09/for-most-trump-voters-very-

warm-feelings-for-him-endured/ 

Frank, J. (2018). Populism isn't the problem. Boston Review . Retrieved from 

http://bostonreview.net/politics/jason-frank-populism-not-the-problem 

Friedman, T. L. (2019). Is America becoming a four-party state? The New York Times . Retrieved 

from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/19/opinion/four-party-america-politics.html 

FULL: President Donald Trump rally in Minneapolis, MN 10/10/19. (2019). Right Side 

Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from https://youtu.be/bfsg0IbTRZU 

Garcia, C. (2016). Mike Pence: 'I'm a Christian, a conservative, and a Republican — in that 

order.' The Week . Retrieved from https://theweek.com/speedreads/637487/mike-pence-

im-christian-conservative-republican--that-order 

Gibson, K. L., & Heyse, A. L. (2010). “The difference between a hockey mom and a pit bull”: 

Sarah Palin's faux maternal persona and performance of hegemonic masculinity at the 

2008 Republican National Convention. Communication Quarterly , 58 , 235-256. 

Goodwyn, L. (1978). The populist moment: A short history of the agrarian revolt in America .

Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Greenfield, J. (2016). Donald Trump’s Caesar moment. Politico . Retrieved from 

http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/07/2016-donald-trump-rnc-convention-

speech-reaction-214086 236 

Guilford, G. (2016). Inside the Trump machine: the bizarre psychology of America’s newest 

political movement. Quartz . Retrieved from https://qz.com/645345/inside-the-trump-

machine-the-bizarre-psychology-of-americas-newest-political-movement/ 

Guo, J. (2015). The real reasons Donald Trump’s so popular — for people totally confused by it. 

The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/12/12/the-four-basic-reasons-that-

explain-why-donald-trump-actually-is-so-popular/?utm_term=.5d4481308c01 

Harrell, J., Ware, B. L., & Linkugel, W. A. (1975). Failure of apology in American politics: 

Nixon on Watergate. Speech Monographs , 42 (4), 245-261. 

Haslam, S. A., & Reicher, S. D. (2012). In search of charisma. Scientific American Mind , 23 (3), 

42-49. 

Haslam, S. A., & Reicher, S. D. (2016). Rethinking the psychology of leadership: from personal 

identity to social identity. Dædalus , 145 , 21-34. 

Healy, G. (2009). The cult of the presidency: America's dangerous devotion to executive power .

Washington, D.C.: CATO Institute. 

Hofstadter, R. (1955). The age of reform . New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf. 

Hogan, J. M., & Williams, G. (2000). Republican charisma and the American Revolution: The 

textual persona of Thomas Paine's Common Sense . Quarterly Journal of Speech , 86 , 1-

18. 

Ifill, G. (1992). The 1992 campaign: The democrats; Touring in midwest, Clinton plays up an 

outsider image. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

http://www.nytimes.com/1992/10/25/us/1992-campaign-democrats-touring-midwest-

clinton-plays-up-outsider-image.html 237 

Inglehart, R. F., & Norris, P. (2016). Trump, Brexit, and the rise of populism: Economic have-

nots and cultural backlash. Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Research Working Paper 

Series . Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2818659 

Jamieson, K. H., & Cappella, J. N. (2008). Echo chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the conservative 

media establishment . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Johnston, R. D. (2007). "The Age of Reform": A defense of Richard Hofstadter fifty years on. 

The Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era , 6, 127-137. 

Jones, J. M., & Rowland, R. C. (2015). Redefining the proper role of government: Ultimate 

definition in Reagan’s first inaugural. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 18 , 691–718. 

Jones, R. P., Jackson, N., Orces, D., Huff, I., Bola, O., & Greenberg, D. (2019). Fractured nation: 

widening partisan polarization and key issues in 2020 presidential elections. Public 

Religion Research Institute . Retrieved from https://www.prri.org/research/fractured-

nation-widening-partisan-polarization-and-key-issues-in-2020-presidential-elections/ 

Justice, J. W. (2018). From communist nightmare to American dream: Hybrid rhetoric in Senator 

Marco Rubio’s 2016 tribute to José Fernández. Southern Communication Journal , 83 (1), 

28-40. doi: 10.1080/1041794X.2017.1398778 

Kamarck, E. (2016). Donald Trump? Meet Barry Goldwater. The Brookings Institution .

Retrieved from https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2016/03/30/donald-trump-meet-

barry-goldwater/ 

Kamarck, E., Podkul, A. R., & Zeppos, N. W. (2018). Trump owns a shrinking Republican party. 

The Brookings Institution . Retrieved from 

https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2018/06/14/trump-owns-a-shrinking-republican-

party/ 238 

Kazin, M. (1995). The populist persuasion: An American history . New York, NY: BasicBooks. 

Kiewe, A. (2019). Andrew Jackson: A rhetorical portrayal of presidential leadership . Knoxville, 

TN: University of Tennessee Press. 

Koch, J. P. (2016). The affective presidency. Wayne State University Dissertations , 1646. 

Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.wayne.edu/oa_dissertations/1646 

Lair, D. J. (2011). Surviving the corporate jungle: The Apprentice as equipment for living in the 

contemporary work world. Western Journal of Communication , 75 , 75-94. 

Lee, M. J. (2006). The populist chameleon: The people's party, Huey Long, George Wallace, and 

the populist argumentative frame. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 92 (4), 355-378. DOI: 

10.1080/00335630601080385 

Live Now: President Trump MAGA rally live in Green Bay, WI 4-27-19. (2019). Right Side 

Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xGcQBt5ZeOc 

Maddux, K. (2013). Fundamentalist fool or populist paragon? William Jennings Bryan and the 

campaign against evolutionary theory. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 16 (3), 489–520. 

Mahaffey, J. D. (2010). Converting Tories to Whigs: Religion and imagined authorship in 

Thomas Paine's Common Sense . Southern Communication Journal , 75 , 488-504. 

Maskovsky, J. (2017). Toward the anthropology of white nationalist postracialism. HAU: 

Journal of Ethnographic Theory , 7(1), 433-440. Retrieved from 

https://www.haujournal.org/index.php/hau/article/view/hau7.1.030/2710 

McDonald, J., Karol, D., & Mason, L. (2019). Many voters think Trump’s a self-made man. 

What happens when you tell them otherwise? Politico . Retrieved from 239 

https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2019/01/17/many-voters-think-trumps-a-self-

made-man-what-happens-when-you-tell-them-otherwise-224019 

Monmouth University Polling Institute. (2017). Trump temperament consequences. Monmouth 

University . Retrieved from https://www.monmouth.edu/polling-

institute/reports/MonmouthPoll_US_081517/ 

Monmouth University Polling Institute. (2019). Partisan opinion on Trump digs in. Monmouth 

University . Retrieved from https://www.monmouth.edu/polling-

institute/reports/monmouthpoll_us_110519/ 

Mudde, C. (2004). The populist zeitgeist. Government and Opposition , 39 (4), 541-563. 

Mudde, C., & Rovira Kaltwasser, C. (2017). Populism: A very short introduction . Oxford, UK: 

Oxford University Press. 

Myers, D. G. (2019). Psychological science meets a gullible post-truth world. In J. P. Forgas & 

R. Baumeister (Eds.) The social psychology of gullibility: Conspiracy theories, fake news 

and irrational beliefs (pp. 77-100). New York, NY: Routledge. 

Nelson, D. (2008). Bad for democracy: How the presidency undermines the power of the people .

Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 

Newport, F., & Saad, L. (2016). Trump support built on outsider status, business experience. 

Gallup . http://news.gallup.com/poll/189773/trump-support-built-outsider-status-business-

experience.aspx 

Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2019). Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit, and authoritarian 

populism . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Oliver, J. E. & Rahn, W. M. (2016). Rise of the Trumpenvolk: Populism in the 2016 Election. 

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , 667 , 189-206. 240 

Parry, K., Cohen, M., Bhattacharya, S., North-Samardzic, A., & Edwards, G. (2019). 

Charismatic leadership: Beyond love and hate and toward a sense of belonging? Journal 

of Management & Organization , 25 , 398–413. 

Parry‐Giles, S. J., & Parry‐Giles, T. (2000). Collective memory, political nostalgia, and the 

rhetorical presidency: Bill Clinton's commemoration of the March on Washington, 

August 28, 1998. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 86 , 417-437. 

Parsons, L. H. (2009). The birth of modern politics: Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, and 

the election of 1828 . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Paybarah, A. (2019). Trump lost over $1 billion. Let us take you back to that decade. The New 

York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/nyregion/newyorktoday/nyc-news-donald-trump-

taxes.html 

Peters, J. W. (2018). As critics assail Trump, his supporters dig in deeper. The New York Times .

Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/23/us/politics/republican-voters-

trump.html 

Reicher, S. & Haslam, S. A. (2017). The politics of hope: Donald Trump as an entrepreneur of 

identity. In M. Fitzduff (Ed.) Why irrational politics appeals: Understanding the allure of 

Trump (pp. 25-40). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Reicher, S. D., Haslam, S. A., & Platow, M. J. (2007). The new psychology of leadership. 

Scientific American Mind , 18 , 22-29. 

The Republican Party is organised around one man. (2018). The Economist . Retrieved from 

https://www.economist.com/leaders/2018/04/19/the-republican-party-is-organised-

around-one-man 241 

Rohler, L. (1999). Conservative appeals to the people: George Wallace's populist rhetoric. 

Southern Communication Journal , 64 (4), 316-322. 

Rowland, R. C. (2019). The populist and nationalist roots of Trump’s rhetoric. Rhetoric & Public 

Affairs , 22 (3), 343-388. 

Rowland, R. C., & Jones, J. M. (2007). Recasting the American Dream and American politics: 

Barack Obama's keynote address to the 2004 Democratic National Convention. Quarterly 

Journal of Speech , 93 , 425-448. 

Serazio, M. (2016). Encoding the paranoid style in American politics: “Anti-establishment” 

discourse and power in contemporary spin. Critical Studies in Media Communication ,

33 (2), 181-194. DOI: 10.1080/15295036.2016.1174338 

Serwer, A. (2019). The Trump infallibility doctrine. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/11/republicans-believe-trump-

infallible/601426/ 

Shear, M. D. (2018, November 4). Trump’s America: Aggrieved and adoring voices from inside 

the presidential bubble. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/04/us/politics/trump-rally-voters.html 

Stuckey, M. E. (2017). American elections and the rhetoric of political change: Hyperbole, 

anger, and hope in U.S. politics. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 20 (4), 667–694. 

Todd, S. (2016). Trump and Pence both think practice is for chumps. Quartz . Retrieved from 

https://qz.com/801309/anti-intellectualism-is-at-the-heart-of-the-trumppence-campaign-

strategy/ 242 

Trump, D. J. (2016a). Full text: Donald Trump 2016 RNC draft speech transcript. Politico .

Retrieved from http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/full-transcript-donald-trump-

nomination-acceptance-speech-at-rnc-225974 

Trump, D. J. (2016b, August 27). Transcript: Donald Trump's full remarks in Des Moines, Iowa. 

Politico . Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/story/2016/08/full-text-trump-227472 

Trump, D. J. (2016c, June 13). Transcript: Donald Trump's national security speech. Politico .

Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/story/2016/06/transcript-donald-trump-

national-security-speech-224273 

Trump, D. J. (2017). Promises made, promises kept [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://youtu.be/4DjtKwKsO40 

Trump, D. J. (2018). Trump tax cuts provide “Shortway” to success [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://youtu.be/ls3EXflyE-8 

Tur, K. (2017a). The Trump fever never breaks. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/09/opinion/sunday/the-trump-fever-never-breaks.html 

Tur, K. (2017b). Unbelievable: My front-row seat to the craziest campaign in American history .

New York, NY: HarperCollins. 

Vance, J. D. (2016). How Donald Trump seduced America’s white working class. The Guardian .

Retrieved https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/jd-vance-hillbilly-

elegy-donald-trump-us-white-poor-working-class 

Wagner, A. (2018). The church of Trump. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2018/08/the-church-of-trump/567425/ 

Ware, B.L., & Linkugel, W.A. (1982). The rhetorical persona : Marcus Garvey as black Moses. 

Communication Monographs , 49 , 50-62. 243 

Watch live: President Donald Trump holds MAGA rally in Grand Rapids, MI 3/28/19. (2019). 

Right Side Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xv8c27Gt-0 

Weaver, R. (1970). The ethics of rhetoric . Chicago, IL: Gateway. 

Zelizer, J. E. (2016). This is Reagan's party. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/02/this-is-reagans-party/459603/ 244 

References: Chapter IV, Church of Trump 

Abril, C. R. (2007). Functions of a national anthem in society and education: A sociocultural 

perspective. Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education , 172 , 69-87. 

Abroms, L. C., & Lefebvre, R. C. (2009). Obama’s wired campaign: Lessons for public health 

communication. Journal of Health Communication , 14 , 415–423. 

Alexander, J.C. (2004). Cultural pragmatics: Social performance between ritual and strategy. 

Sociological Theory , 22 , 527-573. 

Allott, D., & Allott, J. (2018). The enduring power of a Trump rally. Washington Examiner .

Retrieved from https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/the-enduring-power-of-a-

trump-rally 

Anijar, K. (2000). Teaching toward the 24th century: Star Trek as social curriculum . New York, 

NY: Falmer Press. 

Appel, E. C. (2018). Burlesque, tragedy, and a (potentially) “yuuuge” “breaking of a frame”: 

Donald Trump’s rhetoric as “early warning”? Communication Quarterly , 66 (2), 157-175. 

doi: 10.1080/01463373.2018.1439515 

Ball, M. (2015). The ecstasy of Donald Trump. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/11/the-ecstasy-of-donald-

trump/417870/ 

Barbaro, M. (Host), Toeniskoetter, C. (Producer), & Cowett, P. (Editor). (2019, September 20). 

Anatomy of a Warren rally. The Daily [Audio podcast]. Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/20/podcasts/the-daily/elizabeth-warren-rally.html? 

Bean, L. (2014). The politics of evangelical identity: Local churches and partisan divides in the 

United States and Canada . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 245 

Bender, M. (Speaker). (2019, November 5). Inside a Trump rally. Today, explained [Audio 

podcast]. Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-

politics/2019/11/6/20950388/donald-trump-rally-2020-presidential-election-today-

explained 

Berezin, M. (2002). Secure states: Towards a political sociology of emotion. The Sociology 

Review , 50 , 33-52. 

Bergmann, S. (2012). Religion in the built environment: Aesth/ethics, ritual and memory in lived 

urban space. In L. Gómez & W. Van Herck (Eds.) The sacred in the city (pp. 73-95). 

New York, NY: Continuum. 

Blackett, E. (2017). ‘Sexism defeated!’: Women for Trump and the binding energy of political 

hope. Women’s Studies Journal , 31 (2), 18-26. 

Blee, K. M. (1993). Evidence, empathy, and ethics: Lessons from oral histories of the Klan. The 

Journal of American History , 80 (2), 596-606. 

Bouie, J. (2019). The joy of hatred. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/19/opinion/trump-rally.html 

Braden, S. W. (2000). The rhetoric of the benign scapegoat: President Reagan and the federal 

government. LSU Historical Dissertations and Theses , 7340 . Retrieved from 

https://digitalcommons.lsu.edu/gradschool_disstheses/7340 

Brooks, D. (2019). There should be more rituals! The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/22/opinion/rituals-meaning.html. 

Burke, K. (1957). The rhetoric of Hitler’s “battle.” In The philosophy of literary form: Studies in 

symbolic action (pp. 164-189). New York, NY: Vintage Books. 

Burke, K. (1959). Attitudes toward history . Los Altos, CA: Hermes. 246 

Burke, K. (1970). The rhetoric of religion: Studies in logology . Berkeley, CA: University of 

California Press. 

Burns, A., Martin, J., & Haberman, M. (2019). A bruised Trump faces uncertain 2020 prospects. 

His team fears a primary fight. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/26/us/politics/trump-rnc-2020.html 

Campbell, K. (1988). Enactment as a rhetorical strategy in The Year of Living Dangerously .

Central States Speech Journal , 39 (3&4), 258-268. 

Carney, T. P. (2019). The right’s Lena Dunham fallacy. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/12/opinion/marriage-family-

conservatives.html?action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage 

Cavicchi, D. (2007). Loving music: Listeners, entertainments, and the origins of music fandom 

in nineteenth-century America. In J. Gray, C. Sandvoss, & C. L. Harrington (Eds.) 

Fandom: Identities and communities in a mediated world (pp. 235-249). New York: New 

York University Press. 

Charland, M. (1987). Constitutive rhetoric: The case of the peuple Québécois. Quarterly Journal 

of Speech , 73 (2), 133-150. 

Cheathem, M. R. (2018). The coming of democracy: Presidential campaigning in the age of 

Jackson . Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press. 

Continetti, M. (2019). Trump has to choose between the circus and the White House. The New 

York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/03/opinion/trump-

presidential-election.html 

Cummings, W. (2018). Sen. Dianne Feinstein becomes new target of Trump supporters' 'lock her 

up' chant. USA Today . Retrieved from 247 

https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2018/10/10/dianne-feinstein-

lock-her-up-chant-donald-trump-rally/1587135002/ 

Daughton, S. M. (1995). The fine texture of enactment: Iconicity as empowerment in Angelina 

Grimké’s Pennsylvania Hall Address. Women’s Studies in Communication , 18 , 19-43. 

de Coppet, D. (1992). Introduction. In D. de Coppet (Ed.) Understanding rituals (pp. 1-10). New 

York, NY: Routledge. 

DeLuca, K. (2018). Shared passions, shared compositions: Online fandom communities and 

affinity groups as sites for public writing pedagogy. Computers and Composition , 47 , 75– 

92. 

Doty, W. G. (2000). Mythography: The study of myths and rituals (2 nd edition). Tuscaloosa, AL: 

University of Alabama Press. 

Dwyer, J. (2019). Trump’s big tent revival. Topic Magazine . Retrieved from 

https://www.topic.com/trump-s-big-tent-revival 

Endres, D., Hess, A., Senda-Cook, S., & Middleton, M. K. (2016). In Situ rhetoric: Intersections 

between qualitative inquiry, fieldwork, and rhetoric. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical 

Methodologies , 16 (6), 511–524. 

Engels, J. (2009). Friend or foe?: Naming the enemy. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 12 (1), 37–64. 

Engels, J. (2010). The politics of resentment and the tyranny of the minority: Rethinking 

victimage for resentful times. Rhetoric Society Quarterly , 40 (4), 303-325. doi: 

10.1080/02773941003785652 

Erikson, E. (2008). “Hillary is my friend”: MySpace and political fandom. Rocky Mountain 

Communication Review , 4(2), 3-16. 248 

Fea, J. (2018). Believe me: The Evangelical road to Donald Trump . Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. 

Eerdmans Publishing. 

Federal News Service. (2016). Transcript of Donald Trump’s Dec. 30 speech in Hilton Head, 

S.C. The Kansas City Star . Retrieved from https://www.kansascity.com/news/local/news-

columns-blogs/the-buzz/article55604115.html 

Fisher, W. R. (1985). The narrative paradigm: An elaboration. Communication Monographs , 52 ,

347-367. 

Flood, B. (2016). NY Daily News Calls New Hampshire Donald Trump Voters ‘Mindless 

Zombies.’ The Wrap . Retrieved from https://www.thewrap.com/ny-daily-news-calls-

new-hampshire-donald-trump-voters-mindless-zombies/ 

Grimes, R. L. (2000). Deeply into the bone: Re-inventing rites of passage . Berkeley, CA: 

University of California Press. 

Gringlas, S. (2016). Four hours at a Donald Trump rally. Michigan Daily . Retrieved from 

https://www.michigandaily.com/section/news/four-hours-donald-trump-rally 

Glasser, S. B. (2018, October 12). I listened to all six Trump rallies in October. You should, too. 

The New Yorker . Retrieved from https://www.newyorker.com/news/letter-from-trumps-

washington/i-listened-to-all-six-trump-rallies-in-october-you-should-too 

Guilford, G. (2016). Inside the Trump machine: the bizarre psychology of America’s newest 

political movement. Quartz . Retrieved from https://qz.com/645345/inside-the-trump-

machine-the-bizarre-psychology-of-americas-newest-political-movement/ 

Haberman, M. (2018). He’s ‘one of us’: The undying bond between the bible belt and Trump. 

The New York Times . Retrieved from 249 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/14/us/politics/trump-southern-voters-campaign-

rallies.html 

Hagen, J., & Ostergren, R. (2006). Spectacle, architecture and place at the Nuremberg Party 

Rallies: projecting a Nazi vision of past, present and future. Cultural Geographies , 13 ,

157-181. 

Heinze, R. (2000). The nature and function of rituals: Comparing a Singapore Chinese with a 

Thai ritual. In R. Heinze (Ed.) The nature and function of rituals (pp. 1-23). Westport, 

CT: Bergin & Garvey. 

Herndon, A. W. (Speaker). (2019, August 22). What the 2020 campaign sounds like. The Daily 

[Audio podcast]. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/22/podcasts/the-

daily/2020-campaign-songs.html? 

Hinck, A. (2019). Politics for the love of fandom . Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University 

Press. 

Hooks, C. (2019). The Texas GOP keeps on dancing to Donald Trump’s tune. Texas Monthly .

Retrieved from https://www.texasmonthly.com/politics/texas-gop-donald-trump/ 

Huddy, L., & Bankert, A. (2017). Political partisanship as a social identity. Oxford research 

encyclopedia, politics . DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.250 

Jamieson, K. H. (1996). Packaging The presidency: A history and criticism of presidential 

campaign advertising , 2 nd Ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Jenkins, A. (2017). Read President Trump's NFL speech on national anthem protests. Time .

Retrieved from https://time.com/4954684/donald-trump-nfl-speech-anthem-protests/ 250 

Jennings, R. (2019). Why selfie lines are crucial to Elizabeth Warren’s campaign. Vox . Retrieved 

from https://www.vox.com/the-goods/2019/9/19/20872718/elizabeth-warren-2020-selfie-

line 

Jindra, M. (1994). Star Trek fandom as a religious phenomenon. Sociology of Religion , 55 (1), 

27-51. 

Johnson, D. (2016). God is watching you: how the fear of God makes us human . New York, NY: 

Oxford University Press. 

Johnson, P. E. (2017). The art of masculine victimhood: Donald Trump’s demagoguery. 

Women’s Studies in Communication , 40 (3), 229–250. 

Kao, G. Y., & Copulsky, J. E. (2007). The Pledge of Allegiance and the meanings and limits of 

civil religion. Journal of the American Academy of Religion , 75 (1), 121-149. 

Karpf, D. (2017). Digital politics after Trump. Annals of the International Communication 

Association , 41 , 198–207. 

Kusz, K. W. (2017/2018). ‘Winning bigly’: Sporting fantasies of white male omnipotence in the 

rise of Trump and alt right white supremacy. Journal of Hate Studies , 14 (1), 113-135. 

Live Now: President Trump MAGA rally live in Green Bay, WI 4-27-19. (2019). Right Side 

Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xGcQBt5ZeOc 

Lukes, S. (1975). Political ritual and social integration. Sociology , 9(2), 289-308. 

Mackey-Kallis, S., & Hahn, D. (1994). Who's to blame for America's drug problem?: The search 

for scapegoats in the "war on drugs." Communication Quarterly , 42 , 1-20. 

Maclean, J. K. B. (2007). Barabbas, the scapegoat ritual, and the development of the passion 

narrative. Harvard Theological Review , 100 (3), 309-334. 251 

Mills, R. E. (2014). The pirate and the sovereign: Negative identification and the constitutive 

rhetoric of the nation-state. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 17 , 105-136. 

Moore, S. F., & Myerhoff, B. G. (1977). Introduction: Secular ritual: Forms and meanings. In S. 

F. Moore & B. G. Myerhoff (Eds.) Secular ritual (pp. 3-24). Assen, The Netherlands: 

Van Gorcum & Comp. 

Nahmod, S. H. (2005). The Pledge as sacred political ritual. William & Mary Bill of Rights 

Journal , 13 (3), 797-820. 

Nelson, D. (2008). Bad for democracy: How the presidency undermines the power of the people .

Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 

Nuzzi, O. (2019). The Zombie Campaign: Joe Biden is the least formidable front-runner ever. 

Will it matter? New York Magazine . Retrieved from 

http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/10/joe-biden-2020-campaign.html 

Oliver, J. E., & Rahn, W. M. (2016). Rise of the Trumpenvolk: Populism in the 2016 Election. 

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , 667 , 189-206. 

Ott, B. L. (2017). The age of Twitter: Donald J. Trump and the politics of debasement. Critical 

Studies in Media Communication , 34 , 59-68. doi: 10.1080/15295036.2016.1266686 

Ott, B. L., & Dickinson, G. (2019). The twitter presidency: Donald J. Trump and the politics of 

white rage . New York, NY: Routledge. 

Parker, A., & Linskey, A. (2019). ‘The lines keep getting longer’: Crowd size takes center stage 

in 2020 race as Warren event rivals Trump. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/the-lines-keep-getting-longer-crowd-size-

takes-center-stage-in-2020-race-as-warren-event-rivals-trump/2019/09/17/14112608-

d960-11e9-ac63-3016711543fe_story.html 252 

Peterson, A., & Reiter, H. (2016). The ritual of May Day in western Europe: Past, present and 

future . New York, NY: Routledge. 

Pilkington, E. (2018). Feel the love, feel the hate – my week in the cauldron of Trump's wild 

rallies. The Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-

news/2018/nov/01/trump-rallies-america-midterms-white-house 

President Donald Trump holds a MASSIVE rally in Dallas! (2019). Right Side Broadcasting 

[Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.facebook.com/rightsidebroadcasting/videos/1268346326679670/ 

Proctor, W. (2013). ‘Holy crap, more Star Wars! More Star Wars? What if they’re crap?’: 

Disney, Lucasfilm and Star Wars online fandom in the 21st Century. Participations: 

Journal of Audience & Reception Studies , 10 (1), 198-224. 

Putnam, R. D. (1995). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal of Democracy ,

6(1), 65-78. 

Putnam, R. D. (1996). The strange disappearance of civic America. The American Prospect .

Retrieved from https://prospect.org/article/strange-disappearance-civic-america 

Putnam, R. D. (2001). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community . New 

York, NY: Simon & Schuster. 

Rai, C., & Druschke, C. G. (2018). On being there: An introduction to studying rhetoric in the 

field. In C. Rai & C. G. Druschke (Eds.), Field rhetoric: Ethnography, ecology, and 

engagement in the places of persuasion (pp. 1–21). Tuscaloosa, AL: University Alabama 

Press. 253 

Rehak, B. (2014). Materiality and object-oriented fandom. In B. Rehak (Ed.) Materiality and 

Object-Oriented Fandom, Transformative Works and Cultures, no. 16 .

https://doi.org/10.3983/twc.2014.0622. 

Reicher, S. & Haslam, S. A. (2017). The politics of hope: Donald Trump as an entrepreneur of 

identity. In M. Fitzduff (Ed.) Why irrational politics appeals: Understanding the allure of 

Trump (pp. 25-40). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Reicher, S., Haslam, S. A., & Hopkins, N. (2005). Social identity and the dynamics of 

leadership: Leaders and followers as collaborative agents in the transformation of social 

reality. The Leadership Quarterly , 16 , 547–568. 

Reicher, S., Haslam, S. A., & Rath, R. (2008). Making a virtue of evil: A five-step social identity 

model of the development of collective hate. Social and Personality Psychology 

Compass , 2/3 , 1313–1344. 

Rogers, K. (2018, October 12). The Trump rally: A play in three acts. The New York Times .

Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/10/12/us/politics/trump-maga-

rally-play.html 

Rowland, R. C., & Frank, D. A. (2002). Shared land/conflicting identity: Trajectories of Israeli 

and Palestinian symbol use . East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press. 

Saturday Night Live. (2019). Trump rally cold open – SNL [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://youtu.be/Tw3M1x5m7h8 

Schumacher, A. (2018). Observations from a Trump rally. Medium . Retrieved from 

https://medium.com/@schumaal/observations-from-a-trump-rally-e8712d4ee602 

Schwartz, G., & Merten, D. (1968). Social identity and expressive symbols: The meaning of an 

initiation ritual. American Anthropologist , 70 (6), 1117-1131. 254 

Smith, C. A. (2015). Presidential campaign communication , 2 nd edition. Malden, MA: Polity 

Press. 

Somers, M. R. (2008). Genealogies of citizenship . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Soukup, C. (2006). Hitching a ride on a star: Celebrity, fandom, and identification on the world 

wide web. Southern Communication Journal , 71 (4), 319-337. 

Stelter, B. (2018, October 28). Inside a Trump rally: Stelter's view from the press pen. CNN .

Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2018/10/28/media/trump-rally-stelter-

essay/index.html 

Stępińska, A., & Kołodziejczak, M. (2016). Ritual, political. In G. Mazzoleni (Ed.) The 

international encyclopedia of political communication (1 st edition; pp. 1-5). Hoboken, 

NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 

Stevenson, P. W. (2016). A brief history of the ‘lock her up!’ chant by Trump supporters against 

Clinton. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/22/a-brief-history-of-the-

lock-her-up-chant-as-it-looks-like-trump-might-not-even-

try/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.226cfb0e859e 

Stewart, E. (2018). Trump calls media the “true enemy of the people” the same day a bomb is 

sent to CNN. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-

politics/2018/10/29/18037894/donald-trump-twitter-media-enemy-pittsburgh 

Stromer-Galley, J. (2014). Presidential campaigning in the internet age . Oxford, UK: University 

of Oxford Press. 

Stuckey, M. E. (2017). American elections and the rhetoric of political change: Hyperbole, 

anger, and hope in U.S. politics. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 20 (4), 667–694. 255 

Sullivan, A. (2017). America wasn’t built for humans. New York Magazine Intelligencer .

Retrieved from http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/09/can-democracy-survive-

tribalism.html 

Taylor, A. (2016). Barry Goldwater: Insurgent conservatism as constitutive rhetoric. Journal of 

Political Ideologies , 21 , 242–260. 

Trump, D. J. [realDonaldTrump]. (2019, March 28). On my way to Grand Rapids, Michigan 

right now. See you all very soon! #MAGA [Tweet]. Retrieved from 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1111374017418559493 

Tur, K. (2017). Unbelievable: My front-row seat to the craziest campaign in American history .

New York, NY: HarperCollins. 

Vance, J. D. (2016). How Donald Trump seduced America’s white working class. The Guardian .

Retrieved https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/jd-vance-hillbilly-

elegy-donald-trump-us-white-poor-working-class 

Vigil, T. R. (2015). Connecting with constituents: Identification building and blocking in 

contemporary national convention addresses . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 

Wagner, A. (2018). The church of Trump. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2018/08/the-church-of-trump/567425/ 

Wahl-Jorgensen, K. (2018). Media coverage of shifting emotional regimes: Donald Trump’s 

angry populism. Media, Culture & Society , 40 (5), 766–778. 

Whitehead, A. L., Perry, S. L., & Baker, J. O. (2018). Make America Christian Again: Christian 

nationalism and voting for Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election. Sociology of 

Religion , 79 (2), 147-171. 256 

Woods, H. S., & Hahner, L. A. (2019). Make America meme again: The rhetoric of the alt-right .

New York, NY: Peter Lang. 

Yglesias, M. (2017). Donald Trump versus the NFL, explained. Vox . Retrieved from 

https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/9/25/16360264/donald-trump-colin-

kaepernick 

Zubernis, L., & Larsen, K. (2012). Fandom at the crossroads: Celebration, shame and 

fan/producer relationships . Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 257 

References: Chapter V, Violence 

Abel, T. (1938/2012). The Nazi movement . New Brunswick, NJ: AldineTransaction. 

Adorno, T., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Sanford, R. N., & Levinson, D. J. (1951/2019). The 

authoritarian personality . New York, NY: Verso Books. 

Altemeyer, B. (1996). The authoritarian specter . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Associated Press. (2016). Police investigating 2 alleged assaults at Trump rally in Louisville. 

WKYT . Retrieved from https://www.wkyt.com/content/news/Protesters-from-Trump-

rally-in-Louisville-file-police-reports-370947541.html 

Baer, D. (2016). The Psychology of why Americans are afraid of historically low crime levels. 

The Cut . Retrieved from https://www.thecut.com/2016/07/psychology-why-americans-

afraid-low-crime-levels.html 

Baker, P., & Shear, M. D. (2019). El Paso shooting suspect’s manifesto echoes Trump’s 

language. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/04/us/politics/trump-mass-shootings.html 

Bebber, B. (2016). Violence and racism in football: Politics and cultural conflict in British 

society, 1968–1998 . London, UK: Routledge. 

Beckett, L. (2017). Neo-Nazi pleads guilty after shoving black protester at Trump rally. The 

Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jul/19/matthew-

heimbach-neo-nazi-trump-rally-guilty-plea 

Bessel, R. (1986). Violence as propaganda: The role of the storm troopers in the rise of National 

Socialism. In T. Childers (Ed.), The formation of the Nazi constituency 1919-1933 (pp. 

131-146). New York, NY: Routledge. 258 

Blake, A. (2017). A judge rules Trump may have incited violence … and Trump again has his 

own mouth to blame. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/04/02/a-judge-rules-trump-may-

have-incited-violence-and-trump-again-has-his-own-mouth-to-

blame/?utm_term=.fdcaba0ea0c9 

Blake, A. (2019, March 14). Trump again nods toward violence by his supporters — and maybe 

something bigger. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/03/14/trump-again-nods-toward-

violence-by-his-supporters-maybe-something-

bigger/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.725c2f58a667 

Blee, K. M. (2007). The microdynamics of hate violence: Interpretive analysis and implications 

for responses. American Behavioral Scientist , 51 , 258–270. 

Borum, R. (2014). Psychological vulnerabilities and propensities for involvement in violent 

extremism. Behavioral Sciences and the Law , 32 , 286–305. 

Bratton, M. (2008). Vote buying and violence in Nigerian election campaigns. Electoral Studies ,

27 , 621–632. 

Browne, S. H. (1996). Encountering Angelina Grimké: Violence, identity, and the creation of 

radical community. The Quarterly journal of speech , 82 , 55-73. 

Browne, S. H. (2000). “This unparalleled and inhuman massacre”: The gothic, the sacred, and 

the meaning of Nat Turner. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 3(3), 309-331. 

Bump, P. (2016). Surprise! Voters don’t seem to hold violence at Trump rallies against him. The 

Washington Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-

fix/wp/2016/03/14/surprise-voters-dont-seem-hold-violence-at-trump-rallies-against-him/ 259 

Burch, A. D. S. (2017). He became a hate crime victim. She became a widow. The New York 

Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/08/us/he-became-a-hate-crime-

victim-she-became-a-widow.html?module=inline 

Charland, M. (1987). Constitutive rhetoric: The case of the peuple Québécois. Quarterly Journal 

of Speech , 73 (2), 133-150. 

Chattopadhyay, S. (2018). Understanding the authoritarian voter in the 2016 presidential 

election. In B. Warner, D. Bystrom, M. McKinney, & M. Banwart (Eds.) An 

unprecedented election: Media, communication and the electorate in the 2016 campaign 

(pp. 399-418). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 

Cheney, K. (2016). Trump blames Sanders for chaos at his rallies. Politico . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/story/2016/03/donald-trump-blames-bernie-sanders-rally-

protests-220671 

Childers, J. P. (2013). The democratic balance: President McKinley's assassination as domestic 

trauma. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 99 (2), 156-179. 

Childers, J. P. (2016). Transforming violence into a focusing event: A reception study of the 

1946 Georgia lynching. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 19 , 571–600 

Childers, T. & Weiss, E. (1990). Voters and violence: Political violence and the limits of 

National Socialist mass mobilization. German Studies Review , 13 (3), 481-498. 

Cobb, J. (2016). Donald Trump, Chicago, and the lessons of 1968. The New Yorker . Retrieved 

from https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/donald-trump-chicago-and-the-

lessons-of-1968 

Cox, D., Lienesch, R., & Jones, R. P. (2017). Beyond economics: Fears of cultural displacement 

pushed the white working class to Trump. Public Religion Research Institute . Retrieved 260 

from https://www.prri.org/research/white-working-class-attitudes-economy-trade-

immigration-election-donald-trump/ 

Crosswhite, J. (2014). Deep rhetoric: Philosophy, reason, violence, justice, wisdom . Chicago, IL: 

University of Chicago Press. 

Daugherty, O. (2019). Minneapolis police union releases 'Cops for Trump' T-shirts following 

uniform ban. The Hill . Retrieved from https://thehill.com/homenews/state-watch/464625-

minneapolis-police-union-releases-cops-for-trump-t-shirts-after-uniform 

Davey, M., & Bosman, J. (2016). Donald Trump’s rally in Chicago canceled after violent 

scuffles. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/12/us/trump-rally-in-chicago-canceled-after-violent-

scuffles.html 

Deaton, C. (2016). Protester would be 'carried out on a stretcher' in the old days, Trump 

reminisces. The Weekly Standard . Retrieved from 

https://www.weeklystandard.com/chris-deaton/protester-would-be-carried-out-on-a-

stretcher-in-the-old-days-trump-reminisces 

Ebner, M. R. (2010). Ordinary violence in Mussolini's Italy . New York, NY: Cambridge 

University Press. 

Edwards, G., & Rushin, S. (2018). The effect of President Trump's election on hate crimes. 

SSRN , 1-24. Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3102652 

Elfrink, T. (2019). Man charged with assault after punching anti-Trump protester outside 

Cincinnati rally. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/08/02/dallas-frazier-trump-rally-protest-

punch-cincinnati/ 261 

Eligon, J. (2018). Hate crimes increase for the third consecutive year, F.B.I. reports. The New 

York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/13/us/hate-crimes-fbi-

2017.html 

Engels, J. (2010). The politics of resentment and the tyranny of the minority: Rethinking 

victimage for resentful times. Rhetoric Society Quarterly , 40 (4), 303-325. doi: 

10.1080/02773941003785652 

Engels, J. (2013). Forum: The violence of rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 99 (2), 180-181. 

Engels, J. (2015). The politics of resentment: A genealogy . University Park, PA: The 

Pennsylvania State University Press. 

Farber, D. (1994). The silent majority and talk about revolution. In. D. Farber (Ed.) The sixties: 

From memory to history (pp. 291-316). Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina 

Press. 

Farber, D. (2006). Street heat in Chicago: Political violence in the sixties era. In C. Schnurmann 

and I. Wigger (Eds.) Tales of Two Cities/Stadtgeschichten: Hamburg and Chicago (pp. 

229-240). Berlin: LIT Verlag. 

Farber, D. (2016). What anti-Trump activists can learn from Chicago ’68 . The Conversation .

Retrieved from https://theconversation.com/what-anti-trump-activists-can-learn-from-

chicago-68-62741 

Feldman, S., & Stenner, K. (1997). Perceived threat and authoritarianism. International Society 

of Political Psychology , 18 , 741-770. 

Flagg, A. (2018). The myth of the criminal immigrant. The Marshall Project . Retrieved from 

https://www.themarshallproject.org/2018/03/30/the-myth-of-the-criminal-immigrant 262 

Fiske, A. P., & Rai, T. S. (2015). Virtuous violence . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 

Press. 

Foley, M. (2013). Of violence and rhetoric: An ethical aporia. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 99 ,

191-199. 

Freeman, J. B. (2018). The violence at the heart of our politics. The New York Times . Retrieved 

from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/07/opinion/sunday/violence-politics-

congress.html 

FULL: President Donald Trump rally in Minneapolis, MN 10/10/19. (2019). Right Side 

Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from https://youtu.be/bfsg0IbTRZU 

Galtung, J. (1969). Violence, peace, and peace research. Journal of Peace Research , 6, 167-191 

Galtung, J. (1990). Cultural violence. Journal of Peace Research , 27 , 291-305. 

Garcia, N. (2019). Militia-style group, Oath Keepers, will be in Dallas for Trump rally. The 

Dallas Morning News . Retrieved from 

https://www.dallasnews.com/news/politics/2019/10/11/militia-style-group-oath-keepers-

will-be-in-dallas-for-trump-rally/ 

Goldberg, J. (2019). He’s getting worse. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/08/trump-getting-worse/595453/ 

Goggin, B. (2017). Meet the Neo-Nazi at the heart of the Charlottesville rally. Digg . Retrieved 

from http://digg.com/2017/matthew-heimbach-alt-right-charlottesville-unite-the-right 

Griffiths, B. D. (2018). Trump on Gianforte: ‘Any guy who can do a body slam is my kind of 

guy’. Politico . Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/story/2018/10/18/trump-

gianforte-body-slam-praise-915047 263 

Grynbaum, M. M. (2017). Trump tweets a video of him wrestling ‘CNN’ to the ground. The New 

York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/02/business/media/trump-

wrestling-video-cnn-twitter.html 

Guilford, G. (2016). Inside the Trump machine: the bizarre psychology of America’s newest 

political movement. Quartz . Retrieved from https://qz.com/645345/inside-the-trump-

machine-the-bizarre-psychology-of-americas-newest-political-movement/ 

Gunn, J. (2007). Hystericizing Huey: Emotional appeals, desire, and the psychodynamics of 

demagoguery. Western Journal of Communication , 71 (1), 1-27. 

Hackman, M. (2016). Poll: the public isn't blaming Donald Trump for violence at his rallies. 

Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/3/24/11295146/trump-rallies-violence-

poll 

Hale, D. J. (2017). Nwanguma v. Trump, 273 F. Supp. 3d 719. United States District Court for 

the Western District of Kentucky, Louisville Division . Retrieved from Lexis Nexis. 

Hamby, A. R. (2018). You are not cordially invited: How universities maintain first amendment 

rights and safety in the midst of controversial on-campus speakers. Cornell Law Review ,

104 (1), 288-316. 

Heer, J. (2017). The Democrats’ dangerous obsession with impeachment. The New Republic .

Retrieved from https://newrepublic.com/article/146098/democrats-dangerous-obsession-

impeachment 

Heitmeyer, W. (1994) Hostility and violence towards foreigners in Germany. In T. Bjørgo and R. 

Witte (Eds), Racist violence in Europe (pp. 17–28). London, UK: St Martin’s Press. 264 

Hogan, J.M. (2016). George Wallace, speech at Serb Hall (26 March 1976). Voices of 

Democracy , 11 , 66-105. Retrieved from http://voicesofdemocracy.umd.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/02/Wallace-Essay-1-14-17-hogan.pdf 

Iodice, E. F. (2018). Lessons from history: The startling rise to power of Benito Mussolini. The 

Journal of Values-Based Leadership , 11 (2), 1-32. doi: 10.22543/0733.62.1241 

Jacobs, B. (2016). Trump campaign dogged by violent incidents at rallies. The Guardian .

Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-

campaign-claims-violence-rallies 

Jackson, D. M. (2016). Trump: I'm not responsible for violence at rallies. USA Today . Retrieved 

from https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/03/13/donald-trump-

violence-rallies-bernie-sanders-ted-cruz/81726552/ 

Johnson, P. E. (2017). The art of masculine victimhood: Donald Trump’s demagoguery. 

Women’s Studies in Communication , 40 (3), 229–250. 

Jorgensen-Earp, C. R. (2008). In the wake of violence: Image & social reform . East Lansing, MI: 

Michigan State University Press. 

Lawler, D. (2019). The deadliest mass shootings in modern U.S. history. Axios . Retrieved from 

https://www.axios.com/deadliest-mass-shootings-modern-us-history-3b2dfb67-7278-

4082-a78c-d9fdbef367f1.html 

Lawsuit filed by Louisvillians against Donald Trump, supporters. (2016). WLKY News Louisville 

[Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJMTvgQNuUg 

Lee, T. B. (2016). Donald Trump can't admit when he's made a mistake. That's a bad trait for a 

president. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/7/19/12226316/trump-never-

admit-mistakes 265 

Lenz, R. (2016). Law and disorder: Movement lawyer Kyle Bristow takes larger role. Southern 

Poverty Law Center . Retrieved from 

https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2016/10/05/law-and-disorder-movement-lawyer-

kyle-bristow-takes-larger-role 

Levine, M. (2018, November 5). 'No Blame'? ABC News finds 17 cases invoking 'Trump' in 

connection with violence, threats or alleged assaults. ABC News . Retrieved from 

https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/blame-abc-news-finds-17-cases-invoking-

trump/story?id=58912889 

Lichtman, A. J. (2009). White protestant nation: The rise of the American conservative 

movement . New York, NY: Grove Press. 

Lind, D. (2016). What the hell is going on with violence at Trump rallies, explained. Vox .

Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/3/14/11219256/trump-violent 

Lind, D. (2018). The conspiracy theory that led to the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting, explained. 

Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2018/10/29/18037580/pittsburgh-shooter-anti-

semitism-racist-jewish-caravan 

Littman, R., & Paluck, E. L. (2015). The cycle of violence: Understanding individual 

participation in collective violence. Advances in Political Psychology , 36 (Suppl. 1), 79-

99. 

Live Donald Trump Kentucky Louisville International Convention Center full speech hd March. 

(2016). Amopolo Yebada [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ES6ZOQr6GeA 

Lizza, R. (2020). The unexpected joy at a Trump rally in Iowa. Politico . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/news/2020/01/31/unexpected-joy-trump-rally-iowa-109864 266 

Lopez, G. (2016). Don't believe Donald Trump has incited violence at rallies? Watch this video. 

Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/3/12/11211846/donald-trump-violence-

rallies 

MacWilliams, M. (2016). Who decides when the party doesn’t? Authoritarian voters and the rise 

of Donald Trump. PS: Political Science & Politics , 49 (Special Issue 4), 716-721. 

Mathis-Lilley, B. (2016). A continually growing list of violent incidents at Trump events. Slate .

Retrieved from 

http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2016/03/02/a_list_of_violent_incidents_at_donald 

_trump_rallies_and_events.html 

Mattson, K. (2018). The Trumpian personality. Dissent , 65 , 116-122. 

McAdams, D. P. (2017). The appeal of the primal leader: human evolution and Donald J. Trump. 

Evolutionary Studies in Imaginative Culture , 1, 1-13 

McKeague, D., Griffin, D., & White, H. (2018). Opinion: Nwanguma v. Trump. United States 

Court of Appeals, for the Sixth Circuit . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000165-c9ac-d981-af7f-ddae66130001 

Mendes, A. E. (2016). Digital demagogue: The critical candidacy of Donald J. Trump. Journal of 

Contemporary Rhetoric , 6(3/4), 62-73. 

Merkl, P. H. (1975). Political violence under the swastika . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 

Press. 

Miller, M. (2016). John Oliver presents irrefutable evidence that Donald Trump has incited 

violence. Esquire . Retrieved from 

https://www.esquire.com/entertainment/tv/news/a42990/john-oliver-donald-trump-

clinton/ 267 

Miller, Z. J., & Reilly, K. (2016). Presidential candidates say Trump set tone for violence at 

rallies. Time . Retrieved from https://time.com/4256580/donald-trump-rally-violence-

response-cruz-rubio-kasich-hillary-clinton-sanders/ 

Morgan, M., & Shanahan, J. (2017). Television and the cultivation of authoritarianism: A return 

visit from an unexpected friend. Journal of Communication , 67 , 424–444, 

Morrison, C. N., Ukert, B., Palumbo, A., Dong, B., Jacoby, S. F., & Wiebe, D. J. (2018). 

Assaults on days of campaign rallies during the 2016 US presidential election. 

Epidemiology , 29 , 490-493. 

Nelson, L. (2016). Listen to Donald Trump’s “authoritarian hold music” rally playlist. Vox .

Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/3/17/11255380/donald-trump-rally-music 

Ojeda, R. H., Wynn, M., & Chen, Z. (2016). Donald Trump's false narrative on Mexican 

migration and trade: A geopolitical economic analysis. North American Integration & 

Development Center, University of California, Los Angeles . Retrieved from 

http://www.naid.ucla.edu/uploads/4/2/1/9/4219226/trumptrade_execsum_v16.pdf 

Olson, K.M. (2013). An epideictic dimension of symbolic violence in Disney's Beauty and the 

Beast: Inter-generational lessons in romanticizing and tolerating intimate partner 

violence. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 99 (4), 448-480. 

Pence, S. B. (2017). Answer and cross-claim. United States District Court, Western District of 

Kentucky, Louisville Division, Kashiya Ngwanguma, et al. v. Donald J. Trump, et al., 

CASE NO. 3:16cv-247-DJH . Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/f/?id=0000015b-

6ee9-dd98-a9fb-eeefc4690002 

Perlstein, R. (2008). Nixonland . New York, NY: Scribner. 268 

Rand, E.J. (2009). Review essay: Thinking violence and rhetoric. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 12 ,

461-477. 

Rappeport, A. (2015). A beating in Boston, said to be inspired by Donald Trump’s immigrant 

comments. The New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-

draft/2015/08/20/a-beating-in-boston-said-to-be-inspired-by-donald-trumps-immigrant-

comments/ 

Ray, L. (2011). Violence & society . Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 

Reicher, S. (2001). The psychology of crowd dynamics. In M. A. Hogg & R. S. Tindale (Eds.) 

Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology: Group Processes (pp. 182-208). Malden, 

MA: Blackwell. 

Rieger, JM. (2019). When a rallygoer suggested shooting immigrants in May, Trump made a 

joke. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/08/05/when-rally-goer-suggested-

shooting-immigrants-may-trump-made-joke/ 

Rohler, L. (1999). Conservative appeals to the people: George Wallace's populist rhetoric. 

Southern Communication Journal , 64 (4), 316-322. 

Roiser, M. & Willig, C. (2002). The strange death of the authoritarian personality: 50 years of 

psychological and political debate. History of the Human Sciences , 15 , 71-96. 

Rosenthal, B. M. (2017). Police criticize Trump for urging officers not to be ‘too nice’ with 

suspects. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/29/nyregion/trump-police-too-nice.html 

Rucker, P. (2019). ‘How do you stop these people?’: Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric looms 

over El Paso massacre. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 269 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-do-you-stop-these-people-trumps-anti-

immigrant-rhetoric-looms-over-el-paso-massacre/2019/08/04/62d0435a-b6ce-11e9-a091-

6a96e67d9cce_story.html 

Rupar, A. (2019). Trump’s speech in Hershey revealed a presidency off the rails. Vox . Retrieved 

from https://www.vox.com/2019/12/11/21010774/trump-hershey-pennsylvania-rally 

Saramo, S. (2017). The Meta-violence of Trumpism. European journal of American studies ,

12 (2), 1-17. 

Selk, A. (2017). The violent rally Trump can’t move past. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/04/03/the-violent-rally-trump-

cant-move-past/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.2cbd1f5e28ab 

Senior citizen veteran fights protester at Louisville Trump rally. (2016). Conservative Outfitters 

[Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ILwalNSS3vY 

Skowronek, S. (1993). The politics presidents make . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Sopel, J. (2019). Why the attack on our cameraman was no surprise. BBC News . Retrieved from 

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-47219957 

Smith, A., & Clark, D. (2019). Trump goes to war with Minneapolis over $500,000 security bill. 

NBC News . Retrieved from https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/donald-trump/trump-goes-

war-minneapolis-over-500-000-security-bill-n1063726?cid=sm_npd_ms_tw_ma 

Smith, D. (2017). The backlash against Black Lives Matter is just more evidence of injustice. 

The Conversation . Retrieved from https://theconversation.com/the-backlash-against-

black-lives-matter-is-just-more-evidence-of-injustice-85587 

Smith, D. N., & Hanley, E. (2018). The anger games: Who voted for Donald Trump in the 2016 

election, and why? Critical Sociology , 44 , 195-212. 270 

Stahl, R. (2016). Weaponizing speech. Quarterly Journal of Speech , 102 (4), 376-395. 

Swaine, J., & Adolphe, J. (2019). Violence in the name of Trump. The Guardian . Retrieved from 

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2019/aug/28/in-the-name-of-trump-

supporters-attacks-database 

Tomsen, S. (2001). Hate crimes and masculinity: New crimes, new responses and some familiar 

patterns. Paper presented at the 4th National Outlook Symposium on Crime in Australia, 

New Crimes or New Responses convened by the Australian Institute of Criminology and 

held in Canberra 21-22 June 2001. 

Trump rally violence becomes trend. (2016). ABC News [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRZhWQ71qdU 

Tunison, J. (2019, March 29). Police make two ‘disorderly’ arrests outside Trump rally, but say 

event was peaceful. MLive . Retrieved from https://www.mlive.com/news/grand-

rapids/2019/03/police-make-two-disorderly-arrests-outside-trump-rally-but-say-event-

was-peaceful.html 

Tur, K. (2017). Unbelievable: My front-row seat to the craziest campaign in American history .

New York, NY: HarperCollins. 

UVA Center for Politics. (2019). Extended term for Trump? No way, most Americans say. 

Sabato’s Crystal Ball . Retrieved from 

http://crystalball.centerforpolitics.org/crystalball/articles/extended-term-for-trump-no-

way-most-americans-say/ 

Vials, C. (2017, March/April). A must read for the present crisis: Adorno’s The Authoritarian 

Personality. Against The Current , 6-8. 271 

Walsh, P. (2019). Police shoot pepper spray outside amid protest as Trump rally wraps up. Star 

Tribune . Retrieved from http://www.startribune.com/protesters-start-arriving-leading-up-

to-trump-rally-in-minneapolis/562749432/ 

Ward, A. (2019). The New Zealand shooter called immigrants “invaders.” Hours later, so did 

Trump. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2019/3/15/18267745/new-zealand-

mosque-attack-invade-trump 

Weigel, D. (2016). Cruz, Rubio and Kasich criticize Trump for creating ‘environment’ for 

Chicago protest. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/03/11/cruz-and-rubio-

criticize-trump-for-creating-environment-for-chicago-protest/ 

Weiser, B. (2019). Mail bomb suspect accused of targeting Clinton, Obama and other Democrats 

to plead guilty. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/15/nyregion/mail-bomber-cesar-sayoc.html 

Womick, J., Rothmund, T., Azevedo, F., King, L. A., & Jost, J. T. (2018). Group-based 

dominance and authoritarian aggression predict support for Donald Trump in the 2016 

U.S. presidential election. Social Psychological and Personality Science . doi: 

10.1177/1948550618778290 

Zarefsky, D. (2004). Presidential rhetoric and the power of definition. Presidential Studies 

Quarterly , 34 , 607-619. 272 

References: Chapter VI, Conspiracy Theory 

Abalakina-Paap, M., Stephan, W. G., Craig, T., & Gregory, W. L. (1999). Beliefs in 

conspiracies. Political Psychology , 20 (3), 637-647. 

Atkinson, M., DeWitt, D., & Uscinski, J. E. (2017). Conspiracy theories in the 2016 election. In 

J. C. Lucas, C. J. Galdieri, & T. S. Sisco (Eds.) Conventional wisdom, parties, and 

broken barriers in the 2016 election (pp. 163-180). Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 

Austin, J. C. (2019). What do Midwest working-class voters want and need? The Brookings 

Institution . Retrieved from https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2019/06/13/what-

do-midwest-working-class-voters-want-and-need/ 

Bank, J., Stack, L., & Victor, D. (2018). What Is QAnon: Explaining the internet conspiracy 

theory that showed up at a Trump rally. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/01/us/politics/what-is-qanon.html 

Barkun, M. (2017). President Trump and the “fringe.” Terrorism and Political Violence , 29 (3), 

437-443. 

Barkun, M. (2018). Failed prophecies won’t stop Trump’s true believers. Foreign Policy .

Retrieved from https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/11/08/failed-prophecies-wont-stop-

trumps-true-believers/ 

Bender, M. C. (2019, October 22). Trump’s rallies aren’t a sideshow. They are the campaign. 

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/trumps-rallies-

arent-just-part-of-his-campaign-they-are-the-campaign-

11571753199?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=1 273 

Bertrand, N. (2020). How a Russian disinfo op got Trump impeached. Politico . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/news/2020/01/22/ukraine-russia-disinformation-election-

trump-101895 

Bort, R. (2018). As QAnon goes mainstream, Trump’s rallies are turning darker. Rolling Stone .

Retrieved from https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/trump-qanon-

705425/ 

“Brexit and Trump voters more likely to believe in conspiracy theories, survey study shows.” 

(2018). University of Cambridge . Retrieved from 

https://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/brexit-and-trump-voters-more-likely-to-believe-in-

conspiracy-theories-survey-study-shows 

Bricker, B. J. (2013). Climategate: A case study in the intersection of facticity and conspiracy 

theory. Communication Studies , 64 (2), 218-239. 

Bricker, B., & Justice, J. (2019). The postmodern medical paradigm: A case study of anti-MMR 

vaccine arguments. Western Journal of Communication , 83 (2), 172-189. 

Breuninger, K. (2019). Roger Stone avoids jail, banned from major social media after judge rules 

Trump friend breached gag order in Mueller case. CNBC . Retrieved from 

https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/16/roger-stone-banned-from-social-media-after-judge-

rules-gag-order-breached.html 

Bump, P. (2019). QAnon supporters claim they were censored at Trump’s New Hampshire rally. 

The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/08/16/qanon-supporters-claim-they-were-

censored-trumps-new-hampshire-rally/ 274 

Burke, K. (1970). The rhetoric of religion: Studies in logology . Berkeley, CA: University of 

California Press. 

Carter, B. (2018). What Is QAnon? The conspiracy theory tiptoeing into Trump world. NPR .

Retrieved from https://www.npr.org/2018/08/02/634749387/what-is-qanon-the-

conspiracy-theory-tiptoeing-into-trump-world 

Chait, J. (2018). Why does Trump get more credit than Obama for the same economy? New York 

Magazine . Retrieved from http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/08/why-trump-gets-

more-credit-than-obama-for-the-same-economy.html 

Chait, J. (2019). Trump believed Ukraine conspiracy because ‘Putin told me.’ New York 

Magazine . Retrieved from http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/12/trump-putin-told-me-

ukraine-conspiracy-russia-impeachment.html 

Chang, A. (2018). We analyzed every QAnon post on Reddit. Here’s who QAnon supporters 

actually are. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2018/8/8/17657800/qanon-

reddit-conspiracy-data 

Coaston, J. (2019). The Mueller investigation is over. QAnon, the conspiracy theory that grew 

around it, is not. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-

politics/2019/3/29/18286890/qanon-mueller-report-barr-trump-conspiracy-theories 

Collins, B. (2018). What is Qanon? A guide to the conspiracy theory taking hold among Trump 

supporters. NBC News . Retrieved from https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/what-

qanon-guide-conspiracy-theory-taking-hold-among-trump-supporters-n897271 

Collins, B. (2019). Local FBI field office warns of 'conspiracy theory-driven domestic 

extremists.' NBC News . Retrieved from https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/local-

fbi-field-office-warns-conspiracy-theory-driven-domestic-extremists-n1038441 275 

Dalmia, S. (2019). Actually, the numbers show that we need more immigration, not less. The 

New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/15/opinion/trump-

immigration-myth.html 

de Brauw, A. (2017). Does immigration reduce wages? CATO Journal , 37 (3), 473-480. 

Retrieved from https://www.cato.org/cato-journal/fall-2017/does-immigration-reduce-

wages 

Desantis, A. D., & Morgan, S. E. (2004). Civil liberties, the constitution, and cigars: Anti‐ 

smoking conspiracy logic in cigar aficionado, 1992–2001. Communication Studies , 55 ,

319–339. 

Dickerson, M. (2016). Is the American Dream dead? The Conversation . Retrieved from 

https://theconversation.com/is-the-american-dream-dead-57095 

Donskis, L. (1998). The conspiracy theory, demonization of the other. Innovation , 11 (3), 349-

360. 

Douglas, K. M., Sutton, R. M., & Cichocka, A. (2017). The psychology of conspiracy theories. 

Current Directions in Psychological Science , 26 (6), 538–542. 

Douthat, R. (2019). Jeffrey Epstein and when to take conspiracies seriously. The New York 

Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/13/opinion/jeffrey-epstein-

suicide.html 

Drezner, D. W. (2018). Trump says America is respected again. He is quite wrong. The 

Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2018/10/02/trump-says-america-is-respected-

again-he-is-quite-wrong/ 276 

Edy, J. A., & Risley-Baird, E. E. (2016). Rumor communities: The social dimensions of internet 

political misperceptions. Social Science Quarterly , 97 (3), 588-602. 

Ellis, E. G. (2018). Online conspiracy theories: The WIRED guide. Wired . Retrieved from 

https://www.wired.com/story/wired-guide-to-conspiracy-theories/ 

Farber, D. (2018). America first and international trade policy in the Cold War era. In M. P. 

Leffler & W. Hitchcock (Eds.) America first: The past and future of an idea (pp. 39-41). 

Retrieved from https://shafr.org/sites/default/files/passport-09-2018-america-first-

essays.pdf 

Faris, R. M., Roberts, H., Etling, B., Bourassa, N., Zuckerman, E., & Benkler, Y. (2017). 

Partisanship, propaganda, and disinformation: Online media and the 2016 U.S. 

presidential election. Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society Research Paper .

Retrieved from https://dash.harvard.edu/handle/1/33759251 

Finley, L., & Esposito, L. (2019). The immigrant as bogeyman: Examining Donald Trump and 

the right’s anti-immigrant, anti-pc rhetoric. Humanity & 

Society . doi:10.1177/0160597619832627 

Frankovic, K. (2019a). Americans who favor impeachment want President Trump removed, too. 

YouGov . Retrieved from https://today.yougov.com/topics/politics/articles-

reports/2019/10/16/americans-favor-impeachment-want-trump-removed 

Frankovic, K. (2019b). How Americans view the “deep state.” YouGov . Retrieved from 

https://today.yougov.com/topics/politics/articles-reports/2019/10/31/how-americans-

view-deep-state-poll 277 

Frieden, J. (2019). The backlash against globalization and the future of the international 

economic order. In P. Diamond (Ed.) The crisis of globalization: democracy, capitalism, 

and inequality in the twenty-first century (pp. 43-52). London, UK: I.B. Tauris. 

Goldberg, E. (2019). Globalization is bad for America is the lie that all Trump's other lies are 

based on. Salon . Retrieved from https://www.salon.com/2019/02/02/globalization-is-bad-

for-america-is-the-lie-that-all-trumps-other-lies-are-based-on/ 

Gingeras, R. (2019). How the deep state came to America: A history. War on the Rocks .

Retrieved from https://warontherocks.com/2019/02/how-the-deep-state-came-to-america-

a-history/ 

Greenwood, M. (2017). Number of jobs lost to foreign competition up since Trump’s election: 

report. The Hill . Retrieved from https://thehill.com/policy/finance/362526-number-of-

jobs-lost-to-foreign-trade-since-trumps-election-on-par-with 

Gruber, I. D. (1969). The American Revolution as a conspiracy: The British view. The William 

and Mary Quarterly , 26 (3), 360-372. 

Gunn, J. (2008). Death by publicity: U.S. freemasonry and the public drama of secrecy. Rhetoric 

and Public Affairs , 11 (2), 243-277. 

Haag, M. (2018). Florida SWAT officer is demoted after wearing QAnon patch next to Mike 

Pence. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/04/us/swat-leader-qanon-patch.html 

Haag, M., & Salam, M. (2017). Gunman in ‘pizzagate’ shooting is sentenced to 4 years in prison. 

The New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/us/pizzagate-

attack-sentence.html 278 

Herndon, A. W. (2019). ‘Nothing less than a civil war’: These white voters on the far right see 

doom without Trump. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/28/us/politics/trump-2020-trumpstock.html 

Hicks, M. J., & Devaraj, S. (2015). The myth and the reality of manufacturing in America. Ball 

State University Center for Business and Economic Research . Retrieved from 

https://projects.cberdata.org/reports/MfgReality.pdf 

Hochschild, A. R. (2016). Donald Trump loves conspiracy theories. So do his supporters. The 

Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/11/07/donald-trump-loves-

conspiracy-theories-so-do-his-supporters/ 

Hofstadter, R. (1964, November). The paranoid style in American politics. Harper’s Magazine ,

77-86. Print. 

“How Donald Trump thinks about trade.” (2016, November 9). The Economist (Online) .

Retrieved from https://www.economist.com/united-states/2016/11/09/how-donald-trump-

thinks-about-trade 

Howell, J. (2012). Not just crazy: An explanation for the resonance of the birther narrative. 

Communication Monographs , 79 (4), 428-447. 

Hudson, J. (2019). Pompeo says Trump’s debunked Ukraine conspiracy theory is worth looking 

into. The Washington Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-

security/pompeo-says-trumps-debunked-ukraine-conspiracy-theory-is-worth-looking-

into/2019/11/26/66394e98-106e-11ea-9cd7-a1becbc82f5e_story.html 

Imhoff, R., & Bruder, R. (2014). Speaking (un-)truth to power: Conspiracy mentality as a 

generalised political attitude. European Journal of Personality , 28 , 25–43. 279 

Ingber, R. (2017). The “deep state” myth and the real executive branch bureaucracy. Lawfare .

Retrieved from https://www.lawfareblog.com/deep-state-myth-and-real-executive-

branch-bureaucracy 

Ingram, M. (2018). Most Americans say they have lost trust in the media. Columbia Journalism 

Review . Retrieved from https://www.cjr.org/the_media_today/trust-in-media-down.php 

Johnson, P. E. (2017). The art of masculine victimhood: Donald Trump’s demagoguery. 

Women’s Studies in Communication , 40 (3), 229–250. 

Justice, J. W., & Bricker, B. J. (2019). Hacked: Defining the 2016 presidential election in the 

liberal media. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 22 (3), 389–420. 

Kane, T. (2016). No, Mr. Trump, NAFTA was not a ‘bad deal.’ National Review . Retrieved from 

https://www.nationalreview.com/2016/05/donald-trump-nafta-free-trade-wrong/ 

Kaplan, A. (2020). Here are the QAnon supporters running for Congress in 2020. Media Matters .

Retrieved from https://www.mediamatters.org/qanon-conspiracy-theory/here-are-qanon-

supporters-running-congress-2020 

Kelley-Romano, S. (2008). Trust no one: The conspiracy genre on American television. Southern 

Communication Journal , 73 (2), 105-121. 

Kelley-Romano, S., & Carew, K. L. (2019). Make America hate again: Donald Trump and the 

birther conspiracy. Journal of Hate Studies , 14 (1), 33-52. 

Kendall-Taylor, A. (2019). Trump impeachment: Government deep state isn't what you think, 

and America really needs it. USA Today . Retrieved from 

https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2019/11/14/trump-impeachment-attack-

intelligence-agencies-help-russia-column/4184670002/ 280 

Kirby, J. (2019). It doesn’t look like anyone can find evidence that the Trump campaign was set 

up in Russia probe. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-

politics/2019/12/5/20996935/russia-investigation-inspector-general-john-durham-mifsud 

Klein, P. (2020). Claiming John Bolton is just another 'deep state' James Comey is absurd. The 

Washington Examiner . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/claiming-john-bolton-is-just-another-

deep-state-james-comey-is-absurd 

Knutson, J. (2019). Sen. John Kennedy repeats Ukraine conspiracy theory about DNC server. 

Axios . Retrieved from https://www.axios.com/john-kennedy-ukraine-crowdstrike-

conspiracy-theory-5f662a44-9bdc-4a41-a2d3-e56575f8bc83.html 

Landes, R. (2007). The Jews as contested ground in postmodern conspiracy theory. Jewish 

Political Studies Review , 19 (3/4), 9-34. 

Lewis, R., & Marwick, A. (2017). Taking the red pill: Ideological motivations for spreading 

online disinformation. In Understanding and addressing the disinformation ecosystem 

(pp. 18-22). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania, Annenberg School of 

Communication. Retrieved from 

https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/9d91/58807cbf03fff609e74ef9e0e61c2e6088d8.pdf#pag 

e=21 

Lipton, E. (2016). Man motivated by ‘Pizzagate’ conspiracy theory arrested in Washington 

gunfire. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/us/pizzagate-comet-ping-pong-edgar-maddison-

welch.html 281 

Live Now: President Trump MAGA rally live in Green Bay, WI 4-27-19. (2019). Right Side 

Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xGcQBt5ZeOc 

Long, H., & Stein, J. (2019). The U.S. deficit hit $984 billion in 2019, soaring during Trump era. 

The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2019/10/25/us-deficit-hit-billion-marking-

nearly-percent-increase-during-trump-era/ 

Lucey, C., & Superville, D. (2018). Trump accuses DOJ of being part of ‘deep state.’ Associated 

Press . Retrieved from https://apnews.com/8720fde079e84237b8e6cca4219aafb2/Trump-

accuses-DOJ-of-being-part-of-'deep-state' 

Matheson, C. (2016). “What does Obama want of me?” Anxiety and Jade Helm 15. Quarterly 

Journal of Speech , 102 (2), 133-149. 

McCarthy, K. (2018). A top Republican fires back at ‘anonymous.’ The New York Times .

Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/07/opinion/letters/kevin-mccarthy-

trump-anonymous.html 

McIntire, M., & Roose, K. (2020). What happens when QAnon seeps from the web to the offline 

world. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/09/us/politics/qanon-trump-conspiracy-theory.html 

McNeill, C. (2020). QAnon conspiracy theorists find kinship on the Tampa Riverwalk. Tampa 

Bay Times . Retrieved from https://www.tampabay.com/news/tampa/2020/01/16/qanon-

conspiracy-theorists-find-kinship-on-the-tampa-riverwalk/ 

McQuarrie, M. (2017). The revolt of the Rust Belt: place and politics in the age of anger. The 

British Journal of Sociology , 68 (S1), S120-S152. 282 

Michaels, J. D. (2017). Trump and the “deep state”: The government strikes back. Foreign 

Affairs , 96 (5), 52-56. 

Miller, C. C. (2016). The long-term jobs killer is not China. It’s automation. The New York 

Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/upshot/the-long-term-jobs-

killer-is-not-china-its-automation.html 

Miller, J. M., Saunders, K. L., & Farhart, C. E. (2016). Conspiracy endorsement as motivated 

reasoning: The moderating roles of political knowledge and trust. American Journal of 

Political Science , 60 (4), 824-844. 

Miller, S. (2002). Conspiracy theories: Public arguments as coded social critiques: A rhetorical 

analysis of the TWA flight 800 conspiracy theories. Argumentation & Advocacy , 39 , 40-

56. 

Moshakis, A. (2018). Is the Earth flat? Meet the people questioning science. The Guardian .

Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/global/2018/may/27/is-the-earth-pancake-

flat-among-the-flat-earthers-conspiracy-theories-fake-news 

Neville-Shepard, R. (2018). Paranoid style and subtextual form in modern conspiracy rhetoric. 

Southern Communication Journal , 83 (2), 119-132. 

Neville-Shepard, R. (2019). Post-presumption argumentation and the posttruth world: On the 

conspiracy rhetoric of Donald Trump. Argumentation and Advocacy , 55 (3), 175-193. 

Newkirk, M., & Stohr, G. (2018). Trump’s war on ‘deep state’ judges. Constitutional 

Accountability Center . Retrieved from https://www.theusconstitution.org/news/trumps-

war-deep-state-judges/ 283 

Nicholas, P. (2019). Trump needs conspiracy theories. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2019/11/trump-conspiracy-theories-

ukraine/602728/ 

Ohlheiser, A. (2018). You’ll never guess how the QAnon conspiracy theorists feel about all this 

media coverage. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2018/08/03/this-is-the-moment-

how-a-wave-of-media-coverage-gave-qanon-conspiracy-theorists-their-best-week-ever/ 

Oliver, E., & Wood, T. (2019). Yes, views on impeachment are related to belief in conspiracy 

theories — but not the ones you’d expect. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/12/04/americans-views-impeachment-

are-strongly-tied-conspiracy-theories/ 

Olmsted, K. (2018). A conspiracy so dense. The Baffler , 42 , 36-45. 

Olorunnipa, T., & DeBonis, M. (2019). Trump falls short on infrastructure after promising to 

build roads, bridges and consensus. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-falls-short-on-infrastructure-after-

promising-to-build-roads-bridges-and-consensus/2019/05/26/1027446e-7c9f-11e9-8bb7-

0fc796cf2ec0_story.html 

Palen, M. W. (2016). Trump’s anti-trade tirades recall GOP’s protectionist past. The 

Conversation . Retrieved from https://theconversation.com/trumps-anti-trade-tirades-

recall-gops-protectionist-past-54631 

Panetta, G. (2019). Congressional Republicans are repeating many baseless conspiracy theories 

in Trump's impeachment inquiry. Here's why they're all bogus. Business Insider .284 

Retrieved from https://www.businessinsider.com/why-gop-conspiracy-theories-about-

trump-ukraine-bogus-2019-11 

Polletta, F., & Callahan, J. (2019). Deep stories, nostalgia narratives, and fake news: Storytelling 

in the Trump era. In J. L. Mast & J. C. Alexander (Eds.) Politics of meaning/meaning of 

politics: Cultural sociology of the 2016 u.s. presidential election (pp. 55-73). Cham, 

Switzerland: Springer. 

Ponnuru, R., & Strain, M. R. (2018). Trumponomics. National Review . Retrieved from 

https://www.nationalreview.com/magazine/2018/08/13/trumponomics/ 

Popp, R. K. (2006). History in discursive limbo: Ritual and conspiracy narratives on the history 

channel. Popular Communication , 4(4), 253–272. 

Press briefing by Press Secretary Sarah Sanders. (2018, August 1). The White House . Retrieved 

from https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/press-briefing-press-secretary-

sarah-sanders-080118/ 

Prokop, A. (2016). Trump fanned a conspiracy about Obama's birthplace for years. Now he 

pretends Clinton started it. Vox . Retrieved from 

https://www.vox.com/2016/9/16/12938066/donald-trump-obama-birth-certificate-birther 

Public troubled by ‘deep state.’ (2018). Monmouth University Polling Institute . Retrieved from 

https://www.monmouth.edu/polling-institute/reports/monmouthpoll_us_031918/ 

Relman, E. (2019). The pro-Trump conspiracy theory known as 'QAnon' has moved from the 

fringes of the internet to feature prominently at Trump rallies. Business Insider . Retrieved 

from https://www.businessinsider.com/what-is-qanon-right-wing-conspiracy-theory-

surfaces-at-trump-rally-2018-8 285 

Rizzo, S. (2019). More than two years later, Trump’s wall remains unbuilt. The Washington 

Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/09/06/more-than-

two-years-later-trumps-wall-remains-unbuilt/ 

Rogers, K. (2018, July 31). At Florida rally, Trump boasts about the economy and takes aim at 

usual targets. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/31/us/politics/trump-tampa-rally.html 

Rohac, D. (2019). In defense of globalism . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 

Roig-Franzia, M. (2019). Inside the spectacular fall of the granddaddy of right-wing conspiracy 

sites. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/inside-the-spectacular-fall-of-the-

granddaddy-of-right-wing-conspiracy-sites/2019/04/02/6ac53122-3ba6-11e9-a06c-

3ec8ed509d15_story.html 

Rupar, A. (2020). Trump spent his holidays retweeting QAnon and Pizzagate accounts. Vox .

Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2020/1/2/21046707/trump-

qanon-pizzagate-retweets 

Sainato, M. (2019). 'He pulled the wool over our eyes': workers blame Trump for moving jobs 

overseas. The Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-

news/2019/jul/10/trump-workers-jobs-overseas-factories 

Sandel, M. (2019). Populism, Trump, and the future of democracy. Institute for New Economic 

Thinking . Retrieved from https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/populism-

trump-and-the-future-of-democracy 286 

Schwarzenegger, C. (2020). Personal epistemologies of the media: Selective criticality, 

pragmatic trust, and competence–confidence in navigating media repertoires in the digital 

age. New Media & Society , 22 (2), 361–377. 

Schweitzer, M. E. (2017). What’s gone wrong (and right) in the industrial heartland? Federal 

Reserve Bank of Cleveland . Retrieved from https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-

and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2017-economic-commentaries/ec-

201714-whats-gone-wrong-and-right-in-the-industrial-heartland.aspx 

Shammas, B. (2020). A mother teamed up with QAnon followers to kidnap her son from 

protective custody, police say. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/crime-law/2020/01/08/mother-teamed-up-with-qanon-

followers-kidnap-her-son-protective-custody-police-say/ 

Shear, M. D. (2018, November 4). Trump’s America: Aggrieved and adoring voices from inside 

the presidential bubble. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/04/us/politics/trump-rally-voters.html 

Shuster, S., & Bergengruen, V. (2019). How Trump's obsession with a conspiracy theory led to 

the impeachment crisis. Time . Retrieved from https://time.com/5691641/trump-

conspiracy-fears/ 

Sommer, W. (2018). Trump’s allies struggle to stop QAnon’s spread. The Daily Beast . Retrieved 

from https://www.thedailybeast.com/trumps-biggest-media-fans-struggle-to-stop-qanons-

spread 

Sommer, W. (2019). What Is QAnon? The craziest theory of the Trump era, explained. The 

Daily Beast . Retrieved from https://www.thedailybeast.com/what-is-qanon-the-craziest-

theory-of-the-trump-era-explained 287 

Spagat, E. (2017). US-Mexico border mayors worry about NAFTA makeover. Associated Press .

Retrieved from https://apnews.com/df50bbb13c1e433c997cff18fd414f86 

Stack, L. (2016). Globalism: A far-right conspiracy theory buoyed by Trump. The New York 

Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/us/politics/globalism-right-

trump.html 

Stein, J. (2010). Pivotal decade: How the United States traded factories for finance in the 

seventies . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Sturken, M. (1997). Reenactment, fantasy, and the paranoia of history: Oliver Stone’s 

docudramas. History & Theory , 36 (4), 64-79. 

Suessenbach, F., & Moore, A. B. (2019). Dominance desires predicting conspiracy beliefs and 

Trump support in the 2016 U.S. election. Motivation Science . doi:10.1037/mot0000146 

Sullivan, M. (2017). Defending family unity as an immigration policy priority. Studies in Social 

Justice , 11 (2), 369-388. 

Sullivan, M. (2019). Trump cries ‘fake!’ about media reports of White House chaos. But they 

keep getting proven right. The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/trump-cries-fake-about-media-reports-of-

white-house-chaos-but-they-keep-getting-proven-right/2019/01/02/5af4db60-0e8a-11e9-

831f-3aa2c2be4cbd_story.html 

Trump, D. (2016). Transcript of Donald Trump’s immigration speech. The New York Times .

Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/us/politics/transcript-trump-

immigration-speech.html 

Trump, D. (2017). The inaugural address. The White House . Retrieved from 

https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/the-inaugural-address/ 288 

Trump, D. (2018, September 15). While my (our) poll numbers are good, with the Economy 

being the best ever, if it weren’t for the Rigged Russian Witch Hunt, they would be 25 

points higher! Highly conflicted Bob Mueller & the 17 Angry Democrats are using this 

Phony issue to hurt us in the Midterms. No Collusion! [Tweet]. Retrieved from 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1041086383505465345 

Vance, J. D. (2016). How Donald Trump seduced America’s white working class. The Guardian .

Retrieved https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/jd-vance-hillbilly-

elegy-donald-trump-us-white-poor-working-class 

Van Dam, A. (2019). Trump said he’d rebuild manufacturing. Now it’s in decline. What 

happened? The Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2019/09/05/trump-said-hed-rebuild-

manufacturing-now-its-decline-what-happened/ 

van Prooijen, J.-W. (2018). Populism as political mentality underlying conspiracy theories. In B. 

T. Rutjens & M. J. Brandt (Eds.) Belief systems and the perception of reality (pp. 81-96). 

New York, NY: Routledge. 

van Prooijen, J.-W., & Douglas, K. M. (2018). Belief in conspiracy theories: Basic principles of 

an emerging research domain. European Journal of Social Psychology , 48 , 897–908. 

van Prooijen, J.-W., & Krouwel, A. P. M., & Pollet, T. V. (2015). Political extremism predicts 

belief in conspiracy theories. Social Psychological and Personality Science , 6(5) 570-

578. 

van Prooijen, J.-W., & van Vugt, M. (2018). Conspiracy theories: Evolved functions and 

psychological mechanisms. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 13 (6), 770–788. 289 

View, T. (2018). How conspiracy theories spread from the Internet’s darkest corners. The 

Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2018/09/18/how-conspiracy-theories-spread-

internets-darkest-corners/ 

Vogel, K. P., Shane, S., & Kingsley, P. (2018). How vilification of George Soros moved from 

the fringes to the mainstream. The New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/31/us/politics/george-soros-bombs-trump.html 

Walker, J. (2013). The United States of paranoia: A conspiracy theory . New York, NY: Harper 

Collins. 

Warner, B. R., & Neville-Shepard, R. (2014). Echoes of a conspiracy: Birthers, truthers, and the 

cultivation of extremism. Communication Quarterly , 62 (1), 1–17. 

Watch live: President Donald Trump holds MAGA rally in Grand Rapids, MI 3/28/19. (2019). 

Right Side Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xv8c27Gt-0 

Weigel, D. (2017). Trump and Republicans see a ‘deep state’ foe: Barack Obama. The 

Washington Post . Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2017/03/07/trump-and-

republicans-see-a-deep-state-foe-barack-obama/ 

Wolf, Z. B. (2019). The whistleblower vs. Trump's 'deep state.' CNN . Retrieved from 

https://www.cnn.com/2019/09/28/politics/whistleblower-deep-state-trump-impeachment-

inquiry/index.html 290 

Wood, M. J. (2018). Propagating and debunking conspiracy theories on twitter during the 2015– 

2016 Zika virus outbreak. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking , 21 (8), 

485-490. 

Zarefsky, D. (1984). Conspiracy arguments in the Lincoln-Douglas debates. Journal of the 

American Forensic Association , 21 (2), 63-75. 

Zelizer, J. E. (2015). The fierce urgency of now: Lyndon Johnson, Congress, and the battle for 

the Great Society . New York, NY: Penguin Books. 291 

References: Chapter VII, Conclusion 

Achen, C. H., & Bartels, L. M. (2016). Democracy for realists: Why elections do not produce 

responsive government . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Allen, D. S. (2004). Talking to strangers: Anxieties of citizenship since Brown v. Board of 

Education . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Allen, J. (2019). Trump, launching re-election bid, says Democrats ‘want to destroy our 

country.’ NBC News . Retrieved from https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-

election/trump-launching-re-election-bid-says-democrats-want-destroy-our-n1019176 

Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing 

Company. 

Becker, B. (2016). Trump's 6 populist positions. Politico . Retrieved from 

https://www.politico.com/story/2016/02/donald-trump-working-class-voters-219231 

Bond, R. M., Shulman, H. C., & Gilbert, M. (2018). Does having a political discussion help or 

hurt intergroup perceptions? Drawing guidance from social identity theory and the 

contact hypothesis. International Journal of Communication , 12 , 4332–4352. 

Burk, R. F. (1981). New perspectives for presidential libraries. Presidential Studies Quarterly ,

11 , 399-410. 

Burke, K. (1959). Attitudes toward history . Los Altos, CA: Hermes. 

Campanella, E., & Dassù, M. (2019). Brexit and nostalgia. Survival , 61 , 103-111. 

Cheng, S., & Wen, F. (2019). Americans overestimate the intergenerational persistence in 

income ranks. PNAS , 116 (28), 13909–13914. 

Cloud, D. L. (1996). Hegemony or concordance? The rhetoric of tokenism in “Oprah” Winfrey’s 

rags‐to‐riches biography. Critical studies in mass communication , 13 , 115-137. 292 

Cooper, M. (2015). The downsizing of the American Dream. The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/10/american-dreams/408535/ 

Davis, J. H. (2018). Trump calls some unauthorized immigrants ‘animals’ in rant . The New York 

Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/16/us/politics/trump-

undocumented-immigrants-animals.html 

Dickerson, M. (2016). Is the American Dream dead? The Conversation . Retrieved from 

https://theconversation.com/is-the-american-dream-dead-57095 

Endres, D., Hess, A., Senda-Cook, S., & Middleton, M. K. (2016). In Situ rhetoric: Intersections 

between qualitative inquiry, fieldwork, and rhetoric. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical 

Methodologies , 16 (6), 511–524. 

Filkins, D. (2019). Blood and soil in Narendra Modi’s India. The New Yorker . Retrieved from 

https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/12/09/blood-and-soil-in-narendra-modis-

india?verso=true 

Fisher, W. R. (1973). Reaffirmation and subversion of the American dream. The Quarterly 

Journal of Speech , 59 (2), 160-167. 

Fisher, W. R. (1985). The narrative paradigm: An elaboration. Communication Monographs , 52 ,

347–367. doi:10.1080/03637758509376117. 

Foer, F. (2017). What’s wrong with the Democrats? The Atlantic . Retrieved from 

https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/07/whats-wrong-with-the-

democrats/528696/ 

Hasian Jr., M. (1997). Understanding the power of conspiratorial rhetoric: A case study of the 

Protocols of the Elders of Zion. Communication Studies , 48 , 195-214. 293 

Healy, G. (2009). The cult of the presidency: America's dangerous devotion to executive power .

Washington, D.C.: CATO Institute. 

Hibbing, J. R., Smith, K. B., & Alford, J. R. (2014). Predisposed: Liberals, conservatives, and 

the biology of political differences . New York, NY: Routledge. 

Hochschild, J. L. (1995). Facing up to the American Dream: Race, class, and the soul of the 

nation . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Hooks, C. (2019). The Texas GOP keeps on dancing to Donald Trump’s tune. Texas Monthly .

Retrieved from https://www.texasmonthly.com/politics/texas-gop-donald-trump/ 

Justice J., & Bricker, B. (2019). Hacked: Defining the 2016 presidential election in the liberal 

media. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 22 (3), 389-420. 

Kamisar, B. (2016). Trump: 'We’re going to take care of people who are dying on the street'. The 

Hill . Retrieved from http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/gop-primaries/268523-trump-

were-going-to-take-care-of-people-who-are-dying-on-the 

Klein, E. (2020). Why Democrats still have to appeal to the center, but Republicans don’t. The 

New York Times . Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/24/opinion/sunday/democrats-republicans-

polarization.html 

Koch, J. P. (2016). The affective presidency. Wayne State University Dissertations , 1646. 

Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.wayne.edu/oa_dissertations/1646 

Levitz, E. (2017). Democrats can abandon the center — because the center doesn’t exist. New 

York Magazine . Retrieved from https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/07/dems-can-

abandon-the-center-because-the-center-doesnt-exist.html 294 

McCoy, J., Rahman, T., & Somer, M. (2018). Polarization and the global crisis of democracy: 

Common patterns, dynamics, and pernicious consequences for democratic polities. 

American Behavioral Scientist , 62 (1), 16–42. 

Mercieca, J. R., & Vaughn, J. S. (2014). Barack Obama and the rhetoric of heroic expectations. 

In J. S. Vaughn & J. R. Mercieca (Eds.) The rhetoric of heroic expectations: Establishing 

the Obama presidency (pp. 1-29). College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press. 

Metzl, J. (2019). Trump Is a health hazard to his supporters. Vice . Retrieved from 

https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/a3bad8/how-trump-supporters-are-dangers-to-

themselves 

Nelson, D. (2008). Bad for democracy: How the presidency undermines the power of the people .

Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 

Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2019). Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit, and authoritarian 

populism . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Obama, B. (2004). Barack Obama’s keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National 

Convention. PBS . Retrieved from https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/barack-obamas-

keynote-address-at-the-2004-democratic-national-convention 

Ott, B. L., & Dickinson, G. (2019). The twitter presidency: Donald J. Trump and the politics of 

white rage . New York, NY: Routledge. 

Page, S., Behrmann, S., & Santucci, J. (2019, October 29). Poll: Who's sticking with President 

Trump, through trouble and tweets? His seemingly unshakable base. USA Today .

Retrieved from https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/10/29/trump-poll-

impeachment-ukraine-call-core-supporters/2478185001/ 295 

Partisanship and Political Animosity in 2016. (2016). Pew Research Center . Retrieved from 

https://www.people-press.org/2016/06/22/partisanship-and-political-animosity-in-2016/ 

Pink, S. (2015). Doing sensory ethnography (2 nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 

Pradhan, R. (2019). Number of uninsured Americans rises for the first time since Obamacare. 

Politico . Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/story/2019/09/10/health-insurance-

rate-1719381 

Prolonged housing crisis diminishes confidence in the American Dream, 2015 Housing Matters 

survey finds. (2015). MacArthur Foundation . Retrieved from 

https://www.macfound.org/press/press-releases/prolonged-housing-crisis-diminishes-

confidence-american-dream-2015-housing-matters-survey-finds/ 

Reagan, R. (1981). Statement on United States immigration and refugee policy. The American 

Presidency Project . Retrieved from http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=44128 

Reagan, R. (1989). Farewell address to the nation. The American Presidency Project .

http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=29650 

Rowland, R. C., & Jones, J. M. (2007). Recasting the American Dream and American politics: 

Barack Obama's keynote address to the 2004 Democratic National Convention. Quarterly 

Journal of Speech , 93 (4), 425-448. 

Rowland, R. C., & Jones, J. M. (2011). One dream: Barack Obama, race, and the American 

Dream. Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 14 (1), 125–154. 

Samuel, L. R. (2012). The American Dream: A cultural history . Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 

University Press. 296 

Sartwell, C. (2019). Rural voters’ pride and the left’s prejudice. The Wall Street Journal .

Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/rural-voters-pride-and-the-lefts-prejudice-

11571263966?mod=article_inline 

Schwartzburg, R., & Szijarto, I. (2019). When Orbán was a liberal. Jacobin . Retrieved from 

https://jacobinmag.com/2019/07/viktor-orban-fidesz-party-youth-activism 

Serazio, M. (2019). The power of sports: Media and spectacle in American culture . New York, 

NY: New York University Press. 

Stein, J. (2017). Study: Hillary Clinton’s TV ads were almost entirely policy-free. Vox . Retrieved 

from https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/3/8/14848636/hillary-clinton-tv-ads 

Tharoor, I. (2019). The grim history that Brazil’s president wants to celebrate. The Washington 

Post . Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2019/03/27/grim-history-

that-brazils-president-wants-celebrate/ 

Thornton, P. (2016). I’m a coastal elite from the Midwest: The real bubble is rural America. Roll 

Call . https://www.rollcall.com/news/opinion/im-a-coastal-elite-from-the-midwest-the-

real-bubble-is-rural-america 

Tracy, S. J. (2013). Qualitative research methods . Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 

Trump, D. J. (2015). Here's Donald Trump's presidential announcement speech. Time . Retrieved 

from https://time.com/3923128/donald-trump-announcement-speech/ 

Trump, D. J. (2016, July 10). President Obama thinks the nation is not as divided as people 

think. He is living in a world of the make believe! [Tweet]. Retrieved from 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/752207752852832256?s=20 297 

Warner, B. R., & Villamil, A. (2017). A test of imagined contact as a means to improve cross-

partisan feelings and reduce attribution of malevolence and acceptance of political 

violence. Communication Monographs , 84 (4), 447-465. 

Watch live: President Donald Trump holds MAGA rally in Grand Rapids, MI 3/28/19. (2019). 

Right Side Broadcasting Network [Video file]. Retrieved from 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xv8c27Gt-0 

Winslow, L. (2017). Economic injustice and the rhetoric of the American Dream . Lanham, MD: 

Lexington Books. 

Yglesias, M. (2020). Gretchen Whitmer’s smart, boring speech highlighted Democrats’ biggest 

2020 dilemma. Vox . Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2020/2/4/21123581/gretchen-

whitmer-state-of-the-union-response-text 

Zeitz, J. (2017). Does the white working class really vote against its own interests? Politico .

Retrieved from https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2017/12/31/trump-white-

working-class-history-216200 

Zitner, A., & Chinni, D. (2019). Democrats and republicans live in different worlds. The Wall 

Street Journal . Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/democrats-and-republicans-

live-in-different-worlds-11568996171
