Title: Secret Service Director Testifies on Attempted Assassination of Donald Trump : CSPAN2 : July 23, 2024 4:49am-9:28am EDT : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN2_20240723_084900_Secret_Service_Director_Testifies_on_Attempted_Assassination_of_Donald...

Markdown Content:
4:49 am

4:50 am

[inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations]

4:51 am

[inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations]

4:52 am

[inaudible conversations] >> i want to welcome everyone here today and i know we also want to welcome speaker johnson who is also in attendance today. without objection the chair may declare a recess at any time. i now recognize my soul for the purpose of making an opening

4:53 am

statement -- myself -- first without representing mr. nelson of florida and ms. miller of ohio are weighed on to the committee for purpose of questioning the witness at today's hearing. without objection, so ordered. good morning. today's hearing is for the american people who are seeking answers about the attempted assassination of president trump. a a little over a week ago americans watched in horror as a shooter attempted to assassinate president donald j. trump at a campaign rally in butler, pennsylvania. the gunmen nearly succeeded. the bullet that struck president trump said was less than an inch from taking his life. president trump survived but one rally goer, corey comperatore tragically did not. two others were seriously injured. it was a horrifying moment in american history. the horror was exceeded only by the bravery of a law enforcement agents who threw themselves in harm's way when shots were fired.

4:54 am

fired. the bravery of a crowd unwavering and his refusal to panic and the bravery of a bloody president trump refusing to run. while we give overwhelming thanks to the individual secret service agents who did their jobs under immense pressure, this tragedy was preventable. the secret service's protective mission is to protect u.s. and visiting world leaders and safeguard u.s. elections through protection of candidates and nominees. the secret service has a zero failed mission, but it failed on july 13, and in the days leading up to the rally. the secret service has thousands of employees, and a significant budget, but has now become the face of incompetence. the committee has a long track record of providing oversight of the secret service. our predecessors both jason chaffetz and elijah cummings

4:55 am

among others worked together to issue warnings and recommendations to address obvious shortcomings in the agencies make up and operations. unfortunately those warnings and recommendations have gone unheeded. a former president and current candidate for president were shot in head by a sniper within 500 feet of the podium. this is unacceptable and where concern the secret service lacks the proper management to keep protect these safe from bad actors. americans demand answers but they have not been getting them from the secret service. we are instead learning about new facts about the events surrounding the attempted assassination everyday from whistleblowers and leaks. americans demand accountability but no one has yet to be fired for this historic failure. today's witness, secret service director kimberly cheatle, is

4:56 am

here under subpoena to answer questions about how the agency failed president trump and the victims who attended the rally in butler, pennsylvania. it is my firm belief, director cheatle, that you should resign. however, incomplete defiance director cheatle is making shall not attend her requisite nation, therefore she will answer questions they from members of this meeting seeking to provide clarity to the american people about how these events were allowed to transpire. we will ask these questions because the secret service and as parent agency the department of homeland security have been unwilling to provide answers to the american people. dhs has sought to push this hearing to a different time. secret service has suggested very occurred without media presence. and both agencies have provided only shadow explanations to congress about what happened on july 13. indeed, dhs and secret service lack of communication with the oversight committee required me

4:57 am

to issue a subpoena compelling director cheatle to attend today and still dhs requested more time to prepare. it shouldn't take this much time or preparation, director cheatle, to tell the truth and to be transparent with the american people. i am thankful to the ranking member mr. raskin for joining me and insisting that director cheatle appear today. god knows the ranking member and i disagree on many things, , but that does not matter today. the safety of secret service protectees is not based on their political affiliation and the bottom line is that under director cheatle leadership we question whether anyone is a safe, not president biden, not the first lady, not the white house, certainly not the presidential candidates. the july 13 assassination attempt is one of the darkest days in american political history. it represents the ugliest parts of what american politics has become. hatred of each other and the

4:58 am

dangers turn to extremism. before we republicans or democrats we were americans. if he plays our political affiliations about our duty and love of country, we cannot maintain a country. we must ensure our republic is strong and our republic cannot be strong when our leadership, our elections, our institutions and our candidates are threatened by extremism and violence. today, director cheatle went to questions about why she deserved to continue to play a critical role in preserving this countries safety and at the very least what led to the catastrophic deadly events on july 13 in butler, pennsylvania. again i do not believe director cheatle observed to maintain her position as head of the secret service but members of the american, and the american people will make their own decisions based on her answers today. i urge director cheatle to be transparent and forthcoming in her testimony today.

4:59 am

americans deserve no less. we have a duty to find out how this happened, and to ensure it never happens again. i now yield to ranking member raskin for his opening statement. >> thank you kindly, chairman comer. elijah cummings whose beautiful physically looks down upon us taught us that the way to find common ground in a crisis is to look for the higher ground, and leslie chairman comer and i came together to reach for the higher ground. we made a joint statement condemning the mass shooting an assassination attempt against former president trump as a great assault on our democracy. we wrote we are united in condemning all political violence. i join the good chairman and expressing condolences to the family of corey comperatore and in sending wishes to the wounded victims also of this atrocious act of violence. some are calling it a miracle that former president trump escape this ar-15 attack.

5:00 am

unlike so many thousands of our fellow citizens who have been killed or seriously wounded in other ar-15 shootings. whether this miracle is of divine providence for adventitious nature will be up to each of us to ponder, but our job in congress is not simply to marvel at miracles or count on good luck, but to act as public policy legislators to do whatever we can to prevent future political violence attempted assassinations and mass shootings. the chairman and i are that determined to get to the bottom of this stunning security failures that enable this 20-year-old lone gunmen who borrowed his father's ar-15 to perpetrate a mass shooting an assassination attempt at an event protected by the secret service as well as state and local police. we ask hard questions of director cheatle todayreminder e

5:01 am

5:02 am

and death brought by assault weapons and ar-15 in particular that is taken the lives of our children, parents, colleagues and neighbors. this this is a very parcel l. mass shootings have become so frequent that we don't even hear about them anymore. since the mass shooting in butler the roof already been at least ten additional mass shootings in america. two of which took place the same day that former president trump was targeted. one of the mass shootings on that violent saturday july 13 happen at 11 p.m. at a nightclub

5:03 am

in birmingham, alabama, where four people were shot dead and ten others wounded. this means basically that the butler attack was not even the deadliest mass shooting to happen in america on that day. a weapon that can be used to commit a mass shooting at events under the full protection of the secret service together with dozens of state and local police is obviously an intolerable threat to the rest of us who do not receive such protection, and obviously does not belong in our communities. it's time to pass universal background checks and build on this administration forth to ensure that we permanently close the loopholes in the brady law for gun show purchases, online purchases, and private sales to prevent those weapons from getting into the hands of people we know to be a threat to others. what happened in butler shows why even closing these loopholes, however, when i keep assault weapons out of the hands of potential assassins and mass murderers. under federal law and the vast

5:04 am

majority states even young people not old enough to buy a beer legally can legally purchase and own and ar-15 and carried it in public. the shooter in butler just his father's ar-15. we have to find the courage and resolve to pass a ban on ar-15 and other assault weapons, a band with broad support even the "new york post" loudly endorsed such a van in 2019. we have passed and assault weapons ban before. republicans and democrats together passed it in 1994, and in 2004 we as allowed the ban to expire. we know this weapons ban work. wednesday found in the decades that followed the bands lapse, mass shootings went back when hundred 83% and tesla mass shootings went up 239%. but even as we change the secret service and active and in wf war like the ar-15 we still will have fallen short of a duty if he felt announced every instance

5:05 am

of politically motivated violence in whatever form it takes. republicans and democrats again have come together to denounce this assassination attempt just as we did the pilot attempts on the lives of our colleagues stephen scalise and gabby giffords and paul pelosi the husband of speaker nancy pelosi who was attacked and brutalized in his home. and immediate aftermath of the january 6th mass violence ways and to wage against congress and the vice president of the constitution transfer power, democrats and republicans alike including senator mcconnell, chairman comer and other colleagues all denounced this five assault on our democracy that wounded approximately 140 officers from the u.s. capitol police and the metropolitan police department. and i commend them for acting to denounce that attack just as democrats moved swiftly to denounce the attack on congressman scalise. police questioned political

5:06 am

scientists tell us that authoritarian attacks and democratic institutions begin with political parties refusing to disavow or openly embracing political violence. we have projected on a strong bipartisan basis as chairman, and i have done, even as we ensure secret service is up to its vital task of protecting president in candidates, and his work to ensure that america the streets of our country are free from the violence of weapons of war. thank you, mr. chairman. i yield back tees. thank you. gentleman yields back. today were joined by kimberly cheatle was sworn in to office on september 17, 2022, as a direct of the united states secret service. prior to her appointment director cheatle was senior director of global security at pepsico. before her role at pepsi she served 27 years in the secret service. pursuant to committee ruled 9g the witness will please stand and race her right hand. do you solemnly swear or affirm the test when you're about to give it's a truth, the whole, and nothing but the truth so help you god?

5:07 am

>> at the record show the witness answered in the affirmative. thank you. we certainly appreciate you being here today and look forward to your testimony. we normally limit testimony to opening statement to five minutes but take all the time that you need. obviously, the rules that we will abide by, when you are finished with your statement, we will then turn to questions. each member will have five minutes. and just a note to the members, i'm going to strictly adhere to the five minutes. once five minutes is up i will hit the gavel. if the directors in the process of answering a question we will certainly let her finish her answers, and then we will move on. we're going to have about 100% attended to get a post a few additional add-ons, so this will be a very lengthy here and we want to make sure every number gets there five minutes

5:08 am

uninterrupted to be able to add the important questions in this very bipartisan hearing today. i now recognize director cheatle for your opening statement. >> thank you. good morning, chairman comer, ranking member raskin, and distinguished members of the committee. my name is kimberly cheatle and i'm the director of the united states secret service. i appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today. the assassination attempt a former president donald trump on july 13 is the most significant operational failure of the secret service in decades, and i'm keeping him and his family in my thoughts. i would like to offer my sincerest condolences to the family of corey comperatore, a former fire chief and a hero who was killed in this senseless shooting. i would also like to knows those who were injured in butler, david dutch and james copenhagen, and i wish them a speedy recovery. i would never miss evident that

5:09 am

also extend my condolences on the passing of your colleague congresswoman sheila jackson lee. ms. jackson lee was always engage in the oversight of the secret service, and her passing is a great loss to this body. the secret service solemn mission is to protect our nation's leaders. on july 13, we failed. as director of the united states secret service i take full responsibility for any security lapse of our agency. we are fully cooperating with ongoing investigations. we must learn what happened and i will know heaven and earth to ensure that an incident like july 13 has not happen again. let me state unequivocally. nothing i have said should be interpreted to place the blame for this failure on our federal, state or local law enforcement partners who supported the secret service in butler. we could not do job without them we rely on relationships built over use the working together to

5:10 am

secure events and conduct investigations. our agents, officers and support personnel understand that every day we are expected to sacrifice our lives to execute a no fail mission. as witness on july 13, our special agents shield the former president trump with their own bodies on the stage while shots were being fired. fice without hesitation. i'm proud beyond wordsf the actionsaken by the former presidentsetail, the counter sniper team and neutralized the gunman, and the tactical team who was prepared to act. i will be transparent as possible when i speak with you. understanding though at times that any delimited in providing a thorough response in this open setting due to associated risks with sharing highly sensitive protective methodologies. i do not want to end overtly provide you with inaccurate

5:11 am

information. since january 1, 2024, the secret service has successfully secured over 7500 sites. every protective advance comes with its own set of challenges and requires the customize mitigation strategy including specific assets. serity plans are multilayered, providing 360° of protection degrees of protection. these layers include personnel, technical, and tactical assets which are force multiplier for our protective posture. during every advance we attempt to strike a balance between enabling the protectees to be visible and our requirements to be secure. i know this because i have spent 29 years in this agency. i came up through the ranks. i secure events for every president since president clinton, supervisor and president cheney detail, k and center, oversaw all of investigations and protected visits in the state of georgia, supervised on vice president by

5:12 am

detail, and agencies entire protective mission during the trump administration. the comprehensive advanced process involves collaborative planning between our secret service, the protectee staff, local law enforcement partners, and the level of security provided for the former president increase while before the campaign and has been steadily increasing as threats evolve. the security plan included a a full assessment of the butler farm showgrounds to identify security vulnerabilities and craft a security plan for the protectee, attendees, and the public. immediately following the assassination attempt i directed the activation of my crisis center. i assembled my executive team to begin searching more protective resources to the former president and sure the wellness of her people post incident all while security and active crime scene. i immediately ordered a reevaluation of the republican national convention security plan and to increase the security posture and the national capital region for all

5:13 am

permanent protectees and sites. at the same time i i initiatea mission assurance investigation within our agency. i have instructed my team that all necessary resources will be dedicated to investigating these manners. we will not rest until we have explored every option and we believe no stone unturned. i want to be clear, i am not waiting for these investigations to be completed prior to making changes. over the past few weeks we successfully led the planning and execution of the 75th nato summit and republican national convention. over the next humans will estimate security plan for the democratic national convention, the united nations general assembly and and i began plg and corrugated the 2025 inauguration. it is now more important than ever for the men and women of the secret service remained resilient and to focus on what is necessary to carry out our critical mission. our agency needs to be adequately resourced in order to serve our current mission requirements and anticipate future requirements.

5:14 am

the secret service for tex 36 individuals on a daily basis as well as world leaders to visit the united states like israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu who arrived in washington, d.c. today. the coming years will bring an unprecedented heavy protection tempo. i have no doubt that the processes that i've committed during my ten years as director in addition to unduly 30 years of experience in this agency have positioned the secret service to be stronger. our mission is not political. it is literally a matter of life and death, and the tragic events on july 13 remind us of that. i have full confidence in the men and women of the secret service. they are worthy of our support and executing our protective mission. i will not answer any questions that the committee may have. >> thank you much, director cheatle. we will now begin our five minutes question, and i will begin. just for the record, the secret service has an annual budget of

5:15 am

around $3.1 billion, and i believe around 8000 employees. is that correct for? yes, sir. >> obviously there were many security failures on the day of the attempted assassination a leading up to that day. let's start with the building this year used to shoot president trump from. at any point saturday did the secret service have an agent on top of that roof? >> sir, sure as you can imagine which is 90s out from this incident and are still an ongoing -- nine days -- i want to make sure information that we're providing -- >> so you can't, okay. why did the secret service not come can answer why the secret service didn't place a single agent on the roof? >> we are still looking into the advanced process and the decision speed okay, okay. wasn't that building within the perimeter that should be secured? do we agree with that? >> the building was outside of the perimeter on the date of the

5:16 am

visit. but again that is one of the things that during the investigation we want to take a look at and determine whether or not other decisions should have been made. >> one of the things that you said i believe in an interview at the wasn't an agent on the roof because it was a sloped roof. is that normal, and did you fear that immediately creates an opportunity for future would-be assassins to look for a slanted roof? i mean, this is a huge question that every american has. why was it a secret service agent on the roof? and the ribbon reports that agents were supposed to be on the roof but it was hot that day and they did want to be on the roof. can answer those questions, director? >> i appreciate you asking that question, chairman. i should've been more clear my answer when i spoke about where we placed personnel in that interview. what i can you is that the was a plan in place to provide overwatch, and we are still looking into responsibilities and who is going to provide overwatch. but the secret service in

5:17 am

general, not speaking specifically to this incident, when we're providing overwatch whether that be through counter snipers or other technology preferred to have sterile rooftops. >> did the secret service use any drones for surveillance that they? >> so again i'm not going to get into specifics of that day in itself but there are times during a security plan that the secret service has deployed an asset like -- >> there were reports that the shoe used a drone just a few hours before the rally, start typing is accurate? >> i have heard the same reports. and again i'm waiting for the final report. >> do you know, if you can't answer the question, that's your answer. but can answer this, do you know, do you know, i'm not asking yes or no, but do you know if the shooter used a drone before the shooting? >> that information has been passed to us from the fbi. >> how many secret service agents were assigned to

5:18 am

president trump on the day of the rally? >> i can i'm not going to get into the specifics of the numbers of personnel that we had their, we feel that there was a sufficient number of agents assigned. >> there are reports that several agents assigned to the wrote on july 13 were temporary agents, ages that normally assigned to president trump it is accurate? >> what i can tell you is that the agents that were assigned to former president trump are secret service agents that provide close protection to him, and that was what was actual on that day. >> how many temporary agents were there that day? >> quite frequently come , g campaign defense the secret service utilizes agents from hsi or the department of -- >> you don't know how many what? have the investigators reconstructed the shooters precise movements over the past days, weeks and months? >> so again -- >> we need to have confidence that if the api is leading this

5:19 am

investigation, that they are leading a credible investigation because there's some of us sitting appear to did that don't have a lot of confidence in the fbi. so i will repeat the question. have the investigators reconstructed the shooters precise moment over the past days, weeks and months? >> i understand your question chairman. i share your concerns about wanting to make sure that we have factual information. the fbi is conducting a criminal investigation. the secret service is conducting an internal investigation. there are a number of investigations and there is the extra investigation -- >> last question from me. before july 13, had of the company to requested additional resources? >> what i can tell he is about for the events on july 13, the details that were, the assets that were requested for that day were given. >> okay. my time has expired. the chair now recognizes ranking member raskin for five it. >> thank you, mr. chairman. it's then reported that before

5:20 am

former president trump got up on the stage around 6 p.m. on saturday july 13 that the local police have identified and even photographed a man who was acting suspiciously. this man turned out to be the gunman had been flagged as a potential threat. is that accurate? >> what i can say is that the individual was identified as suspicious. >> so he was known to be suspicious before former president trump took the stage. >> that is information i have received. >> why was he about to take the stage with a suspicious person having been identified in the crowd? >> i appreciate the question and i'm like to make two points. if the details have been passed information that there was a threat, the detail would never have brought the former president out onto stage. that is what we do and that is who we are. we are charged with protecting

5:21 am

all of our protectees. >> cigie distinction between someone who is suspicion and someone who is threatening come is that right? >> there are a number of times and protected events were suspicious people are identified, and those individuals have to be investigated and determined what is it that identifies that person as suspicious. >> did you denying a request for additional resources that have been made by the trump campaign? >> there were no assets denied for that event in the butler on the 13th. >> i see. so you're saying there were request made for additional assistance for other specific events rather than the campaign as a whole, is over? >> i'm sorry. i'm not -- >> you seem to say that were not additional resources requested for that event, and forgive me for being unfamiliar with this. is it requested events by event, or is it requested just in general for the campaign? >> so if i can explain the

5:22 am

advanced process. when an event or opinion is identified by in this case campaign staff, then the campaign staff works together with secret service agents who conduct and advance. generally that is a five day time period. where this discussions or have that what the perimeter is going to look like come with the size of the that is, what the venue is. and then from there there's a request made to mitigate potential risks and threat. and i'm saying that on that day the requests that were pushed forward were granted. >> so that secret service did not know that the gunmen actually had a weapon before president trump was allowed to get up on stage? >> to the best of our knowledge and the facts with at this point that is correct. >> so can answer this question which i think is on the minds of most americans thinking about this. how can a 20-year-old with with his father's ar-15 assault weapon climb on to a roof with a

5:23 am

direct 150-yard line of sight, the speakers podium come without this secret service or local police stopping him? >> so again i will say we are nine days out from this event, and i would like to know those answers as well, which is why we are going through these investigations to be able to determine that fully. >> okay. it's been reported that the shooter was not carrying a driver's license or any form of identification. they had no idea who he was, but then he was quickly identified, i think within 30 minutes, by using the serial number on the ar-15. under a tracing system that is now controversial. some people say we should get rid of it, some people want to keep it. but is that right that the serial number was the key information which led to the identification of the shooter? >> that is my understanding, sir, yes. >> okay.

5:24 am

if, if an american citizen where just to stop you and say, director cheatle, we support your work to the tune of billions of dollars in thousands and thousands of employees, what went wrong? what would you say? >> again, knowing we are 90s out i would say as i said from the very outset, i accept responsibility for this tragedy. we are going to look into -- we are nine days out -- we will take corrective action to ensure it never happens again. >> i appreciate that, and i hope you will act with vigor and focus and intensity in the seem to understand the gravity and so -- millions and millions of americans don't feel safe with all the ar-15 out there. without at least the president of the trend for former president of the united states would be safe but now that's not even clear. mr. chairman, i get back to. >> that chernow recognize the chairman of the house future committee mr. and from.

5:25 am

>> director we are guessing or line? the day after president trump is shot, secret service spokesman anthony googly on he said quote the associate member of the former president security requested officials could he resources that the u.s. secret service or the department of homeland security rebuff is absolutely false. the next day secretary mayorkas said that is unequivocally also assertion we've not received any request for additional security measures that were rebuffed. the five days later the "washington post" said this. top officials repeatedly rejected requests from donald trump security detail for more personnel. the next day the nearest time said this. he acknowledged that the secret service had turned down some requests for additional federal security assets for mr. trump's detail. so which is it? both statements can't be true. we are guessing or languages said you didn't turned on request from president trump's

5:26 am

detail? >> need to conserve your appreciate. >> what were you doing because those statements don't jive. >> what i can tell you is for the events in butler there were no request that were denied. as far as request -- >> maybe they got tired of asking. maybe turned them down so darn much the said not worth asking. how may times did you turn down that? >> i think it is important to distinguish between what some people may view as a denial of an asset or request -- >> easier spokesperson? he said he acknowledged the secret service had turned down some request unmasking how many? >> i denial of request is not equal of all ability. >> tom wait it is. >> there are a number of ways that threats and risks can be mitigated with a number of different assets, whether that be through personnel, whether that be through technology or other resources.

5:27 am

>> tell the committee which it was. they asked for additional help in some form or another. you told them no. how may times did you tell them know i what did you tell them no to? >> again, i cannot speak to specific incidents but i n tell you in general terms the secret service is judicious with the resources based on speech what is some request mean? how may times? requests is barroso more than once to ask for additional help and you turn them down. what this as gore and how may times did you turn them down? pretty basic question. >> so again without having all the details in front of me, sir, what i feel he is there times -- >> briefed on how may times you turn down the trump detail. >> on so. >> as you didn't get refund that know you're going to get asked that question. >> was what i can tell is that in generic terms when people, , when details make a request there are times that there are alternate ways to cover off on that threat or their whisper

5:28 am

that somebody said that he said there were denied certain request. some requests. this is your spokesperson not be talking this is a secret service talking. what changed from absolutely false unequivocally false 20 by the way the were sometimes we didn't give them what they wanted? that's a huge change in five days. the fact you can't answer how many times you did that, that's pretty darn frustrating that just for me but for the country. >> i hear your frustration. >> let me ask you this. were any of those request denied for president trump's detail afternoon about the iranian threat? >> what i can tell you again i don't know the specifics is that there are times when we can fill a request that doesn't assert have to be with secret service asset or resources. we can fill that request with locally available assets. >> have you spoke to anyone at the widest since july 13? >> yes, i have. >> who did you talk to? >> i read the president and vice president burke talk to the first lady?

5:29 am

>> oco might not. >> white house staff, anyone in white house medication? >> know i have not. >> have you talked to the counter sniper who took the shot that took up the back of? >> yes, i have. >> candy tells about the conversation? >> i would not want reveal conversations i've had with my employees. >> that's exactly the information the american people want to know. american people to pay your salary. >> i understand that this is an ongoing investigation. >> who's doing the investigation a secret service? i knew the inspector general but is or an internal investigation in addition. >> was where condition mission assurance investigation internally, yes. >> you know it looks like? looks like you will not answer basic questions, and i perseverate, cut corners when it comes to protecting one of those well-known individual on the plan a former present likely to kind would be the next present looks like you guys are cutting corners. that's what it looks like to meet. et cetera? >> i'm here today because want to answer questions but also want -- >> but you haven't answered i don't think you answered one question from the chairman comer ranking member or me.

5:30 am

we have a lot of other people we'll see if your record improves right now you have an answer i don't think any questions. i yield back. >> that chair now recognizes ms. >> thank you, mr. chairman. in the summer of 1963 as a law student i traveled to the south to work in the civil rights movement. when i arrived in jackson, mississippi, i was met by civil rights activist who showed me around town and tried to convince me to work in jackson that summer. i recall talking with him and his wife about the role at mr. in jackson. later that day he took me to the bus station for my trip to my assignment that night he was assassinated outside his home to his name was medgar evers. i condemn the political violence. it is a threat to democracy. i wanted to discuss one of the roots of political violence, ,

5:31 am

guns. for years, republicans including a a member of this committee have introduced legislation and amendments to repeal or block the district of columbia gun violence protection laws, including bans on assault weapons and large capacity magazines. the shooter at the trump rally used them as shooters got of choice, and assault weapon. specifically and ar-15 style rifle, and presumably a large capacity magazine which is defined in d.c. as a magazine that can hold more than ten bullets. under current d.c. law, d.c. doesn't recognize concealed carry permits issued by the jurisdiction. but it does issue concealed carry permits to both residents and nonresidents. however, d.c. and poses a number

5:32 am

of requirements on concealed carry applicants, including suitability, such as not having exhibited a propensity for violence or instability. moreover, d.c. residents, restricts whether kinds can be carried such as a political demonstration, here the white house and naval observatory or near people under secret service protection provided the permit holder has been given notice. this week the house is expected to consider the fiscal year 2025 financial services and general government appropriations bill. this republican drafted bill would allow an individual with the permit to carry a concealed handgun issued by a state or

5:33 am

territory to carry a concealed handgun in d.c., regardless of that jurisdictions permit requirements. a republican has filed an amendment to that provision to allow such an individual to carry a magazine of any size with that handgun. in short, the pending bill an amendment would allow any person with a carry permit issued by another jurisdiction to carry a concealed handgun with a magazine of any size in any location in the district of columbia here the secret service is responsible for protecting a large number of people and facilities in d.c. director cheatle, would secret service protectees in d.c. be safer or less safe if people who

5:34 am

have exhibited a propensity for violence or instability could carry a concealed handgun in d.c.? >> i think the secret service, law for officer in any state is difficult. they are required to make decisions and snap judgments in the blink of an eye. and i think that the officers and agents that work in the d.c. area do a great job of monitoring the public and reacting to threats as appropriate when they arise. >> would secret service protectees in d.c. be safer or less safe if people in d.c. could carry concealed handguns with large capacity magazines? >> i think we work in parameters when we travel around north

5:35 am

america, and rules on open. and concealed carry are different from state to state. and that is part of what the secret service takes into account when we develop a security plan. obviously anyone that comes into any of our protected sites we would establish magnetometer support, metal detectors that personal would have to process through eliminating that potential. >> would secret service protectees in d.c. be safer or less safe if more people could carry handguns in d.c.? >> i think again as i stated we want to make sure that we provide a safe environment for all of our protectees, and whatever measures we would need to put in place for a secure site we would do so. >> i yield back. >> chair now recognizes the chairman of house intelligence committee mr. laturner from ohi ohio. >> director cheatle, your opening statement indicates the secret service constructed a security plan site in

5:36 am

pennsylvania. that plan would also include the security footprint for the site but also would be based upon a threat assessment for the risk threats associated with donald trump and the crowd in attendance, would not include a threat assessment? >> yes, it would. >> so that threat assessment as we know basically what it started with, john was threat against donald trump because he is a president can do. it would have gone through president and he gets security covered just as others do. thing of the heightened political department. even for those it's clear the security footprint that the threat assessment was insufficient which permitted a 20-year-old to actually inter-a weapon and shoot donald trump would as with other aspects of the threat assessment. it is known in public that iran is a threat risk for donald trump. there are threat risk for john bolton, former secretary of state pompeo's and donald trump because they've indicated they

5:37 am

wanted to assassinate them as result of retaliation for the killing of general soleimani. that is both a threat from iran, generalize threat. they're targeting these these individuals but also most recently a specific threat to donald trump himself. now i want to enter into the record by you see a department of justice public affairs release, a cnn article, an article from fox news and an article from cbs all of which acknowledge speech without objection, so ordered. >> that this that exist for donald trump from iran at the door specific threats most recently have been acknowledged. director cheatle, have you read intelligence of the generalize threat to donald trump by iran as result of their desire to retaliate for the killing of general soleimani's? >> i have. >> have you read or been briefed about the intelligence of the

5:38 am

specific recent threat to donald trump from iran? >> yes, i have. >> directory, we were getting everything indicated that he thought the threat assessment should have included this threat from iran. is it your testimony today that the threat assessment since you read this intelligence was sufficient to protect him from this threat from iran? >> my testimony today is that the information that we had at the time was no that speedy wasn't sufficient? director cheatle, was a sufficient for the rainy threat that you said you have read the intelligence briefing for? >> that information was passed -- >> i'm not asking your credit issue of who did he get past rent two. director cheatle, wasn't sufficient for the specific and generalize threat to donald trump life from iran? >> yes, i do believe it was. >> director cheatle, is an iranian assassin more capable than a 20-year-old?

5:39 am

>> i think we've acknowledged that there was gaps and the failure that day. we are -- >> i raise this issue with directory. he said he was shocked that the threat assessment of iran did not seem to be -- as he and i discussed baked into security footprint. he went on to say that the generalize threat that he is told the whole country that we are under from a terrorist, a potential terrorist threat that he is said we are under the highest threat level since 9/11, that the lights are flashing red. he a specific indicator people across the southern border as result of the biden administration's policy and that there are desperate they are in our country today. terrorists and individuals who are affiliate with terrorist groups and organizations. that would be a heightened threat if i'm, director cheatle, would it not? >> yes. >> in his public statements he has said he is making these statements because he wants people to take them into

5:40 am

consideration in threat assessments. specifically, that i would be a threat not just to donald trump but he would also be a threat to the crowd there, wouldn't it? >> yes. >> are isis terrorists and al-qaeda terrorists international groups in terrorist more capable than a 20-year-old in pulling off a mass shooting or an of donald trump? >> server, again there was clearly a breakdown and a fairly that they. >> have you read the intelligence of the terrorists that are currently in the united states that directory speaks and those individuals that here affiliate with terrorist groups and organizations that are in an the process as director wray said of representing a significant threat of a terrorist attack occurring in the united states? >> i have read the reports that a place of specific to the secret service mission. >> director cheatle, because donald trump is life and that god is, you look incompetent. if donald trump had been killed you would've looked -- there's no aspect of this that indicates

5:41 am

that there is been any protection to donald trump. the threat was identified before he took stage, the stage, and the shooter was only killed after donald trump himself was killed. and not or should you resign, even refused to do so, president biden needs to fire you because his life, donald trump's life and all the other people which are protect our at risk because you have no concept of the aspect that the security footprint needs to be correlated to the threat. i yield back. >> the chair now recognizes mr. lynch from massachusetts. >> thank you, mr. chairman. director cheatle, there were multiple security failures at the former president's rally in the butler, pennsylvania. first of all, there was a failure to isolate the podium from exposure to direct fire. do we know who made that decision to allow that rooftop to remain as an unprotected

5:42 am

area? do we know who came up with that security plan that omitted that? >> sir, i don't have a specific person to identify -- >> that's what i'm looking for, so let's move on. there's also a breakdown in security and failure to confront the shooter over an hour before the former president began his remarks when the shooter was identified as a person of interest. what particularly allowed agents or law enforcement to identify him as a person of interest? >> sir, i appreciate the question and again i will say that we are nine days out and are a multitude of interviews that are still taking place. >> okay. did he have a rangefinder? there were some reports that the individual had a rangefinder. that would certainly raise my suspicion. did he have a rangefinder? >> yes, he did it but may i

5:43 am

explain that out of number of our sites especially when you're at outdoor venues, a rangefinder is not a prohibited item. it is sometimes an item that is brought in by individuals that -- >> anybody confront them on that? anybody asking questions, what are you doing with your rangefinder? anybody confront him on his presence where he was in proximity to the president? >> so look into my nose probably that was a process that was taking place was to locate the individual -- >> did they confront him? did they go up to him? did they talk to? >> i do not have those details. >> those are important details. there was also a future communicate between law enforcement to act quickly upon information divided by either local law enforcement or rally attendees that the suspect was position on the roof, minutes of delay before any meaningful act

5:44 am

was taking, even though he was several hundred feet from the podium. this is obviously minutes before the shooting. let me ask you, , there was considerable delay in removing the president from the podium after the shooting began. there was a shot in the epic it was still over a minute before he was removed from the stage. meanwhile, this shooter have multiple clips, several clips. he got off eight shots and had the capacity and the ability if he was not neutralized to basically mow down without whole secret service detachment as well as the president. what, from your own investigation, caused that delay under the circumstances? >> what i can tell you is that when the agents identified that

5:45 am

the shooting was taking place, in under three seconds they threw themselves on speeded i understand that. there was heroism there, no question about it, no question about it. what protocol would indicate, and these are, you know, these are the opinions of various former secret service agents, people who have done this work in the past, that over a minute of exposure on that podium with a shooter with a high-capacity weapon who had already wounded the president and could have got off, we don't know how many more rounds, and yet the president remained exposed, even though he was joined in the exposure by the secret service in their heroic acts. it just, it, i don't know if there's a good explanation for that. >> our personal creator of body

5:46 am

bumper on top of the president. >> i get that. >> shielding that. >> this is an ar-15 style weapon. that would've made pretty quick work if he was determined, and able to do so. this is not the first investigation with that of the secret service during my time here on this committee. in the last when we had our previous investigation determined that the secret service was experienced a staffing crisis that poses perhaps the greatest threat to the agency. that's a quote. is that staffing crisis still in place? is a still something you deal with on a daily basis? >> as of today the secret service has just over 8000 employees. we continue to hire, knowing that we need to ensure that we keep pace with -- >> what would be the full couplet of -- >> the time of the gentleman has expired. please answer the question. >> i'm sorry. >> with what would be the full couplet you're looking for? you cut 8000. how many would be a full complement for the service? >> so we're still striving

5:47 am

toward the number of 9500 employees, , approximately comen order to be able to meet future and emerging agents were okay. thank you, mr. chairman for your courtesy. >> the chair recognizes dr. foxx north carolina. >> thank you, mr. chairman. director cheatle, what grade would you give the secret service's performance in butler, pennsylvania, on july 13? >> as i stated, ma'am, this was clearly a failure. i would grade the agents and officers who selflessly threw themselves in front of president and neutralized the threat and a. i think that we need to examine the events that led up to and prior to that day. >> you stated in 2021 that the secret service has a zero fail mission. it's clear that the events of july 13 show a cascade of failures that caused -- nearly

5:48 am

caused former present his life and injured david dutch and james copenhagen. when it agency fails in its mission, those responsible must be held accountable and the problems must be fixed so they cannot happen again. ..

5:49 am

was there a petition for the position? >> you have to ask those involved in the interview process for you think you are the best person in the country had the secret service box. >> i think i'm the best person to lead the surface service at this time. >> the secret service is

5:50 am

billions explained by mike collings here. an increase in real terms 55% and staffing like the former president has decreased by about 350 today. fairly to blame for the staffing shortage. and secret service during the same year frank stead last ally with law enforcement agencies. can you explain why so many that left in just one year? >> with all due respect, impressive physics of the

5:51 am

employees it seems like an accurate data reported. as i have returned as director of the agency that is and hiring and staffing and increasing resources committed to continue the dynamic mission we have. >> you may want to feuded but given time profile failures during your tenure, why should the american people have any confidence in your ability to lead the secret service perform zero failed mission to protect their senior leaders? >> secret service has incredible culture. men and women they service over self the come in every day willing to risk their lives for our projected mission

5:52 am

investigations people who would do harm to children, child leaders. an incredible nation and our culture is will get the job done no matter what. i hope the american people do appreciate incredible daily risk secret service agents take on our behalf. you mentioned a six regular clients you got flowers participating in the nato summit two weeks ago, 32 heads of government and heads of state plus visiting heads of state

5:53 am

presumably providing protection for all of them. help us understand however, is an ongoing investigation you don't want to go into too much detail until you have all the facts analyzed what they mean. you can understand the anxiety and the american public have about how this could happen and how we can ensure they can't recur. there are some things my friends on one particular side of the aisle don't want to talk about like ar-15's and access to them by a 20-year-old or anybody for that matter. the ubiquity of weapons, because in america especially consultants that help your job

5:54 am

and omissions of your agencies, complicated, isn't that true? >> i'm not understanding your question. look will guns, especially dangerous ones protecting people easier, is that right? the simple english. more guns, today make your job more complicated or less complicated in particular, these clients heads of government? >> the secret service need to take into account -- >> i'm sorry, i asked a simple question which deserves a simple answer. dangerous weapons in america like ar-15's, has a major job easier or more difficult?

5:55 am

>> the environment for protecting secret service is always difficult and evolving this is a simple one -- does it make your job easier or more difficult today? >> i understand the second amendment rights -- >> i'm not questioning the second commitment. simple analysis you're not making my job easier and continuing director. you're the head of the secret service, 8000 members and lives on the line, do guns make the job easier or flooding plus. >> it's difficult every day and

5:56 am

we need to make sure -- >> now i think you are debating the answer. it is not a hard one. you are clearly avoiding the question. 20-year-old access to an ar-15 500 feet of the podium and i'm asking you the ability of the ar-15 replicated across america product for easier and you're not willing to answer that question and wonder why we might have lack of confidence? >> i understand your question --

5:57 am

>> then why not answer it? >> service force in everyday. >> that doesn't tell me anything. >> i know a little bit about it. i'd be fine staff, we live with the threat of violence and crime sorry it's evading. >> thank you. find a ladder to get on the roof, correct? >> , able to answer details at

5:58 am

this time. >> if he did when the latter was placed the night before, you have information how the latter got there? >> the fbi is still conducting an investigation. >> how to they look at it? >> i am unable to who is questions. >> ten days ago or not, has anything been done? >> i don't have an is of the. >> president trump formal agents there that day?

5:59 am

>> yes. >> the same pages that were always there. >> the people assigned institute were working that day. >> these are the same agents to routinely there? >> yes or. >> do we know which patients fired the shots? >> i do. >> i would not offer the name of in this setting but it was a technical counter cyber. >> can we privately get those names? >> i'm sure we can make names available. >> do we know where all shots land? >> how many shots came out of the rifle?

6:00 am

>> i hesitate to offer that mission is the fbi conducted. >> i would be the responsibility of the fbi to collect the evidence. >> we have a correspondence from the shooter? >> i would have to refer you to the fbi for the investigation. >> you spent some time trying to change the makeup of the secret service. does this affect at all who you are hiring for the secret service? >> i've that my time as director

6:01 am

trying to increase the number of people we hire in the secret service so that we have the best and brightest and that has been my concentration as director. >> harry, not harry. >> hiring the best qualified candidate who want to work for our great organization will. >> the shooter obtained a direct sighting of president trump from the position on the rooftop. i assume that should never happen and to elaborate on what you wish you had done differently? >> the fact of the events are still unfolding.

6:02 am

five days a number of reports by do not want to provide information on something that has been erroneously reported or not factual but fairly there was a mistake little take every effort to make sure that this never happens again. >> you elaborate why won't one third of the secret service to be women x. >> i've never stated that i want one third of the secret service -- not 30% or something -- >> something was erroneously reported, what are you referring to? in the context of the shooter using this ability, what was reported? will tell us out something wasn't reported accurately?

6:03 am

him a number of reports of cap speculation and until we have the actual facts, i don't want to report anything that would contradict speculation about the. >> from illinois. >> thank you for bringing us this morning. one thing what congress is to stop this from again? a recent study by professor robert paid for working renowned expert in political violence in the graphics shows 74% for congress to come together announced political files in the classified lines. i negligently deliver condemning political violence is ever my colleagues to join and introduce

6:04 am

a resolution that we think what the political violence and we will circulate that the shooter began shooting 6:11 p.m. eastern july 13. nbc reported 5:51 p.m., 20 minutes before the shooting began the state police and form secret service of their concerns. the rally was not pause at that time, correct? not

6:05 am

6:06 am

6:07 am

6:08 am

>> thank you and i yield back. >> was only one neighbor who took one shot. >> we had multiple counter sniper teams.

6:09 am

>> only one took one shot, correct? >> correct. >> how many casings were found on the roof? >> i would have to refer you to the fbi criminal investigation. >> what is explosives -- >> out how to differ you to the fbi investigation. >> you are not curious, you don't communicate with them? cnn reported secret service did not sweep the building, is that true or false? >> we are conducting an investigation, it will depend on the information we a time from our investigations. >> secret service knew there was a suspicious person from eight minutes to 30 to 60 minutes. as president trump or of his team notified of the threat? >> i think is a difference and a

6:10 am

distinction between suspicious and a threat so we are looking at communications to know when the information about a suspicious person was passed secret service personnel. >> was president trump or his team notified? >> we are going back to make sure we have the exact information when the notifications were made into the notifications were made to. >> for a lot of us the number one question everyone in america is wondering is why was the roof left open and after nine days we should have a little bit of that information. when you come to this hearing and you don't have anything to say about that, it is very troubling. can you review the security plan for this event? >> i personally do not review security plans for events that take place across the country. >> any of them?

6:11 am

>> we have a number of offense. >> who has a security plan? >> there's a number of people who review -- it is a conjunction of personnel. there are people on the ground and super measures on detail and headquarters. >> not one person who says this good x. >> in the way we build security plans -- >> teams working disparate aspect but is there an individual who signs off on the plan? >> much like how we sign plans, there are multiple layers. >> so no accountability? >> there is accountability. >> whether the fbi or -- it's time after time multiple layers turn into layers of deniability and agency after agency after agency it's got to be fixed

6:12 am

because you keep coming here expecting -- yes, you're saying i'm responsible and accountable to there's nothing. what you mean? you say you will keep your job, right? >> i assure you if we determine through the course of our investigation someone for people need to be held accountable, we will do so. >> if president biden god forbid had been shot and killed, would you think that was worthy of resignation? >> i do the same thing i'm doing here and make sure we are conducting an investigation and there is continuity in the investigation and find the answer. >> under your detail is worthy of resignation? >> i think it is tragic and deserves answers. >> the think you said so far as you want to make sure this never happens again. everyone in america knows job

6:13 am

description is to make sure it never happens. one of your goals in the strategic plan is the diversity equity and inclusion is. do you keep the same standards -- does every agent meet the same qualifications? >> everyone who moves through the application process has to meet the same standards to become an agent. >> so far slowed roof you said local law enforcement job was to cover up before backtracking, trump did not ask for security and you backtrack. you have not provided audio

6:14 am

recording requested that was due thursday, he didn't give a statement get there was a recording somewhere else. there seems to be more videos you are able to provide for us and takes the question, you are in charge of the investigation of your own failure so how is anybody in america supposed to trust the results of the investigation anything transparent and genuine? >> please feel free to answer. >> about a secret service agent for 30 years. i fled with integrity and follow core values of duty, justice, honor, loyalty and courage and i'm doing that in this case and i assure this committee that i will provide answers that we have a full and complete report in addition to cooperating with the investigations are ongoing.

6:15 am

>> thank you, i want to take the chair and ranking member for convening this hearing. i joined them in condemning the horrific assassination attempt on the former president. i am relieved for the psaki of the country that he wasn't seriously hurt and he survived in my thoughts with him and his family during this traumatic event. i want to express condolences to corey's family and recognize his heroism and saving his daughter's lives and the victims of that awful event. director tito, would you agree this is the most security labs i would.

6:16 am

>> do you know what stuart knight did when he was in charge of the secret service? to know what he did? >> he remain on duty. he resigned. >> stuart knight resigned. it is not a republican appointee. i just don't think this is partisan. if you have an assassination attempt on the president, former president or candidate, you need to resign. stuart knight did that and he took responsibility and i think you neared to reflect, you cannot lead secret service agency when there is an assassination attempt, presidential candidate and i would say that about anyone running so my question, what is the difference between your position and what stuart knight

6:17 am

did? >> i will tell you i'm dedicated to finding the answers to what happened and we don't shrink from our responsibility's. i will be responsible to the agency, this committee and the former president and the american public. >> is there a

6:18 am

have optimize, you will have to get permission if you receive a

6:19 am

threat. it was not just esu but there was law enforcement with their eyes on the shooter before the shot was taken so one of my questions, there was supposed to be a briefing with the fiber units the local esu teams. that didn't take place, why was that? >> i've been told there was a briefing -- might have been told there wasn't one. >> we are still looking into the facts of the investigation. >> let me ask you this, when were you informed that there was a threat against former president trump? >> the former president has a number of threats -- >> there was a credible threat, when were you informed?

6:20 am

>> we have been monitoring threats -- >> you knew before the rally. the security plan is drafted by supervisor on the site agent probably out of the pittsburgh district office. did they take into account the credible threat against trump? >> the threats -- >> why would they leave the building? 140 yards with clear line of sight to the president, i was the building is not occupied on the roof? why wasn't that done? >> the plan developed that they encompass a number -- >> issue is the supervisor site agent and special agent in

6:21 am

charge sign off on the plan did not this in the grammar in the didn't have a plan to secure the building. as i understand is was next to it but they didn't have a clear line of sight, the angle was severe. the rangefinder was taken at 5:15 p.m., it wasn't until 538 that it was transmitted to the cyber unit. i don't understand the communication process of life people didn't perceive that is a credible threat. the video shown is clearly a credible threat so how is it that all of these mistakes could be made?

6:22 am

how many explosive devices were found on or near the site? >> i have to do for you to the fbi. >> there was one in his car and one here the main gas line. it wasn't just the fact that he had a rifle, he had the ability to inflate enormous numbers of casualties had they exploded. i want to know you conduct a site review, fully informed of all the threats in the principle that they are protected. >> when our agents go out, there goal is to ensure --

6:23 am

>> the failure to secure the building only for the former president's life in danger but the lives of individuals in the crowd as well. the reagan shooting -- that time as well service members lives were in danger so i don't understand how you can continue to stay in the position you are in when this was a failure of historic magnitude. forty-three years without anything like this happening will and you have failed in this way. >> 's the chair recognizes he healed from maryland. >> i want to commend you on your plate statement work will holding this hearing word

6:24 am

release and attempt to get some answers. not to only what we see today some of us remember 1963 assassination of president kennedy will. some of us like myself remember a few days later on live b, shot and killed lee harvey oswald. we've seen over and over since then these kinds of offense whether assassination of martin luther king kennedy blvd. tampa thumbtack on george wallace for the shooting in 1981 ronald reagan or steve police shooting here in d.c. and will be forced to attack on paul pelosi and now regarding former president trump. let me try to look at this is

6:25 am

assuming whoever is in charge takes full responsibly when there's never been based on this magnitude and scale this sort of failure so when members ask you, are you going to resign and you say you have no intention to, they are perplexed like many who watch what's going on and there are some things i don't understand, why was the building arg building placed outside of the perimeter one. it was close enough to launch an attack? >> again sir, we are looking in to this and tell you there is are what pathetic that. >> filed a drone plus medical care given to the specifics. >> i think it's fair to say the overwatch failed.

6:26 am

do you think overwatch was a failure? >> to understand how. >> why was the rooftops left considering it was in the line of sight? the. >> i can't speak to the specifics of this particular event site but what i can tell you is that they develop an advanced plan they take into account a number of factors for your areas of concern, one of the medications will they will have areas of the. >> the shooter came to the two minute more, did anybody was

6:27 am

anybody assigned to track him? >> i would like to clarify -- our personal having is an outdoor event -- >> brought to the attention of the secret service, was anybody he assigned to follow stay with the suspicious person because it might be a threat? >> we have a number of teams on the ground and trying to verify the timeline of when the notifications were so they could assume the responsibility of trying to track. >> there has been a lot of discussion about poor staff

6:28 am

morale. i have the july 17 report of government executive which is credible reporting of us for employees the places to work within the federal government fiscal management and it's 413 at 459. can you explain that? >> but i can tell you is that challenges employees daily. it's holidays, weekends. >> is the same with other businesses one of the worst

6:29 am

places in the federal government, 413, 459. >> is a challenging job in a challenging environment to be in law enforcement and our folks are test for that is the year. then the director recruit and retain our agencies some of the. >> i joining to say thank you on a bipartisan basis. i'm not going to say you are to resign but i'm going to say you

6:30 am

cannot confidence that you have the ability to understand what happened to take the possibility in terms of understanding is that for number of years, how many years did you say. >> twenty-nine. >> i've spent 16 years and seven times with him and had a good feel about their operations. how they look, was responsible never heard you say you got to wait, wait for the final report. when is that going to happen? how long do we have to wait? vendor 28 years, you have you days for your own analysis should understand the process. you talk about being on the team

6:31 am

perhaps in georgia, you talked about your spirits. it either works or doesn't work. there's no in between. my analysis is i've asked these questions and about to sit back and wait for someone else to decide that. have any employees been disciplined for the role? >> not at this time, i am asking these questions. >> no employees have been

6:32 am

disciplined? were placed in any position that would place her job in jeopardy? >> we are still in the process. >> you are the person that runs the place, you're the person who knows good from bad. you had a number. you've come before the committee knowing he will be before us both off to someone else. but there was something that went wrong with the eight years or do you have to count on someone else give you the final report? >> i see that something went wrong and acknowledge that. >> than what went wrong? was the shooter extra time? was the sniper doing their job? is a things people who have been

6:33 am

around 28 years can analyze the i've watched live on tv and within minutes saw a number of factors that could have and should have known people are. you are showing up here telling us got to wait for the final answer. what is yours? >> am asking the same questions. >> tell us what went wrong. the special agent in charge, the person who was there? tell us, do you have the ability to effectively understand what went wrong and tell us i do or don't know what i'm doing press from not asking for you to resign, i'm asking you to do about the experience you should

6:34 am

be able to say to us we know what we did wrong. it was a failure in our system and we are making these corrections progress because we saw it you are the 28 year expert, who are the person and i hear you say have to pay for a final report. that's why we think what you are doing the answers you're giving are not correct and you are not professional expertise. i will allow her to respond. >> i'm asking the same questions and assure you when i have a full and complete report of what happened, there will be accountability.

6:35 am

>> just out of curiosity, every american was these questions answered. you have a ballpark estimate of when you would be able to answer? >> i can tell you internal investigation we are targeting to have that completed within 60 days. there's also an external investigation and a number of spectra general and we are working criminal investigation is in we are currently in the midst of an especially concentrated moment across the

6:36 am

country and about 100 days of a report coming out in 60 days when it is so in the united states and advocacy for to understand the most highly targeted international and domestic united states of america so the idea that the report would be finalized in 60 days let alone prior to any actionable decisions made, ten days of attempted assassination? , the need to be answers.

6:37 am

already, this committee and we have to make policy decisions and we have to make them now. that may require legislation, and they require policy, immediate turn and without that, we are flying blind so lack of answers and report is not something we can expect here. is there a standard perimeter that establishes around an event or are they independently determined? >> there is no secret every venue and event is different. >> so each event has a different perimeter established demand the logistics review established the building on which the shooter

6:38 am

operated from was outside of perimeter from a correct? >> it was outside of our secure perimeter,. >> the building i believe was -- how far away was that? are. >> 200 yards. >> individual used in ar-15 for the assassination attempt. in ar-15 has a range of about four to 600 words. my question, why does the service perimeter -- why is the protective perimeter for lee one of the most popular weapons in the united states lacks. >> there are a number of of

6:39 am

ranges the determination of the perimeter the species specifics there are a number of factors taken into account. building, assets and resources available. >> what i am hearing is that of perimeter is not established outdoors at an outdoor venue that would provide an ar-15 for one of the most common with his use in mass shootings from being within range of the secret service. >> i perimeter was established and even though buildings were outside and it wasn't just evelyn, were a number of buildings in the area and overwatch was created to mitigate some of those. >> respectfully, as a person who

6:40 am

has experienced an enormous amount of threat incidents including incidents never speak in is a common pattern that happens whether secret service, fbi, capital police, after vertical security failure there will be an independent investigation and was it set up and the incident from there. the report is usually not satisfactory the act is rarely we need the answers to the public and ideally i would encourage, the agency to be

6:41 am

forthright question because the public deserves all problems and the stakes are too high. if the file is like a breakout regardless of party and it affects the entire country. thank you and i go back. >> if i could speak to something when you started your questioning, i want to assure you that i'm not waiting for a report, we have been through that analysis a while and adding additional features to security detail since this occurred. >> i can hope you can highlight the incident. >> the chair recognizes the demon from arizona.

6:42 am

i request for photo. >> without objection, so ordered. >> july 13 your agency failed. the failure resulted on the death of corey. a 20-year-old on the radar circular service and law enforcement before trump went on stage and was able to climb onto the roof and fire multiple rounds before he was neutralized. was mr. crooks asked the acting alone? >> was he a gunner? >> don't have to refer you to the investigation for a lot of. >> what is the technical service determined would be the event?

6:43 am

>> you knew you were going to be asked to that question because it's been asked multiple times so this is an easy one. what did they determine would be the event perimeter? you should know that. what was it? >> this is a specific that you ought to know the answers and i know what happened. they probably the president and

6:44 am

it undermines your credibility so i'm going to what did the technical service division determine would be the perimeter? >> we are still gathering reports and interviewing students you know what it is. >> may have the details i will share the. >> was the got already on the roof or did the shooter carry the gun. >> i do not have the information at this time. i do not have the information. >> how many old -- most of us here have been at events, present security i can't tell you how many times we said there was a security hole so we are going to wait and we wait two or three minutes.

6:45 am

you said, think this is connected, they hadn't adjudicated the shooter to be a threat, it was a seditious person even though there is a threat dynamic so my question is that think you answered this, what you do if a suspicious person is identified by the agency? >> a number of our defense is unusual. >> what you do? >> the individuals identified, we will send teams out. >> was a team without? >> there was a team try to divide and interview the

6:46 am

individual. >> there is an on top of a roof within 130 yards when did your team get there to conduct the interview? >> i don't have details on the timeline. >> they did send a team the interview them in, why didn't they put a security gold on president trump going on stage? >> the number of protective sites of individuals identified at the time. it doesn't necessarily mean they come to the threat. >> of course not. the guy scampering of the side of the building on top of a roof that's identified you and you said you sent a team there, you

6:47 am

can't is a and this gets to one of my finer points and that is, we can have these interview sessions, she gets to the wall is, not deliver answers so okay, we put together a blue ribbon committee. same thing will happen. i'm calling on the speaker to put together a truly independent qualified circuit service agency who can conduct this kind of investigation i don't think you will give us the answers. you should have come today ready to get answers. i call upon you to resign today.

6:48 am

... >> secret service visit denied a request for more federal resources. denying some request by trump campaign. >> without objection. >> up with a defined by senator ron johnson and his committee. >> without objection, so ordere ordered. >> articles entitled notice you think about detail, next from by an official question must turn their fire on donald trump to beat him. director says the buck stops with her but she will not resign. mark hamill? joke about trump is bandaged following assassination attempt.

6:49 am

biden i have engagement in sight. i'm threat to democracy. who is secret service chief kimberly cheatle? solely responsible for violent predator tell that to attempt on his life. video actors pushes theory trump assassination trip was stage. report secret service identified rooftop vulnerability days before the rally. former president trump with the assassin, why doesn't the by mse in secret service after the station attempt? secret service director we did not put cyprus over because it was kind of slope. here's what thomas matthew crooks didn't baisley up to the assassination attempt. secret service director under scrutiny for initiatives after trump assassination attempt official story and trump should make some sense at all. andrew mccabe says trump -- >> point of order. i'm happy to -- --

6:50 am

>> you have to read speed it were not even hearing anyway. if we could just, it's up to you, mr. chairman. >> i'll slow it down. probably going to fast. secret service expedition for security failures ahead of trump assassination attempt are not adding up. he was supportive received intel of arena plot to assassinate president trump. debbie t8 secret service now saying they didn't put any agents on the roof because slight slope was too dangerous. report u.s. officials received intel of arena plot to assassinate paltrow. exclusive gop representative macleod agencies anything and house assassination investigation. why trump raise this exercise assassination attempt is triggering for liberal media? questions for security lapse providing all concerns that secret service dierks secret

6:51 am

service scribbles to shift blame after trump shooting as backlash hits hard. nobody contacted me. must-see six camera split screen of assassination attempt captures everything shooter was in open to plus minutes. five reasons you should be angry. she responded up to 30 minutes before firing multiple times. pictures taken, no one stopped him. 30 minutes between noticing and neutralizing shooters come shooter a very short period of time. secret service director says the buck stops with me on trump assassination attempt but will not resign -- >> mr. biggs will stop right there. we can retake them on the next one. i know there are more. without objection will enter into the record although so will take up the others after the next speaker. the jedi recognizes ms. brown from ohio. >> i want to highlight certain comments from ranking member raskin. my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, present by vice president harris, and that is a

6:52 am

lyrical vibe that is completely unacceptable in this country, full stop. it is an assault on our democracy itself and i am devastated by this attack on a candidate for the president for the office of the highest office in the land and continue to pray for the victims of the shooting and their families. as someone who has no gun violence firsthand, no one should have to experience the pain of losing a loved one to weapons of war. it is deeply unfortunate political violence has become far too common. whether it is the deli at out on the on january 6th, the assault on speaker pelosi's husband, or the threats of violence against election workers, we all must work to condemn political violence and tone down the rhetoric. so director cheatle, on behalf of hard-working men and women of the secret service, can you give

6:53 am

us some perspective as to what goes into securing an event like the rally, like how much time do you have to prepare? >> thank you for the question. generally, when we receive notification that this would be an event taking place at a venue, the advance team assignments are made and there is a five-day process to conduct walk-throughs, coordinate with staff, local staff, and whether it be campaign staff or the protectee. they with local law enforcement on where the perimeter is going to be, the size and scope of the victim how many attendees there are going to be, if it's an indoor rally, outdoor rally, what's with assets are available locally, what's with assets the secret service can bring to bear and what the scope of the event, the staff is trying to accomplish. >> so to that point how many agents are recommended or requested as opposed how many were assigned? >> so not what you get into

6:54 am

specifics of how many were assigned, but those numbers that were requested were provided. >> and how many local agents were involved in the preparation, if you will, that you talked about, that five-day preparation? >> the run number of local agents from the local office as well as agents from the former trump detail overinvolved in that advanced process. >> do we have a number? >> i do have a number. i'm not going to release that number in this setting. >> you are not making this easy for us. this is shocking incident on the former presidents life and appalling instance of political violence in threat to our democratic values. i am thankful that former president is on the mend your candidate i'm grieving for the family and friends of corey comperatore who lost a loved one in the shooting, and now know the unbearable pain of gun violence. i really hope this serves as it

6:55 am

might about our responsibility to attack policies, not personalities, to be honest and truthful and to treat one another with dignity, respect and topless. and with that ideal my remaining time to ranking member raskin. >> thank you, ms. brown, for those very powerful and moving remarks. director cheatle, we don't want to lose a presidential candidate to an ar-15. we cannot lose a presidential candidate to an ar-15 attack in the can't lose any more citizens to ar-15 mass violence, mass shootings. and we certainly don't want an attempted ar-15 assassination or assassination attempt to set off political violence or riots in america. so this is deadly serious business.

6:56 am

the vice ranking member pointed out that a report in 60 days will do it for us. because we have responsible. numbers of responsibility -- is anything we can do to prevent this. my question for you is, what is informing your operational decisions right now that you have invoked? without a report. can you tell us what other preliminary judgments or if you don't want to foreshadowed the report find. what are your personal professional judgments in form and operational decisions right now? >> certainly, and i appreciated that question. i don't want to make any preliminary judgments on what happened on this particular day but i but i can tell you that we've looked at as we did immediately in the aftermath what the security plan for the republican national convention was going to be and what made adjustments to

6:57 am

the interior perimeter there. we looked at the protectees that we have here in washington, d.c. area and are protected sites,, e did make some adjustments to their security posture. and as we continue to move through the next several weeks, even yesterday with the announcement of it the president no longer running, we have made adjustments to the vice president detail. we are already prepared for individual vp nominee and we continue to make those assessments. i i think it shows how dynamic e environment is that this agency works in every day. >> so you made the same kinds of commonsense judgments and intuitive recommendations that members of the public and members of congress are asking about right now? >> yes. >> okay. thank you. i yield back. >> i have to say, director, we're pretty close to the halfway point during this period

6:58 am

you answered more questions within abc reporter then you have with members of congress. we have a lot more questions. the american people are demanding that we get answers to those questions, that's with the purpose of the shooting is today. so i'm sure a lot of the question that a party that asked are going to be asked again, and hoping we can get some answers to those questions. i strongly implore you to answer those questions. you are here with the subpoena, and we expect you to answer the questions. such are now ms. mace from succulent. >> thank you, mr. chairman. director cheatle, the american people are watching and they're wanting -- from south carolina -- wondering wonder iy questions you can answer honestly today. so director cheatle, i've a series of questions very specific questions i was very specific answers. most of my questions are going to demand a yes or no answer. do you understand? >> i do. >> okay. my first question, both sides of the aisle today have asked for your resignation.

6:59 am

what you like to use my five minutes to draft your resignation letter, yes or no? >> no, thank you. >> was this a colossal failure? >> it was a failure. >> yes are no? was it a colossal failure is a question? >> yes oh? >> i have admitted this is pretty this is a yes or a series of questions. was this a colossal failure yes or no? >> yes. >> was this tragedy preventable, yes or no? >> yes. >> has the secret service been transparent with this committee? >> yes. >> would you say the fact went to issue a subpoena to get you to show up today as being transparent, yes or no? >> i have always been speeded yes or no. you did want to answer the question. we added issues eusebio to get up to show today. that is not transparent by the way. you said earlier secret service is not political, is that correct? >> yes. >> would you say leaking your

7:00 am

>> would you say leaking your opening statement to punch bowl news, politico's playbook, and washington post, several hours before you sent it to this committee has been political yes or no? >> i have no idea how my statement got out. >> that is bullsit. i would like to enter into the record articles by punch bowl news, political playbook, washington post done at 5:twenty four a.m. 6:twelve a.m. 6:thirty four a.m. am, 3 to 4 hours before this committee got your statement. >> without objection so ordered. >> is the secret service fully cooperating with our committee? >> yes. >> you say you are cooperating with this committee. on july 15th this committee sent you a list of demands of information we wanted. has the secret service provided this committee a list of all

7:01 am

law enforcement personnel that were there that day? have you provided a list to the oversight committee? >> i have to get back to you on that? >> that is a no. have you provided all audio and video recordings in your position to this many as we asked on july 15th? >> i have to get back to you on that. >> that is a know. you are being completely dishonest. >> chairman. we have to maintain to coram in this committee no matter how -- >> met most of this committee we've asked on july 15th, have you provided all memorandums in the secret service? >> i would have to get back you on that. >> that is a know. you are being dishonest or lying get. you are being dishonest with this committee, these are important questions the american people want answers to and you are just dodging and talking around it in generalities and we had to subpoena you to be here and you won't answer the questions, we asked you repeatedly to answer your questions, these are not hard questions.

7:02 am

have you provided us all communications from the secret service related us, we asked for this information on july 15th, have you provided any of this information that this committee has asked of the secret service? >> i have to get back to on that. >> have you read this letter that we sent you? do you even read this? >> yes. >> you have said you don't know, you have no idea, the answer is no. we haven't gotten a single document or piece of information or data from you or your agency related to the rally that we've asked you for. so is this, was this attempted assassination of donald trump a failure of training or execution or both? >> i think those are answers that we need to -- >> training, execution, or both? >> those are answers -- >> how many secret service personnel have lost their jobs due to this colossal failure?

7:03 am

>> at this time none. >> how many secret service personnel have been required to take a refresher course on how not to let people shoot donald trump? >> our personnel are currently operational. we are examining the facts of this investigation and we will make the changes necessary. >> what kind of law enforcement became aware there was an individual on the roof? >> i'm still verifying timelines. >> 9 days and you have no answers. how many minutes between the time enforcement side and took photos, how many minutes? >> i'm still verifying good -- >> 57 minutes. thank you, mr. chairman, i yelled back. before i recognize miss stands are i want to recognize mr. mfume >> i went unanimous consent that it submitted for the record the 2023 ranking of best

7:04 am

and worst workplaces in the federal government compiled by the office of personnel management which shows the united states secret service coming and as i said earlier 413th out of 459 sub agencies, and this appears in the july 17th addition. >> share recognizes miss stansberry from new mexico. >> thank you, mr. chairman. i want to start by saying part of why you have bipartisan agreement here on the dais about the severity and importance of this hearing is because this is not just a single shooting, this is about national security and the security of our democracy. it's not just one operational failure. this is about our public officials faith and what that signals to our country and to the world about american

7:05 am

security and the ability of our officials to do their job safely. i want to say thank you to our brave men and women in uniform whether it is the secret service or local law enforcement who put their lives on the line, i think obviously we honor their service. this is really about operational failures and what it means for our country at large and i also want to reaffirm that we must condemn unequivocally political violence of any kind, violence many kind, not just political and it cannot be tolerated in this democracy and also to offer my prayers for the slain fire chief and prayers for those who have been injured. the tone of this hearing is how is that a 20-year-old young man with the gun that was legally purchased by his father could, on the day of a rally go to a

7:06 am

gun shop, legally purchase ammunition, show up to a secured site and not only attempt an assassination of a political figure, but kill and injure two others. how could this happen? >> we've had a lot of testimony here today. i want to talk a little bit about the timeline. here's what we know. i know, director, you were on the call a few days ago with the fbi and other law enforcement which i respect that you are not able to share the details that are currently being investigated. i heard you on the hollande you heard from too. i will lay out the timeline. on july 3rd, the rally was announced that was going to be in butler. july 6th, we know that the shooter searched for dates for trump and dnc events. on july 7th, four days after

7:07 am

the announcement the shooter went to the site, physically went to the site. on july 12th, the shooter went to a gun range where he and his dad regularly go and practiced shooting. the next day, july 13th, he went to the site again before the rally began. we know that he then searched online for a gun store where he went and purchased 50 rounds of ammunition, went home, got his father's ar which was legally purchased, and returned to the venue. at 5:00 pm that evening, more than an hour before donald trump actually took the stage that evening local law enforcement made aware or made aware that there was a suspicious man. law enforcement flag that he

7:08 am

had arrange finder and radio their concern and sent pictures of the individuals. at 5:40, 20 minutes before local law enforcement identified the shooter, at 5:51, secret service was notified of the suspicious person by the state police and one minute later they distributed that information. that was before donald trump took the stage. that was 11 minutes before he took the stage. the secret service was aware that there was a suspicious person. at 6:03 he took the stage, 6:09 rally goers as shown in the video identified this gentleman climbing on the roof. at 6:11 three shots were heard, three rounds of shots and he and the other victims were shot. this shooter was a 20-year-old young man, no criminal record,

7:09 am

legally purchased gun and ammunition who, for days in the lead up to the shooting was searching mass shooters, he had a picture of a man's shooter on his cell phone the day of the shooting. he searched for explosives, he searched high level officials. so the american people want to know how to the 20-year-old young man with access to a military style weapon actually bring it onto an unsecured perimeter who for days and been planning a mass shooting. and i think that with all due respect, the answers we received here in this hearing today are completely unsatisfactory. how could this happen? we need answers. we need answers not just for the family members of the

7:10 am

gentleman who was killed, and those who were injured, we need answers for our democracy. because as others have stated here today, we are in a highly politically charged environment right now. we are only weeks away from one of the most significant presidential elections in american history and it is clear that our public officials's safety has not been secured and it is not just a matter of one shooting, it's a matter of national security. so i hope that you will take our comments to heart, i hope that there will be accountability and we need answers. >> the chair recognizes mr. laturner from kansas. >> something you bragged about repeatedly is you increased protection for 36 individuals the secret service is entrusted with. is that correct? >> i stated we currently have

7:11 am

36 protect these and we continue to make evaluations on where those levels of protection are provided. >> you mentioned specific increases in protection you provided for some of those individuals, correct? based on what? >> some of it is a result of the tragic incident that occurred on the 13th. we went back and reassessed where we were in providing protection and wanted to make sure we were not overlooking anything considering this most recent incident. >> the secret service needed to learn that allowing a rooftop one hundred 50 yards away from a protect the, not putting that in a perimeter, not having someone guarding that roof, then information is new to you and cause you to increase protection to other folks under your care? >> it is prudent after any incident that occurs to go back and take a look at your current practices and see if there's anything that needs to be done

7:12 am

differently. >> it's inconsistent because what you said earlier to mister turner was the protection you are offering donald trump was in line with the current threats, him being a nominee of a major political party, threats from iran, protection you were providing him was adequate, do you stand by that statement? >> yes. >> do you think it is a problem americans trust in the federal government to set an all-time low. do you think that's a problem? >> i think that it is unfortunate. >> i don't know why you're quibbling with my words. is that a problem worse at night? >> the american public deserves to have trust in their federal government. >> i don't know why you're being difficult. it's a simple question. are you concerned about the increasing prevalence of conspiracy theories going on out there right now? >> yes. >> i am too. you've been incredibly inconsistent with your answers before this committee today and what you were willing to reveal.

7:13 am

you've acknowledged the shooters identified with a rangefinder, donald trump's detail was sufficient for the threats faced from iran, certain details were erroneously reported, in your words but you haven't been willing to provide any information about placing the building in question outside the perimeter, the explosives placed in the shooter's vehicle, do -- of the use of a drone by the shooter more when exactly the secret service identified the shooter as a threat rather than merely suspicious. what is your standard today for what you're willing to answer and what you are not because you've been inconsistent? >> i'm saying you can understand some of the information that has been provided to you thus far has come from the fbi investigation and has come from information we have released. i want to make sure the information being provided to this committee is consistent and factual. >> the question about the drone the chairman asked at the beginning of the hearing, do you know this information and you acknowledged that yes you do know the information.

7:14 am

my question, if you wanted to wait until the end of the investigation to draw conclusions which you acknowledged you are not, your drawing conclusions now and making changes but if that's the standard that you want to wait for the investigation to draw conclusions, at least you would be consistent in that but what we wanted to know today, dispel both conspiracy theories out there, what would increase trust with the american people would be for you to let facts out, to tell us what you know and i want to understand, why is that our problem? wise it inconsistent with a quality investigation to release to the american people today at least the information you know for sure because you certainly know for sure more information than you are willing to give us today? >> i have released that there was a failure and that there are gaps that we need to make sure don't happen again. >> that is not acceptable. that doesn't quell any conspiracy theories out there.

7:15 am

in your 27 years of experience, would you have been concerned about an elevated location within 150 yards of a protect the that did not have a secret service presence based on your experience? >> what i can tell you is every site and every venue -- >> i'm asking for your experience, looking at this situation, where that have been of concern to you or would you have agreed that it's fine, doesn't need to be covered? >> what i've explained today -- is it true that a 5:forty five p.m. 18 minutes before donald trump took the stage the beaver county emergency services unit noticed the shooter on the roof and photographed him, is that a fact or not? >> that's information that i have from the fbi's report. >> you haven't been willing to share whether or when this was communicated to the secret service i would like to get into the difference between suspicious activity and threatening activity. is it suspicious or threatening if an individual is seen around the perimeter with a rangefinder? is that suspicious?

7:16 am

>> that could be termed as suspicious. >> if the same individual with the rangefinder is found on a rooftop, is that still suspicious or is that considered threatening? >> that could be termed still as suspicious. >> my time is over, mister chairman, i yelled back. >> the chair recognizes mr. frost from florida. >> thank you. i want to start by stressing that political violence is always unacceptable and acknowledging this is an ongoing investigation but oversight hearings like this are essential components of an investigation on the i want to thank the chair for pulling this together. madam director, appreciate you being here, the events of july 13th raise serious questions about the efficacy and thoroughness of security protocols in place, the gravity of the fact that an unsophisticated gunman was able to secure his perch and take a shot of the former president despite multiple layers of security and intelligence are not lost on me. before i came to congress i

7:17 am

used to work for a major political candidate and interacted with many law enforcement agencies on large political events like the one that just happen. how many times was the secret service alerted about a suspicious person at the july 13th campaign event prior to the shot? >> i don't have an exact number to share with you today but from what i've been able to discern, somewhere between two and five times that was some sort of communication about a suspicious individual. >> the secret service specifically. according to reports the shooter was photographed twice by security officers prior to the shooting. a police officer saw the shooter on the ground and reported him with a photograph as a suspicious person, multiple local law enforcement officers identified the shooter, radioed that he was acting suspiciously near the event's magnetometers. a local law enforcement tactical team saw the shooter

7:18 am

on a roof and notified other security services and also photographed him. one police officer who photographed the shooters saw him scoping out the roof and carrying a rangefinder. my question, you have answered this but you haven't answered this. why wasn't the event positive right then? >> i'm not clear on the timeline of when the secret service shift and counter sniper were notified. >> but earlier, you said the secret service would have pause the rally if they identified a threat. >> correct. >> why wasn't it pause? >> i have to assume that they did not know that there was a threat when they brought him out on the stage. >> i feel like this is a breakdown in communication between local law enforcement, you, and other actors at the rally. as someone who has worked on these i understand there's

7:19 am

multiple people with multiple decisions with the ability to make different decisions on the ground. i've taken over the last week i've spoken with a lot of folks in local law enforcement in my district and across the country that i've worked with before and other people have brought up concerns around being able to communicate with secret service during these big events and have their flags taken seriously. i believe there was a general threat they would've paused the rally. my concern is before that, something was flag day and wasn't taken as seriously as it should have been taken. this shows an issue with communication. i want to know what you intend to do to fix that, not in 60 days apart now. we are in the middle of a presidential election. a former president who had an assassination attempt, another rally go or who was killed due to this gun violence. we now have a presumptive nominee of the democratic

7:20 am

party, first black woman to be running for president and i am worried about everybody's life. what do you intend to do to fix this communication breakdown, and making sure you actually take what local law enforcement, local folks are saying more seriously? >> we take what local law enforcement relates to a seriously. let me be clear on that. as far as the communication -- >> not this time. >> we always trust our law enforcement partners and have a great relationship with them. we looking at whether there was a communication breakdown. if that was the case, we will take steps to ensure that we correct that because to your point, we cannot have a communication breakdown. >> you mention the perimeter of the event did not include the rooftop where the shooter was. does your response ability and the secret service's response. to protect the principal stop at the upper a writer of an event?

7:21 am

>> our responsibility is to ensure the safety and security of the event itself and the protective who is attending that event and personnel. >> you would say the fact the rooftop is outside the perimeter is not an excuse for what happened, saying was outside the perimeter? >> i'm not offering that as an excuse. >> thank you. i yelled back. >> judgment yields back. the chair recognizes mister fallon from texas. >> how did a 20-year-old loner with a week's notice pick the absolute best location to assassinate donald trump and the entire secret service missed it? in your leadership your agency got outsmarted and outmaneuvered by a 20-year-old which i can we have any confidence you can stop trained professionals from a nefarious nationstate. >> those are absolutely questions we need to -- >> i know they are questions, we can't have that confidence. do you have the ability personally to beef up security of any of your protecting? >> yes i do.

7:22 am

>> were you also aware there is a credible threat donald trump was facing, human security threat to a foreign adversary? >> yes. >> given there was increased threat to donald trump's life, provided a full security complement that a sitting president would receive? >> he was provided a full complement of security based on the threat assessment we had. >> my question is if he had been a sitting president would he have the same security? >> there's a difference between a sitting president -- and continuity of government. >> there wasn't a full team on site and surveillance on site. you said you have the ability to beef up security, you knew about the threat and you didn't and that is as telling as it is chilling. we have satellite images from

7:23 am

the fairgrounds, have you visited site? >> i have not. >> nine days and have not visited the site. you should have been there that night. did you talk to the team, the heroes, did you call him that night? >> there was operational work -- >> the answer is no. the you column the next day? do you call him the next day? not the day of? 72 hours after? >> i don't know the timeline but i spoke with -- immediately followed. >> 72 hours, you went three days. it is immediately clear a number of structures need to be secure. other than the first four what is the most dangerous site that should have been secured? security 101. >> yes. >> do you know what the next most dangerous i, what was the closest structure? other than the four immediate ones you have your counter sniper teams on? >> there are a number of structures around that event site. >> the shooter has visited the

7:24 am

site two more times than you have and he had a drone anti-picked the agr building. you remember in an abc interview you did, you didn't have people on the roof of the building because you are worried about safety because of the slope. >> i recall that statement. >> does the secret service have written policy you can share about sloped roofs? >> no. >> why did you act like there was one? is your practice to comment on events of enormous national implication when you are ignorant of the facts? there's rhetorical. is this thing with the slopes. 1812, you can go to a one hundred 12, which is about as flat as you can get without being completely flat and you are saying there is a danger, safety concern there but the problem is you put your counter snipers on a freefall roof which is steeper than the 112, the 112 is ada compliant, you can build a ramp for a

7:25 am

wheelchair on a one hundred 12 roof. these are nothing but pathetic excuses that make no sense. all the law enforcement i've spoken with the last nine days armadas the agr rooftop was not secure, you want to know why? because it is dangerous. i've never had any long gun training in my life. i own an ar 15 and last time i shot it i shot at one time in my whole life, 6 years ago. that is until saturday, we re-created the event. i was lying prone on our sloped roof at 130 yards at 6:30 at night and i knew he had a scope, didn't know what kind, red dot are magnified, i shot 8 rounds in both, you know what the result was, 15 out of 16 kill shot and the one i missed would have hit ear. 94% success rate and that shooter was a better shot than me. it is a miracle donald trump wasn't killed.

7:26 am

the shooter made it on the roof which wasn't the roof that was dangerous, it was the nut job on top of the roof. you know what else is dangerous? i believe your horrifying ineptitude and lack of skilled leadership is a disgrace, you're up you skating today, it is shameful. you should be fired immediately, go back to guard duty. i yelled back. >> the chair recognizes miss lee from pennsylvania. >> thank you. i would like to thank the ranking member for coming together and holding this hearing but i have to say i don't think any of our concerns have been addressed today and what little we've learned has not inspired much confidence. i will say that we obviously can't allow the violence we are seeing in this country become the norm but that seems to be where we are heading. on this occasion it was very shockingly a former president and current political candidate at a rally we assume is one of the most secure places we can be but the violence we saw last saturday is the same culture of

7:27 am

violence that makes too many communities on the safe, to play outside or go to class or live their lives each day. this was a political rally, is supposed to be one of the most secure places we have very specific questions about that. i would like to start by following up on some of my colleagues's questions. my colleagues highlighted number of points that show the shooter presenting an active threats i would like to ask you to clarify what the protocol is for postponing or canceling an event based on a threat and how that event the event on july 13th didn't meet those standards. >> i think we are talking about the distinction between suspicious behavior and a threat and at the time that this individual was identified they were displaying suspicious behavior. i'm still waiting for interviews from the fbi to determine what it was identified that individual as suspicious and what those behaviors were.

7:28 am

>> is suspicious behavior suspicious behavior vary between different events? if we have an event with a president would there be a heightened standard for sufficient behavior? >> i think there are a number of ways someone could be identified as suspicious and it doesn't matter whether it is at a rally or an indoor event or who the protect he is. i think it is up to law enforcement or citizens with enterprise someone as suspicious. >> okay, thank you. according to the associated press six agencies including two sheriff's office, local police, state police, emergency rescue officials were involved in securing a rally in butler. when there are so many teams collaborating, who takes the lead and how is that determined? >> the secret service is responsible for the security of the site and court nation. >> that the case on july 13th. >> correct. >> changing gears. in 2024 the secret service was given $3 billion which was 78 million above what was requested.

7:29 am

you have requested another increase. how much of these funds go toward training and improving protection procedures? >> i would have to get back to you on the training aspect of it but about 30% of our budget is for protections and facilities and training. >> the problem can't be lack of funding is so what exactly do you see as the core problem that led to this failure, the lead to your agency being outgunned by a 20-year-old using his father's gun and acting on his own without a particularly sophisticated plan or technology? >> i think we are waiting to determine exactly what those failures or failure was so that we can make sure that the secret service is stronger after this. >> there's a lot today you can't answer because it's an ongoing investigation but you are still figuring out the details and you won't answer the question. you said 60 days for the

7:30 am

investigation but i simply don't think that is acceptable which do you plan to keep avoiding questions and the american people's questions where the next 60 days? >> i'm not avoiding questions. i want to make sure i am providing factual and accurate information. >> but is there no in between between what is obviously a fact and what you can surmise from the detail you already have? >> i assure you when i have a full and complete report of what took place on that day i will certainly come back and make that available. >> the united states is experiencing increased levels of political violence and tension. does the secret service increase of violence as a threat to its work and how is the secret service adapting its strategy and protocols to account for increasing political violence? >> we are constantly evaluating threats we receive and monitoring that and we make adjustments on a daily basis to

7:31 am

our protect these based on what those threats are and what actions we need to take. >> do you believe controls on the availability of assault weapons would make it easier for the secret service to fulfill its mission of protecting public officials. >> the secret service is tasked with providing a safe environment which is why we put in place a number of mitigation factors. >> do assault weapons make it easier or harder for you to do your job? >> i think any weapon makes it difficult for us to do our job. >> i yelled back. >> the chair recognizes mr. donalds from florida. >> thank you, chairman. director, real quick. at what time was secret service aware of the active threat against donald trump? director? what time? >> the secret service was aware there was an individual who had been identified as suspicious and that individual was

7:32 am

attempting to be tracked down. >> at what time? >> i don't have a specific timeline. >> it has been nine days. at what time. >> i want to make sure i give you factual information. >> director, have you talked to the agents on the ground that day? >> yes. >> you've talked to all of them. you talked to every agent on the ground that day. >> as we have. >> have they all corroborated the same time they identify the shooter or were made aware of the shooter? >> a number of reports of when those times -- >> was a five minutes before the first shot rang out? >> no. >> was it 10 minutes before the first shot rang out? >> no. >> wasn't 15 minutes before the first shot rang out. >> bless than that timeframe when it was identified as a threat. >> how many days before the shooting took place did the secret service do their work to secure the facility the rally

7:33 am

was going to be held at? >> five days. >> in the five days prior when the security advancing did their work, did they identify the rooftop as a potential threat? >> i am pulling those reports and information. >> it has been nine days, did they notice rooftop? >> i'm pulling the reports. >> what was the saturday parameters around securing the rooftop? what did they do? >> there was overwatch provided. >> did overwatch fail? >> i am waiting to hear what the results of the investigation were. >> who did you talk to that was on the ground that day that was responsible for overwatch? what are their names? >> i'm not going to provide their names in this setting. >> did you talk to the people

7:34 am

providing overwatch that day? >> i talked to the people who conducted the advance on that day and were working the shift and birth counter snipers that day. >> you talk to the counter sniper team. you talked to people providing overwatch and the advances. correct? what did they tell you? >> we are putting together a comprehensive report to identify where the gaps and failures -- >> when the counter sniper team was on the roof and identified to there was suspicious activity on the roof in question, what was the chain of command on said roof. i am quite sure somebody saw under your organization, quite sure somebody saw the shooter on the roof. what was communication through the chain of command to deal with that.

7:35 am

>> when the individual was identified by the counter sniper, they took one shot and neutralized that individual. >> is that correct? >> that is correct. >> what you are saying now is the secret service did not see the shooter on the roof until after the shooter took a shot? >> i do not have all of those details at this time. >> if you don't have those details after nine days what you are telling me is you didn't see it. is that correct? >> i'm telling you i don't have details of the sequence at this time. >> it has been nine days. either you have the information or you do not. >> we are still in the process of conducting interviews and an investigation. >> some of my colleagues texted me the last couple days about whether you should you lose your job and i've been quiet on that question. because i wanted to see what you were going to do today.

7:36 am

in my opinion you do need to be fired immediately. this is gross incompetence and the fact that it has been nine days, these are simple questions to answer, if i ask any of my kids if they got in trouble i would tell them to give him to give me the details i would get more answers from them than i'm getting from you right now. that is what is frustrating on a bipartisan basis or nonpartisan basis, this is a joke. you are in charge. that is why you need to go. i yield back. >> the chair recognizes mister goldman from new york. >> thank you. director, i want to follow up and understand a little bit why there is so much information about this out in the public, including some from you and your communications team and yet you are here pursuant to a

7:37 am

subpoena under oath in front of congress and you are unable or unwilling to answer some of those same questions. can you just explain why you are answering so many fewer questions here than you have to the media? >> i am answering the questions that i am able to answer based on the fact there are multiple ongoing investigations. >> you have answered some of these questions previously. correct? to the public, to the media. >> which questions? >> did you have an interview with abc news? >> yes i did. >> did you explain the interaction between local law enforcement and law enforcement was responsible for securing the perimeter of the building where the shooter was? >> i said the secret service is responsible for designing and implementing and executing the security plan and we rely on

7:38 am

the assistance of local law enforcement to assist us with that plan. >> were you given any instructions what you can or can't answer today? >> my ability to answer questions is solely reflective of the fact that there are multiple ongoing investigations and i want to make sure that i provide accurate information that doesn't conflict with the investigations that are going on. >> is your view you can't talk about anything that happened that day until investigations are completed? >> i want to make sure this committee and the american public gets correct and actual information. >> is it your view that that can only happen after completion of the investigation? >> it is my view that when the investigations are complete that we will be able to share that information. >> how about before that?

7:39 am

>> if i have factual information i can share before that i absolutely will. >> i'm guessing you have factual information as to when the suspicious photograph of the suspicious person was relayed to the secret service. there's a timestamp on the text message or whatever it was, correct? >> i'm sure you can understand when you're dealing with text messages, email and other communications, timelines don't always match up. >> what you have acknowledged this was a major security failure. is that right? >> do you acknowledge it was a major security failure not to secure the rooftop of the building the shooter shot from. >> at this time the rooftop was

7:40 am

provided overwatch, we were unaware at this time how the individual to access this. >> overwatch meaning from other higher points. >> correct? >> wasn't a failure when the shooter was on the rooftop, overwatch did not identify him before he fired the shot? >> i don't have the timeline how they access the roof, where they accessed the roof or how long they were on the roof. >> you testified about the resources the secret service needed to deploy to protect the nato summit and all the leaders here, is that right? do you have to rely more on local law enforcement because of this event?

7:41 am

>> the secret service works with local law enforcement at every event the weather at the nato summit -- >> obviously there is natural give and take, agents that you deploy and how much you rely on local law enforcement. and secret service assets because of the nato summit. >> no. we get answers before the completion, i don't like the fact the media receive more answers than congress has. if this is a function of getting your ducks in a row, i assume you have access to these reports and information and should have come prepared here today. i want to flag mr.

7:42 am

chairman, before i yield back, i want to point out one thing my colleague from texas was talking about, with an ar 15, 94% success rate, 15 of 16 shots. i don't know why that doesn't convince him we should get rid of ar 15s but we have to do something about the prevalence of weapons of war on our streets. >> the chair, mr. perry from pennsylvania. >> 60 days, is that the information you put out or where did that come from. information committee members are talking about. 60 days, you are in charge of the secret service, your

7:43 am

organization what happened nine days ago. are you receiving regular updates? >> yes i am. >> you know some things are true. we want to talk about the things we are hearing about and find out, you've been in contact with the fbi and getting updates on a daily basis. are you confident the person in question mister crookes was the only person firing that day against the crowd? is he the only one? i'm not answering you yet if he acted alone but is he the only one, can you say that with certainty to the american people? >> that is the information i have at this time, yes. >> does it appear he acted alone? >> that is the information we have at this time. >> let's talk about the fact he was noticed as a person of interest, of concern, suspicion. your pi team, how do they stay,

7:44 am

ac of people, how does the pi team get to that individual in the sea of people. how the individual track? >> are protective intelligence teams are paired up with a local police counterpart so they work in conjunction together. >> would this follow him are browned. multiple parameters, inside perimeter, multiple parameters, was the agr building the highest location affecting the site of the rally? was it the highest location? >> the highest location at the site is where counter snipers were. >> what about the water tower? >> i don't have the height on the water tower. >> seems like water towers are pretty high. there might be a building

7:45 am

behind the agr building that is higher than the building crookes fired from. you are familiar with cover, concealment, death rate. you are familiar with those terms which how would your sniper team or your pi team track the individual and give vectors on the pi team to get to that individual to question him and how would you cover the concealment of areas you can't see from where your sniper team immediately adjacent to him were cited? how would you do that if you are not on the high ground? >> when counter sniper teams conduct an advanced they have a methodology and provide a grid system that our response teams are able to factor in if they see something troubling. >> when mr. jordan asked about the assets

7:46 am

that were requested, were aerial assets requested for this event from the secret service or state police or a drone, manned or otherwise, where they requested? >> i can't speak -- we had conversations with local police but i can tell you the assets that were requested from the secret service for the fight that day were all granted. >> were aerial assets -- i didn't ask if you used them or were they requested? >> overwatch was requested to. >> is that aerial? that could be on the water tower or not. could you be specific? running out of daylight here. >> i understand. if you are asking me about specifics -- >> it's not clear what i'm asking you? were aerial assets requested by secret service or anybody? where they requested? >> the secret service we felt we had a good plan in place.

7:47 am

>> how about canine assets with bomb sniffing or explosive sniffing capabilities? requested? where they requested? >> those requests were fulfilled. >> they were requested and fulfilled? so was crookes's vehicle inside your parameters? >> no it was not. >> it was not. it was not. was there a device located on mr. crookes's body to detonate the vehicle? >> that is the information i have. >> what would be the point of detonating the vehicle it's not inside the perimeter? >> i have no idea what mister crookes's motivation was. >> the fact you haven't even visited the site, i understand there were other things going on but the culture of your organization, the culture, do you know how tall donald trump is? >> over six feet tall. >> you assign agents based on

7:48 am

their ability to recover physically and to carry if necessary the president of the united states when you assign them to this mission is that a parameter that is considered? >> i assign agents to work our protect these that are capable and entrained. >> i understand they are trained but if you are not tall enough it has nothing to do, we are not mad at you but if so what is 7 feet tall and you are 5 feet tall there's going to be a delta there that is problematic in protecting, i am asking is that a consideration when these agents, not saying you but assigned to protect the. >> the agents are assigned to protect these, perfectly capable. >> what i'm concerned about, the primary objective here seems to be something other than securing the site, and that's a concern based on answers you've given today so far. with that i yield.

7:49 am

>> mr. moscowitz from florida. >> thank you for this hearing. i want to thank the subpoenas that you sent, ranking member raskin, and the creation of a commission to get to the bottom of what happened. i want to give you an honest assessment how this is going for you today. did you happen to catch the hearing many months ago in education with a bunch of university presidents, very easy question and couldn't get an answer. do you see that hearing? >> i don't think i did. >> the short end of that story as university professors all resigned the. they are gone. that is how this is going for you. this is where this is headed.

7:50 am

i don't know who prepare you for this. i don't know how many times you testified in front of congress, but a president was almost assassinated live on television not just for americans but for the world to see. this be your first opportunity. i understand there's an ongoing investigation, things you cannot talk about but the idea that the things like that, something independents and republicans will find unacceptable. my high school, marjory stoneman douglas, was on the list of mass shootings representative raskin held up. that day, did not stand into the building, hid in the stairwell, stayed outside, never helped. he also directed other officers who showed up on the scene not to go into the building.

7:51 am

when it was determined feel years in response and training and the sheriff fired nobody in his agency. governor desantis removed that sheriff, i supported the removal. you said there's going to be account ability. you don't want to give us names. are you telling the committee once it is concluded you are prepared to fire the people on the ground who made poor decisions that day? >> i'm prepared to take the actions necessary. >> that's nonsense, okay? accountability, the failure was human. doesn't mean they are bad people, they failed that day, a former president was almost assassinated. are you prepared to fire the human failure on the ground, yes or no? when you have the names, not like a piece of technology failed, people failed that day. are you prepared to fire them? >> i don't have an answer. >> how can there be

7:52 am

accountability if you are not prepared to fire someone? the reason why your name is the person who is held accountable, the reason members of this committee are calling for resignation and i join in that, or for the president to fire you, you say there's going to be accountability but you can't commit that people are going to get fired. let me ask this a different way. if trump had been assassinated that day, if the gunman had succeeded will you have tendered your resignation. >> i would sitting here because i want to ensure the integrity of the investigation. >> that is a fair answer you would have set up that process but would you have had the honor to come in front of the committee and say if a former president was assassinated on my watch, there should be new leadership? >> i have admitted that -- >> would you have tendered your resignation if he had been killed? >> if it occurred on my watch i am accountable for that. >> would you have tendered your

7:53 am

resignation if he had been killed? >> i think i have admitted i've taken accountability and will take response ability. >> okay. let me follow up on representative connelly's question about guns and you're not willing to commit that makes your job harder. this is not about the second amendment. if there are 400 million guns on the streets, if those were all machine guns with that make your job harder? to protect people? >> i think weapons -- >> if i'll of those guns were rocket propelled grenades with that make your job harder? >> yes, sir. >> thank you, perfect the. . it is not a trick question. i won't ask the other 15 things, i was going to do drone strikes but it is okay. that's all we were asking. creates a challenging environment. it does make your job harder.

7:54 am

representative connelly asked that question. one last thing and i will conclude. there was a question asked, is an iranian assassin more capable than a 20-year-old and i've been tough on iran, more resolutions iran than almost anyone in congress but it is not irradiance walking into schools and grocery stores and movie theaters and churches. it is 20-year-olds. some of them are mentally unstable. they have access to guns and they are domestic terrorists. christopher ran talked about domestic terrorism. we collectively come together on foreign threats and i am not at all debasing of the fact there are foreign threats here and abroad but there are domestic threats, and how we stop domestic terrorism. it was a 20-year-old who walked into my high school and killed 17 people. he was plenty capable and wasn't uranian. >> mr. timmons from south carolina.

7:55 am

>> we've asked you a lot of questions and haven't gotten a lot of straight answers which i've intentionally created a line of questions you can't answer. the first question is do you agree the allocation of secret service resources should correspond with the risk profile of any given event? higher degree of risk to get more resources? >> that is fair. >> 2 of this will occur at the same thing, the risk profile, the obvious event is greater risk for greater resources. >> that is correct. >> this is publicly announced, the venue is an outdoor fairground, no existing security, tens of thousands, over 20,000. there were general and specific

7:56 am

threats as the chairman of intelligence remarked. when donald trump was in office, he made a lot of people mad. the former and future president, that's a fairly high risk event. would you agree? >> yes. >> the first lady had an event at a casino in pittsburgh, a few dozen miles away. it was publicly announced on july 10th. what is interesting is the casino is extremely secure. we had magnetometers prior to this being an ounce. it was in the ballroom. the size of the crowd, there were no specific threats, the asset is the first lady.

7:57 am

there is a huge disparity relative to risk. would you agree? >> yes. >> thank you. >> multiple whistleblowers and various media outlets reported the office of the secret service out located 12 additional to the first lady and three additional post standards to the trump rally. is that correct? >> there were no assets that were diverted. >> simple question. i'm not asking if anything was diverted. did the first lady's event that was relatively secure especially compared to trump's rally get 12 assets, the first lady's event got 12 assets and trump's get three from the pittsburgh field office. don't answer it if you don't -- >> personnel that were allocated to both of those events were comparable to risk at both of those events. >> really?

7:58 am

so you think the pittsburgh casino ballroom would ingress egress through a well guarded parking garage was four times more dangerous than 20,000 person rally an open field with the former president and future president, four times more dangerous? >> i didn't say that. >> they got four times, likely in charge of that event. we have continually highlighted the failures of the secret service at the trump rally. the former and future president getting a shot, multiple injuries, one fatality. i would have to think that if we had nine more standards, nine more individuals that have the training and integration into the secret service defense of trump, i have a feeling crookes would have somebody say hello to him before he fired a bunch of shots.

7:59 am

do you think that's true? >> there were significantly more assets and resources available at the former president's event. >> who made the decision to deploy 12 post standards to the casino where the first lady was having a 400 person dinner and only three people from the pittsburgh field office to the 20,000 person plus trump rally, who made that mistake? >> there were additional secret service resources available at donald trump's event. >> who made the decision to deploy 12 to the first lady's event and three to the trump event? >> the allocation of resources is decided based on the availability of personnel and their location and where they are but there were sufficient resources that were given -- >> do you say there were sufficient resources? donald trump got shot, there were not sufficient resources clearly. it doesn't take 27 years of

8:00 am

experience to know that and whoever made that decision probably wasn't you, needs to be fired and you need to resign because it is unacceptable and you lost the trust of the american people. i yelled back. >> the chair recognizes rashida tlaib from michigan. >> when we hear the headline of 20-year-old young man with access to an assault weapon commits an act of mass violence, we heard this before. over and over again. the unfortunate thing is my residents don't get a committee hearing. we've not had one committee hearing about the over 260 mass shootings we had killing hundreds of people, injuring, changing their lives forever. .. wrong, i think watch to even the pool of blood, it was horrific staley think about which is i saw after mass

8:01 am

shootings at schools, grocery stores. a supermarket in new york where the shooter killed ten shoppers with an ar. >> info caso, ak-47 so assault rifle killed 22. in florida parkland, florida, 17 students and teachers murdered again with an ar. in pittsburgh at a place of faith, tree of life synagogue, 11 murdered. and don't get me about newton in connecticut which still breaks my heart, 26 murdered including 20 elementary school children. they should michigan we've had, mr. chair comer two mass shootings. 21 shot in detroit, one of the more horrific shootings we have seen, two killed at at a splash pad in rochester hills, michigan. eight shot there.

8:02 am

again, an assault weapon used. but the difference here is the former president gets a hearing in his attempted assassination but our residents don't't get a hearing about mass shootings, about gun violence in our country. you know, mr. chair, i asked this wholeheartedly, you know, it'll have secret service to protect them. they w don't. they don't have these mass agencies protecting our kids in the schools and supermarket, movie theaters or going to a block party. i don't have that. we don't have that. but but i can't believe we'ret going to focus on that and not the fact that we're hearing yet again in the headlines a 20-year-old young man having access to an assault weapon, a weapon of war. many of my veterans said have to be trained to use but he can get it. wasn't safely stored by the parent, grabbing that gun, and

8:03 am

innocent lives were lost. director, i know you've got asked about this at it think it's important for us to hear this. but how difficult is your job and are such easy access to assault weapons in the streets? >> i think the java secret service agent and all is incredibly difficult. i think the environment with the with every day and the dynamics of the threat environment is incredibly difficult. these are brave men and women who put their lives on the line, and a day like went on july 13 is a day that no one in my agency ever wants to have as their responsibility. it is an incredibly difficult jump. >> yeah, i immediately thought of the children in the audience. we getting about going to a rally with your family. again, their lives are forever changed.

8:04 am

the incident is never isolate. at least these incidents are never isolated at a note "detroit free press" has decoded the 20-year-old pennsylvania should've looked up the 2021 oxford high school shooting in michigan. can you comment on what information they should was looking up regarding. the tragey of oxford high school where it took four of her high school youth of there? >> i'm sorry, i'm not able to. the fbi has the details. >> you can give a telescope was a look at the type of weapon? how many -- >> unfortunately i don't have those details. >> did they share that with you? >> i don't have the full content of what his searches worker i think they are still in the process of examining all of his devices. okay.ta again, again the impact, i want to be really serious about this. the impact on our families is more than just this political belly, mr. chair but we have to talk about this. even if we are disagreements let's talk aboutut it because i

8:05 am

consisted to show we could be saving lives now if we banned these weapons of war from being able to buy it at the local store down the street. we just can't continue to allow this to happen and, unfortunately, my residents are not former president of the united states. they don't get a hearing. it'll get secret service, any of that. even among those that are expressing the failed in the system, they just deserve better. they truly do. thank you edit your. >> that you are now recognizes mr. burchett from tennessee. >> thank you, mr. chairman. ms. cheatle, there should was set up on the roof of the age of internationally as a no. was roof identified as a potential formidably days before the rally? >> to my knowledge as it was. >> were agents or officers inside the building works if so what floor with a on? >> we have local police officers inside the building. >> the roof looks like it is a ten roof. how did no one inside the building here so moving on the top of a metal roof? >> i don't have the details of the interviews that a been conducted jet. >> when will you have those?

8:06 am

>> i been asking and want to that information as soon as you do. >> why did secret service fail s to block the line of sight from that roof? >> i think that the secret service put together a plan whether counting that roof in as part of their overwatch, and that was a plan that put in place that day. >> if you were not going to put a security personnel on the roof why not at least use drone technology or enteral surveillance to monitor the rally? >> there are a number of times that we do use drone technology. i'm not speaking specifically to this he did and what was utilized or not. there are times when drone technology is available and helpful at events, and there are times when it is not appropriate. >> do you use personally use signal to communiqué with any official from the white house? signal come on your phone. >> on occasion. i'm sure there are people that signal, yes. >> okay. do you use it to speak with the

8:07 am

white house, use signal? >> no, i do not. >> when was thomas grokster said in a fight as person of interest? >> let me helpso you. 5 p.m. he was spotted with a rangefinder at 5:51. when did secret service notice him? >> again i don't have specific timelines but it was relatively short period of time. >> let me help you, 5:52. why was president trump allowed on stage that matters at the secret service spotted a suspicious individual? that seems to be the worst thing of all.. of all the breakdown in all this communication all the bs you been feeding us are today or not feeding as that seems to be the question. >> as i stated before there are number of the fans were suspicious people may be identified. that doesn't necessarily -- >> i submitted you got a guy who's going to be the next president of the united states. he's on stage. i've been to these events. we've all been to these events.

8:08 am

a car backfires and 50 minute that can wait. that's not acceptable. that the secret service till president trump fayette spotted a suspicious individual before he was shot? >> i am unclear as to what the medication was with the former president at that time. >> i'll take that as are no. did you all deny president trump's request more security, yes or no? and when was the most recent request for additional security? >> the rally request for security, all of those requests were fulfilled. >> with any personnel we directed to joe biden's rally? >> no. who made the decision on direction of agents at either one of those rallies? >> i am unclear as to your question on the direction of the agents. >> i said who directed those agents to be at ms. biden from a president trump's rally?

8:09 am

the specific agents. >> so there is a methodology in which agents are available for assignments and they are assigned based on either geographic location or logistics or flight. >> i appreciate all that but that methodology about got president trump killed. was a security detail starting president trump a temporary detail? >> the personnel who are assigned to the former presidents detail are assigned t to him -- >> why was her different detail on the opening night of the convention than the detail that was guarding him and pennsylvania? >> the president has a very large permanent protected detail assigned too them. a work shift work and so it could be the people you saw at the rally were not working the same shift the day that he -- >> i can assure you somebody that's a lot shorter than the president was not at the convention and the people that were cowering downnt behind the mass of common agents on top of the present were not in the convention hall, at least i didn't see them.

8:10 am

you can't answer seemed at a single question about an ongoing investigation and you don't know when thew information would be released publicly. are you waiting for the administration to sign off? >> no. i'm waiting for the result of investigation at which time -- >> let me ask one more question. he found explosives in the shooters possession, is that correct? >> the fbi found explosives. >> do we know who directed fisherman how toak make those explosives? >> i believe the fbi you still looking into that on their investigation. >> ms. cheatle, you said the buck stops with me and i agree. i don't think he should resign. i think you should been fired. you are a dei, or story. i've told my daughter multiple times, my, wife and my daughter, we talked to her all the time about how she's going to succeed in life. she succeed in life by achieving. you have not achieved today. you let the american public to pick it was up to me you be gone. thank you, mr. chairman.

8:11 am

>> now recognized ms. crockett from texas. >> thank you so mucho mr. chair. let me pick up what my call it from tennessee left off. director cheatle, was thehe incident on july 13 due to dei a rather systemic failures in communication and potentially safety protocols? >> the incident on the 13th has nothing to do with dei. the incident on the 13th has to do with a failure or a gap either in planning or communication. >> thank you so much. in fact, i have a few articles that i will enter into the record once i a wrap up that actually acknowledge a number of women, specifically for their valor in their service, whether it's been in various levels of law enforcement but you know, i want to stick your for just a second because earlier you had a conversation which there was a discussion about training. and i want to talk about

8:12 am

training at a a want to talk t the fact that there's been a double that of dancing about as it relates to this being a suspicious person and this being a situation that was perceived to be a threat. and it seems as if there's a different analysis that takes place. one of my questions hasse to do with if you have any bias training that your officers undergo and the reason i ask that because as a civil rights lawyer i have learned so many times in having to do with law enforcement that there usually is not as perception of a threat when it is a young, white male, even if they are carrying a long gun. yet a e lot of times at least in this country when it comes to law enforcement, there is a perceived threat just by somebody having aom look at more melanin in their skin. so i'm curious because a lot of times one of the things with consistently push for on my side of things, and when i say my side, his once we're looking at a tragedy in which law

8:13 am

enforcement made an error, is the bias training of whether or not our officers are getting it. so i'm curious to know in some a trend you talk about that's part of your budget has biased and been part of that. >> was yesterday. >> okay, thank you. . >> i know today is a rough day. you may or may not know the answer the space in which this event was an open carry space, is that correct? >> that is correct okay so in the state of texas now serving whenever there were mass shooting and el paso. we had an opportunity to do right by our citizens in texas but we did not. they cost formulas very.

8:14 am

we don't want to keep pointing the finger. our job for the american people and to be honest there. they said their jobs will be made more difficult. all is in the other side of the aisle he said they would ignore the warnings in the past the law and said in right after, we end of with this. there is get you going because of the firearm in which the case had that and they were given the opportunity, at least you have to be 21 before you could have the weapon. if there is no objection, connie

8:15 am

decades after we know there has been political violence in this country, are you aware of the fact that the numbers are higher? in addition i will blame ourselves because right now you have fingers pointing at you. the reality is a number of engaging in violent rhetoric, he needs to be calmed down. another thing happening is it has already began. the problem is when people believe say the president of the united states or they believe

8:16 am

whatever conspiracy they believe in front of them, that sites the next level at the next event so we are only making for your job as it relates as well as the men and women your protection is there director so making sure the american people have what they need so they can feel as if she were services on the side of the american people and i don't doubt secret service is on the side of the american people but right now as long as conspiracy theories continue, he will make their job that much harder. >> the chair recognizes chairman. >> i would like to remind you that you are under oath. an advanced team of protective intelligence team cyber element,

8:17 am

who was the agent in charge, how long has she been agent in charge and what is for secret service background? >> i'm not going to provide a name -- >> why not? your here to answer questions. you stated in her testimony, he said i am here to answer your questions. >> that is correct. >> it's a question. >> i'm not going to provide personnel. >> why not? the american people are demanding answers. >> i will do the best to provide accurate information based on the facts i have at this time. >> with law enforcement partners identify threats in the movement, would like a copy of the report, have you brought it today? >> the documentation requested.

8:18 am

>> he should have brought today. >> i'm certain our personnel are working -- >> i don't believe you need to do the people watching you are not doing well. you've been sitting here for three hours and i have you, the entire committee is demanding you to resign or be fired do not resign. you need to answer the question. what technical resources utilized for the event, specifically drone for helicopter? >> there were a number of technical assets deployed at the event and there was an intelligence team assigned to that event. >> why was crooks able to fly a drone over the entire area the day of his assassination? >> to my knowledge, he did not like the drone over the entire area.

8:19 am

>> how did he like a drone over any part of the area? connect i will have to go back and check the timeline of when it took place. >> why didn't you ring the timeline with you today to answer the questions? >> i will have all of the answers on the timeline. >> for you not prepared today? to enter our questions? >> i am prepared based on the information and wanted to provide -- >> you have a timeline from any of the day? >> i have a timeline that does not have the civics. >> that is talking. that is absolutely unacceptable. that means you are a failure at your job. let's talk about things prohibited. i've been to a lot of trump rallies. thanks, bicycles any type of

8:20 am

weapon or any item determined be a safety hazard. at 5:10 p.m., he's observed by one of the ciphers, sniper one of the building. 5:10 p.m. president trump was shot in the face 6:11 p.m. 5:28 p.m., a picture of a bicycle and two bags that belong to crooks 5:32 p.m., crooks looking at his phone and using a rangefinder. 5:55 p.m., command confirm photos and states they've been relayed on. 6:05 p.m., sniper one communicates groups moving northeast and direction of the backpack, two minutes before the

8:21 am

shooting president trump has been allowed. people see him laying on his stomach they are yelling he has a gun and they are trying to alert law enforcement and service secret service. why was crooks not shot by the ciphers? why was he allowed to be there? >> as soon as the individual was identified as a threat -- >> what you consider to be a threat? command with the sun playing in a cyber position, a man that had a backpack, a man that had a bicycle, a man that had a rangefinder, what is determined a threat next. >> an individual with the backpack is not a threat. an individual was a rangefinder is not a threat. >> a building that has direct line of sight of president trump

8:22 am

the gun that people are screaming and pointing out. >> was identified, they were neutralized. >> crooks was neutralized after he shot president trump in the face. >> as soon as the counter sniper identify the individual, they were able to neutralize. >> people under your command did not consider him to be right yet people in the crowd knew he had a gun and considered him to be a threat. that means you are the failure is director of the secret service people under your command don't perceive a man on the roof with a gun, they don't perceive that to be a threat of the people in the do. how is that possible?

8:23 am

>> please answer the question. >> i'm not certain how the information from the people in the crowd was related to any law enforcement personnel. >> you knew that everyone knew, people there knew that there was a danger, they knew there was a threat to president trump and was allowed to happen, was there a standdown order? was there a conspiracy to kill president trump? >> absolutely not. >> and how does this happen and why are you still sitting here not turning in your letter of resignation? >> please answer and then i will answer. >> that is what we are investigating to determine. >> we are waiting for your letter of resignation and you really need to consider doing that before you leave today. >> the chair now recognizes from massachusetts. >> thank you, no one should fear for their life at a political

8:24 am

rally, in the classroom are in their home. we must do something about violence gun violence in all forms. have noted investigations secret service response and we can expect a report in the next 60 days. with the election nearly 100 days away, it is unacceptable and makes people less safe. it also allows my colleagues across the aisle additional time to spread dangerous misinformation which also puts people in harm's way. in this moment to continue to attack progress with racial justice and gender equity in america. disappointing but not surprising. republicans have stated hiring

8:25 am

women of color into the response to the shooting. the republican strategy constantly attacked necessary diversity, equity and inclusion ever in the disability community others make each and every day it is disgraceful. and violence and tragic loss of life ignoring solutions like gun safety reform that trotting out. secret service and di for security failure and trump shooting. >> without objection, so ordered. >> in the accused di and the hiring of women as a liability

8:26 am

from the secret service one of have been an integral person 71 in the same standards as their male reports use them. it is dangerously divisive. based on recent publicly available data of agency, the largest demographic move most special occasions are white and male. to write wing extremist, it doesn't matter the lies they tell to advance their agenda which is a key theme throughout project 2025 will only make the american public less safe and more divided. every day that you fail to give us answers, they are given more oxygen to make their baseless claims that women and people of

8:27 am

color are responsible for tragic events and that is dangerous, too. thank you and i yield my remaining time to ranking member harassed and neck agility. the points you are making and other members to bring into relief here, the very same day that donald trump narrowly escaped an assassination attempt in the firefighter was gunned down and others injured, there was another mass shooting that day several hours later in birmingham, alabama. four people killed and ten wounded in a nightclub shooting and you might as a freakish

8:28 am

coincidence. not at all. we have 11 mass shooting a day in america so commonplace now reported in the national news and confirming the ten other people were shot and seriously wounded being treated at the hospital. these things are a nightmare for the families of the victims who have been killed for the families that take care of the people seriously injured and wounded. a major financial drain publicly and privately that allow ar-15's to be purchased all over the country. we have a hearing went on all other days of the year we don't have a hearing about it. i think it is because it's an

8:29 am

honest disagreement we have about the second amendment and some you got the right to arm yourself with whatever weaponry you need to overthrow the government of the united states and we reject that in the constitution. we can ban assault weapons and did in 1994 produced shootings and when that was lifted, they went through the roof. we are demanding real answers and actions from the secret service, less demand real action and real answers from ourselves about the nightmare of violence when you compared to similar issues. nothing like what we are going through so act on service to protect ourselves.

8:30 am

we got to act as congress against ar-15's in america. >> i want to thank the secret service agents, those who work tirelessly to protect our president and specifically agents who did not hesitate to jump in front of president trump. my heart goes out to the family and the people of the rally still recovering. on the other hand, secret service has leadership problems and that falls on you. i appreciate your hollow word that it stops here, i was actually hoping for some answers. director cheatle, you must answer to the american people if you want to stay in charge. it's really simple.

8:31 am

you want to keep your job, right? >> absolutely. >> the best way to keep your job is to answer the question. come on. how long did you prepare for this hearing x. >> i've been preparing into last week. >> five, six days? >> as soon as i was notified. >> and how long was that? >> about this hearing i began preparing. >> forth days, three days? >> i'm not sure the date got a letter. >> what are you sure of? are you sure the color of your hair, your seat? tell the american people, what are you sure of? you don't even know what you started preparing for the hearing? you have no clue you can't remember?

8:32 am

>> osiris, dementia. >> i'm taking accountability. >> super. let's start with some questions. you keep referring to the fbi and when asked about him on the roof, diverted to the fbi. when asked the civics acting alone, you referred and i could go on and on. my question is, who at the fbi should i speak with? >> the fbi is responsible -- >> is there a name?

8:33 am

>> i'm not certain -- let me ask a different question, have you been in communication with the fbi? with whom? >> the director and fbi director. >> what have they shared with you about this investigation? i'll give you an opportunity to answer again. >> they have shared with me -- >> how many shell casings were on the roof? >> yes okay, how many were there? >> i would defer to the fbi -- >> how many were there? >> the information they need to share in their investigation. >> they shared the information with you, you just don't want to share the information with us, correct? >> we have concurrent investigations going on in exit they have shared this information with you, you know

8:34 am

the answer to the question, you just refuse to answer the question from the member of congress who subpoenaed you to be here. is there a different answer to that question? >> i was willing to come testify before this oversight committee hearing. >> let's hear your actions, not your words. you know the answer had refused to tell us the answers. i will ask you again, you know how many shell casings were on the roof. what is the answer to that question? >> it's pertinent to talk about the information secret service says and secret service relates to -- >> i'm asking and answering the question. if you are supposed to be in charge, the buck stops with you,

8:35 am

how come you can share the answer? what are you covering up? what are you hiding my friend? >> i'm not covering anything up. >> and why can't you answer a simple question? >> i would leave it to the criminal investigation to answer questions related to that. >> when you talk to the fbi and asked -- did you ask them? >> yes. >> you know the answer to that question but again, you refuse to give us the answers. i submit to you, if you can't -- it's not can't, it's won't. it's not i don't know, it's i choose not to answer the question. well, let me tell you. if you are going to lead, you

8:36 am

need to leave. if you want to be in charge, answer the question or step aside and have someone with the courage to answer to the american people the questions they deserve answers to and with that, i yield back. >> refusing they we know you have the information for. your wanting to answer questions of the secret service. ma'am, you are the secret service. you said you're the best for the job. you been passing the buck to this entire day and i'll start with something to be the fbi

8:37 am

does know because it has to deal with you personally. you said you spoke with president trump after the assassination attempt and i want to know, did you apologize to him directly? for nearly having president trump killed? >> i did. >> i appreciate that. i appreciate that you recognize that this was your failure. since the assassination attempt, you are under oath, reminding you, have you communicated with anybody in the white house and messaging cap like signal? in are you willing to surrender your phone for personal analysis? >> if i am required to do so. >> okay, i will look into making that request because i would like to see your personal phone to see if you were mitigating with your messaging app. have you ever turned down

8:38 am

security request from donald trump's detailed special agent in charge? >> i have not. >> have there been -- as your team, the secret service? and vulnerability. additional requests. >> with made a number of enhancements. >> bomb sniffing dogs provided -- you failed to confirm if there were aerial security surveillance assets provided, yes or no? >> we had overwatch provided at

8:39 am

the rally. fifty-seven minutes prior to the shooting. was the individual approached by an agent? is set the standard protocol for someone identified as suspicious? two to five times, approximately? >> the information was passed potentially between -- >> never located by an agent? >> we have dozens who identified him and not one agent, there are many agents on the ground. no one was able to identify him.

8:40 am

>> the agents on the ground at the time i have no knowledge they were able to interview him. >> was there local law enforcement officer approached the roof and all the shooter that he was present on the roof? have you spoke to that local law enforcement officer? are you going to? >> it is part of a criminal investigation interviewing those individuals. >> that would not be something included the plan. >> allegedly requested a photo of the dead body on top of identified? >> i will have that information. >> is that something you've heard of? the mark know.

8:41 am

>> were patients present at the rally? to attend or to work? >> to work. not to my knowledge. >> how long did the cyber have crooks in his sight before the shooter opened fire on president trump? >> i don't have that specific timeline. >> will you be able to tell us if you communicate with other agents on what he was saying through his sights? >> once i had that information absolutely. >> because we do know why he waited for multiple rounds to be fired at president trump before the threat was neutralized. we need to know if he was given an order to hold fire. now, you've excused the roof of being unmanned because the slope of the roof. do you continue to assert the slope of the roof as a credible reason for leaving this position undefended? >> first, i'll go back and correct that there was no order

8:42 am

to hold fire. our agents and officers have the ability to neutralize a threat at the time -- >> you don't know, i'm sorry you to know the key medication that was taking place or how long he had this man inside. you have spoken to them but you do know there was no order to hold fire? >> i can tell you the way our personnel are trained, they are trained on use of force scale that when you see a threat they are authorized to neutralize that threat. there is no, , they don't have o ask for permission. >> you excuse the roof being unmanned because of the slope. do you stand by that assertion? >> the roof was not covered with an individual on it because there was overwatch provided. >> apparently not. no, there was no overwatch provided. this is very evident that president trump was shot. a man died. there was no oversight provided. i find this rather maddening especially now knowing that you do if answers from the fbi who

8:43 am

you've been passing the buck to this entire hearing, not answering a congressional hearing, members of congress while you are under oath and under a a subpoena. i find it maddening that the director that oura country has come centimeters away from oblivion under your watch.nd you have answers. you are refusing to give those to us. directing as to the fbi and this entire thing is a waste of time. you, you are responsible for the loss of a life and the shooting that took place on president trump. you do need to reside. this is bipartisan. you need to be fired. you do not need to hold this position. you are not the best for this job. i am of my time but i cannot tolerate your watch any longer. and i'm going to continue to call daily for you to be removed from her position. >> the chair recognizes mr. fry from succulent. >> thank you, mr. chairman. director cheatle, how long have

8:44 am

you been with the secret service? 29 years come right? >> that's correct. >> how long have you been director of the secret service? >> just under two years. >> during her tenure as director under the secret service i know it today to talk about the assassination attempt on president trump, but how many other security lapses have occurred with protectees under your watch? >> i don't have is the specific number but there have been some lapses. >> there have been other lapses. once one of them jake sullivan? >> yes, sir. >> what happened there? >> there was an individual who was able to access mr. sullivans residence for his residence? a protectee somebody was whe to break into his house? and what happened with did anyone get fired because of that? >> there were individuals who have been reassigned. >> reassigned. what other steps have taken -- what i'm seeing, what other, excuse what other incidents have

8:45 am

occurred other than jake sullivan? was an issue with the secret service agent and vice president harris? >> i would not call that a security incident. >> well, it seems to me i mean your security lapses with president trump if you have security lapses with jake sullivan. you have issues with your personnel related to vice president harris. there seems to be a repeated theme here, would you not agree with that? >> i think that we're talking about separate categories of incidents. >> i would disagree with that. there is a repeated theme when you cut protectees and you are not upholding your core mission. let me askre you something else. does the secret service retune the record communication between and amongst detail? >> radio communications? >> any communication. >> e-mail communications are captured as well as text messages, , and independent on e

8:46 am

detail, radio communications are recorded. >> does best secret service have recorded communication from the july 13 event? >> we do not have radiocommunication from that day. >> but you haveak text messages? >> we do with emails and text messages. >> emails okay great. does ahead of the trump detail or someone else embedded in this detail have command decision-making authority, or does he need to seek authorization from somewhere outside that detail? >> the head ofut the detail has the decision-making authority for things that are necessary for that detail. >> is that stand for protection detail? >> yes, it is. >> okay. let me ask you something, during campaign event visit, for the secret service to utilize other agencies? >> yes, it is. >> what other agencies would bet providing assistance to the secret service? >> the are a number of other agencies that provide assistance to the secret service during campaigns. we utilize personnel from the

8:47 am

department of homeland security. we utilize personal from the department of defense, and a we utilize local lawt enforcement partners. >> are you on the same radios? do you provide the radios to all the assets that are taking part in protection of an event? >> we provide radios to the personnel from the department of homeland security that are assisting us. >> but not local law enforcement? >> local law enforcement is working on their own radios. >> are you on the same frequency? >> we ensure that we have counterparts in the security room, and so the local law enforcement replace one of their personnel in the security room with our personnel so that we have interoperable, interoperability communication. >> let me ask you something about the time of because this is interesting that we can't nail that down. there are laypeople out there with the more knowledge about the timeline and you seem to come before a subpoena in front of congress. was mr. crooks object at the agr building prior to the shooting?

8:48 am

>> he was observed on the grounds outside of our perimeter prior to the should. >> at approximate what time wasn't what you'd would have to give me the specific minute. approximate what time wasn't? >> i believe it was about 45 minutes or so prior to. >> did the sniper, sniper team take a photo of mr. crooks? >> the local team did, yes. >> so was a local team and not a secret service sniper? >> that took the photo. >> did he relayedk that photo to central command? >> again, it's an active ongoing investigation so i want to make sure i am factual with the route that that photo took and who that was disseminated to and when. >> what time did, did, when did mr. crooks status go from a suspicion, a person that was undert suspicion, to a threat? when did that happen?

8:49 am

>> for -- >> maybe not even specific time, director cheatle, may be a certainat that happened that transformed him from a person of suspicion to a threat, when did that happen? >> to the best of my knowledge based on what i have been told thus far, it's approximately five minutes were a individuals relayed that there was an incident being, or an issue, i'm sorry,be being worked at the 3:0 of the president. >> so that was, but it was before the shots were fired? >> that is correct but again it was not phrase as a threat. it was just that something was being worked. >> my question is when didas he become, when did he transform from suspicion to threat? they are treated very differently. people can be suspicious but are not a threat until a certain point in time. a so when did that happen? >> i believe that it was seconds before the guns, the gunfire starts. >> seconds. my gosh, we actually have a few

8:50 am

questions get answered today. listen, i'm going to wrap up your, mr. chairman, but here is a frustration that people have. the buck stops with you. you said that your self but the problem in washington, d.c. is, it is you only count in america that you can be so bad at your job that you actually get a promotion or don't get fired. you have not been able to enter the number of agents, whether or not requests were denied on additional security, whether or not law enforcement were able to engage beforeor the shooting wih the assassin, how he got on the roof, how the rifle got under with. you can tell us how mr. schatz he fired, whether the casings were recovered. you can't tell us anything about his cell phone. you can tell us whether the rally was supposed to be postponed given the intelligence that you are receiving. you can't tell us whether the car had a bomb. you can even tell us his motives. any american people are incredibly distressful because it has taken nine days to even get a a scintilla of evidencet of you maybe if i've seen in our abc or npc i would've gotten much more thorough and accurate information but we've notgh

8:51 am

received that in a subpoenaed hearing in front of this congress. that is white american people are frustrated and echo the bipartisan calls on this committee and all across this country that you should resign or maybe when the president wakes up from his nap he can fire you. thank you, mr. chairman. >> chaired a recognizes ms. luna from floor. >> 202-748-8001 direu please give me the names of the individuals who were in charge of your rally? >> i'm not going to release names. >> any given the titles and how many individuals? >> no. we had a full advance team that was responsible for advanced -- >> how may people are the final approval for? >> the number of people that are engage in approving -- >> can you give me a number? >> no, i do not have from number. >> can you confirm whether not understand this is an open investigation but in order to dispel conspiracy theorists have you guys been able to subpoena the shooters off discord records or has he fbi to your knowledge? >> i played the fbi is working on those.

8:52 am

>> is a a factual to say you e not ruled out the shooter was working with other people or person? >> again the fbi's conducting a criminal investigation. >> can you at least an effort to dispel conspiracy theories can you confirm or deny that? >> at this time we do not have that the range of the people engage. >> so you believe he was acting alone? >> i do. >> have been made aware of multiple eyewitness reporting who is a second shooter on a water tower? >> i do not having information related to any second shooter.. >> okay. the reason i ask that is because according to testimony from multiple witnesses they did report that,t, and again it's my understanding there were over 40 saper teams that were briefed by the butler esu and want to make sure that people are where you were saying there's not another shooter that are able to clear the information because from the soul and everything it does assume a much information has been able getas up to the amerin people and some trying to dispel rumors as i'm sure you understand. wasd. it true that secret servie

8:53 am

was present at the butler esu briefing? >> there was a briefing between the counter sniper teams that were working on the ground. >> were the present pghno yes to my nose. >> i want to read you a report from people that seem to be throwing you under the bus and stated that there were in attendance and that secret service was not in attendance at the sigar debriefing according to individuals with knowledge to also include that the agr building where the shooter thomas matthew crooks was located was actually not a part of their security perimeter for that. so there was not secret service present. it seems as though that when you were asked earlier from representative krishnamoorthi whether secret service was aware of the threat you said no they were unaware of a threat and yet according to communiqué should again from law enforcement that were in somee of these group chats they actually had reported that secret service was made aware of a a threat at around 5e

8:54 am

command including secret service aware of messages andt requests about information about the suspect'son location. can you please tell me if you have knowledge of that at all? >> i can ial think we're conflating the difference between the term threat and suspicious. >> but you guys did acknowledge at 5:59 p.m. according to this group chats, degenerate? >> of a suspicious individual suspicious individual. y >> okay. chairman, in my opinion, according to some of the testimony. i feel you have perjured yourself in some instances as ad some good ask for a full review of the transcript by stephanie find that to be the case i do ask that you bring perjury charges against the director. i will say this. it is very frustrating and i talked to my colleagues and we had set it to your face that you can up here basically stonewalling our ability to get the answers to the american people. and what i will also say is that every single member ofr caucuses not feel safe with you in charge.

8:55 am

you've heard that i think we're all sitting ducks with you directing the secret service currently. but moree importantly it sends a message to our adversaries we are not protected andha we are e of the strongest country in the world so you're thee essential made us less safe country because of it. as result of that i'm asking you to formally step down. i share my same opinions as my democraticle colleagues, i also think that your efforts to bring forward a full investigation and report in 60 days is unacceptable, and as result of that i'mth going to do everythig in my legislative toolkit to ensure that that happens sooner rather than later. and ensure that you know that we brought a vote on inherent contempt against cardiff are essentially blocking a congressional investigation and i don't think you should be any different. so i will say that i am just completely disgusted by her performance today and understand that you're probably a position where you been told not to testify which is why we had just been you. i think that goes back to garland but again that is part of the flushing that we need to get out of washington and i

8:56 am

would be happy to assist in the process. chairman, yield with the rest op our time. >> chaired a recognizes mr. langworthy from new york. >> thank you very much, mr. chau bringing this hearing forward subpoena. director, yesterday i made the decision to get my car and drive to butler, pennsylvania, in preparation for this moment in asking youhi questions about the events of the assassination attempt on president trump's life. i've done several presidential advance events in prior my career and i wanted to see the site with my own two eyes because i don't believe the video footage tells a whole story or looking at things in the diagram. and i was. absolutely appalled when it went to the site. when i saw the fact that i could havet stood on the roof of that building, the agr building, and hit that podium with a nine iron, and i'm a lousy golfer. and fact that i was not included in the perimeter is a complete dereliction of the duty of the

8:57 am

u.s. secret service. there are very few rooftops that needed to be secured and the fact that secret service is, there were putting a site plan in place did not think it was necessary to man those rooftops. you have completely walked away from your duties. you had one job and that's to protect the future president of the united states, or to protect all of the other protectees. and president trump is only here today by god's grace, because he had just something in him that made him turn his head just slightly or we would be international. of the morning right now. you have done nothing here to -- i've rewritten these questions like four times during her hearing and you h haven't answed a damn one of them. you haven't given any information. you have hidden behind us that the investigation and i think you should be ashamed of yourself because you have brought more shame to your agency that i think the assassination attempt has at this point. this is literally the worst performance i've ever seen in front of a'v congressional

8:58 am

hearing. you have offered no reason for this committee, this body, or the america people to trust you or the y secret service today. and you should resign. you had said that you put new secret measures in place after the assassination attempt. can you tell us what those are? because the american people want to know that you're taking real corrective measures, but today he appointed to an investigation, investigation or not you still have a job to do with his ego fail mission. but so far there's been absently no accountability and you have admitted that here h today. not one person has been suspended. not one person has been put on a desk. meanwhile, we got the most contentious of elections in our nation's history in i protectees are in danger. because of incompetent leadership. not the agents. the agents piled on president trump to protect his life.p those are heroes, but the administrators running or agency they are not right now. they are not doing their jobs and you certainly are not doing. the most appalling part of

8:59 am

saturday's events is the countless opportunities that secret service had to stop? before he even got on the roof. at 3:00? raise suspicion by entering the rally with a rangefinder. at 5:45 account with the beaver county emergency services unit saw crooks eyeballing the roof at the agr international building. and then at 5:55 secret service was one of a suspicious person acted in five? as a threat. o this. this was alls before shots were fired 15 minutes later. director, yes or no, did local law enforcement alert the secret service about? present at the rally? >> yes, they did. >> the shooter came to attention of law enforcement almost an hour before president trump went on stage. law enforcement alerted the secret service of the shooter over and over you said there's a difference between a suspicious individual and a a threatening individual. can you explain what the shooter needed to example byt to be called a threat? >> so i'm not clear as to what identified him as suspicious to

9:00 am

the individuals who originally clarified him that way. for the secret service, for an individual to be determined to be a threat, that individual would have to bend seen with a weapon or capable of doing some sort of harm to our protectees. >> i mean, director, an individual walk into a rally with a rangefinder, scoping out and unprotect a rooftop and reportedly flew a drone over hours before. soundsds like a lot more than suspicious especially at a presidential ballot. you are operational lapses your resource management, your poor judgment nearly resold in assassination president trump. a dereliction of duty here is just appalling. the fact you haven't visited butler is just maddening to me, that you're not taking this job seriously. manyny people here call for your resignation. i've introduced a resolution here into this body that hopefully will get a vote this week calling on the president to fire you.

9:01 am

you've not done your job. you put two black eyes on your agency and you need to go. mr. chairman, i yield back. >> gentleman just back. that you are now burlison from missouri. >> director cheatle, i just want to kind oft get an idea of what you can answer. .. responsible for, you have full responsibility for the department of the secret service. so the question is, what is the mission? who defined the mission? >> our nation at the secret service is to protect the president, the vice president, their immediate families, presidential candidates, the >> and those by executive order and we also have an investigative mission. >> and those are well-defined. >> yes, sir. >> and everybody understands the mission. >> yes, they do. >> what are the protocols and

9:02 am

standards? who defines the protocols and standards? >> we have various protocols in place for the various missions we have. >> would it be safe to say that you failed the mission, the ultimate mission? >> i have stated repeatedly here today that there was a failure. >> what about specific failures within protocols and guidelines within the agency? >> again, i am certain that the investigation that is being conducted internally as well as the external investigation-- >> you said earlier in the hearing there was either a communication -- there was errors in communication or in operations. could it be both? in both errors in operational decisions and errors in communication? >> i think the investigation potentially could identify both. >> so, let's talk about communications. representative boebrt asked

9:03 am

about incrypted app, i guess signal. have you used any encrypted app to communicate from your personal device? >> i do on occasion use encrypted apps to communicate. >> so you use some form of an encrypted app to communicate with people within the federal government? with local law enforcement? whom are you communicating with using encrypted apps? >> many times it's with colleagues and associates. >> so you're communicating with colleagues on a personal device? >> there are times that the secret service when we work internationally with some of our partners, that they don't have the same texting capability. >> and you're not able to do that with your government issued device? >> recently we have been able to install some of those apps

9:04 am

on government devices. >> okay. let's talk about some of the things that we can get access to. i'm actually shocked that you're using your personal device in encrypted communication tool. i think that might be the most shocking thing that you've heard today. i didn't expect for you to say that. we have requested, this committee has requested multiple documents and this is not, you know, under the purview of the fbi, this is under your purview. we requested a complete list of all law enforcement personnel, including secret service, department of homeland security, law enforcement with the rolls of protecting the president and we requested that for us to receive that by july 18th. did you provide that? >> i believe that our agency is in the process of collecting all documents. >> so you did not -- you have not provided it. >> how long does it take to determine who the personnel were that were on site? >> we are collecting a

9:05 am

comprehensive list of all the documents that have been requested. >> we also requested all the audio and video recordings that your agency, not the fbi, but your agency has in possession related to the event. did we receive those? have you provided those at all? >> we are in the process of collecting all documentation requested. >> you're in the process, but you have not. any memorandums or any internal communications related to the event? we asked that you provide that. have you provided any of that? >> we are in the process of collecting the information that has been requested. >> okay. so when can we expect to receive these documents? how long does it take to determine who was on site, who was being employed to be there to protect the former president? when can we expect that? how long, how many days doe i take to provide that information?

9:06 am

>> we want to make sure that we have a comprehensive accounting of all of the documents that were engaged in that day and we will make them available as soon as possible. >> i think transparency is the key here. it's shocking to me that we are communicating in an encrypted app to colleagues. i'm almost certain that violates some federal laws. >> i would like to clarify. you didn't ask me whether my communications were government work related or personally related. >> you're communicating with colleagues. >> i don't communicate government business with colleagues on a personal device. i communicate on my work device. >> are you using an encrypted device on you work device. >> i am not. >> no encrypted apps. >> no, i do not. >> thank you, mr. chairman. >> the chair now recognizes mr. waltz from florida. >> this thank you, mr. chairman. madam director, please, i'd like to direct your attention to this video. >> i sincerely appreciate the

9:07 am

clarity. >> would you turn uple volume? >> this has popped up, congressman mike waltz, it does talk about you secretary, i have reliable sources telling me there have been repeated requests for stronger secret service protection for president trump on secretary mayorkas, he's putting it on you. >> that's a baseless and irresponsible statement and unequivocally false. >> director cheatle did you speak with your boss, secretary mayorkas? you call under dhs. did you speak with him on the 14th, the day after? >> yes, i did. >> so you spoke with him before he made that statement? >> i spoke with him immediately

9:08 am

following the incident. >> did you inform him that all requests for additional resources for president trump had been fulfilled or that it was false to say they had been denied? >> i informed him that the request for that rally that day had been fulfilled. >> okay. you continue to answer that very carefully because i made a broader statement, the agents that game to me made a brother statement that's permanent protective details for years now have been asking for more, is that correct? >> i do not have specific incidents of those requests. >> is it correct that they have been asking for more? >> i have heard the same reports that you have. without having them in front of me i'm-- >> those requests were made in writing. agents are telling me they make them in writing. this isn't a verbal agency. things are made in writing.

9:09 am

>> i understand what you're saying. i don't have those requests in front of me here. >> i'm not asking if you have them in front of you. are you aware they were made? >> as i said earlier, there are times when requests were made and depending on the availability of assets or if there is a way that that-- >> so there are times when they were denied. >> if there's a way the vulnerability can be mitigated in a different way that's why-- >> so there are times they were denied for a variety of reasons? >> that's why the secret service has a multi-layered and multi-facetted security plan so we can pivotments so in the wake, in the immediate 48 hours of an assasination attempt on a former president, could be the next leader of the free world almost had his head blown off, your boss says that's i remember responsible and false to say things are denied and you had talked to him. so did he just make that on his own-- make that up on his own or did you tell him that? >> we were speaking about the requests made at the rally. >> staff, can we show the next

9:10 am

slide, please? then we have your spokesman, did you sign off on this statement? that there's an assertion this a member of the former president's team requested additional security resources and those were -- and this is false. in fact, we added protective resources and technology and capability as part of the incrested campaign travel tempo, but next slide, please. next slide please, staff. we have "the washington post" article that then says we have now have senior secret service officials saying there were in times-- at times when it was denied. so which is it? >> again, there have been a number of conversations going on here. >> did you sign off on that spokesman's statement. >> the spokesman's statement, i believe was related to requests made at the rally. >> did you sign off on it. >> for the requests that were made at the rally, yes. >> did you sign off on the statement before it went out.

9:11 am

i sign off on my spokesman's statements before they go out. i would hope you did-- >> categorically you sign off on it, thank you for that clarity. how many press conferences have you held since the assasination attempt. >> we have put our press releases. >> how many press conferences have you held, gone to the mic, taking comments from the media. >> i have not held any. >> how many has secretary mayorkas held? >> i don't-- >> zero. how many has the fbi held? zero. how many has the department of justice held? i know you know the answer. >> i believe there was a press conference in butler after the incident occurred. >> by local law enforcement, not by you and not by the

9:12 am

department of homeland security so this is how disinformation flies. in the darkness, in the absence of information. now we have nine days later before a congressional committee we all represent almost a million people and you don't have answers. are you aware that national news anchors are saying that this was a hoax on national television, they're saying, no, the president wasn't shot, it was flying glass. are you aware of that. >> i have not heard those reports. >> are you aware there are rumors rampant online there are multiple shooters. >> yes. >> are you aware that because the shooter had overseas encrypted platforms in belgium and new zealand and in germany, that a lot of people are speculating there could have been foreign involvement, logically, are you aware of that. >> yes. >> have you done anything to defuse any of these notions today? no, you haven't. madam director, i would fire

9:13 am

you regardless of the failure, i would fire you just how you've handled it since. you should have been the first to the mic to say, america, world, i want to assure you, we're going to get to the bottom of this, assure you full transparency. our agency clearly had major gaps here and i want to personally take responsibility and accountability. you should have been the first, standing alongside secretary mayorkas and i would go so far as to have daily press conferences, updating everyone on what we know, but you haven't had any of that. what are you hiding behind? >> i am not hiding-- >> you're making the situation worse. i think you've heard that on a bipartisan basis here. you are making this situation far worse in the absence of information. let's move on. this is truly astounding. i want to be clear because you keep dodging the issue.

9:14 am

has president trump's permanent detail requested additional assets over the last three years. he's not jimmy carter at a home, he is not george bush painting. has he requested additional resources? >> we have continued as we stated earlier to increase over the past year the assets that are at the former president's residence and supplied to his detail. >> mr. chairman, if i could just ask for one more indulgence, it's clear you've not been to butler pennsylvania. leaders lead and should be on the ground and you have not been there. instead you went to the rnc, but you weren't originally going to go there. where were you originally scheduled to go before the rnc, a national special security event? >> i was always scheduled to go to the rnc. >> mr. chairman i would like to

9:15 am

enter into the record that the director was scheduled to go to aspen, hobnobbing around with i don't know who, what liberal elites go to aspen. that's where you were originally scheduled to go to speak at a forum. >> i was scheduled to go to the rnc. i was going to leave the rnc for 24 hours and return back to the rnc. >> i hope as your predecessor julie peerson with under the obama administration, and reagan detailed lead, i would hope that you would have the dignity for the agency and the service to resign. >> thank you. i'd like to enter a few things into the record. first of all, the remaining articles that mr. biggs was wanting to enter into the record. >> without objection, so ordered. next a written statement from representative mike kelly of pennsylvania. his district, includes butler,

9:16 am

and he has a written statement that we'd like to enter into the record. >> without objection so ordered. a report entitled united states secret service and agency in crisis prepared by oversight committee cha fits and aliza cummings. and the subpoena for the director cheatle to the hearing. that concludes our question segment and thank the director for your testimony today i now yield to the ranking member for closing remarks. >> thank you very much, mr. chairman. and director, cheatle, i want to thank you for your patience over the course of what must have been a very long and trying hearing for you. it has been an unusually encouraging hearing and a

9:17 am

usually depressing hearing. what's encouraging, mr. chairman is that we came together to issue a strong statement deploring and categorically denouncing political violence in america and i didn't see any daylight between the members of the two parties at the hearing in terms of our bafflement and outrage about the shocking operational failures that led to disaster and near catastrophe on july 13th, 2024. what is depressing is extraordinary communications gap between the director of the secret service and congress and i don't want to add to the director's terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day, but i will be joining the chairman in calling for the resignation of the director just because i think that this relationship is irretrievable at this point and

9:18 am

i think that the director has lost the confidence of congress at a very urgent and tender moment in the history of the country and we need to very quickly move beyond this, but what i will say, mr. chairman, is that i took this hearing to be about two major policy failures. one policy failure is the one that got the vast majority of the attention which was the failure of the secret service to executively respond to a gunman on a roof within 150 yards of a presidential visit and speech. but the other failure is on the part of congress because the mass shooting that took place in butler, pennsylvania is replicated all over the country every day and in fact, as i said, mr. chairman, it happened that evening in alabama, in

9:19 am

birmingham, alabama there was a mass shooting where more people were even killed and wounded than were killed and wounded in butler, pennsylvania. so, it's true, the president, the former president and the handful of people who get the secret service protection are the only people in america we thought were safe from an ar-15 attack. it's clear they're not safe either and we've got to get to the bottom of that, but also have to get to the bottom of the larger problem which is that the whole country is living like this in fear and in terror of assault weapon attacks, in movie theaters, churches, mosques, supermarkets, walmarts, you know, anyplace where an audience, where a public gathers. the worse was in las vegas got up on a roof and mowed down 60 people below him and wounded hundreds and hundreds of other people. so, we've got to deal with that

9:20 am

problem. yes, we've got to move as swiftly as we can to deal with the problems at the secret service, but the broader problem is still there and i just wish to the heavens that our colleagues at that could get together on the question of presidential security against an ar-15 attack could get together on the question of public security against an ar-15 attack because all of us are vulnerable. all of our families are in dangered by this and the rest of the world doesn't live this way and we have to look to see how uniquely strange it is that we allow 20-year-olds to access ar-15's, weapons of mass destruction and show up in public places to endanger other people and i hope, mr. chairman, we can work together on that with the same spirit of bipartisan commitment to the public safety that was exemplified here today and i yield back to you. >> yields back.

9:21 am

i'll deliver by closing remarks. >> director cheatle, i've subpoenaed you here today to get answers for the american people about the failures that led to the assassination attempt of president donald j. trump. unfortunately, you refuse to answer today and this committee is not known for its bipartisan-- it's model of bipartisanship, but i think today we came together unanimously in our des appointment for your lack of answers. you stated that the fbi will investigate and give a report and you estimate 60 days. we've been waiting for months and months for lots of different bits of information from the fbi. we have no confidence in the fbi, the majority of this committee has no confidence in the fbi. i sincerely hoped that the

9:22 am

hearing today would give, not just congress confidence in the secret service, but the american people would have confidence in the secret service. we don't have confidence, not just in congress. i don't believe the american people tonight when they go to bed are going to have confidence that the secret service is the best it could be at protecting president biden, at protecting the first lady, at protecting president trump, at protecting their families. that's what the primary role for the secret service should be and some people said and speculated there needs to be more money and more employees. as i stated early on, $3.1 billion, i believe next year, 3.2 billion dollar budget over 8,000 employees. if the secret service is spread too thin and doing things like expecting counterfeits, which is what the secret service was

9:23 am

created to do to inspect counterfeit money and things like that with the treasury, if it's spread too thin we need to come together in congress and i think we can do that in a bipartisan way to narrow the focus of the secret service to protect the leaders of our country, to protect our elections, by protecting our candidates and i don't believe we have any confidence that you can do that as the leader of the fbi. i sincerely hope that we would adjourn this committee hearing and have confidence not just in the secret service, but in you as director of the secret service. but we do not. taking responsibility requires a lot of things. it means providing transparency. it means answering simple questions. it means providing a specific timeline of july 13th to this committee and the american people. it's been nine days, there were people that were demanding that

9:24 am

we have a hearing the next day or two days following the shooting and i said, no, we need to give the secret service ample time to be able to answer those questions. nine days, nine days. and i don't think we answered very many questions of the american people. i've never said this before and i've presided over a lot of hearings. i don't think there was one question asked by anyone that the average american hasn't asked at a diner or a church or at a ball game. the american people have questions. they deserve answers. congress deserves answers. you were subpoenaed today to provide answers and, ma'am, you did not do that. so, as ranking member raskin stated, he and i will be sending a letter requesting that you submit your resignation as a step towards accountability in what happened

9:25 am

and one of the biggest frustrations that many of us have, frustration on this side of the aisle, there's never accountability in this administration. and when you look at the debacles. prior to july 13th, it would be hard to beat the withdrawal in afghanistan, the debacle there and no one was held accountable to this day no one has been held accountable for that, but here we have clearly video showing people notifying the police and the police are blaming the secret service, the secret service are blaming the police, homeland security's blaming everybody, but at the end of the day after this hearing and after our request for information, we don't have any answers for the american people and we don't have that confidence that you can lead the seek to restore the confidence and again, i commend the ranking member for joining with me in the letter asking your resignation and we certainly hope that you will

9:26 am

take that to heart. with that and without objection all members have five legislative days within which to submit materials and additional written questions for the witness which will be forwarded to the witness. if there's no further business without objection the committee stands adjourned. [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations] >> that's what we call a smackdown. you can't be happy about that, it's sad. and this guy back here he was filming for c-span, a quality organization. naudible conversations] >> today, pennsylvania state police commissioner christopher paris testifies on the recent

9:27 am

assassination attempt on former president donald trump on the ongoing operation. and watch the heang live at 10 a.m. on c-span2, c-span now, our free mobile app, or c-span.org. >> c-span now is a free mobile app featuring your floor proceedings and hearings from congress, white house events, the courts, campaigns and more from the world of politics, all at your fingertips. you can stay current with the latest episodes of washington journal and by scheduling information by the tv network and c-span radio plus a variety of compelling podcasts and available now at the google

64 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on July 23, 2024
