Title: Terrorism and Security at the Olympics: Empirical Trends and Evolving Research Agendas

URL Source: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09523367.2015.1136290

Markdown Content:
Abstract
--------

This paper examines the intersections of terrorism, security and the Olympics. An empirical analysis of Olympic-related terrorism in the period 1968–2014 suggests the need to bring state terrorism into the analysis of terrorism at the Olympics. The empirical data presented in this study underline the significance of state terrorism in this context: the two deadliest attacks in the history of the modern Olympic Games were perpetrated or sponsored by representatives of the state against civilians. The findings indicate the spatial and temporal displacement of Olympic-related terrorism, with the bulk of attacks taking place outside Olympic competitions and away from host cities, as well as its diverse ideological and cultural contexts. The paper reviews and synthesizes the emerging field of critical research on terrorism and security at the Olympics. It is concluded that this historical and sociological work opens up new lines of inquiry and raises significant policy questions by drawing attention to both intended and unanticipated security legacies of the Olympics, including the wider social implications of Olympic security operations _._

Introduction
------------

Terrorism is a recurring historical phenomenon.Footnote 1 The Olympic Games have not been immune to acts of political violence. The global stage that the sport mega-event provides arguably makes the Olympics attractive to terrorists who seek to inflict maximum damage and fear or to maximize publicity for their campaigns. Extremist groups may attack the event not because they bear any particular grievance against the Olympic movement, but because of its potent symbolism in relation to their violent campaigns against the enemy.Footnote 2 The host government or other states or communities involved in the Olympics are typically the primary target of the attack.Footnote 3 The impact of terrorism at the Olympics reaches beyond the event itself. The 1972 Munich Olympics, when Black September extremists killed five Israeli athletes, six Israeli coaches and a police officer, not only had a lasting impact on West German society,Footnote 4 but coupled terrorism and the Olympics in popular consciousness and provided an impetus for the development of the US government’s counterterrorism effort and Olympic security operations.Footnote 5

While the year 1972 is a landmark in the intersections of terrorism and the Olympics, the events of 11 September 2001 have accelerated and amplified the course of security and terrorism issues at the Olympics. The current security context provides both an opportunity and a challenge for authorities to demonstrate their ability to defend themselves and their allies against the threat of terrorism. This security environment is characterized by what terrorism scholar Ronald Crelinsten calls ‘September 12 thinking’, which considers that terrorism is a new form of war which must be fought with different, far-reaching means.Footnote 6 September 12 thinking informs security responses surrounding the Olympics. The ever greater efforts to securing the Games are reflected in the exponential growth in Olympic security budgets, to the point where the Games now exhibit one of the world’s largest security operations outside of war.Footnote 7 For example, senior security consultant Neil Fergus hailed the 2004 Athens Summer Games as ‘the greatest security operation since Alexander the Great marched through Persia’,Footnote 8 while political scientist Ying Yu has described the 2008 Beijing Olympics as ‘the largest peacetime security operation in history’.Footnote 9

Terrorism and security have received less academic scrutiny than other aspects of the Games. Nearly a decade ago, sociologists John Horne and Wolfram Manzenreiter predicted that security issues ‘are likely to come more to the fore in production of sports mega-events’ and ‘will form a substantial research theme in future studies of sports mega-events’.Footnote 10 They were correct. In recent years, research on terrorism and security at the Olympics and other major sports events has burgeoned. Contributions to the knowledge base have come from a range of disciplines and fields including history, sociology, criminology, political science, international relations, communication science, sport management and legal studies. It is timely to take stock of these contributions and identify how they inform, or can inform, intellectual and public understandings of terrorism and security at the Olympics.

The aim of this paper, then, is to examine the contemporary intersections of terrorism, security and the Olympics. This aim will be met through an examination of empirical trends in Olympic-related terrorism in the period 1968–2014, as well as a review and synthesis of contemporary and emerging research agendas. The broader literature on terrorism and counter-terrorism will be used to contextualize and interpret the identified trends and research agendas.

Terrorism is defined here as the intentional use of, or threat to use, violence against civilians or against civilian targets, in order to attain political aims.Footnote 11 The deliberate targeting of civilians is what distinguishes a terrorist act from other forms of political violence in which, for instance, military units are targeted. The Olympic-related attacks examined in this paper fit this definition because they (primarily) target non-combatants. An area of contention is whether the term ‘terrorism’ should apply to the actions of state bodies in the same way that it applies to the actions of non-state actors. The absence of state terrorism from orthodox accounts of terrorism has been subject to scholarly critique.Footnote 12 Indeed, state terrorism has been far more prevalent throughout history and has taken a vastly higher death toll than its non-state counterpart.Footnote 13 State terrorism, defined as acts or threats of politically motivated violence carried out by representatives of the state against civilians, is of particular import for the present purpose. As will be seen, the two deadliest Olympic-related terrorist attacks to date were carried out or sponsored by state actors. Moreover, the historical insight that the tactics that states use to combat terrorism can themselves resemble terrorism is echoed in recent debates (discussed later in this paper) on the implications of security operations at the Olympics.

The Olympics, like other premier sports events, are thought to be vulnerable to terrorist attacks and have been portrayed as such in political and media discourse, especially in the post-9/11 era.Footnote 14 The attacks in Paris on 13 November 2015, which killed 130 people, have increased discussions on safety and security at major sporting events, including the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympic Games and the bidding of Paris for the hosting rights to the 2024 Olympic Games.Footnote 15 In a series of coordinated attacks, three suicide bombers struck near the Stade de France, the country’s national sports stadium, in Saint-Denis, followed by suicide bombings and mass shootings at cafés, restaurants and a music venue in Paris.Footnote 16 The first explosion near the stadium occurred while an international friendly football match between France and Germany was underway. Investigators believe the attacker had planned to detonate his explosives belt inside the stadium but did not get past the gates. The bomber reportedly had a match ticket but was turned away during a security check at the gate.Footnote 17 Ten minutes after the first explosion, a second bomber, who had been lying in wait, detonated his suicide vest near the stadium. Another 23 min after the second explosion, a third bomber’s explosives belt detonated nearby.

The security considerations and actions of governments and organizing committees are well documented. For example, the Olympic Strategic Threat Assessment identified terrorism as the greatest threat to the security of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, ahead of serious crime, domestic extremism and public disorder, and natural hazards.Footnote 18 Security costs from the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games budget exceeded £550 million.Footnote 19 In a similar vein, declassified documents show that the United States and other governments have anticipated the possibility of a terrorist nuclear incident at events such as the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics.Footnote 20 The identification of terrorism as a major threat to the Olympics is reflective of what Ole Wæver and others have called securitization: the process by which an issue, having been labelled an existential threat, is moved out of the sphere of normal politics into the realm of emergency politics, where states can control and deal with it without the normal (democratic) rules and regulations of policy-making.Footnote 21 According to media studies scholar John Tulloch, the mass mediation and political framing of the terrorism-Olympics nexus have become embedded in people’s routine daily knowledge, experiences and anxieties by preparing people for the possibility of terrorism and by normalizing the extraordinary measures designed to combat it.Footnote 22

Terrorism at the Olympics cannot be fully understood, however, without reference to how terrorist actors portray the Olympics and other major sports events as legitimate targets. Consider, for example, Eric Rudolph’s bomb attack on the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games, which was one of four separate attacks perpetrated by Rudolph between 1996 and 1998. Rudolph was driven by a complex set of overlapping motives. He believed that violence was necessary to stop abortion and he justified killing law enforcement officers who defended abortion rights. In an 11-page statement released after his guilty pleas, Rudolph described the bombings as being part of a fight ‘in the defense of the unborn’.Footnote 23 He also stated his specific purpose in bombing Centennial Park:

Under the protection and auspices of the regime in Washington millions of people came out [to] celebrate the ideals of global socialism. Multinational corporations spent billions of dollars, and Washington organized an army of security to protect these best of all games. Even though the conception and purpose of the so-called Olympic movement is to promote the values of global socialism, as perfectly expressed in the song ‘Imagine’ by John Lennon, which was the theme of the 1996 games – even though the purpose of the Olympics is to promote these despicable ideals, the purpose of the attack on July 27th was to confound, anger and embarrass the Washington government in the eyes of the world for its abominable sanctioning of abortion on demand.Footnote 24

Rudolph’s plan was ‘to force the cancellation of the Games, or at least create a state of insecurity to empty the streets around the venues and thereby eat into the vast amounts of money invested’. For Rudolph, the Olympics were a legitimate target as it symbolized at an abstract level the righteousness of his cause and the evil of his adversaries. Other targets would have been equally suited to this purpose.Footnote 25 Indeed, Rudolph committed three more bombings, none of which involved sports events.

Eric Rudolph has not been alone in framing the Olympics or other major sports events as a symbolic target for terrorism. Al Qaeda has publically framed major sports events as an attractive target. In 2012, Al Qaeda propagandist Abu Mus’ab al-Suri advocated ‘targeting human crowds in order to inflict maximum human losses’ in an article in _Inspire_, an online English-language magazine produced by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP).Footnote 26 In the article, Al-Suri mentions several suitable targets including crowded sports arenas. A 2014 issue of _Inspire_ discusses the strategic importance of attacking dense crowds and identifies several specific targets including horseracing events and tennis tournaments such as the US Open.Footnote 27 With regard to the United Kingdom, the article notes:

You have the soccer (football) stadiums especially during Premier League and FA Cup matches. They have worldwide life [_sic_] media coverage. The best time is after the final whistle, when huge crowds leave the stadium and celebrate around the entrances.Footnote 28

On other occasions explicit reference has been made to the Olympics in extremist rhetoric. In July 2013, Doku Umarov, leader of the Caucasus Emirate, declared his will to disrupt the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, which lies on the western edge of the Caucasus Mountains. In a four-minute video posted on the pro-independence website kavkazcenter.com, Umarov called for all Muslims and his followers to use any methods, including violent ones, in order to achieve this goal:

They [Russia] plan to hold the Olympics on the bones of our ancestors, on the bones of many, many dead Muslims, buried on the territory of our land on the Black Sea, and we as mujahedeen [warriors] are obliged to not permit that, using any methods allowed us by the almighty Allah.Footnote 29

He continued: ‘I call on you, every mujahid, either in Tatarstan, Bashkortostan or on the territory of the Caucasus to use maximum force on the path of Allah to disrupt this Satanic dancing on the bones of our ancestors’.Footnote 30 In doing so, Umarov lifted the moratorium on attacks on Russian targets outside the North Caucasus region that he had ordered in February 2012 because, according to Umarov, ‘unbelievers’ in Moscow had treated it as a sign of weakness and ‘only increased their persecution of peaceful Muslims’.Footnote 31

Six months after the Umarov video, Vilayat Dagestan, one of the factions that make up the Caucasus Emirate, posted a video warning Russia to expect attacks at the 2014 Sochi Olympics. The video showed two men who allegedly perpetrated the 2013 suicide bombings in Volgograd (see Table ). Their video statement says:

If you hold the Olympics you will receive a present from us, for you [Mr. Putin] and all those tourists who will come over. It will be for all the Muslim blood that is shed every day around the world, be it in Afghanistan, Somalia, Syria, all around the world. This will be our revenge.Footnote 32

### **Table 1. Olympic-related terrorist attacks, 1968–2014.**

Determined to demonstrate its ability to host the Winter Olympics, Russia stepped up its security to an unprecedented scale. The country reportedly deployed more than 50,000 police and soldiers to secure the event.Footnote 33 Dmitry Chernyshenko, the president of the Sochi Winter Olympics Organizing Committee, described the city as ‘the most secure venue on the planet’, while also promising that the tight security measures would not detract from the atmosphere of the Games.Footnote 34 Yet, critics argued that Russia’s efforts to secure the Olympics did impact the experiences of athletes and spectators, with Ishaan Tharoor, former senior editor at _Time_, calling it ‘the most anxiety-ridden and militarized Olympiad in recent memory’.Footnote 35

Terrorism at the Olympics, 1968–2014
------------------------------------

Data-sets on terrorism at the Olympics are inevitably partial and likely to display a degree of arbitrariness. Existing databases vary enormously in regard to their definitional parameters. For example, while some studies incorporate not only successful attacks but a range of terrorist threats and plots,Footnote 36 others consider the security investments made to prevent terrorist attacks as part of (‘evidence’ for) the threat.Footnote 37 This paper uses a narrower approach, one that focuses on Olympic-related terrorist attacks that were actually carried out. However, some conceptual difficulties inevitably remain. Criminologist Pete Fussey notes the complexity of determining what constitutes Olympic-related terrorism by pointing to complicating factors such as when a terrorist attack takes place in a host nation in the run-up to or during the Olympic Games without an apparent connection to the event, yet with considerable impact on Olympic security planning.Footnote 38 Terrorism can also be ‘Olympic related’ in the sense that it targets members or symbols of the Olympic movement more broadly. The cases discussed below illustrate these complexities.

In order to identify empirical trends in terrorism at the Olympics, three major sources were combined: the Global Terrorism Database (GTD), the National Security Archive’s digital material, and the Cold War International History Project’s digital archives. The starting point was the GTD, managed by the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses of Terrorism (START).Footnote 39 Its purpose is to enable researchers and analysts to increase understanding of terrorism by providing a comprehensive set of open-source data on incidents of domestic and international terrorism since 1970.Footnote 40 For the present purpose, only GTD records which meet three criteria are included: (1) the violent act must be aimed to attain a political goal; and (2) there must be evidence of an intention to coerce, intimidate or convey some other message to a larger audience than the immediate victims; and (3) there must be a reported link to the Olympic Games or the Olympic movement (Olympic Committee members, athletes, etc.).

The GTD was searched for the period 1970–2014. All GTD database records for this period were searched using ‘Olympic*’ as the primary search term across all separate attributes of each incident record. Each incident report in the GTD includes approximately 75 coded variables that can be used for statistical analysis, for example the incident date, country, city, perpetrator, target, tactics used in the attack, types of weapon used, fatalities, injuries, and so forth.Footnote 41 The GTD search returned 34 records. Each record was examined in depth and, based on the information provided in the GTD, 15 incidents were excluded. The main reasons for excluding these records were irrelevance (where targets were non-Olympic-related sites such as ‘Olympic Airlines’, ‘Radio Station Olympica Stereo’, ‘Olympic Plaza Building’, ‘Olympic Country club’, etc.), and lack of robust information to make an informed decision on the attack’s relation to the Olympics. Cases in which the political motivations or the connection with the Olympic movement could not be corroborated were excluded. As a result, the list omits some of the incidents that are mentioned in previous studies,Footnote 42 such as an incident that occurred only days before the 2008 Beijing Olympics in the city of Kashgar in the Western Chinese province of Xinjiang. The incident, labelled a ‘terrorist plot’ by Chinese state media, killed 16 police officers and injured 16 others.Footnote 43 Two men with suspected links to the Uyghur separatist movement reportedly drove a dump truck at a group of police officers and threw explosive devices. They attacked the survivors with knives and grenades. China stepped up security around the Beijing Olympics following the attack. However, exile groups and other critics accused the Chinese authorities of exaggerating and manufacturing the terrorist threat to justify indiscriminate arrests and repression in the region.Footnote 44 Foreign tourists who witnessed the incident provided a conflicting interpretation by stating that the attackers appeared to be paramilitary officers, not activists.Footnote 45

The Olympic-related terrorist attacks identified from the GTD were corroborated through an analysis of the National Security Archive and the Cold War International History Project’s digital materials, again using ‘Olympic*’ as the primary search term.Footnote 46 Three additional cases that are not registered in the GTD were identified from these archives. Table lists the final sample of 22 cases.

What does the information conveyed in Table reveal about empirical trends in terrorism at the Olympics? First of all, it shows that since 1968 there have been a number of attacks directly and indirectly related to the Olympic Games. This includes three lethal attacks in host cities during the competition: Munich 1972, Atlanta 1996 and Beijing 2008. The overwhelming majority of attacks (19 in total, or 86%) occurred outside of competitions and targeted a diverse range of victims including officials, athletes, tourists, venues, spectators and local populations. This finding suggests that, overall, the locations of the Olympic Games are quite safe with regard to terrorism.Footnote 47 Terrorist attacks on the Olympics are relatively rare compared to attacks on other types of targets.Footnote 48 Moreover, Table indicates the spatial and temporal displacement of attacks,Footnote 49 a process that appears to have been caused at least in part by the intensified security measures at Olympic venues. A similar displacement process has been observed in other forms of sports-related violence including football hooliganism.Footnote 50

Secondly, the two most lethal terrorist attacks in the history of the modern Olympic Games were acts of state terrorism: the Tlatelolco massacre in Mexico in 1968, and the bombing of Korean Air flight 858 in 1987. The 1968 Olympics in Mexico City stand out because the Mexican government used the international attention of the Olympic Games to justify suppressing the nascent student movement and framing them for attacking police officers to initiate the crackdown that led to the Tlatelolco massacre.Footnote 51 Mexico pursued the 1968 Olympic bid as a unique opportunity to herald the nation’s coming of age.Footnote 52 Increasingly concerned about the effect the student protests would have on the Games and on the country’s international reputation, the Mexican government engaged in flagrant repression against organized student actions before the Olympics, culminating in a public massacre that left more than one hundred student and civilian protesters dead. Nineteen years later, on 29 November 1987, Korean Air flight 858, which was flying from Baghdad to Seoul, exploded mid-air upon the detonation of a bomb planted by two North Korean operatives who then swallowed cyanide capsules (although only one actually died). The attack killed all 115 people on board. It appears that North Korea had wanted to destabilize the South Korean government, disrupt its upcoming parliamentary elections and frighten international teams from attending the 1988 Seoul Olympics.Footnote 53

These two acts of state terrorism collectively killed at least 215 people, more than one and a half times as many as all other attacks combined (139 casualties).Footnote 54 Fatal Olympic-related terrorist attacks are rare, indicative of which is that nine attacks, or 40 per cent, produced no casualties; yet, state terrorism tends to be far more lethal than non-state terrorism. With regard to the latter, four attacks that stand out in terms of their high fatality rates are: the bombing of Cubana flight 455 in 1976 (73 casualties); the attack on the Israeli team during the 1972 Munich Olympics (17 casualties, including five perpetrators) and the two suicide bombings in Russia in 2013 (19 and 17 fatalities, respectively, including two perpetrators).

Thirdly, while the Olympic Games are a mega-event that offers terrorists a global stage for communicating their political causes, terrorist actors who target the Games are typically grounded in particular localized sociopolitical contexts.Footnote 55 This is evident, for instance, in the attacks in Spain by anti-fascist and nationalist/separatist groups, in Russia by nationalist/separatists and Islamist extremists, and in the United States by a pro-life activist opposing US government policy on abortion. These examples indicate that terrorist activity around the Olympics has involved myriad forms and is characterized by the ideological diversity of the actors implicated in the attacks.Footnote 56 This finding is consistent with historical research which shows that terrorism exists only in a cultural and historical context.Footnote 57

Finally, Figure shows that there is no consistent change in the frequency of Olympic-related terrorism over time. While Figure indicates a clustering of attacks in the period 2004–2013, it should be stressed here that Olympic-related attacks are atypical events that heavily influence fatality and temporal trend statistics. We should therefore exercise caution when seeking to establish patterns in Olympic-related terrorism over time. Olympic-related terrorist attacks can be considered ‘black swan’ events: low-probability and high-consequence events that are difficult to pattern, predict or prevent. According to risk engineering scholar Nassim Nicholas Taleb, a black swan event has three attributes: it lies outside the realm of regular expectations; it carries an extreme impact; and, despite its outlier status, retrospective explanations are created for its occurrence, seemingly making the event explainable and predictable.Footnote 58 In this context, there appears to have been a semiotic shift in security and risk governance which links into the cultural dimensions of living with low-probability, high-consequence events after 9/11.Footnote 59 As will be shown later in this paper, the Olympics are one site where authorities seek to construct and manage the risk of terrorism through highly dramatized security displays. Rather than mere retrospective predictability, security governance at the Olympics and other major sports events involves prospective risk management aimed at pre-empting and minimizing the probability of terrorism.Footnote 60 This issue has received significant scholarly attention in recent years. It is to the growing body of research on the intersections of terrorism, security and the Olympics that the paper now turns.

Figure 1.  Olympic-related terrorist attacks, 1968–2014.

Contemporary Research Agendas
-----------------------------

A growing body of scholarly research examines various aspects of the intersections of terrorism, security and the Olympics. These studies stem from a range of disciplines and fields of study and draw on different epistemological, ontological and theoretical perspectives. Within this literature, a number of established and emerging themes can be distinguished.

### Media Representations of Terrorism at the Olympics

Media discourses about terrorism and security at the Olympics have been occupying scholars for well over a decade. This research highlights how such media discourses are tied to, and products of, broader geo-political ideologies. Thus, sociologists Michael Atkinson and Kevin Young have critiqued how media coverage of the 2002 Salt Lake City Games, the first post-9/11 Olympics, became an integrated media campaign to align particular ideas about global insiders and outsiders in the ‘war on terror’.Footnote 61 Their more recent work shows the mediated construction of the Olympics as political war zones.Footnote 62 Their comparison of the 2002 Salt Lake City Games with subsequent Games suggests an important trend in media representation of terrorism and security at the Olympics:

Whereas the mediation of terror at the Salt Lake City Games contained a relative balance of the selling of fear and the assurance of security through highly descriptive accounts, today what seems to be more commonplace is the simple reminder that everyone should be fearful of every possible threat, contingency and instance of violence imaginable.Footnote 63

Other studies have arrived at similar conclusions.Footnote 64 In their analysis of Australian media reporting on terrorism and sport during the period 1996–2001, sport management scholars Kristine Toohey and Tracy Taylor found that the media coverage created ‘hegemonic tropes’ that reinforced the government’s counter-terrorism policy, fuelled public fears about terrorism, and portrayed sport as a signifier of defiance against terrorism and its attempts to strike at the western way of life.Footnote 65 A recent study by media and communication scholars Moran Yarchi, Ilan Tamir and Yair Galily focuses on international media coverage of the authorities’ reaction to terrorist attacks or threats targeting sports events, including the Olympics.Footnote 66 Similar to Toohey and Taylor, they found that the international media generally expressed uncritical support for the authorities and their counter-terrorism actions. As such, the media acted as a unifying arena and rallied around the political actors facing the challenge of terrorism.Footnote 67

### Public Perceptions of Terrorism and Security

A related research theme is spectators’ and public perceptions of terrorist threats at the Olympics. Kristine Toohey’s work on the risk perceptions of 2004 Athens Olympic Games attendees is groundbreaking in this regard.Footnote 68 Toohey shows that while the majority of attendees displayed tenets of risk aversion and engagement with a discourse of fear, and took for granted the increased security measures, they did not consider terrorism to be a major deterrent or threat to their safety during the Games. Moreover, some spectators were committed not to let the risk of terrorism overshadow their enjoyment of the Olympics, displaying resilience, resistance and indifference to potential terrorist threats.Footnote 69 Toohey uncovered a range of emotional responses to terrorism threats including both fear- and anger-related attitudes. Gender was an important factor influencing attendees’ perceptions, with women’s comments being more fear-related and indicating higher perceived risk, while men’s comments were more likely to be associated with optimism and lower perceived risk.Footnote 70

Toohey and Taylor’s work suggests that the risk aversion that pervades Olympic security operations and, more specifically, what Olympic organizers fear will or might happen, is at odds with attendees’ constructions of risk and fear.Footnote 71 This disconnect also comes to the fore in recent studies that explore the perceptions and planning of event organizers.Footnote 72 Toohey and Taylor point to the prospect of government and Olympic organizers overreacting and amplifying the risk, and raise the need to work towards ensuring that spectators have a positive and safe experience.Footnote 73 Recent research has extended these insights into a full-blown critical socio-historical analysis of security and surveillance at the Olympics, as discussed below.

### Security, Surveillance and its Consequences

One of the challenges Olympic organizers face is the need to balance the requirements of security and public safety with the festive and convivial nature of the Games. In a review of Olympic security operations during the period 1972–1994, Guy Sanan writes that ‘Olympic security operations not only occur in a democratic context where civil liberties and rights have to be strictly respected, but they also cannot spoil the joyous festival atmosphere, which is so special to the Olympic Games’.Footnote 74 Sanan notes that Olympic security should be both comprehensive and unobtrusive, and posits this as one of the defining characteristics of Olympic security.Footnote 75

International research shows that in the twenty-first century this ‘defining characteristic’ has receded well into the background as progressive securitization and expanding notions of risk have taken hold. Historical studies document the lasting impact of the 1972 Munich Olympics terrorist attack on the Olympic movement’s security considerations and planning.Footnote 76 The 1976 Montreal Summer Games constituted a turning point in Olympic history as the Games’ first highly visible security operation.Footnote 77 According to historical sociologist Dominique Clément, the Montreal Olympics laid the foundation and set a precedent for high security investment that has since become the standard for the Olympics, in spite of being ‘based largely on imagined threats’.Footnote 78 Clément further shows that the Montreal Olympics had long-term implications for Canadian law enforcement as the security operation produced new resources and inter-agency links that were only made possible as a result of hosting the Games.

A series of critical investigations carried out in the past decade show the broader applicability and implications of the issues raised by Clément. This nascent field demonstrates the central role of security in Olympic planning and, more specifically, the pervasive aspirations of securitization and the ever increasing range of surveillance and control measures. This broad shift towards a ‘total security’ model has been examined from a range of disciplinary, theoretical and methodological perspectives. Lack of space prevents a discussion of the full breadth and depth of this work here. Instead, it is possible to identify at least three areas of consensus from this recent literature.

Firstly, Olympic security planning has become increasingly standardized across time and space since the 1976 Montreal Olympics.Footnote 79 The generation of post-9/11 uncertainties has further escalated the scale, intensity and scope of Olympic security practices, which both express and extend contemporary developments in global security governance. The Olympics are discursively constructed as ‘spaces of exception’ wherein aggressive security and surveillance measures are justified to mitigate and prevent any potential or actual security risks.Footnote 80 As such, the Olympics, like other major sports events, serve as an opportunity for the authorities to introduce security measures that would be more difficult to justify in normal circumstances.Footnote 81 Yet, the convergence and transferability of Olympic security strategies across time and place impacts unevenly on their hosts as they are mediated by localized conditions and processes, such as local security vernaculars and the scale of existing security infrastructures.Footnote 82

Secondly, a combination of factors drives the global standardization of Olympic security. The governance asserted by the IOC as a knowledge broker is particularly noteworthy in this regard.Footnote 83 Broader processes of transnational and multi-agency collaboration and knowledge transfer are also centrally implicated in this process. Crucially, these processes transcend public/private and civilian/military boundaries. Research shows the proliferating range and scale of transnational collaborations and networks in security governance at the Olympics, which include a range of private sector actors such as security consultancy and technology companies.Footnote 84 Interactions between these actors, which include regular expert conferences, knowledge exchange programmes and test events, not only serve to institutionalize Olympic security discourses and practices, but also provide a space of experimentation to develop, refine and rehearse (the integration of) surveillance and control technologies.Footnote 85

Thirdly, it is broadly agreed that Olympic security arrangements can endure long after the event is over. Post-event security legacies are now a strategic issue in Olympic security planning.Footnote 86 Security legacy has evolved into an explicitly articulated component of the Olympic business plan ‘intended from the outset to capitalize on an opportune moment’ in order to accelerate the expansion of security capabilities and surveillance infrastructures.Footnote 87 The intended and unanticipated security legacies are multifaceted. In addition to technological, informational and knowledge legacies, they include the endurance of attitudes about security and surveillance whereby the Olympic ‘state of exception’ can become normalized.Footnote 88 Another major security legacy is the reconfiguration of the physical environment both during and after the Olympics, with the Games acting as a catalyst for the re-making of urban security and socio-spatial architectures.Footnote 89 Examples include urban clearing programmes (e.g. forced relocations) and efforts to cleanse or civilize urban space through intense regulation and control.Footnote 90 These issues raise critical concern regarding social polarization, inequality and civil liberties. Recent research highlights the potential for the Olympics to exacerbate social inequalities and undercut democratic principles and practices in the name of keeping the Games safe,Footnote 91 the decline of local control over urban environments in Olympic cities,Footnote 92 and the risk of function creep,Footnote 93 among other issues. At the same time, the Olympics can have the unanticipated legacy of revitalizing and mobilizing activist networks which seek to resist the securitization of the public sphere and create spaces of dissent within and beyond Olympic events.Footnote 94

Conclusion
----------

This study has set out to examine the historical and contemporary intersections of terrorism, security and the Olympics. The paper indicates the need to bring state terrorism into the analysis of terrorism at the Olympics. The empirical data presented in this paper underline the significance of state terrorism in this context: the two deadliest terrorist attacks in the history of the modern Olympic Games were perpetrated or sponsored by representatives of the state against civilians. This finding should be viewed within its broader social and historical context; namely, that throughout history state terrorism has taken a vastly higher death toll than its non-state equivalent. The data further show the spatial and temporal displacement of attacks, with the bulk of attacks taking place outside of Olympic competitions and away from host cities, as well as the diverse ideological and cultural contexts of the violence.

The diverse body of research surveyed in this paper indicates that rather than taking the nature, causes and subjectivities of terrorism as the primary locus of investigation, the recent literature focuses on external representations of, and responses to, terrorism. An emerging field of critical research is concerned with security and surveillance at the Olympics. This research opens up new lines of inquiry by drawing critical attention to both intended and unanticipated security legacies of the Olympics, including the wider social implications of Olympic security operations. In so doing, it paves the way for future critical work on the intersections of terrorism, security and the Olympics.

An important policy implication of this historical and sociological research concerns what historians Gerard Chaliand and Arnaud Blin describe as the need to avoid fuelling terrorism while claiming to fight it.Footnote 95 Olympic history offers some lessons here. Terrorism at the Olympics is not a new phenomenon and is not confined to a particular ideology, such as radical Islamism. Yet, the extent to which terrorist activity has targeted the Olympics in the past is rather limited. At the same time, Olympic security operations have evolved from a relatively low-key approach to an expansive security regime in which protection from terrorism is a key security concern for local organizing committees and dealt with as such. This security regime, which generally developed since the 1972 Munich Olympics and the 1976 Montreal Olympics and whose development accelerated since 9/11, has become increasingly standardized and globalized. The recent scholarship on the security legacies of the Olympics, which have become increasingly normalized, foregrounds this development and illustrates some of the tensions that exist between liberal democracy and counterterrorism. Here, as in counterterrorism more broadly,Footnote 96 a key question is how the securitization of, and response to, terrorism can be balanced with democratic principles and respect for human rights and civil liberties.

Notes on contributor
--------------------

**_Associate professor Ramón Spaaij_** is a sociologist based at Victoria University and holds a Special Chair of Sociology of Sport at the University of Amsterdam. His research interests include the sociology of sport and the sociology of terrorism. His recent books include _Sport and Social Mobility_; _Sport and Social Exclusion in Global Society_; and _Understanding Lone Wolf Terrorism: Global Patterns, Motivations and Prevention_.

Disclosure statement
--------------------

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

1. Walter Laqueur, _A History of Terrorism_ (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2001); David C. Rapoport, ‘The Fourth Wave: September 11 in the History of Terrorism’, _Current History_ 100, no. 650 (2001), 419–24.

2. Pete Fussey et al., _Securing and Sustaining the Olympic City: Reconfiguring London for 2012 and Beyond_ (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2011), 40.

3. Andrew Silke, ‘Understanding Terrorist Target Selection’, in Anthony Richards, Pete Fussey, and Andrew Silke (eds), _Terrorism and the Olympics: Major Event Security and Lessons for the Future_ (London: Routledge, 2010), 58.

4. Kay Schiller and Christopher Young, _The 1972 Munich Olympics and the Making of Modern Germany_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010).

5. Robert Cotrell, ‘The Legacy of Munich 1972: Terrorism, Security and the Olympic Games’, in M. de Moragas, C. Kennett, and N. Puig (eds), _The Legacy of the Olympic Games 1984_–_2000_ (Lausanne: International Olympic Committee), 309–13; [Author name deleted], ‘Terrorism Analysis in the CIA: The Gradual Awakening (1972–80)’, _Studies in Intelligence_ 51, no. 1 (1979), 19–32 (declassified article from the CIA’s Internal Journal), http://nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB431/docs/intell_ebb_017.PDF (accessed 12 November 2015).

6. Ronald Crelinsten, _Counterterrorism_ (Cambridge: Polity, 2009).

7. Philip Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games: Exemplifications of Global Governance’, in Helen Jefferson Lenskyj and Stephen Wagg (eds), _The Palgrave Handbook of Olympic Studies_ (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), 394.

8. Neil Fergus, a former Australian intelligence agent whose consulting firm Intelligent Risks worked on the Athens Olympics, quoted in Andrew Chang, ‘Fearing Olympic Terror, Athens Gears Up’, _ABC News_, 26 June 2004, http://abcnews.go.com/International/story?id=79466 (accessed 1 August 2015).

9. Ying Yu, Francisco Klauser, and Gerald Chan, ‘Governing Security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics’, _The International Journal of the History of Sport_ 26, no 3 (2009), 390.

10. John Horne and Wolfram Manzenreiter, ‘An Introduction to the Sociology of Sports Mega-Events’, _Sociological Review_ 54, no. 2 (2006), 19.

11. Boaz Ganor, ‘Defining Terrorism: Is One Man’s Terrorist another Man’s Freedom Fighter?’, _Police Practice and Research: An International Journal_ 3, no. 4 (2002), 287–304.

12. Ruth Blakeley, ‘Bringing the State Back into Terrorism Studies’, _European Political Science_ 6 (2007), 228–35.

13. Alexander George, _Western State Terrorism_ (Cambridge: Polity, 1991); R.J. Rummel, _Death by Government: Genocide and Mass Murder in the Twentieth Century_ (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1997).

14. Michael Atkinson and Kevin Young, ‘Political Violence, Terrorism, and Security at the Olympic Games’, in Kevin Young and Kevin Wamsley (eds), _Global Olympics: Historical and Sociological Studies of the Modern Games_ (Oxford: Elsevier, 2005), 269–94.

18. Home Office, _Olympic and Paralympic Safety and Security Strategy_ (London: Home Office, 2011).

20. Jeffrey T. Richelson, ‘Nuclear Terrorism: How Big a Threat?’, National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 388, 7 September 2012, http://nsarchive.gwu.edu/nukevault/ebb388/ (accessed 14 November 2015).

21. Ole Wæver, ‘Securitization and Desecuritization’, in Ronnie D. Lipschutz (ed.), _On Security_ (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995), 46–86; Barry Buzan, Ole Wæver, and Jaap de Wilde, _Security: A New Framework for Analysis_ (London: Lynne Rienner, 1998). For a critique, see for example: Matt McDonald, ‘Securitization and the Construction of Security’, _European Journal of International Relations_ 14, no. 4 (2008), 563–87.

22. John Tulloch, ‘Terrorism, “Killing Events,” and their Audience: Fear and Crime at the 2000 Olympics’, in Kay Schaffer and Sidonie Smith (eds), _The Olympics at the Millennium: Power, Politics and the Games_ (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2000), 224–40.

24. Ibid.

25. Ramón Spaaij and Mark S. Hamm, ‘Endgame? Sports Events as Symbolic Targets in Lone Wolf Terrorism’, _Studies in Conflict & Terrorism_ 38, no. 12 (2015), 1022–1037.

26. Abu Mus’ab al-Suri, ‘The Jihadi Experiences: The Most Important Enemy Targets Aimed 600 at by the Individual’, _Inspire_ 9 (May 2012), 23–4.

27. ‘Car Bomb: Field Data’, _Inspire_, 12 (Spring 2014), 70–1.

28. Ibid., 71.

30. Ibid.

34. Ibid.

36. E.g. Pete Fussey, ‘Terrorist Threats to the Olympics, 1972–2016’, in Anthony Richards, Pete Fussey, and Andrew Silke (eds), _Terrorism and the Olympics: Major Event Security and Lessons for the Future_ (London: Routledge, 2010), 239–43; Fussey et al., _Securing and Sustaining the Olympic City_.

37. Tracy Taylor and Kristine Toohey, ‘Perceptions of Terrorism Threats at the 2004 Olympic Games: Implications for Sport Events’, _Journal of Sport & Tourism_ 12, no. 2 (2007), 99–114.

38. Fussey, ‘Terrorist Threats to the Olympics, 1972–2016’.

39. National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START), ‘Global Terrorism Database’, 2015, http://www.start.umd.edu/gtd (accessed 4 June 2015); Gary LaFree and Laura Dugan, ‘Introducing the Global Terrorism Database’, _Terrorism and Political Violence_ 19 (2007), 181–204; Gary LaFree, ‘The Global Terrorism Database: Accomplishments and Challenges’,_Perspectives on Terrorism_ 4, no. 1 (2010), 24–46.

40. The GTD has considerable limitations that should be kept in mind when interpreting the data. One noteworthy limitation is that the GTD does not include information on state terrorism. Thus, an act of state terrorism that may be considered ‘Olympic related’ is not covered in the GTD: the bombing of Korean Airlines flight KAL 858 in November 1987, which caused 115 fatalities. This attack reportedly involved state terrorism from North Korea and impacted upon security planning for the 1988 Seoul Olympics. See: Fussey, ‘Terrorist Threats to the Olympics, 1972–2016’. For a more general discussion of the database’s limitations see: Ramón Spaaij, _Understanding Lone Wolf Terrorism: Global Patterns, Motivations and Prevention_ (New York: Springer, 2012); LaFree, ‘The Global Terrorism Database’.

42. E.g. Fussey, ‘Terrorist Threats to the Olympics, 1972–2016’; Pete Fussey and Jon Coaffee, ‘Olympics Rings of Steel: Constructing Security for 2012 and Beyond’, in Colin Bennett and Kevin Haggerty (eds), _Security Games: Surveillance and Control at Mega_-_Events_ (London: Routledge, 2011), 36–54.

45. Edward Wong, ‘Doubt Arises in Account of an Attack in China’, _International Herald Tribune_, 29 September 2008.

47. Erin Miller and Tiara Giddings, _Terrorism and the Olympics: Background Report_ (College Park: START, University of Maryland, 2012).

48. START, _Bombings at the 2013 Boston Marathon: Background Report_ (College Park: START, University of Maryland, 2013).

49. Fussey, ‘Terrorist Threats to the Olympics, 1972–2016’, 243.

50. Eric Dunning, _Sport Matters: Sociological Studies of Sport, Violence and Civilization_ (London: Routledge, 1999); Ramón Spaaij, _Understanding Football Hooliganism: A Comparison of Six Western European Football Clubs_ (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2006); and Ramón Spaaij, ‘Football Hooliganism in the Netherlands: Patterns of Continuity and Change’, _Soccer and Society_ 8, no. 2 (2007), 316–34.

52. For an excellent analysis of Mexico 1968 see Kevin B. Witherspoon, _Before the Eyes of the World: Mexico and the 1968 Olympic Games_ (DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press, 2008). See also Keith Brewster, ‘Mexico City 1968: Oscillating Aspirations’, _The International Journal of the History of Sport_ 27, nos 16–18 (2010), 2748–65; Eric Zolov, ‘Showcasing the “Land of Tomorrow”: Mexico and the 1968 Olympics’, _The Americas_ 61, no. 2 (2004), 159–88.

54. The death toll of the Tlatelolco massacre is disputed. A conservative estimate of 100 fatalities is used here.

55. Fussey and Coaffee, ‘Olympic Rings of Steel’.

56. Ibid.

57. Gerard Chaliand and Arnaud Blin, ‘Introduction’, in Gerard Chaliand and Arnaud Blin (eds.), _The History of Terrorism: From Antiquity to Al Qaeda_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007), 1–11.

59. Philip Boyle and Kevin Haggerty, ‘Spectacular Security: Mega-Events and the Security Complex’, _International Political Sociology_ 3, no. 3 (2009), 257–74.

60. Ramón Spaaij, ‘Risk, Security and Technology: Governing Football Supporters in the Twenty-First Century’, _Sport in Society_ 16, no. 2 (2013), 167–83.

61. Michael Atkinson and Kevin Young, ‘Terror Games: Media Treatment of Security Issues at the 2002 Winter Olympic Games’, _Olympika: The International Journal of Olympic Studies_ 11, no. 1 (2002), 53–78.

62. Michael Atkinson and Kevin Young, ‘Shadowed by the Corpse of War: Sport Spectacles and the Spirit of Terrorism’, _International Review for the Sociology of Sport_ 47, no. 3 (2012), 286–306; Atkinson and Young, ‘Political Violence, Terrorism, and Security at the Olympic Games’.

63. Atkinson and Young, ‘Shadowed by the Corpse of War’, 303.

64. E.g. Mark Falcous and Michael Silk, ‘Manufacturing Consent: Mediated Sporting Spectacle and the Cultural Politics of the War on Terror’,_International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics_ 1, no. 1 (2005), 59–65.

65. Kristine Toohey and Tracy Taylor, ‘“Here be Dragons, Here be Savages, Here be Bad Plumbing”: Australian Media Representations of Sport and Terrorism’, _Sport in Society_ 9, no. 1 (2006), 71–93.

66. Moran Yarchi, Ilan Tamir, and Yair Galily, ‘Rallying or Criticizing? The Media’s Coverage of the Authorities’ Reaction to Terror Attacks Targeting Sport Events’, _Studies in Conflict & Terrorism_ 38, no. 12 (2015), 1008–1021.

67. Ibid., 20.

68. Kristine Toohey and Tracy Taylor, ‘Mega Events, Fear, and Risk: Terrorism at the Olympic Games’, _Journal of Sport Management_ 22 (2008), 451–69; Tracy Taylor and Kristine Toohey, ‘Perceptions of Terrorism Threats at the 2004 Olympic Games: Implications for Sport Events’, _Journal of Sport & Tourism_ 12, no. 2 (2007), 99–114; and Kristine Toohey, ‘Terrorism, Sport and Public Policy in the Risk Society’, _Sport in Society_, 11, no. 4 (2008), 429–42.

69. Ibid.

70. Taylor and Toohey, ‘Perceptions of Terrorism Threats at the 2004 Olympic Games’.

71. Toohey and Taylor, ‘Mega Events, Fear, and Risk: Terrorism at the Olympic Games’.

72. Thomas A. Baker et al., ‘Perceived Risk of Terrorism and Related Risk Management Practices of NCAA Division 1A Football Stadium Managers’, _Journal of Legal Aspects of Sport_ 17, no. 1 (2007), 27–51; Thomas A. Baker, ‘Terrorism: A Foreseeable Threat to U.S. Sport Facility Owners and Operators’, in James Humphrey (ed.), _Issues in Contemporary Athletics_ (New York: Nova Science, 2007), 101–12.

73. Toohey and Taylor, ‘Mega Events, Fear, and Risk’, 466.

74. Guy Sanan, ‘Olympic Security Operations 1972–94’, in Alan Thompson (ed.), _Terrorism and the 2000 Olympics_ (Canberra: Australian Defence Studies Centre, 1996), 35.

75. Ibid., 35.

76. Ibid.

77. Dominique Clément, ‘The Transformation of Security Planning for the Olympics: The 1976 Montreal Games’, _Terrorism and Political Violence_ (2015), doi:10.1080/09546553.2014.987342.

78. Ibid., 1.

79. Fussey et al., _Securing and Sustaining the Olympic City_; Colin Bennett and Kevin Haggerty (eds), _Security Games: Surveillance and Control at Mega_-_Events_ (London: Routledge, 2011); Anthony Richards, Pete Fussey, and Andrew Silke (eds), _Terrorism and the Olympics: Major Event Security and Lessons for the Future_ (London: Routledge, 2010); Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’; and Boyle and Haggerty, ‘Spectacular Security’.

80. Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’; Pete Fussey and Jon Coaffee, ‘Balancing Local and Global Security Leitmotifs: Counter-Terrorism and the Spectacle of Sporting Mega-Events’, _International Review for the Sociology of Sport_ 47, no. 3 (2012), 268–85; Malcolm MacDonald and Duncan Hunter, ‘The Discourse of Olympic Security: London 2012’, _Discourse & Society_ 24, no. 1 (2013), 66–88.

81. Colin Bennett and Kevin Haggerty, ‘Introduction: Security Games: Surveillance and Control at Mega-Events’, in Colin Bennett and Kevin Haggerty (eds), _Security Games: Surveillance and Control at Mega_-_Events_ (London: Routledge, 2011), 1–19; and Yu et al., ‘Governing Security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics’.

82. Fussey et al., _Securing and Sustaining the Olympic City_; Fussey and Coaffee, ‘Balancing Local and Global Security Leitmotifs’; Jon Coaffee, Pete Fussey, and Cerwyn Moore, ‘Laminated Security for London 2012: Enhancing Security Infrastructures to Defend Mega Sporting Events’, _Urban Studies_ 48, no. 15 (2011), 3311–27; and Bennett and Haggerty, ‘Introduction’.

83. Fussey and Coaffee, ‘Balancing Local and Global Security Leitmotifs’; Atkinson and Young, ‘Political Violence, Terrorism, and Security at the Olympic Games’.

84. Bennett and Haggerty, _Security Games_; Yu et al., ‘Governing Security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics’; Anthony Richards, Pete Fussey, and Andrew Silke, ‘Towards an Understanding of Terrorism and the Olympics’, in Anthony Richards, Pete Fussey, and Andrew Silke (eds), _Terrorism and the Olympics: Major Event Security and Lessons for the Future_ (London: Routledge, 2010), 1–11; Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’.

85. Yu et al., ‘Governing Security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics’; Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’.

86. Bennett and Haggerty, _Security Games_; Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’; and Fussey and Coaffee, ‘Balancing Local and Global Security Leitmotifs’.

87. Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’, 398.

88. Bennett and Haggerty, ‘Introduction’.

89. Yu et al., ‘Governing Security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics’; Fussey and Coaffee, ‘Balancing Local and Global Security Leitmotifs’; and Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’.

90. Giulianotti and Klauser, ‘Sport Mega-Events and “Terrorism”’; Yu et al., ‘Governing Security at the 2008 Beijing Olympics’; Bennett and Haggerty, _Security Games_; and Fussey et al., _Securing and Sustaining the Olympic City_.

91. Boyle, ‘Securing the Olympic Games’.

92. Minas Samatas, ‘Security and Surveillance in the Athens 2004 Olympics: Some Lessons from a Troubled Story’, _International Criminal Justice Review_ 17, no. 3 (2007), 220–38. Minas Samatas, ‘Surveilling the 2004 Athens Olympics in the Aftermath of 9/11: International Pressures and Domestic Implications’, in Colin Bennett and Kevin Haggerty (eds), _Security Games: Surveillance and Control at Mega_-_Events_ (London: Routledge, 2011), 55–71.

93. Bennett and Haggerty, ‘Introduction’.

94. Jules Boykoff and Pete Fussey, ‘London’s Shadow Legacies: Security and Activism at the 2012 Olympics’, _Contemporary Social Science_ 9, no. 2 (2014), 253–70; Jules Boykoff, _Activism and the Olympics: Dissent at the Games in Vancouver and London_ (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2014).

95. Chaliand and Blin, ‘Introduction’.

96. Paul Wilkinson, _Terrorism versus Democracy: The Liberal State Response_ (London: Routledge, 2006).
