Title: Michael Pollan-The Omnivores Dilemma

URL Source: https://ia600205.us.archive.org/25/items/Michael_Pollan-The_Omnivores_Dilemma/Michael_Pollan-The_Omnivores_Dilemma_text.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 21 Feb 2014 11:15:46 GMT

Markdown Content:
# THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA ALSO BY MICHAEL POLLAN 

Second Nature 

## A Place of My Own 

The Botany of Desire THE 

# OMNIVORE'S 

# DILEMMA 

# A NATURAL HISTORY 

# OF FOUR MEALS 

# MICHAEL POLLAN 

## THE PENGUIN PRESS  

> New York
> 2006

THE PENGUIN PRESS 

Published by the Penguin Group 

Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. *

Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) * Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, 

London WC2R 0RL, England » Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, 

Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) • Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 

Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3 1 24, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia 

Group Pty Ltd) » Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 1 1 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, 

New Delhi -110 017, India • Penguin Group (NZ) , Cnr Airborne and Rosedale Roads, 

Albany, Auckland 1310, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) •

Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, 

Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England  

> First

published in 2006 by The Penguin Press  

> a

member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 

Copyright © Michael Pollan, 2006  

> All

rights reserved 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA 

Pollan, Michael. 

The omnivore's dilemma : a natural history of four meals / Michael Pollan.  

> p.

cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 1-59420-082-3  

> 1.

GT2850 .P65 2006. 2. Food habits. 3 . Food preferences. I. Title. 

GT2850.P65 2006 

394.T2 —dc22 2005056557 

Printed in the United States of America 

13 15 17 19 20 18 16 14 

DESIGNED BY MARYSARAH QUINN 

Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this 

publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 

recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the 

copyright owner and the above publisher of this book. 

The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any 

other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by  

> law.

Please purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not participate in or 

encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of the author's 

rights is appreciated. FOR JUDITH AND ISAAC CONTENTS 

introduction Our National Eating Disorder 1

one The Plant: Corn's Conquest 15 

two The Farm 3 2 

three The Elevator 57 

four The Feedlot: Making Meat 65 

five The Processing Plant: Making Complex Foods 85 

six The Consumer: A Republic of Fat 100 

seven The Meal: Fast Food 109 

# I

# INDUSTRIAL 

# CORN 

# II 

# PASTORAL 

# GRASS 

eight All Flesh Is Grass 123 

nine Big Organic 134 ten Grass: Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Pasture 1 8 5

eleven The Animals: Practicing Complexity 208 

twelve Slaughter: In a Glass Abattoir 226 

thirteen The Market: "Greetings from the Non-Barcode People" 239 

fourteen The Meal: Grass-Fed 262 

# PERSONAL 

# THE FOREST 

fifteen The Forager 277 

sixteen The Omnivor e 's Dilemma 287 

seventeen The Ethics of Eating Animals 304 

eighteen Hunting: The Meat 334 

nineteen Gathering : The Fungi 364 

twenty The Perfect Meal 391 

acknowledgments 413 

SOURCES 417 

index 437 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA INTRODUCTION 

# OUR NATIONAL 

# EATING DISORDER 

What should we have for dinner? 

This book is a long and fairly involved answer to this seemingly 

simple question. Along the way, it also tries to figure out how such a

simple question could ever have gotten so complicated. As a culture we 

seem to have arrived at a place where whatever native wisdom we may 

once have possessed about eating has been replaced by confusion and 

anxiety. Somehow this most elemental of activities —figuring out what 

to eat —has come to require a remarkable amount of expert help. How 

did we ever get to a point where we need investigative journalists to tell 

us where our food comes from and nutritionists to determine the din-

ner menu? 

For me the absurdity of the situation became inescapable in the fall 

of 2002, when one of the most ancient and venerable staples of human 

life abruptly disappeared from the American dinner table. I'm talking of 

course about bread. Virtually overnight, Americans changed the way 

they eat. A collective spasm of what can only be described as carbopho-2 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

bia seized the country, supplanting an era of national lipophobia dating 

to the Carter administration. That was when, in 1 977, a Senate commit-

tee had issued a set of "dietary goals" warning beef-loving Americans 

to lay off the red meat. And so we dutifully had done, until now. 

What set off the sea change? It appears to have been a perfect media 

storm of diet books, scientific studies, and one timely magazine article. 

The new diet books, many of them inspired by the formerly discredited  

> Dr.

Robert C. Atkins, brought Americans the welcome news that they 

could eat more meat and lose weight just so long as they laid off the 

bread and pasta. These high-protein, low-carb diets found support in a

handful of new epidemiological studies suggesting that the nutritional 

orthodoxy that had held sway in America since the 1970s might be 

wrong. It was not, as official opinion claimed, fat that made us fat, but 

the carbohydrates we'd been eating precisely in order to stay slim. So 

conditions were ripe for a swing of the dietary pendulum when, in the 

## summer of 2002, the New York Times Magazine published a cover story on 

the new research entitled "What if Fat Doesn't Make You Fat?" Within 

months, supermarket shelves were restocked and restaurant menus 

rewritten to reflect the new nutritional wisdom. The blamelessness of 

steak restored, two of the most wholesome and uncontroversial foods 

## known to man —bread and pasta —acquired a moral stain that 

promptly bankrupted dozens of bakeries and noodle firms and ruined 

an untold number of perfectly good meals. 

So violent a change in a culture's eating habits is surely the sign of 

a national eating disorder. Certainly it would never have happened in a 

culture in possession of deeply rooted traditions surrounding food and  

> eating.

But then, such a culture would not feel the need for its most au-

gust legislative body to ever deliberate the nation's "dietary goals" —or, 

for that matter, to wage political battle every few years over the precise 

design of an official government graphic called the "food pyramid." A

country with a stable culture of food would not shell out millions for 

the quackery (or common sense) of a new diet book every January. It 

would not be susceptible to the pendulum swings of food scares or  

> fads,

to the apotheosis every few years of one newly discovered nutri-OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER* 3

ent and the demonization of another. It would not be apt to confuse 

protein bars and food supplements with meals or breakfast cereals with 

medicines. It probably would not eat a fifth of its meals in cars or feed  

> fully

a third of its children at a fast-food outlet every day. And it surely 

would not be nearly so fat. 

Nor would such a culture be shocked to discover that there are 

other countries, such as Italy and France, that decide their dinner ques-

tions on the basis of such quaint and unscientific criteria as pleasure 

and tradition, eat all manner of "unhealthy" foods, and, lo and behold, 

wind up actually healthier and happier in their eating than we are. We 

show our surprise at this by speaking of something called the "French 

paradox," for how could a people who eat such demonstrably toxic 

substances as foie gras and triple creme cheese actually be slimmer and 

healthier than we are? Yet I wonder if it doesn't make more sense to 

speak in terms of an American paradox —that is, a notably unhealthy 

people obsessed by the idea of eating healthily. 

To one degree or another, the question of what to have for dinner as- 

> sails

every omnivore, and always has. When you can eat just about any-

thing nature has to offer, deciding what you should eat will inevitably stir 

anxiety, especially when some of the potential foods on offer are liable 

to sicken or kill you. This is the omnivore 's dilemma, noted long ago by 

writers like Rousseau and Brillat-Savarin and first given that name thirty 

years ago by a University of Pennsylvania research psychologist named 

Paul Rozin. I've borrowed his phrase for the tide of this book because 

the omnivore 's dilemma turns out to be a particularly sharp tool for 

understanding our present predicaments surrounding food. 

In a 1976 paper called "The Selection of Foods by Rats, Humans, 

and Other Animals" Rozin contrasted the omnivore 's existential situa-

tion with that of the specialized eater, for whom the dinner question 

could not be simpler. The koala doesn't worry about what to eat: If it looks and smells and tastes like a eucalyptus leaf, it must be dinner. 

The koala's culinary preferences are hardwired in its genes. But for 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

omnivores like us (and the rat) a vast amount of brain space and time 

must be devoted to figuring out which of all the many potential dishes 

nature lays on are safe to eat. We rely on our prodigious powers of 

recognition and memory to guide us away from poisons (Isn't that the 

mushroom that made me sick last week?) and toward nutritious plants (The red       

> berries are the juicier, sweeter ones) .

Our taste buds help too, predisposing us 

toward sweetness, which signals carbohydrate energy in nature, and 

away from bitterness, which is how many of the toxic alkaloids produced 

by plants taste. Our inborn sense of disgust keeps us from ingesting 

things that might infect us, such as rotten meat. Many anthropologists 

believe that the reason we evolved such big and intricate brains was 

precisely to help us deal with the omnivore's dilemma. 

Being a generalist is of course a great boon as well as a challenge; it  

> is

what allows humans to successfully inhabit virtually every terrestrial 

environment on the planet. Omnivory offers the pleasures of variety, 

too. But the surfeit of choice brings with it a lot of stress and leads to a

kind of Manichaean view of food, a division of nature into The Good 

Things to Eat, and The Bad. 

The rat must make this all-important distinction more or less on its 

own, each individual figuring out for itself —and then remembering 

# —

which things will nourish and which will poison. The human omni-

vore has, in addition to his senses and memory, the incalculable 

advantage of a culture, which stores the experience and accumulated 

wisdom of countless human tasters before him. I don't need to experi-

ment with the mushroom now called, rather helpfully, the "death cap," 

and it is common knowledge that that first intrepid lobster eater was on 

to something very good. Our culture codifies the rules of wise eating in 

an elaborate structure of taboos, rituals, recipes, manners, and culinary 

traditions that keep us from having to reenact the omnivore's dilemma  

> at

every meal. 

One way to think about America's national eating disorder is as the re-

turn, with an almost atavistic vengeance, of the omnivore's dilemma. The 

cornucopia of the American supermarket has thrown us back on a bewil-

dering food landscape where we once again have to worry that some of OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER * 5

those tasty-looking morsels might kill us. (Perhaps not as quickly as a

poisonous mushroom, but just as surely.) Certainly the extraordinary 

abundance of food in America complicates the whole problem of choice. 

At the same time, many of the tools with which people historically man-

aged the omnivore's dilemma have lost their sharpness here —or simply  

> failed.

As a relatively new nation drawn from many different immigrant 

populations, each with its own culture of food, Americans have never had 

a single, strong, stable culinary tradition to guide us. 

The lack of a steadying culture of food leaves us especially vulnera-

ble to the blandishments of the food scientist and the marketer, for 

# whom the omnivore's dilemma is not so much a dilemma as an oppor-   

> tunity. It is

very much in the interest of the food industry to exacerbate 

our anxieties about what to eat, the better to then assuage them with 

## new products. Our bewilderment in the supermarket is no accident; the 

return of the omnivore's dilemma has deep roots in the modern food 

industry, roots that, I found, reach all the way back to fields of corn 

growing in places like Iowa. 

And so we find ourselves where we do, confronting in the super-

market or at the dinner table the dilemmas of omnivorousness, some of 

them ancient and others never before imagined. The organic apple or the 

conventional? And if the organic, the local one or the imported? The wild  

> fish

or the farmed? The trans fats or the butter or the "not butter"? Shall I

be a carnivore or a vegetarian? And if a vegetarian, a lacto-vegetarian or a

vegan? Like the hunter-gatherer picking a novel mushroom off the for- 

> est

floor and consulting his sense memory to determine its edibility, we 

pick up the package in the supermarket and, no longer so confident of 

our senses, scrutinize the label, scratching our heads over the meaning 

of phrases like "heart healthy," "no trans fats," "cage-free," or "range-fed." 

What is "natural grill flavor" or TBHQ or xanthan gum? What is all this  

> stuff,

anyway, and where in the world did it come from? 

# My wager in writing The Omnivore's Dilemma was that the best way to an-

swer the questions we face about what to eat was to go back to the very 6 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

beginning, to follow the food chains that sustain us, all the way from 

the earth to the plate —to a small number of actual meals. I wanted to 

look at the getting and eating of food at its most fundamental, which is 

to say, as a transaction between species in nature, eaters and eaten. ("The 

whole of nature," wrote the English author William Ralph Inge, "is a con-

jugation of the verb to eat, in the active and passive.") What I try to do in  

> this

book is approach the dinner question as a naturalist might, using the 

long lenses of ecology and anthropology, as well as the shorter, more in-

timate lens of personal experience. 

# My premise is that like every other creature on earth, humans take 

part in a food chain, and our place in that food chain, or web, deter-

mines to a considerable extent what kind of creature we are. The fact of 

our omnivorousness has done much to shape our nature, both body (we 

possess the omnicompetent teeth and jaws of the omnivore, equally well 

suited to tearing meat and grinding seeds) and soul. Our prodigious 

powers of observation and memory, as well as our curious and experi-

mental stance toward the natural world, owe much to the biological  

> fact

of omnivorousness. So do the various adaptations we've evolved to 

defeat the defenses of other creatures so that we might eat them, in-

cluding our skills at hunting and cooking with fire. Some philosophers 

have argued that the very open-endedness of human appetite is respon- 

> sible

for both our savagery and civility, since a creature that could con-

ceive of eating anything (including, notably, other humans) stands in particular need of ethical rules, manners, and rituals. We are not only 

what we eat, but how we eat, too. 

Yet we are also different from most of nature's other eaters 

# —

markedly so. For one thing, we've acquired the ability to substantially 

modify the food chains we depend on, by means of such revolutionary 

technologies as cooking with fire, hunting with tools, farming, and 

food preservation. Cooking opened up whole new vistas of edibility by 

rendering various plants and animals more digestible, and overcoming 

many of the chemical defenses other species deploy against being 

eaten. Agriculture allowed us to vastly multiply the populations of a few 

favored food species, and therefore in turn our own. And, most recently, OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER 7

industry has allowed us to reinvent the human food chain, from the 

synthetic fertility of the soil to the microwaveable can of soup designed 

to fit into a car's cup holder. The implications of this last revolution, for 

our health and the health of the natural world, we are still struggling 

to grasp. 

The Omnivore's Dilemma is about the three principal food chains that 

sustain us today: the industrial, the organic, and the hunter-gatherer. 

Different as they are, all three food chains are systems for doing more 

or less the same thing: linking us, through what we eat, to the fertility 

of the earth and the energy of the sun. It might be hard to see how, but 

even a Twinkie does this —constitutes an engagement with the natural 

world. As ecology teaches, and this book tries to show, it's all con-

nected, even the Twinkie. 

Ecology also teaches that all life on earth can be viewed as a compe- 

> tition

among species for the solar energy captured by green plants and 

stored in the form of complex carbon molecules. A food chain is a sys-

tem for passing those calories on to species that lack the plant's unique  

> ability

to synthesize them from sunlight. One of the themes of this 

book is that the industrial revolution of the food chain, dating to the 

close of World War II, has actually changed the fundamental rules of  

> this

game. Industrial agriculture has supplanted a complete reliance on 

the sun for our calories with something new under the sun: a food 

chain that draws much of its energy from fossil fuels instead. (Of 

course, even that energy originally came from the sun, but unlike sun-

light it is finite and irreplaceable.) The result of this innovation has been 

a vast increase in the amount of food energy available to our species;  

> this

has been a boon to humanity (allowing us to multiply our num-

bers) , but not an unalloyed one. We've discovered that an abundance of food does not render the omnivore's dilemma obsolete. To the contrary, 

abundance seems only to deepen it, giving us all sorts of new problems 

and things to worry about. 

Each of this book's three parts follows one of the principal human 

food chains from beginning to end: from a plant, or group of plants, 

photosynthesizing calories in the sun, all the way to a meal at the din-8* THE OMN'IVORE'S DILEMMA 

ner end of that food chain. Reversing the chronological order, I start 

with the industrial food chain, since that is the one that today involves 

and concerns us the most. It is also by far the biggest and longest. Since 

monoculture is the hallmark of the industrial food chain, this section 

focuses on a single plant: Zea mays, the giant tropical grass we call corn, 

which has become the keystone species of the industrial food chain, 

and so in turn of the modern diet. This section follows a bushel of com-

modity corn from the field in Iowa where it grew on its long, strange 

journey to its ultimate destination in a fast-food meal, eaten in a mov-

ing car on a highway in Marin County, California. 

The book's second part follows what I call —to distinguish it from 

the industrial —the pastoral food chain. This section explores some of 

the alternatives to industrial food and farming that have sprung up in 

recent years (variously called "organic," "local," "biological," and "be-

yond organic"), food chains that might appear to be preindustrial but 

in surprising ways turn out in fact to be postindustrial. I set out think-

ing I could follow one such food chain, from a radically innovative 

farm in Virginia that I worked on one recent summer to an extremely 

local meal prepared from animals raised on its pastures. But I promptly 

discovered that no single farm or meal could do justice to the complex, 

branching story of alternative agriculture right now, and that I needed 

also to reckon with the food chain I call, oxymoronically, the "indus- 

> trial

organic." So the book's pastoral section serves up the natural his-

tory of two very different "organic" meals: one whose ingredients 

came from my local Whole Foods supermarket (gathered there from as  

> far

away as Argentina) , and the other tracing its origins to a single poly-

culture of grasses growing at Polyface Farm in Swoope, Virginia. 

The last section, titled Personal, follows a kind of neo-Paleolithic 

food chain from the forests of Northern California to a meal I prepared 

(almost) exclusively from ingredients I hunted, gathered, and grew 

myself. Though we twenty-first-century eaters still eat a handful of 

hunted and gathered food (notably fish and wild mushrooms) , my in- 

> terest

in this food chain was less practical than philosophical: I hoped 

to shed fresh light on the way we eat now by immersing myself in the OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER * 9

way we ate then. In order to make this meal I had to learn how to do 

some unfamiliar things, including hunting game and foraging for wild 

mushrooms and urban tree fruit. In doing so I was forced to confront 

some of the most elemental questions —and dilemmas —faced by the 

## human omnivore: What are the moral and psychological implications of  

> killing,

preparing, and eating a wild animal? How does one distinguish 

between the delicious and the deadly when foraging in the woods? How 

do the alchemies of the kitchen transform the raw stuffs of nature into 

some of the great delights of human culture? 

The end result of this adventure was what I came to think of as the 

Perfect Meal, not because it turned out so well (though in my humble 

opinion it did) , but because this labor- and thought-intensive dinner, 

enjoyed in the company of fellow foragers, gave me the opportunity, so 

rare in modern life, to eat in full consciousness of everything involved 

in feeding myself: For once, I was able to pay the full karmic price of 

a meal. 

Yet as different as these three journeys (and four meals) turned out 

to be, a few themes kept cropping up. One is that there exists a funda-

mental tension between the logic of nature and the logic of human in-      

> dustry, at least as it is

presently organized. Our ingenuity in feeding 

ourselves is prodigious, but at various points our technologies come 

into conflict with nature's ways of doing things, as when we seek to 

maximize efficiency by planting crops or raising animals in vast mono- 

> cultures.

This is something nature never does, always and for good 

reasons practicing diversity instead. A great many of the health and en-

vironmental problems created by our food system owe to our attempts 

to oversimplify nature's complexities, at both the growing and the eat-

ing ends of our food chain. At either end of any food chain you find a

biological system —a patch of soil, a human body —and the health of 

one is connected —literally —to the health of the other. Many of the 

problems of health and nutrition we face today trace back to things that 

happen on the farm, and behind those things stand specific govern-

ment policies few of us know anything about.  

> I

don't mean to suggest that human food chains have only recently JO* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

come into conflict with the logic of biology; early agriculture and, long 

before that, human hunting proved enormously destructive. Indeed, 

## we might never have needed agriculture had earlier generations of 

hunters not eliminated the species they depended upon. Folly in the 

getting of our food is nothing new. And yet the new follies we are per-

petrating in our industrial food chain today are of a different order. By 

replacing solar energy with fossil fuel, by raising millions of food ani-

mals in close confinement, by feeding those animals foods they never 

evolved to eat, and by feeding ourselves foods far more novel than we 

even realize, we are taking risks with our health and the health of the 

natural world that are unprecedented. 

Another theme, or premise really, is that the way we eat represents 

our most profound engagement with the natural world. Daily, our eat-

ing turns nature into culture, transforming the body of the world into 

our bodies and minds. Agriculture has done more to reshape the natu- 

> ral

world than anything else we humans do, both its landscapes and the 

composition of its flora and fauna. Our eating also constitutes a rela-

tionship with dozens of other species —plants, animals, and fungi 

# —

with which we have coevolved to the point where our fates are deeply 

entwined. Many of these species have evolved expressly to gratify our 

desires, in the intricate dance of domestication that has allowed us 

and them to prosper together as we could never have prospered apart. 

But our relationships with the wild species we eat —from the mush-

rooms we pick in the forest to the yeasts that leaven our bread —are no  

> less

compelling, and far more mysterious. Eating puts us in touch with  

> all

that we share with the other animals, and all that sets us apart. It de-

fines us. 

What is perhaps most troubling, and sad, about industrial eating is 

## how thoroughly it obscures all these relationships and connections. To 

go from the chicken (Gallus gallus) to the Chicken McNugget is to leave  

> this

world in a journey of forgetting that could hardly be more costly 

not only in terms of the animal's pain but in our pleasure, too. But for-

getting, or not knowing in the first place, is what the industrial food 

chain is all about, the principal reason it is so opaque, for if we could OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER 1 I

see what lies on the far side of the increasingly high walls of our indus- 

> trial

agriculture, we would surely change the way we eat. 

"Eating is an agricultural act," as Wendell Berry famously said. It is 

also an ecological act, and a political act, too. Though much has been 

done to obscure this simple fact, how and what we eat determines to a 

great extent the use we make of the world —and what is to become of  

> it.

To eat with a fuller consciousness of all that is at stake might sound  

> like

a burden, but in practice few things in life can afford quite as much  

> satisfaction.

By comparison, the pleasures of eating industrially, which  

> is

to say eating in ignorance, are fleeting. Many people today seem per- 

> fectly

content eating at the end of an industrial food chain, without a

thought in the world; this book is probably not for them. There are 

things in it that will ruin their appetites. But in the end this is a book 

about the pleasures of eating, the kinds of pleasure that are only deep-

ened by knowing. CORN ONE 

# THE PLANT 

Corn's Conquest  

> 1.

# A NATURALIST IN THE SUPERMARKET 

Air-conditioned, odorless, illuminated by buzzing fluorescent tubes, 

the American supermarket doesn't present itself as having very much to 

do with Nature. And yet what is this place if not a landscape (man-

made, it's true) teeming with plants and animals? 

I'm not just talking about the produce section or the meat counter, 

either —the supermarket's flora and fauna. Ecologically speaking, these 

are this landscape's most legible zones, the places where it doesn't take a

field guide to identify the resident species. Over there's your eggplant, 

onion, potato, and leek; here your apple, banana, and orange. Spritzed 

with morning dew every few minutes, Produce is the only corner of the 

supermarket where we're apt to think "Ah, yes, the bounty of Nature!" 

Which probably explains why such a garden of fruits and vegetables 

(sometimes flowers, too) is what usually greets the shopper coming 

through the automatic doors. 

Keep rolling, back to the mirrored rear wall behind which the butch-]6*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA   

> ers toil,

and you encounter a set of species only slightly harder to 

identify —there's chicken and turkey, lamb and cow and pig. Though in 

Meat the creaturely character of the species on display does seem to be 

fading, as the cows and pigs increasingly come subdivided into bone- 

> less

and bloodless geometrical cuts. In recent years some of this super-

market euphemism has seeped into Produce, where you'll now find 

formerly soil-encrusted potatoes cubed pristine white, and "baby" car-rots machine-lathed into neatly tapered torpedoes. But in general here 

in flora and fauna you don't need to be a naturalist, much less a food  

> scientist,

to know what species you're tossing into your cart. 

Venture farther, though, and you come to regions of the supermar-

ket where the very notion of species seems increasingly obscure: the 

canyons of breakfast cereals and condiments; the freezer cases stacked 

with "home meal replacements" and bagged platonic peas; the broad 

expanses of soft drinks and towering cliffs of snacks; the unclassifiable 

Pop-Tarts and Lunchables; the frankly synthetic coffee whiteners and 

the Linnaeus-defying Twinkie. Plants? Animals?! Though it might not 

always seem that way, even the deathless Twinkie is constructed out 

of . . . well, precisely what I don't know offhand, but ultimately some 

sort of formerly living creature, i.e., a species. We haven't yet begun to 

synthesize our foods from petroleum, at least not directly.  

> If

you do manage to regard the supermarket through the eyes of a 

> naturalist,

your first impression is apt to be of its astounding biodiver- 

> sity.

Look how many different plants and animals (and fungi) are rep-

resented on this single acre of land! What forest or prairie could hope 

to match it? There must be a hundred different species in the produce 

section alone, a handful more in the meat counter. And this diversity 

appears only to be increasing: When I was a kid, you never saw radic-

chio in the produce section, or a half dozen different kinds of mush-

rooms, or kiwis and passion fruit and durians and mangoes. Indeed, in 

the last few years a whole catalog of exotic species from the tropics has 

colonized, and considerably enlivened, the produce department. Over 

in fauna, on a good day you're apt to find —beyond beef —ostrich and 

quail and even bison, while in Fish you can catch not just salmon and THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST + / 7

shrimp but catfish and tilapia, too. Naturalists regard biodiversity as a

measure of a landscape's health, and the modern supermarket's devo-

tion to variety and choice would seem to reflect, perhaps even pro-

mote, precisely that sort of ecological vigor. 

Except for the salt and a handful of synthetic food additives, every 

edible item in the supermarket is a link in a food chain that begins with  

> a

particular plant growing in a specific patch of soil (or, more seldom, 

stretch of sea) somewhere on earth. Sometimes, as in the produce sec-  

> tion, that

chain is fairly short and easy to follow: As the netted bag says,  

> this

potato was grown in Idaho, that onion came from a farm in Texas. 

Move over to Meat, though, and the chain grows longer and less com-

prehensible: The label doesn't mention that that rib-eye steak came 

from a steer born in South Dakota and fattened in a Kansas feedlot on 

grain grown in Iowa. Once you get into the processed foods you have  

> to

be a fairly determined ecological detective to follow the intricate and 

increasingly obscure lines of connection linking the Twinkie, or the 

nondairy creamer, to a plant growing in the earth someplace, but it can 

be done. 

So what exactly would an ecological detective set loose in an Amer-

ican supermarket discover, were he to trace the items in his shopping   

> cart all

the way back to the soil? The notion began to occupy me a few 

years ago, after I realized that the straightforward question "What 

should I eat?" could no longer be answered without first addressing 

two other even more straightforward questions: "What am I eating? 

And where in the world did it come from?" Not very long ago an eater 

didn't need a journalist to answer these questions. The fact that today 

one so often does suggests a pretty good start on a working definition 

of industrial food: Any food whose provenance is so complex or ob-

scure that it requires expert help to ascertain. 

## When I started trying to follow the industrial food chain —the one  

> that

## now feeds most of us most of the time and typically culminates ei-

ther in a supermarket or fast-food meal —I expected that my investiga-

tions would lead me to a wide variety of places. And though my 

journeys did take me to a great many states, and covered a great many 18* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

miles, at the very end of these food chains (which is to say, at the very 

beginning), I invariably found myself in almost exactly the same place: 

a farm field in the American Corn Belt. The great edifice of variety and 

choice that is an American supermarket turns out to rest on a remark-

ably narrow biological foundation comprised of a tiny group of plants 

that is dominated by a single species: Zea mays, the giant tropical grass 

most Americans know as corn. 

Corn is what feeds the steer that becomes the steak. Corn feeds the 

chicken and the pig, the turkey and the lamb, the catfish and the tilapia 

and, increasingly, even the salmon, a carnivore by nature that the fish 

farmers are reengineering to tolerate corn. The eggs are made of corn. 

The milk and cheese and yogurt, which once came from dairy cows 

that grazed on grass, now typically come from Holsteins that spend 

their working lives indoors tethered to machines, eating corn. 

Head over to the processed foods and you find ever more intricate 

manifestations of corn. A chicken nugget, for example, piles corn upon 

corn: what chicken it contains consists of corn, of course, but so do most of a nugget's other constituents, including the modified corn 

starch that glues the thing together, the corn flour in the batter that 

coats it, and the corn oil in which it gets fried. Much less obviously, the 

leavenings and lecithin, the mono-, di-, and triglycerides, the attractive 

golden coloring, and even the citric acid that keeps the nugget "fresh" 

can all be derived from corn. 

To wash down your chicken nuggets with virtually any soft drink in 

the supermarket is to have some corn with your corn. Since the 1980s 

virtually all the sodas and most of the fruit drinks sold in the supermar-

ket have been sweetened with high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) —after 

water, corn sweetener is their principal ingredient. Grab a beer for your 

beverage instead and you'd still be drinking corn, in the form of alco-

hol fermented from glucose refined from corn. Read the ingredients on 

the label of any processed food and, provided you know the chemical 

names it travels under, corn is what you will find. For modified or un-

modified starch, for glucose syrup and maltodextrin, for crystalline 

fructose and ascorbic acid, for lecithin and dextrose, lactic acid and ly-THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST* 19  

> sine,

for maltose and HFCS, for MSG and polyols, for the caramel color 

and xanthan gum, read: corn. Corn is in the coffee whitener and Cheez 

Whiz, the frozen yogurt and TV dinner, the canned fruit and ketchup 

and candies, the soups and snacks and cake mixes, the frosting and 

gravy and frozen waffles, the syrups and hot sauces, the mayonnaise 

and mustard, the hot dogs and the bologna, the margarine and short-

ening, the salad dressings and the relishes and even the vitamins. (Yes,  

> it's

in theTwinkie, too.) There are some forty-five thousand items in the 

average American supermarket and more than a quarter of them now 

contain corn. This goes for the nonfood items as well —everything from 

the toothpaste and cosmetics to the disposable diapers, trash bags, cleans- 

> ers,

charcoal briquettes, matches, and batteries, right down to the shine on 

the cover of the magazine that catches your eye by the checkout: corn. 

Even in Produce on a day when there's ostensibly no corn for sale you'll 

nevertheless find plenty of corn: in the vegetable wax that gives the 

cucumbers their sheen, in the pesticide responsible for the produce's 

perfection, even in the coating on the cardboard it was shipped in. In-

deed, the supermarket itself —the wallboard and joint compound, the 

linoleum and fiberglass and adhesives out of which the building itself 

has been built —is in no small measure a manifestation of corn. 

And us? 

2. CORN WALKING 

Descendents of the Maya living in Mexico still sometimes refer to them-  

> selves as

"the corn people." The phrase is not intended as metaphor. 

Rather, it's meant to acknowledge their abiding dependence on this 

miraculous grass, the staple of their diet for almost nine thousand years. 

Forty percent of the calories a Mexican eats in a day comes directly from 

corn, most of it in the form of tortillas. So when a Mexican says "I am 

maize" or "corn walking," it is simply a statement of fact: The very sub-

stance of the Mexican's body is to a considerable extent a manifestation 

of this plant. 20* THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

For an American like me, growing up linked to a very different food 

chain, yet one that is also rooted in a field of corn, not to think of him- 

> self

as a corn person suggests either a failure of imagination or a tri-

## umph of capitalism. Or perhaps a little of both. It does take some 

imagination to recognize the ear of corn in the Coke bottle or the Big 

Mac. At the same time, the food industry has done a good job of per-

suading us that the forty-five thousand different items or SKUs (stock 

keeping units) in the supermarket —seventeen thousand new ones 

every year —represent genuine variety rather than so many clever re-

arrangements of molecules extracted from the same plant. 

You are what you eat, it's often said, and if this is true, then what we 

mostly are is corn —or, more precisely, processed corn. This proposition  

> is

susceptible to scientific proof: The same scientists who glean the 

composition of ancient diets from mummified human remains can do 

the same for you or me, using a snip of hair or fingernail. The science 

works by identifying stable isotopes of carbon in human tissue that 

bear the signatures, in effect, of the different types of plants that origi-

nally took them from the air and introduced them into the food chain. 

The intricacies of this process are worth following, since they go some 

distance toward explaining how corn could have conquered our diet 

and, in turn, more of the earth's surface than virtually any other domes-

ticated species, our own included. 

Carbon is the most common element in our bodies —indeed, in all 

living things on earth. We earthlings are, as they say, a carbon life form. 

(As one scientist put it, carbon supplies life's quantity, since it is the 

main structural element in living matter, while much scarcer nitrogen 

supplies its quality —but more on that later.) Originally, the atoms of 

carbon from which we're made were floating in the air, part of a car-

bon dioxide molecule. The only way to recruit these carbon atoms for 

the molecules necessary to support life —the carbohydrates, amino 

acids, proteins, and lipids —is by means of photosynthesis. Using sun-

light as a catalyst the green cells of plants combine carbon atoms taken 

from the air with water and elements drawn from the soil to form the THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST* 21 

simple organic compounds that stand at the base of every food chain.   

> It is

more than a figure of speech to say that plants create life out of 

thin air. 

But corn goes about this procedure a little differently than most 

other plants, a difference that not only renders the plant more efficient 

than most, but happens also to preserve the identity of the carbon 

atoms it recruits, even after they've been transformed into things like 

Gatorade and Ring Dings and hamburgers, not to mention the human 

bodies nourished on those things. Where most plants during photosyn- 

> thesis

create compounds that have three carbon atoms, corn (along 

with a small handful of other species) make compounds that have four: 

hence "C-4," the botanical nickname for this gifted group of plants, 

which wasn't identified until the 1 970s. 

The C-4 trick represents an important economy for a plant, giving  

> it

an advantage, especially in areas where water is scarce and tempera-

tures high. In order to gather carbon atoms from the air, a plant has to 

open its stomata, the microscopic orifices in the leaves through which 

plants both take in and exhaust gases. Every time a stoma opens to ad-

mit carbon dioxide precious molecules of water escape. It's as though 

every time you opened your mouth to eat you lost a quantity of blood.  

> Ideally,

you would open your mouth as seldom as possible, ingesting as 

## much food as you could with every bite. This is essentially what a C-4 

plant does. By recruiting extra atoms of carbon during each instance of 

photosynthesis, the corn plant is able to limit its loss of water and 

"fix" —that is, take from the atmosphere and link in a useful molecule 

# —

significantly more carbon than other plants. 

At its most basic, the story of life on earth is the competition among 

species to capture and store as much energy as possible —either directly 

from the sun, in the case of plants, or, in the case of animals, by eating 

plants and plant eaters. The energy is stored in the form of carbon mol-

ecules and measured in calories. The calories we eat, whether in an ear 

of corn or a steak, represent packets of energy once captured by a plant. 

The C-4 trick helps explain the corn plant's success in this competition: 2 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Few plants can manufacture quite as much organic matter (and calo- 

> ries)

from the same quantities of sunlight and water and basic elements  

> as

corn. (Ninety-seven percent of what a corn plant is comes from the  

> air,

three percent from the ground.) 

The trick doesn't yet, however, explain how a scientist could tell 

that a given carbon atom in a human bone owes its presence there to a

photosynthetic event that occurred in the leaf of one kind of plant and 

not another —in corn, say, instead of lettuce or wheat. The scientist can 

do this because all carbon is not created equal. Some carbon atoms, 

called isotopes, have more than the usual complement of six protons 

and six neutrons, giving them a slightly different atomic weight. C-13, 

for example, has six protons and seven neutrons. (Hence "C-13.") For 

whatever reason, when a C-4 plant goes scavenging for its four-packs of 

carbon, it takes in more carbon 1 3 than ordinary —C-3 —plants, which 

exhibit a marked preference for the more common carbon 1 2. Greedy 

for carbon, C-4 plants can't afford to discriminate among isotopes, and 

so end up with relatively more carbon 1 3 . The higher the ratio of car-

bon 1 3 to carbon 1 2 in a person's flesh, the more corn has been in his 

diet —or in the diet of the animals he or she ate. (As far as we're con-

cerned, it makes little difference whether we consume relatively more 

or less carbon 13.) 

## One would expect to find a comparatively high proportion of 

carbon 1 3 in the flesh of people whose staple food of choice is corn 

# —

Mexicans, most famously. Americans eat much more wheat than corn 

# —  

> 11

4 pounds of wheat flour per person per year, compared to 1 1 pounds 

of corn flour. The Europeans who colonized America regarded them-

selves as wheat people, in contrast to the native corn people they en-

countered; wheat in the West has always been considered the most 

refined, or civilized, grain. If asked to choose, most of us would prob-

ably still consider ourselves wheat people (except perhaps the proud 

corn-fed Midwesterners, and they don't know the half of it), though by 

## now the whole idea of identifying with a plant at all strikes us as a lit- 

> tle

old-fashioned. Beef people sounds more like it, though nowadays 

chicken people, which sounds not nearly so good, is probably closer to THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST 23 

the truth of the matter. But carbon 1 3 doesn't lie, and researchers who 

have compared the isotopes in the flesh or hair of North Americans to 

those in the same tissues of Mexicans report that it is now we in the 

North who are the true people of corn. "When you look at the isotope  

> ratios,"

Todd Dawson, a Berkeley biologist who's done this sort of re-

search, told me, "we North Americans look like corn chips with legs." 

Compared to us, Mexicans today consume a far more varied carbon diet: 

the animals they eat still eat grass (until recently, Mexicans regarded 

feeding corn to livestock as a sacrilege); much of their protein comes 

from legumes; and they still sweeten their beverages with cane sugar. 

So that's us: processed corn, walking. 

3. THE RISE OF ZEA MAYS 

# How this peculiar grass, native to Central America and unknown to the 

Old World before 1492, came to colonize so much of our land and 

bodies is one of the plant world's greatest success stories. I say the plant 

world's success story because it is no longer clear that corn's triumph is 

such a boon to the rest of the world, and because we should give credit 

where credit is due. Corn is the hero of its own story, and though we 

humans played a crucial supporting role in its rise to world domina-  

> tion, it

would be wrong to suggest we have been calling the shots, or 

acting always in our own best interests. Indeed, there is every reason to 

believe that corn has succeeded in domesticating us. 

To some extent this holds true for all of the plants and animals that 

take part in the grand coevolutionary bargain with humans we call 

agriculture. Though we insist on speaking of the "invention" of agricul-ture as if it were our idea, like double-entry bookkeeping or the light-

bulb, in fact it makes just as much sense to regard agriculture as a  

> brilliant (if

unconscious) evolutionary strategy on the part of the plants 

and animals involved to get us to advance their interests. By evolving 

certain traits we happen to regard as desirable, these species got them-

selves noticed by the one mammal in a position not only to spread their 24 " THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

genes around the world, but to remake vast swaths of that world in the 

image of the plants' preferred habitat. No other group of species gained 

more from its association with humans than the edible grasses, and no 

grass has reaped more from agriculture than Zea mays, today the world's 

most important cereal crop. 

Corn's success might seem fated in retrospect, but it was not some-

thing anyone would have predicted on that day in May 1493 when 

Columbus first described the botanical oddity he had encountered in 

the New World to Isabella's court. He told of a towering grass with an 

ear as thick as a man's arm, to which grains were "affixed by nature in a wondrous manner and in form and size like garden peas, white when 

young." Wondrous, perhaps, yet this was, after all, the staple food of a

people that would shortly be vanquished and all but exterminated. 

By all rights, maize should have shared the fate of that other native 

species, the bison, which was despised and targeted for elimination 

precisely because it was "the Indians' commissary," in the words of 

General Philip Sheridan, commander of the armies of the West. Exter-

minate the species, Sheridan advised, and "[t]hen your prairies can be 

covered with speckled cattle and the festive cowboy." In outline Sheri-

dan's plan was the plan for the whole continent: The white man brought 

his own "associate species" with him to the New World —catde and apples, 

pigs and wheat, not to mention his accustomed weeds and microbes —and 

wherever possible helped them to displace the native plants and ani-

mals allied with the Indian. More even than the rifle, it was this biotic 

army that did the most to defeat the Indians. 

But corn enjoyed certain botanical advantages that would allow it to 

thrive even as the Native Americans with whom it had coevolved were 

being eliminated. Indeed, maize, the one plant without which the 

American colonists probably would never have survived, let alone pros-

pered, wound up abetting the destruction of the very people who had 

helped develop it. In the plant world at least, opportunism trumps grat- 

> itude.

Yet in time, the plant of the vanquished would conquer even the 

conquerors. 

Squanto taught the Pilgrims how to plant maize in the spring of THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST 25 

1621, and the colonists immediately recognized its value: No other 

plant could produce quite as much food quite as fast on a given patch 

of New World ground as this Indian corn. (Originally "corn" was a

generic English word for any kind of grain, even a grain of salt —hence 

"corned beef"; it didn't take long for Zea mays to appropriate the word 

for itself, at least in America.) The fact that the plant was so well adapted 

to the climate and soils of North America gave it an edge over European 

grains, even if it did make a disappointingly earthbound bread. Cen-

turies before the Pilgrims arrived the plant had already spread north 

from central Mexico, where it is thought to have originated, all the way 

to New England, where Indians were probably cultivating it by 1000. 

Along the way, the plant —whose prodigious genetic variability allows  

> it

to adapt rapidly to new conditions —made itself at home in virtually 

every microclimate in North America; hot or cold, dry or wet, sandy  

> soil

or heavy, short day or long, corn, with the help of its Native Amer-

ican allies, evolved whatever traits it needed to survive and flourish. 

Lacking any such local experience, wheat struggled to adapt to the 

continent's harsh climate, and yields were often so poor that the settle-

ments that stood by the old world staple often perished. Planted, a sin-

gle corn seed yielded more than 1 50 fat kernels, often as many as 300, 

while the return on a seed of wheat, when all went well, was some-

thing less than 50:1. (At a time when land was abundant and labor  

> scarce,

agricultural yields were calculated on a per-seed-sown basis.) 

Corn won over the wheat people because of its versatility, prized es-

pecially in new settlements far from civilization. This one plant supplied  

> settlers

with a ready-to-eat vegetable and a storable grain, a source of  

> fiber

and animal feed, a heating fuel and an intoxicant. Corn could be 

eaten fresh off the cob ("green") within months after planting, or dried 

on the stalk in fall, stored indefinitely, and ground into flour as needed. 

Mashed and fermented, corn could be brewed into beer or distilled into 

whiskey; for a time it was the only source of alcohol on the frontier. 

(Whiskey and pork were both regarded as "concentrated corn," the lat- 

> ter

a concentrate of its protein, the former of its calories; both had the 

virtue of reducing corn's bulk and raising its price.) No part of the big 2 6 * THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

grass went to waste: The husks could be woven into rugs and twine; the 

leaves and stalks made good silage for livestock; the shelled cobs were 

burned for heat and stacked by the privy as a rough substitute for toilet 

paper. (Hence the American slang term "corn hole.") 

"Corn was the means that permitted successive waves of pioneers 

to settle new territories," writes Arturo Warman, a Mexican historian. 

"Once the settlers had fully grasped the secrets and potential of corn, 

they no longer needed the Native Americans." Squanto had handed the 

white man precisely the tool he needed to dispossess the Indian. With-

out the "fruitfulness" of Indian corn, the nineteenth-century English 

writer William Cobbett declared, the colonists would never have been 

able to build "a powerful nation." Maize, he wrote, was "the greatest 

blessing God ever gave to man." 

Valuable as corn is as a means of subsistence, the kernel's qualities 

make it an excellent means of accumulation as well. After the crop has 

supplied its farmer's needs, he can go to market with any surplus, dried 

corn being the perfect commodity: easy to transport and virtually inde- 

> structible.

Corn's dual identity, as food and commodity has allowed 

many of the peasant communities that have embraced it to make the leap 

from a subsistence to a market economy. The dual identity also made 

corn indispensable to the slave trade: Corn was both the currency traders 

used to pay for slaves in Africa and the food upon which slaves subsisted 

during their passage to America. Corn is the protocapitalist plant. 

4. MARRIED TO MAN 

But while both the new and the native Americans were substantially de-

pendent on corn, the plant's dependence on the Americans had become  

> total.

Had maize failed to find favor among the conquerors, it would have 

risked extinction, because without humans to plant it every spring, corn 

would have disappeared from the earth in a matter of a few years. The 

novel cob-and-husk arrangement that makes corn such a convenient grain 

for us renders the plant utterly dependent for its survival on an animal in THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST 27 

possession of the opposable thumb needed to remove the husk, sepa- 

> rate

the seeds, and plant them. 

Plant a whole corncob and watch what happens: If any of the ker-

nels manage to germinate, and then work their way free of the smoth-

ering husk, they will invariably crowd themselves to death before their 

second set of leaves has emerged. More than most domesticated plants  

> (a

few of whose offspring will usually find a way to grow unassisted) 

> ,

corn completely threw its lot in with humanity when it evolved its pe-

culiar husked ear. Several human societies have seen fit to worship corn, 

but perhaps it should be the other way around: For corn, we humans 

are the contingent beings. So far, this reckless-seeming act of evolution-

ary faith in us has been richly rewarded.   

> It is

tempting to think of maize as a human artifact, since the plant  

> is

so closely linked to us and so strikingly different from any wild  

> species.

There are in fact no wild maize plants, and teosinte, the weedy 

grass from which corn is believed to have descended (the word is 

Nahuatl for "mother of corn"), has no ear, bears its handful of tiny 

naked seeds on a terminal rachis like most other grasses, and generally 

looks nothing whatsoever like maize. The current thinking among 

botanists is that several thousand years ago teosinte underwent an 

abrupt series of mutations that turned it into corn; geneticists calculate 

that changes on as few as four chromosomes could account for the 

main traits that distinguish teosinte from maize. Taken together, these 

mutations amounted to (in the words of botanist Hugh litis) a "cata-

strophic sexual transmutation" : the transfer of the plant's female organs 

from the top of the grass to a monstrous sheathed ear in the middle of 

the stalk. The male organs stayed put, remaining in the tassel.   

> It is,

for a grass, a bizarre arrangement with crucial implications: The  

> ear's

central location halfway down the stalk allows it to capture far more 

nutrients than it would up top, so suddenly producing hundreds of gi-

gantic seeds becomes metabolically feasible. Yet because those seeds are 

## now trapped in a tough husk, the plant has lost its ability to reproduce 

> itself

# —hence the catastrophe in teosinte 's sex change. A mutation this 

freakish and maladaptive would have swiftly brought the plant to an evo-28 •> THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

lutionary dead end had one of these freaks not happened to catch the eye 

of a human somewhere in Central America who, looking for something 

to eat, peeled open the husk to free the seeds. What would have been an 

unheralded botanical catastrophe in a world without humans became an 

incalculable evolutionary boon. If you look hard enough, you can still 

find teosinte growing in certain Central American highlands; you can 

find maize, its mutant offspring, anywhere you find people. 

5. CORN SEX 

Maize is self-fertilized and wind-pollinated, botanical terms that don't 

begin to describe the beauty and wonder of corn sex. The tassel at the 

top of the plant houses the male organs, hundreds of pendant anthers 

that over the course of a few summer days release a superabundance of 

powdery yellow pollen: 14 million to 18 million grains per plant, 

20,000 for every potential kernel. ("Better safe than sorry" or "more is 

more" being nature's general rule for male genes.) A meter or so be-

low await the female organs, hundreds of minuscule flowers arranged 

in tidy rows along a tiny, sheathed cob that juts upward from the stalk  

> at

the crotch of a leaf midway between tassel and earth. That the male 

anthers resemble flowers and the female cob a phallus is not the only 

oddity in the sex life of corn. 

Each of the four hundred to eight hundred flowers on a cob has the 

potential to develop into a kernel —but only if a grain of pollen can find  

> its

way to its ovary, a task complicated by the distance the pollen has to  

> travel

and the intervening husk in which the cob is tightly wrapped. To 

surmount this last problem, each flower sends out through the tip of 

the husk a single, sticky strand of silk (technically its "style") to snag its 

## own grain of pollen. The silks emerge from the husk on the very day the    

> tassel is set

to shower its yellow dust. 

What happens next is very strange. After a grain of pollen has fallen 

through the air and alighted on the moistened tip of silk, its nucleus di-

vides in two, creating a pair of twins, each with the same set of genes THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST * 2 9 

but a completely different role to perform in the creation of the kernel. 

The first twin's job is to tunnel a microscopic tube down through the 

center of the silk thread. That accomplished, its clone slides down 

through the tunnel, past the husk, and into the waiting flower, a jour-

ney of between six and eight inches that takes several hours to com- 

> plete.

## Upon arrival in the flower the second twin fuses with the egg to 

form the embryo —the germ of the future kernel. Then the first twin 

follows, entering the now fertilized flower, where it sets about forming 

the endosperm —the big, starchy part of the kernel. Every kernel of 

corn is the product of this intricate menage a trois; the tiny, stunted ker-

nels you often see at the narrow end of a cob are flowers whose silk no 

pollen grain ever penetrated. Within a day of conception, the now su-

perfluous silk dries up, eventually turning reddish brown; fifty or so 

days later, the kernels are mature.* 

The mechanics of corn sex, and in particular the great distance over 

open space corn pollen must travel to complete its mission, go a long 

way toward accounting for the success of maize's alliance with hu-

mankind. It's a simple matter for a human to get between a corn plant's 

pollen and its flower, and only a short step from there to deliberately 

crossing one corn plant with another with an eye to encouraging spe-  

> cific traits

in the offspring. Long before scientists understood hybridiza-

tion, Native Americans had discovered that by taking the pollen from the  

> tassel

of one corn plant and dusting it on the silks of another, they could 

create new plants that combined the traits of both parents. American In-

dians were the world's first plant breeders, developing literally thou-

sands of distinct cultivars for every conceivable environment and use. 

Looked at another way, corn was the first plant to involve humans so 

intimately in its sex life. For a species whose survival depends on how 

well it can gratify the ever shifting desires of its only sponsor, this has 

proved to be an excellent evolutionary strategy. More even than other 

domesticated species, many of which can withstand a period of human 

*My account of the sex life of corn is drawn from Betty Fussell 's The Story of Corn (1992) and Fred-      

> erick Sargent's Corn Plants (1901). 3*

THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

neglect, it pays for corn to be obliging —and to be so quick about it. 

The usual way a domesticated species figures out what traits its human  

> ally

will reward is through the slow and wasteful process of Darwinian  

> trial

and error. Hybridization represents a far swifter and more efficient 

means of communication, or feedback loop, between plant and hu-

man; by allowing humans to arrange its marriages, corn can discover in a single generation precisely what qualities it needs to prosper.   

> It is

by being so obliging that corn has won itself as much human 

attention and habitat as it has. The plant's unusual sexual arrangements, 

so amenable to human intervention, have allowed it to adapt to the very 

different worlds of Native Americans (and to their very different worlds, 

from southern Mexico to New England) , of colonists and settlers and  

> slaves,

and of all the other corn-eating societies that have come and 

gone since the first human chanced upon that first teosinte freak. 

But of all the human environments to which corn has successfully 

adapted since then, the adaptation to our own —the world of industrial 

consumer capitalism; the world, that is, of the supermarket and fast-

food franchise —surely represents the plant's most extraordinary evolu-

tionary achievement to date. For to prosper in the industrial food chain 

to the extent it has, corn had to acquire several improbable new tricks.  

> It

had to adapt itself not just to humans but to their machines, which it 

did by learning to grow as upright, stiff-stalked, and uniform as sol-  

> diers. It

had to multiply its yield by an order of magnitude, which it did 

by learning to grow shoulder to shoulder with other corn plants, as 

many as thirty thousand to the acre. It had to develop an appetite for  

> fossil

fuel (in the form of petrochemical fertilizer) and a tolerance for 

various synthetic chemicals. But even before it could master these tricks 

and make a place for itself in the bright sunshine of capitalism, corn  

> first

had to turn itself into something never before seen in the plant 

world: a form of intellectual property. 

The free corn sex I've described allowed people to do virtually any-

thing they wanted with the genetics of corn except own them —a big 

problem for a would-be capitalist plant. If I crossed two corn plants to 

create a variety with an especially desirable trait, I could sell you my THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST » j )

special seeds, but only once, since the corn you grew from my special 

seeds would produce lots more special seeds, for free and forever, put-

ting me out business in short order. It's difficult to control the means of 

production when the product you're selling can reproduce itself end- 

> lessly.

This is one of the ways in which the imperatives of biology are  

> difficult

to mesh with the imperatives of business.  

> Difficult,

but not impossible. Early in the twentieth century Ameri-

can corn breeders figured out how to bring corn reproduction under 

firm control and to protect the seed from copiers. The breeders dis-

covered that when they crossed two corn plants that had come from 

inbred lines —from ancestors that had themselves been exclusively 

self-pollinated for several generations —the hybrid offspring displayed 

some highly unusual characteristics. First, all the seeds in that first gen-

eration (F-l, in the plant breeder's vocabulary) produced genetically 

identical plants —a trait that, among other things, facilitates mecha-

nization. Second, those plants exhibited heterosis, or hybrid vigor 

# —

better yields than either of their parents. But most important of all, they 

found that the seeds produced by these seeds did not "come true" —the 

plants in the second (F-2) generation bore little resemblance to the 

plants in the first. Specifically, their yields plummeted by as much as a

third, making their seeds virtually worthless. 

Hybrid corn now offered its breeders what no other plant at that 

time could: the biological equivalent of a patent. Farmers now had to 

buy new seeds every spring; instead of depending upon their plants to 

reproduce themselves, they now depended on a corporation. The cor-

poration, assured for the first time of a return on its investment in breed-

ing, showered corn with attention —R&D, promotion, advertising —and 

the plant responded, multiplying its fruitfulness year after year. With 

the advent of the F-l hybrid, a technology with the power to remake 

nature in the image of capitalism, Zea mays entered the industrial age 

and, in time, it brought the whole American food chain with it. TWO 

# THE FARM 

1. ONE FARMER, 129 EATERS 

To take the wheel of a clattering 1975 International Harvester tractor, 

pulling a spidery eight-row planter through an Iowa cornfield during 

the first week of May, is like trying to steer a boat through a softly 

rolling sea of dark chocolate. The hard part is keeping the thing on a

straight line, that and hearing the shouted instructions of the farmer 

sitting next to you when you both have wads of Kleenex jammed into 

your ears to muffle the diesel roar. Driving a boat, you try to follow the 

compass heading or aim for a landmark on shore; planting corn, you 

try to follow the groove in the soil laid down on the previous pass by a

rolling disk at the end of a steel arm attached to the planter behind us. 

Deviate from the line and your corn rows will wobble, overlapping 

or drifting away from one another. Either way, it'll earn you a measure 

of neighborly derision and hurt your yield. And yield, measured in 

bushels per acre, is the measure of all things here in corn country. THE FARM * 33 

The tractor I was driving belonged to George Naylor, who bought  

> it

## new back in the midseventies, when, as a twenty-seven-year-old, he 

returned to Greene County, Iowa, to farm his family's 470 acres. Naylor  

> is

a big man with a moon face and a scraggly gray beard. On the phone 

his gravelly voice and incontrovertible pronouncements ("That is just 

the biggest bunch of bullshit! Only the New York Times would be dumb 

enough to believe the Farm Bureau still speaks for American farmers!") 

led me to expect someone considerably more ornery than the shy fellow 

## who climbed down from his tractor cab to greet me in the middle of a 

> field

in the middle of a slate- gray day threatening rain. Naylor had on 

the farmer's standard-issue baseball cap, a yellow chamois shirt, and 

overalls —the stripy blue kind favored by railroad workers, about as un-

intimidating an article of clothing as has ever been donned by a man. 

# My first impression was more shambling Gentle Ben than fiery prairie 

populist, but I would discover that Naylor can be either fellow, the mere 

mention of "Cargill" or "Earl Butz" supplying the transformational 

> trigger.

This part of Iowa has some of the richest soil in the world, a layer 

of cakey alluvial loam nearly two feet thick. The initial deposit was 

made by the retreat of the Wisconsin glacier ten thousand years ago, 

and then compounded at the rate of another inch or two every decade 

by prairie grasses —big bluestem, foxtail, needlegrass, and switchgrass. 

Tall-grass prairie is what this land was until the middle of the nine-

teenth century, when the sod was first broken by the settler's plow. 

George's grandfather moved his family to Iowa from Derbyshire, Eng-

land, in the 1880s, a coal miner hoping to improve his lot in life. The 

sight of such soil, pushing up and then curling back down behind the 

blade of his plow like a thick black wake behind a ship, must have 

stoked his confidence, and justifiably so: It's gorgeous stuff, black gold  

> as

deep as you can dig, as far as you can see. What you can't see is all the   

> soil that's

no longer here, having been blown or washed away since the 

sod was broken; the two-foot crust of topsoil here probably started out 

closer to four. 34* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

The story of the Naylor farm since 1919, when George's grandfa-

ther bought it, closely tracks the twentieth-century story of American 

agriculture, its achievements as well as its disasters. It begins with a

farmer supporting a family on a dozen different species of plants and 

animals. There would have been a fair amount of corn then too, but also  

> fruits

and other vegetables, as well as oats, hay, and alfalfa to feed the 

pigs, cattle, chickens, and horses —horses being the tractors of that 

time. One of every four Americans lived on a farm when Naylor 's grand-

father arrived here in Churdan; his land and labor supplied enough 

food to feed his family and twelve other Americans besides. Less than a

century after, fewer than 2 million Americans still farm— and they 

grow enough to feed the rest of us. What that means is that Naylor 's 

grandson, raising nothing but corn and soybeans on a fairly typical 

Iowa farm, is so astoundingly productive that he is, in effect, feeding 

some 129 Americans. Measured in terms of output per worker, Ameri-

can farmers like Naylor are the most productive humans who have ever 

> lived.

Yet George Naylor is all but going broke —and he's doing better 

than many of his neighbors. (Partly because he's still driving that 1975  

> tractor.)

For though this farm might feed 129, it can no longer support 

the four who live on it: The Naylor farm survives by the grace of Peggy 

Naylor 's paycheck (she works for a social services agency in Jefferson) 

and an annual subsidy payment from Washington, D.C. Nor can the 

Naylor farm literally feed the Naylor family, as it did in grandfather 

Naylor 's day. George's crops are basically inedible —they're commodi- 

> ties

that must be processed or fed to livestock before they can feed peo- 

> ple.

Water, water, everywhere and not a drop to drink: Like most of 

Iowa, which now imports 80 percent of its food, George's farm (apart 

from his garden, his laying hens, and his fruit trees) is basically a food 

desert. 

The 1 29 people who depend on George Naylor for their sustenance 

are all strangers, living at the far end of a food chain so long, intricate, 

and obscure that neither producer nor consumer has any reason to know 

the first thing about the other. Ask one of those eaters where their steak THE FARM * 35 

or soda comes from and she'll tell you "the supermarket." Ask George 

Naylor whom he's growing all that corn for and he'll tell you "the mil-

itary-industrial complex." Both are partly right.  

> I

came to George Naylor 's farm as an unelected representative of the 

Group of 1 29, curious to learn whom, and what, I'd find at the far end 

of the food chain that keeps me alive. There's no way of knowing whether 

George Naylor is literally growing the corn that feeds the steer that be-

comes my steak, or that sweetened my son's soft drink, or that supplied 

the dozen or so corn-derived ingredients from which his chicken nug-

get is constructed. But given the complexly ramifying fate of a bushel 

of commodity corn, the countless forking paths followed by its ninety 

thousand kernels as they're dispersed across the nation's sprawling food 

system, the odds are good that at least one of the kernels grown on the 

Naylor farm has, like the proverbial atom from Caesar's dying breath, 

made its way to me. And if not me, then certainly you. This Iowa corn- 

> field

(and all the others just like it) is the place most of our food 

comes from. 

2. PLANTING THE CITY OF CORN 

The day I showed up was supposed to be the only dry one all week, so 

George and I spent most of it in the cab of his tractor, trying to get ac-

quainted and get his last 160 acres of corn planted at the same time; a

week or two later he'd start in on the soybeans. The two crops take turns 

in these fields year after year, in what has been the classic Corn Belt ro-

tation since the 1970s. (Since that time soybeans have become the sec-

ond leg supporting the industrial food system: It too is fed to livestock 

and now finds its way into two-thirds of all processed foods.) For most 

of the afternoon I sat on a rough cushion George had fashioned for me 

from crumpled seed bags, but after a while he let me take the wheel. 

Back and forth and back again, a half a mile in each direction, plant-

ing corn feels less like planting, or even driving, than stitching an inter-

minable cloak, or covering a page with the same sentence over and over .36* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

again. The monotony, compounded by the roar of a diesel engine well 

past its prime, is hypnotic after a while. Every pass across this field, 

which is almost but not quite dead flat, represents another acre of corn 

planted, another thirty thousand seeds tucked into one of the eight fur-

rows being simultaneously etched into the soil by pairs of stainless steel 

disks; a trailing roller then closes the furrows over the seed. 

The seed we were planting was Pioneer Hi-Bred 's 34H3 1 , a strain that 

the catalog described as "an adaptable hybrid with solid agronomics and 

yield potential." The lack of hype, notable for a seed catalog, probably  

> reflects

the fact that 34H31 does not contain the "YieldGard gene," the 

Monsanto-developed line of genetically engineered corn that Pioneer is 

currently pushing: The genetically modified 34B98, on the same page, 

promises "outstanding yield potential." Despite the promises, Naylor, un- 

> like

many of his neighbors, doesn't plant GMOs (genetically modified or-

ganisms) . He has a gut distrust of the technology ("They're messing with 

three billion years of evolution") and doesn't think it's worth the extra 

twenty-five dollars a bag (in technology fees) they cost. "Sure, you might 

get a yield bump, but whatever you make on the extra corn goes right 

back to cover the premium for the seed. I fail to see why I should be laun-

dering money for Monsanto." As Naylor sees it, GMO seed is just the lat- 

> est

chapter in an old story: Farmers eager to increase their yields adopt 

the latest innovation, only to find that it's the companies selling the inno-

vations who reap the most from the gain in the farmer's productivity. 

Even without the addition of transgenes for traits like insect resis-

tance, the standard F-l hybrids Naylor plants are technological marvels, 

capable of coaxing 180 bushels of corn from an acre of Iowa soil. One 

bushel holds 56 pounds of kernels, so that's slightly more than ten 

thousand pounds of food per acre; the field George and I planted that 

day would produce 1 .8 million pounds of corn. Not bad for a day's work sit- 

> ting

down, I thought to myself that afternoon, though of course there 'd 

be several more days of work between now and the harvest in October. 

## One way to tell the story of this farm is by following the steady up-

ward arc in the yield of corn. Naylor has no idea how many bushels of 

corn per acre his grandfather could produce, but the average back in THE FARM * 3 7

1920 was about twenty bushels per acre— roughly the same yields his- 

> torically

realized by Native Americans. Corn then was planted in widely 

spaced bunches in a checkerboard pattern so farmers could easily cul- 

> tivate

between the stands in either direction. Hybrid seed came on the 

market in the late the 1930s, when his father was farming. "You heard  

> stories,"

George shouted over the din of the tractor. "How they talked 

him into raising an acre or two of the new hybrid, and by god when 

the old corn fell over, the hybrid stood straight up. Doubled Dad's   

> yields, till

he was getting seventy to eighty an acre in the fifties." George 

has doubled that yet again, some years getting as much as two hundred 

bushels of corn per acre. The only other domesticated species ever to 

have multiplied its productivity by such a factor is the Holstein cow. 

"High yield" is a fairly abstract concept, and I wondered what it 

meant at the level of the plant: more cobs per stalk? more kernels per 

cob? Neither of the above, Naylor explained. The higher yield of mod-

ern hybrids stems mainly from the fact that they can be planted so close 

together, thirty thousand to the acre instead of eight thousand in his fa-  

> ther's day.

Planting the old open-pollinated (nonhybrid) varieties so 

densely would result in stalks grown spindly as they jostled each other 

for sunlight; eventually the plants would topple in the wind. Hybrids 

have been bred for thicker stalks and stronger root systems, the better 

to stand upright in a crowd and withstand mechanical harvesting. Basi- 

> cally,

modern hybrids can tolerate the corn equivalent of city life, 

growing amid the multitudes without succumbing to urban stress. 

You would think that competition among individuals would threaten 

the tranquility of such a crowded metropolis, yet the modern field of 

corn forms a most orderly mob. This is because every plant in it, being 

an F- 1 hybrid, is genetically identical to every other. Since no individ-

ual plant has inherited any competitive edge over any other, precious 

resources like sunlight, water, and soil nutrients are shared equitably. 

There are no alpha corn plants to hog the light or fertilizer. The true so- 

> cialist

Utopia turns out to be a field of F- 1 hybrid plants. 

Iowa begins to look a little different when you think of its sprawl-

ing fields as cities of corn, the land, in its own way, settled as densely as J8*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Manhattan for the very same purpose: to maximize real estate values. 

There may be little pavement out here, but this is no middle landscape. 

Though by any reasonable definition Iowa is a rural state, it is more 

thoroughly developed than many cities: A mere 2 percent of the state's 

land remains what it used to be (tall-grass prairie) , every square foot of 

the rest having been completely remade by man. The only thing miss-

ing from this man-made landscape is . . . man. 

3. VANISHING SPECIES 

## A case can be made that the corn plant's population explosion in places  

> like

Iowa is responsible for pushing out not only other plants but the 

animals and then finally the people, too. When Naylor's grandfather ar-

rived in America the population of Greene County was near its peak:  

> 1

6,467 people. In the most recent census it had fallen to 1 0,3 6 6. There 

are many reasons for the depopulation of the American Farm Belt, but 

the triumph of corn deserves a large share of the blame —or the credit, 

depending on your point of view. 

# When George Naylor's grandfather was farming, the typical Iowa 

farm was home to whole families of different plant and animal species, 

corn being only the fourth most common. Horses were the first, be-

cause every farm needed working animals (there were only 225 trac-

tors in all of America in 1920), followed by cattle, chickens, and then 

corn. After corn came hogs, apples, hay, oats, potatoes, and cherries; 

many Iowa farms also grew wheat, plums, grapes, and pears. This diver- 

> sity

allowed the farm not only to substantially feed itself —and by that  

> I

don't mean feed only the farmers, but also the soil and the livestock 

# —

but to withstand a collapse in the market for any one of those crops. It 

also produced a completely different landscape than the Iowa of today. 

"You had fences everywhere," George recalled, "and of course pas- 

> tures.

Everyone had livestock, so large parts of the farm would be green 

most of the year. The ground never used to be this bare this long." For 

## much of the year, from the October harvest to the emergence of the THE FARM * 39 

corn in mid-May, Greene County is black now, a great tarmac only  

> slightly

more hospitable to wildlife than asphalt. Even in May the only 

green you see are the moats of lawn surrounding the houses, the nar-

row strips of grass dividing one farm from another, and the roadside  

> ditches.

The fences were pulled up when the animals left, beginning in 

the fifties and sixties, or when they moved indoors, as Iowa's hogs have 

more recently done; hogs now spend their lives in aluminum sheds 

perched atop manure pits. Greene County in the spring has become a

monotonous landscape, vast plowed fields relieved only by a dwindling 

number of farmsteads, increasingly lonesome islands of white wood 

and green grass marooned in a sea of black. Without the fences and hedgerows to slow it down, Naylor says, the winds blow more fiercely 

in Iowa today than they once did. 

Corn isn't solely responsible for remaking this landscape: It was the     

> tractor, after all, that

put the horses out of work, and with the horses 

went the fields of oats and some of the pasture. But corn was the crop  

> that

put cash in the farmer's pocket, so as corn yields began to soar at 

midcentury, the temptation was to give the miracle crop more and 

more land. Of course, every other farmer in America was thinking the 

same way (having been encouraged to do so by government policies) 

> ,

with the inevitable result that the price of corn declined. One might 

think falling corn prices would lead farmers to plant less of it, but the 

economics and psychology of agriculture are such that exactly the op-

posite happened. 

Beginning in the fifties and sixties, the flood tide of cheap corn made  

> it

profitable to fatten cattle on feedlots instead of on grass, and to raise 

chickens in giant factories rather than in farmyards. Iowa livestock farmers 

couldn't compete with the factory-farmed animals their own cheap corn 

had helped spawn, so the chickens and catde disappeared from the farm, 

and with them the pastures and hay fields and fences. In their place the 

farmers planted more of the one crop they could grow more of than 

anything else: corn. And whenever the price of corn slipped they planted   

> alittle

more of it, to cover expenses and stay even. By the 1980s the di- 

> versified

family farm was history in Iowa, and corn was king. 40 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

(Planting corn on the same ground year after year brought down 

the predictable plagues of insects and disease, so beginning in the 

1970s Iowa farmers started alternating corn with soybeans, a legume. 

Recently, though, bean prices having fallen and bean diseases hav-

ing risen, some farmers are going back to a risky rotation of "corn on 

corn.") 

With the help of its human and botanical allies (i.e., farm policy 

and soybeans), corn had pushed the animals and their feed crops off 

the land, and steadily expanded into their paddocks and pastures and  

> fields.

# Now it proceeded to push out the people. For the radically sim- 

> plified

farm of corn and soybeans doesn't require nearly as much hu-

## man labor as the old diversified farm, especially when the farmer can  

> call

on sixteen-row planters and chemical weed killers. One man can 

handle a lot more acreage by himself when it's planted in monoculture, 

and without animals to care for he can take the weekend off, and even 

think about spending the winter in Florida. 

"Growing corn is just riding tractors and spraying," Naylor told me; 

the number of riding and spraying days it takes to raise five hundred 

acres of industrial corn can probably be counted in weeks. So the farms 

got bigger, and eventually the people, whom the steadily falling price 

of corn could no longer support anyway, went elsewhere, ceding the  

> field

to the monstrous grass. 

Today Churdan is virtually a ghost town, much of its main street 

shuttered. The barbershop, a food market, and the local movie theater 

have all closed in recent years; there's a cafe and one sparsely stocked  

> little

market somehow still hanging on, but most people drive the ten 

miles to Jefferson to buy their groceries or pick up milk and eggs when 

they're getting gas at the Kum & Go. The middle school can no longer   

> field a

baseball team or put together a band, it has so few students left, 

and it takes four local high schools to field a single football team: the 

Jefferson-Scranton-Paton-Churdan Rams. Just about the only going con-cern left standing in Churdan is the grain elevator, rising at the far end 

of town like a windowless concrete skyscraper. It endures because, peo-

ple or no people, the corn keeps coming, more of it every year. THE FARM * 4 I

4. THERE GOES THE SUN  

> I've

oversimplified the story a bit; corn's rapid rise is not quite as self-

propelled as I've made it sound. As in so many other "self-made" Amer-

ican successes, the closer you look the more you find the federal 

government lending a hand —a patent, a monopoly, a tax break —to 

our hero at a critical juncture. In the case of corn, the botanical hero  

> I've

depicted as plucky and ambitious was in fact subsidized in crucial 

ways, both economically and biologically. There's a good reason I met 

farmers in Iowa who don't respect corn, who will tell you in disgust 

that the plant has become "a welfare queen." 

The great turning point in the modern history of corn, which in 

turn marks a key turning point in the industrialization of our food, can 

be dated with some precision to the day in 1 947 when the huge muni-

tions plant at Muscle Shoals, Alabama, switched over to making chem-  

> ical fertilizer.

After the war the government had found itself with a

tremendous surplus of ammonium nitrate, the principal ingredient in 

the making of explosives. Ammonium nitrate also happens to be an ex-

cellent source of nitrogen for plants. Serious thought was given to 

spraying America's forests with the surplus chemical, to help out the 

timber industry. But agronomists in the Department of Agriculture had 

a better idea: Spread the ammonium nitrate on farmland as fertilizer. 

The chemical fertilizer industry (along with that of pesticides, which 

are based on poison gases developed for the war) is the product of the 

government's effort to convert its war machine to peacetime purposes. 

As the Indian farmer activist Vandana Shiva says in her speeches, "We're  

> still

eating the leftovers of World War II." 

Hybrid corn turned out to be the greatest beneficiary of this conver- 

> sion.

Hybrid corn is the greediest of plants, consuming more fertilizer 

than any other crop. For though the new hybrids had the genes to sur-

vive in teeming cities of corn, the richest acre of Iowa soil could never have fed thirty thousand hungry corn plants without prompdy bank-

rupting its fertility. To keep their land from getting "corn sick" farmers 4 2 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

in Naylor's father's day would carefully rotate their crops with legumes 

(which add nitrogen to the soil) , never growing corn more than twice 

in the same field every five years; they would also recycle nutrients by 

spreading their cornfields with manure from their livestock. Before 

synthetic fertilizers the amount of nitrogen in the soil strictly limited 

the amount of corn an acre of land could support. Though hybrids were 

introduced in the thirties, it wasn't until they made the acquaintance of 

chemical fertilizers in the 1 950s that corn yields exploded. 

The discovery of synthetic nitrogen changed everything —not just 

for the corn plant and the farm, not just for the food system, but also 

for the way life on earth is conducted. All life depends on nitrogen; it is 

the building block from which nature assembles amino acids, proteins, 

and nucleic acids; the genetic information that orders and perpetuates   

> life is

written in nitrogen ink. (This is why scientists speak of nitrogen  

> as

supplying life's quality, while carbon provides the quantity.) But the 

supply of usable nitrogen on earth is limited. Although earth's atmos-

phere is about 80 percent nitrogen, all those atoms are tightly paired, 

nonreactive, and therefore useless; the nineteenth-century chemist 

Justus von Liebig spoke of atmospheric nitrogen's "indifference to all 

other substances." To be of any value to plants and animals, these self-

involved nitrogen atoms must be split and then joined to atoms of hy-

drogen. Chemists call this process of taking atoms from the atmosphere 

and combining them into molecules useful to living things "fixing" 

that element. Until a German Jewish chemist named Fritz Haber fig-

ured out how to turn this trick in 1 909, all the usable nitrogen on earth 

had at one time been fixed by soil bacteria living on the roots of legu-

minous plants (such as peas or alfalfa or locust trees) or, less com-

monly, by the shock of electrical lightning, which can break nitrogen 

bonds in the air, releasing a light rain of fertility. 

Vaclav Smil, a geographer who has written a fascinating book about 

Fritz Haber called Enriching the Earth, pointed out that "there is no way to 

grow crops and human bodies without nitrogen." Before Fritz Haber 's 

invention the sheer amount of life earth could support —the size of 

crops and therefore the number of human bodies —was limited by the THE FARM 43 

amount of nitrogen that bacteria and lightning could fix. By 1900, Eu-

ropean scientists recognized that unless a way was found to augment  

> this

naturally occurring nitrogen, the growth of the human population 

would soon grind to a very painful halt. The same recognition by Chi-nese scientists a few decades later is probably what compelled China's 

opening to the West: After Nixon's 1972 trip the first major order the 

Chinese government placed was for thirteen massive fertilizer factories. 

Without them, China would probably have starved. 

This is why it may not be hyperbole to claim, as Smil does, that the 

Haber-Bosch process (Carl Bosch gets the credit for commercializing 

Haber's idea) for fixing nitrogen is the most important invention of the 

twentieth century. He estimates that two of every five humans on earth 

today would not be alive if not for Fritz Haber's invention. We can eas- 

> ily

imagine a world without computers or electricity, Smil points out, 

but without synthetic fertilizer billions of people would never have 

been born. Though, as these numbers suggest, humans may have struck 

something of a Faustian bargain with nature when Fritz Haber gave us 

the power to fix nitrogen.  

> Fritz

Haber? No, I'd never heard of him either, even though he was 

awarded the Nobel Prize in 1920 for "improving the standards of agri-

culture and the well-being of mankind." But the reason for his obscu- 

> rity

has less to do with the importance of his work than the ugly twist 

of his biography, which recalls the dubious links between modern war- 

> fare

and industrial agriculture. During World War I, Haber threw him- 

> self

into the German war effort, and his chemistry kept alive Germany's 

hopes for victory. After Britain choked off Germany's supply of nitrates 

from Chilean mines, an essential ingredient in the manufacture of ex- 

> plosives,

Haber's technology allowed Germany to continue making 

bombs from synthetic nitrate. Later, as the war became mired in the 

trenches of France, Haber put his genius for chemistry to work devel-

oping poison gases —ammonia, then chlorine. (He subsequently devel-

oped Zyklon B, the gas used in Hitler's concentration camps.) On 

April 22 , 1915, Smil writes, Haber was "on the front lines directing the  

> first

gas attack in military history." His "triumphant" return to Berlin 4 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

was ruined a few days later when his wife, a fellow chemist sickened by 

her husband's contribution to the war effort, used Haber's army pistol 

to kill herself. Though Haber later converted to Christianity, his Jewish 

background forced him to flee Nazi Germany in the thirties; he died, 

broken, in a Basel hotel room in 1934. Perhaps because the history of 

science gets written by the victors, Fritz Haber's story has been all but 

written out of the twentieth century. Not even a plaque marks the site 

of his great discovery at the University of Karlsruhe. 

Haber's story embodies the paradoxes of science: the double edge 

to our manipulations of nature, the good and evil that can flow not only 

from the same man but the same knowledge. Haber brought a vital new 

source of fertility and an awful new weapon into the world; as his bi-

ographer wrote, "[I]t's the same science and the same man doing 

both." Yet this dualism dividing the benefactor of agriculture from the 

chemical weapons maker is far too pat, for even Haber's benefaction has 

proven decidedly to be a mixed blessing. 

# When humankind acquired the power to fix nitrogen, the basis of   

> soil fertility

shifted from a total reliance on the energy of the sun to a

## new reliance on fossil fuel. For the Haber-Bosch process works by com-

bining nitrogen and hydrogen gases under immense heat and pressure 

in the presence of a catalyst. The heat and pressure are supplied by 

prodigious amounts of electricity, and the hydrogen is supplied by oil,   

> coal, or,

most commonly today, natural gas —fossil fuels. True, these  

> fossil

fuels were at one time billions of years ago created by the sun, but 

they are not renewable in the same way that the fertility created by a

legume nourished by sunlight is. (That nitrogen is actually fixed by a

bacterium living on the roots of the legume, which trades a tiny drip of 

sugar for the nitrogen the plant needs.) 

## On the day in the 1 950s that George Naylor's father spread his first 

load of ammonium nitrate fertilizer, the ecology of his farm underwent 

a quiet revolution. What had been a local, sun-driven cycle of fertility, 

in which the legumes fed the corn which fed the livestock which in 

turn (with their manure) fed the corn, was now broken. Now he could THE FARM * 4 5

plant corn every year and on as much of his acreage as he chose, since 

he had no need for the legumes or the animal manure. He could buy  

> fertility

in a bag, fertility that had originally been produced a billion 

years ago halfway around the world. 

Liberated from the old biological constraints, the farm could now 

be managed on industrial principles, as a factory transforming inputs 

of raw material —chemical fertilizer —into outputs of corn. Since the 

farm no longer needs to generate and conserve its own fertility by 

maintaining a diversity of species, synthetic fertilizer opens the way to 

monoculture, allowing the farmer to bring the factory's economies of 

scale and mechanical efficiency to nature. If, as has sometimes been  

> said,

the discovery of agriculture represented the first fall of man from 

the state of nature, then the discovery of synthetic fertility is surely a

second precipitous fall. Fixing nitrogen allowed the food chain to turn 

from the logic of biology and embrace the logic of industry. Instead of 

eating exclusively from the sun, humanity now began to sip petroleum. 

# Com adapted brilliantly to the new industrial regime, consuming 

prodigious quantities of fossil fuel energy and turning out ever more 

prodigious quantities of food energy. More than half "of all the synthetic 

nitrogen made today is applied to corn, whose hybrid strains can make 

better use of it than any other plant. Growing corn, which from a bio-

logical perspective had always been a process of capturing sunlight to 

turn it into food, has in no small measure become a process of convert-

ing fossil fuels into food. This shift explains the color of the land: The 

reason Greene County is no longer green for half the year is because the 

farmer who can buy synthetic fertility no longer needs cover crops to 

capture a whole year's worth of sunlight; he has plugged himself into a

## new source of energy. When you add together the natural gas in the fer- 

> tilizer

to the fossil fuels it takes to make the pesticides, drive the trac- 

> tors,

and harvest, dry, and transport the corn, you find that every bushel of industrial corn requires the equivalent of between a quarter and a

third of a gallon of oil to grow it —or around fifty gallons of oil per acre 

of corn. (Some estimates are much higher.) Put another way, it takes 4 6 » THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

more than a calorie of fossil fuel energy to produce a calorie of food; 

before the advent of chemical fertilizer the Naylor farm produced more 

than two calories of food energy for every calorie of energy invested. 

From the standpoint of industrial efficiency, it's too bad we can't sim-

ply drink the petroleum directly. 

Ecologically this is a fabulously expensive way to produce food 

# —

but "ecologically" is no longer the operative standard. As long as fossil 

fuel energy is so cheap and available, it makes good economic sense to 

produce corn this way. The old way of growing corn —using fertility 

drawn from the sun —may have been the biological equivalent of a free 

lunch, but the service was much slower and the portions were much 

skimpier. In the factory time is money, and yield is everything. 

## One problem with factories, as compared to biological systems, is 

that they tend to pollute. Hungry for fossil fuel as hybrid corn is, farm-

ers still feed it far more than it can possibly eat, wasting most of the fer- 

> tilizer

they buy. Maybe it's applied at the wrong time of year; maybe it 

runs off the fields in the rain; maybe the farmer puts down extra just to 

play it safe. "They say you only need a hundred pounds per acre. I don't 

know. I'm putting on up to two hundred. You don't want to err on the 

side of too little," Naylor explained to me, a bit sheepishly. "It's a form 

of yield insurance." 

But what happens to the one hundred pounds of synthetic nitrogen 

that Naylor 's corn plants don't take up? Some of it evaporates into the  

> air,

where it acidifies the rain and contributes to global warming. (Am-

## monium nitrate is transformed into nitrous oxide, an important green-

house gas.) Some seeps down to the water table. When I went to pour 

myself a glass of water in the Naylors' kitchen, Peggy made sure I drew  

> it

from a special faucet connected to a reverse-osmosis filtration system 

in the basement. As for the rest of the excess nitrogen, the spring rains 

wash it off Naylor s fields, carrying it into drainage ditches that eventu-  

> ally spill

into the Raccoon River. From there it flows into the Des Moines 

River, down to the city of Des Moines —which drinks from the Des 

Moines River. In spring, when nitrogen runoff is at its heaviest, the city THE FARM 

issues "blue baby alerts," warning parents it's unsafe to give children 

water from the tap. The nitrates in the water convert to nitrite, which 

binds to hemoglobin, compromising the blood's ability to carry oxy-

gen to the brain. So I guess I was wrong to suggest we don't sip fossil 

fuels directly; sometimes we do.  

> It

has been less than a century since Fritz Haber's invention, yet 

already it has changed the earth's ecology. More than half of the world's 

supply of usable nitrogen is now man-made. (Unless you grew up on 

organic food, most of the kilo or so of nitrogen in your body was fixed 

by the Haber-Bosch process.) "We have perturbed the global nitrogen 

cycle," Smil wrote, "more than any other, even carbon." The effects may 

be harder to predict than the effects of the global warming caused by 

our disturbance of the carbon cycle, but they may be no less momen- 

> tous.

The flood of synthetic nitrogen has fertilized not just the farm  

> fields

but the forests and the oceans too, to the benefit of some species 

(corn and algae being two of the biggest beneficiaries) , and to the detri-

ment of countless others. The ultimate fate of the nitrates that George 

Naylor spreads on his cornfield in Iowa is to flow down the Mississippi 

into the Gulf of Mexico, where their deadly fertility poisons the marine 

ecosystem. The nitrogen tide stimulates the wild growth of algae, and 

the algae smother the fish, creating a "hypoxic," or dead, zone as big as 

the state of New Jersey —and still growing. By fertilizing the world, we  

> alter

the planet's composition of species and shrink its biodiversity. 

5. A PLAGUE OF CHEAP CORN 

The day after George Naylor and I finished planting his corn, the rains 

came, so we spent most of it around his kitchen table, drinking coffee 

and talking about what farmers always talk about: lousy commodity 

prices; benighted farm policies; making ends meet in a dysfunctional 

farm economy. Naylor came back to the farm in what would turn out to 

be the good old days in American agriculture: Corn prices were at an 4 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

all-time high, and it looked as though it might actually be possible to 

make a living growing it. But by the time Naylor was ready to take his  

> first

crop to the elevator, the price of a bushel of corn had dropped 

from three dollars to two dollars, the result of a bumper crop. So he 

held his corn off the market, storing it in the hope that the price would 

rebound. But the price kept falling all through that winter and into the 

following spring and, if you factor in inflation, it has pretty much been  

> falling

ever since. These days the price of a bushel of corn is about a dol- 

> lar

beneath the true cost of growing it, a boon for everyone but the 

corn farmer. What I was hoping George Naylor could help me under-

stand is, if there's so much corn being grown in America today that the 

market won't pay the cost of producing it, then why would any farmer 

in his right mind plant another acre of it? 

The answer is complicated, as I would learn, but it has something to 

do with the perverse economics of agriculture, which would seem to 

defy the classical laws of supply and demand; a little to do with the psy-

chology of farmers; and everything to do with farm policies, which un-

derwent a revolution right around the time George Naylor was buying 

his first tractor. Government farm programs once designed to limit pro-

duction and support prices (and therefore farmers) were quietly rejig-

gered to increase production and drive down prices. Put another way, 

instead of supporting farmers, during the Nixon administration the 

government began supporting corn at the expense of farmers. Corn, al-

ready the recipient of a biological subsidy in the form of synthetic ni-

trogen, would now receive an economic subsidy too, ensuring its final 

triumph over the land and the food system. 

Naylor 's perspective on farm policy was shaped by a story his dad 

used to tell him. It takes place during the winter of 1 933, in the depths 

of the farm depression. "That's when my father hauled corn to town 

and found out that the price of corn had been ten cents a bushel the day 

before, but on that day the elevator wasn't even buying." The price of 

corn had fallen to zero. "Tears always came to his eyes when he re-THE FARM * 4 9 

counted the neighbors losing their farms in the 1 920s and '30s," Naylor 

told me. America's farm policy was forged during the Depression not,  

> as

many people seem to think, to encourage farmers to produce more 

food for a hungry nation, but to rescue farmers from the disastrous  

> effects

of growing too much food —far more than Americans could af-

ford to buy. 

For as long as people have been farming, fat years have posed almost    

> as stiff a

challenge as lean, since crop surpluses collapse prices and 

bankrupt farmers who will be needed again when the inevitable lean 

years return. When it comes to food, nature can make a mockery of the  

> classical

economics of supply and demand —nature in the form of good 

or bad weather, of course, but also the nature of the human body, 

which can consume only so much food no matter how plentiful the 

supply. So, going back to the Old Testament, communities have devised 

various strategies to even out the destructive swings of agricultural pro-

duction. The Bible's recommended farm policy was to establish a grain  

> reserve.

Not only did this ensure that when drought or pestilence ru-

ined a harvest there 'd still be food to eat, but it kept farmers whole by 

taking food off the market when the harvest was bountiful. 

This is more or less what New Deal farm programs attempted to do. 

For storable commodities such as corn, the government established atarget price based on the cost of production, and whenever the market 

price dropped below that target, the farmer was given a choice. Instead 

of dumping corn onto a weak market (thereby weakening it further) 

> ,

the farmer could take out a loan from the government —using his crop  

> as collateral

# —that allowed him to store his grain until prices recovered. 

At that point, he sold the corn and paid back the loan; if corn prices stayed low, he could elect to keep the money he'd borrowed and, in re-

payment, give the government his corn, which would then go into 

something that came to be called, rather quaintly, the "Ever-Normal 

Granary." Other New Deal programs, such as those administered by the  

> Soil

Conservation Service, sought to avert overproduction (and soil ero-

sion) by encouraging farmers to idle their most environmentally sensi- 

> tive

land. 5 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

The system, which remained in place more or less until shortly be-

fore George Naylor came back to the farm in the 1 970s, did a fairly good 

job of keeping corn prices from collapsing in the face of the twentieth 

century's rapid gains in yield. Surpluses were held off the market by the 

offer of these "nonrecourse loans," which cost the government rela-  

> tively little,

since most of the loans were eventually repaid. And when 

prices climbed, as a result of bad weather, say, the government sold 

corn from its granary, which helped both to pay for the farm programs 

and smooth out the inevitable swings in price.  

> I

say this system remained in place "more or less" until the 1970s 

because, beginning in the 1950s, a campaign to dismantle the New 

Deal farm programs took root, and with every new farm bill since then 

another strut was removed from the structure of support. Almost from 

the start, the policy of supporting prices and limiting production had 

collected powerful enemies: exponents of laissez-faire economics, who 

didn't see why farming should be treated differently than any other 

economic sector; food processors and grain exporters, who profited 

from overproduction and low crop prices; and a coalition of political 

and business leaders who for various reasons thought America had far 

too many farmers for her (or at least their) own good. 

America's farmers had long been making political trouble for Wall  

> Street

and Washington; in the words of historian Walter Karp, "since the  

> Civil

War at least, the most unruly, the most independent, the most re-

publican of American citizens have been the small farmers." Beginning 

with the populist revolt of the 1 890s, farmers had made common cause 

with the labor movement, working together to check the power of cor-

porations. Rising agricultural productivity handed a golden opportu-

nity to the farmers' traditional adversaries. Since a smaller number of 

farmers could now feed America, the moment had come to "rational-

ize" agriculture by letting the market force prices down and farmers off 

the land. So Wall Street and Washington sought changes in farm policies  

> that

would loose "a plague of cheap corn" (in the words of George 

Naylor, a man very much in the old rural-populist mold) on the nation, 

the effects of which are all around us —indeed, in us. THE FARM * 5 I

6. THE SAGE OF PURDUE  

> Earl

"Rusty" Butz, Richard Nixon's second secretary of agriculture, 

probably did more than any other single individual to orchestrate 

George Naylor's plague of cheap corn. In every newspaper article about him, and there were scores, the name of Earl Butz, a blustering, highly 

quotable agricultural economist from Purdue University, is invariably 

accompanied by the epithet "colorful." Butz's plainspoken manner and 

barnyard humor persuaded many people he must be a friend to the 

farmer, but his presence on the board of Ralston Purina probably of-

fered a more reliable guide to his sympathies. Though chiefly remem-

bered outside agriculture for the racist joke that cost him his job during 

the 1976 election, Butz revolutionized American agriculture, helping to  

> shift

the food chain onto a foundation of cheap corn. 

Butz took over the Department of Agriculture during the last period 

in American history that food prices climbed high enough to generate    

> real political heat;

his legacy would be to make sure that never happened  

> again.

In the fall of 1972 Russia, having suffered a series of disastrous  

> harvests,

purchased 30 million tons of American grain. Butz had helped 

arrange the sale, in the hopes of giving a boost to crop prices in order to 

bring restive farmers tempted to vote for George McGovern into the Re-

publican fold. The plan worked all too well: The unexpected surge in de-

mand, coinciding with a spell of bad weather in the Farm Belt, drove 

grain prices to historic heights. These were the corn prices that per-

suaded George Naylor he could make a go of it on his family's farm. 

The 1972 Russian grain sale and the resulting spike in farm income   

> that fall

helped Nixon nail down the farm vote for his reelection, but by 

the following year those prices had reverberated through the food 

chain, all the way to the supermarket. By 1973 the inflation rate for 

groceries reached an all-time high, and housewives were organizing 

protests at supermarkets. Farmers were killing chicks because they 

couldn't afford to buy feed, and the price of beef was slipping beyond 

the reach of middle-class consumers. Some foods became scarce; horse 52 •> THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

meat began showing up in certain markets. "Why a Food Scare in a

Land of Plenty?" was a headline in U.S. News and World Report that summer. 

Nixon had a consumer revolt on his hands, and he dispatched Earl Butz 

to quell it. The Sage of Purdue set to work reengineering the American 

food system, driving down prices and vastly increasing the output 

of American farmers. What had long been the dream of agribusiness 

(cheaper raw materials) and the political establishment (fewer restive 

farmers) now became official government policy. 

Butz made no secret of his agenda: He exhorted farmers to plant 

their fields "fencerow to fencerow" and advised them to "get big or get 

out." Bigger farms were more productive, he believed, so he pushed 

farmers to consolidate ("adapt or die" was another of his credos) and 

to regard themselves not as farmers but as "agribusinessmen." Some-

what less noisily, Butz set to work dismantling the New Deal farm 

regime of price supports, a job made easier by the fact that prices at the 

time were so high. He abolished the Ever-Normal Granary and, with 

the 1973 farm bill, began replacing the New Deal system of supporting 

prices through loans, government grain purchases, and land idling 

with a new system of direct payments to farmers. 

The change from loans to direct payments hardly seems 

momentous —either way, the government pledges to make sure the 

farmer receives some target price for a bushel of corn when prices are 

weak. But in fact paying farmers directly for the shortfall in the price of 

corn was revolutionary, as its proponents surely must have understood. 

They had removed the floor under the price of grain. Instead of keep-

ing corn out of a falling market, as the old loan programs and federal 

granary had done, the new subsidies encouraged farmers to sell their 

corn at any price, since the government would make up the difference. 

Or, as it turned out, make up some of the difference, since just about 

every farm bill since has lowered the target price in order, it was 

claimed, to make American grain more competitive in world markets. 

(Beginning in the 1980s, big buyers of grain like Cargill and Archer 

Daniels Midland [ADM] took a hand in shaping the farm bills, which 

predictably came to reflect their interests more closely than those of THE FARM * 53 

farmers.) Instead of supporting farmers, the government was now sub-

sidizing every bushel of corn a farmer could grow —and American 

farmers pushed to go flat out could grow a hell of a lot of corn. 

7. THE NAYLOR CURVE  

> It's

not at all clear that very many American farmers know exactly what  

> hit

them, even now. The rhetoric of competitiveness and free trade per-

suaded many of them that cheap corn would be their salvation, and 

several putative farmers' organizations have bought into the virtues of 

cheap corn. But since the heyday of corn prices in the early seventies, 

farm income has steadily declined along with corn prices, forcing mil-

lions of farmers deeper into debt and thousands of them into bank-

ruptcy every week. Exports, as a percentage of the American corn 

harvest, have barely budged from around 20 percent, even as prices 

have fallen. Iowa State University estimates that it costs roughly $2.50 

to grow a bushel of Iowa corn; in October 2005 Iowa grain elevators 

were paying $1 .45, so the typical Iowa farmer is selling corn for a dol-  

> lar less

than it costs him to grow it. Yet the corn keeps coming, more of  

> it

every year. 

How can this possibly be? 

George Naylor has studied this question, and he has come up with 

a convincing answer. He's often asked to speak at meetings on the farm  

> crisis,

and to testify at hearings about farm policy, where he often pre-

sents a graph he's drawn to explain the mystery. He calls it the Naylor 

Curve. ("Remember the Laffer curve? Well, this one looks a little like 

that one, only it's true.") Basically it purports to show why falling farm 

prices force farmers to increase production in defiance of all rational 

economic behavior. 

"Farmers facing lower prices have only one option if they want to 

be able to maintain their standard of living, pay their bills, and service 

their debt, and that is to produce more." A farm family needs a certain 

amount of cash flow every year to support itself, and if the price of corn 54 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> falls,

the only way to stay even is to sell more corn. Naylor says that 

farmers desperate to boost yield end up degrading their land, plowing 

and planting marginal land, applying more nitrogen —anything to 

squeeze a few more bushels from the soil. Yet the more bushels each 

farmer produces, the lower prices go, giving another turn to the per-

verse spiral of overproduction. Even so, corn farmers persist in measur-

ing their success in bushels per acre, a measurement that improves even  

> as

they go broke. 

"The free market has never worked in agriculture and it never will. 

The economics of a family farm are very different than a firm's: When 

prices fall, the firm can lay off people, idle factories, and make fewer 

widgets. Eventually the market finds a new balance between supply and 

demand. But the demand for food isn't elastic; people don't eat more  

> just

because food is cheap. And laying off farmers doesn't help to re-

duce supply. You can fire me, but you can't fire my land, because some 

other farmer who needs more cash flow or thinks he's more efficient 

than I am will come in and farm it. Even if I go out of business this land 

will keep producing corn." 

But why corn and not something else? "We're on the bottom rung 

of the industrial food chain here, using this land to produce energy and 

protein, mostly to feed animals. Corn is the most efficient way to pro-

duce energy, soybeans the most efficient way to produce protein." The 

notion of switching to some other crop Naylor gruffly dismisses. "What 

## am I going to grow here, broccoli? Lettuce? We've got a long-term in-

vestment in growing corn and soybeans; the elevator is the only buyer 

in town, and the elevator only pays me for corn and soybeans. The mar-

ket is telling me to grow corn and soybeans, period." As is the govern-

ment, which calculates his various subsidy payments based on his yield 

of corn. 

So the plague of cheap corn goes on, impoverishing farmers (both 

here and in the countries to which we export it) , degrading the land, 

polluting the water, and bleeding the federal treasury, which now 

spends up to $5 billion a year subsidizing cheap corn. But though those 

subsidy checks go to the farmer (and represent nearly half of net farm THE FARM 55 

income today) , what the Treasury is really subsidizing are the buyers of  

> all

that cheap corn. "Agriculture's always going to be organized by the 

government; the question is, organized for whose benefit? Now it's for 

Cargill and Coca-Cola. It's certainly not for the farmer." 

Early that afternoon, after George and I had been talking agricul- 

> tural

policy for longer than I ever thought possible, the phone rang; his 

neighbor Billy needed a hand with a balky corn planter. On the drive 

over Naylor told me a little about Billy. "He's got all the latest toys: the 

twelve-row planter, Roundup Ready seed, the new John Deere com-

bine." George rolled his eyes. "Billy's in debt up to his eyeballs." George 

believes he's managed to survive on the farm by steering clear of debt, 

nursing along his antique combine and tractor, and avoiding the trap of 

expansion. 

## A blockish fellow in his fifties, with a seed cap perched over a gray-

ing crew cut, Billy seemed cheerful enough, especially considering he'd  

> just

blown his morning fiddling with a broken tractor cable. While he and George were working on it I checked out the shed full of state-

of-the-art farm equipment and asked him what he thought about the 

Bt corn he was planting —corn genetically engineered to produce its 

## own pesticide. Billy thought the seed was the greatest. "I'm getting 220 

bushels an acre on that seed," he boasted. "How's that compare, 

George?" 

George owned he was getting something just south of two hun-

dred, but he was too polite to say what he knew, which was that he was 

almost certainly clearing more money per acre growing less corn more 

cheaply. But in Iowa, bragging rights go to the man with the biggest  

> yield,

even if it's bankrupting him. 

In a shed across the way I noticed the shiny chrome prow of a trac-

tor trailer poking out and asked Billy about it. He explained he'd had to take on long-distance hauling work to keep the farm afloat. "Have to 

drive the big rig to pay for all my farm toys," he chuckled. 

George tossed me a look, as if to say, kind of pathetic, isn't it? 

Poignant seemed more like it, to think what this farmer had to do to 

hold on to his farm. I was reminded of Thoreau's line: "Men have be-5 6 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

come the tools of their tools." And I wondered if Billy gave much 

thought, in those late-night hours rolling up the miles on Interstate 80, 

to how he got to this point, and about who he was really working for 

now. The bank? John Deere? Monsanto? Pioneer? Cargill? Two hun-

dred and twenty bushels of corn is an astounding accomplishment, yet  

> it

didn't do Billy nearly as much good as it did those companies. 

## And then of course there's the corn itself, which if corn could form 

an opinion would surely marvel at the absurdity of it all —and at its 

great good fortune. For corn has been exempted from the usual rules of 

nature and economics, both of which have rough mechanisms to check any such wild, uncontrolled proliferation. In nature, the population of 

a species explodes until it exhausts its supply of food; then it crashes. In 

the market, an oversupply of a commodity depresses prices until either 

the surplus is consumed or it no longer makes sense to produce any 

more of it. In corn's case, humans have labored mightily to free it from 

either constraint, even if that means going broke growing it, and con-

suming it just as fast as we possibly can. THREE 

# THE ELEVATOR 

## On the spring afternoon I visited the grain elevator in Jefferson, Iowa, 

where George Naylor hauls his com each October, the sky was a soft 

gray, drizzling lightly. Grain elevators, the only significant verticals for 

miles around in this part of Iowa, resemble tight clusters of windowless 

concrete office towers, but this day the cement sky had robbed them of 

contrast, rendering the great cylinders nearly invisible. What stood out 

as my car rumbled across the railroad tracks and passed the green and 

white "Iowa Farmers Cooperative" sign was a bright yellow pyramid 

the size of a circus tent pitched near the base of the elevator: an im-

mense pile of corn left out in the rain. 

The previous year's had been a bumper crop in this part of the Mid-

west; the pile represented what was left of the millions of bushels of 

corn that had overflowed the elevators last October. Even now, seven 

months later, there was still a surfeit of corn, and I watched a machine 

that looked like a portable escalator pour several tons of it over the lip 

of a railroad car. As I circumnavigated the great pile, I started to see the 

golden kernels everywhere, ground into the mud by tires and boots, 5 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

floating in the puddles of rainwater, pancaked on the steel rails. Most of  

> this

grain is destined for factory farms and processing plants, so no one 

worries much about keeping it particularly clean. Even so, it was hard 

not to register something deeply amiss in the sight of so much food ly-

ing around on the wet ground. 

In Ames the following afternoon I met a Mexican American agron-

omist named Ricardo Salvador, a professor at Iowa State University, 

## who told me he'd had a similar reaction the first time he'd seen kernels 

littering Iowa roads in October; farmers haul their corn to town in big 

open wagons that fishtail across the county highways, scattering a light 

rain of yellow kernels as they go. "To be honest, I felt a revulsion. In 

Mexico, even today, you do not let corn lay on the ground; it is consid-

ered almost sacrilegious." He sent me to a passage from a sixteenth-

century writer, Friar Sahagun, who had chronicled the Aztecs' reverence 

for maize:  

> If

they saw dry grains of maize scattered on the ground, they 

quickly gathered them up, saying "Our Sustenance sufYereth, it  

> lieth

weeping. If we should not gather it up, it would accuse us 

before our Lord. It would say, 'O, Our Lord, this vassal picked 

## me not up when I lay scattered upon the ground. Punish him!' 

Or perhaps we should starve." 

The agronomist's reaction, like mine, owes something to our con-

fusion of corn-the-food with corn-the-commodity, which turn out to 

be two subtly but crucially different things. What George Naylor 

grows, and what the pile by the elevator consists of, is "number 2 field 

corn," an internationally recognized commodity grown everywhere 

(and nowhere in particular), fungible, traded in and speculated upon 

and accepted as a form of capital all over the world. And while number 

2 field corn certainly looks like the corn you would eat, and is directly 

descended from the maize Friar Sahagun 's Aztecs worshipped as the 

source of life, it is less a food than an industrial raw material —and an 

abstraction. The kernels are hard to eat, but if you soak them in water THE ELEVATOR "59 

for several hours you'll find they taste less like corn than lightly corn-

flavored starch. 

Actually there are many different kinds of corn heaped together in   

> this pile:

George Naylor's Pioneer Hi-Bred 34H31 mixed in with his 

neighbor Billy's genetically modified 33P67; corn grown with atrazine 

mixed with corn grown with metolachlor. Number 2 corn is a lowest 

## common denominator; all the designation tells you is that the moisture 

content of this corn is no more than 14 percent, and that fewer than 5

percent of the kernels exhibit insect damage. Other than that, this is the 

corn without qualities; quantity is really the only thing that counts. Such 

corn is not something to feel reverent or even sentimental about, and no-

body in Iowa, save the slightly embarrassed agronomist, does. 

Commodity corn, which is as much an economic abstraction as it is 

a biological fact, was invented in Chicago in the 1850s.* Before then 

corn was bought and sold in burlap sacks. More often than not the 

sacks bore the name of the farm where the corn had been grown. You 

could follow a sack from a farm in Iowa to the mill in Manhattan where  

> it

was ground into meal, or to the dairy in Brooklyn where it was fed 

to a cow. This made a difference. For most of history farmers have had 

to think about the buyers of their crops, to worry about making sure 

their corn found its way to the right place at the right time, before it 

spoiled or got waylaid or its price collapsed. Farmers had to worry, too, 

about the quality of their corn, since customers didn't pay before sam-

pling what was in the sack. In America before the 1850s a farmer 

owned his sacks of corn up to the moment when a buyer took delivery, 

and so bore the risk for anything that went wrong between farm and 

table or trough. For better or worse that burlap sack linked a corn buyer 

anywhere in America with a particular farmer cultivating a particular 

patch of the earth. 

With the coming of the railroads and the invention of the grain el-

evator (essentially a great vertical warehouse filled by conveyor belt and 

I'm drawing on the excellent account of the invention of agricultural commodities in William           

> Cronon's Natures Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (1991). 6*

THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

emptied by spigot) the sacks suddenly became a problem. Now it made 

sense to fill railroad cars and elevators by conveyor, to treat corn less as 

a certain number of discrete packages someone had to haul and more  

> like

an unbounded liquid that could be pumped, in effect, by machine. 

Mix it all together in a great golden river. The river of corn would flow 

from the farms to the Chicago market and then out from there to buy- 

> ers

anywhere in the world. But before buyers would accept this new, 

nonspecific, trackless corn they would have to have some assurance of  

> its quality.

The breakthrough came in 1856, when the Chicago Board of Trade 

instituted a grading system. Now any number 2 corn was guaranteed to 

be as good as any other number 2 corn. So there was no longer any rea-

son for anyone to care where the corn came from or who grew it, as 

long as it met the board's standard. Since this standard was fairly mini-

mal (specifying acceptable levels of insect damage, dirt and extraneous 

matter, and moisture) growers and breeders were now free to train 

their energies on producing bigger and bigger harvests. Before the 

commodity system farmers prided themselves on a panoply of qualities 

in their crop: big ears, plump kernels, straight rows, various colors; 

even the height of their corn plants became a point of pride. Now none 

of these distinctions mattered; "bushels per acre" became the only 

boast you heard. No one could foresee it at the time, but the Chicago 

Board of Trade's decision redirected the evolution of Zea mays. From that 

## moment on the trajectory of the species' descent was guided by a sin-

gle quality: yield. Which is to say, by the quality of sheer quantity. 

The invention of commodity grain severed any link between the 

producer of a foodstuff and its ultimate consumer. A commodity is like 

a filter, stripping qualities and histories from the harvest of a particular 

farm and farmer. When George Naylor delivers his wagonload to the el-

evator in Jefferson, which at the height of the harvest runs twenty-four 

hours a day seven days a week, his corn is weighed and graded, his ac-

count is credited with that day's posted price per bushel, and Naylor 's 

worries about his crop —his responsibility for it, indeed his whole re-

lationship to it —are over for another year. THE ELEVATOR 

Within hours Naylor's corn joins the streams of corn coming off his 

neighbors' farms; later, that tributary flows from Jefferson County into 

the river of commodity corn flowing mostly east and south from Iowa 

into the tremendous maw of the American food system. (Today much 

of it flows farther south, into Mexico.) Watching a pile of corn stream 

over the lip of a hopper car painted with Cargill's blue-and-yellow 

logo, a car destined to join a train more than a mile long and holding 

440,000 bushels of corn, I began to see what George Naylor was get-

ting at when he'd told me whom it was he grew his corn for: "the 

military-industrial complex." 

The immense pyramid of corn I stood before in Jefferson is of 

course only a tiny part of an infinitely more immense mountain of corn 

dispersed over thousands of grain elevators across the American Corn  

> Belt

every autumn. That mountain is the product of the astounding ef-

ficiency of American corn farmers, who —with their technology, ma-

chinery, chemicals, hybrid genetics, and sheer skill —can coax five tons 

of corn from an acre of Iowa soil. All this you can see with your own  

> eyes,

hanging around during the harvest. What is much harder to see is    

> that all this

corn is also the product of government policies, which have 

done more than anything else to raise that mountain and shrink the 

price of each bushel in it. 

The Iowa Farmers Cooperative does not write the only check George 

Naylor will receive for his corn crop this fall. He gets a second check 

from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) —about twenty-eight 

cents a bushel no matter what the market price of corn is, and consider-

ably more should the price of corn drop below a certain threshold.  

> Let's

say the price of a bushel falls to $ 1 .45 , as it most recently did in Oc-

tober 2005. Since the official target price (called the "loan rate") in 

Greene County stands at $ 1 .87, the government would then send farm- 

> ers

another $0.42 in "deficiency payments," for a total of $0.70 for 

every bushel of corn they can grow. Taken together these federal pay-

ments account for nearly half the income of the average Iowa corn 

farmer and represent roughly a quarter of the $ 1 9 billion U.S. taxpayers 

spend each year on payments to farmers. 6 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

This is a system designed to keep production high and prices low. 

In fact, it's designed to drive prices ever lower, since handing farmers 

deficiency payments (as compared to the previous system of providing 

loans to support prices) encourages them to produce as much corn as 

they possibly can, and then to dump it all on the market no matter what 

the price —a practice that inevitably pushes prices even lower. And as 

prices decline, the only way a farmer like George Naylor can keep his 

income from declining is by producing still more corn. So the moun-

tain grows, from 4 billion bushels in 1970 to 10 billion bushels today. 

Moving that mountain of cheap corn —finding the people and animals 

to consume it, the cars to burn it, the new products to absorb it, and the 

nations to import it —has become the principal task of the industrial 

food system, since the supply of corn vastly exceeds the demand. 

Another way to look at this 1 -billion-bushel pile of commodity 

corn —a naturalist's way of looking at it* —is that industrial agriculture 

has introduced a vast new stock of biomass to the environment, creat-

ing what amounts to an imbalance —a kind of vacuum in reverse. Ecol-

ogy teaches that whenever an excess of organic matter arises anywhere 

in nature, creatures large and small inevitably step forward to consume  

> it,

sometimes creating whole new food chains in the process. In this 

case the creatures feasting on the surplus biomass are both metaphori- 

> cal

and reahThere are the agribusiness corporations, foreign markets, and 

whole new industries (such as ethanol), and then there are the food  

> scientists,

livestock, and human eaters, as well as the usual array of mi-

croorganisms (such as E. coli 0157:H7). 

What's involved in absorbing all this excess biomass goes a long 

way toward explaining several seemingly unconnected phenomena, 

from the rise of factory farms and the industrialization of our food, to 

the epidemic of obesity and prevalence of food poisoning in America, 

to the fact that in the country where Zea mays was originally domesti-

cated, campesinos descended from those domesticators are losing their  

> *See

Manning (2004). THE ELEVATOR * 63 

farms because imported corn, flooding in from the North, has become 

too cheap. Such is the protean, paradoxical nature of the corn in that pile  

> that

getting rid of it could contribute to obesity and to hunger both. 

# My plan when I came to Iowa was to somehow follow George Naylor's 

corn on its circuitous path to our plates and into our bodies. I should 

have known that tracing any single bushel of commodity corn is as im-

possible as tracing a bucket of water after it's been poured into a river. 

Making matters still more difficult, the golden river of American com-

modity corn, wide though it is, passes through a tiny number of cor-

porate hands. Though the companies won't say, it has been estimated  

> that

Cargill and ADM together probably buy somewhere near a third of  

> all

the corn grown in America. 

These two companies now guide corn's path at every step of the 

way: They provide the pesticide and fertilizer to the farmers; operate 

most of America's grain elevators (Naylor's member-owned coopera-  

> tive is

an exception); broker and ship most of the exports; perform the 

wet and dry milling; feed the livestock and then slaughter the corn-

fattened animals; distill the ethanol; and manufacture the high-fructose 

corn syrup and the numberless other fractions derived from number 2 

> field

corn. Oh, yes —and help write many of the rules that govern this 

whole game, for Cargill and ADM exert considerable influence over U.S. 

agricultural policies. More even than the farmers who receive the 

checks (and the political blame for cashing them) , these companies are 

the true beneficiaries of the "farm" subsidies that keep the river of cheap corn flowing. Cargill is the biggest privately held corporation in 

the world. 

Cargill and ADM together comprise the vanishingly narrow sluice 

gate through which the great corn river passes every year. That gate is 

also virtually invisible. Neither company sells products directly to con-

sumers, so they have little to gain from cooperating with journalists 

# —

and seldom do. Both companies declined to let me follow the corn river 64 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

as it passes through their elevators, pipes, vats, tankers, freighters, feed- 

> lots,

mills, and laboratories on its complex and increasingly obscure 

path to our bodies. The reason this segment of our food chain is essen- 

> tially

off-limits, they explained, is "food security." 

Even so, it is possible to follow a bushel of George Naylor's corn, 

provided you are willing to regard it as the commodity it is —that is,   

> treat it

not as a specific physical entity you can hold in your hands but 

as a generic, fungible quantity, no different from any other bushel of 

number 2 field corn boarding that Cargill train or any other. Since Nay- 

> lor's

corn is mixed in with all the other corn grown this year, the des-

tinations of the kernels in any one of his bushels will mirror, more or  

> less

precisely, the ultimate destinations of the crop as a whole —export, 

livestock, high-fructose corn syrup, etc. 

So where do those ninety thousand generic kernels wind up? After 

they've been milled and fractionated, processed and exported and 

passed through the guts of cows and chickens and pigs, what sort of 

meal do they make? And —at the risk of employing a word that might 

sound extreme attached to something as wholesome and ail-American 

as corn —what sort of havoc can those ninety thousand kernels wreak? 

The place where most of those kernels wind up —about three of every 

> five

# —is on the American factory farm, a place that could not exist with-

out them. Here, hundreds of millions of food animals that once lived 

on family farms and ranches are gathered together in great commis- 

> saries,

where they consume as much of the mounting pile of surplus 

corn as they can digest, turning it into meat. Enlisting the cow in this 

undertaking has required particularly heroic efforts, since the cow is by 

nature not a corn eater. But Nature abhors a surplus, and the corn must 

be consumed. 

Enter the corn-fed American steer. FOUR 

# THE FEEDLOT 

# Making Meat 

## (54,000 KERNELS) 

1. CATTLE METROPOLIS 

The landscape that corn has made in the American Middle West is un-

mistakable: It forms a second great American lawn, unfurling through 

the summer like an absurdly deep-pile carpet of green across the vast 

lands drained by the Mississippi River. Corn the plant has colonized 

some 125,000 square miles of the American continent, an area twice 

the size of New York State; even from outer space you can't miss it. It 

takes a bit more looking, however, to see some of the other landscapes 

that corn-the-commodity has created, in obscure places like Garden  

> City,

Kansas. Here in the high plains of western Kansas is where Amer-  

> ica's first

feedlots were built, beginning in the early fifties. 

You'll be speeding down one of Finney County's ramrod roads 

## when the empty, dun-colored January prairie suddenly turns black and 

geometric, an urban grid of steel-fenced rectangles as far as the eye can 

see —which in Kansas is really far. I say "suddenly" but in fact the 

swiftly rising odor —an aroma whose Proustian echoes are decidedly 66 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

more bus station men's room than cows in the country —has been 

heralding the feedlot's approach for more than a mile. And then it's 

upon you: Poky Feeders, population, thirty-seven thousand. A sloping 

subdivision of cattle pens stretches to the horizon, each one home to a

hundred or so animals standing dully or lying around in a grayish mud   

> that, it

eventually dawns on you, isn't mud at all. The pens line a net-

work of unpaved roads that loop around vast waste lagoons on their 

way to the feedyard's thunderously beating heart and dominating land-

mark: a rhythmically chugging feed mill that rises, soaring and silvery 

in the early morning light, like an industrial cathedral in the midst of 

a teeming metropolis of meat. As it does twelve hours a day seven days 

a week, the mill is noisily converting America's river of corn into  

> cattle

feed.  

> I'd

traveled to Poky early one January with the slighdy improbable 

notion of visiting one particular resident, though as I nosed my rental 

car through the feedlot's rolling black sea of bovinity, I began to wonder   

> if this

was realistic. I was looking for a young black steer with three 

white blazes on his face that I'd met the previous fall on a ranch in Vale, 

South Dakota, five hundred miles due north of here. In fact, the steer I

hoped to find belonged to me: I'd purchased him as an eight-month-old 

calf from the Blair Ranch for $598. 1 was paying Poky Feeders $1.60 a

day for his room and board (all the corn he could eat) and meds. 

# My interest in this steer was not strictly financial, or even gustatory. 

No, my primary interest in this animal was educational. I wanted to 

learn how the industrial food chain transforms bushels of corn into  

> steaks.

# How do you enlist so unlikely a creature —for the cow is a her-

bivore by nature —to help dispose of America's corn surplus? By far the 

biggest portion of a bushel of American commodity corn (about 60 

percent of it, or some fifty-four thousand kernels) goes to feeding live-

stock, and much of that goes to feeding America's 100 million beef 

> cattle

# —cows and bulls and steers that in times past spent most of their  

> lives

grazing on grasses out on the prairie. 

America's food animals have undergone a revolution in lifestyle in 

the years since World War II. At the same time as much of America's hu-THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT* 67 

## man population found itself leaving the city for the suburbs, our food 

animals found themselves traveling in the opposite direction, leaving 

widely dispersed farms in places like Iowa to live in densely populated 

## new animal cities. These places are so different from farms and ranches  

> that

a new term was needed to denote them: CAFO —Concentrated An-

imal Feeding Operation. The new animal and human landscapes were 

both products of government policy. The postwar suburbs would never 

have been built if not for the interstate highway system, as well as the  

> G.I. Bill

and federally subsidized mortgages. The urbanization of Amer- 

> ica's

animal population would never have taken place if not for the ad-

vent of cheap, federally subsidized corn. 

Corn itself profited from the urbanization of livestock twice. As the 

animals left the farm, more of the farm was left for corn, which rapidly 

colonized the paddocks and pastures and even the barnyards that had 

once been the animals' territory. The animals left because the farmers 

simply couldn't compete with the CAFOs. It cost a farmer more to grow 

feed corn than it cost a CAFO to buy it, for the simple reason that com-

modity corn now was routinely sold for less than it cost to grow. Corn 

profited again as the factory farms expanded, absorbing increasing 

amounts of its surplus. Corn found its way into the diet of animals that 

never used to eat very much of it (like cattle) or any corn at all, like the 

farmed salmon now being bred to tolerate grain. All that excess bio-

mass has to go somewhere. 

The economic logic of gathering so many animals together to feed 

them cheap corn in CAFOs is hard to argue with; it has made meat, 

which used to be a special occasion in most American homes, so cheap 

and abundant that many of us now eat it three times a day. Not so com-

pelling is the biological logic behind this cheap meat. Already in their 

short history CAFOs have produced more than their share of environ-

mental and health problems: polluted water and air, toxic wastes, novel 

and deadly pathogens. 

Raising animals on old-fashioned mixed farms such as the Naylors' 

used to make simple biological sense: You can feed them the waste 

products of your crops, and you can feed their waste products to your 68 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

crops. In fact, when animals live on farms the very idea of waste ceases 

to exist; what you have instead is a closed ecological loop —what in ret-

rospect you might call a solution. One of the most striking things that 

animal feedlots do (to paraphrase Wendell Berry) is to take this elegant 

solution and neatly divide it into two new problems: a fertility problem 

on the farm (which must be remedied with chemical fertilizers) and a

pollution problem on the feedlot (which seldom is remedied at all) 

> .

This biological absurdity, characteristic of all CAFOs, is compounded 

in the cattle feedyard by a second absurdity. Here animals exquisitely 

adapted by natural selection to live on grass must be adapted by us —at 

considerable cost to their health, to the health of the land, and ulti-

mately to the health of their eaters —to live on corn, for no other rea-

son than it offers the cheapest calories around and because the great 

pile must be consumed. This is why I decided to follow the trail of in-

dustrial corn through a single steer rather than, say, a chicken or a pig, 

which can get by just fine on a diet of grain: The short, unhappy life of 

a corn-fed feedlot steer represents the ultimate triumph of industrial 

thinking over the logic of evolution. 

2. PASTORAL: VALE, SOUTH DAKOTA 

The Blair Ranch occupies fifty-five hundred acres of rolling short-grass 

prairie a few miles outside Sturgis, South Dakota, and directly in the 

shadow of Bear Butte. The Bismarck-Deadwood trail crossed its land 

just to the north of the butte, which rises dramatically from the plains  

> like

a chubby ten-story exclamation mark. You can still make out ruts in 

the turf dug by stagecoaches and cattle drives the century before last. 

The turf itself in November, when I visited, forms a luxuriant pelt of 

grass oscillating yellow and gold in the constant wind and sprinkled 

with perambulating black dots: Angus cows and calves, grazing. 

Ed and Rich Blair run what's called a "cow-calf" operation, the first 

stage in the production of a hamburger and the stage least changed by THE FEED LOT: MAKING MEAT •> 6 9 

the modern industrialization of meat. While the pork and chicken in-

dustries have consolidated the life cycle of those animals under a single 

roof, beef cattle still get born on hundreds of thousands of indepen-

dently owned ranches scattered mainly across the West. Although a mere 

four giant meatpacking companies (Tyson subsidiary IBP, Cargill sub-

sidiary Excel, Swift & Company, and National) now slaughter and mar-

ket four of every five beef cattle born in this country, that concentration 

represents the narrow end of a funnel that starts out as wide as the 

Great Plains. These corporations have concluded that it takes so much 

land (and therefore capital) to produce a calf ready for the feedlot —ten 

acres per head at a minimum —that they're better off leaving the ranch-

ing (and the risk) to the ranchers. 

Steer number 534 spent his first six months in these lush pastures 

alongside his mother, 9534. The number signifies she was the thirty-

fourth cow born in 1995; since none of her male offspring stick 

around long enough to meet, they're all named 534. His father was a

registered Angus by the name of Gar Precision 1680, a bull distin-

guished by the size and marbling of his offsprings' rib-eye steaks. Gar 

Precision's only contact with 9534 came by way of a fifteen-dollar 

mail-order straw of his semen. 

Born on March 13, 2001, in the birthing shed across the road, 534 

and his mother were turned out on pasture just as soon as the eighty-

pound calf stood up and began nursing. Within a few weeks the calf be-

gan supplementing his mother's milk by nibbling on a salad bar of 

mostly native grasses: western wheatgrass, little bluestem, buffalo  

> grass,

green needlegrass. 

Apart from the trauma of the Saturday in April when he was 

branded and castrated, one could imagine 534 looking back on those  

> six

months as the good old days. It might be foolish for us to presume  

> to

## know what a cow experiences, yet we can say that a calf grazing on 

grass is at least doing what he has been supremely well suited by evo-

lution to do. Oddly enough, though, eating grass is something that af-ter October my steer will never have the opportunity to do again. 7 0* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

The coevolutionary relationship between cows and grass is one of 

nature's underappreciated wonders; it also happens to be the key to un-

derstanding just about everything about modern meat. For the grasses, 

which have evolved to withstand the grazing of ruminants, the cow 

maintains and expands their habitat by preventing trees and shrubs 

from gaining a foothold and hogging the sunlight; the animal also 

spreads grass seed, plants it with his hooves, and then fertilizes it with 

his manure. In exchange for these services the grasses offer ruminants 

a plentiful and exclusive supply of lunch. For cows (like sheep, bison, 

and other ruminants) have evolved the special ability to convert grass 

# —

which single-stomached creatures like us can't digest —into high-

quality protein. They can do this because they possess what is surely the 

most highly evolved digestive organ in nature: the rumen. About the  

> size

of a medicine ball, the organ is essentially a forty-five-gallon fer-

mentation tank in which a resident population of bacteria dines on  

> grass.

Living their unseen lives at the far end of the food chain that cul-

minates in a hamburger, these bacteria have, like the grasses, coevolved 

with the cow, whom they feed. 

Truly this is an excellent system for all concerned: for the grasses, for 

the bacteria, for the animals, and for us, the animals' eaters. While it is 

true that overgrazing can do ecological harm to a grassland, in recent 

years ranchers have adopted rotational grazing patterns that more closely 

mimic the patterns of the bison, a ruminant that sustainably grazed these 

same grasses for thousands of years before the cow displaced it. In fact, a

growing number of ecologists now believe the rangelands are healthier 

with cattle on them, provided they're moved frequently. Today the most 

serious environmental harm associated with the cattle industry takes 

place on the feedlot. 

In fact, growing meat on grass makes superb ecological sense: It is 

a sustainable, solar-powered food chain that produces food by trans-

forming sunlight into protein. Row crops could accomplish this trick 

too, but not around here: In places like western South Dakota the land THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT * 71   

> is far

too arid, thin, and hilly to grow crops without large amounts of 

irrigation, chemicals, and erosion. "My cattle can take low-quality for-

age and convert it into a pretty desirable product," Rich Blair pointed 

out. "If you didn't have ruminant animals, all this" —he gestures to the 

high plains rolling out from his ranch in every direction —"would be 

the great American desert." 

So then why is it that steer number 534 hasn't tasted a blade of 

prairie grass since October? Speed, in a word, or, in the industry's pre-

ferred term, "efficiency." Cows raised on grass simply take longer to 

reach slaughter weight than cows raised on a richer diet, and for half a

century now the industry has devoted itself to shortening a beef ani-

mal's allotted span on earth. "In my grandfather's time, cows were four 

or five years old at slaughter," Rich explained. "In the fifties, when my 

father was ranching, it was two or three years old. Now we get there at 

fourteen to sixteen months." Fast food, indeed. What gets a steer from 

80 to 1,100 pounds in fourteen months is tremendous quantities of 

corn, protein and fat supplements, and an arsenal of new drugs. 

Weaning marks the fateful moment when the natural, evolutionary 

logic represented by a ruminant grazing on grass bumps up against the 

industrial logic that will propel the animal on the rest of its swift jour-

ney to a wholesale box of beef. This industrial logic is rational and even 

> irresistible

# —after all, it has succeeded in making beef everyday fare for 

millions of people for whom it once represented a luxury And yet the 

further you follow it, the more likely you are to begin wondering if 

that rational logic might not also be completely mad. 

In October, two weeks before I made his acquaintance, steer number 

534 was weaned from his mother. Weaning is perhaps the most trau-

matic time on a ranch for animals and ranchers alike; cows separated 

from their calves will mope and bellow for days, and the calves, stressed 

by the change in circumstance and diet, are prone to getting sick. 

Calves are weaned for a couple of reasons: to free their mothers to have 

more calves (9534 had already been inseminated again in June) , and to 7 2 * T H E OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

get the animals, now five or six hundred pounds, ready for life on the 

feedlot. 

The animals are rounded up and herded into a "backgrounding" 

pen, where they'll spend a couple of months before boarding the truck 

for Poky Feeders. Think of backgrounding as prep school for feedlot  

> life:

The animals are, for the first time in their lives, confined to a pen, 

"bunk broken" —taught to eat from a trough —and gradually accus-

tomed to eating what is for them a new and unnatural diet. Here is 

where the rumen first encounters corn.  

> It

was in the backgrounding pen that I first made the acquaintance 

of 534. Before coming to Vale I'd told the Blairs I wanted to follow one 

of their steers through the life cycle; Ed Blair, the older of the brothers, 

suggested only half in jest that I might as well go whole hog and buy 

the animal, if I really wanted to appreciate the challenges of ranching. 

This immediately struck me as a promising idea. 

Ed and Rich told me what to look for: a broad straight back and 

thick shoulders —basically, a sturdy frame on which to hang a lot of 

meat. I was also looking for a memorable face in this black Angus sea, 

one that I could pick out of the crowd at the feedlot. Almost as soon 

as I began surveying the ninety or so animals in the pen, 534 moseyed 

up to the railing and made eye contact. He had a wide stout frame and 

was brockle-faced —he had three easy-to-spot white blazes. Here was 

## my boy. 

5. INDUSTRIAL: GARDEN CITY, KANSAS 

Traveling from the ranch to the feedyard, as 534 and I both did (in sep-

arate vehicles) the first week of January, feels a lot like going from the 

country to the big city. A feedlot is very much a premodern city, how- 

> ever,

teeming and filthy and stinking, with open sewers, unpaved roads, 

and choking air rendered visible by dust. 

The urbanization of the world's livestock being a fairly recent his-

torical development, it makes a certain sense that cow towns like Poky THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT 73 

Feeders would recall human cities centuries ago, in the days before 

modern sanitation. As in fourteenth-century London, say, the workings 

of the metropolitan digestion remain vividly on display, the foodstuffs 

coming in, the streams of waste going out. The crowding into tight 

quarters of recent arrivals from all over, together with the lack of sani- 

> tation,

has always been a recipe for disease. The only reason contempo-

rary animal cities aren't as plague-ridden or pestilential as their medieval 

## human counterparts is a single historical anomaly: the modern anti- 

> biotic.
> I

spent the better part of a day at Poky Feeders, walking the streets,  

> cattle

watching, looking up my steer, and touring local landmarks like 

the towering feed mill. In any city it's easy to lose track of nature —of 

the transactions between various species and the land on which every-thing ultimately depends. Back on the ranch the underlying ecological 

relationship could not have been more legible: It is a local food chain 

built upon grass and the ruminants that can digest grass, and it draws  

> its

energy from the sun. But what about here? 

As the long shadow of the mill suggests, the feedlot is a city built 

upon America's mountain of surplus corn —or rather, corn plus the various pharmaceuticals a ruminant must have if it is to tolerate corn.  

> Yet,

having started out from George Naylor's farm, I understood that 

the corn on which this place runs is implicated in a whole other set of 

ecological relationships powered by a very different source of energy 

# —

the fossil fuel it takes to grow all that corn. So if the modern CAFO is a 

> city

built upon commodity corn, it is a city afloat on an invisible sea of 

petroleum. How this peculiar state of affairs came to seem sensible is a

question I spent my day at Poky trying to answer.  

> It

was only natural that I start my tour at the feed mill, the feedlot's 

thundering hub, where three meals a day for thirty-seven thousand an-

imals are designed and mixed by computer. A million pounds of feed 

pass through the mill each day. Every hour of every day a tractor trailer 

pulls up to the loading dock to deliver another fifty tons of corn. The 7 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

driver opens a valve in the belly of the truck and a golden stream of 

grain —one thin rivulet of the great corn river coursing out of the Mid-

dle West —begins to flow, dropping down a chute into the bowels of 

the mill. Around to the other side of the building, tanker trucks back up 

to silo-shaped tanks into which they pump thousands of gallons of liq-

uefied fat and protein supplements. In a shed attached to the mill sit 

vats of liquid vitamins and synthetic estrogen beside pallets stacked 

with fifty-pound sacks of antibiotics —Rumensin and Tylosin. Along 

with alfalfa hay and silage (for roughage) , all these ingredients will be 

automatically blended and then piped into the parade of dump trucks 

that three times a day fan out from here to keep Poky's eight and a half 

miles of trough filled. 

The feed mill's pulsing din is the sound of two giant steel rollers 

turning against one another twelve hours a day, crushing steamed corn 

kernels into warm and fragrant flakes. (Flaking the corn makes it easier 

for cattle to digest it.) This was the only feed ingredient I sampled, and  

> it

wasn't half bad; not as crisp as a Kellogg's flake, but with a cornier   

> flavor. I

passed on the other ingredients: the liquefied fat (which on to-

day's menu is beef tallow, trucked in from one of the nearby slaughter-

houses), and the protein supplement, a sticky brown goop consisting 

of molasses and urea. The urea is a form of synthetic nitrogen made 

from natural gas, similar to the fertilizer spread on George Naylor's 

> fields.

Before being put on this highly concentrated diet, new arrivals to 

the feedyard are treated to a few days of fresh long-stemmed hay. (They 

don't eat on the long ride and can lose up to one hundred pounds, so 

their rumens need to be carefully restarted.) Over the next several 

weeks they'll gradually step up to a daily ration of thirty-two pounds of 

feed, three-quarters of which is corn —nearly a half bushel a day. 

What got corn onto the menu at this and almost every other Amer-

ican feedlot is price, of course, but also USDA policy, which for decades 

has sought to help move the mountain of surplus corn by passing as 

## much of it as possible through the digestive tracts of food animals, 

## who can convert it into protein. THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT 75 

We've come to think of "corn-fed" as some kind of old-fashioned  

> virtue,

which it may well be when you're referring to Midwestern chil-

dren, but feeding large quantities of corn to cows for the greater part 

of their lives is a practice neither particularly old nor virtuous. Its chief 

advantage is that cows fed corn, a compact source of caloric energy, get  

> fat

quickly; their flesh also marbles well, giving it a taste and texture 

American consumers have come to like.Yet this corn-fed meat is demon-  

> strably less

healthy for us, since it contains more saturated fat and less 

omega-3 fatty acids than the meat of animals fed grass. A growing body 

of research suggests that many of the health problems associated 

with eating beef are really problems with corn-fed beef. (Modern-day 

hunter-gatherers who subsist on wild meat don't have our rates of heart  

> disease.)

In the same way ruminants are ill adapted to eating corn, hu-

mans in turn may be poorly adapted to eating ruminants that eat corn. 

Yet the USDA's grading system has been designed to reward mar-

bling (a more appealing term than "intramuscular fat," which is what   

> it is)

and thus the feeding of corn to cattle. Indeed, corn has become so 

deeply ingrained in the whole system of producing beef in America  

> that

whenever I raised any questions about it among ranchers or feed- 

> lot

operators or animal scientists, people looked at me as if I'd just ar-

rived from another planet. (Or perhaps from Argentina, where excellent 

steaks are produced on nothing but grass.) 

The economic logic behind corn is unassailable, and on a factory 

farm there is no other kind. Calories are calories, and corn is the cheap- 

> est,

most convenient source of calories on the market. Of course, it was 

the same industrial logic —protein is protein —that made feeding ren-

dered cow parts back to cows seem like a sensible thing to do, until sci- 

> entists

figured out that this practice was spreading bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy (BSE), more commonly known as mad cow disease. 

Rendered bovine meat and bonemeal represented the cheapest, most 

convenient way of satisfying a cow's protein requirement (never mind 

these animals were herbivores by evolution) and so appeared on the 

daily menus of Poky and most other feedyards until the Food and Drug 

Administration (FDA) banned the practice in 1997. 7 6 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

# We now understand that while at a reductive, molecular level pro-

tein may indeed be protein, at an ecological or species level, this isn't 

quite true. As cannibal tribes have discovered, eating the flesh of one's 

## own species carries special risks of infection. Kuru, a disease bearing a

striking resemblance to BSE, spread among New Guinea tribesmen 

## who ritually ate the brains of their dead kin. Some evolutionary biolo- 

> gists

believe that evolution selected against cannibalism as a way to 

avoid such infections; animals' aversion to their own feces, and the car-

casses of their species, may represent a similar strategy. Through natural 

selection animals have developed a set of hygiene rules, functioning 

## much like taboos. One of the most troubling things about factory farms  

> is

## how cavalierly they flout these evolutionary rules, forcing animals to 

overcome deeply ingrained aversions. We make them trade their in- 

> stincts

for antibiotics. 

Though the industrial logic that made feeding cattle to cattle seem  

> like

a good idea has been thrown into doubt by mad cow disease, I was 

surprised to learn it hadn't been discarded. The FDA ban on feeding ru-

minant protein to ruminants makes an exception for blood products 

and fat; my steer will probably dine on beef tallow recycled from the 

very slaughterhouse he's heading to in June. ("Fat is fat," the feedlot 

manager shrugged, when I raised an eyebrow.) Though Poky doesn't 

do it, the rules still permit feedlots to feed nonruminant animal pro-

tein to ruminants. Feather meal and chicken litter (that is, bedding, fe-ces, and discarded bits of feed) are accepted cattle feeds, as are chicken,  

> fish,

and pig meal. Some public health experts worry that since the 

bovine meat and bonemeal that cows used to eat is now being fed to 

chickens, pigs, and fish, infectious prions could find their way back 

into cattle when they're fed the protein of the animals that have been 

eating them. 

Before mad cow disease remarkably few people in the cattle busi-

ness, let alone the general public, comprehended the strange new semi-

circular food chain that industrial agriculture had devised for the beef 

animal —and so, in turn, for the beef eater. When I mentioned to Rich THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT * 77 

Blair how surprised I'd been to learn cattle were eating cattle, he said, 

"To tell you the truth, it was kind of a shock to me, too." 

Compared to all the other things we feed cattle these days, corn seems 

positively wholesome. And yet it too violates the biological or evolu-

tionary logic of bovine digestion. During my day at Poky I spent a few 

hours with Dr. Mel Metzin, the staff veterinarian, learning more than 

any beef eater really should know about the gastrointestinal life of the 

modern cow. Dr. Mel, as he's known at Poky, oversees a team of eight 

cowboys who spend their days riding the yard's dusty streets, spotting 

sick animals and bringing them into Poky's three "hospitals" for treat-

ment. Most of the health problems that afflict feedlot cattle can be 

traced either directly or indirectly to their diet. "They're made to eat 

forage," Dr. Metzin explained, "and we're making them eat grain.  

> "It's

not that they can't adjust," he continues, "and now we're 

breeding cattle to do well in a feedyard." One way to look at the breed-

ing work going on at ranches like the Blairs' is that the contemporary 

beef cow is being selected for the ability to eat large quantities of corn 

and efficiently convert it to protein without getting too sick. (These, af-  

> ter all,

are precisely the genes prized in 534's father, Gar Precision 

1680.) The species is evolving, in other words, to help absorb the ex-

cess biomass coming off America's cornfields. But the cow's not there 

quite yet, and a great many feedlot cattle —virtually all of them to one 

degree or another, according to several animal scientists I talked to 

# —

are simply sick. 

Bloat is perhaps the most serious thing that can go wrong with a ru-

minant on corn. The fermentation in the rumen produces copious 

amounts of gas, which is normally expelled by belching during rumi-

nation. But when the diet contains too much starch and too little 

roughage, rumination all but stops, and a layer of foamy slime forms in 

the rumen that can trap the gas. The rumen inflates like a balloon until  

> it

presses against the animal's lungs. Unless action is taken promptly to 7 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

relieve the pressure (usually by forcing a hose down the animal's esoph -

agus) , the animal suffocates. 

## A concentrated diet of corn can also give a cow acidosis. Unlike our 

## own highly acid stomachs, the normal pH of a rumen is neutral. Corn ren-ders it acidic, causing a kind of bovine heartburn that in some cases can kill 

the animal, but usually just makes him sick. Acidotic animals go off their 

feed, pant and salivate excessively, paw and scratch their bellies, and eat dirt. 

The condition can lead to diarrhea, ulcers, bloat, rumenitis, liver disease, 

and a general weakening of the immune system that leaves the animal 

vulnerable to the full panoply of feedlot diseases —pneumonia, coccid- 

> iosis,

enterotoxemia, feedlot polio. Much like modem humans, modern 

catde are susceptible to a set of relatively new diseases of civilization 

# —

assuming, that is, we're willing to put the modern feedlot under the rubric 

of civilization. 

Cattle rarely live on feedlot diets for more than 150 days, which 

might be about as much as their systems can tolerate. "I don't know 

## how long you could feed them this ration before you'd see problems," 

Dr. Metzin said; another vet told me the diet would eventually "blow 

out their livers" and kill them. Over time the acids eat away at the ru-

## men wall, allowing bacteria to enter the animal's bloodstream. These 

microbes wind up in the liver, where they form abscesses and impair 

the liver's function. Between 1 5 percent and 30 percent of feedlot cows 

are found at slaughter to have abscessed livers; Dr. Mel told me that in 

some pens the figure runs as high as 70 percent. 

What keeps a feedlot animal healthy —or healthy enough —are anti-

biotics. Rumensin buffers acidity in the rumen, helping to prevent 

bloat and acidosis, andTylosin, a form of erythromycin, lowers the in-

cidence of liver infection. Most of the antibiotics sold in America today 

end up in animal feed, a practice that, it is now generally acknowledged 

(except in agriculture), is leading directly to the evolution of new 

antibiotic-resistant superbugs. In the debate over the use of antibiotics 

in agriculture, a distinction is usually made between their clinical and 

nonclinical uses. Public health advocates don't object to treating sick 

animals with antibiotics; they just don't want to see the drugs lose their THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT * 79 

effectiveness because factory farms are feeding them to healthy animals 

to promote growth. But the use of antibiotics in feedlot cattle confounds  

> this

distinction. Here the drugs are plainly being used to treat sick ani-

mals, yet the animals probably wouldn't be sick if not for the diet of 

grain we feed them.  

> I

asked Dr. Mel what would happen if drugs like Rumensin and Ty-

losin were banned from cattle feed, as some public health experts advo- 

> cate.

"We'd have a high death rate [it's currently about 3 percent, 

matching the industry average] and poorer performing cattle. We just 

couldn't feed them as hard." The whole system would have to change 

# —

and slow down. 

"Hell, if you gave them lots of grass and space, I wouldn't have 

a job." 

# My first impression of pen 63, where my steer is spending his last five 

months, was, Not a bad little piece of real estate, all considered. The pen is far 

enough from the feed mill to be fairly quiet and it has a water view of 

what I thought was a pond or reservoir until I noticed the brown scum. 

The body of water is what is known, in the geography of CAFOs, as a

manure lagoon. I asked the feedlot manager why they didn't just spray 

the liquefied manure on neighboring farms. The farmers don't want it, 

he explained. The nitrogen and phosphorus levels are so high that 

spraying the crops would kill them. He didn't say that feedlot wastes 

also contain heavy metals and hormone residues, persistent chemicals 

that end up in waterways downstream, where scientists have found fish 

and amphibians exhibiting abnormal sex characteristics. CAFOs like 

Poky transform what at the proper scale would be a precious source of 

> fertility

# —cow manure —into toxic waste. 

The pen 534 lives in is surprisingly spacious, about the size of a

hockey rink, with a concrete feed bunk along the road, and a fresh wa- 

> ter

trough out back. I climbed over the railing and joined the ninety  

> steers,

which, en masse, retreated a few lumbering steps, and then 

stopped to see what I would do. 80 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> I

had on the same carrot-colored sweater I'd worn to the ranch in 

South Dakota, hoping to elicit some glint of recognition from my steer.  

> I

couldn't find him at first; all the faces staring at me were either com-

pletely black or bore an unfamiliar pattern of white marks. And then I

spotted him —the three white blazes —way off in the back. As I gingerly 

stepped toward him the quietly shuffling mass of black cowhide be-

tween us parted, and there stood 534 and I, staring dumbly at one an-

other. Glint of recognition? None, none whatsoever. I told myself not to 

take it personally; 534 and his pen mates have been bred for their mar-

bling, after all, not their ability to form attachments.  

> I

noticed that 534's eyes looked a little bloodshot. Dr. Metzin had 

told me that some animals are irritated by feedlot dust. The problem is 

especially serious in the summer months, when the animals kick up 

clouds of the stuff and workers have to spray the pens with water to 

keep it down. I had to remind myself that this is not ordinary dirt dust, 

inasmuch as the dirt in a feedyard is not ordinary dirt; no, this is fecal 

dust. But apart from the air quality, how did feedlot life seem to be 

agreeing with 534? I don't know enough about the emotional life of a

steer to say with confidence that 534 was miserable, bored, or indiffer-

ent, but I would not say he looked happy. 

He's clearly eating well, though. My steer had put on a couple hun-

dred pounds since we'd last met, and he looked it: thicker across the 

shoulder and round as a barrel through the middle. He carried himself 

more like a steer now than a calf, even though his first birthday was still 

two months away. Dr. Metzin complimented me on his size and confor-

mation. "That's a handsome-looking beef you got there." (Shucks.)   

> If I

stared at my steer hard enough, I could imagine the white lines 

of the butcher's chart dissecting his black hide: rump roast, flank steak, 

standing rib, tenderloin, brisket. One way of looking at 534 —the feed- 

> lot

way, the industrial way —was as a most impressive machine for 

turning number 2 field corn into cuts of beef. Every day between now 

and his slaughter in six months, 534 will convert thirty-two pounds of 

feed into four pounds of gain —new muscle, fat, and bone. This at least  

> is

## how 534 appears in the computer program I'd seen at the mill: the THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT * 81  

> ratio

of feed to gain that determines his efficiency. (Compared to other 

food animals, cattle are terribly inefficient: The ratio of feed to flesh in 

chicken, the most efficient animal by this measure, is two pounds of 

corn to one of meat, which is why chicken costs less than beef.) Poky 

Feeders is indeed a factory, transforming —as fast as bovinely possible 

# —

cheap raw materials into a less cheap finished product, through the 

mechanism of bovine metabolism. 

Yet metaphors of the factory and the machine obscure as much as 

they reveal about the creature standing before me. He has, of course, 

another, quite different identity —as an animal, I mean, connected as all 

animals must be to certain other animals and plants and microbes, as 

well as to the earth and the sun. He's a link in a food chain, a thread in 

a far-reaching web of ecological relationships. Looked at from this per-

spective, everything going on in this cattle pen appears quite different, 

and not nearly as far removed from our world as this manure-encrusted 

patch of ground here in Nowhere, Kansas, might suggest. 

For one thing, the health of these animals is inextricably linked to 

our own by that web of relationships. The unnaturally rich diet of corn 

that undermines a steer's health fattens his flesh in a way that under-

mines the health of the humans who will eat it. The antibiotics these 

animals consume with their corn at this very moment are selecting, in 

their gut and wherever else in the environment they end up, for new  

> strains

of resistant bacteria that will someday infect us and withstand 

the drugs we depend on to treat that infection. We inhabit the same mi-

crobial ecosystem as the animals we eat, and whatever happens in it 

also happens to us. 

Then there's the deep pile of manure on which I stand, in which 

534 sleeps. We don't know much about the hormones in it —where 

they will end up, or what they might do once they get there —but we 

do know something about the bacteria, which can find their way from 

the manure on the ground to his hide and from there into our ham-

burgers. The speed at which these animals will be slaughtered and 

processed —four hundred an hour at the plant where 534 will go 

# —

means that sooner or later some of the manure caked on these hides 8 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

gets into the meat we eat. One of the bacteria that almost certainly re-

sides in the manure I'm standing in is particularly lethal to humans. Es-   

> cherichia coli 1

57:H7 is a relatively new strain of the common intestinal 

bacteria (no one had seen it before 1980) that thrives in feedlot cattle, 

40 percent of which carry it in their gut. Ingesting as few as ten of these 

microbes can cause a fatal infection; they produce a toxin that destroys 

## human kidneys. 

Most of the microbes that reside in the gut of a cow and find their 

way into our food get killed off by the strong acids in our stomachs, 

since they evolved to live in the neutral pH environment of the rumen. 

But the rumen of a corn-fed feedlot steer is nearly as acidic as our own 

stomachs, and in this new, man-made environment new acid-resistant 

strains of E. coli, of which 0157:H7 is one, have evolved —yet another 

creature recruited by nature to absorb the excess biomass coming off the 

Farm Belt. The problem with these bugs is that they can shake off the acid 

bath in our stomachs —and then go on to kill us. By acidifying the ru-

## men with corn we've broken down one of our food chain's most impor-

tant barriers to infection. Yet another solution turned into a problem. 

We've recently discovered that this process of acidification can be 

reversed, and that doing so can greatly diminish the threat from E. coli  

> 1

57:H7. Jim Russell, a USDA microbiologist on the faculty at Cornell, 

has found that switching a cow's diet from corn to grass or hay for a

few days prior to slaughter reduces the population of E. coli 1 5 7 :H7 in 

the animal's gut by as much as 80 percent. But such a solution (Grass?!)  

> is

considered wildly impractical by the cattle industry and (therefore) 

by the USDA. Their preferred solution for dealing with bacterial con-

tamination is irradiation —essentially, to try to sterilize the manure get-

ting into the meat. 

So much comes back to corn, this cheap feed that turns out in so 

## many ways to be not cheap at all. While I stood in pen 63 a dump truck 

pulled up alongside the feed bunk and released a golden stream of feed. 

The black mass of cowhide moved toward the trough for lunch. The 

$ 1 .60 a day I'm paying for three meals a day here is a bargain only by 

the narrowest of calculations. It doesn't take into account, for example, THE FEEDLOT: MAKING M E AT * S 3 

the cost to the public health of antibiotic resistance or food poisoning 

by E. coli 0157:H7. It doesn't take into account the cost to taxpayers of 

the farm subsidies that keep Poky's raw materials cheap. And it certainly 

doesn't take into account all the many environmental costs incurred by 

cheap corn.  

> I

stood alongside 534 as he lowered his big head into the stream of 

fresh grain. How absurd, I thought, the two of us standing hock-deep 

in manure in this godforsaken place, overlooking a manure lagoon in 

the middle of nowhere somewhere in Kansas. Godforsaken perhaps, 

and yet not apart, I realized, as I thought of the other places connected 

to this place by the river of commodity corn. Follow the corn from this 

bunk back to the fields where it grows and I'd find myself back in the 

middle of that 1 25,000-mile-square monoculture, under a steady rain 

of pesticide and fertilizer. Keep going, and I could follow the nitrogen 

runoff from that fertilizer all the way down the Mississippi into the 

Gulf of Mexico, adding its poison to an eight-thousand-square-mile 

zone so starved of oxygen nothing but algae can live in it. And then go 

farther still, follow the fertilizer (and the diesel fuel and the petrochem- 

> ical

pesticides) needed to grow the corn all the way to the oil fields of 

the Persian Gulf.  

> I

don't have a sufficiently vivid imagination to look at my steer and 

see a barrel of oil, but petroleum is one of the most important ingredi-

ents in the production of modern meat, and the Persian Gulf is surely a

link in the food chain that passes through this (or any) feedlot. Steer 534 

started his life part of a food chain that derived all of its energy from the 

sun, which nourished the grasses that nourished him and his mother. 

## When 534 moved from ranch to feedlot, from grass to corn, he joined 

an industrial food chain powered by fossil fuel —and therefore defended 

by the U.S. military, another never-counted cost of cheap food. (One- 

> fifth

of America's petroleum consumption goes to producing and trans-

porting our food.) After I got home from Kansas, I asked an economist 

## who specializes in agriculture and energy if it might be possible to cal-

culate precisely how much petroleum it will take to grow my steer to 

slaughter weight. Assuming 534 continues to eat twenty-five pounds of 84 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

corn a day and reaches a weight of twelve hundred pounds, he will have 

consumed in his lifetime the equivalent of thirty-five gallons of oil 

# —

nearly a barrel. 

So this is what commodity corn can do to a cow: industrialize the 

miracle of nature that is a ruminant, taking this sunlight- and prairie 

grass-powered organism and turning it into the last thing we need: an-

other fossil fuel machine. This one, however, is able to suffer. 

Standing there in the pen alongside my steer, I couldn't imagine 

ever wanting to eat the flesh of one of these protein machines. Hungry 

was the last thing I felt. Yet I'm sure that after enough time goes by, and 

the stink of this place is gone from my nostrils, I will eat feedlot beef 

again. Eating industrial meat takes an almost heroic act of not knowing  

> or,

now, forgetting. But I left Poky determined to follow this meat to a

meal on a table somewhere, to see this food chain at least that far. I was 

curious to know what feedlot beef would taste like now, if I could taste 

the corn or even, since taste is as much a matter of what's in the head    

> as it is

about molecules dancing on the tongue, some hint of the petro-

leum. "You are what you eat" is a truism hard to argue with, and yet it   

> is, as

a visit to a feedlot suggests, incomplete, for you are what what 

you eat eats, too. And what we are, or have become, is not just meat but 

number 2 corn and oil. FIVE 

# THE PROCESSING PLANT 

# Making Complex Foods 

## (18,000 KERNELS)   

> 1.

# TAKING THE KERNEL APART: THE MILL 

One of the truly odd things about the 1 billion bushels of corn har-

vested each year is how little of it we eat. Sure, we grind some of it to 

make cornmeal, but most of the corn we eat as corn —whether on the 

cob, flaked, or baked into muffins or tortillas or chips —comes from va-

rieties other than number 2: usually sweet corn or white corn. These 

uses represent a tiny fraction of the harvest —less than a bushel per per-

son per year —which is probably why we don't think of ourselves as 

big corn eaters. And yet each of us is personally responsible for con-

suming a ton of the stuff every year. 

## Much of the rest of that per capita ton does enter our bodies, but 

not before it has been heavily processed, broken down into simple 

compounds either by animals like steer 534 or a processing plant, and 

then reassembled either as beef, chicken, or pork, or as soft drinks, 

breakfast cereals, or snacks. What doesn't pass through the gut of a food 

animal to become meat will pass through one of America's twenty-five 8 6 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

"wet mills" on its way to becoming one of the innumerable products 

food science has figured out how to tease from a kernel of corn. (These 

mills are called wet to distinguish them from the traditional mills 

where corn is simply ground into dry meal for things like tortillas.) 

About a fifth of the corn river flowing out from the elevators at the 

Iowa Farmers Cooperative travels to a wet milling plant, usually by  

> train.

There it diverges into a great many slender branching tributaries, 

only to converge much later on a plate or in a cup. For what the wet 

mill does to a bushel of corn is to turn it into the building blocks from 

which companies like General Mills, McDonald's, and Coca-Cola as-

semble our processed foods. 

The first rough breakdown of all that corn begins with the subdivi-

sion of the kernel itself: Its yellow skin will be processed into various 

vitamins and nutritional supplements; the tiny germ (the dark part 

nearest the cob, which holds the embryo of the potential future corn 

plant) will be crushed for its oil; and the biggest part, the endosperm, 

will be plundered for its rich cache of complex carbohydrates. 

This oversized packet of starch is corn's most important contribu-

tion to the industrial food chain: an abundance of carbohydrate mole-

cules in long chains that chemists have learned to break down and then 

rearrange into hundreds of different organic compounds —acids, sug- 

> ars,

starches, and alcohols. The names of many of these compounds will 

be familiar to anyone who's studied the ingredient label on a package 

of processed food: citric and lactic acid; glucose, fructose, and mal-

todextrin; ethanol (for alcoholic beverages as well as cars), sorbitol, 

mannitol, and xanthan gum; modified and unmodified starches; as well  

> as

dextrins and cyclodextrins and MSG, to name only a few. 

To watch the stream of corn coming off of George Naylor's farm 

proceed to divide, subdivide, and ultimately branch off into a molecule of fructose destined to sweeten a soda is not as easy as following it to a 

feedlot into a cut of meat. For one thing, the two companies who wet 

mill most of America's corn (Cargill and ADM) declined to let me 

watch them do it. For another, the process is largely invisible, since it 

takes place inside a series of sealed vats, pipes, fermentation tanks, and THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS 8 7 

> filters.

Even so, I would have liked to follow my bushel of corn through 

ADM's plant in Decatur, Illinois (the unofficial capital of corn process-

ing in America) , or to Cargill's mill in Iowa City (the likely destination 

of the train I saw being loaded at the elevator in Jefferson) , but the in-

dustrial food chain goes underground, in effect, as it passes through 

these factories on its path to our plates. 

The closest I got to following corn through a mill was at the Center 

for Crops Utilization Research at Iowa State University, in Ames, forty- 

> five

miles from the farmers cooperative elevator in Jefferson. After my  

> visit

to George Nay lor 's farm, I spent a couple of days on the Ames cam-

pus, which really should be called the University of Corn. Corn is the 

hero of the most prominent sculptures and murals on campus, and the 

work of the institution is dedicated in large part to the genetics, culture,  

> history,

and uses of this plant, though the soybean, Iowa's second crop, 

gets its share of attention too. The Center for Crops Utilization Research  

> is

charged with developing new uses for America's corn and soybean 

surplus, and to this end operates a scaled-down wet milling operation, 

a Rube Goldberg contraption of stainless steel tubes, pipes, valves, 

vents, drying tables, centrifuges, filters, and tanks that Larry Johnson, 

the center's director, was more than happy to show me. 

To hear Johnson describe it, the wet milling process is essentially an 

industrial version of digestion: A food is broken down through a series 

of steps that includes the application of physical pressure, acids, and en-

zymes. The order of the steps is different in industrial digestion —the 

acids come before the mechanical chewing, for instance —but the results 

are much the same: A complex food is reduced to simple molecules, 

mostly sugars.  

> "First

## we separate the corn into its botanical parts —embryo, en-

dosperm, fiber —and then into its chemical parts," Johnson explained  

> as

## we began our tour of the plant. When a shipment of corn arrives at 

the mill, it is steeped for thirty-six hours in a bath of water containing 

a small amount of sulphur dioxide. The acid bath swells the kernels and 

frees the starch from the proteins that surround it. 

After the soak, the swollen kernels are ground in a mill. "By now the 88* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

germ is rubbery and it pops right off," Johnson explained. "We take the 

slurry to a hydroclone" —basically a centrifuge for liquids —"where 

the germ floats off. After it's dried, we squeeze it for corn oil." Corn oil 

can be used as a cooking or salad oil, or hydrogenated for use in mar-

garine and other processed foods: Atoms of hydrogen are forced into 

the fat molecules to make them solid at room temperature. (Though 

originally designed as a healthy substitute for animal fats, medical re-

searchers now think these trans fats are actually worse for our arteries 

than butter.) 

Once the germ has been removed and the kernels crushed, what's   

> left is

a white mush of protein and starch called "mill starch." To draw 

off as much of the protein as possible, the mill starch undergoes a pro-

gressively finer series of grindings and filterings and centrifuges. The 

extracted protein, called gluten, is used in animal feed. At each step 

more fresh water is added —it takes about five gallons to process a

bushel of corn, and prodigious amounts of energy. Wet milling is an 

energy-intensive way to make food; for every calorie of processed food  

> it

produces, another ten calories of fossil fuel energy are burned. 

At this point the process has yielded a white slurry that's poured out 

onto a stainless steel table and dried to a fine, superwhite powder 

# —

cornstarch. Cornstarch comprised wet milling's sole product when the 

industry got its start in the 1 840s. At first the laundry business was its 

biggest customer, but cooks and early food processors soon began 

adding cornstarch to as many recipes as they could: It offered the glam-

our of modernity, purity, and absolute whiteness. By 1866, corn refin-

ers had learned how to use acids to break down cornstarch into 

glucose, and sweeteners quickly became —as they remain today —the 

industry's most important product. Corn syrup (which is mostly glu-

cose or dextrose —the terms are interchangeable) became the first 

cheap domestic substitute for cane sugar.  

> I

remember an elementary school science experiment in which we 

were instructed to chew —and chew and chew —a cracker until the 

slurry of starch turned suddenly sweet on our tongues. The teacher ex-

plained that the enzymes in our saliva had broken the long starch mol-THE PROCESSING PLANT; MAKING COMPLEX FOODS •: 89 

ecules into shorter molecules of glucose. Much the same process —it's 

called "enzyme hydrolysis" —revolutionized corn refining in the 1 940s. 

As enzymes replaced acids, refiners were able to produce progressively 

sweeter sweeteners from corn. Yet none were quite as sweet as sugar  

> (or,

to be more precise, sucrose) . That threshold wasn't crossed until 

the late 1960s, when Japanese chemists "broke the sweetness barrier," 

in the words of the Corn Refiners Association's official history of high-

fructose corn sweetener. They discovered that an enzyme called glucose 

isomerase could transform glucose into the much sweeter sugar mole-

cule called fructose. By the 1970s the process of refining corn into 

fructose had been perfected, and high-fructose corn syrup —which is a

blend of 55 percent fructose and 45 percent glucose that tastes exactly  

> as

sweet as sucrose —came onto the market. Today it is the most valuable 

food product refined from corn, accounting for 530 million bushels 

every year. (A bushel of com yields thirty -three pounds of fructose.) 

But if the pipe marked "HFCS" leads to the fattest spigot at the far 

end of a corn refinery's bewildering tangle of pipes and valves, it is by 

no means the only spigot you'll find back there. There are dozens of 

other "output streams." At various points along its way through the mill 

some portion of the thick white slurry of starch is diverted to another 

purpose or, in the refiner's jargon, another "fraction." The starch itself  

> is

capable of being modified into spherical, crystalline, or highly 

branched molecules, each suitable for a different use: adhesives, coat-

ings, sizings, and plastics for industry; stabilizers, thickeners, gels, and 

"viscosity-control agents" for food. 

What remains in the slurry is "saccharified" —treated with enzymes 

that turn it into dextrose syrup. A portion of this dextrose is siphoned 

off for use as corn syrup; other fractions are recruited to become sug-  

> ars like

maltodextrin and maltose. The largest portion of the corn syrup 

stream is piped into a tank where it is exposed to glucose isomerase en-

zymes and then passed through ion exchange filters, emerging eventu-  

> ally as

fructose. Now what's left of the dextrose stream is piped into a

fermentation tank, where yeasts or amino acids go to work eating the 

sugars, in several hours yielding an alcoholic brew. This itself is frac-9 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

tionated into various alcohols, ethanol chief among them, our gas tanks 

being the ultimate destination of a tenth of the corn crop. The fer-

mented brew can also be refined into a dozen different organic and 

amino acids for use in food processing or the manufacture of plastic. 

## And then that's about it: There's no corn left, and not much of any-

thing else either, except for some dirty water. (Though even some of 

this "steep water" is used to make animal feeds.) The primary differ-

ence between the industrial digestion of corn and an animal's is that in 

this case there is virtually no waste at the end of it. 

Step back for a moment and behold this great, intricately piped 

stainless steel beast: This is the supremely adapted creature that has 

evolved to help eat the vast surplus biomass coming off America's 

farms, efficiently digesting the millions of bushels of corn fed to it each 

day by the trainload. Go around back of this beast and you'll see a hun-

dred different spigots, large and small, filling tanker cars of other trains 

with HFCS, ethanol, syrups, starches, and food additives of every de-

scription. The question now is, Who or what (besides our cars) is going 

to consume and digest all this freshly fractionated biomass —the sugars 

and starches, the alcohols and acids, the emulsifiers and stabilizers and 

viscosity-control agents? This is where we come in. It takes a certain 

kind of eater —an industrial eater —to consume these fractions of corn, 

and we are, or have evolved into, that supremely adapted creature: the 

eater of processed food. 

2. PUTTING IT BACK TOGETHER AGAIN: 

# PROCESSED FOODS 

The dream of liberating food from nature is as old as eating. People 

began processing food to keep nature from taking it back: What is 

spoilage, after all, if not nature, operating through her proxy microor-

ganisms, repossessing our hard-won lunch? So we learned to salt and 

dry and cure and pickle in the first age of food processing, and to can, 

freeze, and vacuum-pack in the second. These technologies were bless-THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS * 9 1 

> ings,

freeing people from nature's cycles of abundance and scarcity, as 

well as from the tyranny of the calendar or locale: Now a New Englander 

could eat sweet corn, or something reminiscent of it, in January, and   

> taste a

pineapple for the first time in his life. As Massimo Montanari, an  

> Italian

food historian, points out, the fresh, local, and seasonal food we 

prize today was for most of human history "a form of slavery," since it  

> left

us utterly at the mercy of the local vicissitudes of nature. 

Even after people had learned the rudiments of preserving food, how- 

> ever,

the dream of liberating food from nature continued to flourish 

# —

indeed, to expand in ambition and confidence. In the third age of food 

processing, which begins with the end of World War II, merely preserv-

ing the fruits of nature was deemed too modest: The goal now was to 

improve on nature. The twentieth-century prestige of technology and 

convenience combined with advances in marketing to push aside but- 

> ter

to make shelf space for margarine, replace fruit juice with juice 

drinks and then entirely juice-free drinks like Tang, cheese with Cheez 

Whiz, and whipped cream with Cool Whip. 

Corn, a species that had been a modest beneficiary of the first two 

ages of food processing (having taken well to the can and the freezer)  

> ,
> really

came into its own during the third. You would never know it 

without reading the ingredient label (a literary genre unknown until 

the third age), but corn is the key constituent of all four of these 

processed foods. Along with the soybean, its rotational partner in the  

> field,

corn has done more than any other species to help the food in-

dustry realize the dream of freeing food from nature's limitations and 

seducing the omnivore into eating more of a single plant than anyone 

would ever have thought possible. 

In fact, you would be hard-pressed to find a late-model processed 

food that isn't made from corn or soybeans. In the typical formulation, 

corn supplies the carbohydrates (sugars and starches) and soy the pro- 

> tein;

the fat can come from either plant. (Remember what George Nay- 

> lor

said about the real produce of his farm: not corn and soybeans but 

"energy and protein.") The longer the ingredient label on a food, the 

more fractions of corn and soybeans you will find in it. They supply the 92 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

essential building blocks, and from those two plants (plus a handful of 

synthetic additives) a food scientist can construct just about any processed 

food he or she can dream up. 

## A few years ago, in the days when "food security" meant something 

very different than it does today, I had the chance to visit one of the 

small handful of places where this kind of work is done. The Bell Insti- 

> tute,

a leafy corporate campus on the outskirts of Minneapolis, is the 

research-and-development laboratory for General Mills, the sixth-

largest food company in the world. Here nine hundred food scientists 

spend their days designing the future of food —its flavor, texture, and 

packaging. 

## Much of their work is highly secretive, but nowhere more so than 

in the cereals area. Deep in the heart of the heart of the Bell Institute, 

## down in the bowels of the laboratory, you come to a warren of win-

dowless rooms called, rather grandly, the Institute of Cereal Technology.  

> I

was permitted to pass through a high-security conference room fur-

nished with a horseshoe-shaped table that had a pair of headphones at 

every seat. This was the institute's inner sanctum, the cereal situation 

room, where General Mills executives gather to hear briefings about 

## new products. 

The secrecy surrounding the successor to Cocoa Pebbles struck me 

as laughable, and I said so. But as an executive explained to me, 

"Recipes are not intellectual property; you can't patent a new cereal. All 

you can hope for is to have the market to yourself for a few months to 

establish your brand before a competitor knocks off the product. So 

we're very careful not to show our hand." For the same reason, the in- 

> stitute

operates its own machine shop, where it designs and builds the 

machines that give breakfast cereals their shapes, making it that much 

harder for a competitor to knock off, say, a new marshmallow bit 

shaped to resemble a shooting star. In the interests of secrecy, the food  

> scientists

would not talk to me about current projects, only past fail-

ures, like the breakthrough cereal in the shapes of little bowling pins THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS * 93 

and balls. "In focus group the kids loved it," the product's rueful inven-

tor told me, "but the mothers didn't like the idea of kids bowling their 

breakfast across the table." Which is why bowling pin cereal never 

showed up in your supermarket. 

In many ways breakfast cereal is the prototypical processed food: 

four cents' worth of commodity corn (or some other equally cheap 

grain) transformed into four dollars' worth of processed food. What an 

alchemy! Yet it is performed straightforwardly enough: by taking sev- 

> eral

of the output streams issuing from a wet mill (corn meal, corn  

> starch,

corn sweetener, as well as a handful of tinier chemical fractions) 

and then assembling them into an attractively novel form. Further value  

> is

added in the form of color and taste, then branding and packaging. 

## Oh yes, and vitamins and minerals, which are added to give the prod-

uct a sheen of healthfulness and to replace the nutrients that are lost 

whenever whole foods are processed. On the strength of this alchemy 

the cereals group generates higher profits for General Mills than any 

other division. Since the raw materials in processed foods are so abun-

dant and cheap (ADM and Cargill will gladly sell them to all comers) 

protecting whatever is special about the value you add to them is im- 

> perative.
> I

think it was at General Mills that I first heard the term "food sys-

tem." Since then, I've seen in the pages of Food Technology, the monthly 

bible of the food-processing industry, that this term seems to be taking 

over from plain old "food." Food system is glossier and more high-tech 

than food, I guess; it also escapes some of the negative connotations  

> that

got attached to "processed food" during the sixties. It's probably as 

good a term as any when you're describing, as that magazine routinely 

does, new edible materials constructed from "textured vegetable pro- 

> tein,"

or a nutraceutical breakfast cereal so fortified with green tea, 

grape seed extract, and antioxidants that it's not even called a cereal but  

> a

"healthy heart system." 

Exactly what corn is doing in such food systems has less to do with 

nutrition or taste than with economics. For the dream of liberating 

food from nature, which began as a dream of the eaters (to make it less 9 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

perishable) , is now primarily a dream of the feeders —of the corpora-

tions that sell us our food. No one was clamoring for synthetic cheese, 

or a cereal shaped like a bowling pin; processed food has become 

largely a supply-driven business —the business of figuring out clever 

ways to package and market the glut of commodities coming off the 

farm and out of the wet mills. Today the great advantages of processing 

food redound to the processors themselves. For them, nature is fore-

most a problem —not so much of perishable food (though that's always 

a concern when your market is global) as of perishable profits. 

Like every other food chain, the industrial food chain is rooted at 

either end in a natural system: the farmer's field at one end, and the hu-

## man organism at the other. From the capitalist's point of view, both of 

these systems are less than ideal. 

The farm, being vulnerable to the vicissitudes of weather and pests,  

> is

prone to crises of over- and underproduction, both of which can 

hurt business. Rising raw material prices cut into profits, obviously 

enough. Yet the potential boon of falling raw material prices —which 

should allow you to sell a lot more of your product at a lower price 

# —

can't be realized in the case of food because of the special nature of 

your consumer, who can eat only so much food, no matter how cheap   

> it gets.

(Food industry executives used to call this the problem of the "fixed stomach"; economists speak of "inelastic demand.") Nature has 

cursed the companies working the middle of the food chain with a

recipe for falling rates of profits. 

The growth of the American food industry will always bump up 

against this troublesome biological fact: Try as we might, each of us can 

eat only about fifteen hundred pounds of food a year. Unlike many other 

products —CDs, say, or shoes —there's a natural limit to how much food 

## we can each consume without exploding. What this means for the food 

industry is that its natural rate of growth is somewhere around 1 percent 

per year —1 percent being the annual growth rate of the American 

population. The problem is that won't tolerate such an anemic rate of 

growth. 

This leaves companies like General Mills and McDonald's with two THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS * 9 5

options if they hope to grow faster than the population: figure out how 

to get people to spend more money for the same three-quarters of a ton 

of food, or entice them to actually eat more than that. The two strate-

gies are not mutually exclusive, of course, and the food industry ener- 

> getically

pursues them both at the same time. Which is good news 

indeed for the hero of our story, for it happens that turning cheap corn 

into complex food systems is an excellent way to achieve both goals. 

Building processed food out of a commodity like corn doesn't com-

pletely cushion you from the vicissitudes of nature, but it comes close. 

The more complex your food system, the more you can practice "sub-

stitutionism" without altering the taste or appearance of the product. 

So if the price of hydrogenated fat or lecithin derived from corn spikes 

one day, you simply switch to fat or lecithin from soy, and the con-

sumer will never know the difference. (This is why ingredient labels says things like "Contains one or more of the following: corn, soybean, 

or sunflower oil.") As a management consultant once advised his food 

industry clients, "The further a product's identity moves from a specific 

raw material —that is, the more processing steps involved —the less 

vulnerable is its processor" to the variability of nature. 

In fact, there are lots of good reasons to complicate your product 

# —  

> or, as

the industry prefers to say, to "add value" to it. Processing food 

can add months, even years, to its shelf life, allowing you to market  

> globally.

Complicating your product also allows you to capture more of 

the money a consumer spends on food. Of a dollar spent on a whole 

food such as eggs, $0.40 finds its way back to the farmer. By compari-

son, George Naylor will see only $0.04 of every dollar spent on corn 

sweeteners; ADM and Coca-Cola and General Mills capture most of the  

> rest.

(Every farmer I've ever met eventually gets around to telling the 

story about the food industry executive who declared, "There's money 

to be made in food, unless you're trying to grow it.") When Tyson food  

> scientists

devised the chicken nugget in 1 983 , a cheap bulk commodity 

# —

chicken —overnight became a high-value-added product, and most of 9 6 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

the money Americans spend on chicken moved from the farmer's 

pocket to the processor's. 

As Tyson understood, you want to be selling something more than 

a commodity, something more like a service: novelty, convenience, sta-   

> tus, fortification, lately

even medicine. The problem is, a value-added 

product made from a cheap commodity can itself become a commod- 

> ity,

so cheap and abundant are the raw materials. That lesson runs 

straight through the history of a company like General Mills, which 

started out in 1926 as a mill selling whole wheat flour: ground wheat. 

# When that product became a cheap commodity, the company kept 

ahead of the competition by processing the grain a bit more, creating 

bleached and then "enriched" flour. Now they were adding value, sell-

ing not just wheat but an idea of purity and health, too. In time, how- 

> ever,

even enriched white flour became a commodity, so General Mills 

took another step away from nature —from the farm and the plants in 

question —by inventing cake mixes and sweetened breakfast cereals. 

# Now they were selling convenience, with a side of grain and corn sweet- 

> ener,

and today they're beginning to sell cereals that sound an awful lot like medicines. And so it goes, the rushing stream of ever cheaper agri-

cultural commodities driving food companies to figure out new and 

ever more elaborate ways to add value and so induce us to buy more. 

# When I was in Minneapolis I spoke to a General Mills vice president 

## who was launching a new line of organic TV dinners, a product that at  

> first

blush sounded like an oxymoron. The ingredient list went on for- 

> ever,

brimming with additives and obscure fractions of corn: maltodex- 

> trin,

corn starch, xanthan gum. It seems that even organic food has 

succumbed to the economic logic of processing. The executive patiently 

explained that selling unprocessed or minimally processed whole foods 

will always be a fool's game, since the price of agricultural commodi- 

> ties

tends to fall over time, whether they're organic or not. More food 

coming off the farm leads to either falling profits —or more processing. 

The other problem with selling whole foods, he explained, is that it 

will always be hard to distinguish one company's corn or chickens or 

apples from any other company's. It makes much more sense to turn THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS * 97 

the corn into a brand-name cereal, the chicken into a TV dinner, and 

the apples into a component in a nutraceutical food system. 

This last is precisely what one company profiled in a recent issue 

of Food Technology has done. TreeTop has developed a "low-moisture, nat-

urally sweetened apple piece infused with a red-wine extract." Just 

eighteen grams of these apple pieces have the same amount of cancer-

fighting "flavonoid phenols as five glasses of wine and the dietary fiber 

equivalent of one whole apple." Remember the sixties dream of an en- 

> tire

meal served in a pill, like the Jetsons? We've apparently moved from 

the meal-in-a-pill to the pill-in-a-meal, which is to say, not very far at  

> all.

Either way, the message is: We need food scientists to feed us. Of 

course, it was fortified breakfast cereal that first showed the way, by 

supplying more vitamins and minerals than any mere grain could hope  

> to.

Nature, these products implied, was no match for food science. 

The news of TreeTop 's breakthrough came in a recent Food Technology 

trend story titled "Getting More Fruits and Vegetables into Food." I had 

thought fruits and vegetables were already foods, and so didn't need to 

be gotten into them, but I guess that just shows I'm stuck in the food  

> past.

Evidently we're moving into the fourth age of food processing, in 

which the processed food will be infinitely better (i.e., contain more of 

whatever science has determined to be the good stuff) than the whole 

foods on which they're based. The food industry has gazed upon nature 

and found it wanting-—and has gotten to work improving it. 

Back in the seventies, a New York food additive manufacturer called 

International Flavors & Fragrances used its annual report to defend itself 

against the rising threat of "natural foods" and explain why we were 

better off eating synthetics. Natural ingredients, the company pointed 

out rather scarily, are a "wild mixture of substances created by plants 

and animals for completely non-food purposes —their survival and re-

production." These dubious substances "came to be consumed by hu-

mans at their own risk." 

Now, thanks to the ingenuity of modern food science, we had a

choice. We could eat things designed by humans for the express pur-

pose of being eaten by people —or eat "substances" designed by natu-9 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> ral

selection for its own purposes: to, say, snooker a bee or lift a wing 

or (eek!) make a baby. The meal of the future would be fabricated "in the laboratory out of a wide variety of materials," as one food historian 

wrote in 1973, including not only algae and fungi but also petrochem- 

> icals.

Protein would be extracted directly from petroleum and then 

"spun and woven into 'animal' muscle —long, wrist-thick tubes of 'filet  

> steak."'

(Come to think of it, agribusiness has long since mastered this 

trick of turning petroleum into steak, though it still needs corn and cat- 

> tle

to do it.) 

All that's really changed since the high-tech food future of the six-  

> ties is

that the laboratory materials out of which these meals will be 

constructed are nominally natural —the relative prestige of nature and 

modern chemistry having traded places in the years since the rise of en-

vironmentalism. And besides, why go to the trouble and expense of 

manufacturing food from petroleum when there is such a flood of 

cheap carbon coming off the farm? So instead of creating foods whole 

cloth from completely synthetic materials, the industry is building 

them from fortified apple bits, red-wine extract, flavor fractions derived 

from oranges, isoflavones from soy, meat substitutes fashioned from 

mycoprotein, and resistant starches derived from corn. ("Natural rasp-

berry flavor" doesn't mean the flavor came from a raspberry; it may well 

have been derived from corn, just not from something synthetic.) But 

the underlying reductionist premise —that a food is nothing more than 

the sum of its nutrients— remains undisturbed. So we break down the 

plants and animals into their component parts and then reassemble 

them into high-value-added food systems. The omnivore's predilection 

to eat a variety of species is tricked by this protean plant, and even the 

biological limit on his appetite is overcome. 

Resistant starch, the last novelty on that list of ingredients, has the 

corn refiners particularly excited today. They've figured out how to 

tease a new starch from corn that is virtually indigestible. You would 

not think this is a particularly good thing for a food to be, unless of 

course your goal is to somehow get around the biological limit on how 

## much each of us can eat in a year. Since the body can't break down re-THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS 9 9

sistant starch, it slips through the digestive track without ever turning 

into calories of glucose —a particular boon, we're told, for diabetics. 

## When fake sugars and fake fats are joined by fake starches, the food in-

dustry will at long last have overcome the dilemma of the fixed stom-

ach: whole meals you can eat as often or as much of as you like, since 

this food will leave no trace. Meet the ultimate —the utterly elastic! 

# —

industrial eater. SIX 

# THE CONSUMER 

# A Republic of Fat 

In the early years of the nineteenth century, Americans began drinking 

more than they ever had before or since, embarking on a collective 

bender that confronted the young republic with its first major public 

health crisis —the obesity epidemic of its day. Corn whiskey, suddenly 

superabundant and cheap, became the drink of choice, and in 1820 the 

typical American was putting away half a pint of the stuff every day. That 

comes to more than five gallons of spirits a year for every man, woman, 

and child in America. The figure today is less than one. 

As the historian W J. Rorabaugh tells the story in The Alcoholic Repub- 

> lic,

## we drank the hard stuff at breakfast, lunch, and dinner, before work 

and after and very often during. Employers were expected to supply 

spirits over the course of the workday; in fact, the modern coffee break 

began as a late-morning whiskey break called "the elevenses." (Just to 

pronounce it makes you sound tipsy.) Except for a brief respite Sunday 

morning in church, Americans simply did not gather —whether for a

barn raising or quilting bee, corn husking or political rally —without 

passing the whiskey jug. Visitors from Europe —hardly models of sobri-THE CONSUMER: A REPUBLIC OF FAT * 101 

ety themselves —marveled at the free flow of American spirits. "Come 

on then, if you love toping," the journalist William Cobbett wrote his 

fellow Englishmen in a dispatch from America. "For here you may 

drink yourself blind at the price of sixpence." 

The results of all this toping were entirely predictable: a rising tide 

of public drunkenness, violence, and family abandonment, and a spike 

in alcohol-related diseases. Several of the Founding Fathers —including 

George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and John Adams —denounced 

the excesses of "the Alcoholic Republic," inaugurating an American 

quarrel over drinking that would culminate a century later in Pro-

hibition. 

But the outcome of our national drinking binge is not nearly as rel-

evant to our own situation as its underlying cause. Which, put simply, 

was this: American farmers were producing far too much corn. This 

was particularly true in the newly settled regions west of the Appalachi-

ans, where fertile, virgin soils yielded one bumper crop after another. A

mountain of surplus corn piled up in the Ohio River Valley. Much as to- 

> day,

the astounding productivity of American farmers proved to be 

their own worst enemy, as well as a threat to public health. For when 

yields rise, the market is flooded with grain, and its price collapses. 

What happens next? The excess biomass works like a vacuum in re-verse: Sooner or later, clever marketers will figure out a way to induce 

the human omnivore to consume the surfeit of cheap calories. 

As it is today, the clever thing to do with all that cheap corn was to 

process it —specifically, to distill it into alcohol. The Appalachian range 

made it difficult and expensive to transport surplus corn from the lightly  

> settled

Ohio River Valley to the more populous markets of the East, so 

farmers turned their corn into whiskey —a more compact and portable, 

and less perishable, value-added commodity. Before long the price of 

whiskey plummeted to the point that people could afford to drink it by 

the pint. Which is precisely what they did. 

The Alcoholic Republic has long since given way to the Republic of  

> Fat;

we're eating today much the way we drank then, and for some of 

the same reasons. According to the surgeon general, obesity today is of-102 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> ficially

an epidemic; it is arguably the most pressing public health prob-

lem we face, costing the health care system an estimated $90 billion a 

> year.

Three of every five Americans are overweight; one of every five is 

obese. The disease formerly known as adult-onset diabetes has had to 

be renamed Type II diabetes since it now occurs so frequently in chil-

dren. A recent study in the Journal of the .American Medical .Association predicts 

that a child born in 2000 has a one-in-three chance of developing dia-

betes. (An African American child's chances are two in five.) Because of 

diabetes and all the other health problems that accompany obesity, to-

day's children may turn out to be the first generation of Americans 

whose life expectancy will actually be shorter than that of their parents. 

The problem is not limited to America: The United Nations reported that 

in 2000 the number of people suffering from overnutrition —a billion 

# —

had officially surpassed the number suffering from malnutrition —800 

million. 

You hear plenty of explanations for humanity's expanding waist-  

> line, all

of them plausible. Changes in lifestyle (we're more sedentary; 

## we eat out more) . Affluence (more people can afford a high-fat Western 

diet) . Poverty (healthier whole foods cost more) . Technology (fewer of 

us use our bodies in our work; at home, the remote control keeps us 

pinned to the couch). Clever marketing (supersized portions; advertis-

ing to children). Changes in diet (more fats; more carbohydrates; more 

processed foods) 

> .

All these explanations are true, as far as they go. But it pays to go a 

> little

further, to search for the cause behind the causes. Which, very 

simply, is this: When food is abundant and cheap, people will eat more 

of it and get fat. Since 1977 an American's average daily intake of calo- 

> ries

has jumped by more than 1 percent. Those two hundred calories 

have to go somewhere, and absent an increase in physical activity 

(which hasn't happened), they end up being stored away in fat cells in 

our bodies. But the important question is, Where, exactly, did all those 

extra calories come from in the first place? And the answer to that ques-

tion takes us back to the source of almost all calories: the farm. 

Most researchers trace America's rising rates of obesity to the 1 970s. THE CONSUMER: A REPUBLIC OF FAT* 10 

> 3

This was, of course, the same decade that America embraced a cheap-

food farm policy and began dismantling forty years of programs de-

signed to prevent overproduction. Earl Butz, you'll recall, sought to 

drive up agricultural yields in order to drive down the price of the in- 

> dustrial

food chain's raw materials, particularly corn and soybeans. It 

worked: The price of food is no longer a political issue. Since the Nixon 

administration, farmers in the United States have managed to produce 

500 additional calories per person every day (up from 3,300, already 

substantially more than we need); each of us is, heroically, managing to 

put away 200 of those surplus calories at the end of their trip up the 

food chain. Presumably the other 300 are being dumped overseas, or 

turned (once again!) into ethyl alcohol: ethanol for our cars. 

The parallels with the alcoholic republic of two hundred years ago 

are hard to miss. Before the changes in lifestyle, before the clever mar-

keting, comes the mountain of cheap corn. Corn accounts for most of 

the surplus calories we're growing and most of the surplus calories 

we're eating. As then, the smart thing to do with all that surplus grain is  

> to

process it, transform the cheap commodity into a value-added con-

sumer product —a denser and more durable package of calories. In the 

1820s the processing options were basically two: You could turn your 

corn into pork or alcohol. Today there are hundreds of things a proces-

sor can do with corn: They can use it to make everything from chicken 

nuggets and Big Macs to emulsifiers and nutraceuticals. Yet since the 

## human desire for sweetness surpasses even our desire for intoxication, 

the cleverest thing to do with a bushel of corn is to refine it into thirty-

three pounds of high-fructose corn syrup. 

That at least is what we're doing with about 530 million bushels of 

the annual corn harvest —turning it into 17.5 billion pounds of high-

fructose corn syrup. Considering that the human animal did not taste  

> this

particular food until 1980, for HFCS to have become the leading 

source of sweetness in our diet stands as a notable achievement on the 

part of the corn-refining industry, not to mention this remarkable  

> plant.

(But then, plants have always known that one of the surest paths 

to evolutionary success is by gratifying the mammalian omnivore's in-104* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

nate desire for sweetness.) Since 1985, an American's annual consump-

tion of HFCS has gone from forty-five pounds to sixty-six pounds. You 

might think that this growth would have been offset by a decline in 

sugar consumption, since HFCS often replaces sugar, but that didn't 

happen: During the same period our consumption of refined sugar ac-tually went up by five pounds. What this means is that we're eating and 

drinking all that high-fructose corn syrup on top of the sugars we were 

already consuming. In fact, since 1985 our consumption of all added 

sugars —cane, beet, HFCS, glucose, honey, maple syrup, whatever —has 

climbed from 128 pounds to 1 58 pounds per person. 

This is what makes high-fructose corn syrup such a clever thing to 

do with a bushel of corn: By inducing people to consume more calo- 

> ries

than they otherwise might, it gets them to really chomp through 

the corn surplus. Corn sweetener is to the republic of fat what corn 

whiskey was to the alcoholic republic. Read the food labels in your 

kitchen and you'll find that HFCS has insinuated itself into every corner 

of the pantry: not just into our soft drinks and snack foods, where you 

would expect to find it, but into the ketchup and mustard, the breads 

and cereals, the relishes and crackers, the hot dogs and hams. But it is in soft drinks that we consume most of our sixty-six 

pounds of high-fructose corn syrup, and to the red-letter dates in the 

natural history of Zea mays —right up there with teosinte's catastrophic 

sexual mutation, Columbus's introduction of maize to the court of 

Queen Isabella in 1493, and Henry Wallace's first F-l hybrid seed in 

1927 —we must now add the year 1980. That was the year corn first 

became an ingredient in Coca-Cola. By 1984, Coca-Cola and Pepsi had 

switched over entirely from sugar to high-fructose corn syrup. Why? 

Because HFCS was a few cents cheaper than sugar (thanks in part to tar- 

> iffs

on imported sugarcane secured by the corn refiners) and con-

sumers didn't seem to notice the substitution. 

The soft drink makers' switch should have been a straightforward, 

zero-sum trade-off between corn and sugarcane (both, incidentally, 

C-4 grasses) , but it wasn't: We soon began swilling a lot more soda and 

therefore corn sweetener. The reason isn't far to seek: Like corn whiskey THE CONSUMER: A REPUBLIC OF FAT 105 

in the 1820s, the price of soft drinks plummeted. Note, however, that 

Coca-Cola and Pepsi did not simply cut the price of a bottle of cola. That 

would only have hurt profit margins, for how many people are going 

to buy a second soda just because it cost a few cents less? The compa-

nies had a much better idea: They would supersize their sodas. Since a 

> soft

drink's main raw material —corn sweetener —was now so cheap, 

## why not get people to pay just a few pennies more for a substantially 

bigger bottle? Drop the price per ounce, but sell a lot more ounces. So 

began the transformation of the svelte eight-ounce Coke botde into the 

chubby twenty-ouncer dispensed by most soda machines today. 

But the soda makers don't deserve credit for the invention of super- 

> sizing.

That distinction belongs to a man named David Wallerstein. Un- 

> til

his death in 1993, Wallerstein served on the board of directors at 

McDonald's, but in the fifties and sixties he worked for a chain of movie  

> theaters

in Texas, where he labored to expand sales of soda and popcorn 

# —

the high-markup items that theaters depend on for their profitability. 

As the story is told in John Love's official history of McDonald's, Waller- 

> stein tried

everything he could think of to goose up sales —two-for-one  

> deals,

matinee specials —but found he simply could not induce cus-

tomers to buy more than one soda and one bag of popcorn. He thought 

he knew why: Going for seconds makes people feel piggish. 

Wallerstein discovered that people would spring for more popcorn 

and soda —a lot more' —as long as it came in a single gigantic serving. 

Thus was born the two-quart bucket of popcorn, the sixty-four-ounce 

Big Gulp, and, in time, the Big Mac and the jumbo fries, though Ray 

Kroc himself took some convincing. In 1968, Wallerstein went to work 

for McDonald's, but try as he might, he couldn't convince Kroc, the 

company's founder, of supersizing's magic powers.  

> "If

people want more fries," Kroc told him, "they can buy two 

bags." Wallerstein patiently explained that McDonald's customers did 

want more but were reluctant to buy a second bag. "They don't want to 

look like gluttons." 

Kroc remained skeptical, so Wallerstein went looking for proof. He 

began staking out McDonald's oudets in and around Chicago, observ-10 6 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ing how people ate. He saw customers noisily draining their sodas, and 

digging infinitesimal bits of salt and burnt spud out of their little bags 

of French fries. After Wallerstein presented his findings, Kroc relented 

and approved supersized portions, and the dramatic spike in sales con-

firmed the marketer's hunch. Deep cultural taboos against gluttony 

# —

one of the seven deadly sins, after all —had been holding us back. 

Wallerstein 's dubious achievement was to devise the dietary equivalent 

of a papal dispensation: Supersize it! He had discovered the secret to ex-

panding the (supposedly) fixed human stomach. 

## One might think that people would stop eating and drinking these 

gargantuan portions as soon as they felt full, but it turns out hunger 

doesn't work that way. Researchers have found that people (and ani-

mals) presented with large portions will eat up to 30 percent more 

than they would otherwise. Human appetite, it turns out, is surpris-

ingly elastic, which makes excellent evolutionary sense: It behooved 

our hunter-gatherer ancestors to feast whenever the opportunity pre-

sented itself, allowing them to build up reserves of fat against future 

famine. Obesity researchers call this trait the "thrifty gene." And while 

the gene represents a useful adaptation in an environment of food 

scarcity and unpredictability, it's a disaster in an environment of fast-

food abundance, when the opportunity to feast presents itself 24/7. 

Our bodies are storing reserves of fat against a famine that never comes. 

But if evolution has left the modern omnivore vulnerable to the 

blandishments of super sizing, the particular nutrients he's most likely 

to encounter in those supersized portions —lots of added sugar and 

> fat

# —make the problem that much worse. Like most other warm-

blooded creatures, humans have inherited a preference for energy-

dense foods, a preference reflected in the sweet tooth shared by most 

mammals. Natural selection predisposed us to the taste of sugar and fat  

> (its

texture as well as taste) because sugars and fats offer the most en-

ergy (which is what a calorie is) per bite. Yet in nature —in whole 

foods —we seldom encounter these nutrients in the concentrations we 

## now find them in in processed foods: You won't find a fruit with any-THE CONSUMER: A REPUBLIC OF FAT 107 

where near the amount of fructose in a soda, or a piece of animal flesh 

with quite as much fat as a chicken nugget. 

You begin to see why processing foods is such a good strategy for 

getting people to eat more of them. The power of food science lies in   

> its ability

to break foods down into their nutrient parts and then re-

assemble them in specific ways that, in effect, push our evolutionary 

buttons, fooling the omnivore's inherited food selection system. Add  

> fat

or sugar to anything and it's going to taste better on the tongue of an animal that natural selection has wired to seek out energy-dense 

foods. Animal studies prove the point: Rats presented with solutions of 

pure sucrose or tubs of pure lard —goodies they seldom encounter in 

nature —will gorge themselves sick. Whatever nutritional wisdom the  

> rats

are born with breaks down when faced with sugars and fats in un-

natural concentrations —nutrients ripped from their natural context, 

which is to say, from those things we call foods. Food systems can cheat 

by exaggerating their energy density, tricking a sensory apparatus that 

evolved to deal with markedly less dense whole foods.   

> It is

the amped-up energy density of processed foods that gets om-

nivores like us into trouble. Type II diabetes typically occurs when the 

body's mechanism for managing glucose simply wears out from over- 

> use.

Just about everything we eat sooner or later winds up in the blood  

> as

molecules of glucose, but sugars and simple starches turn to glucose  

> faster

than anything else. Type II diabetes and obesity are exactly what 

you would expect to see in a mammal whose environment has over-

whelmed its metabolism with energy-dense foods. 

This begs the question of why the problem has gotten so much 

worse in recent years. It turns out the price of a calorie of sugar or fat 

has plummeted since the 1970s. One reason that obesity and diabetes 

become more prevalent the further down the socioeconomic scale you 

look is that the industrial food chain has made energy-dense foods the 

cheapest foods in the market, when measured in terms of cost per calo- 

> rie.

## A recent study in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition compared the 

"energy cost" of different foods in the supermarket. The researchers 108 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

found that a dollar could buy 1,200 calories of potato chips and cook- 

> ies;

spent on a whole food like carrots, the same dollar buys only 250 

calories. On the beverage aisle, you can buy 875 calories of soda for a 

> dollar,

or 170 calories of fruit juice from concentrate. It makes good 

economic sense that people with limited money to spend on food 

would spend it on the cheapest calories they can find, especially when 

the cheapest calories —fats and sugars —are precisely the ones offering 

the biggest neurobiological rewards. 

Corn is not the only source of cheap energy in the supermarket 

# —

## much of the fat added to processed foods comes from soybeans —but it  

> is

by far the most important. As George Naylor said, growing corn is the 

most efficient way to get energy —calories —from an acre of Iowa 

farmland. That corn-made calorie can find its way into our bodies in 

the form of an animal fat, a sugar, or a starch, such is the protean na-

ture of the carbon in that big kernel. But as productive and protean as 

the corn plant is, finally it is a set of human choices that have made 

these molecules quite as cheap as they have become: a quarter century 

of farm policies designed to encourage the overproduction of this crop 

and hardly any other. Very simply, we subsidize high-fructose corn 

syrup in this country, but not carrots. While the surgeon general is rais-

ing alarms over the epidemic of obesity, the president is signing farm  

> bills

designed to keep the river of cheap corn flowing, guaranteeing 

that the cheapest calories in the supermarket will continue to be the 

unhealthiest. SEVEN 

# THE MEAL 

Fast Food 

The meal at the end of the industrial food chain that begins in an Iowa 

cornfield is prepared by McDonald's and eaten in a moving car. Or at 

least this was the version of the industrial meal I chose to eat; it could 

easily have been another. The myriad streams of commodity corn, after 

being variously processed and turned into meat, converge in all sorts of 

different meals I might have eaten, at KFC or Pizza Hut or Applebee's, 

or prepared myself from ingredients bought at the supermarket. Indus- 

> trial

meals are all around us, after all; they make up the food chain from 

which most of us eat most of the time. 

# My eleven-year-old son, Isaac, was more than happy to join me at 

McDonald's; he doesn't get there often, so it's a treat. (For most Ameri-

can children today, it is no longer such a treat: One in three of them eat  

> fast

food every single day.) Judith, my wife, was less enthusiastic. She's 

careful about what she eats, and having a fast-food lunch meant giving 

up a "real meal," which seemed a shame. Isaac pointed out that she 

could order one of McDonald's new "premium salads" with the Paul 

## Newman dressing. I read in the business pages that these salads are a big 110 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> hit,

but even if they weren't, they'd probably stay on the menu strictly 

for their rhetorical usefulness. The marketers have a term for what a

salad or veggie burger does for a fast-food chain: "denying the denier." 

These healthier menu items hand the child who wants to eat fast food 

a sharp tool with which to chip away at his parents' objections. "But 

## Mom, you can get the salad . .

> ."

Which is exactly what Judith did: order the Cobb salad with Caesar 

dressing. At $3.99, it was the most expensive item on the menu. I ordered 

a classic cheeseburger, large fries, and a large Coke. Large turns out to 

be a full 32 ounces (a quart of soda!) but, thanks to the magical eco-

nomics of supersizing, it cost only 30 cents more than the 16-ounce 

"small." Isaac went with the new white-meat Chicken McNuggets, a

double-thick vanilla shake, and a large order of fries, followed by a new 

dessert treat consisting of freeze-dried pellets of ice cream. That each of 

us ordered something different is a hallmark of the industrial food 

chain, which breaks the family down into its various demographics and 

markets separately to each one: Together we would be eating alone to-

gether, and therefore probably eating more. The total for the three of us 

came to fourteen dollars, and was packed up and ready to go in four 

minutes. Before I left the register I picked up a densely printed handout 

called "A Full Serving of Nutrition Facts: Choose the Best Meal for You." 

# We could have slipped into a booth, but it was such a nice day we 

decided to put the top down on the convertible and eat our lunch in the  

> car,

something the food and the car have both been engineered to ac-

commodate. These days 19 percent of American meals are eaten in the  

> car.

The car has cup holders, front seat and rear, and, except for the   

> salad, all

the food (which we could have ordered, paid for, and picked 

up without opening the car door) can be readily eaten with one 

hand. Indeed, this is the genius of the chicken nugget: It liberated 

chicken from the fork and plate, making it as convenient, waste-free, 

and automobile-friendly as the precondimented hamburger. No doubt 

the food scientists at McDonald's corporate headquarters in Oak Brook,  

> Illinois,

are right now hard at work on the one-handed salad. 

But though Judith's Cobb salad did present a challenge to front-seat THE MEAL: FAST FOOD III 

dining, eating it at fifty-five miles per hour seemed like the thing to do, 

since corn was the theme of this meal: The car was eating corn too, be-

ing fueled in part by ethanol. Even though the additive promises to di-

minish air quality in California, new federal mandates pushed by the 

corn processors require refineries in the state to help eat the corn sur-

plus by diluting their gasoline with 1 percent ethanol.   

> Iate

a lot of McDonald's as a kid. This was in the pre-Wallerstein era, 

## when you still had to order a second little burger or sack of fries if you 

wanted more, and the chicken nugget had not yet been invented. (One memorable childhood McDonald's meal ended when our station wagon 

got rear-ended at a light, propelling my milk shake across the car in 

creamy white lariats.) I loved everything about fast food: the individual 

portions all wrapped up like presents (not having to share with my 

three sisters was a big part of the appeal; fast food was private property   

> at its

best); the familiar meaty perfume of the French fries filling the  

> car;

and the pleasingly sequenced bite into a burger —the soft, sweet  

> roll,

the crunchy pickle, the savory moistness of the meat. 

Well-designed fast food has a fragrance and flavor all its own, a fra-

grance and flavor only nominally connected to hamburgers or French  

> fries

or for that matter to any particular food. Certainly the hamburgers 

and fries you make at home don't have it. And yet Chicken McNuggets 

do, even though they're ostensibly an entirely different food made from 

a different species. Whatever it is (surely the food scientists know) , for 

countless millions of people living now, this generic fast-food flavor is 

one of the unerasable smells and tastes of childhood —which makes it 

a kind of comfort food. Like other comfort foods, it supplies (besides 

nostalgia) a jolt of carbohydrates and fat, which, some scientists now 

believe, relieve stress and bathe the brain in chemicals that make it  

> feel

good. 

Isaac announced that his white-meat McNuggets were tasty, a defi-

nite improvement over the old recipe. McNuggets have come in for a  

> lot

of criticism recently, which might explain the reformulation. Ruling 

in 2003 in a lawsuit brought against McDonald's by a group of obese 

teenagers, a federal judge in New York had defamed the McNugget even ! 12 » THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

as he dismissed the suit. "Rather than being merely chicken fried in a

pan," he wrote in his decision, McNuggets "are a McFrankensteinian 

creation of various elements not utilized by the home cook." After cat-

aloging the thirty-eight ingredients in a McNugget, Judge Sweet sug-

gested that McDonald's marketing bordered on deceptive, since the 

dish is not what it purports to be —that is, a piece of chicken simply 

fried —and, contrary to what a consumer might reasonably expect, ac-

tually contains more fat and total calories than a cheeseburger. Since the 

lawsuit, McDonald's has reformulated the nugget with white meat, and 

begun handing out "A Full Serving of Nutrition Facts."* According to 

the flyer, a serving of six nuggets now has precisely ten fewer calories 

than a cheeseburger. Chalk up another achievement for food science. 

## When I asked Isaac if the new nuggets tasted more like chicken than 

the old ones, he seemed baffled by the question. "No, they taste like 

what they are, which is nuggets," and then dropped on his dad a with-

ering two-syllable "duh." In this consumer's mind at least, the link be-

tween a nugget and the chicken in it was never more than notional, and 

probably irrelevant. By now the nugget constitutes its own genre of food 

for American children, many of whom eat nuggets every day. For Isaac, 

the nugget is a distinct taste of childhood, quite apart from chicken, and 

no doubt a future vehicle of nostalgia —a madeleine in the making. 

Isaac passed one up to the front for Judith and me to sample. It 

looked and smelled pretty good, with a nice crust and bright white in-

terior reminiscent of chicken breast meat. In appearance and texture a

nugget certainly alludes to fried chicken, yet all I could really taste was  

> salt,

that all-purpose fast-food flavor, and, okay, maybe a note of chicken 

bouillon informing the salt. Overall the nugget seemed more like an ab-

straction than a full-fledged food, an idea of chicken waiting to be 

fleshed out. 

The ingredients listed in the flyer suggest a lot of thought goes into 

a nugget, that and a lot of corn. Of the thirty-eight ingredients it takes  

> *Irt

2005 McDonald's announced it would begin printing nutrition information on its packaging. THE MEAL: FAST FOOD / / 3

to make a McNugget, I counted thirteen that can be derived from corn: 

the corn-fed chicken itself; modified cornstarch (to bind the pulverized 

chicken meat); mono-, tri-, and diglycerides (emulsifiers, which keep 

the fats and water from separating); dextrose; lecithin (another emulsi- 

> fier);

chicken broth (to restore some of the flavor that processing 

leaches out) ; yellow corn flour and more modified cornstarch (for the  

> batter);

cornstarch (a filler); vegetable shortening; partially hydro-

genated corn oil; and citric acid as a preservative. A couple of other 

plants take part in the nugget: There's some wheat in the batter, and on 

any given day the hydrogenated oil could come from soybeans, canola, 

or cotton rather than corn, depending on market price and availability. 

According to the handout, McNuggets also contain several com-

pletely synthetic ingredients, quasi-edible substances that ultimately 

come not from a corn or soybean field but from a petroleum refinery 

or chemical plant. These chemicals are what make modern processed 

foods possible, by keeping the organic materials in them from going 

bad or looking strange after months in the freezer or on the road. Listed  

> first

are the "leavening agents": sodium aluminum phosphate, mono-

calcium phosphate, sodium acid pyrophosphate, and calcium lactate. 

These are antioxidants added to keep the various animal and vegetable  

> fats

involved in a nugget from turning rancid. Then there are "anti-

foaming agents" like dimethylpolysiloxene, added to the cooking oil to 

keep the starches from binding to air molecules, so as to produce foam 

during the fry. The problem is evidently grave enough to warrant 

adding a toxic chemical to the food: According to the Handbook of Food  

> Additives,

dimethylpolysiloxene is a suspected carcinogen and an estab-lished mutagen, tumorigen, and reproductive effector; it's also flamma- 

> ble.

But perhaps the most alarming ingredient in a Chicken McNugget   

> is tertiary

butylhydroquinone, or TBHQ, an antioxidant derived from 

petroleum that is either sprayed directly on the nugget or the inside of 

the box it comes in to "help preserve freshness." According to A Con-     

> sumer's Dictionary of Food Additives,

# TBHQ is a form of butane (i.e., lighter  

> fluid)

the FDA allows processors to use sparingly in our food: It can /f4»THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

comprise no more than 0.02 percent of the oil in a nugget. Which is 

probably just as well, considering that ingesting a single gram ofTBHQ 

can cause "nausea, vomiting, ringing in the ears, delirium, a sense of 

suffocation, and collapse." Ingesting five grams ofTBHQ can kill. 

With so many exotic molecules organized into a food of such com- 

> plexity,

you would almost expect a chicken nugget to do something more 

spectacular than taste okay to a child and fill him up inexpensively. 

What it has done, of course, is to sell an awful lot of chicken for com-

panies like Tyson, which invented the nugget —at McDonald's behest 

# —

in 1983. The nugget is the reason chicken has supplanted beef as the 

most popular meat in America. 

Compared to Isaac's nuggets, my cheeseburger is a fairly simple 

construct. According to "A Full Serving of Nutrition Facts," the cheese-

burger contains a mere six ingredients, all but one of them familiar: a

100 percent beef patty, a bun, two American cheese slices, ketchup, 

mustard, pickles, onions, and "grill seasoning," whatever that is. It 

tasted pretty good, too, though on reflection what I mainly tasted were 

the condiments: Sampled by itself, the gray patty had hardly any flavor. 

## And yet the whole package, especially on first bite, did manage to give 

off a fairly convincing burgerish aura. I suspect, however, that owes 

more to the olfactory brilliance of the "grill seasoning" than to the 1 00 

percent beef patty. 

In truth, my cheeseburger's relationship to beef seemed nearly as 

metaphorical as the nugget's relationship to a chicken. Eating it, I had 

to remind myself that there was an actual cow involved in this meal 

# —

most likely a burned-out old dairy cow (the source of most fast-food 

beef) but possibly bits and pieces of a steer like 534 as well. Part of the 

appeal of hamburgers and nuggets is that their boneless abstractions al-

low us to forget we're eating animals. I'd been on the feedlot in Garden 

City only a few months earlier, yet this experience of cattle was so far 

removed from that one as to be taking place in a different dimension. 

No, I could not taste the feed corn or the petroleum or the antibiotics 

or the hormones —or the feedlot manure. Yet while "A Full Serving of 

Nutrition Facts" did not enumerate these facts, they too have gone into THE MEAL: FAST FOOD*M5 

the making of this hamburger, are part of its natural history. That per-

haps is what the industrial food chain does best: obscure the histories 

of the foods it produces by processing them to such an extent that they 

appear as pure products of culture rather than nature —things made 

from plants and animals. Despite the blizzard of information contained 

in the helpful McDonald's flyer —the thousands of words and numbers 

specifying ingredients and portion sizes, calories and nutrients —all  

> this

food remains perfectly opaque. Where does it come from? It comes 

from McDonald's. 

But that's not so. It comes from refrigerated trucks and from ware-

houses, from slaughterhouses, from factory farms in towns like Garden  

> City,

Kansas, from ranches in Sturgis, South Dakota, from food science 

laboratories in Oak Brook, Illinois, from flavor companies on the New 

Jersey Turnpike, from petroleum refineries, from processing plants 

owned by ADM and Cargill, from grain elevators in towns like Jeffer-

son, and, at the end of that long and tortuous trail, from a field of corn 

and soybeans farmed by George Naylor in Churdan, Iowa.  

> It

would not be impossible to calculate exactly how much corn Ju-  

> dith, Isaac,

and I consumed in our McDonald's meal. I figure my 4-ounce 

burger, for instance, represents nearly 2 pounds of corn (based on a cow's 

feed conversion rate of 7 pounds of corn for every 1 pound of gain, half 

of which is edible meat) . The nuggets are a little harder to translate into 

corn, since there's no telling how much actual chicken goes into a

nugget; but if 6 nuggets contain a quarter pound of meat, that would 

have taken a chicken half a pound of feed corn to grow. A 3 2 -ounce soda 

contains 86 grams of high-fructose corn syrup (as does a double-thick 

shake) , which can be refined from a third of a pound of corn; so our 3

drinks used another 1 pound. Subtotal: 6 pounds of corn. 

From here the calculations become trickier because, according to 

the ingredients list in the flyer, corn is everywhere in our meal, but in 

unspecified amounts. There's more corn sweetener in my cheeseburger, 

of all places: The bun and the ketchup both contain HFCS. It's in the 

salad dressing, too, and the sauces for the nuggets, not to mention  

> Isaac's

dessert. (Of the sixty menu items listed in the handout, forty-i 16 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> five

contain HFCS.) Then there are all the other corn ingredients in the 

nugget: the binders and emulsifiers and fillers. In addition to corn 

sweeteners, Isaac's shake contains corn syrup solids, mono- and diglyc-

erides, and milk from corn-fed animals. Judith's Cobb salad is also 

stuffed with corn, even though there's not a kernel in it: Paul Newman 

makes his dressing with HFCS, corn syrup, corn starch, dextrin, cara-

mel color, and xanthan gum; the salad itself contains cheese and eggs 

from corn-fed animals. The salad's grilled chicken breast is injected with 

a "flavor solution" that contains maltodextrin, dextrose, and mono-

sodium glutamate. Sure, there are a lot of leafy greens in Judith's salad 

too, but the overwhelming majority of the calories in it (and there are 

500 of them, when you count the dressing) ultimately come from 

corn. And the French fries? You would think those are mostly potatoes. 

Yet since half of the 540 calories in a large order of fries come from the  

> oil

they're fried in, the ultimate source of these calories is not a potato 

farm but a field of corn or soybeans. 

The calculation finally defeated me, but I took it far enough to esti-

mate that, if you include the corn in the gas tank (a whole bushel right 

there, to make two and a half gallons of ethanol) , the amount of corn 

that went into producing our movable fast-food feast would easily have 

overflowed the car's trunk, spilling a trail of golden kernels on the 

blacktop behind us. 

Some time later I found another way to calculate just how much 

corn we had eaten that day. I asked Todd Dawson, a biologist at Berke- 

> ley,

to run a McDonald's meal through his mass spectrometer and calcu- 

> late

## how much of the carbon in it came originally from a corn plant. It  

> is

hard to believe that the identity of the atoms in a cheeseburger or a

Coke is preserved from farm field to fast-food counter, but the atomic 

signature of those carbon isotopes is indestructible, and still legible to 

the mass spectrometer. Dawson and his colleague Stefania Mambelli 

prepared an analysis showing roughly how much of the carbon in the 

various McDonald's menu items came from corn, and plotted them on 

a graph. The sodas came out at the top, not surprising since they con- 

> sist

of little else than corn sweetener, but virtually everything else we THE MEAL: FAST FOOD « U7  

> ate

revealed a high proportion of corn, too. In order of diminishing 

corniness, this is how the laboratory measured our meal: soda (100 per-

cent corn), milk shake (78 percent), salad dressing (65 percent), chicken nuggets (56 percent), cheeseburger (52 percent), and French fries (23 

percent) . What in the eyes of the omnivore looks like a meal of impres- 

> sive

variety turns out, when viewed through the eyes of the mass spec-

trometer, to be the meal of a far more specialized kind of eater. But 

then, this is what the industrial eater has become: corn's koala. 

So what? Why should it matter that we have become a race of corn 

eaters such as the world has never seen? Is this necessarily a bad thing? 

The answer all depends on where you stand.  

> If

where you stand is in agribusiness, processing cheap corn into  

> forty-five

different McDonald's items is an impressive accomplishment.  

> It

represents a solution to the agricultural contradictions of capitalism, 

the challenge of increasing food industry profits faster than America can 

increase its population. Supersized portions of cheap corn-fixed carbon 

solves the problem of the fixed stomach; we may not be expanding the 

number of eaters in America, but we've figured out how to expand each 

of their appetites, which is almost as good. Judith, Isaac, and I together 

consumed a total of 4,510 calories at our lunch —more than half as 

many as we each should probably consume in a day. We had certainly 

done our parts in chomping through the corn surplus. (We had also 

consumed a lot of petroleum, and not just because we were in a car. To 

grow and process those 4,510 food calories took at least ten times as 

many calories of fossil energy, the equivalent of 1 .3 gallons of oil.)  

> If

where you stand is on one of the lower rungs of America's eco-

nomic ladder, our cornified food chain offers real advantages: not 

cheap food exactly (for the consumer ultimately pays the added cost of 

processing) , but cheap calories in a variety of attractive forms. In the 

long run, however, the eater pays a high price for these cheap calories:  

> obesity,

Type II diabetes, heart disease.  

> If

where you stand is at the lower end of the worlds economic ladder, (I«*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

however, America's corn-fed food chain looks like an unalloyed disas-  

> ter. I

mentioned earlier that all life on earth can be viewed as a compe-

tition for the energy captured by plants and stored in carbohydrates, 

energy we measure in calories. There is a limit to how many of those 

calories the world's arable land can produce each year, and an industrial 

meal of meat and processed food consumes —and wastes —an uncon-

scionable amount of that energy. To eat corn directly (as Mexicans and 

## many Africans do) is to consume all the energy in that corn, but when 

you feed that corn to a steer or a chicken, 90 percent of its energy is 

> lost

# —to bones or feathers or fur, to living and metabolizing as a steer 

or chicken. This is why vegetarians advocate eating "low on the food 

chain"; every step up the chain reduces the amount of food energy by 

a factor of ten, which is why in any ecosystem there are only a fraction  

> as

many predators as there are prey. But processing food also burns en- 

> ergy.

What this means is that the amount of food energy lost in the 

making of something like a Chicken McNugget could feed a great many 

more children than just mine, and that behind the 4,510 calories the 

three of us had for lunch stand tens of thousand of corn calories that 

could have fed a great many hungry people. 

## And how does this corn-fed food chain look if where you stand is 

in the middle of a field of corn? Well, it depends on whether you are 

the corn farmer or the plant. For the corn farmer, you might think the 

cornification of our food system would have redounded to his benefit, 

but it has not. Corn's triumph is the direct result of its overproduction, 

and that has been a disaster for the people who grow it. Growing corn 

and nothing but corn has also exacted a toll on the farmer's soil, the 

quality of the local water and the overall health of his community, the 

biodiversity of his landscape, and the health of all the creatures living 

on or downstream from it. And not only those creatures, for cheap corn 

has also changed, and much for the worse, the lives of several billion 

food animals, animals that would not be living on factory farms if not 

for the ocean of corn on which these animal cities float. 

But return to that Iowa farm field for a moment and look at the 

matter —at us —from the standpoint of the corn plant itself. Corn, corn, THE MEAL: FAST FOOD * 1 19 

corn as far as the eye can see, ten-foot stalks soldiering in perfect thirty-

inch rows to the far horizon, an 80 -million-acre corn lawn rolling 

across the continent. It's a good thing this plant can't form an impres-

sion of us, for how risible that impression would be: the farmers going 

broke cultivating it; the countless other species routed or emiserated by  

> it;

the humans eating and drinking it as fast as they can, some of 

them —like me and my family —in automobiles engineered to drink it, 

too. Of all the species that have figured out how to thrive in a world 

dominated by Homo sapiens, surely no other has succeeded more 

spectacularly —has colonized more acres and bodies —than Zea mays, the 

grass that domesticated its domesticator. You have to wonder why we 

Americans don't worship this plant as fervently as the Aztecs; like they 

once did, we make extraordinary sacrifices to it. 

These, at least, were my somewhat fevered speculations, as we sped 

## down the highway putting away our fast-food lunch. What is it about  

> fast

food? Not only is it served in a flash, but more often than not it's 

eaten that way too: We finished our meal in under ten minutes. Since 

## we were in the convertible and the sun was shining, I can't blame the 

McDonald's ambiance. Perhaps the reason you eat this food quickly is 

because it doesn't bear savoring. The more you concentrate on how it  

> tastes,

the less like anything it tastes. I said before that McDonald's serves 

a kind of comfort food, but after a few bites I'm more inclined to think 

they're selling something more schematic than that —something more  

> like

a signifier of comfort food. So you eat more and eat more quickly, 

hoping somehow to catch up to the original idea of a cheeseburger or 

French fry as it retreats over the horizon. And so it goes, bite after bite, 

until you feel not satisfied exactly, but simply, regrettably, full. PASTORAL 

# GRASS EIGHT 

# ALL FLESH 

# IS GRASS 

1. GREEN ACRES 

Early in the afternoon on the first day of summer, I found myself sitting 

in the middle of an impossibly green pasture, resting. "The longest day 

of the year" is what I would jot down in my notebook in bed late that 

night, followed by "literally," which was then struck out and replaced 

with "figuratively." What can I say? I was tired. I'd spent the afternoon 

making hay, really just lending a hand to a farmer making hay, and af-

ter a few hours in the midday sun hoisting and throwing fifty-pound 

bales onto a hay wagon, I hurt. We think of grass as soft and hospitable  

> stuff,

but once it's been dried in the sun and shredded by machines 

# —

once it's become hay —grass is sharp enough to draw blood and dusty 

enough to thicken lungs. I was covered in chaff, my forearms tattooed 

red with its pinpricks. 

The others —Joel Salatin, whose farm this was; his grown son, 

Daniel; and two helpers —had gone off to the barn for something, leav-

ing me with a welcome moment in the pasture to gather myself before 12 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

## we cranked up the baler again. We were racing to get this hay in before 

thunderstorms predicted for the evening. It was Monday, my first of 

seven days working on the farm, and thus far my principal conclusion 

was that in the event I survived the labors of the week, I would never 

again begrudge a farmer any price he cared to name for his produce: 

one dollar for an egg seemed entirely reasonable; fifty dollars for a steak 

a steal. 

The wail of farm machinery had fallen silent, and in the space it left  

> I

could hear the varied sounds of birds: songbirds in the trees, but also 

the low gossip of hens and the lower throat singing of turkeys. Up on 

the green, green shoulder of hill rising to the west I could see a small 

herd of cattle grazing, and, below them on a gentler slope, several dozen 

portable chicken pens marching in formation down the meadow. 

Laid before me was, I realized, a scene of almost classical pastoral 

beauty —the meadows dotted with contented animals, the backdrop of 

woods, a twisting brook threading through it all —marred only by the  

> fact

that I couldn't just lie here on this springy pasture admiring it for 

the rest of the afternoon. (Wasn't leisure supposed to be a big part of 

the pastoral idyll?) Our culture, perhaps even our biology, disposes us 

to respond to just such a grassy middle landscape, suspended as it is 

halfway between the wilderness of forest and the artifice of civilization. 

"The argument of the verdurous vista," Henry James once called it. He 

had just returned from Europe to tour rural New England, and found 

himself beguiled by Connecticut's pastoral charms in spite of himself 

and all he knew —about history, about the inevitable triumph of the 

machine, about "the bullying railway." A century earlier, of course, 

Thomas Jefferson had made the argument of the verdurous vista with a

force some of us still feel: His agrarian ideal was an attempt to make a 

> literal

American reality out of the old world's pastoral dreams, though 

even he sometimes doubted the middle landscape could survive the ad-

vent of industry. But then, the pastoral idyll was already in trouble even 

in Virgil's time, threatened by the encroaching marshlands on one side, 

the corruptions of civilization on the other. 

The wonder really is that it survives at all. Two centuries and a one-ALL FLESH IS GRASS I 2 5 

hour drive over the Blue Ridge from Monticello, Joel Salatin, a self-

described "Christian-conservative-libertarian-environmentalist-lunatic 

farmer," is attempting again and against all odds to put real-live grass 

under the old agrarian-pastoral ideal, to try to make it new long after 

the triumph of the industrial system Jefferson fretted over has been 

completed. I'd come here to the Shenandoah Valley to see whether such 

a farm, and the alternative food chain it is part of, belonged to the past 

or the future. 

Taking in Salatin 's verdurous vista that afternoon, it occurred to me 

that the only thing missing from the scene was a happy shepherd, but 

then, wasn't that the tall fellow loping toward me in the broad blue sus-

penders and the floppy hat? Salatin 's broad-brimmed straw hat did 

more than protect his neck and face from the Virginia sun: It declared a

political and aesthetic stance, one descended from Virgil through Jeffer-

son with a detour through the sixties counterculture. Whereas a feed 

company cap emblazoned with the logo of an agribusiness giant would 

have said labor, would have implied (in more ways than one) a debt to 

the industrial, Salatin 's jaunty chapeau —made of grass, note, rather 

than plastic —bespoke independence, sufficiency, even ease. "On our 

farm the animals do most of the work," he had told me the first time 

## we talked. At the moment, too tired to stand, the claim sounded to me  

> like

a pretty empty pastoral conceit. But as I would understand by the 

end of my week on Salatin 's farm, the old pastoral idea is alive and, if 

not well exactly, still useful, perhaps even necessary. 

2. THE GENIUS OF THE PLACE 

Polyface Farm raises chicken, beef, turkeys, eggs, rabbits, and pigs, plus 

tomatoes, sweet corn, and berries on one hundred acres of pasture 

patchworked into another 450 acres of forest, but if you ask Joel Salatin 

what he does for a living (Is he foremost a cattle rancher? A chicken 

farmer?) he'll tell you in no uncertain terms, "I'm a grass farmer." The  

> first

time I heard this designation I didn't get it at all —hay seemed the 126 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> least

(and least edible) of his many crops, and he brought none of it to 

market. But undergirding the "farm of many faces," as he calls it, is a

single plant —or rather that whole community of plants for which the 

word "grass" is shorthand. 

"Grass," so understood, is the foundation of the intricate food chain 

Salatin has assembled at Polyface, where a half dozen different animal 

species are raised together in an intensive rotational dance on the 

theme of symbiosis. Salatin is the choreographer and the grasses are his 

verdurous stage; the dance has made Polyface one of the most produc- 

> tive

and influential alternative farms in America. 

Though it was only the third week of June, the pasture beneath me 

had already seen several rotational turns. Before being cut earlier in the 

week for the hay that would feed the farm's animals through the win-  

> ter, it

had been grazed twice by beef cattle, which after each day-long  

> stay

had been succeeded by several hundred laying hens. They'd arrived 

by Eggmobile, a ramshackle portable henhouse designed and built by  

> Salatin.

# Why chickens? "Because that's how it works in nature," Salatin 

explained. "Birds follow and clean up after herbivores." And so during 

their turn in the pasture, the hens had performed several ecological serv- 

> ices

for the cattle as well as the grass: They'd picked the tasty grubs and  

> fly

larvae out of the cowpats, in the process spreading the manure and 

eliminating parasites. (This is what Joel has in mind when he says the 

animals do the work around here; the hens are his "sanitation crew," the 

reason his cattle have no need of chemical parasiticides.) And while they 

were at it, nibbling on the short cattle-clipped grasses they like best, the 

chickens applied a few thousand pounds of nitrogen to the pasture 

# —

and produced several thousand uncommonly rich and tasty eggs. After a

few weeks' rest, the pasture will be grazed again, each steer turning 

these lush grasses into beef at the rate of two or three pounds a day. 

By the end of the season Salatin 's grasses will have been transformed 

by his animals into some 40,000 pounds of beef, 30,000 pounds of 

pork, 10,000 broilers, 1,200 turkeys, 1,000 rabbits, and 35,000 dozen 

eggs. This is an astounding cornucopia of food to draw from a hundred 

acres of pasture, yet what is perhaps still more astonishing is the fact ALL FLESH IS GRASS * 12 7

that this pasture will be in no way diminished by the process —in fact,  

> it

will be the better for it, lusher, more fertile, even springier underfoot  

> (this

thanks to the increased earthworm traffic). Salatin's audacious bet  

> is

that feeding ourselves from nature need not be a zero-sum proposi-

tion, one in which if there is more for us at the end of the season then 

there must be less for nature —less topsoil, less fertility, less life. He's 

betting, in other words, on a very different proposition, one that looks 

an awful lot like the proverbially unattainable free lunch. 

And none of it happens without the grass. In fact, the first time I

met Salatin he'd insisted that even before I met any of his animals, I get 

## down on my belly in this very pasture to make the acquaintance of the  

> less

charismatic species his farm was nurturing that, in turn, were nur-

turing his farm. Taking the ant's-eye view, he ticked off the census of a

single square foot of pasture: orchard grass, foxtail, a couple of differ-

ent fescues, bluegrass, and timothy. Then he cataloged the legumes 

# —

red clover and white, plus lupines —and finally the forbs, broad-leaved 

species like plantain, dandelion, and Queen Anne's lace. And those were  

> just

the plants, the species occupying the surface along with a handful of 

itinerant insects; belowdecks and out of sight tunneled earthworms 

(knowable by their castied mounds of rich castings) , woodchucks, moles 

and burrowing insects, all making their dim way through an unseen 

wilderness of bacteria, phages, eelish nematodes, shrimpy rotifers, and 

miles upon miles of mycelium, the underground filaments of fungi. We 

think of the grasses as the basis of this food chain, yet behind, or be-

neath, the grassland stands the soil, that inconceivably complex commu-

nity of the living and the dead. Because a healthy soil digests the dead to 

nourish the living, Salatin calls it the earth's stomach. 

But it is upon the grass, mediator of soil and sun, that the human 

gaze has always tended to settle, and not just our gaze, either. A great 

many animals, too, are drawn to grass, which partly accounts for our 

## own deep attraction to it: We come here to eat the animals that ate the 

grass that we (lacking rumens) can't eat ourselves. "All flesh is grass." 

The Old Testament's earthy equation reflects a pastoral culture's appre-

ciation of the food chain that sustained it, though the hunter-gatherers 128 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

living on the African savanna thousands of years earlier would have un-

derstood the flesh-grass connection just as well. It's only in our own 

time, after we began raising our food animals on grain in Concentrated An-

imal Feeding Operations (following the dubious new equation, All flesh  

> is

corn) , that our ancient engagement with grass could be overlooked. 

Or should I say partly overlooked, for surely our abiding affection for the stuff —reflected in our scrupulously tended lawns and playing   

> fields, as

well as in the persistence of so many forms of grassy pastoral, 

in everything from poetry to supermarket labels —expresses an uncon-

scious recognition of our one-time dependence. Our inclination to-

ward grass, which has the force of a tropism, is frequently cited as a

prime example of "biophilia," E. O.Wilson's coinage for what he claims  

> is

our inherited genetic attraction for the plants and animals and land-

scapes with which we coevolved. 

Certainly I was feeling the pull of the pastoral that summer after-

noon on Joel Salatin's farm; whether or not its wellsprings were in my 

genes who can really say, but the idea does not strike me as implausible 

in the least. Our species' coevolutionary alliance with the grasses has 

deep roots and has probably done more to ensure our success as a

species than any other, with the possible exception of our alliance with 

the trillion or so bacteria that inhabit the human gut. Working together, 

grass and man have overspread much of the earth, far more of it than 

would ever have been possible working alone. 

This human-grass alliance has, in fact, had two distinct phases, tak-

ing us all the way from our time as hunter-gatherers to agriculturists, or, 

to date this natural history as the grasses might, from the Age of Peren-  

> nials, like

the fescues and bluegrass in these pastures, to the Age of An-

nuals, such as the corn George Naylor and I had planted in Iowa. In the  

> first

phase, which began when our earliest ancestors came down out of 

the trees to hunt animals on the savanna, the human relationship with 

grass was mediated by animals that (unlike us) could digest it, in much 

the same way it still is on Joel Salatin's postmodern savanna. Like Salatin, 

hunter-gatherers deliberately promoted the welfare of the grasses in or-

der to attract and fatten the animals they depended upon. Hunters would ALL FLESH IS GRASS * 129 

periodically set fire to the savanna to keep it free of trees and nourish the  

> soil.

In a sense, they too were "grass farmers," deliberately nurturing 

grasses so that they might harvest meat. 

So at least it appeared to us. Regarded from the grasses' point of view 

the arrangement appears even cleverer. The existential challenge facing 

grasses in all but the most arid regions is how to successfully compete 

against trees for territory and sunlight. The evolutionary strategy they hit 

upon was to make their leaves nourishing and tasty to animals who in 

turn are nourishing and tasty to us, the big-brained creature best 

equipped to vanquish the trees on their behalf. But for this strategy to 

succeed the grasses needed an anatomy that could withstand the rigors of 

both grazing and fire. So they developed a deep root system and a

ground-hugging crown that in many cases puts out runners, allowing the 

grasses to recover quickly from fire and to reproduce even when grazers 

(or lawnmowers) prevent them from ever flowering and going to seed.  

> (I

used to think we were dominating the grass whenever we mowed the 

lawn, but in fact we're playing right into its strategy for world domina- 

> tion,

by helping it outcompete the shrubs and trees.) 

The second phase of the marriage of grasses and humans is usually 

called the "invention of agriculture," a self-congratulatory phrase that 

overlooks the role of the grasses themselves in revising the terms of the 

relationship. Beginning about ten thousand years ago a handful of par- 

> ticularly

opportunistic grass species —the ancestors of wheat, rice, and 

corn —evolved to produce tremendous, nutritionally dense seeds that 

could nourish humans directly, thereby cutting out the intermediary 

animals. The grasses accomplished this feat by becoming annuals, throw-

ing all their energy into making seeds rather than storing some of it un-

derground in roots and rhizomes to get through the winter. These 

monster annual grasses outcompeted not only the trees, which humans 

obligingly cut down to expand the annuals' habitats, but bested the 

perennial grasses, which in most places succumbed to the plow. Their 

## human sponsors ripped up the great perennial-polyculture grasslands 

to make the earth safe for annuals, which would henceforth be grown 

in strict monocultures. 130*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

3. INDUSTRIAL ORGANIC 

Hard to believe, but Joel Salatin and George Naylor are, if regarded 

from a great enough distance, engaged in much the same pursuit: 

growing grasses to feed the cattle, chickens, and pigs that feed us. Com-

pared to Salatin, however, Naylor participates in an infinitely more 

complex industrial system, involving not only corn (and soybeans), 

but fossil fuels, petrochemicals, heavy machinery, CAFOs, and an elab-

orate international system of distribution to move all these elements 

around: the energy from the Persian Gulf, the corn to the CAFOs, the 

animals to slaughter, and their meat finally to a Wal-Mart or McDonald's 

near you. Considered as a whole this system comprises a great ma-

chine, transforming inputs of seed and fossil energy into outputs of 

carbohydrate and protein. And, as with any machine, this one generates 

streams of waste: the nitrogen and pesticides running off the corn- 

> fields;

the manure pooling in the feedlot lagoons; the heat and exhaust 

produced by all the machines within the machine —the tractors and 

trucks and combines. 

Polyface Farm stands about as far from this industrialized sort of 

agriculture as it is possible to get without leaving the planet. Joel's farm 

stands as a kind of alternative reality to George's: Every term governing 

a conventional 500-acre corn-and-bean operation in Churdan, Iowa, 

finds its mirror opposite here on these 550 acres in Swoope, Virginia. 

To wit: 

## NAYLOR FARM POLYFACE FARM  

> Industrial Pastoral

Annual species 

Monoculture  

> Fossil

energy 

Global market 

Specialized 

Perennial species 

Polyculture  

> Solar

energy 

Local market 

> Diversified

Mechanical Biological ALL FLESH IS GRASS * 13 1

Imported fertility 

Myriad inputs 

Local fertility 

Chicken feed 

For half a century now, which is to say for as long as industrial agri-

culture has held sway in America, the principal alternative to its meth-

ods and general approach has gone by the name "organic," a word 

chosen (by J. I. Rodale, the founding editor of Organic Gardening and Farm- 

> ing

magazine) to imply that nature rather than the machine should sup-

ply the proper model for agriculture. Before my journey through the 

organic food industry I would have thought that virtually any organic 

farm would belong on the Polyface side of this ledger. But it turns out 

that this is not necessarily the case: There are now "industrial organic" 

farms that belong firmly on the left-hand side. Then there is this further 

paradox: Polyface Farm is technically not an organic farm, though by 

any standard it is more "sustainable" than virtually any organic farm. Its 

example forces you to think a lot harder about what these words 

# —

sustainable, organic, natural —really mean. 

As it happened, the reason I found my way to Polyface Farm in the  

> first

place had everything to do with Joel Salatin's unusually strict con-

struction of the word sustainable. As part of my research into the or-

ganic food chain, I kept hearing about this organic farmer in Virginia 

## who had no use for the federal government's new organic standards. I

also kept hearing about the exceptional food he was producing. So I

gave him a call, hoping to get some salty quotes about the organic in-

dustry and perhaps get him to ship me a pastured chicken or steak. 

The salty quotes I got. Speaking in a rapid-fire delivery that sounded  

> like

a cross between Bill Clinton and a hopped-up TV evangelist, Salatin 

delivered a scathing indictment of the "organic empire." I struggled to 

keep up with a spirited diatribe that bounced from the "Western con-

quistador mentality" and the "clash of paradigms" to the "innate distinc- 

> tive

desires of a chicken" and the impossibility of taking a "decidedly 

Eastern, connected, holistic product, and selling it through a decidedly 

Western, disconnected, reductionist Wall Streetified marketing system." 

"You know what the best kind of organic certification would be? 13 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Make an unannounced visit to a farm and take a good long look at the 

farmer's bookshelf. Because what you're feeding your emotions and 

thoughts is what this is really all about. The way I produce a chicken is 

an extension of my worldview. You can learn more about that by seeing 

what's sitting on my bookshelf than having me fill out a whole bunch 

of forms."  

> I

asked him what was on his bookshelf. J. I. Rodale. Sir Albert 

Howard. Aldo Leopold. Wes Jackson. Wendell Berry. Louis Bromfield. 

The classic texts of organic agriculture and American agrarianism. 

## "We never called ourselves organic —we call ourselves 'beyond or-

ganic' Why dumb down to a lesser level than we are? If I said I was or-

ganic, people would fuss at me for getting feed corn from a neighbor 

## who might be using atrazine. Well, I would much rather use my money 

to keep my neighborhood productive and healthy than export my dol-  

> lars five

hundred miles away to get 'pure product' that's really coated in 

diesel fuel. There are a whole lot more variables in making the right de-

cision than does the chicken feed have chemicals or not. Like what sort 

of habitat is going to allow that chicken to express its physiological dis-

tinctiveness? A ten-thousand-bird shed that stinks to high heaven or a

## new paddock of fresh green grass every day? Now which chicken shall 

## we call 'organic'? I'm afraid you'll have to ask the government, because 

## now they own the word. 

## "Me and the folks who buy my food are like the Indians —we just 

want to opt out. That's all the Indians ever wanted —to keep their te-

pees, to give their kids herbs instead of patent medicines and leeches. 

They didn't care if there was a Washington, D.C., or a Custer or a USDA;  

> just

leave us alone. But the Western mind can't bear an opt-out option. 

We're going to have to refight the Battle of the Little Bighorn to pre-

serve the right to opt out, or your grandchildren and mine will have no 

choice but to eat amalgamated, irradiated, genetically prostituted, bar-

coded, adulterated fecal spam from the centralized processing con-

glomerate." 

# Whew . . .

As I indicated earlier, I got my quotes, but in the end I didn't get my ALL FLESH IS GRASS / 3 3

food. Before we got off the phone, I asked Salatin if he could ship me 

one of his chickens and maybe a steak, too. He said that he couldn't do   

> that. I

figured he meant he wasn't set up for shipping, so offered him 

## my FedEx account number. 

"No, I don't think you understand. I don't believe it's sustainable 

# —

or 'organic,' if you will —to FedEx meat all around the country. I'm  

> sorry,

but I can't do it." 

This man was serious. 

"Just because we can ship organic lettuce from the Salinas Valley, or 

organic cut flowers from Peru, doesn't mean we should do it, not if we're  

> really

serious about energy and seasonality and bioregionalism. I'm 

afraid if you want to try one of our chickens, you're going to have to 

drive down here to Swoope to pick it up." 

Which is eventually what I did. But before I traveled to Virginia for 

## my week on the farm ("your Paris Hilton adventure," as my wife called    

> it) ,I

spent several weeks touring the organic empire to see if Salatin's 

criticisms, which had taken me by surprise, were just. A new, alterna- 

> tive

food chain was taking shape in this country, and this seemed to me 

an unalloyed good: What had been a fringe movement in the 1960s 

was now a thriving business —the fastest growing corner of the food in-

dustry, in fact. Salatin was suggesting that the organic food chain couldn't 

expand into America's supermarkets and fast-food outlets without sacri-

ficing its ideals. I wondered if this wasn't a case of making the ideal an 

enemy of the good, but Salatin was convinced that industrial organic 

was finally a contradiction in terms. I decided I had to find out if he 

was right. NINE 

# BIG ORGANIC 

1. SUPERMARKET PASTORAL  

> I

enjoy shopping at Whole Foods nearly as much as I enjoy browsing a

good bookstore, which, come to think of it, is probably no accident: 

Shopping at Whole Foods is a literary experience, too. That's not to take 

anything away from the food, which is generally of high quality, much 

of it "certified organic" or "humanely raised" or "free range." But right 

there, that's the point: It's the evocative prose as much as anything else 

that makes this food really special, elevating an egg or chicken breast or 

bag of arugula from the realm of ordinary protein and carbohydrates 

into a much headier experience, one with complex aesthetic, emo-

tional, and even political dimensions. Take the "range-fed" sirloin steak  

> I

recently eyed in the meat case. According to the brochure on the 

counter, it was formerly part of a steer that spent its days "living in 

beautiful places" ranging from "plant-diverse, high-mountain mead-

ows to thick aspen groves and miles of sagebrush-filled flats." Now a

steak like that has got to taste better than one from Safeway, where the BIG ORGANIC ) 3 5 

only accompanying information comes in the form of a number: the 

price, I mean, which you can bet will be considerably less. But I'm ev-idently not the only shopper willing to pay more for a good story. 

With the growth of organics and mounting concerns about the 

wholesomeness of industrial food, storied food is showing up in su-

permarkets everywhere these days, but it is Whole Foods that consis-

tently offers the most cutting-edge grocery lit. On a recent visit I filled 

## my shopping cart with eggs "from cage-free vegetarian hens," milk 

from cows that live "free from unnecessary fear and distress," wild 

salmon caught by Native Americans in Yakutat, Alaska (population 833), 

and heirloom tomatoes from Capay Farm ($4.99 a pound), "one of the 

early pioneers of the organic movement." The organic broiler I picked 

up even had a name: Rosie, who turned out to be a "sustainably farmed" 

"free-range chicken" from Petaluma Poultry, a company whose "farm-

ing methods strive to create harmonious relationships in nature, sustain-

ing the health of all creatures and the natural world." Okay, not the most 

mellifluous or even meaningful sentence, but at least their heart's in the 

right place. 

In several corners of the store I was actually forced to choose be-

tween subtly competing stories. For example, some of the organic milk 

in the milk case was "ultrapasteurized," an extra processing step that 

was presented as a boon to the consumer, since it extends shelf life. But 

then another, more local dairy boasted about the fact they had said no 

to ultrapasteurization, implying that their product was fresher, less 

processed, and therefore more organic. This was the dairy that talked 

about cows living free from distress, something I was beginning to feel 

a bit of myself by this point. 

This particular dairy's label had a lot to say about the bovine   

> lifestyle: Its

Holsteins are provided with "an appropriate environment, 

including shelter and a comfortable resting area, . . . sufficient space, 

proper facilities and the company of their own kind." All this sounded 

pretty great, until I read the story of another dairy selling raw milk 

# — 

> completely

unprocessed— whose "cows graze green pastures all year 

long." Which made me wonder whether the first dairy's idea of an ap-1.36* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

propriate environment for a cow included, as I had simply presumed, a

pasture. All of a sudden the absence from their story of that word 

seemed weirdly conspicuous. As the literary critics would say, the 

writer seemed to be eliding the whole notion of cows and grass. In-

deed, the longer I shopped in Whole Foods, the more I thought that   

> this is

a place where the skills of a literary critic might come in 

handy —those, and perhaps also a journalist's. 

## Wordy labels, point-of-purchase brochures, and certification schemes 

are supposed to make an obscure and complicated food chain more 

legible to the consumer. In the industrial food economy, virtually the 

only information that travels along the food chain linking producer and 

consumer is price. Just look at the typical newspaper ad for a supermar- 

> ket.

The sole quality on display here is actually a quantity: tomatoes 

$0.69 a pound; ground chuck $1.09 a pound; eggs $0.99 a dozen 

# —

special this week. Is there any other category of product sold on such a

reductive basis? The bare-bones information travels in both directions, 

of course, and farmers who get the message that consumers care only 

about price will themselves care only about yield. This is how a cheap 

food economy reinforces itself. 

## One of the key innovations of organic food was to allow some more 

information to pass along the food chain between the producer and the 

consumer —an implicit snatch of narrative along with the number. A 

> certified

organic label tells a little story about how a particular food was 

produced, giving the consumer a way to send a message back to the 

farmer that she values tomatoes produced without harmful pesticides 

or prefers to feed her children milk from cows that haven't been in-

jected with growth hormones. The word "organic" has proved to be 

one of the most powerful words in the supermarket: Without any help 

from government, farmers and consumers working together in this 

way have built an $ 1 1 billion industry that is now the fastest growing 

sector of the food economy. 

Yet the organic label itself —like every other such label in the BIG ORGANIC / 3 7

supermarket —is really just an imperfect substitute for direct observa-

tion of how a food is produced, a concession to the reality that most 

people in an industrial society haven't the time or the inclination to fol-

low their food back to the farm, a farm which today is apt to be, on av-erage, fifteen hundred miles away. So to bridge that space we rely on  

> certifiers

and label writers and, to a considerable extent, our imagina-

tion of what the farms that are producing our food really look like. The 

organic label may conjure an image of a simpler agriculture, but its very 

existence is an industrial artifact. The question is, what about the farms 

themselves? How well do they match the stories told about them? 

Taken as a whole, the story on offer in Whole Foods is a pastoral 

narrative in which farm animals live much as they did in the books we 

read as children, and our fruits and vegetables grow in well-composted  

> soils

on small farms much like Joel Salatin's. "Organic" on the label 

conjures up a rich narrative, even if it is the consumer who fills in most 

of the details, supplying the hero (American Family Farmer), the villain 

(Agribusinessman) , and the literary genre, which I've come to think of  

> as

Supermarket Pastoral. By now we may know better than to believe  

> this

too simple story, but not much better, and the grocery store poets do 

everything they can to encourage us in our willing suspension of dis-

> belief.

Supermarket Pastoral is a most seductive literary form, beguiling 

enough to survive in the face of a great many discomfiting facts. I sus-

pect that's because it gratifies some of our deepest, oldest longings, not 

merely for safe food, but for a connection to the earth and to the hand- 

> ful

of domesticated creatures we've long depended on. Whole Foods 

understands all this better than we do. One of the company's marketing 

consultants explained to me that the Whole Foods shopper feels that by 

buying organic he is "engaging in authentic experiences" and imagina- 

> tively

enacting a "return to a Utopian past with the positive aspects of 

modernity in tact." This sounds a lot like Virgilian pastoral, which also 

tried to have it both ways. In The Machine in the Garden Leo Marx writes that  

> Virgil's

shepherd Tityr us, no primitive, "Enjoys the best of both worlds 

# —

the sophisticated order of art and the simple spontaneity of nature." In 13 8 * TH E OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

keeping with the pastoral tradition, Whole Foods offers what Marx 

terms "a landscape of reconciliation" between the realms of nature and 

culture, a place where, as the marketing consultant put it, "people will 

come together through organic foods to get back to the origin of 

things" —perhaps by sitting down to enjoy one of the microwaveable 

organic TV dinners (four words I never expected to see conjoined) 

stacked in the frozen food case. How's that for having it both ways? 

Of course the trickiest contradiction Whole Foods attempts to rec-

oncile is the one between the industrialization of the organic food in-

dustry of which it is a part and the pastoral ideals on which that 

industry has been built. The organic movement, as it was once called, 

has come a remarkably long way in the last thirty years, to the point 

where it now looks considerably less like a movement than a big busi-

ness. Lining the walls above the sumptuously stocked produce section 

in my Whole Foods are full-color photographs of local organic farmers 

accompanied by text blocks setting forth their farming philosophies. A

handful of these farms —Capay is one example —still sell their produce 

to Whole Foods, but most are long gone from the produce bins, if not 

yet the walls. That's because Whole Foods in recent years has adopted 

the grocery industry's standard regional distribution system, which 

makes supporting small farms impractical. Tremendous warehouses 

buy produce for dozens of stores at a time, which forces them to deal 

exclusively with tremendous farms. So while the posters still depict 

family farmers and their philosophies, the produce on sale below them 

comes primarily from the two big corporate organic growers in Cali-

fornia, Earthbound Farm and Grimmway Farms,* which together dom-

inate the market for organic fresh produce in America. (Earthbound 

alone grows 80 percent of the organic lettuce sold in America.) 

As I tossed a plastic box of Earthbound prewashed spring mix salad 

into my Whole Foods cart, I realized that I was venturing deep into the 

belly of the industrial beast Joel Salatin had called "the organic empire." 

*Grimmway Farms owns Cal-Organic, one of the most ubiquitous organic brands in the super-

> market.

BIG ORGANIC 1 i 9

(Speaking of my salad mix, another small, beyond organic farmer, a friend 

of Joel's, had told me he "wouldn't use that stuff to make compost" —the 

organic purist's stock insult.) But I'm not prepared to accept the premise 

that industrial organic is necessarily a bad thing, not if the goal is to re-

form a half-trillion-dollar food system based on chain supermarkets and 

the consumer's expectations that food be convenient and cheap. 

And yet to the extent that the organic movement was conceived as 

a critique of industrial values, surely there comes a point when the 

process of industrialization will cost organic its soul (to use a word still 

uttered by organic types without irony), when Supermarket Pastoral 

becomes more fiction than fact: another lie told by marketers. 

The question is, has that point been reached, as Joel Salatin sug-

gests? Just how well does Supermarket Pastoral hold up under close 

reading and journalistic scrutiny? 

About as well as you would expect anything genuinely pastoral to 

hold up in the belly of an $ 1 1 billion industry, which is to say not very 

well at all. At least that's what I discovered when I traced a few of the 

items in my Whole Foods cart back to the farms where they were grown.  

> I

learned, for example, that some (certainly not all) organic milk comes 

from factory farms, where thousands of Holsteins that never encounter 

a blade of grass spend their days confined to a fenced "dry lot," eating  

> (certified

organic) grain and tethered to milking machines three times 

a day. The reason much of this milk is ultrapasteurized (a high-heat 

process that damages its nutritional quality) is so that big companies  

> like

Horizon and Aurora can sell it over long distances. I discovered or-

ganic beef being raised in "organic feedlots" and organic high-fructose 

corn syrup —more words I never expected to see combined. And I

learned about the making of the aforementioned organic TV dinner, a

microwaveable bowl of "rice, vegetables, and grilled chicken breast 

with a savory herb sauce." Country Herb, as the entree is called, turns 

out to be a highly industrialized organic product, involving a choreog-

raphy of thirty-one ingredients assembled from far-flung farms, labo-140* THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

ratories, and processing plants scattered over a half-dozen states and 

two countries, and containing such mysteries of modern food technol-

ogy as high-oleic safflower oil, guar and xanthan gum, soy lecithin, 

carrageenan, and "natural grill flavor." Several of these ingredients are 

synthetic additives permitted under federal organic rules. So much for 

"whole" foods. The manufacturer of Country Herb is Cascadian Farm, 

a pioneering organic farm turned processor in Washington State that is 

## now a wholly owned subsidiary of General Mills. (The Country Herb 

chicken entree has since been discontinued.)  

> I

also visited Rosie the organic chicken at her farm in Petaluma, 

which turns out to be more animal factory than farm. She lives in a 

shed with twenty thousand other Rosies, who, aside from their certi-

fied organic feed, live lives little different from that of any other indus- 

> trial

chicken. Ah, but what about the "free-range" lifestyle promised on 

the label? True, there's a little door in the shed leading out to a narrow 

grassy yard. But the free-range story seems a bit of a stretch when you 

discover that the door remains firmly shut until the birds are at least five 

or six weeks old —for fear they'll catch something outside —and the 

chickens are slaughtered only two weeks later. 

2. FROM PEOPLE'S PARK TO 

# PETALUMA POULTRY  

> If

you walk five blocks north from the Whole Foods in Berkeley along 

Telegraph Avenue and then turn right at Dwight Street, you'll soon 

come to a trash- strewn patch of grass and trees dotted with the tattered 

camps of a few dozen homeless people. Mostly in their fifties and six- 

> ties,

some still affecting hippie styles of hair and dress, these men and 

## women pass much of their days sleeping and drinking, like so many of 

the destitute everywhere. Here, though, they also spend time tending 

scruffy little patches of flowers and vegetables —a few stalks of corn, 

some broccoli plants gone to seed. People's Park today is the saddest of 

places, a blasted monument to sixties' hopes that curdled a long time BIG ORGANIC 1 4 1

ago. And yet, while the economic and social distances separating the 

well-heeled shoppers cruising the aisles at Whole Foods from the un-

heeled homeless in People's Park could not be much greater, the two 

neighborhood institutions are branches of the same unlikely tree. 

Indeed, were there any poetic justice in the world, the executives at 

Whole Foods would have long ago erected a commemorative plaque at 

People's Park and a booth to give away organic fruits and vegetables. 

The organic movement, much like environmentalism and feminism, 

has deep roots in the sixties' radicalism that briefly flourished on this  

> site;

organic is one of several tributaries of the counterculture that 

ended up disappearing into the American mainstream, but not before 

significantly altering its course. And if you trace that particular tributary  

> all

the way back to its spring, your journey will eventually pass through  

> this

park. 

People's Park was born on April 20, 1969, when a group calling it- 

> self

the Robin Hood Commission seized a vacant lot owned by the Uni-

versity of California and set to work rolling out sod, planting trees, and, 

perhaps most auspiciously, putting in a vegetable garden. Calling them- 

> selves

"agrarian reformers," the radicals announced that they wanted to 

establish on the site the model of a new cooperative society built from 

the ground up; that included growing their own "uncontaminated" 

food. One of the inspirations for the commission's act of civil disobe-

dience was the example of the Diggers in seventeenth-century England, 

## who had also seized public land with the aim of growing food to give 

away to the poor. In People's Park that food would be organic, a word   

> that at

the time brimmed with meanings that went far beyond any par- 

> ticular

agricultural method. 

In Appetite for Change, his definitive account of how the sixties' coun-

terculture changed the way we eat, historian Warren J. Belasco writes  

> that

the events in People's Park marked the "greening" of the counter- 

> culture,

the pastoral turn that would lead to the commune movement 

in the countryside, to food co-ops and "guerilla capitalism," and, even-  

> tually, to

the rise of organic agriculture and businesses like Whole 

Foods. The moment for such a turn to nature was ripe in 1969: DDT I 42 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

was in the news, an oil spill off Santa Barbara had blackened California's 

coastline, and Cleveland's Cuyahoga River had caught fire. Overnight,  

> it

seemed, "ecology" was on everybody's lips, and "organic" close 

behind. 

As Belasco points out, the word "organic" had enjoyed a currency 

among nineteenth-century English social critics, who contrasted the 

social fragmentation and atomism wrought by the Industrial Revolu-

tion with the ideal of a lost organic society, one where the bonds of 

affection and cooperation still held. Organic stood for everything in-

dustrial was not. But applying the word "organic" to food and farming 

occurred much more recently: In the 1940s in the pages of Organic Gar- 

> dening

and Farming. Founded in 1 940 by J. I. Rodale, a health-food fanatic 

from New York City's Lower East Side, the magazine devoted its pages to 

the agricultural methods and health benefits of growing food without 

synthetic chemicals —"organically." Joel Salatin's grandfather was a char- 

> ter

subscriber.  

> Organic

Gardening and Farming struggled along in obscurity until 1969, 

## when an ecstatic review in the Whole Earth Catalog brought it to the atten-

tion of hippies trying to figure out how to grow vegetables without 

patronizing the military-industrial complex. "If I were a dictator deter-

mined to control the national press," the Whole Earth correspondent wrote,   

> Organic Gardening

would be the first publication I'd squash, be-

cause it's the most subversive. I believe that organic gardeners 

are in the forefront of a serious effort to save the world by 

changing man's orientation to it, to move away from the col-  

> lective, centrist,

superindustrial state, toward a simpler, realer 

one-to-one relationship with the earth itself. 

Within two years Organic Gardening and Farming's circulation climbed 

from 400, 000 to 700,000. 

As the Whole Earth encomium suggests, the counterculture had mar-

ried the broader and narrower definitions of the word "organic." The or-BIG ORGANIC 143 

ganic garden planted in People's Park (soon imitated in urban lots across 

the country) was itself conceived of as a kind of scale model of a more 

cooperative society, a landscape of reconciliation that proposed to re-

place industrialism's attitude of conquest toward nature with a softer, 

more harmonious approach. A pastoral Utopia in miniature, such a gar-

den embraced not only the humans who tended and ate from it but "as 

many life kingdoms as possible," in the words of an early account of 

Berkeley's People's Gardens in an underground paper called Good Times. 

The vegetables harvested from these plots, which were sometimes called 

"conspiracies of soil," would supply, in addition to wholesome calories, 

an "edible dynamic" —a "new medium through which people can  

> relate

to one another and their nourishment." For example, organic 's 

rejection of agricultural chemicals was also a rejection of the war ma-

chine, since the same corporations —Dow, Monsanto —that manufac-

tured pesticides also made napalm and Agent Orange, the herbicide with 

which the U.S. military was waging war against nature in Southeast Asia. 

Eating organic thus married the personal to the political. 

Which was why much more was at stake than a method of farming. 

Acting on the ecological premise that everything's connected to every-

thing else, the early organic movement sought to establish not just an 

alternative mode of production (the chemical-free farms) , but an alter-

native system of distribution (the anticapitalist food co-ops) , and even 

an alternative mode of consumption (the "countercuisine"). These were 

the three struts on which organic 's revolutionary program stood; since 

ecology taught "you can never do only one thing," what you ate was 

inseparable from how it was grown and how it reached your table. 

## A countercuisine based on whole grains and unprocessed organic 

ingredients rose up to challenge conventional industrial "white bread 

food." ("Plastic food" was an epithet thrown around a lot.) For a host of 

reasons that seem ridiculous in retrospect, brown foods of all kinds 

# — 

> rice,

bread, wheat, eggs, sugar, soy sauce, tamari —were deemed morally 

superior to white foods. Brown foods were less adulterated by industry, 

of course, but just as important, eating them allowed you to express I44*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

your solidarity with the world's brown peoples. (Only later would the 

health benefits of these whole foods be recognized, not the first or last 

time an organic conceit would find scientific backing.) But perhaps best 

of all, brown foods were also precisely what your parents didn't eat. 

# How to grow this stuff without chemicals was a challenge, espe- 

> cially

to city kids coming to the farm or garden with a head full of 

pastoral ideals and precisely no horticultural experience. The rural 

## communes served as organic agriculture's ramshackle research stations, 

places where neophyte farmers could experiment with making com-

post and devising alternative methods of pest control. The steepness of 

their learning curve was on display in the food co-ops, where sorry-

looking organic produce was the rule for many years. But the freak 

farmers stuck with it, following Rodale's step-by-step advice, and some 

of them went on to become excellent farmers. 

One such notable success was Gene Kahn, the founder of Cascadian 

Farm, the company responsible for the organic TV dinner in my Whole 

Foods cart. Today Cascadian Farm is foremost a General Mills brand, but  

> it

began as a quasi-communal hippie farm, located on a narrow, gor-

geous shelf of land wedged between the Skagit River and the North 

Cascades about seventy-five miles northeast of Seattle. (The idyllic little 

farmstead depicted on the package turns out to be a real place.) Origi-

nally called the New Cascadian Survival and Reclamation Project, the 

farm was started in 1971 by Gene Kahn with the idea of growing food 

for the collective of environmentally minded hippies he had hooked up 

with in nearby Bellingham. At the time Kahn was a twenty-four-year-

old grad school dropout from the South Side of Chicago, who had been 

inspired by Silent Spring and Diet for a Small Planet to go back to the land 

# —

and from there to change the American food system. This particular 

dream was not so outrageous in 1971, but Kahn's success in actually re-

alizing it surely is: He went on to become a pioneer of the organic 

movement and probably has done as much as anyone to move organic 

food into the mainstream, getting it out of the food co-op and into the BIG ORGANIC I 4 5

supermarket. Today, the eponymous Cascadian Farm is a General Mills 

showcase —"a PR farm," as its founder freely acknowledges —arid Kahn, 

erstwhile hippie farmer, is a General Mills vice president. Cascadian 

Farm is precisely what Joel Salatin has in mind when he talks about an 

organic empire. 

Like most of the early organic farmers, Kahn had no idea what he 

was doing at first, and he suffered his share of crop failures. In 1971 or-

ganic agriculture was in its infancy —a few hundred scattered amateurs 

learning by trial and error how to grow food without chemicals, an ad 

hoc grassroots R&D effort for which there was no institutional support. 

(In fact, the USDA was actively hostile to organic agriculture until re- 

> cently,

viewing it —quite rightly —as a critique of the industrialized 

agriculture the USDA was promoting.) What the pioneer organic farm-

ers had instead of the USDA's agricultural extension service was Organic 

Gardening and Farming (to which Kahn subscribed) and the model of vari-

ous premodern agricultural systems, as described in books like Farmers    

> of Forty Centuries

by F. H. King and Sir Albert Howard's The Soil and Health 

and An Agricultural Testament. This last book may fairly be called the move-

ment's bible. 

Perhaps more than any other single writer, Sir Albert Howard (1873- 

> 1

947) , an English agronomist knighted after his thirty years of research 

in India, provided the philosophical foundations for organic agricul- 

> tural.

Even those who never read his 1940 Testament nevertheless ab-

sorbed his thinking through the pages of Rodale's Organic Gardening and 

Farming, where he was lionized, and in the essays of Wendell Berry, 

## who wrote an influential piece about Howard in the The Last Whole Earth  

> Catalog

in 1971. Berry seized particularly on Howard's arresting —and 

prescient —idea that we needed to treat "the whole problem of health 

in soil, plant, animal and man as one great subject." 

For a book that devotes so many of its pages to the proper making 

of compost, An Agricultural Testament turns out to be an important work of 

philosophy as well as of agricultural science. Indeed, Howard's drawing / 4 6 '• THE OMNJVORE'S DILEMMA 

of lines of connection between so many seemingly discrete realms 

# —

from soil fertility to "the national health"; from the supreme impor-

tance of animal urine to the limitations of the scientific method —is his 

signal contribution, his method as well as his message. Even though 

Howard never uses the term "organic," it is possible to tease out all the 

## many meanings of the word —as a program for not just agricultural but 

social renovation —from his writings. To measure the current definition 

of organic against his genuinely holistic conception is to appreciate just 

## how much it has shrunk. 

Like many works of social and environmental criticism, An Agricul-   

> tural Testament is

in broad outline the story of a Fall. In Howard's case, the 

serpent in question is a nineteenth-century German chemist by the 

name of Baron Justus von Liebig, his tempting fruit a set of initials: 

NPK. It was Liebig, in his 1 840 monograph Chemistry in Its Application to  

> Agriculture,

## who set agriculture on its industrial path when he broke 

## down the quasi-mystical concept of fertility in soil into a straightfor-

ward inventory of the chemical elements plants require for growth. At 

a stroke, soil biology gave way to soil chemistry, and specifically to the 

three chemical nutrients Liebig highlighted as crucial to plant growth: 

nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, or to use these elements' initials 

from the periodic table, N-P-K. (The three letters correspond to the 

three-digit designation printed on every bag of fertilizer.) Much of 

Howard's work is an attempt to demolish what he called the "NPK 

mentality." 

The NPK mentality embraces a good deal more than fertilizer, how- 

> ever.

Indeed, to read Howard is to begin to wonder if it might not be 

one of the keys to everything wrong with modern civilization. In 

Howard's thinking, the NPK mentality serves as a shorthand for both 

the powers and limitations of reductionist science. For as followers of 

Liebig discovered, NPK "works": If you give plants these three ele-

ments, they will grow. From this success it was a short step to drawing 

the conclusion that the entire mystery of soil fertility had been solved.  

> It

fostered the wholesale reimagining of soil (and with it agriculture) BIG ORGANIC 1 4 7

from a living system to a kind of machine: Apply inputs of NPK at this 

end and you will get yields of wheat or corn on the other end. Since 

treating the soil as a machine seemed to work well enough, at least in 

the short term, there no longer seemed any need to worry about such 

quaint things as earthworms and humus. 

## Humus is the stuff in a handful of soil that gives it its blackish cast 

and characteristic smell. It's hard to say exactly what humus is because   

> it is

so many things. Humus is what's left of organic matter after it has 

been broken down by the billions of big and small organisms that in-

habit a spoonful of earth —the bacteria, phages, fungi, and earthworms 

responsible for decomposition. (The psalmist who described life as a 

> transit

from "dust to dust" would have been more accurate to say "hu-

mus to humus.") But humus is not a final product of decomposition so 

## much as a stage, since a whole other group of organisms slowly breaks 

humus down into the chemical elements plants need to grow, elements 

including, but not limited to, nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. 

This process is as much biological as chemical, involving the symbiosis 

of plants and the mycorrhizal fungi that live in and among their roots; 

the fungi offer soluble nutrients to the roots, receiving a drop of su-

crose in return. Another critical symbiotic relationship links plants to 

the bacteria in a humus-rich soil that fix atmospheric nitrogen, putting  

> it

into a form the plants can use. But providing a buffet of nutrients to 

plants is not the only thing humus does: It also serves as the glue that 

binds the minute mineral particles in soil together into airy crumbs 

and holds water in suspension so that rainfall remains available to plant 

roots instead of instandy seeping away. 

To reduce such a vast biological complexity to NPK represented the  

> scientific

method at its reductionist worst. Complex qualities are re-

duced to simple quantities; biology gives way to chemistry. As Howard 

was not the first to point out, that method can only deal with one or 

two variables at a time. The problem is that once science has reduced a

complex phenomenon to a couple of variables, however important 

they may be, the natural tendency is to overlook everything else, to as-148* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

sume that what you can measure is all there is, or at least all that really 

matters. When we mistake what we can know for all there is to know, a

healthy appreciation of one's ignorance in the face of a mystery like soil  

> fertility

gives way to the hubris that we can treat nature as a machine. 

Once that leap has been made, one input follows another, so that when 

the synthetic nitrogen fed to plants makes them more attractive to in-

sects and vulnerable to disease, as we have discovered, the farmer turns 

to chemical pesticides to fix his broken machine. 

In the case of artificial manures —the original term for synthetic 

> fertilizers

# —Howard contended that our hubris threatened to damage 

the health not only of the soil (since the harsh chemicals kill off bio-

logical activity in humus) but of "the national health" as well. He 

linked the health of the soil to the health of all the creatures that de-

pended on it, an idea that, once upon a time before the advent of in-

dustrial agriculture, was in fact a commonplace, discussed by Plato and 

Thomas Jefferson, among many others. Howard put it this way: "Arti- 

> ficial

manures lead inevitably to artificial nutrition, artificial food, arti- 

> ficial

animals and finally to artificial men and women." 

Howard's flight of rhetoric might strike our ears as a bit over the top 

(we are talking about fertilizer, after all) , but it was written in the heat 

of the pitched battle that accompanied the introduction of chemical 

agriculture to England in the 1930s and 1940s. "The great humus con-

troversy," as it was called, actually reached the floor of the House of 

Lords in 1 943 , a year when one might have thought there were more 

pressing matters on the agenda. But England's agriculture ministry was 

promoting the new fertilizers, and many farmers complained their pas-

tures and animals had become less robust as a result. Howard and his  

> allies

were convinced that "history will condemn [chemical fertilizer] 

as one of the greatest misfortunes to have befallen agriculture and 

mankind." He claimed that the wholesale adoption of artificial manures 

would destroy the fertility of the soil, leave plants vulnerable to pests 

and disease, and damage the health of the animals and peoples eating 

those plants, for how could such plants be any more nutritious than the  

> soil

in which they grew? Moreover, the short-term boosts in yield that BIG ORGANIC 1 49  

> fertilizers

delivered could not be sustained; since the chemicals would 

eventually destroy the soil's fertility, today's high yields were robbing 

the future. 

Needless to say, the great humus controversy of the 1 940s was set-

tled in favor of the NPK mentality. 

Howard pointed down another path. "We now have to retrace our 

steps," he wrote, which meant jettisoning the legacy of Liebig and in-

dustrial agriculture. "We have to go back to nature and to copy the 

methods to be seen in the forest and prairie." Howard's call to redesign 

the farm as an imitation of nature wasn't merely rhetorical; he had spe- 

> cific

practices and processes in mind, which he outlined in a paragraph  

> at

the beginning of An Agricultural Testament that stands as a fair summary 

of the whole organic ideal: 

Mother earth never attempts to farm without live stock; she always raises mixed crops; great pains are taken to preserve 

the soil and to prevent erosion; the mixed vegetable and ani-

mal wastes are converted into humus; there is no waste; the processes of growth and the processes of decay balance one 

another; the greatest care is taken to store the rainfall; both 

plants and animals are left to protect themselves against dis-

> ease.

Each of the biological processes at work in a forest or prairie could 

have its analog on a farm: Animals could feed on plant wastes as they do 

in the wild; in turn their wastes could feed the soil; mulches could pro- 

> tect

bare soil in the same way leaf litter in a forest does; the compost  

> pile,

acting like the lively layer of decomposition beneath the leaf litter, 

could create humus. Even the diseases and insects would perform the 

salutary function they do in nature: to eliminate the weakest plants and 

animals, which he predicted would be far fewer in number once the 

system was operating properly. For Howard, insects and diseases —the 150 THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

bane of industrial agriculture —are simply "nature's censors," useful to 

the farmer for "pointing out unsuitable varieties and methods of farm-

ing inappropriate to the locality." On a healthy farm pests would be no 

more prevalent than in a healthy wood or pasture, which should be 

agriculture's standard. Howard was thus bidding farmers to regard 

their farms less like machines than living organisms. 

The notion of imitating whole natural systems stands in stark oppo-

sition to reductionist science, which works by breaking such systems 

## down into their component parts in order to understand how they 

work and then manipulating them —one variable at a time. In this sense, 

Howard's concept of organic agriculture is premodern, arguably even  

> antiscientific:

He's telling us we don't need to understand how humus 

works or what compost does in order to make good use of it. Our ig-

norance of the teeming wilderness that is the soil (even the act of re-

garding it as a wilderness) is no impediment to nurturing it. To the 

contrary, a healthy sense of all we don't know —even a sense of mystery 

# —

keeps us from reaching for oversimplifications and technological silver 

> bullets.

## A charge often leveled against organic agriculture is that it is more 

philosophy than science. There's some truth to this indictment, if that is 

what it is, though why organic farmers should feel defensive about it is  

> itself

a mystery, a relic, perhaps, of our fetishism of science as the only 

credible tool with which to approach nature. In Howard's conception, 

the philosophy of mimicking natural processes precedes the science of 

understanding them. The peasant rice farmer who introduces ducks 

and fish to his paddy may not understand all the symbiotic relation-

ships he's put in play —that the ducks and fish are feeding nitrogen to 

the rice and at the same time eating the pests. But the high yields of 

food from this ingenious polyculture are his to harvest even so. 

The philosophy underlying Howard's conception of organic agri-

culture is a variety of pragmatism, of course, the school of thought that  

> is

willing to call "true" whatever works. Charles Darwin taught us that 

a kind of pragmatism —he called it natural selection —is at the very 

heart of nature, guiding evolution: What works is what survives. This is BIG ORGANIC * I 5 I

## why Howard spent so much time studying peasant agricultural systems 

in India and elsewhere: The best ones survived as long as they did be-

cause they brought food forth from the same ground year after year 

without depleting the soil. 

In Howard's agronomy, science is mostly a tool for describing what 

works and explaining why it does. As it happens, in the years since 

Howard wrote, science has provided support for a great many of his 

unscientific claims: Plants grown in synthetically fertilized soils are less 

nourishing than ones grown in composted soils; 1

such plants are more 

vulnerable to diseases and insect pests; 2 polycultures are more pro-

ductive and less prone to disease than monocultures; 3 and that in fact 

the health of the soil, plant, animal, human, and even nation are, as 

Howard claimed, connected along lines we can now begin to draw with 

empirical confidence. We may not be prepared to act on this knowl-

edge, but we know that civilizations that abuse their soil eventually 

collapse. 4 

> If

farms modeled on natural systems work as well as Howard sug- 

> gests,

then why don't we see more of them? The sad fact is that the or-

ganic ideal as set forth by Howard and others has been honored mainly 

in the breach. Especially as organic agriculture has grown more suc- 

> cessful,

finding its way into the supermarket and the embrace of 

agribusiness, organic farming has increasingly come to resemble the 

industrial system it originally set out to replace. The logic of that system 

has so far proven more ineluctable than the logic of natural systems. 

The journey of Cascadian Farm from the New Cascadian Survival and 

Reclamation Project to a General Mills subsidiary stands as a parable of  

> this

process. On an overcast morning a few winters ago, Kahn drove me 

out to see the original farm, following the twists of the Skagit River east      

> 1. Asami, et al (2003);

Benbrook (2005); Carbonaro (2001); Davis, et al (2004).  

> 2.

Altai (1995);Tilman (1998).  

> 3.

Altai (1995, 1999);Tilman (1998);Wolfe (2000).  

> 4.

Diamond (2005). 152 •> T H E OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

in a new forest-green Lexus with vanity plates that say organic. Kahn  

> is

a strikingly boyish-looking man in his midfifties, and after you fac- 

> tor

in a shave and twenty pounds, it's not hard to pick his face out from 

the beards-beads-and-tractors photos on display in his office. Walking 

# me through the history of his company as we drove out to the farm, 

Gene Kahn spoke candidly and without defensiveness about the com-

promises made along his path from organic farmer to agribusiness-

man, and about "how everything eventually morphs into the way the 

world is." 

By the late seventies, Kahn had become a pretty good organic 

farmer and an even better businessman. He had discovered the eco-

nomic virtues of adding value to his produce by processing it (freezing 

blueberries and strawberries, making jam), and once Cascadian Farm 

started processing food, Kahn discovered he could make more money 

buying produce from other farmers than by growing it himself —the 

same discovery conventional agribusiness companies had made a long 

time before. 

"The whole notion of a 'cooperative community' we started with 

gradually began to mimic the system," Kahn told me. "We were ship-

ping food around the country, using diesel fuel— we were industrial 

organic farmers. I was bit by bit becoming more of this world, and 

there was a lot of pressure on the business to become more privatized." 

That pressure became irresistible in 1990, when in the aftermath of 

the "Alar scare" Kahn nearly lost everything —and control of Cascadian 

Farm wound up in corporate hands. In the history of the organic move-

ment the Alar episode is a watershed, marking the birth pangs of the 

modern organic industry. Throughout its history, the sharpest growth 

of organic has closely followed spikes in public concern over the indus- 

> trial

food supply. Some critics condemn organic for profiting time and 

again from "food scares," and while there is certainly some truth to this 

charge, whether it represents a more serious indictment of organic or 

industrial food is open to question. Organic farmers reply that episodes 

focusing public attention on pesticides, food poisoning, genetically 

modified crops, and mad cow disease serve as "teachable moments" BIG ORGANIC / 5 3

about the industrial food system and its alternatives. Alar was one of 

the first. 

After a somewhat overheated 60 Minutes expose on apple growers' 

use of Alar, a growth-regulating chemical widely used in conventional 

orchards that the Environmental Protection Agency had declared a car-

cinogen, Middle America suddenly discovered organic. "Panic for Or-

ganic" was the cover line on one newsweekly, and overnight, demand 

from the supermarket chains soared. The ragtag industry was not quite 

ready for prime time, however. Like a lot of organic producers, Gene 

Kahn borrowed heavily to finance an ambitious expansion, contracted 

with farmers to grow an awful lot of organic produce —and then 

watched in horror as the bubble of demand subsided along with the 

headlines about Alar. Badly overextended, Kahn was forced to sell a ma- 

> jority

stake in his company —to Welch's —and the onetime hippie 

farmer set out on what he calls his "corporate adventure." 

## "We were part of the food industry now," he told me. "But I wanted 

to leverage that position to redefine the way we grow food —not what 

people want to eat or how we distribute it. That sure as hell isn't going 

to change." Becoming part of the food industry meant jettisoning two 

of the three original legs on which the organic movement had stood: 

the countercuisine —what people want to eat —and the food co-ops and 

other alternative modes of distribution. Kahn's bet was that agribusi-

ness could accommodate itself most easily to the first leg —the new 

way to grow food —by treating organic essentially as a niche product 

that could be distributed and marketed through the existing channels. 

The original organic ideal held that you could not divorce these three 

elements, since (as ecology taught) everything was connected. But 

Gene Kahn, for one (and he was by no means the only one), was a re- 

> alist,

a businessman with a payroll to meet. And he wasn't looking back. 

"You have a choice of getting sad about all that or moving on. We 

tried hard to build a cooperative community and a local food system, 

but at the end of the day it wasn't successful. This is just lunch for most 

people. Just lunch. We can call it sacred, we can talk about communion, 

but it's just lunch." 1 54 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

In the years after the Alar bubble burst in 1990, the organic industry 

recovered, embarking on a period of double-digit annual growth and 

rapid consolidation, as mainstream food companies began to take or-

ganic (or at least the organic market) seriously. Gerber's, Heinz, Dole, 

ConAgra, and ADM all created or acquired organic brands. Cascadian 

Farm itself became a miniconglomerate, acquiring Muir Glen, a Cali-

fornia organic tomato processor, and the combined company changed  

> its

name to Small Planet Foods. Nineteen ninety also marked the begin-

ning of federal recognition for organic agriculture: That year, Congress 

passed the Organic Food and Production Act (OFPA).The legislation in-

structed the Department of Agriculture —which historically had treated 

organic farming with undisguised contempt —to establish uniform na-

tional standards for organic food and farming, fixing the definition of 

a word that had always meant different things to different people. 

Settling on that definition turned out to be a grueling decade-long 

process, as various forces both within and outside the movement bat-tled for control of a word that had developed a certain magic in the 

marketplace. Agribusiness fought to define the word as loosely as pos- 

> sible,

in part to make it easier for mainstream companies to get into 

organic, but also out of fear that anything deemed not organic —such  

> as

genetically modified food —would henceforth carry an official 

stigma. At first, the USDA, acting out of long-standing habit, obliged its 

agribusiness clients, issuing a watery set of standards in 1997 that 

# —

astoundingly —allowed for the use of genetically modified crops and 

irradiation and sewage sludge in organic food production. Some saw 

the dark hand of companies like Monsanto or ADM at work, but it 

seems more likely the USDA was simply acting on the reasonable as-

sumption that the organic industry, like any other industry, would want  

> as

light a regulatory burden as possible. But it turned out organic wasn't  

> like

other industries: It still had a lot of the old movement values in its 

genetic makeup, and it reacted to the weak standards with fury. An un-BIG ORGANIC 155 

precedented flood of public comment from outraged organic farmers 

and consumers forced the USDA back to the drawing board, in what 

was widely viewed as a victory for the movement's principles. 

Yet while the struggle with the government over the meaning of 

"organic" was making headlines in 1 997, another equally important strug- 

> gle

was underway within the USDA between Big and Little Organic 

# — 

> or,

put another way, between the organic industry and the organic 

movement —and here the outcome was decidedly more ambiguous. 

Could a factory farm be organic? Was an organic dairy cow entitled to 

graze on pasture? Did food additives and synthetic chemicals have a

place in processed organic food? If the answers to these questions seem  

> like

no-brainers, then you too are stuck in an outdated pastoral view 

of organic. Big Organic won all three arguments. The final standards 

do a good job of setting the bar for a more environmentally responsi- 

> ble

kind of farming but, as perhaps was inevitable as soon as bureau- 

> cratic

and industrial thinking was brought to bear, many of the 

philosophical values embodied in the word "organic" —the sorts of 

values expressed by Albert Howard —did not survive the federal rule-

making process. 

From 1992 to 1997 Gene Kahn served on the USDA's National Or-

ganic Standards Board, where he played a key role in making the stan-

dards safe for the organic TV dinner and a great many other organic 

processed foods. This was no small feat, for Kahn and his allies had to 

work around the original 1990 legislation, which had prohibited syn- 

> thetic

food additives and manufacturing agents outright. Kahn argued  

> that

you couldn't have organic processed food without synthetics, 

which are necessary to both the manufacture and preservation of such su-

permarket products. Several of the consumer representatives on the stan-

dards board contended that this was precisely the point, and if no 

synthetics meant no organic TV dinners, then TV dinners were some-

thing organic simply shouldn't do. At stake was the very idea of a coun-

> tercuisine.

Joan Dye Gussow, a nutritionist and an outspoken standards-board 156* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

member, made the case against synthetics in a 1996 article that was 

## much debated at the time: "Can an Organic Twinkie Be Certified?" 

Demonstrating that under the proposed rules such a thing was entirely 

possible, Gussow questioned whether organic should simply mirror 

the existing food supply, with its highly processed, salted, and sugary 

junk food, or whether it should aspire to something better —a counter-

cuisine based on whole foods. Kahn responded with an argument 

rooted in the populism of the market: If the consumer wants an organic 

Twinkie, then we should give it to him. As he put it to me on the drive 

back from Cascadian Farm, "Organic is not your mother." In the end it 

came down to an argument between the old movement and the new 

industry and the new industry won: The final standards simply ignored 

the 1990 law, drawing up a list of permissible additives and synthetics, 

from ascorbic acid to xanthan gum.* 

"If we had lost on synthetics," Kahn told me, "we'd be out of 

business." 

The same might be said for the biggest organic meat and dairy pro-

ducers, who fought to make the new standards safe for the organic 

factory farm. Horizon Organic 's Mark Retzloff labored mightily to pre-

serve the ability of his company —which is the Microsoft of organic 

milk, controlling more than half of the market —to operate its large-

scale industrial dairy in southern Idaho. Here in the western desert, 

where precious little grass can grow, the company was milking several 

thousand cows that, rather than graze on pasture (as most consumers 

presume their organic cows are doing), spend their days milling 

around a dry lot —a grassless fenced enclosure. It's doubtful a dairy 

could pasture that many cows even if it wanted to —you would need at 

least an acre of grass per animal and more hours than there are in a day 

to move that many cows all the way out to their distant acre and then 

back again to the milking parlor every morning and evening. So in-     

> *After Arthur Harvey, a

Maine blueberry farmer, won a 2003 lawsuit forcing the USDA to obey     

> the language of the

1990 law, lobbyists working for the Organic Trade Association managed in 

200S to slip language into a USDA appropriations bill restoring —and possibly expanding —the       

> industry's right to use synthetics in organic foods.

BIG ORGANIC •:• 257 

stead, as in the typical industrial dairy, these organic cows stood around 

eating grain and silage when they weren't being milked three times a 

> day.

Their organic feed was shipped in from all over the West, and their 

waste accumulated in manure ponds. Retzloff argued that keeping cows 

in confinement meant that his farmhands, who all carried stetho-

scopes, could keep a closer eye on their health. Of course, cows need  

> this

sort of surveillance only when they're living in such close quarters 

# —

and can't be given antibiotics. 

Such a factory farm didn't sound terribly organic to the smaller 

dairy farmers on the board, not to mention to the consumer repre- 

> sentatives.

Also, the OFPA had spelled out that the welfare of organic animals should take into account, and accommodate, their "natural be-

havior," which in the case of cows —ruminants who have evolved to eat 

grass —surely meant grazing on pasture. You might say the whole pas- 

> toral

idea was hardwired into these animals and stood squarely in the 

way of industrializing them. So how could the logic of industry ever 

hope to prevail? 

The USDA listened to the arguments on both sides and finally ruled 

that dairy cows must have "access to pasture," which sounds like more 

of a victory for the pastoral ideal than it turned out to be in practice. By  

> itself

"access to pasture" is an extremely vague standard (What consti-

tutes "access"? How much pasture per animal? How often could it 

graze?), and it was weakened further by a provision stating that even 

access could be dispensed with at certain stages of the animal's life. 

Some big organic dairies have decided that lactation constitutes one 

such stage, and thus far the USDA has not objected. Some of its organic  

> certifiers

have complained that "access to pasture" is so vague as to 

be meaningless —and therefore unenforceable. It's hard to argue with 

them. 

Along with the national list of permissible synthetics, "access to 

pasture," and, for other organic animals, "access to the outdoors" indi-

cate how the word "organic" has been stretched and twisted to admit the 

very sort of industrial practices for which it once offered a critique and 

an alternative. The final standards also demonstrate how, in Gene Kahn's 158* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

words, "everything eventually morphs into the way the world is." And 

yet the pastoral values and imagery embodied in that word survive in 

the minds of many people, as the marketers of organic food well under-

stand: Just look at a container of organic milk, with its happy cows and 

verdant pastures. Thus is a venerable ideal hollowed out, reduced to a

sentimental conceit printed on the side of a milk carton: Supermarket 

Pastoral. 

5. DOWN ON THE INDUSTRIAL ORGANIC FARM    

> Get over it,

Gene Kahn would say. The important thing, the real value of 

putting organic on an industrial scale, is the sheer amount of acreage it 

puts under organic management. Behind every organic TV dinner or 

chicken or carton of industrial organic milk stands a certain quantity of 

land that will no longer be doused with chemicals, an undeniable gain 

for the environment and the public health. I could see his point. So I

decided to travel around California to see these farms for myself. Why 

California? Because the state's industrial agriculture grows most of 

America's produce, and organic has in large part become a subset, or 

brand, of that agriculture. 

## No farms I had ever visited before prepared me for the industrial 

organic farms I saw in California. When I think about organic farming,  

> I

think family farm, I think small scale, I think hedgerows and compost 

piles and battered pickups —the old agrarian idea (which in fact has 

never had much purchase in California). I don't think migrant labor 

crews, combines the size of houses, mobile lettuce-packing factories 

marching across fields of romaine, twenty-thousand-broiler-chicken 

houses, or hundreds of acres of corn or broccoli or lettuce reaching 

clear to the horizon. To the eye, these farms look exactly like any other 

industrial farm in California —and in fact some of the biggest organic 

operations in the state are owned and operated by conventional mega-

farms. The same farmer who is applying toxic fumigants to sterilize the BIG ORGANIC I 5 9 

> soil

in one field is in the next field applying compost to nurture the  

> soil's

natural fertility.  

> Is

there anything wrong with this picture? I'm not sure, frankly. 

Gene Kahn makes the case that the scale of a farm has no bearing on its  

> fidelity

to organic principles, and that unless organic "scales up [it will] 

never be anything more than yuppie food." To prove his point Kahn 

sent me to visit several of the large-scale farms that supply Small Planet 

Foods. These included Greenways, the Central Valley operation that 

grows vegetables for his frozen dinners (and tomatoes for Muir Glen) 

> ,

and Petaluma Poultry, which grows the chicken in his frozen dinner as 

well as Rosie, the organic chicken I made the acquaintance of in Whole 

Foods. I also paid a visit to the Salinas Valley, where Earthbound Farm, 

the largest organic grower in the world, has most of its lettuce fields. 

# My first stop was Greenways Organic, a successful two-thousand-acre 

organic produce operation tucked into a twenty-four-thousand-acre 

conventional farm in the Central Valley outside Fresno; the crops, the 

machines, the crews, the rotations, and the fields were virtually indis-

tinguishable, and yet two different kinds of industrial agriculture are 

being practiced here side by side. 

In many respects the same factory model is at work in both fields, 

but for every chemical input used in the farm's conventional fields, a

more benign organic input has been substituted in the organic ones. So 

in place of petrochemical fertilizers, Greenways' organic acres are 

nourished by compost made by the ton at a horse farm nearby and by 

poultry manure. Instead of toxic pesticides, insects are controlled by 

spraying-approved organic agents (most of them derived from plants) 

such as rotenone, pyrethrum, and nicotine sulfate, and by introducing 

beneficial insects like lacewings. Inputs and outputs: a much greener 

machine, but a machine nevertheless. 

Perhaps the greatest challenge to farming organically on an indus-   

> trial scale is

controlling weeds without the use of chemical herbicides. 

Greenways tackles its weeds with frequent and carefully timed tilling. 

Even before the crops are planted, the fields are irrigated to germinate 160 > THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

the weed seeds present in the soil; a tractor then tills the field to kill 

them, the first of several passes it will make over the course of the 

growing season. When the crops stand too high to drive a tractor over, 

farm workers wielding propane torches will spot kill the biggest weeds 

by hand. The result is fields that look just as clean as the most herbicide-

soaked farmland. But this approach, which I discovered is typical of 

large-scale organic operations, represents a compromise at best. The 

heavy tillage —heavier than in a conventional field —destroys the tilth 

of the soil and reduces its biological activity as surely as chemicals 

would; frequent tilling also releases so much nitrogen into the air that 

these weed-free organic fields require a lot more nitrogen fertilizer 

than they otherwise might. In a less disturbed, healthier soil, nitrogen-

fixing bacteria would create much of the fertility that industrial organic 

growers must add in the form of compost, manures, fish emulsion, or 

Chilean nitrate —all inputs permitted under federal rules. (International 

organic rules, however, forbid the use of Chilean nitrate, a mineral 

form of nitrogen mined in Chile, often using child labor.) Not surpris-

ingly the manufacturers of these inputs lobbied hard to shape the fed-

eral organic rules; in the end it proved easier to agree on a simple list of 

approved and prohibited materials rather than to try to legislate a gen-

uinely more ecological model of farming. 

Yet the best organic farmers deplore this sort of input substitution 

as a fall from the organic ideal, which envisions farms that provide for 

as much of their own fertility as possible, and control pests by means 

of crop diversification and rotation. It is too simple to say that smaller 

organic farms automatically hew closer to the organic ideals set forth 

by Albert Howard: Many small organic farms practice input substitu-

tion as well. The organic ideal is so exacting —a sustainable system 

modeled on nature that requires not only no synthetic chemicals but 

also no purchased inputs of any kind, and that returns as much to the  

> soil

as it removes —that it is mostly honored in the breach. Still, stand-

ing in a 1 60 -acre block of organic broccoli in the Central Valley makes 

you appreciate why the farmers who come closest to achieving this 

ideal tend to be smaller in scale. These are the farmers who can plant BIG ORGANIC / 6 I 

> literally

dozens of different crops in fields that resemble quilts and 

practice long and elaborate rotations, thereby achieving the rich biodi-

versity in space and time that is the key to making a farm sustainable in 

something of the way a natural ecosystem is. 

For better or worse, these are not the kinds of farms a big company  

> like

Small Planet Foods, or Whole Foods, does business with today. It's 

simply more cost-efficient to buy from one thousand-acre farm than 

ten hundred-acre farms. That's not because those big farms are neces- 

> sarily

any more productive, however. In fact, study after study has 

demonstrated that, measured in terms of the amount of food produced 

per acre, small farms are actually more productive than big farms; it is 

the higher transaction costs involved that makes dealing with them im-

practical for a company like Kahn's —that and the fact that they don't 

grow tremendous quantities of any one thing. As soon as your business 

involves stocking the frozen food case or produce section at a national 

chain, whether it be Wal-Mart or Whole Foods, the sheer quantities of 

organic produce you need makes it imperative to buy from farms op-

erating on the same industrial scale you are. Everything's connected. The in-

dustrial values of specialization, economies of scale, and mechanization 

wind up crowding out ecological values such as diversity, complexity, 

and symbiosis. Or, to frame the matter in less abstract terms, as one of 

Kahn's employees did for me, "The combine just can't make the turn in 

a five-acre corn field" —and Small Planet Foods now consumes com-

bine quantities of organic corn. 

The big question is whether the logic of an industrial food chain 

can be reconciled to the logic of the natural systems on which organic 

agriculture has tried to model itself. Put another way, is industrial or-

ganic ultimately a contradiction in terms? 

Kahn is convinced it is not, but others both inside and outside his 

company see an inescapable tension. Sarah Huntington is one of Casca-

dian Farm's oldest employees. She worked alongside Kahn on the orig- 

> inal

farm and at one time or another has held just about every job in the 

company. "The maw of that processing beast eats ten acres of cornfield 

in an hour," she told me. "And you're locked into planting a particular 162* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

variety like Jubilee that ripens all at once and holds up in processing. So 

you see how the system is constantly pushing you back toward mono-

culture, which is anathema in organic. But that's the challenge —to 

change the system more than it changes you." 

## One of the most striking ways companies like Small Planet Foods is 

changing the system is by helping conventional farms convert a portion 

of their acreage to organic. Several thousand acres of American farm-

land are now organic as a result of the company's efforts, which go well 

beyond offering contracts to providing instruction and even manage-

ment. Kahn has helped to prove to the skeptical that organic farming 

# —

dismissed as "hippie farming" only a few short years ago —can work 

on a large scale. The environmental benefits of this process cannot be 

overestimated. And yet the industrialization of organic comes at a price. 

The most obvious is consolidation down on the farm: Today two giant 

growers sell most of the fresh organic produce from California. 

One of them is Earthbound Farm, a company that arguably represents 

industrial organic farming at its best. If Cascadian Farm is a first-

generation organic farm, Earthbound is second generation. It was 

started in the early eighties by Drew and Myra Goodman, two entirely 

improbable farmers who came to the land from the city with exactly no 

farming experience. The two had grown up within a few blocks of each 

other on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, where they attended the 

same progressive private high school. They didn't get together until af- 

> ter

both had gone off to college in California, Drew to Santa Cruz, Myra 

to Berkeley. While living near Carmel, killing time before heading to 

graduate school, Drew and Myra started a roadside organic farm on a

few rented acres, growing raspberries and the sort of baby greens that 

chefs were making trendy in the eighties. Every Sunday Myra would 

wash and bag a bunch of lettuce for their own use, a salad for each 

night of the week. They discovered that the whole-leaf lettuces held up 

remarkably well right through to dinner the following Saturday. 

## One day in 1986 the Goodmans learned that the Carmel chef who BIG ORGANIC I 63 

bought the bulk of their lettuce crop had moved on, and that his re-

placement wanted to use his own supplier. Suddenly they were faced 

with a field of baby greens to get rid of, greens that wouldn't stay baby 

for very long. So they decided to wash and bag them, and try to sell a

prewashed salad mix at retail. Produce managers greeted the novel 

product with skepticism, so the Goodmans offered to take back any un-

sold bags at the end of the week. None of them was returned. The 

"spring mix" business had been born. 

So at least goes the Earthbound creation story, as recounted to me by 

Myra Goodman, now a tanned, leggy, and loquacious forty-two-year- 

> old,

over lunch at the company's roadside stand in the Carmel Valley. 

Like Cascadian Farm, Earthbound still maintains a showplace farm and 

roadside stand, a tangible reminder of its roots. Unlike Cascadian, how- 

> ever,

Earthbound is still very much in the farming business, though 

most of its production land is an hour and a half north of Carmel, in 

the Salinas Valley. Opening onto the Pacific near Monterey, the fertile, 

sea breeze-conditioned valley offers ideal conditions for growing let-

tuces nine months of the year. In winter, the company picks up and 

moves its operation, and many of its employees, south to Yuma, Arizona. 

The prewashed salad business became one of the great success sto- 

> ries

in American agriculture during the eighties and nineties, a time 

## when there wasn't much to celebrate, and the Goodmans are directly 

responsible for much of that success. They helped dethrone iceberg, 

which used to dominate the valley, by introducing dozens of different 

salad mixes and innovating the way lettuces were grown, harvested, 

cleaned, and packed. Myra's father is an engineer and inveterate tin- 

> kerer,

and while the business was still headquartered in their Carmel 

Valley living room, he designed gentle-cycle washing machines for let-  

> tuce; later

the company introduced one of the first customized baby let-

tuce harvesters, and helped pioneer the packing of greens in specially 

formulated plastic bags pumped with inert gases to extend shelf life. 

Earthbound Farm's growth exploded after Costco placed an order in  

> 1

993. "Costco wanted our prewashed spring mix, but they didn't want 

organic," Myra told me. "To them, organic sent the wrong message: !64*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

high price and low quality." At the time, organic was still recovering 

from the boom and bust following the Alar episode. But the Goodmans 

were committed to organic farming practices, so they decided to sell 

Costco their organically grown lettuce without calling it that. 

"Costco was moving two thousand cases a week to start," Myra said, 

"and the order kept increasing." Wal-Mart, Lucky 's, and Albertson's 

soon followed. The Goodmans quickly learned that in order to feed the 

# maw of this industrial beast, Earthbound would have to industrialize it- 

> self.

Their days of washing lettuce in the living room and selling at the 

Monterey farmer's market were over. "We didn't know how to farm on 

that scale," Drew told me, "and we needed a lot more land —fast." So 

the Goodmans entered into partnership with two of the most estab-

lished conventional growers in the Salinas Valley first Mission Ranches 

in 1995, and thenTanimura &Antle in 1999. These growers (no one in 

the valley calls himself a farmer) controlled some of the best land in the  

> valley;

they also knew how to grow, harvest, pack, and distribute tremen-

dous quantities of produce. What they didn't know was organic pro-

duction; in fact, Mission Ranches had tried it once and failed. 

Through these partnerships, the Goodmans have helped convert 

several thousand acres of prime Salinas Valley land to organic; if you in-

clude all the farmland growing produce for Earthbound —which has 

expanded beyond greens to a full line of fruits and vegetables —the 

company represents a total of 25,000 organic acres. (This includes the 

acreage of the 135 farms that grow under contract to Earthbound.) 

The Goodmans estimate that taking all that land out of conventional 

production has eliminated some 270,000 pounds of pesticide and 8

million pounds of petrochemical fertilizer that would otherwise have 

been applied, a boon to both the environment and the people who work 

in those fields. Earthbound also uses biodiesel fuel in its tractors.  

> I

expected a field of spring mix to look a lot like the stuff in the bag: 

a dozen varieties tossed together in happy profusion. But it turns out 

the mixing comes later. Each variety, which has its own slightly differ-

ent cultural requirements and life span, is grown in a monoculture of 

several acres each, which has the effect of turning this part of the valley BIG ORGANIC I 6 5

into a mosaic of giant color blocks: dark green, burgundy, pale green, 

blue green. As you get closer you see that the blocks are divided into a 

> series

of eighty-inch-wide raised beds thickly planted with a single va- 

> riety.

Each weed-free strip is as smooth and flat as a tabletop, leveled 

with a laser so that the custom-built harvester can snip each leaf at pre- 

> cisely

the same point. Earthbound's tabletop fields exemplify one of the 

most powerful industrial ideas: the tremendous gains in efficiency to 

be had when you can conform the irregularity of nature to the preci-

sion and control of a machine. 

Apart from the much higher level of precision —time as well as 

space are scrupulously managed on this farm —the organic practices at 

Earthbound resemble those I saw at Greenways farm. Frequent tilling is 

used to control weeds, though crews of migrant workers, their heads 

wrapped in brightly colored cloths against the hot sun, do a last pass 

through each block before harvest, pulling weeds by hand. To provide 

> fertility

# —the farm's biggest expense —compost is trucked in; some 

crops also receive fish emulsion along with their water and a side 

dressing of pelleted chicken manure. Over the winter a cover crop of 

legumes is planted to build up nitrogen in the soil. 

To control pests, every six or seven strips of lettuce is punctuated 

with a strip of flowers: sweet alyssum, which attracts the lacewings and 

syrphid flies that eat the aphids that can molest lettuces. Aside from 

some insecticidal soap to control insects in the cruciferous crops, pes- 

> ticides

are seldom sprayed. "We prefer to practice resistance and avoid-

ance," Drew Goodman explained. Or, as their farm manager put it, 

"You have to give up the macho idea that you can grow anything you 

want anywhere you want to." So they closely track insect or disease out-

breaks in their many fields and keep vulnerable crops at a safe distance; 

they also search out varieties with a strong natural resistance. Occasion-  

> ally they'll

lose a block to a pest, but as a rule growing baby greens is  

> less

risky since, by definition, the crop stays in the ground for so short a period of time —usually thirty days or so. Indeed, baby lettuce is one 

crop that may well be easier to grow organically than conventionally: 

Harsh chemicals can scorch young leaves, and nitrogen fertilizers ren-166* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

der lettuces more vulnerable to insects. It seems the bugs are attracted 

to the free nitrogen in their leaves, and because of the more rapid 

growth of chemically nourished plants, insects find their leaves easier 

to pierce. 

From the moment an organic lettuce plant is ready for harvest, the  

> rest

of its journey from field to produce aisle follows a swift and often 

ingenious industrial logic that is only nominally organic. "The only 

way we can sell organic produce at a reasonable price is by moving it 

into a conventional supply chain the moment it's picked," Drew Good-

## man explained. There is nothing particularly sustainable about that 

chain: It relies on the same crews of contract workers who pick produce 

throughout the Valley on a per piece basis, and on the same prodigious 

quantities of energy required to deliver any bag of prewashed salad to 

supermarkets across the country. (Though Earthbound does work to    

> offset its fossil

fuel consumption by planting trees.) 

That conventional supply chain begins with the clever machine 

Earthbound developed to harvest baby greens: a car-size lettuce-shaving 

machine that moves down the rows, cutting the baby greens at a pre- 

> cise

point just above the crown. Spidery arms extended in front of the 

machine gently rake through the bed in advance of the blade, scaring 

off any mice that might find their way into the salad. A fan blows the cut leaves over a screen to shake out any pebbles or soil, after which a 

> belt

conveys the greens into white plastic totes that workers stack on  

> pallets

on a wagon trailing alongside. At the end of each row the pallets 

are loaded onto a refrigerated tractor trailer, entering a "cold chain"  

> that

will continue unbroken all the way to the produce section at your 

supermarket. 

Earthbound's own employees (who receive generous benefits by 

Valley standards, including health insurance and retirement) operate 

the baby greens harvester, but on the far side of the field I saw a con- 

> tract

crew of Mexicans, mostly women, slowly moving through the 

rows pulling weeds. I noticed that some of the workers had blue Band-

Aids on their fingers. The Band-Aids are colored so inspectors at the 

plant can easily pick them out of the greens; each Band-Aid also con-BIG ORGANIC ] 6 7 

> tains

a metal filament so that the metal detector through which every 

Earthbound leaf passes will pick it up before it winds up in a customer's 

> salad.

Once filled, the trucks deliver their cargo of leaves to the loading 

dock at the processing plant in San Juan Bautista, essentially a 200,000-

square-foot refrigerator designed to maintain the lettuce at exactly 

thirty-six degrees through the entire process of sorting, mixing, wash-

ing, drying, and packaging. These employees, most of them Mexicans, 

are dressed in full-length down coats; they empty totes of arugula, 

radicchio, and frisee into stainless steel rivers of lightly chlorinated wa- 

> ter,

the first of three washes each leaf will undergo. Viewed from over-

head, the lettuce-packing operation looks like a hugely intricate Rube 

Goldberg contraption, a tangle of curving silver watercourses, shaking  

> trays,

and centrifuges, blue Band-Aid detectors, scales, and bagging sta-

tions that in about a half hour propels a freshly harvested leaf of baby 

lettuce into a polyethylene bag or box of ready-to-dress spring mix. The 

plant washes and packs 2.5 million pounds of lettuce a week; when 

you think just how many baby leaves it takes to make a pound, that rep-

resents a truly stupendous amount of lettuce. It also represents a truly 

stupendous amount of energy: to run the machines and chill the build-

ing, not to mention to transport all that salad to supermarkets across the 

country in refrigerated trucks and to manufacture the plastic containers  

> it's

packed in. A one-pound box of prewashed lettuce contains 80 calo- 

> ries

of food energy. According to Cornell ecologist David Pimentel, 

growing, chilling, washing, packaging, and transporting that box of or-

ganic salad to a plate on the East Coast takes more than 4,600 calories 

of fossil fuel energy, or 5 7 calories of fossil fuel energy for every calo- 

> rie

of food. (These figures would be about 4 percent higher if the salad 

were grown conventionally.)  

> I

had never before spent quite so much time looking at and think-

ing about lettuce, which when you do think about it —at least in the 

confines of the world's biggest refrigerator packed to the rafters with 

the stuff —is truly peculiar stuff. There are few things humans eat that 

are quite so elemental —a handful of leaves, after all, consumed raw. J68*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

# When we're eating salad we're behaving a lot like herbivores, drawing  

> as

close as we ever do to all those creatures who bend their heads down 

to the grass, or reach up into the trees, to nibble on plant leaves. We add 

only the thinnest veneer of culture to these raw leaves, dressing them in  

> oil

and vinegar. Much virtue attaches to this kind of eating, for what do 

## we regard as more wholesome than tucking into a pile of green leaves? 

The contrast of the simplicity of this sort of eating, with all its pas- 

> toral

overtones, and the complexity of the industrial process behind it 

produced a certain cognitive dissonance in my refrigerated mind. I be-

gan to feel that I no longer understood what this word I'd been follow-

ing across the country and the decades really meant —I mean, of 

course, the word "organic." It is an unavoidable and in some ways im-

polite question, and very possibly besides the point if you look at the 

world the way Gene Kahn or Drew and Myra Goodman do, but in pre- 

> cisely

what sense can that box of salad on sale in a Whole Foods three 

thousand miles and five days away from this place truly be said to be 

organic? And if that well-traveled plastic box deserves that designation, 

should we then perhaps be looking for another word to describe the 

## much shorter and much less industrial food chain that the first users of 

the word "organic" had in mind? 

This at least is the thinking of the smaller organic farmers who, not 

surprisingly, are finding it impossible to compete against the impres- 

> sive

industrial efficiencies achieved by a company like Earthbound Farm. 

Supermarket chains don't want to deal with dozens of different organic 

farmers; they want one company to offer them a complete line of fruits 

and vegetables, every SKU in the produce section. And Earthbound has 

obliged, consolidating its hold on the organic produce section of the 

American supermarket, and in the process growing into a $350 million 

company. "Everything eventually morphs into the way the world is." 

Drew Goodman told me a day had come several years ago when he sud-

denly no longer felt comfortable manning his usual stall at the Mon-

terey farmer's market. He looked around and understood "we didn't 

belong here anymore. We're really in a whole different business now." 

## Goodman makes no apologies for that, and rightly so: His company has BIG ORGANIC + 169 

done a world of good, for its land, its workers, the growers it works 

with, and its customers. 

Yet his success, like Gene Kahn's, has opened up a gulf between Big 

and Little Organic and convinced many of the movement's founders, as 

well as pioneering farmers like Joel Salatin, that the time has come to 

move beyond organic —to raise the bar on the American food system 

once again. Some of these innovating farmers are putting their empha- 

> sis

on quality, others on labor standards, some on local systems of 

distribution, and still others on achieving a more thoroughgoing sus- 

> tainability.

Michael Ableman, one of the self-described beyond organic 

farmers I interviewed in California, said, "We may have to give up on 

the word 'organic,' leave it to the Gene Kahns of the world. To be hon- 

> est,

I'm not sure I want that association, because what I'm doing on my 

farm is not just substituting inputs." 

## A few years ago, at a conference on organic agriculture in Califor- 

> nia,

a corporate organic grower suggested to a small farmer struggling 

to survive in the competitive world of industrial organic agriculture 

that "you should really try to develop a niche to distinguish yourself in 

the market." Holding his fury in check, the small farmer replied as lev-  

> elly as

he could manage:  

> "I

believe I developed that niche twenty years ago. It's called 'or-

ganic' And now you, sir, are sitting on it." 

4. MEET ROSIE, THE ORGANIC 

# FREE-RANGE CHICKEN 

The last stop on my tour of California industrial organic farming took 

## me to Petaluma, where I tried without success to find the picturesque 

farmstead, with its red barn, cornfield, and farmhouse, depicted on the 

package in which the organic roasting chicken I bought at Whole Foods 

had been wrapped; nor could I find Rosie herself, at least not outdoors, 

ranging freely. 

Petaluma Poultry has its headquarters not on a farm but in a sleek i 7 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

modern office building in an industrial park just off Route 101; there's  

> little

farmland left in Petaluma, which is now a prosperous San Fran-

cisco bedroom community. The survival of Petaluma Poultry in the face 

of this development (it's one of what were once dozens of chicken 

farms in the area) is a testament to the company's marketing acumen. 

# When its founder, Allen Shainsky, recognized the threat from integrated 

national chicken processors like Tyson and Perdue, he decided that the 

only way to stay in business was through niche marketing. So he started 

processing, on different days of the week, chickens for the kosher, Asian,  

> natural,

and organic markets. Each required a slighdy different protocol: to 

process a kosher bird you needed a rabbi on hand, for example; for an 

Asian bird you left the head and feet on; for the natural market you sold 

the same bird minus head and feet, but played up the fact that Rocky, as  

> this

product was called, received no antibiotics or animal by-products 

in its feed, and you provided a little exercise yard outside the shed so 

Rocky could, at his option, range free. And to call a bird organic, you 

followed the natural protocol except that you also fed it certified organic 

feed (corn and soy grown without pesticides and chemical fertilizer) 

and you processed the bird slightly younger and smaller, so it wouldn't 

seem quite so expensive. Philosophy didn't really enter into it. 

(Petaluma Eggs, a nearby egg producer with corporate ties to 

Petaluma Poultry, pursues a similar niche strategy, offering natural free-

range eggs [no drugs in the chickens' feed, no battery cages]; fertile 

eggs [all of the above plus the hens have access to a rooster] ; enhanced 

omega- 3 natural eggs [all of the above, save the rooster, plus kelp in the 

feed to boost levels of omega-3 fatty acids]; and certified organic eggs 

[cage- and drug-free plus certified organic feed]. These last are sold un-

der the label Judy's Family Farm, a brand that until my visit to Petaluma  

> I

hadn't connected to Petaluma Eggs. The Judy's label had always made 

# me picture a little family farm, or maybe even a commune of back-to-

the-land lesbians up in Sonoma. But it turns out Judy is the name of the 

wife of Petaluma 's principal owner, a marketer who has clearly mas-

tered the conventions of Supermarket Pastoral. Who could begrudge aBIG ORGANIC 1 7 I

farmer named Judy $3.59 for a dozen organic eggs she presumably has 

to get up at dawn each morning to gather? Just how big and sophisti-

cated an operation Petaluma Eggs really is I was never able to ascertain: 

The company was too concerned about biosecurity to let a visitor get 

past the office.) 

Rosie the organic chicken's life is little different from that of her kosher 

and Asian cousins, all of whom are conventional Cornish Cross broilers 

processed according to state-of-the-art industrial practice. (Though 

Petaluma Poultry sets the bar higher than many of its competitors, who 

routinely administer antibiotics and use feed made from animal by-

products.) The Cornish Cross represents the pinnacle of industrial chicken 

breeding. It is the most efficient converter of corn into breast meat ever 

designed, though this efficiency comes at a high physiological price: 

The birds grow so rapidly (reaching oven-roaster proportions in seven 

weeks) that their poor legs cannot keep pace, and frequently fail. 

After a tour of the fully automated processing facility, which can  

> translate

a chicken from a clucking, feathered bird to a shrink-wrapped 

pack of parts inside often minutes, the head of marketing drove me out 

to meet Rosie —preprocessing. The chicken houses don't resemble a

farm so much as a military barracks: a dozen long, low-slung sheds 

with giant fans at either end. I donned what looked like a hooded white 

hazmat suit —since the birds receive no antibiotics yet live in close con-

finement, the company is ever worried about infection, which could 

## doom a whole house overnight —and stepped inside. Twenty thousand 

birds moved away from me as one, like a ground-hugging white cloud, 

clucking softly. The air was warm and humid and smelled powerfully of 

ammonia; the fumes caught in my throat. Twenty thousand is a lot of 

chickens, and they formed a gently undulating white carpet that 

stretched nearly the length of a football field. After they adjusted to our 

presence, the birds resumed sipping from waterers suspended from the  

> ceiling,

nibbled organic food from elevated trays connected by tubes to 

a silo outside, and did pretty much everything chickens do except step 

outside the little doors located at either end of the shed. 1 72 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Compared to conventional chickens, I was told, these organic birds 

have it pretty good: They get a few more square inches of living space 

per bird (though it was hard to see how they could be packed together 

## much more tightly), and because there are no hormones or anti-

biotics in their feed to accelerate growth, they get to live a few days 

longer. Though under the circumstances it's not clear that a longer life  

> is

necessarily a boon. 

Running along the entire length of each shed was a grassy yard 

maybe fifteen feet wide, not nearly big enough accommodate all twenty 

thousand birds inside should the group ever decide to take the air en 

masse. Which, truth be told, is the last thing the farm managers want to 

see happen, since these defenseless, crowded, and genetically identical 

birds are exquisitely vulnerable to infection. This is one of the larger 

ironies of growing organic food in an industrial system: It is even more 

precarious than a conventional industrial system. But the federal rules 

say an organic chicken should have "access to the outdoors," and Su-

permarket Pastoral imagines it, so Petaluma Poultry provides the doors 

and the yard and everyone keeps their fingers crossed.  

> It

would appear Petaluma 's farm managers have nothing to worry 

about. Since the food and water and flock remain inside the shed, and 

since the little doors remain shut until the birds are at least five weeks 

old and well settled in their habits, the chickens apparently see no rea-

son to venture out into what must seem to them an unfamiliar and ter-

rifying world. Since the birds are slaughtered at seven weeks, free range 

turns out to be not so much a lifestyle for these chickens as a two-week 

vacation option. 

After I stepped back outside into the fresh air, grateful to escape the 

humidity and ammonia, I waited by the chicken door to see if any of 

the birds would exercise that option and stroll down the little ramp to 

their grassy yard, which had been mowed recently. And waited. I finally 

had to conclude that Rosie the organic free-range chicken doesn't really 

grok the whole free-range conceit. The space that has been provided to 

her for that purpose is, I realized, not unlike the typical American front BIG ORGANIC I 73 

lawn it resembles —it's a kind of ritual space, intended not so much 

for the use of the local residents as a symbolic offering to the larger 

community. Seldom if ever stepped upon, the chicken-house lawn is 

scrupulously maintained nevertheless, to honor an ideal nobody wants 

to admit has by now become something of a joke, an empty pastoral 

conceit. 

5. MY ORGANIC INDUSTRIAL MEAL 

# My shopping foray to Whole Foods yielded all the ingredients for a

comforting winter Sunday night dinner: roast chicken (Rosie) with 

roasted vegetables (yellow potatoes, purple kale, and red winter squash 

from Cal-Organics) , steamed asparagus, and a spring mix salad from 

Earthbound Farm. Dessert would be even simpler: organic ice cream 

from Stonyfield Farm topped with organic blackberries from Mexico. 

## On a hunch it probably wasn't quite ready for prime time (or at  

> least

for my wife), I served the Cascadian Farm organic TV dinner I'd 

bought to myself for lunch, right in its microwaveable plastic bowl. 

Five minutes on high and it was good to go. Peeling back the polyeth-

ylene film covering the dish, I felt a little like a flight attendant serving 

meals, and indeed the entree looked and tasted very much like airline 

food. The chunks of white meat chicken had been striped nicely with  

> grill

marks and impregnated with a salty marinade that gave the meat 

that slightly abstract chicken taste processed chicken often has, no 

doubt owing to the "natural chicken flavor" mentioned on the box's list 

of ingredients. The chicken chunks and allied vegetables (soft carrots, 

peas, green beans, and corn) were "blanketed in a creamy rosemary dill 

sauce" —a creaminess that had evidently been achieved synthetically, 

since no dairy products appeared among the ingredients. I'm betting  

> it's

the xanthan gum (or maybe the carrageenan?) that bears responsi- 

> bility

for the sauce's unfortunate viscosity. To be fair, one shouldn't 

compare an organic TV dinner to real food but to a conventional TV i74*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

dinner, and by that standard (or at least my recollection of it) Cascadian 

Farm has nothing to be ashamed of, especially considering that an or-

ganic food scientist must work with only a tiny fraction of the synthetic 

preservatives, emulsifiers, and flavor agents available to his colleagues at 

Swanson or Kraft. 

Rosie and her consort of fresh vegetables fared much better at din-   

> ner, if I

don't mind saying so myself. I roasted the bird in a pan sur-

rounded by the potatoes and chunks of winter squash. After removing 

the chicken from the oven, I spread the crinkled leaves of kale on a

cookie sheet, sprinkled them with olive oil and salt, and slid them into 

the hot oven to roast. After ten minutes or so, the kale was nicely 

crisped and the chicken was ready to carve.  

> All

but one of the vegetables I served that night bore the label of 

Cal-Organic Farms, which, along with Earthbound, dominates the or-

ganic produce section in the supermarket. Cal-Organic is a big grower 

of organic vegetables in the San Joaquin Valley. As part of the consolida-

tion of the organic industry, the company was acquired by Grimmway 

Farms, which already enjoyed a virtual monopoly in organic carrots. 

Unlike Earthbound, neither Grimmway nor Cal-Organic has ever been 

part of the organic movement. Both companies were started by conven-

tional growers looking for a more profitable niche and worried that the  

> state

might ban certain key pesticides. "I'm not necessarily a fan of or-

ganic," a spokesman for Grimmway recently told an interviewer. "Right 

## now I don't see that conventional farming does harm. Whether we stay 

with organic for the long haul depends on profitability." Philosophy, in 

other words, has nothing to do with it. 

The combined company now controls seventeen thousand acres 

across California, enough land that it can, like Earthbound, rotate pro-

duction up and down the West Coast (and south into Mexico) in order 

to ensure a twelve-month national supply of fresh organic produce, just   

> as California's

conventional growers have done for decades. It wasn't 

many years ago that organic produce had only a spotty presence in the 

supermarket, especially during the winter months. Today, thanks in BIG ORGANIC * 1 75 

large part to Grimm way and Earthbound, you can find pretty much 

everything, all year round. 

Including asparagus in January, I discovered. This was the one veg-

etable I prepared that wasn't grown by Cal-Organic or Earthbound; it 

had been grown in Argentina and imported by a small San Francisco  

> distributor.

# My plan had been a cozy winter dinner, but I couldn't resist 

the bundles of fresh asparagus on sale at Whole Foods, even though it  

> set

## me back six dollars a pound. I had never tasted organic South Amer-

ican asparagus in January, and felt my foray into the organic empire de-

manded that I do. What better way to test the outer limits of the word 

"organic" than by dining on a springtime delicacy that had been grown 

according to organic rules on a farm six thousand miles (and two sea-

sons) away, picked, packed, and chilled on Monday, flown by jet to Los 

Angeles Tuesday, trucked north to a Whole Foods regional distribution  

> center,

then put on sale in Berkeley by Thursday, to be steamed, by me, 

Sunday night? 

The ethical implications of buying such a product are almost too 

numerous and knotty to sort out: There's the expense, there's the prodi-

gious amounts of energy involved, the defiance of seasonality, and the 

whole question of whether the best soils in South America should be 

devoted to growing food for affluent and overfed North Americans. 

And yet you can also make a good argument that my purchase of or-

ganic asparagus from Argentina generates foreign exchange for a coun- 

> try

desperately in need of it, and supports a level of care for that 

country's land —farming without pesticides or chemical fertilizer —it 

might not otherwise receive. Clearly my bunch of asparagus had deliv-

ered me deep into the thicket of trade-offs that a global organic mar-

ketplace entails. 

Okay, but how did it taste? 

# My jet-setting Argentine asparagus tasted like damp cardboard. 

After the first spear or two no one touched it. Perhaps if it had been 

sweeter and tenderer we would have finished it, but I suspect the fact  

> that

asparagus was out of place in a winter supper made it even less ap-176 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

petizing. Asparagus is one of a dwindling number of foods still firmly 

linked in our minds to the seasonal calendar. 

All the other vegetables and greens were much tastier —really good, 

in fact. Whether they would have been quite so sweet and bright after a

cross-country truck ride is doubtful, though the Earthbound greens, in 

their polyethylene bag, stayed crisp right up to the expiration date, a 

> full

eighteen days after leaving the field —no small technological feat. 

The inert gases, scrupulous cold chain and space-age plastic bag (which 

allows the leaves to respire just enough) account for much of this 

longevity, but some of it, as the Goodmans had explained to me, owes 

to the fact that the greens were grown organically. Since they're not 

## pumped up on synthetic nitrogen, the cells of these slower-growing 

leaves develop thicker walls and take up less water, making them more 

durable. 

And, I'm convinced, tastier, too. When I visited Greenways Organic, 

which grows both conventional and organic tomatoes, I learned that 

the organic ones consistently earn higher Brix scores (a measure of 

sugars) than the same varieties grown conventionally. More sugars 

means less water and more flavor. It stands to reason the same would 

hold true for other organic vegetables: slower growth, thicker cell 

walls, and less water should produce more concentrated flavors. That at  

> least

has always been my impression, though in the end freshness prob-

ably affects flavor even more than growing method. 

To serve such a scrupulously organic meal begs an unavoidable ques-  

> tion: Is

organic food better? Is it worth the extra cost? My Whole Foods 

dinner certainly wasn't cheap, considering I made it from scratch: 

Rosie cost $ 1 5 ($2.99 a pound) , the vegetables another $ 1 2 (thanks to 

that six-buck bunch of asparagus), and the dessert $7 (including $3 for 

a six-ounce box of blackberries) . Thirty-four dollars to feed a family of 

three at home. (Though we did make a second meal from the leftovers.) 

Whether organic is better and worth it are certainly fair, straightforward 

questions, but the answers, I've discovered, are anything but simple. BIG ORGANIC* 177   

> Better for

what? is the all-important corollary to that question. If the 

answer is "taste," then the answer is, as I've suggested, very likely, at  

> least

in the case of produce —but not necessarily. Freshly picked con-

ventional produce is bound to taste better than organic produce that's 

been riding the interstates in a truck for three days. Meat is a harder  

> call.

Rosie was a tasty bird, yet, truth be told, not quite as tasty as Rocky, 

her bigger nonorganic brother. That's probably because Rocky is an 

older chicken, and older chickens generally have more flavor. The fact 

that the corn and soybeans in Rosie 's diet were grown without chemi- 

> cals

probably doesn't change the taste of her meat. Though it should be said that Rocky and Rosie both taste more like chicken than mass-

market birds fed on a diet of antibiotics and animal by-products, which 

makes for mushier and blander meat. What's in an animal's feed natu-  

> rally affects

## how it will taste, though whether that feed is organic or not 

probably makes no difference.   

> Better for

what? If the answer is "for my health" the answer, again, is 

probably —but not automatically. I happen to believe the organic dinner  

> I

served my family is healthier than a meal of the same foods conven-

tionally produced, but I'd be hard-pressed to prove it scientifically. What  

> I

could prove, with the help of a mass spectrometer, is that it contained  

> little

or no pesticide residue —the traces of the carcinogens, neurotox- 

> ins,

and endocrine disruptors now routinely found in conventional 

produce and meat. What I probably can't prove is that the low levels of 

these toxins present in these foods will make us sick —give us cancer,  

> say,

or interfere with my son's neurological or sexual development. But 

that does not mean those poisons are not making us sick: Remarkably  

> little

research has been done to assess the effects of regular exposure to 

the levels of organophosphate pesticide or growth hormone that the 

government deems "tolerable" in our foods. (One problem with these  

> official

tolerances is that they don't adequately account for children's 

exposure to pesticides, which, because of children's size and eating 

habits, is much greater than adults'.) Given what we do know about ex-

posure to endocrine disruptors, the biological impact of which de-

pends less on dose than timing, minimizing a child's exposure to these I 78 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEA4MA 

chemicals seems like a prudent idea. I very much like the fact that the 

milk in the ice cream I served came from cows that did not receive in-

jections of growth hormone to boost their productivity, or that the 

corn those cows are fed, like the corn that feeds Rosie, contains no 

residues of atrazine, the herbicide commonly sprayed on American 

cornfields. Exposure to vanishingly small amounts (0.1 part per bil-

lion) of this herbicide has been shown to turn normal male frogs into 

hermaphrodites. Frogs are not boys, of course. So I can wait for that sci-

ence to be done, or for our government to ban atrazine (as European 

governments have done), or I can act now on the presumption that 

food from which this chemical is absent is better for my son's health 

than food that contains it. 

## Of course, the healthfulness of a food is not simply a question of its  

> toxicity;

## we have also to consider its nutritional quality. Is there any rea-

son to think my Whole Foods meal is any more nutritious than the 

same meal prepared with conventionally grown ingredients? 

Over the years there have been sporadic efforts to demonstrate the 

nutritional superiority of organic produce, but most have foundered on 

the difficulty of isolating the great many variables that can affect the nu- 

> tritional

quality of a carrot or a potato —climate, soils, geography, 

freshness, farming practices, genetics, and so on. Back in the fifties, 

## when the USDA routinely compared the nutritional quality of produce 

from region to region, it found striking differences: carrots grown in 

the deep soils of Michigan, for example, commonly had more vitamins 

than carrots grown in the thin, sandy soils of Florida. Naturally this in-

formation discomfited the carrot growers of Florida, which probably 

explains why the USDA no longer conducts this sort of research. Nowa-

days U.S. agricultural policy, like the Declaration of Independence, is 

founded on the principle that all carrots are created equal, even though 

there's good reason to believe this isn't really true. But in an agricultural 

system dedicated to quantity rather than quality, the fiction that all 

foods are created equal is essential. This is why, in inaugurating the fed- 

> eral

organic program in 2000, the secretary of agriculture went out of 

his way to say that organic food is no better than conventional food. BIG ORGANIC / 7 9

"The organic label is a marketing tool," Secretary Glickman said. "It is 

not a statement about food safety. Nor is 'organic' a value judgment 

about nutrition or quality." 

Some intriguing recent research suggests otherwise. A study by 

University of California-Davis researchers published in the Journal of    

> Agriculture and Food

Chemistry in 2003 described an experiment in which 

identical varieties of corn, strawberries, and blackberries grown in 

neighboring plots using different methods (including organically and 

conventionally) were compared for levels of vitamins and polyphenols. 

Polyphenols are a group of secondary metabolites manufactured by 

plants that we've recently learned play an important role in human 

health and nutrition. Many are potent antioxidants; some play a role in 

preventing or fighting cancer; others exhibit antimicrobial properties. 

The Davis researchers found that organic and otherwise sustainably 

grown fruits and vegetables contained significantly higher levels of 

both ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and a wide range of polyphenols. 

The recent discovery of these secondary metabolites in plants has 

brought our understanding of the biological and chemical complexity 

of foods to a deeper level of refinement; history suggests we haven't 

gotten anywhere near the bottom of this question, either. The first level 

was reached early in the nineteenth century with the identification of 

the macronutrients —protein, carbohydrate, and fat. Having isolated 

these compounds, chemists thought they'd unlocked the key to human 

nutrition. Yet some people (such as sailors) living on diets rich in 

macronutrients nevertheless got sick. The mystery was solved when sci- 

> entists

discovered the major vitamins —a second key to human nutri- 

> tion.

# Now it's the polyphenols in plants that we're learning play a 

> critical

role in keeping us healthy. (And which might explain why diets 

heavy in processed food fortified with vitamins still aren't as nutritious  

> as

fresh foods.) You wonder what else is going on in these plants, what 

other undiscovered qualities in them we've evolved to depend on. 

In many ways the mysteries of nutrition at the eating end of the 

food chain closely mirror the mysteries of fertility at the growing end: 

The two realms are like wildernesses that we keep convincing ourselves 180 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

our chemistry has mapped, at least until the next level of complexity 

comes into view. Curiously, Justus von Liebig, the nineteenth-century 

German chemist with the spectacularly ironic surname, bears responsi-   

> bility for science's

overly reductive understanding of both ends of the food 

chain. It was Liebig, you'll recall, who thought he had found the chem- 

> ical

key to soil fertility with the discovery of NPK, and it was the same 

Liebig who thought he had found the key to human nutrition when he 

identified the macronutrients in food. Liebig wasn't wrong on either 

count, yet in both instances he made the fatal mistake of thinking that 

what we knew about nourishing plants and people was all we needed  

> to

## know to keep them healthy. It's a mistake we'll probably keep repeat-

ing until we develop a deeper respect for the complexity of food and  

> soil

and, perhaps, the links between the two. 

But back to the polyphenols, which may hint at the nature of that  

> link.

# Why in the world should organically grown blackberries or corn 

contain significantly more of these compounds? The authors of the 

Davis study haven't settled the question, but they offer two suggestive 

theories. The reason plants produce these compounds in the first place  

> is

to defend themselves against pests and diseases; the more pressure 

from pathogens, the more polyphenols a plant will produce. These 

compounds, then, are the products of natural selection and, more  

> specifically,

the coevolutionary relationship between plants and the 

species that prey on them. Who would have guessed that humans 

evolved to profit from a diet of these plant pesticides? Or that we would 

invent an agriculture that then deprived us of them? The Davis authors 

hypothesize that plants being defended by man-made pesticides don't 

need to work as hard to make their own polyphenol pesticides. Cod-

dled by us and our chemicals, the plants see no reason to invest their re-

sources in mounting a strong defense. (Sort of like European nations 

during the cold war.) 

## A second explanation (one that subsequent research seems to sup-

port) may be that the radically simplified soils in which chemically fer- 

> tilized

plants grow don't supply all the raw ingredients needed to 

synthesize these compounds, leaving the plants more vulnerable to at-BIG ORGANIC 1 S 1 

> tack,

as we know conventionally grown plants tend to be. NPK might 

be sufficient for plant growth yet still might not give a plant everything  

> it

needs to manufacture ascorbic acid or lycopene or resveratrol in 

quantity. As it happens, many of the polyphenols (and especially a sub- 

> set

called the flavonols) contribute to the characteristic taste of a fruit 

or vegetable. Qualities we can't yet identify in soil may contribute qual- 

> ities

we've only just begun to identify in our foods and our bodies. 

Reading the Davis study I couldn't help thinking about the early 

proponents of organic agriculture, people like Sir Albert Howard and   

> J. I.

Rodale, who would have been cheered, if unsurprised, by the find-

ings. Both men were ridiculed for their unscientific conviction that a

reductive approach to soil fertility —the NPK mentality —would dimin-

ish the nutritional quality of the food grown in it and, in turn, the 

health of the people who lived on that food. All carrots are not created 

equal, they believed; how we grow it, the soil we grow it in, what we 

feed that soil all contribute qualities to a carrot, qualities that may yet 

escape the explanatory net of our chemistry. Sooner or later the soil sci- 

> entists

and nutritionists will catch up to Sir Howard, heed his admoni-

tion that we begin "treating the whole problem of health in soil, plant, 

animal and man as one great subject." 

So it happens that these organic blackberries perched on this mound 

of vanilla ice cream, having been grown in a complexly fertile soil and 

forced to fight their own fights against pests and disease, are in some 

quantifiable way more nutritious than conventional blackberries. This 

would probably not come as earthshaking news to Albert Howard or   

> J. I.

Rodale or any number of organic farmers, but at least now it is a

claim for which we can supply a scientific citation: J. Agric. Food. Chan.  

> vol.

51, no. 5, 2003. (Several other such studies have appeared since; 

see the Sources section at the back of this book.) 

Obviously there is much more to be learned about the relationship 

of soil to plant, animals, and health, and it would be a mistake to lean 

too heavily on any one study. It would also be a mistake to assume that 

the word "organic" on a label automatically signifies healthfulness, es-

pecially when that label appears on heavily processed and long-distance 1 S2 •> THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

foods that have probably had much of their nutritional value, not to 

mention flavor, beaten out of them long before they arrive on our tables. 

The better for what? question about my organic meal can of course be 

answered in a much less selfish way: Is it better for the environment? 

Better for the farmers who grew it? Better for the public health? For the 

taxpayer? The answer to all three questions is an (almost) unqualified  

> yes.

To grow the plants and animals that made up my meal, no pesti-

cides found their way into any farmworker's bloodstream, no nitrogen 

runoff or growth hormones seeped into the watershed, no soils were 

poisoned, no antibiotics were squandered, no subsidy checks were 

written. If the high price of my all-organic meal is weighed against the 

comparatively low price it exacted from the larger world, as it should 

be, it begins to look, at least in karmic terms, like a real bargain. 

And yet, and yet ... an industrial organic meal such as mine does 

leave deep footprints on our world. The lot of the workers who har-

vested the vegetables and gathered up Rosie for slaughter is not appre-

ciably different from that of those on nonorganic factory farms. The 

chickens lived only marginally better lives than their conventional 

counterparts; in the end a CAFO is a CAFO, whether the food served in   

> it is

organic or not. As for the cows that produced the milk in our ice 

cream, they may well have spent time outdoors in an actual pasture 

(Stonyfield Farm buys most —though not all —of its milk from small dairy farmers), but the organic label guarantees no such thing. And 

while the organic farms I visited don't receive direct government 

payments, they do receive other subsidies from taxpayers, notably sub-

sidized water and electricity in California. The two-hundred-thousand-

square-foot refrigerated processing plant where my salad was washed 

pays half as much for its electricity as it would were Earthbound not   

> classified as

a "farm enterprise." 

But perhaps most discouraging of all, my industrial organic meal is 

nearly as drenched in fossil fuel as its conventional counterpart. Aspara-

gus traveling in a 747 from Argentina; blackberries trucked up from 

Mexico; a salad chilled to thirty-six degrees from the moment it was BIG ORGANIC * 18 3

picked in Arizona (where Earthbound moves its entire operation every 

winter) to the moment I walk it out the doors of my Whole Foods. The 

food industry burns nearly a fifth of all the petroleum consumed in the 

United States (about as much as automobiles do) . Today it takes be-

tween seven and ten calories of fossil fuel energy to deliver one calorie 

of food energy to an American plate. And while it is true that organic 

farmers don't spread fertilizers made from natural gas or spray pesti-

cides made from petroleum, industrial organic farmers often wind up 

burning more diesel fuel than their conventional counterparts: in truck-

ing bulky loads of compost across the countryside and weeding their  

> fields,

a particularly energy-intensive process involving extra irrigation  

> (to

germinate the weeds before planting) and extra cultivation. All told, 

growing food organically uses about a third less fossil fuel than grow-

ing it conventionally, according to David Pimentel, though that savings 

disappears if the compost is not produced on site or nearby. 

Yet growing the food is the least of it: only a fifth of the total energy 

used to feed us is consumed on the farm; the rest is spent processing 

the food and moving it around. At least in terms of the fuel burned to get it from the farm to my table, there's little reason to think my Casca-

dian Farm TV dinner or Earthbound Farm spring mix salad is any more 

sustainable than a conventional TV dinner or salad would have been. 

Well, at least we didn't eat it in the car. 

So is an industrial organic food chain finally a contradiction in 

terms? It's hard to escape the conclusion that it is. Of course it is possi-

ble to live with contradictions, at least for a time, and sometimes it is 

necessary or worthwhile. But we ought at least face up to the cost of 

our compromises. The inspiration for organic was to find a way to feed 

ourselves more in keeping with the logic of nature, to build a food sys-

tem that looked more like an ecosystem that would draw its fertility 

and energy from the sun. To feed ourselves otherwise was "unsustain- 

> able,"

a word that's been so abused we're apt to forget what it very  

> specifically

means: Sooner or later it must collapse. To a remarkable extent, 

farmers succeeded in creating the new food chain on their farms; the 184*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

trouble began when they encountered the expectations of the super-

market. As in so many other realms, nature's logic has proven no match  

> for

the logic of capitalism, one in which cheap energy has always been 

a given. And so, today, the organic food industry finds itself in a most 

unexpected, uncomfortable, and, yes, unsustainable position: floating 

on a sinking sea of petroleum. TEN 

# GRASS 

Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Pasture   

> 1.

# MONDAY 

For something people profess to like so much, grass is peculiarly hard 

for us to see. Oh, you can see it well enough in a general sense, but how 

## much do you really see when you look at a patch of grass? The color 

green, of course, perhaps a transitory recording of the breeze: an ab-

straction. Grass to us is more ground than figure, a backdrop to more 

legible things in the landscape —trees, animals, buildings. It's less a

subject in its own right than a context. Maybe this has to do with the 

disparity in scale between us and the uncountable tiny beings that make 

up a pasture. Maybe we're just too big to see what's going on down 

there in any detail. 

Curiously, we seem to like grass less for what it is than for what it 

> isn't

# —the forest, I mean —and yet we're much more likely to identify 

with a tree than a blade of grass. When poets liken people to blades of 

grass it's usually to humble us, to pull the rug out from under our in-

dividuality and remind us of our existential puniness. Composed of so 186* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

## many tiny seemingly indistinguishable parts, a patch of grass —which 

on closer inspection isn't even composed of grasses half the time but of 

legumes and broad-leafed plants of many kinds —resolves itself in our 

perception into an undifferentiated mass, a more or less shaggy field of 

color. This way of looking at, or not looking at, grass must suit us, or 

## why would we work so hard to keep it mowed? Mowing only adds to 

the abstractness of grass. 

This is not at all how grass looks to a cow or for that matter to a

grass farmer like Joel Salatin. When one of his cows moves into a new 

paddock, she doesn't just see the color green; she doesn't even see  

> grass.

She sees, out of the corner of her eye, this nice tuft of white 

clover, the emerald-green one over there with the heart-shaped leaves,  

> or,

up ahead, that grassy spray of bluish fescue tightly cinched at ground  

> level.

These two entities are as different in her mind as vanilla ice cream  

> is

from cauliflower, two dishes you would never conflate just because 

they both happen to be white. The cow opens her meaty wet lips, curls 

her sandpaper tongue around the bunched clover like a fat rope, and 

with the pleasing sound of tearing foliage, rips the mouthful of tender 

leaves from its crown. She'll get to the fescue eventually, and the or-

chard grass, and even to quite a few of the weeds, but not before she's 

eaten all the clover ice cream she can find. 

Joel calls his pastures the "salad bar," and to his cows they contain   

> at least

as many different things to eat. As well as a few things not to eat. 

Though we might fail to notice the handful of Carolina nightshades or  

> thistles

lurking in this pasture, when the cows are done grazing it to-

morrow, those plants will still be standing, like forlorn florets of cauli-

flower languishing on a picky child's plate. 

What watching this cow eat her supper tells me is that the scale 

argument doesn't really hold. The reason we don't see very much when 

## we look at grass has less to do with our relative proportions than 

with our interests. The cow I'm following in Joel Salatin 's pasture this 

evening is a far sight bigger than I am, and in most matters a good deal  

> less

perceptive, yet she can pick a clump of timothy out of this illegible 

green chaos in less time than it would take me to remember that plant's GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE 187 

name. I don't eat timothy, or even clover. But if I did I'd probably per-

ceive the order and beauty and delegability of this salad bar as vividly  

> as

she does. Legibility, too, is in the eye of the beholder. 

Joel doesn't eat grass either —it's one of the few nutritious things in 

nature the human omnivore, lacking a rumen to break down its cellu- 

> lose,

can't digest —yet he can see the salad bar almost as vividly as his 

cows. That first day I spent on his farm, when he insisted that before I

met any animals I join him down on his belly in a pasture, he intro-

duced me to orchard grass and fescue, to red and white clover, to 

millet and bluegrass, plantain and timothy and sweet grass, which he 

pulled a blade of for me to taste (and a very sweet grass it is). Joel 

wanted me to understand why he calls himself a grass farmer rather 

than a rancher or a pig farmer or a chicken farmer or a turkey farmer 

or a rabbit farmer or an egg farmer. The animals come and go, but the  

> grasses,

which directly or indirectly feed all the animals, abide, and the 

well-being of the farm depends more than anything else on the well-

being of its grass. 

Grass farming is a relatively new term in American agriculture, im-

ported from New Zealand by Allan Nation, the editor of Stockman Grass  

> Farmer,

in the 1980s. Stockman is a tabloid monthly, chock-full of ads for 

portable electric fencing, mineral supplements, and bull semen, that 

has become the bible for the growing band of livestock producers who 

practice something called "management-intensive grazing," or as ab-

breviated in the pages of Nation's magazine, MiG. (It's sometimes also 

called rotational grazing.) Joel writes a column for the Stockman Grass 

Farmer called The Pastoralist, and has become close friends with Nation, 

# whom he regards as something of a mentor. 

## When Allan Nation went to New Zealand in 1 984 and heard sheep 

ranchers there refer to themselves as grass farmers something clicked, 

he says, and he began to regard the growing of food in a completely 

fresh light. Nation promptly changed the name of his little journal 

from the Stockman to Stockman Grass farmer and "got pretty evangelical 

about grass." He gathered around his magazine a group of like-minded 

grass evangelists, including Joel, Jim Gerrish, an Idaho rancher and 188 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

teacher (who corned the phrase "management-intensive grazing"), Gerald  

> Fry,

a breeding specialist, Jo Robinson, a health writer who studies the 

health benefits of grass-fed meat, and an Argentine agronomist named  

> Dr.

Anibal Pordomingo. Many of these people first encountered the the-

ory of rotational grazing in the work of Andre Voisin, a French agrono-

mist whose 1959 treatise, Grass Productivity, documented that simply by 

applying the right number of ruminants at the right time pastures 

could produce far more grass (and, in turn, meat and milk) than any-

one had ever thought possible. 

Grass farmers grow animals —for meat, eggs, milk, and wool —but regard them as part of a food chain in which grass is the keystone 

species, the nexus between the solar energy that powers every food 

chain and the animals we eat. "To be even more accurate," Joel has said, 

"we should call ourselves sun farmers. The grass is just the way we cap-

ture the solar energy." One of the principles of modern grass farming is 

that to the greatest extent possible farmers should rely on the contem-

porary energy of the sun, as captured every day by photosynthesis, 

instead of the fossilized sun energy contained in petroleum. 

For Allan Nation, who grew up on a cattle ranch in Mississippi, do-

ing so is as much a matter of sound economics as environmental virtue. 

"All agriculture is at its heart a business of capturing free solar energy 

in a food product that can then be turned into high-value human en- 

> ergy,"

he recently wrote in his column, Al's Obs; here each month he 

applies the theories of a decidedly eclectic group of thinkers (ranging 

from business gurus like Peter Drucker and Michael Porter to writers  

> like

Arthur Koestler) to the problems of farming. "There are only two  

> efficient

ways to do this," he wrote in his column. "One is for you to 

walk out in your garden, pull a carrot and eat it. This is a direct transfer 

of solar energy to human energy. The second most efficient way is for 

you to send an animal out to gather this free solar food and then you  

> eat

the animal. 

"All other methods of harvest and transfer require higher capital 

and petroleum energy inputs and these necessarily lower the return 

to the farmer/rancher. As Florida rancher Bud Adams once told me, GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE * 189 

'Ranching is a very simple business. The really hard part is keeping it 

simple.'" 

The simplest way to capture the sun's energy in a form food animals 

can use is by growing grass: "These blades are our photovoltaic panels," 

Joel says. And the most efficient— if not the simplest —way to grow 

vast quantities of solar panels is by management-intensive grazing, a

method that as its name implies relies more heavily on the farmer's 

brain than on capital —or on energy-intensive inputs. All you need, in   

> fact, is

some portable electric fencing, a willingness to move your live-

stock onto fresh pasture every day, and the kind of intimate knowledge 

of grass that Joel tried to impart to me that early spring afternoon, 

## down on our bellies in his pasture. 

"The important thing to know about any grass is that its growth fol-

lows a sigmoid, or S, curve," Joel explained. He grabbed my pen and 

notebook and began drawing a graph, based on one that appears in 

Voisin's book. "This vertical axis here is the height of our grass plant, 

okay? And the horizontal axis is time: the number of days since this 

paddock was last grazed." He started tracing a big S on the page, begin-

ning in the lower left-hand corner where the two axes met. "See, the 

growth starts out real slow like this, but then after a few days it begins 

to zoom. That's called 'the blaze of growth,' when the grass has recov-

ered from the first bite, rebuilt its reserves and root mass, and really 

taken off. But after a while" —the curve leveled out at around day four-

teen or so —"it slows down again, as the grass gets ready to flower and 

seed. It's entering its period of senescence, when the grass begins to 

lignify [get woody] and becomes less palatable to the cow. 

"What you want to do is graze a pasture right at this point here" 

# —

he tapped my pad sharply —"at the very top of the blaze of growth. But 

what you never, ever want to do is violate the law of the second bite. 

You can't let your cows take a second bite of a grass before it has had a

chance to fully recover."  

> If

the law of the second bite were actually on the books, most of the world's ranchers and dairy farmers would be outlaws, since they allow 

their stock to graze their pastures continuously. By allowing cattle a sec-190->THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ond or third bite, the most desirable "ice cream" species —clover, or-

chard grass, sweet grass, bluegrass, timothy —weaken and gradually 

disappear from the sward, giving way to bald spots and to weedy and 

brushy species the cows won't touch. Any plant wants to keep its roots 

and shoots roughly in balance, so grasses kept short by overgrazing lack 

the deep roots needed to bring water and minerals up from the subsoil. 

Over time a closely cropped grassland deteriorates, and in a dry or brit- 

> tle

environment, it will eventually turn into a desert. The reason envi-

ronmentalists in the western United States take such a dim view of 

grazing is that most ranchers practice continuous grazing, degrading 

the land by flouting the law of the second bite. 

Joel pulled a single blade of orchard grass, showing me exactly 

where a cow had sheared it the week before, and pointing out the fin-

ger of fresh green growth that had emerged from the cut in the days  

> since.

The blade was a kind of timeline, sharply demarcated between 

the dark growth predating the bite, and the bright green blade coming   

> after it.

"That's the blaze of growth, right there. I'd say this paddock will 

be ready for the cows to come back in three or four more days." 

"Management intensive" it is. Joel is constantly updating the spread-

sheet he keeps in his head to track the precise stage of growth of the 

farm's several dozen paddocks, which range in size from one to five  

> acres,

depending on the season and the weather. This particular pad-

dock, a flattish five acres directly behind the barn that is bordered to the 

north by a hedgerow and to the south by the creek and dirt road that 

links Polyface's various parts and pastures like a crooked tree trunk, 

## now took its place on the mental schedule. The sheer number of local 

variables involved in making such a determination hurt my head to 

consider, and help explain the difficulty of fitting intensive grazing into 

an industrial agriculture founded on standardization and simplicity. The 

amount of time it takes a paddock to recover is constantly changing, 

depending on temperature, rainfall, exposure to the sun, and the time 

of year, as does the amount of forage any given cow requires, depend-

ing on its size, age, and stage of life: A lactating cow, for example, eats 

twice as much grass as a dry one. GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE 191 

The unit in which a grass farmer performs and records all these cal-

culations, deciding exacdy when and where to move the herd, is a "cow  

> day,"

which is simply the average amount of forage a cow will eat in one 

day; for his rotations to work, the farmer needs to know just how many 

cow days each paddock will yield. Though it turns out that, as a unit of 

measurement a cow day is a good deal more rubbery than, say, the speed 

of light, since the number of cow days any given paddock can supply  

> rises

and falls in response to all the aforementioned variables. 

As destructive as overgrazing can be to a pasture, undergrazing can 

be almost as damaging, since it leads to woody, senescent grasses and a 

> loss

of productivity. But getting it just right —grazing the optimal num-

ber of cattle at the optimal moment to exploit the blaze of growth 

# —

yields tremendous amounts of grass, all the while improving the quality 

of the land. Joel calls this optimal grazing rhythm "pulsing the pas-

tures" and says that at Polyface it has boosted the number of cow days 

to as much as four hundred per acre; the county average is seventy. "In  

> effect

we've bought a whole new farm for the price of some portable 

fencing and a lot of management." 

Grass farming done well depends almost entirely on a wealth of nu-

anced local knowledge at a time when most of the rest of agriculture 

has come to rely on precisely the opposite: on the off-farm brain, and 

the one-size-fits-all universal intelligence represented by agrochemicals 

and machines. Very much on his own in a very particular place, the 

grass farmer must continually juggle the various elements of his farm 

in space as well as time, relying on his powers of observation and or-

ganization to arrange the appointed daily meeting of animal and grass in such a way as to ensure maximum benefit for both. 

So is this sort of low-tech pastoralism simply a throwback to prein-

dustrial agriculture? Salatin adamantly begged to differ: "It might not 

look that way, but this is all information-age stuff we're doing here. 

Polyface Farm is a postindustrial enterprise. You'll see." J 92 <• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

2. MONDAY EVENING 

As I neared the blessed, longed-for end of my first day as a Polyface 

farmhand, I must say I didn't feel at all the way I normally do after a day 

spent laboring in the information economy. And there was still one 

more daunting chore before dinner: moving the cows, an operation  

> that,

Joel wanted me to understand, is a whole lot easier than it sounds.  

> I

certainly hoped so. Throwing and stacking fifty-pound bales of hay all 

afternoon had left me bone tired, sore, and itchy all over from pricks of 

the chaff, so I was mightily relieved when Joel proposed we ride the 

four-wheeler to the upper pasture where the cows had spent their day.  

> (It's

axiomatic that the more weary you feel the more kindly you look 

on fossil fuel.) We stopped by the toolshed for a freshly charged car bat-

tery to power the electrified paddock fence, and sped up the rutted dirt 

road, Joel behind the wheel, me hanging on behind him, trying to keep 

# my rear end planted on the little wooden deck he'd rigged up for haul-

ing stuff around the farm. 

## "My neighbors think I'm insane, moving my cows as often as I do. 

That's because when most people hear the words 'moving the cattle' 

they picture a long miserable day, featuring a couple of pickup trucks, 

a bunch of barking dogs, several cans of Skoal, and a whole lot of hol-

lering," Joel said, hollering himself to be heard over the ATV's engine. 

"But honestly, it's not like that at all." 

Like most grass farmers who practice rotational grazing, Joel moves 

his cattle onto fresh grass every day. The basic principle is "mob and 

move," he explained, as we bumped to a halt at the gate to the upper 

pasture. Eighty or so cattle were milling or lying around what looked  

> like

relatively tight quarters in a fenced-off section of a much larger 

pasture that sloped to the south. 

"What we're trying to do here is mimic on a domestic scale what 

herbivore populations do all over the world. Whether it is wildebeests 

on the Serengeti, caribou in Alaska, or bison on the American plains, GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE 19.! 

multistomached herds are always moving onto fresh ground, following 

the cycles of the grass. Predators forced the buffalo to move frequently, 

and stay mobbed-up together for safety." 

These intense but brief stays completely change the animals' inter-

action with the grass and the soil. They eat down just about everything in the paddock, and then they move on, giving the grasses a chance to re-cover. Native grasses evolved to thrive under precisely such grazing pat- 

> terns;

indeed, they depend on them for their reproductive success. Not 

only do ruminants spread and fertilize seed with their manure, but their 

hoofprints create shady little pockets of exposed soil where water 

> collects

# —ideal conditions for germinating a grass seed. And in brittle 

lands during the driest summer months, when microbial life in the soil  

> all

but stops, the rumen of the animals takes over the soil's nutrient-

cycling role, breaking down dry plant matter into basic nutrients and or-

ganic matter, which the animals then spread in their urine and manure. 

The mob-and-move routine also helps to keep the ruminants healthy. 

"Short-duration stays allow the animals to follow their instinct to seek 

fresh ground that hasn't been fouled by their own droppings, which 

are incubators for parasites." 

Joel disconnected the electric fence from its battery and held down 

the wire with his boot to let me into the paddock. "We achieve the same 

objective domestically with our portable electric fences. The fence plays 

the role of predator in our system, keeping the animals mobbed up and 

making it possible for us to move them every day." The technology for   

> this light,

inexpensive electric fencing (elements of which Joel's father 

invented in the 1960s) was the breakthrough that made management-

intensive grazing practical. (Though much earlier, dogs allowed shep-herds to practice a rough approximation of rotational grazing.) 

Clearly Joel's cattle knew the drill; I could feel their anticipation. 

Cows that had been lying around roused themselves, and the bolder 

ones slowly lumbered over in our direction, one of them —"That's 

Budger" —stepping right up to nuzzle us like a big cat. Joel's herd is an 

exceptionally amiable if somewhat motley crew of black, brown, and 194 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

yellowish animals, crosses of Brahman, Angus, and shorthorn blood- 

> lines.

## He doesn't believe in artificial insemination or put much stock in 

fancy genetics. Instead he picks a new bull from his crop of calves every 

couple of years, naming him for a celebrated Lothario: Slick Willie had 

the job for much of the Clinton administration. You wouldn't mistake  

> Slick's

progeny for show cattle, yet their coats were sleek, their tails 

were clean, and for cows on a steamy afternoon in June, they had re-

markably few flies on them.  

> It

took the two of us working together no more than fifteen min-

utes to fence a new paddock next to the old one, drag the watering 

tub into it, and set up the water line. (The farm's irrigation system is 

gravity-fed from a series of ponds Joel's dug on the hillside.) The 

grasses in the new paddock were thigh-high and lush, and the cattle 

plainly couldn't wait to get at them. 

The moment arrived. Looking more like a maitre d' than a rancher, 

Joel opened the gate between the two paddocks, removed his straw hat 

and swept it grandly in the direction of the fresh salad bar, and called 

his cows to their dinner. After a moment of bovine hesitation, the cows 

began to move, first singly, then two by two, and then all eighty of them 

sauntered into the new pasture, brushing past us as they looked about 

intently for their favorite grasses. The animals fanned out in the new 

paddock and lowered their great heads, and the evening air filled with 

the muffled sounds of smacking lips, tearing grass, and the low snuf- 

> fling

of contented cows. 

The last time I had stood watching a herd of cattle eat their supper  

> I

was standing up to my ankles in cow manure in Poky Feeders pen 

number 43 in Garden City, Kansas. The difference between these two 

bovine dining scenes could not have been starker. The single most ob-

vious difference was that these cows were harvesting their own feed in-

stead of waiting for a dump truck to deliver a total mixed ration of corn 

that had been grown hundreds of miles away and then blended by an-

imal nutritionists with urea, antibiotics, minerals, and the fat of other  

> cattle

in a feedlot laboratory. Here we'd brought the cattle to the food 

rather than the other way around, and at the end of their meal there 'd GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE 195 

be nothing left for us to clean up, since the cattle would spread their 

waste exactly where it would do the most good. 

Cows eating grasses that had themselves eaten the sun: The food 

chain at work in this pasture could not be any shorter or simpler. Espe- 

> cially

## when I compared it to the food chain passing through the feed- 

> lot,

with its transcontinental tentacles reaching all the way back to 

cornfields in Iowa, from there to the hypoxic zone in the Gulf of Mex- 

> ico,

and farther still, to the oil fields of the Persian Gulf that had sup-

plied much of the energy to grow the corn. The flaked number 2 corn 

in steer 534's feed bunk linked him to an industrial (not to mention 

military) complex that reached halfway around the world. 

And yet if I could actually see everything that was going on right 

here in this pasture, could trace all the ecological connections involved, 

the scene unfolding directly before me was not nearly as simple as it 

looked. In fact, there was easily as much complexity present in a single 

square foot of this pasture as there is in the whole industrial complex 

into which 534 was plugged; what makes this pasture's complexity so 

## much harder for us to comprehend is that it is not a complexity of our 

making. 

But try anyway. Focus in for a moment on just the relationship be-

tween Budger and the tuft of fescue she's tearing from its crown. Those 

blades of grass have spent this long June day turning sunlight into sug- 

> ars.

(The reason Joel moves his cattle at the end of the day is because  

> that's

## when sugar levels in the grass hit their peak; overnight the plant 

will gradually use up these reserves.) To feed the photosynthetic process 

the grass's roots have drawn water and minerals up from deep in the  

> soil

(some grasses can sink their roots as much as six feet down) , min- 

> erals

that soon will become part of this cow. Chances are Budger has 

also chosen exactly which grasses to eat first, depending on whatever 

minerals her body craves that day; some species supply her more mag-

nesium, others more potassium. (If she's feeling ill she might go for the 

plantain, a forb whose leaves contain antibiotic compounds; grazing  

> cattle

instinctively use the diversity of the salad bar to medicate them- 

> selves.)

By contrast 534, who never got to pick and choose his dinner, 196 -'THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> let

alone his medications, depends on animal nutritionists to design his  

> total

ration —which of course is only as total as the current state of 

knowledge in animal science permits. 

So far the relationship between Budger and this square foot of pas-

ture might seem a little one-sided, since viewed at least from where I

stood, Budger 's bite appears to have diminished the pasture. But if I

could view the same event from underground and over time, I would 

see that that bite is not a zero-sum transaction between cow and grass 

plant. The moment Budger shears the clump of grass, she sets into mo-

tion a sequence of events that will confer a measurable benefit on this 

square foot of pasture. The shorn grass plant, endeavoring to restore the 

rough balance between its roots and leaves, will proceed to shed as 

## much root mass as it's just lost in leaf mass. When the discarded roots  

> die,

the soil's resident population of bacteria, fungi, and earthworms 

will get to work breaking them down into rich brown humus. What 

had been the grass plant's root runs will become channels through 

which worms, air, and rainwater will move through the earth, stimu-

lating the process by which new topsoil is formed.   

> It is

in this manner that the grazing of ruminants, when managed 

properly, actually builds new soil from the bottom up. Organic matter 

in a pasture also builds from the top down, as leaf litter and animal 

wastes break down on the surface, much as it does on a forest floor. But 

in a grassland decaying roots are the biggest source of new organic 

matter, and in the absence of grazers the soil-building process would be 

nowhere near as swift or productive. 

Back up to the surface now. Over the next few days, Budger 's shear-

ing of this grass plant will stimulate new growth, as the crown redirects 

reserves of carbohydrate energy from the roots upward to form new 

shoots. This is the critical moment when a second bite would derail the  

> grass's

recovery, since the plant has to live on these reserves until it has 

grown new leaves and resumed photosynthesis. As the plant adds leaves  

> it

adds new roots too, reaching deeper into the soil, making good use 

of the humus the first bite helped sponsor, and bringing nutrients up to 

the surface. Over the course of the season this one grass plant will con-GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE * 197 

vert more sunlight into more biomass, both above and below the sur-

face of the pasture, than it ever would have had it never encountered 

a cow. 

Yet it's misleading to speak about any grass plant in isolation, since 

many different plant species, performing many different functions, oc-

cupy even this one square foot of pasture, and Budger's bite subtly al- 

> ters

the composition of this community. The shearing of the tallest 

grasses exposes the pasture's shorter plants to sunlight, stimulating  

> their

growth. This is why a well-grazed pasture will see its population of ground-hugging clovers increase, a boon to grasses and grazers alike. 

These legumes fix nitrogen in the soil, fertilizing the neighboring 

grasses from below while supplying nitrogen to the grazers above; the 

bacteria living in the animal's rumen will use the nitrogen in these 

clover leaves to construct new molecules of protein. 

Side-by-side comparisons of intensive and continuously grazed pas-

tures have demonstrated that intensive grazing increases the diversity of 

species in pastures. That's because rotated cattle don't eliminate favored 

species by overgrazing them and their equal-opportunity shearing en-

sures that no one species of grass ever dominates by rising to hog all the 

sunlight. This biodiversity confers a great many benefits on all parties. At 

the most fundamental level, it allows the farm's land to capture the max-

## imum amount of solar energy, since one kind of photosynthesizer or an-

other is occupying every conceivable niche —niches in space as well as 

time. For example, when the early season grasses slow down in June, the  

> late

season grasses step in, and when drought hits, the deep-rooted 

species will take over from the shallower ones. A diverse enough poly-

culture of grasses can withstand virtually any shock and in some places 

will produce in a year nearly as much total biomass as a forest receiving 

the same amount of rainfall. 

This productivity means Joel's pastures will, like his woodlots, 

remove thousands of pounds of carbon from the atmosphere each year; 

instead of sequestering all that carbon in trees, however, grasslands 

store most of it underground, in the form of soil humus. In fact, grass-

ing over that portion of the world's cropland now being used to grow I 98 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

grain to feed ruminants would offset fossil fuel emissions appreciably. 

For example, if the sixteen million acres now being used to grow corn 

to feed cows in the United States became well-managed pasture, that 

would remove fourteen billion pounds of carbon from the atmosphere 

each year, the equivalent of taking four million cars off the road. We sel-

## dom focus on farming's role in global warming, but as much as a third 

of all the greenhouse gases that human activity has added to the atmos-

phere can be attributed to the saw and the plow. 

The benefits of a food chain rooted in a perennial polyculture are so 

many and so great that they've inspired dreams of converting our agri-

culture of annual grains into something that would look a lot more like 

Joel Salatin's pastures. That particular vision hatched more than thirty 

years ago in the mind of a graduate student in plant genetics named Wes 

Jackson. Today breeders at his Land Institute, in Salina, Kansas, are work-

ing on a (very) long-term project to "perennialize" many of our princi-

pal grain crops (including corn) and then grow them in polycultures 

that farmers would seldom if ever have to plow or replant. The basic idea   

> is to

allow us to live off the land (and the sun) more like ruminants do, 

by coaxing perennial grasses (which we can't digest) to yield bigger and 

more nutritious seeds (which we can) . Of course, the same goal would 

be accomplished by changing us rather than the grasses —giving people 

rumens, that is, so they could digest grasses. And there are skeptics who 

believe perennializing the major crops is no less of a pipe dream than 

outfitting humans with rumens. Jackson claims his group is making 

slow but steady progress, however, and has already disproved the con-

ventional wisdom, widely held among botanists, that plants must 

choose, in effect, between devoting their energy to the production of 

seeds, as annuals do, or using it to survive the winter in the manner of 

perennials. 

For the time being, though, I'll have to eat Budger herself if I want 

to make use of the food energy contained in the grasses growing in Joel  

> Salatin's

pastures. For me, Wes Jackson's audacious vision of an agricul-

ture that might someday feed us without diminishing the earth's sub-GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE * 199 

stance (its soil), as even the most sustainable annual agriculture must 

do, only deepens my appreciation for the grass-based food chain we al-

ready have —the one, I mean, that links Budger to the soil and sun and, 

eventually, to me. It's true that prodigious amounts of food energy are 

wasted every time an animal eats another animal —nine calories for 

every one we consume. But if all that energy has been drawn from the 

boundless storehouse of the sun, as in the case of eating meat off this 

pasture, that meal comes as close to a free lunch as we can hope to get. 

Instead of mining the soil, such a meal builds more of it. Instead of di-

minishing the world, it has added to it. 

All of which begs a rather large question: Why did we ever turn away from this free lunch in favor of a biologically ruinous meal based on 

corn? Why in the world did Americans ever take ruminants off the 

grass? And how could it come to pass that a fast-food burger produced 

from corn and fossil fuel actually costs less than a burger produced 

from grass and sunlight?  

> I

asked myself these questions standing there in Joel's pasture that 

evening, and in the months since I've thought of several answers. The 

most obvious answer turns out not to be true. I had thought that the 

victory of corn over grass might owe to the fact that a field of corn sim-

ply produces more total food energy than an acre of grass; it certainly 

looks that way. But researchers at the Land Institute have studied this 

question and calculated that in fact more nutrients are produced 

# —

protein and carbohydrate —in an acre of well-managed pasture than in 

an acre of field corn. How can this be? Because a polyculture of grass, 

with its wide diversity of photosynthesizers exploiting every inch of 

land as well as every moment of growing season, captures more solar 

energy and therefore produces more biomass than a cornfield; also, 

only the kernels are harvested from a cornfield, whereas virtually all the 

grass grown in a pasture finds its way into the rumen. 

Even so, the temptations of cheap corn are powerful, as irresistible 2 00 » THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> as

the temptations of cheap energy. Even before the advent of the feed- 

> lot,

farmers had begun using a little corn to finish their cattle —fatten 

them for slaughter —whenever they ran out of good grass, especially in 

the fall and winter. "When you're trying to finish cattle," Allan Nation 

pointed out, "corn covers a multitude of sins." Cattlemen found that 

corn, being such a dense source of calories, produced meat more 

quickly than grass; it also produced a more reliably consistent product, 

eliminating the seasonal and regional differences you often find in 

grass-finished beef. Over time, the knowledge that went into growing 

grass good enough to finish cattle all the year round gradually was lost. 

Along the way corn kept getting more plentiful and ever cheaper. 

# When the farmer found that he could buy corn more cheaply than he could ever hope to grow it, it no longer made economic sense to feed 

animals on the farm, so they moved into CAFOs.The farmer who then 

plowed up his pastures to grow corn to market found he could take off 

to Florida in the winter, not work so hard. To help dispose of the rising 

mountain of cheap corn farmers were now producing, the government 

did everything it could to help wean cattle off grass and onto corn, by 

subsidizing the building of feedlots (through tax breaks) and promot-

ing a grading system based on marbling that favored corn-fed over 

grass-fed beef. (The government also declined to make CAFOs obey 

clean air and clean water laws.) In time the cattle themselves changed,  

> as

the industry selected for animals that did well on corn; these ani-

mals, generally much bigger, had trouble getting all the energy they 

needed from grass. In dairy, farmers moved to superproductive breeds  

> like

the Holstein, whose energy requirements were so great they could 

barely survive on a diet of grass. 

So feeding ruminants corn came to make a certain economic sense 

# — 

> I

say "certain" because that statement depends on the particular method 

of accounting our economy applies to such questions, one that tends to 

hide the high cost of cheap food produced from corn. The ninety-nine-

cent price of a fast-food hamburger simply doesn't take account of that 

meal's true cost —to soil, oil, public health, the public purse, etc., costs 

which are never charged directly to the consumer but, indirectly and GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE * 201'  

> invisibly,

to the taxpayer (in the form of subsidies) , the health care sys-

tem (in the form of food-borne illnesses and obesity) , and the environ-

ment (in the form of pollution) , not to mention the welfare of the 

workers in the feedlot and the slaughterhouse and the welfare of the 

animals themselves. If not for this sort of blind-man's accounting, grass 

would make a lot more sense than it now does. 

So there are a great many reasons American cattle came off the grass 

and into the feedlot, and yet all of them finally come down to the same 

one: Our civilization and, increasingly, our food system are strictly or-

ganized on industrial lines. They prize consistency, mechanization, pre- 

> dictability,

interchangeability, and economies of scale. Everything about 

corn meshes smoothly with the gears of this great machine; grass 

doesn't. 

Grain is the closest thing in nature to an industrial commodity:  

> storable,

portable, fungible, ever the same today as it was yesterday and 

will be tomorrow. Since it can be accumulated and traded, grain is a

form of wealth. It is a weapon, too, as Earl Butz once had the bad taste 

to mention in public; the nations with the biggest surpluses of grain have 

always exerted power over the ones in short supply. Throughout history 

governments have encouraged their farmers to grow more than enough 

grain, to protect against famine, to free up labor for other purposes, to 

improve the trade balance, and generally to augment their own power. 

George Naylor is not far off when he says the real beneficiary of his crop  

> is

not America's eaters but its military-industrial complex. In an indus- 

> trial

economy, the growing of grain supports the larger economy: the 

chemical and biotech industries, the oil industry, Detroit, pharmaceuti- 

> cals

(without which they couldn't keep animals healthy in CAFOs), 

agribusiness, and the balance of trade. Growing corn helps drive the 

very industrial complex that drives it. No wonder the government sub-  

> sidizes it

so lavishly. 

You cannot say any of these things about grass. The government 

writes no subsidy checks to grass farmers. Grass farmers, who buy lit- 

> tle

in the way of pesticides and fertilizers (none, in the case of Joel   

> Salatin) ,

do little to support agribusiness or the pharmaceutical indus-202 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

try or big oil. A surplus of grass does nothing for a nation's power or its 

balance of payments. Grass is not a commodity. What grass farmers 

grow can't easily be accumulated, traded, transported, or stored, at least 

for very long. Its quality is highly variable, different from region to re-

gion, season to season, even farm to farm; there is no number 2 hay. 

Unlike grain, grass can't be broken down into its constituent molecules 

and reassembled as value-added processed foods; meat, milk, and fiber  

> is

about all you can make out of grass, and the only way to do that is 

with a living organism, not a machine. Grass farming with skill in-

volves so many variables, and so much local knowledge, that it is dif- 

> ficult

to systematize. As faithful to the logic of biology as a carefully 

grazed pasture is, it meshes poorly with the logic of industry, which has 

no use for anything it cannot bend to its wheels and bottom line. And,   

> at least

for the time being, it is the logic of industry that rules. 

3. MONDAY SUPPER 

Once the cows were settled in their paddock for the night, Joel showed 

# me how to hook the electric fence to its battery and we rolled down the  

> hill

to dinner. We ditched our boots by the back door, washed up in a

basin in the mudroom, and sat down to a meal prepared by Joel's wife, 

Teresa, and Rachel, the Salatins' eighteen-year-old daughter. The farm's 

two young interns, Galen and Peter, joined us at the big pine table, and 

focused so intently on eating they uttered not a word. The Salatins' son 

Daniel, twenty-two, is a full partner in the farm, but most nights he has 

dinner with his wife and baby son in the new house they recently built 

themselves, up the hill. Joel's mother, Lucille, also lives on the property, 

in a trailer home next to the house. It was in Lucille's guest room that I

was sleeping. 

The Salatins' brick colonial dates to the eighteenth century, and my  

> first

impression of the big, cozy kitchen was that it looked strangely 

familiar. Then it dawned on me: This is exactly the sort of farmhouse 

kitchen —wood-paneled and decorated with all things quaint and hearth-GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE * 203  

> like,

up to and including the neady framed needlepoints —that countless 

kitchens in American suburbs and sitcoms have been striving to simu-   

> late at least

since World War II. This was what all that nostalgia pointed  

> to,

the real McCoy. 

Indeed, much about dining with the Salatins had, at least for me, 

the flavor of a long-ago time and faraway place in America. Joel began 

the meal by closing his eyes and saying a rambling and strikingly non-

generic version of grace, offering a fairly detailed summary of the day's 

doings to a Lord who, to judge by Joel's tone of easy familiarity, was 

present and keenly interested. Everything we ate had been grown on 

the farm, with the exception of the cream of mushroom soup that tied 

together Teresa's tasty casserole of Polyface chicken and broccoli from 

the garden. Rachel passed a big platter of delicious deviled eggs, eggs  

> that

in this form or some other would appear at every meal that week. 

Though it wasn't even the end of June, we tasted the first sweet corn of 

the season, which had been grown in the hoop house where the laying 

hens spend the winter. There was plenty of everything, and the interns 

endured many jokes about their stupendous appetites. To drink there 

was only a pitcher of ice water. Caffeine and alcohol, both of which I

sorely felt the need of at the end of my first day, were nowhere in evi-

dence. It was going to be a long week. 

At dinner I mentioned that this was probably the all-time most lo- 

> cal

meal I'd ever eaten. Teresa joked that if Joel and Daniel could just 

figure out how to mill paper towels and toilet paper from the trees on 

the farm, she'd never have to go to the supermarket. It was true: We 

were eating almost completely off the grid. I realized that the sort of 

agriculture practiced at Polyface was very much of a piece with the sort 

of life the Salatins led. They had largely detached their household from 

industrial civilization, and not just by eating from land that had virtu- 

> ally

no economic or ecological ties to what Joel variously called "the 

empire," "the establishment," and "Wall Street." Joel, who had de-

scribed his politics as Christian libertarian environmentalist, wanted 

nothing to do with "institutional anything," but especially the institu-

tions of government. Daniel and Rachel had both been homeschooled. 2 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

There were plenty of books in the house, but, aside from the Staunton 

daily newspaper, which devoted more space to local car crashes than 

the war in Iraq, little media (and no television) penetrated the Salatin 

household. 

The farm and the family comprised a remarkably self-contained 

world, in the way I imagined all American farm life once did. But the 

agrarian self-sufficiency that Thomas Jefferson celebrated used to be a

matter of course and a product of necessity; nowadays that sort of in-

dependence constitutes a politics and economics and way of life both 

deliberate and hard-won —an achievement. Were Jefferson to return to-

day he would no doubt be gratified to learn that there were still farm- 

> ers

## down the road from Monticello as Jeffersonian as Joel Salatin. Until, 

that is, Jefferson got around a bit more and discovered there weren't 

## many others like him. 

At dinner I got Joel and Teresa talking about the history of Polyface,  

> a

history in which the roots of Salatin 's politics and agriculture become  

> fairly

easy to trace. "I'm actually a third-generation alternative farmer," 

Joel said. "My grandfather was a charter subscriber to Rodale's Organic  

> Gardening and

Farming." Fred Salatin had farmed a half-acre in-town lot in 

Anderson, Indiana, supplying the local markets with fruit, honey, and 

eggs sold in boxes that bore the Salatin name. Fred Salatin, who was as 

## much an inventor and tinkerer as he was a farmer, held the patent for 

the very first walking garden sprinkler. 

To hear Joel and Teresa describe him, Joel's father William was an in-

genious and somewhat eccentric farmer, a man who wore bow ties and 

sandals and drove a '58 Plymouth sedan that he'd converted into a

pickup by removing all the seats and the lid of the trunk. ("He would 

drive it into town sitting on a bucket," Joel explained. "It embarrassed 

us kids terribly") From the time he was a young boy, William had 

wanted to farm; after flying planes in World War II and earning an eco-

nomics degree from the University of Indiana, he bought a farm in the 

highlands of Venezuela, where he and Lucille began raising chickens. 

# Why Venezuela? "Dad felt he could farm the way he wanted there, get 

out from under both convention and regulations." GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE 205 

The chicken farm thrived until 1959, when a leftist coup toppled 

the government and "we got caught as ugly Americans in the middle of   

> this political

mess." Joel's father refused on principle to buy protection 

from the local authorities, who proceeded to look the other way when 

guerillas came after the family's property. "We fled out the back door as 

the guerillas were coming in the front. We stayed in the country nine or 

ten months after that, living with a missionary friend while my dad  

> tried to

get the government to return our land. We had a deed, but not 

a single official would look at us without a bribe. And the whole time 

the American ambassador was dutifully reporting that everything was 

under control." 

In 1961 the Salatins were forced to flee the country, leaving behind 

everything they'd built and saved. "Now that I'm hitting the age he was 

then, I just can't imagine what it must have felt like to walk away from   

> it all."

The episode clearly left its mark on Joel, undermining his faith 

that a government, right or left, could protect its citizens and their 

property, much less do the morally right thing. 

Determined to start over again, William Salatin went shopping for 

farmland within a day's drive of Washington, D.C., so that he might 

continue petitioning the Venezuelan embassy for compensation. He 

ended up buying 550 acres of badly eroded and hilly farmland on the 

western edge of the Shenandoah Valley, in the tiny town of Swoope. (It's 

pronounced Swope.) After Drew Pearson, the muckraking journalist, 

publicized his case against the Venezuelans, Salatin won a small settle-

ment that he used to buy a small herd of Hereford cattle. 

"The farm had been abused by tenant farmers for 150 years," Joel  

> said.

## On land that was really too steep for row crops, several genera-

tions of tenant farmers had grown corn and other grains until most of 

the soil had been either exhausted or lost to erosion. "We measured  

> gullies

fourteen feet deep. This farm couldn't stand any more plowing. 

In many places there was no topsoil left whatsoever —just outcroppings 

of granite and clay. Some spots you couldn't even dig a posthole, so Dad 

would fill tires with concrete and sink fence posts in that. We've been 

working to heal this land ever since." 206 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

William Salatin quickly discovered the farm couldn't support both a

mortgage and a family, so he took on work in town as an accountant. 

"He turned the farm into an R&D project instead of a salary project." 

William was now free to experiment, to turn his back on conventional 

thinking about how to farm. 

His instinct to go against conventional agricultural wisdom was 

confirmed by his accounting clients, many of whom were struggling 

farmers. "One look at their books convinced him that all the advice he'd 

been hearing from consultants and extension agents —to build silos, 

graze the forest, plant corn, and sell commodities —was a recipe for fi-

nancial ruin." 

"So instead of building bankruptcy tubes" —farmer lingo for 

> silos

# —"he started down a whole other path." William read Andre 

Voisin's treatise on grass and began practicing rotational grazing. He 

stopped buying fertilizer and started composting. He also let the 

steeper, north-facing hillsides return to forest. 

"Dad was very much a visionary and an inventor. He figured out the 

key to success on a farm like this was first, grass, and second, mobility." 

This last guiding principle, which Joel claims goes all the way back to 

Frederick Salatin 's patented walking sprinkler ("moving things must be 

in our genes"), inspired his father to invent a movable electric fence, a

portable veal calf barn, and a portable chicken coop for the laying hens 

Joel raised as a boy. (Until he went off to college, Joel sold eggs every 

Saturday at a farmer's market in Staunton.) When William noticed that 

on hot days the cattle gathered under the trees, concentrating their ma-

nure in one place, he built a portable "shademobile" —basically a big 

section of canvas stretched over a steel frame on wheels. Now he could 

induce the cattle to spread their manure evenly over his pastures, sim-

ply by towing the shademobile to a new spot every few days. 

Innovations like these helped rebuild the fertility of the soil, and 

gradually the farm began to recover. Grasses colonized the gullies, the 

thin soils deepened, and the rock outcrops disappeared under a fresh 

mantle of sod. And though William Salatin was never quite able to sup-

port his family from the farm, he did live to see Joel make a success of GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE * 207 

the place by building on his example, especially the devotion to grass 

and mobility —and a determination to go his own way. Joel had re-

turned to the farm in 1982 after four years at Bob Jones University and 

a stint as a newspaper reporter. Six years later, when Joel was thirty-one, 

William Salatin died of prostate cancer.   

> "I still

miss him every day," Joel said. "Dad was definitely a little 

odd, but in a good way. How many other Christian conservatives were 

reading Mother Earth News? He lived out his beliefs. I can remember when 

the Arab oil embargo hit in 1974, Dad rode his bicycle thirty-five miles 

back and forth to work every day because he refused to buy another 

drop of imported oil. He would have been a wonderful tent dweller, al-

ways living on less than you have and more lightly than you need to." I 

> felt

a tiny flush of embarrassment at ever having asked Joel to FedEx me 

a steak; I also better understood why he had refused. 

"But you want to know when I miss him the most? When I see thick 

hay and earthworm castings and slick cows, all the progress we've made 

since he left us. Oh, how proud he would be to see this place now!" ELEVEN 

# THE ANIMALS 

Practicing Complexity 

1. TUESDAY MORNING  

> It's

not often I wake up at six in the morning to discover I've overslept, 

but by the time I had hauled my six-foot self out of the five-foot bed 

in Lucille 's microscopic guest room, everyone was already gone and 

morning chores were nearly done. Shockingly, chores at Polyface com-

mence as soon as the sun comes up (five-ish this time of year) and al-

ways before breakfast. Before coffee, that is, not that there was a drop of  

> it

to be had on this farm. I couldn't recall the last time I'd even at-

tempted to do anything consequential before breakfast, or before caf-

feine at the very least. 

# When I stepped out of the trailer into the warm early morning 

mist, I could make out two figures —the interns, probably —moving 

around up on the broad shoulder of hill to the east, where a phalanx of 

portable chicken pens formed a checkerboard pattern on the grass. 

## Among other things, morning chores consist of feeding and watering 

the broilers and moving their pens one length down the hillside. I was THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY 2 09 

supposed to be helping Galen and Peter do this, so I started up the path, 

somewhat groggily, hoping to get there before they finished. 

As I stumbled up the hill, I was struck by how very beautiful the 

farm looked in the hazy early light. The thick June grass was silvered 

with dew, the sequence of bright pastures stepping up the hillside 

dramatically set off by broad expanses of blackish woods. Birdsong 

stitched the thick blanket of summer air, pierced now and again by the 

## wood clap of chicken pen doors slamming shut. It was hard to believe   

> this hillside

had ever been the gullied wreck Joel had described at din- 

> ner,

and even harder to believe that farming such a damaged landscape 

so intensively, rather than just letting it be, could restore it to health and 

yield this beauty. This is not the environmentalist's standard prescrip- 

> tion.

But Polyface is proof that people can sometimes do more for the 

health of a place by cultivating it rather than by leaving it alone. 

By the time I reached the pasture Galen and Peter had finished mov-

ing the pens. Fortunately they were either too kind or too timid to give 

## me a hard time for oversleeping. I grabbed a pair of water buckets, filled 

them from the big tub in the center of the pasture, and lugged them to 

the nearest pen. Fifty of these pens were spread out across the damp 

grass in a serrated formation that had been calibrated to cover every 

square foot of this meadow in the course of the fifty-six days it takes a

broiler to reach slaughter weight; the pens moved ten feet each day, the 

length of one pen. Each ten-by-twelve, two-foot-tall fioorless pen 

houses seventy birds. A section of the roof is hinged to allow access, and  

> a

five-gallon bucket perched atop each unit feeds a watering device sus-

pended inside. 

Directly behind each pen was a perfectly square patch of closely 

cropped grass resembling a really awful Jackson Pollock painting, thickly 

spattered with chicken crap in pigments of white, brown, and green. It 

was amazing what a mess seventy chickens could make in a day. But that 

was the idea: Give them twenty-four hours to eat the grass and fertilize  

> it

with their manure, and then move them onto fresh ground. 

Joel developed this novel method for raising broiler chickens in the  

> 1

980s and popularized it in his 1 993 book, Pastured Poultry Profit!, some-2 10 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

thing of a cult classic among grass farmers. (Joel has self-published four 

other how-to books on farming, and all but one of them has a $ step-

ping in for an S somewhere in its title.) Left to their own devices, a con-

fined flock of chickens will eventually destroy any patch of land, by 

pecking the grass down to its roots and poisoning the soil with its 

extremely "hot," or nitrogenous, manure. This is why the typical free-

range chicken yard quickly winds up bereft of plant life and hard as 

brick. Moving the birds daily keeps both the land and the birds healthy; 

the broilers escape their pathogens and the varied diet of greens sup-

plies most of their vitamins and minerals. The birds also get a ration of 

corn, toasted soybeans, and kelp, which we scooped into long troughs 

in their pens, but Joel claims the fresh grass, along with the worms, 

grasshoppers, and crickets they peck out of the grass, provides as much  

> as

20 percent of their diet —a significant savings to the farmer and a

boon to the birds. Meanwhile, their manure fertilizes the grass, supply-

ing all the nitrogen it needs. The chief reason Polyface Farm is com-

pletely self-sufficient in nitrogen is that a chicken, defecating copiously, 

pays a visit to virtually every square foot of it at several points during the 

season. Apart from some greensand (a mineral supplement to replace 

calcium lost in the meadows) , chicken feed is the only important input 

Joel buys, and the sole off-farm source of fertility. ("The way I look at it, 

I'm just returning some of the grain that's been extracted from this land over the last ISO years.") The chicken feed not only feeds the broilers 

but, transformed into chicken crap, feeds the grass that feeds the cows    

> that, as I

was about to see, feed the pigs and the laying hens. 

After we had finished watering and feeding the broilers, I headed 

up to the next pasture, where I could hear a tractor idling. Galen had 

told me Joel was moving the Eggmobile, an operation I'd been eager to 

watch. The Eggmobile, one of Joel's proudest innovations, is a ram-

shackle cross between a henhouse and a prairie schooner. Housing four 

hundred laying hens, this rickety old covered wagon has hinged nest-

ing boxes lined up like saddlebags on either side, allowing someone to retrieve eggs from the outside. I'd first laid eyes on the Eggmobile the 

night before, parked a couple of paddocks away from the cattle herd. THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 2 1 I

The hens had already climbed the little ramp into the safety of the coop 

for the night, and before we went down to dinner Joel had latched the 

trapdoor behind them. Now it was time to move them into a fresh pad-

dock, and Joel was bolting the Eggmobile to the hitch of his tractor. It 

wasn't quite 7:00 a.m. yet, but Joel seemed delighted to have someone 

to talk to, holding forth being one of his greatest pleasures. 

"In nature you'll always find birds following herbivores," Joel ex-

plained, when I asked him for the theory behind the Eggmobile. "The 

egret perched on the rhino's nose, the pheasants and turkeys trailing af-ter the bison —that's a symbiotic relationship we're trying to imitate." 

In each case the birds dine on the insects that would otherwise bother 

the herbivore; they also pick insect larvae and parasites out of the ani-

mal's droppings, breaking the cycle of infestation and disease. "To 

mimic this symbiosis on a domestic scale, we follow the cattle in their 

rotation with the Eggmobile. I call these gals our sanitation crew." 

Joel climbed onto the tractor, threw it into gear, and slowly towed 

the rickety contraption fifty yards or so across the meadow to a pad-

dock the cattle had vacated three days earlier. It seems the chickens es-

chew fresh manure, so he waits three or four days before bringing 

them in —but not a day longer. That's because the fly larvae in the ma-

nure are on a four-day cycle, he explained. "Three days is ideal. That 

gives the grubs a chance to fatten up nicely, the way the hens like them, 

but not quite long enough to hatch into flies." The result is prodigious 

amounts of protein for the hens, the insects supplying as much as a

third of their total diet —and making their eggs unusually rich and  

> tasty.

By means of this simple little management trick, Joel is able to use 

his cattle's waste to "grow" large quantities of high-protein chicken 

feed for free; he says this trims his cost of producing eggs by twenty- 

> five

cents per dozen. (Very much his accountant father's son, Joel can  

> tell

you the exact economic implication of every synergy on the farm.) 

The cows further oblige the chickens by shearing the grass; chickens 

can't navigate in grass more than about six inches tall. 

After Joel had maneuvered the Eggmobile into position, he opened 

the trapdoor, and an eager, gossipy procession of Barred Rocks, Rhode 2 12 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Island Reds, and New Hampshire Whites filed down the little ramp, 

fanning out across the pasture. The hens picked at the grasses, especially 

the clover, but mainly they were all over the cowpats, doing this frantic 

backward-stepping break-dance with their claws to scratch apart the 

caked manure and expose the meaty morsels within. Unfolding here 

before us, I realized, was a most impressive form of alchemy: cowpat- 

> ties

in the process of being transformed into exceptionally tasty eggs. 

"I'm convinced an Eggmobile would be worth it even if the chick-

ens never laid a single egg. These birds do a more effective job of sani-

tizing a pasture than anything human, mechanical, or chemical, and 

the chickens love doing it." Because of the Eggmobile, Joel doesn't have 

to run his cattle through a headgate to slather Ivomectrin, a systemic 

paraciticide, on their hides or worm them with toxic chemicals. This is 

what Joel means when he says the animals do the real work around 

here. "I'm just the orchestra conductor, making sure everybody's in the 

right place at the right time." 

That day, my second on the farm, as Joel introduced me to each of his 

intricately layered enterprises, I began to understand just how radically 

different this sort of farming is from the industrial models I'd observed 

before, whether in an Iowa cornfield or an organic chicken farm in Cal- 

> ifornia.

Indeed, it is so different that I found Polyface's system difficult 

to describe to myself in an orderly way. Industrial processes follow a  

> clear, linear,

hierarchical logic that is fairly easy to put into words, 

probably because words follow a similar logic: First this, then that; put  

> this

in here, and then out comes that. But the relationship between 

cows and chickens on this farm (leaving aside for the moment the 

other creatures and relationships present here) takes the form of a loop 

rather than a line, and that makes it hard to know where to start, or how 

to distinguish between causes and effects, subjects and objects.  

> Is

what I'm looking at in this pasture a system for producing excep-

tionally tasty eggs? If so, then the cattle and their manure are a means 

to an end. Or is it a system for producing grass-fed beef without the use THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 2 1 3

of any chemicals, in which case the chickens, by fertilizing and sanitiz-

ing the cow pastures, comprise the means to that end? So does that 

make their eggs a product or a by-product? And is manure —theirs or 

the cattle's —a waste product or a raw material? (And what should we  

> call

the fly larvae?) Depending on the point of view you take —that of 

the chicken, the cow, or even the grass —the relationship between sub- 

> ject

and object, cause and effect, flips. 

Joel would say this is precisely the point, and precisely the distinc-

tion between a biological and an industrial system. "In an ecological 

system like this everything's connected to everything else, so you can't 

change one thing without changing ten other things. 

"Take the issue of scale. I could sell a whole lot more chickens and 

eggs than I do. They're my most profitable items, and the market is  

> telling

## me to produce more of them. Operating under the industrial 

paradigm, I could boost production however much I wanted —just buy 

more chicks and more feed, crank up that machine. But in a biological 

system you can never do just one thing, and I couldn't add many more 

chickens without messing up something else. 

"Here's an example: This pasture can absorb four hundred units of 

nitrogen a year. That translates into four visits from the Eggmobile or 

two passes of a broiler pen. If I ran any more Eggmobiles or broiler 

pens over it, the chickens would put down more nitrogen than the 

grass could metabolize. Whatever the grass couldn't absorb would run  

> off,

and suddenly I have a pollution problem." Quality would suffer, 

too: Unless he added more cattle, to produce more grubs for the chick-

ens and to keep the grass short enough for them to eat it, those chick-

ens and eggs would not taste nearly as good as they do.   

> "It's all

connected. This farm is more like an organism than a

machine, and like any organism it has its proper scale. A mouse is the  

> size

of a mouse for a good reason, and a mouse that was the size of an 

elephant wouldn't do very well." Joel likes to quote from an old agricultural textbook he dug out of 

the stacks at Virginia Tech many years ago. The book, which was pub-

lished in 1 941 by a Cornell Ag professor, offers a stark conclusion that, 214* THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

depending on your point of view, will sound either hopelessly quaint or arresting in its gnomic wisdom: "Farming is not adapted to large-

scale operations because of the following reasons: Farming is con-

cerned with plants and animals that live, grow, and die." 

"Efficiency" is the term usually invoked to defend large-scale indus- 

> trial

farms, and it usually refers to the economies of scale that can be 

achieved by the application of technology and standardization. Yet Joel  

> Salatin's

farm makes the case for a very different sort of efficiency —the 

one found in natural systems, with their coevolutionary relationships 

and reciprocal loops. For example, in nature there is no such thing as a

waste problem, since one creature's waste becomes another creature's 

lunch. What could be more efficient than turning cow pies into eggs? 

Or running a half-dozen different production systems —cows, broilers,  

> layers,

pigs, turkeys —over the same piece of ground every year? 

Most of the efficiencies in an industrial system are achieved through 

simplification: doing lots of the same thing over and over. In agricul-  

> ture, this

usually means a monoculture of a single animal or crop. In  

> fact,

the whole history of agriculture is a progressive history of simpli-  

> fication, as

humans reduced the biodiversity of their landscapes to a

small handful of chosen species. (Wes Jackson calls our species "homo 

the homogenizer.") With the industrialization of agriculture, the sim-

plifying process reached its logical extreme —in monoculture. This 

radical specialization permitted standardization and mechanization, 

leading to the leaps in efficiency claimed by industrial agriculture. Of 

course, how you choose to measure efficiency makes all the difference, 

and industrial agriculture measures it, simply, by the yield of one cho-

sen species per acre of land or farmer. 

By contrast, the efficiencies of natural systems flow from complex- 

> ity

and interdependence —by definition the very opposite of simplifi-

cation. To achieve the efficiency represented by turning cow manure 

into chicken eggs and producing beef without chemicals you need at  

> least

two species (cows and chickens), but actually several more as well, THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY* 215 

including the larvae in the manure and the grasses in the pasture and 

the bacteria in the cows' rumens. To measure the efficiency of such a

complex system you need to count not only all the products it produces 

(meat, chicken, eggs) but also all the costs it eliminates: antibiotics, 

wormers, paraciticides, and fertilizers. 

Polyface Farm is built on the efficiencies that come from mimicking 

relationships found in nature and layering one farm enterprise over an-

other on the same base of land. In effect, Joel is farming in time as well  

> as

in space —in four dimensions rather than three. He calls this intricate 

layering "stacking" and points out that "it is exactly the model God 

used in building nature." The idea is not to slavishly imitate nature, but 

to model a natural ecosystem in all its diversity and interdependence, 

one where all the species "fully express their physiological distinctive-

ness." He takes advantage of each species' natural proclivities in a way 

that benefits not only that animal but other species as well. So instead 

of treating the chicken as a simple egg or protein machine, Polyface 

honors —and exploits —"the innate distinctive desires of a chicken," 

which include pecking in the grass and cleaning up after herbivores. 

The chickens get to do, and eat, what they evolved to do and eat, and in 

the process the farmer and his cattle both profit. What is the opposite of 

zero-sum? I'm not sure, but this is it. 

Joel calls each of his stacked farm enterprises a "holon," a word I'd 

never encountered before. He told me he picked it up from Allan Na- 

> tion;

## when I asked Nation about it, he pointed me to Arthur Koestler, 

## who coined the term in The Ghost in the Machine. Koestler felt English 

lacked a word to express the complex relationship of parts and wholes 

in a biological or social system. A holon (from the Greek holos, or 

whole, and the suffix on, as in proton, suggesting a particle) is an entity 

that from one perspective appears a self-contained whole, and from an-

other a dependent part. A body organ like the liver is a holon; so is an 

Eggmobile. 

At any given time, Polyface has a dozen or more holons up and run-

ning, and on my second day Joel and Daniel introduced me to a hand- 

> ful

of them. I visited the Raken House, the former toolshed where 2 16 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Daniel has been raising rabbits for the restaurant trade since he was ten. 

("Raken?" "Half rabbit, half chicken," Daniel explained.) When the 

rabbits aren't out on the pasture in portable hutches, they live in cages 

suspended over a deep bedding of woodchips, in which I watched sev- 

> eral

dozen hens avidly pecking away in search of earthworms. Daniel 

explained that the big problem in raising rabbits indoors is their pow- 

> erful

urine, which produces so much ammonia that it scars their lungs 

and leaves them vulnerable to infection. To cope with the problem most 

rabbit farmers add antibiotics to their feed. But the scratching of the 

hens turns the nitrogenous rabbit pee into the carbonaceous bedding, 

creating a rich compost teeming with earthworms that feed the hens. 

Drugs become unnecessary and, considering how many rabbits and 

chickens lived in it, the air in the Raken was, well, tolerable. "Believe 

me," Daniel said, "if it weren't for these chickens, you'd be gagging 

right about now, and your eyes would sting something awful." 

Before lunch I helped Galen and Peter move the turkeys, another 

holon. Moving the turkeys, which happens every three days, means setting 

up a new "feathernet" —a paddock outlined by portable electric fencing 

so lightweight I could carry and lay out the entire thing by myself —and 

then wheeling into it the shademobile, called the Gobbledy-Go. The 

turkeys rest under the Gobbledy-Go by day and roost on top of it at 

night. They happily follow the contraption into the fresh pasture to  

> feast

on the grass, which they seemed to enjoy even more than the 

chickens do. A turkey consumes a long blade of grass by neatly folding  

> it

over and over again with its beak, as if making origami. Joel likes to 

run his turkeys in the orchard, where they eat the bugs, mow the grass, 

and fertilize the trees and vines. (Turkeys will eat much more grass than 

chickens, and they don't damage crops the way chickens can.) "If you 

run turkeys in a grape orchard," Joel explained, "you can afford to 

stock the birds at only seventy percent of normal density, and space the 

vines at seventy percent of what's standard, because you're getting two 

crops off the same land. And at seventy percent you get much healthier 

birds and grapevines than you would at one hundred percent. That's the 

beauty of stacking." By industry standards, the turkey and grape holons THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 2 1 7

are each less than 100 percent efficient; together, however, they pro-

duce more than either enterprise would yield if fully stocked, and they 

do so without fertilizer, weeding, or pesticide.  

> I

had witnessed one of the most winning examples of stacking in 

the cattle barn during my first visit to Polyface back in March. The barn  

> is

an unfancy open-sided structure where the cattle spend three months 

during the winter, each day consuming twenty-five pounds of hay and 

producing fifty pounds of manure. (Water makes up the difference.) 

But instead of regularly mucking out the barn, Joel leaves the manure 

in place, every few days covering it with another layer of woodchips or  

> straw.

As this layer cake of manure, woodchips, and straw gradually  

> rises

beneath the cattle, Joel simply raises the adjustable feed gate from 

which they get their ration of hay; by winter's end the bedding, and the  

> cattle,

can be as much as three feet off the ground. There's one more se- 

> cret

ingredient Joel adds to each layer of this cake: a few bucketfuls of 

corn. All winter long the layered bedding composts, in the process gen-

erating heat to warm the barn (thus reducing the animals' feed require-

ments) , and fermenting the corn. Joel calls it his cattle's electric blanket. 

# Why the corn? Because there's nothing a pig enjoys more than 

forty-proof corn, and there's nothing he's better equipped to do than 

root it out with his powerful snout and exquisite sense of smell. "I call 

them my pigaerators," Salatin said proudly as he showed me into the 

barn. As soon as the cows head out to pasture in the spring, several 

dozen pigs come in, proceeding systematically to turn and aerate the 

compost in their quest for kernels of alcoholic corn. What had been an 

anaerobic decomposition suddenly turns aerobic, which dramatically 

heats and speeds up the process, killing any pathogens. The result, after 

a few weeks of pigaerating, is a rich, cakey compost ready to use. 

"This is the sort of farm machinery I like: never needs its oil 

changed, appreciates over time, and when you're done with it you eat  

> it."

# We were sitting on the rail of a wooden paddock, watching the pigs 

do their thing —a thing, of course, we weren't having to do ourselves. 

The line about the pigaerators was obviously well-worn. But the cliche  

> that

kept banging around in my head was "happy as a pig in shit." 218 > THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Buried clear to their butts in composting manure, a bobbing sea of 

wriggling hams and corkscrew tails, these were the happiest pigs I'd 

ever seen.  

> I

couldn't look at their spiraled tails, which cruised above the earthy 

mass like conning towers on submarines, without thinking about the  

> fate

of pigtails in industrial hog production. Simply put, there are no 

pigtails in industrial hog production. Farmers "dock," or snip off, the   

> tails at

birth, a practice that makes a certain twisted sense if you follow 

the logic of industrial efficiency on a hog farm. Piglets in these CAFOs 

are weaned from their mothers ten days after birth (compared with 

thirteen weeks in nature) because they gain weight faster on their 

drug-fortified feed than on sow's milk. But this premature weaning 

leaves the pigs with a lifelong craving to suck and chew, a need they 

gratify in confinement by biting the tail of the animal in front of them. 

## A normal pig would fight off his molester, but a demoralized pig has 

stopped caring. "Learned helplessness" is the psychological term, and  

> it's

not uncommon in CAFOs, where tens of thousands of hogs spend 

their entire lives ignorant of earth or straw or sunshine, crowded to-

gether beneath a metal roof standing on metal slats suspended over a

septic tank. It's not surprising that an animal as intelligent as a pig 

would get depressed under these circumstances, and a depressed pig 

will allow his tail to be chewed on to the point of infection. Since treat-

ing sick pigs is not economically efficient, these underperforming pro-

duction units are typically clubbed to death on the spot.  

> Tail

docking is the USDA's recommended solution to the porcine 

"vice" of tail chewing. Using a pair of pliers and no anesthetic, most 

# —

but not quite all —of the tail is snipped off. Why leave the little stump? 

Because the whole point of the exercise is not to remove the object of tail 

biting so much as to render it even more sensitive. Now a bite to the tail  

> is

so painful that even the most demoralized pig will struggle to resist it. 

Horrible as it is to contemplate, it's not hard to see how the road to such 

a hog hell is smoothly paved with the logic of industrial efficiency. 

## A very different concept of efficiency sponsors the hog heaven on 

display here in Salatin's barn, one predicated on what he calls "the pig-THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 21 9

ness of the pig." These pigs too were being exploited —in this case, 

tricked into making compost as well as pork. What distinguishes Salatin's 

system is that it is designed around the natural predilections of the pig 

rather than around the requirements of a production system to which the 

pigs are then conformed. Pig happiness is simply the by-product of treat-

ing a pig as a pig rather than as "a protein machine with flaws" —flaws 

such as pigtails and a tendency, when emiserated, to get stressed. 

Salatin reached down deep where his pigs were happily rooting and 

brought a handful of fresh compost right up to my nose. What had 

been cow manure and woodchips just a few weeks before now smelled 

as sweet and warm as the forest floor in summertime, a miracle of tran-

substantiation. As soon as the pigs complete their alchemy, Joel will 

spread the compost on his pastures. There it will feed the grasses, so the 

grasses might again feed the cows, the cows the chickens, and so on 

until the snow falls, in one long, beautiful, and utterly convincing 

proof that in a world where grass can eat sunlight and food animals can 

eat grass, there is indeed a free lunch. 

2 . TUESDAY AFTERNOON 

After our own quick lunch (ham salad and deviled eggs), Joel and I

drove to town in his pickup to make a delivery and take care of a few 

errands. It felt sweet to be sitting down for a while, especially after a

morning taken up with loading the hay we'd baled the day before into 

the hayloft. For me this rather harrowing operation involved attempt-

ing to catch fifty-pound bales that Galen tossed in my general direction 

from the top of the hay wagon. The ones that didn't completely knock 

## me over I hoisted onto a conveyor belt that carried them to Daniel and  

> Peter,

stationed up in the hayloft. It was an assembly line, more or less, 

and as soon as I fell behind (or just fell, literally) the hay bales piled up   

> fast at

## my station; I felt like Lucille Ball at the candy factory I joked to 

Joel that, contrary to his claims that the animals did most of the real 

work on this farm, it seemed to me they'd left plenty of it for us. 2 20 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

## On a farm, complexity sounds an awful lot like hard work, Joel's 

claims to the contrary notwithstanding. As much work as the animals 

do, that's still us humans out there moving the cattle every evening, 

dragging the broiler pens across the field before breakfast (something  

> I'd

pledged I'd wake up in time for the next day), and towing chicken 

coops hither and yon according to a schedule tied to the life cycle of fly 

larvae and the nitrogen load of chicken manure. My guess is that there 

aren't too many farmers today who are up for either the physical or 

mental challenge of this sort of farming, not when industrializing 

promises to simplify the job. Indeed, a large part of the appeal of indus- 

> trial

farming is its panoply of labor- and thought-saving devices: ma-

chines of every description to do the physical work, and chemicals to 

keep crops and animals free from pests with scarcely a thought from 

the farmer. George Naylor works his fields maybe fifty days out of the 

year; Joel and Daniel and two interns are out there every day sunrise to 

sunset for a good chunk of the year. 

Yet Joel and Daniel plainly relish their work, partly because it is so 

varied from day to day and even hour to hour, and partly because they 

find it endlessly interesting. Wendell Berry has written eloquently about 

the intellectual work that goes into farming well, especially into solv-

ing the novel problems that inevitably crop up in a natural system as 

complex as a farm. You don't see much of this sort of problem-solving 

in agriculture today, not when so many solutions come ready-made in   

> plastic bottles.

So much of the intelligence and local knowledge in agri-

culture has been removed from the farm to the laboratory, and then re-

turned to the farm in the form of a chemical or machine. "Whose head  

> is

the farmer using?" Berry asks in one of his essays. "Whose head is us-

ing the farmer?" 

"Part of the problem is, you've got a lot of D students left on the 

farm today," Joel said, as we drove around Staunton running errands. 

"The guidance counselors encouraged all the A students to leave home 

and go to college. There's been a tremendous brain drain in rural Amer- 

> ica.

Of course that suits Wall Street just fine; Wall Street is always trying 

to extract brainpower and capital from the countryside. First they take THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 2 2 1

the brightest bulbs off the farm and put them to work in Dilbert's cu- 

> bicle,

and then they go after the capital of the dimmer ones who stayed 

behind, by selling them a bunch of gee-whiz solutions to their prob-

lems." This isn't just the farmer's problem, either. "It's a foolish culture 

that entrusts its food supply to simpletons."   

> It isn't

hard to see why there isn't much institutional support for the 

sort of low-capital, thought-intensive farming Joel Salatin practices: He 

buys next to nothing. When a livestock farmer is willing to "practice 

complexity" —to choreograph the symbiosis of several different ani-

mals, each of which has been allowed to behave and eat as it evolved 

to —he will find he has little need for machinery, fertilizer, and, most  

> strikingly,

chemicals. He finds he has no sanitation problem or any of 

the diseases that result from raising a single animal in a crowded 

monoculture and then feeding it things it wasn't designed to eat. This  

> is

perhaps the greatest efficiency of a farm treated as a biological sys-

tem: health.  

> I

was struck by the fact that for Joel abjuring agrochemicals and 

pharmaceuticals is not so much a goal of his farming, as it so often is 

in organic agriculture, as it is an indication that his farm is functioning 

well. "In nature health is the default," he pointed out. "Most of the time 

pests and disease are just nature's way of telling the farmer he's doing 

something wrong." 

At Polyface no one ever told me not to touch the animals, or asked 

## me to put on a biohazard suit before going into the brooder house. The 

reason I had to wear one at Petaluma Poultry is because that system —

a

monoculture of chickens raised in close confinement —is inherently 

precarious, and the organic rules' prohibition on antibiotics puts it at a

serious disadvantage. Maintaining a single-species animal farm on an 

industrial scale isn't easy without pharmaceuticals and pesticides. In-

deed, that's why these chemicals were invented in the first place, to 

keep shaky monocultures from collapsing. Sometimes the large-scale 

organic farmer looks like someone trying to practice industrial agricul-

ture with one hand tied behind his back. 

By the same token, a reliance on agrochemicals destroys the infor-222 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

mation feedback loop on which an attentive farmer depends to im-

prove his farming. "Meds just mask genetic weaknesses," Joel explained 

one afternoon when we were moving the cattle. "My goal is always to 

improve the herd, adapt it to the local conditions by careful culling. To 

do this I need to know: Who has a propensity for pinkeye? For worms? 

You simply have no clue if you're giving meds all the time." 

"So you tell me, who's really in this so-called information economy? 

Those who learn from what they observe on their farm, or those who 

rely on concoctions from the devil's pantry?" 

Of course the simplest, most traditional measure of a farm's efficiency  

> is

## how much food it produces per unit of land; by this yardstick too 

Polyface is impressively efficient. I asked Joel how much food Polyface 

produces in a season, and he rattled off the following figures: 

30,000 dozen eggs 

10,000 broilers 

800 stewing hens 

50 beeves (representing 25,000 pounds of beef) 

250 hogs (25,000 pounds of pork) 

1,000 turkeys 

500 rabbits. 

This seemed to me a truly astonishing amount of food from one hun-

dred acres of grass. But when I put it that way to Joel that afternoon —we 

were riding the ATV up to the very top of the hill to visit the hogs in 

their summer quarters —he questioned my accounting method. It was  

> far

too simple. 

"Sure, you can write that we produced all that food from a hundred 

open acres, but if you really want to be accurate about it, then you've got to count the four hundred and fifty acres of woodlot too." I didn't 

get that at all. I knew the woodlot was an important source of farm in-

come in the winter —Joel and Daniel operate a small sawmill from THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 223 

which they sell lumber and mill whatever wood they need to build 

sheds and barns (and Daniel's new house). But what in the world did 

the forest have to do with producing food? 

Joel proceeded to count the ways. Most obviously, the farm's water 

supply depended on its forests to hold moisture and prevent erosion. 

Many of the farm's streams and ponds would simply dry up if not for 

the cover of trees. Nearly all of the farm's 550 acres had been deforested 

## when the Salatins arrived; one of the first things Bill Salatin did was 

plant trees on all the north-facing slopes. 

"Feel how cool it is in here." We were passing through a dense stand 

of oak and hickory. "Those deciduous trees work like an air condi- 

> tioner.

That reduces the stress on the animals in summer." 

Suddenly we arrived at a patch of woodland that looked more like a

savanna than a forest: The trees had been thinned and all around them 

grew thick grasses. This was one of the pig paddocks that Joel had 

carved out of the woods with the help of the pigs themselves. "All we 

do to make a new pig paddock is fence off a quarter acre of forest, thin 

out the saplings to let in some light, and then let the pigs do their  

> thing."

Their thing includes eating down the brush and rooting around 

in the stony ground, disturbing the soil in a way that induces the grass 

seed already present to germinate. Within several weeks, a lush stand of 

wild rye and foxtail emerges among the trees, and a savanna is born. 

Shady and cool, this looked like ideal habitat for the sunburn-prone  

> pigs,

## who were avidly nosing through the tall grass and scratching their 

backs against the trees. There is something viscerally appealing about a

savanna, with its pleasing balance of open grass and trees, and some-

thing profoundly heartening about the idea that, together, farmer and 

pigs could create such beauty here in the middle of a brushy second-

growth forest. 

But Joel wasn't through counting the benefits of woodland to a

farm; idyllic pig habitat was the least of it. 

"There's not a spreadsheet in the world that can measure the value of 

maintaining forest on the northern slopes of a farm. Start with those trees 

easing the swirling of the air in the pastures. That might not seem like a224 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

big deal, but it reduces evaporation in the fields —which means more 

water for the grass. Plus, a grass plant burns up fifteen percent of its calo- 

> ries just

defying gravity, so if you can stop it from being wind whipped, 

you greatly reduce the energy it uses keeping its photovoltaic array 

pointed toward the sun. More grass for the cows. That's the efficiency of 

a hedgerow surrounding a small field, something every farmer used to 

understand before 'fencerow to fencerow' became USDA mantra." 

Then there is the water-holding capacity of trees, he explained, 

which on a north slope literally pumps water uphill. Next was all the 

ways a forest multiples a farm's biodiversity. More birds on a farm mean 

fewer insects, but most birds won't venture more than a couple hun-

dred yards from the safety of cover. Like many species, their preferred 

habitat is the edge between forest and field. The biodiversity of the for- 

> est

edge also helps control predators. As long as the weasels and coyotes 

have plenty of chipmunks and voles to eat, they're less likely to venture 

out and prey on the chickens. 

There was more. On a steep northern slope trees will produce much 

more biomass than will grass. "We're growing carbon in the woods for 

the rest of the farm —not just the firewood to keep us warm in the win- 

> ter,

but also the woodchips that go into making our compost." Making 

good compost depends on the proper ratio of carbon to nitrogen; the 

carbon is needed to lock down the more volatile nitrogen. It takes a lot 

of woodchips to compost chicken or rabbit waste. So the carbon from 

the woodlots feeds the fields, finding its way into the grass and, from 

there, into the beef. Which it turns out is not only grass fed but tree fed 

as well. 

These woods represented a whole other order of complexity that I

had failed to take into account. I realized that Joel didn't look at this 

land the same way I did, or had before this afternoon: as a hundred 

acres of productive grassland patchworked into four hundred and fifty 

acres of unproductive forest. It was all of a biological piece, the trees 

and the grasses and the animals, the wild and the domestic, all part of 

a single ecological system. By any conventional accounting, the forests 

here represented a waste of land that could be put to productive use. THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY * 22 5

But if Joel were to cut down the trees to graze more cattle, as any con-

ventional accounting would recommend, the system would no longer 

be quite as whole or as healthy as it is. You can't just do one thing. 

For some reason the image that stuck with me from that day was that 

slender blade of grass in a too-big, wind-whipped pasture, burning all 

those calories just to stand up straight and keep its chloroplasts aimed  

> at

the sun. I'd always thought of the trees and grasses as antagonists 

# —

another zero-sum deal in which the gain of the one entails the loss of 

the other. To a point, this is true: More grass means less forest; more 

forest less grass. But either-or is a construction more deeply woven 

into our culture than into nature, where even antagonists depend on 

one another and the liveliest places are the edges, the in-betweens or both-ands. So it is with the blade of grass and the adjacent forest as, 

indeed, with all the species sharing this most complicated farm. Rela-

tions are what matter most, and the health of the cultivated turns on 

the health of the wild. Before I came to Polyface I'd read a sentence of  

> Joel's

that in its diction had struck me as an awkward hybrid of the eco-

nomic and the spiritual. I could see now how characteristic that mixing  

> is,

and that perhaps the sentence isn't so awkward after all: "One of the 

greatest assets of a farm is the sheer ecstasy of life." TWELVE 

# SLAUGHTER 

In a Glass Abattoir 

1. WEDNESDAY 

Today promised not to be about the ecstasy of life on a farm. Today was 

the day we were "processing" broilers or, to abandon euphemism, 

killing chickens. 

For all the considerable beauty I'd witnessed following a food chain 

in which the sun fed the grass, the grass the cattle, the cattle the chick-

ens, and the chickens us, there was one unavoidable link in that chain 

few would consider beautiful: the open-air processing shed out behind 

the Salatins' house where, six times a month in the course of a long 

morning, several hundred chickens are killed, scalded, plucked, and 

eviscerated.  

> I

said this link was "unavoidable," but of course most of us, includ-

ing most of the farmers who raise food animals, do our very best to 

avoid thinking about, let alone having anything directly to do with, 

their slaughter. "You have just dined," Emerson once wrote, "and how-SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS ABATTOIR " 22 7

ever scrupulously the slaughterhouse is concealed in the graceful dis-

tance of miles, there is complicity." 

The killing of the animals we eat generally takes place behind high  

> walls,

well beyond our gaze or ken. Not here. Joel insists on slaughter-

ing chickens on the farm, and would slaughter his beeves and hogs 

here too if only the government would let him. (Under an old federal 

exemption, farmers are still permitted to process a few thousand birds 

on farms, but most other food animals must be processed in a state or 

federally inspected facility.) Joel's reasons for wanting to do this work 

here himself are economic, ecological, political, ethical, and even spir- 

> itual.

"The way I produce a chicken is an extension of my worldview," 

he'd told me the first time we'd talked; by the end of the morning I had  

> a

## much better idea of what he meant. 

Wednesday morning I managed to get up right on time —5:30 a.m., to 

be exact —and to make my way to the broilers' pasture before the in-

terns had finished chores. Which today, in addition to watering, feed-

ing, and moving the chickens, included catching and crating the three 

hundred we planned to process immediately after breakfast. While we 

waited for Daniel to show up with the chicken crates, I helped Peter 

move pens, a two-man operation in which one man slides a cus-

tomized, extrawide hand truck beneath the pen's back edge (thereby 

raising it up on wheels) , while the other grabs a broad loop of cable at-

tached in front and slowly drags the pen forward onto fresh grass. The 

chickens, familiar with the daily drill, scooted along in step with their 

slowly moving mobile home. The pens were much heavier than they 

appeared, though, and it took every ounce of my strength to drag one 

a few feet across the uneven ground; "moving the broilers" was not as 

easy as Joel had made it sound or the interns had made it look, but 

then, I wasn't nineteen, either. 

After a while Daniel drove up on the tractor, towing a wagon piled 

high with plastic chicken crates. We stacked four of them in front of 228 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

each of the pens housing the doomed birds and then he and I got to 

work catching chickens. After lifting the top off the pen, Daniel used a

big plywood paddle to crowd the birds into one corner, so they'd be 

easier to catch. He reached in and grabbed a flapping bird by one leg 

and flipped it upside down, which seemed to settle it. Then, in a deft, 

practiced move, he switched the dangling bird from his right hand to 

his left, freeing his right hand to grab another. When he had five birds 

in one hand, I held open the crate door and he stuffed them in. He 

could fill a crate with ten birds in less than a minute. 

"Your turn," Daniel said, nodding toward the cornered mass of 

feathers remaining in the pen. To me, the way he'd grabbed and flipped 

the chickens seemed unduly rough, their pencil legs so fragile-looking, 

yet when I tried to coddle the birds as I grabbed them, they flapped 

around even more violently, until I was forced to let go. This clearly 

wasn't going to work. So finally I just reached into the flapping mass 

and blindly clutched at a leg with one hand and flipped it over. When I

saw the chicken was none the worse for it, I switched it to my right 

hand (I'm a lefty), and went for a second and a third, until I had five 

chicken legs and a giant white pom-pom of feathers in my right hand. Daniel flipped open the lid on a crate and I pushed the pom-pom in. I

don't know if there is a more humane way to catch three hundred 

chickens, but I could see why doing it as fast and as surely as possible 

was best for all concerned. 

Before we sat down to breakfast (scrambled Polyface eggs and Poly-

face bacon) , Daniel turned on the gas under the scalding tank; the wa- 

> ter

had to reach 1 40 degrees before we could start. At breakfast Joel 

talked a little about the importance of on-farm processing, not only to 

Polyface but to the prospects for rebuilding a viable local food chain. To 

hear him describe it, what we were about to do —kill a bunch of chick-

ens in the backyard —was nothing less than a political act. 

## "When the USDA sees what we're doing here they get weak in the 

knees," Joel said with a chuckle. "The inspectors take one look at our 

processing shed, and they don't know what to do with us. They'll tell me 

the regulations stipulate a processing facility must have impermeable SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS ABATTOIR * 229 

white walls so they can be washed down between shifts. They'll quote 

## me a rule that says all doors and windows must have screens. I point out 

## we don't have any walls at all, not to mention doors and windows, be-

cause the best disinfectant in the world is fresh air and sunshine. Well,   

> that really

gets them scratching their heads!" 

The problem with current food-safety regulations, in Joel's view, is 

that they are one-size-fits-all rules designed to regulate giant slaughter-

houses that are mindlessly applied to small farmers in such a way that 

"before I can sell my neighbor aT-bone steak I've got to wrap it up in a

million dollars' worth of quintuple-permitted processing plant." For 

example, federal rules stipulate that every processing facility have a

bathroom for the exclusive use of the USDA inspector. Such regulations 

favor the biggest industrial meatpackers, who can spread the costs of 

compliance over the millions of animals they process every year, at the 

expense of artisanal enterprises like Polyface. 

The fact that Polyface can prove its chickens have much lower bac- 

> teria

counts than supermarket chickens (Salatin's had them both tested 

by an independent lab) doesn't cut any mustard with the inspectors,  

> either.

## USDA regulations spell out precisely what sort of facility and 

system is permissible, but they don't set thresholds for food-borne 

pathogens. (That would require the USDA to recall meat from packers 

## who failed to meet the standards, something the USDA, incredibly, 

lacks the authority to do.) "I'd be happy to swab-test my chickens for 

salmonella, listeria, Campylobacter, you name it, but the USDA refuses 

to set any levels!" As breakfast-time conversation, the topic left a lot to 

be desired, but once Joel gets started on the government, there's no 

stopping him. "Just tell me where the finish line is, and I'll figure out 

the best way to get there." 

The processing shed in question resembles a sort of outdoor kitchen 

on a concrete slab, protected from (some of) the elements by a sheet-

meca.1 roof perched on /ocust posts. Arranged in an orderly horseshoe 

along the edge are stainless steel sinks and counters, a scalding tank, a

feather-plucking machine, and a brace of metal cones to hold the birds 

upside down while they're being killed and bled out. It's not hard to 2 3 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

see how a plein-air abattoir like this might give a USDA inspector con-

niptions. 

"Make no mistake, we're in a war with the bureaucrats, who would  

> like

nothing better than to put us out of business." I couldn't tell 

whether Joel wasn't perhaps being a tad paranoid on this point; the 

pastoral idyll has always felt itself besieged by malign outside forces, 

and on this farm that role is played by the government and the big pro-

cessing companies whose interests they serve. Joel said state inspectors 

have tried to close down his chicken-processing operation more than 

once, but so far he's managed to stave them off.  

> It

was a little early in the day for a full-blown prairie populist stem-

winder, but clearly I was going to get one anyway. "The USDA is being 

used by the global corporate complex to impede the clean-food move-

ment. They aim to close down all but the biggest meat processors, and 

to do it in the name of biosecurity. Every government study to date has 

shown that the reasons we're having an epidemic of food-borne illness 

in this country is centralized production, centralized processing, and 

long-distance transportation of food. You would think therefore that 

they'd want to decentralize the food system, especially after 9/11. But 

no! They'd much rather just irradiate everything instead." 

By the time we finished breakfast, a couple of cars had pulled into 

the driveway —two women from downstate, who had read Pastured Poul-  

> try Profit$

and wanted to learn how to process the chickens they'd  

> started,

and a neighbor or two Joel sometimes hires when he needs ex- 

> tra

hands on processing day. Joel had once told me he regarded the will-

ingness of neighbors to work for a business as the true mark of its  

> sustainability,

that it operated on the proper scale socially and econom- 

> ically,

as well as environmentally. 

"That's another reason we don't raise a hundred thousand chickens.  

> It's

not just the land that couldn't take it, but the community, too. We'd be 

processing six days a week, so we'd have to do what the industrial folks 

do: bring in a bunch of migrant workers because no one around here 

would want to gut chickens every day. Scale makes all the difference." SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS ABATTOIR > 2 3 1

After a few minutes of neighborly chitchat, everybody drifted to-

ward their stations in the processing shed. I volunteered to join Daniel, 

the designated executioner, at the first station on the line. Why? Because  

> I'd

been dreading this event all week and wanted to get it over with. 

Nobody was insisting I personally slaughter a chicken, but I was curi-

ous to learn how it was done and to see if I could bring myself to do it. 

The more I'd learned about the food chain, the more obligated I felt to 

take a good hard look at all of its parts. It seemed to me not too much 

to ask of a meat eater, which I was then and still am, that at least once 

in his life he take some direct responsibility for the killing on which his 

meat-eating depends.  

> I

stacked several chicken crates in the corner by the killing cones 

and, while Daniel sharpened his knives, began lifting chickens from the 

crates and placing them, head first, into the killing cones, which have an opening at the bottom for the chicken's head. Taking the squawking 

birds out of the crate was actually the hard part; as soon as they were 

snug in the cones, which kept their wings from flapping, the chickens   

> fell silent.

Once all eight cones were loaded, Daniel reached underneath 

and took a chicken head between his first finger and thumb, holding it  

> still.

Gently, he gave the head a quarter turn and then quickly drew his 

knife across the artery running alongside the bird's windpipe. A stream 

of blood erupted from the cut, pulsing slightly as it poured down into 

a metal gutter that funneled it into a bucket. Daniel explained that you 

wanted to sever only the artery, not the head, so that the heart would 

continue to beat and pump out the blood. The bird shuddered in its 

cone, its yellow feet dancing spastically.  

> It

was hard to watch. I told myself the spasms were involuntary, and 

they probably were. I told myself that the birds waiting their turn ap-

peared to have no idea what was going on in the cone next to them. I

told myself that their suffering, once their throats were slit, was brief. 

Yet it took several long minutes for the spasms to subside. Could they 

smell the blood on Daniel's hands? Recognize the knife? I have no idea, 

but the waiting birds did not seem panicked, and I took solace in their 232 < THE OMN/VORE'S DILEMMA 

seeming obliviousness. Yet, honestly, there wasn't much time for these 

reflections, because you're working on an assembly (or, really, disas-

sembly) line, and it has a rhythm of its own that soon overpowers your 

mind as well as your body. Within minutes the first eight chickens had 

been bled out and transferred to the scalding tank. Daniel was calling 

for eight more, and I had to hustle so as not to fall behind. 

After I had loaded and he had slaughtered several batches, Daniel 

offered me his knife. He showed me how to hold the chicken's little 

head in a V between my thumb and forefinger, how to turn it to expose 

the artery and avoid the windpipe, and how to slice down toward you  

> at

a spot just beneath the skull. Since I am left-handed, every step had 

to be reverse engineered, which tangled us in an excruciating moment 

of delay. I looked into the black eye of the chicken and, thankfully, saw 

nothing, not a flicker of fear. Holding his head in my right hand, I drew 

the knife down the left side of the chicken's neck. I worried about not 

cutting hard enough, which would have prolonged the bird's suffering, 

but needn't have: The blade was sharp and sliced easily through the 

white feathers covering the bird's neck, which promptly blossomed a 

> brilliant

red. Before I could let go of the bird's suddenly limp head my 

hand was painted in a gush of warm blood. Somehow, an errant droplet 

spattered the lens of my glasses, leaving a tiny, fogged red blot in my  

> field

of vision for the rest of the morning. Daniel voiced his approval of 

# my technique and, noticing the drop of blood on my glasses, offered 

one last bit of advice: "The first rule of chicken killing is that if you ever  

> feel

anything on your lip, you don't want to lick it off." Daniel smiled. 

He's been killing chickens since he was ten years old and doesn't seem 

to mind it. 

Daniel gestured toward the next cone; I guess I wasn't done. In the 

end I personally killed a dozen or so chickens before moving on to try 

another station. I got fairly good at it, though once or twice I sliced too 

deeply, nearly severing a whole head. After a while the rhythm of the 

work took over from my misgivings, and I could kill without a thought 

to anything but my technique. I wasn't at it long enough for slaughter-

ing chickens to become routine, but the work did begin to feel me-SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS ABATTOIR * 235 

chanical, and that feeling, perhaps more than any other, was disconcert-

ing: how quickly you can get used to anything, especially when the 

people around you think nothing of it. In a way, the most morally trou-

bling thing about killing chickens is that after a while it is no longer 

morally troubling. 

## When Daniel and I got ahead of the scalder, which could accommo-

date only a few birds at a time, I stepped away from the killing area for  

> a

break. Joel clapped me on the back for having taken my turn at the  

> killing

cones. I told him killing chickens wasn't something I would 

want to do every day. 

"Nobody should," Joel said. "That's why in the Bible the priests 

drew lots to determine who would conduct the ritual slaughter, and 

they rotated the job every month. Slaughter is dehumanizing work if 

you have to do it every day." Temple Grandin, the animal-handling ex-

pert who's helped design many slaughterhouses, has written that it is 

not uncommon for full-time slaughterhouse workers to become sadis- 

> tic.

"Processing but a few days a month means we can actually think 

about what we're doing," Joel said, "and be as careful and humane as 

possible."  

> I'd

had enough of the killing station, so after my break I moved 

## down the line. Once the birds were bled out and dead, Daniel handed 

them, by their feet, to Galen, who dropped them into the scalder, a tub 

outfitted with moving shelves that plunged the birds up and down in 

the hot water to loosen their feathers. They came out of the scalder 

looking very dead and soaked —floppy wet rags with beaks and feet. 

Next they went into the plucker, a stainless steel cylinder that resembles 

a top-loading washing machine with dozens of black rubber fingers 

projecting from the sides. As the chickens spin at high speed, they flop 

and jostle against the stiff fingers, which pull their feathers off. After a

few minutes they emerge as naked as supermarket broilers. This is the 

## moment the chickens passed over from looking like dead animals to 

looking like food. 

Peter pulled the birds from the plucker, yanked off the heads, and 

cut off the feet before passing the birds to Galen for gutting. I joined 234* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

him at his station, and he showed me what to do —where to make the 

incision with your knife, how to reach your hand into the cavity with-

out tearing too much skin, and how to keep the digestive tract intact as 

you pull the handful of warm viscera from the belly. As the viscera 

spilled out onto the stainless steel counter he named the parts: gullet, 

gizzard, gallbladder (which you must be careful not to pierce), liver, 

heart, lungs, and intestines (have to be careful here again); then he 

showed me which organs to keep for sale, and which ones to drop in 

the gutbucket at our feet. The viscera were unexpectedly beautiful, glis-

tening in a whole palette of slightly electric colors, from the steely blue 

striations of the heart muscle to the sleek milk chocolate liver to the 

dull mustard of the gallbladder. I was curious to see the gizzard, the 

stomachlike organ where a chicken uses bits of ingested grit to crush  

> its

food after it's passed down the gullet. I slit open the tight, hard nut 

of gizzard and there inside found tiny pieces of stone and a blade of 

bright green grass folded like an accordion. I couldn't make out any in-

sects in the gizzard, but its contents recapitulated the Polyface food 

chain: pasture on its way to becoming meat.  

> I

didn't get very good at evisceration; my clumsy hands tore unac-

ceptably large openings in the skin, giving my chickens a ragged appear-

ance, and I accidentally broke a gallbladder, spilling a thin yellow bile that  

> I

then had to painstakingly rinse off the carcass. "After you gut a few 

thousand chickens," Galen said dryly after I'd torn another chicken, 

"you'll either get really good at it, or you'll stop gutting chickens." Galen 

had clearly gotten really good at it, and he seemed to enjoy the work. 

Everybody was making desultory conversation as they went about 

their jobs, and the morning had something of the flavor that I imagine 

a barn raising or a November session of corn shucking once had: peo-

ple who ordinarily work alone having a chance to visit with one an-

other while getting something useful done. Much of the work was 

messy and unpleasant, but it did allow for conversation, and you 

weren't going to be at it long enough to get bored or sore. And by the 

end of the morning you had something to show for it —and a great 

deal more than you would have had had you been working alone. We SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS ABATTOIR 235 hadn't been at it much more than three hours before there were three 

hundred or so chickens floating in the big steel tank of iced water. Each 

of them had made the transition from clucking animal to oven-ready  

> roaster,

from killing cone to holding tank, in ten minutes, give or take. 

While we were cleaning up, scrubbing the blood off the tables and 

hosing down the floor, customers began arriving to pick up their 

chickens. This was when I began to appreciate what a morally powerful 

idea an open-air abattoir is. Polyface's customers know to come after 

noon on a chicken day, but there's nothing to prevent them from show-

ing up earlier and watching their dinner being killed —indeed, cus-

tomers are welcome to watch, and occasionally one does. More than 

any USDA rule or regulation, this transparency is their best assurance  

> that

the meat they're buying has been humanely and cleanly processed. 

"You can't regulate integrity," Joel is fond of saying; the only gen-

uine accountability comes from a producer's relationship with his or 

her customers, and their freedom "to come out to the farm, poke 

around, sniff around. If after seeing how we do things they want to buy 

food from us, that should be none of the government's business." Like 

fresh air and sunshine, Joel believes transparency is a more powerful 

disinfectant than any regulation or technology. It is a compelling idea. 

Imagine if the walls of every slaughterhouse and animal factory were as 

transparent as Polyface's —if not open to the air then at least made of  

> glass.

So much of what happens behind those walls —the cruelty, the 

carelessness, the filth —would simply have to stop. 

The customers pick their chicken out of the tank and bag it them-

selves before putting it on the scale in the shop next door to the pro-

cessing shed. (Having customers bag their own chickens preserves the   

> fiction that

they're not buying a processed food product, which is ille- 

> gal

in an area zoned for agriculture. Rather, they're buying the live bird, 

which Polyface has slaughtered and cleaned as a courtesy.) If you buy 

one at the farm, a Polyface chicken costs $2.05 a pound, compared to 

$1.29 at the local supermarket. To keep that premium as low as possi-

ble is yet another reason for processing on the farm. Having to take 

beeves and hogs to the packing plant in Harrisonburg adds a dollar to 2 3 6 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

every pound of beef or pork Polyface sells, and two dollars to every 

pound of ham or bacon, which regulations prohibit Joel from smoking 

himself. Curing meat is considered manufacturing, he explained, smok-

ing slightly now himself, and manufacturing is prohibited in an area 

zoned for agriculture. Joel is convinced "clean food" could compete 

with supermarket food if the government would exempt farmers from 

the thicket of regulations that prohibit them from processing and sell-

ing meat from the farm. For him, regulation is the single biggest im-

pediment to building a viable local food chain, and what's at stake is 

our liberty, nothing less. "We do not allow the government to dictate 

what religion you can observe, so why should we allow them to dictate 

what kind of food you can buy?" He believes "freedom of food" —the 

freedom to buy a pork chop from the farmer who raised the hog 

# —

should be a constitutional right. 

While Theresa chatted with customers as she checked them out, oc-

casionally dispatching Daniel or Rachel to fetch a dozen eggs from the 

fridge or a roast from the walk-in freezer, Galen and I helped Joel com-

post chicken waste. This just may be the grossest job on the farm —or 

anywhere else for that matter. Yet I came to see that even the way Poly-

face handles its chicken guts is, as Joel would say, an extension of his 

worldview. 

Joel went off on the tractor to get a load of woodchips from the big 

pile he keeps across the road, while Galen and I hauled five-gallon 

buckets of blood and guts and feathers from the processing shed to the 

compost pile, which is only a stone's throw from the house. The day 

was getting steamy, and the heaping mound of woodchips, beneath 

which simmered earlier installments of chicken waste, exhaled a truly    

> evil stink. I've

encountered some funky compost piles, but this one 

smelled like, well, exactly what it was: rotting flesh. I realized that this 

was what I had caught the occasional waft of during my first sleepless 

night in the trailer. 

Beside the old pile Joel dumped a few yards of fresh woodchips, 

which Galen and I raked into a broad rectangular mound about the size 

of a double bed, leaving a slight depression in the middle. Into this dip SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS AB ATTO I R * 2 3 7

## we spilled the buckets of guts, forming a glistening, parti-colored stew. 

## On top of this we added the pillowy piles of feathers, and finally the 

blood, which now had the consistency of house paint. By now Joel was 

back with another load of chips, which he proceeded to dump onto the 

top of the pile. Galen climbed up onto the mass of woodchips with his 

rake, and I followed him with mine. The top layer of woodchips was  

> dry,

but you could feel the viscera sliding around underfoot; it felt like 

walking on a mattress filled with Jell-O. We raked the pile level and got 

out of there. 

The compost pile repulsed me, but what did that say? Beyond the 

stench in my nostrils (which, believe me, was not so easy to get be-

yond) , the pile offered an inescapable reminder of all that eating chicken 

involves —the killing, the bleeding, the evisceration. And no matter how 

well it is masked or how far it is hidden away, this death smell —and the   

> reality that

gives rise to it —shadows the eating of any meat, industrial, 

organic, or whatever, is part and parcel of even this grassy pastoral food 

chain whose beauty had so impressed me. I wondered whether my dis-

gust didn't cover a certain shame I was feeling about the morning's 

work. Just at the moment, I wasn't sure I could imagine eating chicken 

again any time soon.  

> I

certainly couldn't imagine keeping this rotting heap of chicken 

guts an errant summer's breeze away from my dinner table. But Joel 

probably saw that pile in a very different light than I did; who knows, 

by now it might not even smell all that bad to him. For Joel, yet another 

of the advantages of processing chickens here is that it allows him to 

keep the whole cycle of birth, growth, death, and decay on the land. 

Otherwise, the waste would end up in a rendering plant, there to be su-

perheated, dried, and pelleted, turned into "protein meal," and fed to 

factory-farmed pigs and cattle and even other chickens, a dubious prac- 

> tice

that mad cow disease has rendered even more dubious. This is not 

a system he wants any part of.  

> It

could be that Joel even finds a certain beauty in that compost pile, 

or at least in its redemptive promise. He certainly hasn't hidden it away. 

Like every other bit of "waste" on this farm, he regards chicken guts as 2 3 8 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

a form of biological wealth —nitrogen he can return to the land by 

locking it down with carbon he's harvested from the woodlot. Having 

seen what happened to last year's pile, and all the piles before that, Joel 

can see the future of this one in a way I can't, its promise to transub-

stantiate this mass of blood and guts and feathers into a particularly 

rich, cakey black compost, improbably sweet-smelling stuff that, by 

spring, will be ready for him to spread onto the pastures and turn back 

into grass. THIRTEEN 

# THE MARKET 

"Greetings from the 

# Non-Barcode People"   

> 1.

# WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON 

Following the corn-based industrial food chain had taken me on a

journey of several thousand miles, from George Naylor's Iowa fields to 

the feedlots and packing plants of Kansas, through any number of far-

flung food processors before ending up in a Marin County McDonald's. 

After that, it didn't surprise me to read that the typical item of food on 

an American's plate travels some fifteen hundred miles to get there, and  

> is

frequently better traveled and more worldly than its eater. By com-

parison, the grass-based food chain rooted in these Virginia pastures is, 

for all its complexity, remarkably short; I had been able to follow it for 

most of its length without leaving the Salatins' property. The farm work 

in Virginia may have been more taxing than in Iowa —killing chickens 

as compared to planting corn —but the detective work here was a rela-

tive cinch. And all that remained to do now was to trace the grass-based 

food chain along the various marketing paths linking Joel's pastures to 

his customers' plates. 240 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

What had brought me to Polyface in the first place, you'll recall, 

was Joel's refusal to FedEx me a steak. I was given to understand that 

his concept of sustainability was not limited to agricultural technique 

or processing method, but extended the entire length of the food 

chain. Joel is no more likely to sell his grass-finished beef to Whole 

Foods (let alone Wal-Mart) than he would be to feed his cows grain, 

chicken manure, or Rumensin; as far as he's concerned, it is all of the 

same industrial piece. So Polyface does not ship long distance, does not  

> sell

into supermarkets, and does not wholesale its food. All three hun-

dred chickens we'd processed Wednesday morning would be eaten 

within a few dozen miles or, at the most, half a day's drive, of the farm. 

Originally I assumed Joel's motive for keeping his food chain so short 

was strictly environmental —to save on the prodigious quantities of  

> fossil

fuel Americans burn moving their food around the country and, 

increasingly today, the world. But it turns out Joel aims to save a whole  

> lot

more than energy. 

## A chicken —or steak, or ham, or carton of eggs —can find its way 

from Polyface Farm to an eater's plate by five possible routes: direct   

> sales at

the farm store, farmer's markets, metropolitan buying clubs, a

handful of small shops in Staunton, and Joel's brother Art's panel truck, 

which makes deliveries to area restaurants every Thursday. Each of these 

outlets seems quite modest in itself, yet taken together they comprise 

the arteries of a burgeoning local food economy that Joel believes is in-

dispensable to the survival of his kind of agriculture (and community) 

> ,

not to mention to the reform of the entire global food system. 

In Joel's view, that reformation begins with people going to the 

trouble and expense of buying directly from farmers they know— 

"relationship marketing," as he calls it. He believes the only meaning- 

> ful

guarantee of integrity is when buyers and sellers can look one 

another in the eye, something few of us ever take the trouble to do. 

"Don't you find it odd that people will put more work into choosing 

their mechanic or house contractor than they will into choosing the 

person who grows their food?" 

Joel often speaks of his farming as his ministry, and certainly his THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" * 24/ 

four hundred or so regular customers hear plenty of preaching. Each 

spring he sends out a long, feisty, single-spaced letter that could con-

vince even a fast-food junkie that buying a pastured broiler from Poly- 

> face

Farm qualifies as an act of social, environmental, nutritional, and  

> political

redemption. 

"Greetings from the non-Barcode people," began one recent mis- 

> sive,

before it launched into a high-flying jeremiad against our "dis-

connected multi-national global corporate techno-glitzy food system" 

with its "industrial fecal factory concentration camp farms." (The dan-

gerous pileup of modifiers is a hallmark of Joel's rhetorical style.) 

He darkly warns that the government "and their big-food-system 

fraternity-mates" are exploiting worries about bio terrorism to regulate 

small food producers out of business, and beseeches his customers "to 

stand with Polyface during these paranoid, hysterical days." Like any 

good jeremiad, this one eventually transits from despair to hope, not-

ing that the "yearning in the human soul to smell a flower, pet a pig and 

enjoy food with a face has never been stronger," before moving into a

matter-of-fact discussion of this year's prices and the paramount im-

portance of sending in your order blanks and showing up to collect 

your chickens on time.  

> I'd

met several of Polyface 's four hundred parishioners on Wednes-

day afternoon, and then again on Friday, as they came to collect the 

fresh chickens they'd reserved. It was a remarkably diverse group of 

people: a schoolteacher, several retirees, a young mom with her tow-

headed twins, a mechanic, an opera singer, a furniture maker, a woman 

## who worked in a metal fabrication plant in Staunton. They were paying  

> a

premium over supermarket prices for Polyface food, and in many 

cases driving more than an hour over a daunting (though gorgeous) 

tangle of county roads to come get it. But no one would ever mistake 

these people for the well-heeled urban foodies generally thought to be 

the market for organic or artisanal food. There was plenty of polyester 

in this crowd and a lot more Chevrolets than Volvos in the parking lot. 

So what exactly had they come all the way out here to the farm to 

buy? Here are some of the comments I jotted down: 242 THE OMNIVORE'S DJLEA4MA 

"This is the chicken I remember from my childhood. It actually   

> tastes like

chicken."   

> "I just

don't trust the meat in the supermarket anymore." "These eggs just jump up and slap you in the face!" 

"You're not going to find fresher chickens anywhere." 

"All this meat comes from happy animals —I know because I've 

seen them."  

> "I

drive 150 miles one way in order to get clean meat for my family."  

> "It's

very simple: I trust the Salatins more than I trust the Wal-Mart. 

## And I like the idea of keeping my money right here in town."  

> I

was hearing, in other words, the same stew of food fears and food 

pleasures (and memories) that has driven the growth of the organic 

food industry over the past twenty years —that and the satisfaction 

many Polyface customers clearly take in spending a little time on a

farm, porch chatting with the Salatins, and taking a beautiful drive in 

the country to get here. For some people, reconnecting with the source 

of their food is a powerful idea. For the farmer, these on-farm sales al-

low him to recapture the ninety-two cents of a consumer's food dollar 

that now typically winds up in the pockets of processors, middlemen, 

and retailers. 

Later that afternoon, Joel and I took a long drive down to Moneta,  

> at

the southern end of the Shenandoah Valley. He was eager for me to 

meet Bev Eggleston, whose one-man marketing company, EcoFriendly 

Foods, is a second route along which Polyface food finds its way to  

> eaters.

Eggleston, a former herb and livestock farmer who discovered 

he had a greater gift for marketing food than producing it, sells Polyface 

meat and eggs from his booths at farmer's markets in the Washington,   

> D.C., area.

## On the drive, Joel and I talk about the growing local-food 

movement, the challenges it faces, and the whole sticky issue of price.  

> I

asked Joel how he answers the charge that because food like his is 

more expensive it is inherently elitist.  

> "I

don't accept the premise. First off, those weren't any elitists you THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" * 243 

met on the farm this morning. We sell to all kinds of people. Second, 

whenever I hear people say clean food is expensive, I tell them it's actu- 

> ally

the cheapest food you can buy. That always gets their attention. 

Then I explain that with our food all of the costs are figured into the 

price. Society is not bearing the cost of water pollution, of antibiotic re-

sistance, of food-borne illnesses, of crop subsidies, of subsidized oil 

and water —of all the hidden costs to the environment and the taxpayer 

that make cheap food seem cheap. No thinking person will tell you they 

don't care about all that. I tell them the choice is simple: You can buy 

honestly priced food or you can buy irresponsibly priced food." 

He reminded me that his meat would be considerably cheaper than    

> it is if

not for government regulations and the resulting high cost of 

processing —at least a dollar cheaper per pound. "If we could just level 

the playing field —take away the regulations, the subsidies, and factor in 

the health care and environmental cleanup costs of cheap food —we 

could compete on price with anyone."  

> It's

true that cheap industrial food is heavily subsidized in many ways 

such that its price in the supermarket does not reflect its real cost. But un- 

> til

the rules that govern our food system change, organic or sustainable 

food is going to cost more at the register, more than some people can af-

ford. Yet for the great majority of us the story is not quite so simple. As a

society we Americans spend only a fraction of our disposable income 

feeding ourselves —about a tenth, down from a fifth in the 1950s. Amer-

icans today spend less on food, as a percentage of disposable income, than 

any other industrialized nation, and probably less than any people in the 

history of the world. This suggests that there are many of us who could 

afford to spend more on food if we chose to. After all, it isn't only the elite 

## who in recent years have found an extra fifty or one hundred dollars each 

month to spend on cell phones (now owned by more than half the U.S. 

population, children included) or television, which close to 90 percent 

of all U.S. households now pay for. Another formerly free good that more 

than half of us happily pay for today is water. So is the unwillingness to 

pay more for food really a matter of affordability or priority? 

As things stand, artisanal producers like Joel compete not on price 2 44 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

but quality, which, oddly enough, is still a somewhat novel idea when  

> it

comes to food. "When someone drives up to the farm in a BMW and 

asks me why our eggs cost more, . . . well, first I try not to get mad. 

Frankly, any city person who doesn't think I deserve a white-collar 

salary as a farmer doesn't deserve my special food. Let them eat E. coli. 

But I don't say that. Instead, I take him outside and point at his car. 'Sir, 

you clearly understand quality and are willing to pay for it. Well, food  

> is

no different: You get what you pay for.' 

## "Why is it that we exempt food, of all things, from that rule? Indus- 

> trial

agriculture, because it depends on standardization, has bombarded 

us with the message that all pork is pork, all chicken is chicken, eggs 

eggs, even though we all know that can't really be true. But it's down-

right un-American to suggest that one egg might be nutritionally supe-

rior to another." Joel recited the slogan of his local supermarket chain: 

'"We pile it high and sell it cheap.' What other business would ever sell  

> its

products that way?" 

# When you think about it, it is odd that something as important to 

our health and general well-being as food is so often sold strictly on the 

basis of price. The value of relationship marketing is that it allows many 

kinds of information besides price to travel up and down the food 

chain: stories as well as numbers, qualities as well as quantities, values 

rather than "value." And as soon as that happens people begin to make 

different kinds of buying decisions, motivated by criteria other than 

price. But instead of stories about how it was produced accompanying 

our food, we get bar codes —as inscrutable as the industrial food chain  

> itself,

and a fair symbol of its almost total opacity. 

Not that a bar code needs to be so obscure or reductive. Supermarkets 

in Denmark have experimented with adding a second bar code to pack-

ages of meat that when scanned at a kiosk in the store brings up on a

monitor images of the farm where the meat was raised, as well as de-

tailed information on the particular animal's genetics, feed, medica-

tions, slaughter date, etc. Most of the meat in our supermarkets simply 

couldn't withstand that degree of transparency; if the bar code on the 

typical package of pork chops summoned images of the CAFO it came THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" ''245 

from, and information on the pig's diet and drug regimen, who could 

bring themselves to buy it? Our food system depends on consumers' 

not knowing much about it beyond the price disclosed by the checkout 

scanner. Cheapness and ignorance are mutually reinforcing. And it's a

short way from not knowing who's at the other end of your food chain 

to not caring —to the carelessness of both producers and consumers. Of 

course, the global economy couldn't very well function without this 

wall of ignorance and the indifference it breeds. This is why the rules of 

world trade explicitly prohibit products from telling even the simplest 

> stories

# —"dolphin safe," "humanely slaughtered," etc. —about how 

they were produced. 

For his part, Joel would just as soon build local economies in which 

bar codes are unnecessary rather than attempt to enhance them —to use 

technology or labeling schemes to make the industrial food chain we 

have more transparent. I realized with a bit of a jolt that his pastoral, or 

agrarian, outlook doesn't adequately deal with the fact that so many of 

us now live in big cities far removed from the places where our food is 

grown and from opportunities for relationship marketing. When I

asked how a place like New York City fit into his vision of a local food 

economy he starded me with his answer: "Why do we have to have a

## New York City? What good is it?"  

> If

there was a dark side to Joel's vision of the postindustrial food 

chain, I realized, it was the deep antipathy to cities that has so often 

shadowed rural populism in this country. Though when I pressed him, 

pointing out that New York City, den of pestilence and iniquity though  

> it

might be, was probably here to stay and would need to eat, he al-

lowed that farmer's markets and CSAs —"community supported agri-

culture," schemes in which customers "subscribe" to a farm, paying a

few hundred dollars at the start of the growing season in exchange for a weekly box of produce through the summer —might be a good way 

for urbanites to connect with distant farmers. For my own part, this taut  

> little

exchange made me appreciate what a deep gulf of culture and ex-

perience separates me from Joel —and yet at the same time, what a

sturdy bridge caring about food can sometimes provide. 246 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

(Sometimes, but not always, for the antipathy of city and country  

> still

runs deep —and in both directions. I once encouraged a food 

writer from a big city newspaper to pay a visit to Polyface. The day she 

got back she telephoned me, all in a lather about the alien beings she'd 

had to spend the day with in Swoope: "You never warned me he had a Jesus fish 

on his front door!") 

## When Joel and I arrived at Bev's office that afternoon, we were greeted 

by an intense, wiry, blue-eyed fellow in his forties wearing shorts and a

Polyface baseball cap, and talking a mile a minute. Joel had explained 

on the way down that Bev was at the moment operating under excru-

ciating financial pressure: He had mortgaged his family's farm to build 

a small meat-processing plant. Bev's experience at the farmer's markets 

had convinced him of the growing demand for pastured meat, but sup-

ply was limited by the shortage of small processing plants willing to 

work with the state's grass farmers. So he'd decided to build one himself. 

Bev was nearing the end of his financial rope while the USDA dilly-

dallied on the approvals he needed to open. Yet when he'd finally se-

cured the necessary permits, hired a crew, and begun killing animals, 

the USDA abruptly pulled its inspector, effectively shutting him down. 

They explained that Bev wasn't processing enough animals fast enough 

to justify the inspector's time —in other words, he wasn't sufficiently 

industrial, which of course was precisely the point of the whole ven-  

> ture. I

realized Joel had wanted me to see Bev's predicament as proof of 

his contention that the government is putting obstacles in the path of 

an alternative food system. 

Remarkably under the circumstances, Bev —whose business card 

gives his full name as Beverly P. Eggleston IV —had not lost his sense of 

## humor or weakness for bad puns and high-velocity patter. When I told 

him what I'd been up to on the farm all week he cautioned me that 

"trying to follow Joel around will give you carpool tunnels and old-

timer's disease." Joel thinks Bev is the funniest man alive. He also fer-

vently wants him to succeed and has been advancing him thousands of THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" * 2 47  

> dollars'

worth of Polyface product to help float him while he does  

> battle

with the bureaucrats. 

After Bev took us on a tour through the shiny new processing facil-  

> ity, a

million dollars' worth of stainless steel and white tile built to ex-

acting USDA specifications and sitting idle, we repaired to the trailer 

## home parked out back, where Bev appeared to be living on potato chips 

and caffeinated soda. Every weekend he drives the three hundred miles 

up to Washington with a truckload of product from Joel and other grass 

farmers from all over Virginia. I asked him about selling pastured meats  

> at

farmer's markets, about exactly what it took to get people to pay the 

extra money. 

"What I sell them on is where they're coming from," Bev explained. 

"There's a whole wheel of reasons to work with, and you've got three 

seconds to figure out what their issue is. Animal cruelty? Pesticides? 

Nutrition? Taste?" Joel had told me Bev is a born salesman ("He could   

> sell a

hat rack to a moose"), and it wasn't hard to imagine him work-

ing the Saturday crowd, hitting the adjacent chords of fear and pleasure 

and health, all the while barbecuing free samples and unspooling his 

high-speed shtick. "This is food for folks whose faces itch when the 

wool's being pulled over their eyes," Bev said, giving me a taste of his  

> spiel.

"Instead of mad cow disease, we've got glad cows at ease." 

Not many farmers can do this; indeed, many farmers become farm- 

> ers

precisely so they don't have to do any such thing. They'd much pre- 

> fer

to work with animals or plants rather than human strangers, and for 

these farmers direct relationship marketing isn't an option, which is 

## why they're happy to have someone like Bev work the farmer's markets 

for them, even if that means giving him a cut on top of the 6 percent 

the farmer's market already takes from every dollar of sales. It's still a 

> vastly

better deal than wholesaling commodities.  

> Sitting

around the trailer's tiny kitchen table drinking sodas, Bev 

and Joel talked about the economics of selling food locally. Joel said the 

farmer's market was his least profitable outlet, which is why he had 

stopped doing them himself a few years ago. All the same, farmer's 

markets have blossomed in recent years, their number increasing from 2 48 > THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

1,755 a decade ago to 3 , 1 3 7 at last count. Joel was even higher on met-

ropolitan buying clubs, a scheme with which I was not familiar. A group 

of families gets together to place a big order once or twice a month; a

lead person organizes everything, and offers her home as a pickup site, 

usually in exchange for free product. The size of the order makes it 

worth the farmer's while to deliver, in Joel's case sometimes as far as 

Virginia Beach or Bethesda —half a day's drive. Metropolitan buying 

clubs represent the fastest- growing segment of Joel's market. 

# Who were these consumers? In Joel's case mostly young mothers 

concerned about the health of their children, many of them drawn from the homeschooling community ("People who have already opted 

out once") or from an organization called the Weston Price Founda- 

> tion.

Dr. Weston Price was a dentist who in the 1930s began to wonder 

## why isolated "primitive" tribes had so much better teeth and general 

good health than people living in industrialized countries. He traveled  

> all

over the world researching the diets of the healthiest, longest-lived 

populations, and found certain common denominators in their diets: 

They ate lots of meat and fats from wild or pastured animals; unpas-

teurized dairy products; unprocessed whole grains; and foods preserved 

by fermentation. Today the foundation, which is run by a nutritionist 

and cookbook author named Sally Fallon, promotes these traditional 

diets in books and conferences, as well as on its Web site, where Joel is 

one of the producers often cited. 

"The beauty of the Internet is that it allows like-minded people to 

find their tribes, and then for the tribes to find their way to us" —all 

without the expense of marketing or a storefront. Eatwild.com, a site 

that promotes the benefits of pastured meat and dairy, is another route 

by which consumers find their way to Polyface. "It's never been easier 

for people to opt out." 

"Opting out" is a key term for Joel, who believes that it would be a 

> fatal

mistake to "try to sell a connected, holistic, ensouled product 

through a Western, reductionist, Wall Street sales scheme" —by which  

> (I

think) he means selling to Whole Foods. As far as both Joel and Bev 

are concerned there isn't a world of difference between Whole Foods THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" * 2 49 

and Wal-Mart. Both are part of an increasingly globalized economy that 

turns anything it touches into a commodity, reaching its tentacles 

wherever in the world a food can be produced most cheaply, and then 

transporting it wherever it can be sold most dearly. 

Late in our conversation, Joel asked Bev and me if we'd seen a recent 

column by Allan Nation in Stockman Grass Farmer about "artisanal econom- 

> ics."

Drawing on the theories of Harvard Business School professor 

Michael Porter, Nation had distinguished between industrial and artisanal 

enterprises to demonstrate why attempts to blend the two modes seldom 

succeed. Industrial farmers are in the business of selling commodities, he 

explained, a business where the only viable competitive strategy is to be 

the least-cost producer. The classic way any industrial producer lowers the  

> costs

of his product is by substituting capital —new technologies and  

> fossil-fuel

energy —for skilled labor and then stepping up production, 

exploiting the economies of scale to compensate for shrinking profit 

margins. In a commodity business a producer must sell ever more cheaply 

and grow ever bigger or be crushed by a competitor who does. 

Nation contrasted this industrial model with its polar opposite, 

what he calls "artisanal production," where the competitive strategy is 

based on selling something special rather than being the least-cost pro-

ducer of a commodity. Stressing that "productivity and profits are two 

entirely different concepts," Nation suggests that even a small producer 

can be profitable so long as he's selling an exceptional product and 

keeping his expenses down. Yet this artisanal model works only so long   

> as it

doesn't attempt to imitate the industrial model in any respect. It 

must not try to replace skilled labor with capital; it must not grow for 

the sake of growth; it should not strive for uniformity in its products 

but rather make a virtue of variation and seasonality; it shouldn't invest  

> capital

to reach national markets but rather should focus on local mar- 

> kets,

relying on reputation and word of mouth rather than on advertis-

ing; and lastly, it should rely as much as possible on free solar energy 

rather than costly fossil fuels. 

"The biggest problem with alternative agriculture today," Nation 

writes, "is that it seeks to incorporate bits and pieces of the industrial 2 5 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

model and bits and pieces of the artisanal model. This will not work. . . .

In the middle of the road, you get the worst of both worlds." Nation's column had helped Joel understand why his broiler busi-

ness was more profitable than his beef or pork business. Since he could 

process the chickens himself, the product was artisanal from start to  

> finish;

his beef and pork, on the other hand, had to pass through an in-

dustrial processing plant, adding to his costs and shrinking his margins. 

## No one needed to spell it out, but the Porter/Nation theory also 

helped explain Bev's current predicament. He had built an artisanal 

meat plant, designed to custom-process pastured livestock humanely 

and scrupulously, no more than a few dozen animals a day. But his arti-

sanal enterprise was being forced to conform to a USDA regulatory sys-

tem that is based on an industrial model —indeed, that was created in 

response to the industrial abuses Upton Sinclair chronicled in The Jungle. 

The federal regulatory regime is expressly designed for a large slaugh-

terhouse operated by unskilled and indifferent workers killing and cut-

ting as many as four hundred feedlot animals an hour. The volume of 

such an operation can easily cover the costs of things like a dedicated 

restroom for the inspector, or elaborate machinery to steam clean (or 

irradiate) carcasses presumed to carry E. coli. The specifications and 

costly technologies implicitly assume that the animals being processed 

have been living in filth and eating corn rather than grass. The industrial 

packing plant where number 534 met his end can take a steer from 

knocker to boxed beef for about fifty dollars a head; it would cost 

nearly ten times as much to process him in a custom facility like this. 

The industrial and artisanal economies clash right here in Bev's packing 

plant, and sadly, it's not hard to guess which one will ultimately prevail. 

2. THURSDAY MORNING  

> I

woke to the sound of Joel's brother Art's panel truck noisily backing 

up to the salesroom door. The clock said 5:45 a.m. Thursday is delivery  

> day,

and Art likes to start staging orders and organizing his truck before THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" •> 2 5 1

any of the other farmers he makes deliveries for shows up. I threw on 

some clothes and dashed out to meet him. Art is five years older than 

Joel and, on first impression, a very different sort of character: not 

nearly so sunny or expansive, more grounded in the world as it is and 

perhaps as a result, prone to flashes of crankiness I've never observed in  

> Joel.

But then, Art works in a less pastoral world, one in which he has  

> to

contend with city traffic and overzealous meter maids as well as the 

occasional temperamental chef. Compared to his brother's revolution-

ary zeal, Art seems to have passed the point of believing that this world, 

or for that matter the human soul, is ever going to be substantially dif-

ferent than we find it. 

Every Thursday Art mounts a scrupulously planned military opera-

tion to supply Charlottesville's white-tablecloth restaurants with pas-

tured meat and eggs from Polyface, as well as produce, dairy products, 

and mushrooms from a half dozen other small producers in the Shenan-

doah Valley. He phones his farmers on Monday night to find out what 

they've got, faxes his chefs an order list Tuesday morning, sells and 

writes orders all day Tuesday, Tuesday night faxes them to the farmers so 

they can harvest Wednesday, and then reconnoiter with Art in the Poly-

face parking lot shortly after dawn on Thursday.  

> I

spent the better part of Thursday riding shotgun in Art's panel 

truck, an old orange Dodge Caravan with a cranky compressor on the 

roof and a sign on the side that says On Delivery From Polyface Inc. Follow 

me to the Best Restaurants in Town. Which seemed to be more or less the  

> case:

Most of Charlottesville's best chefs buy from Polyface, primarily 

chickens and eggs, but also lots of pork and as many rabbits as Daniel 

can raise. We made most of our deliveries after lunch, when the 

kitchens were prepping dinner and relatively quiet. After Art nailed 

## down a quasi-legal parking spot, I'd help him haul in plastic totes the  

> size

of laundry baskets laden with meat and produce. The chefs had 

uniformly high praise for the quality of Polyface produce, and clearly  

> felt

good about supporting a local farm, which many of them had vis-

ited on one of the Chef Appreciation Days that Polyface holds each 

summer. I could have filled a notebook with their encomiums. A few: 2 5 2 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

"Okay, a happier chicken, great, but frankly for me it's all about the  

> taste,

which is just so different —this is a chickenier chicken." 

"Art's chickens just taste cleaner, like the chicken I remember when  

> I

was a kid. I try to buy from people who are in my community and 

stand by their food. Don Tyson, on the other hand, stands behind a

bunch of lawyers." 

"Oh, those beautiful eggs! The difference is night and day —the 

color and richness and fat content. There's just no comparison. I always 

have to adjust my recipes for these eggs —you never need as many as 

they call for." 

Between stops, Art mentioned that Joel's eggs usually gave him his 

foot in the door when trying to land a new account. We stopped in at 

one such prospect, a newly opened restaurant called the Filling Station. 

Art introduced himself and presented the chef with a brochure and a

dozen eggs. The chef cracked one into a saucepan; instead of spreading 

out flabbily, the egg stood up nice and tall in the pan. Joel refers to this 

as "muscle tone." When he first began selling eggs to chefs, he'd crack 

one right into the palm of his hand, and then flip the yolk back and 

forth from one hand to another to demonstrate its integrity. The Filling 

Station chef called his staff over to admire the vibrant orange color of 

the yolk. Art explained that it was the grass diet that gave the eggs their 

color, indicating lots of beta-carotene. I don't think I'd ever seen an egg 

yolk rivet so many people for so long. Art beamed; he was in. 

At one restaurant, the chef inquired if Art could find him some 

game birds; maybe in the fall, Art offered. Later, back in the truck, Art 

launched into a little diatribe about seasonality —one of the stiffest 

challenges facing the development of a local food economy. 

## "We have to battle the idea that you can have anything you want any 

time you want it. Like 'spring lamb.' What the hell does that mean? 

That's not its natural cycle. You want lambs to hit the ground when the grass is lush, in April. They won't be ready for eight to ten months after 

that —not till early winter. But the market's become totally out of sync 

with nature. We should eat red meat when it's cold, but people want 

chicken in the winter, when we don't have it." THE MARKET-. "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" 253 

## A global food market, which brings us New Zealand lamb in the 

spring, Chilean asparagus in December, and fresh tomatoes the year 

round, has smudged the bright colors of the seasonal food calendar we  

> all

once knew by heart. But for local food chains to succeed, people will 

have to relearn what it means to eat according to the seasons. This is es-

pecially true in the case of pastured animals, which can be harvested 

only after they've had several months on rapidly growing grass. Feed-

ing animals corn in CAFOs has accustomed us to a year-round supply 

of fresh meats, many of which we forget were once eaten as seasonally  

> as

tomatoes or sweet corn: People would eat most of their beef and 

pork in late fall or winter, when the animals were fat, and eat chicken 

in the summer. 

Joel told me that when he first began selling eggs to chefs, he found 

himself apologizing for their pallid hue in winter; the yolks would lose  

> their

rich orange color when the chickens came in off the pasture in 

November. Then he met a chef who told him not to worry about it. The 

chef explained that in cooking school in Switzerland he'd been taught 

recipes that specifically called for April eggs, August eggs, and Decem-

ber eggs. Some seasons produce better yolks, others better whites, and 

chefs would adjust their menus accordingly. 

Both Joel and Art evinced the deepest respect for their chefs, who 

not only seldom argued price and wrote checks right on the spot, but  

> clearly

appreciated their work and, very often, acknowledged it right 

on their menus: "Polyface Farm Chicken" is something I saw on menus 

and specials boards all over Charlottesville. 

This informal alliance of small farmers and local chefs is something 

you find in many cities these days. Indeed, ever since Alice Waters 

opened Chez Panisse in Berkeley in 1973, chefs have been instrumen- 

> tal

in helping rebuild local food economies all over America. Waters 

made a point of sourcing much of her food from local organic grow- 

> ers,

cooked only what was in season, and shone the bright light of 

glamour on the farmers, turning many of them into menu celebrities. 

Chefs like Waters have also done much to educate the public about the 

virtues of local agriculture, the pleasures of eating by the season, and 254 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

the superior qualities of exceptionally fresh food grown with care and 

without chemicals. The Roman writer Livy once warned that when a so- 

> ciety's

chefs come to be regarded as consequential figures, it is a sure sign  

> that

society is well down the road to decadence. Livy's rule might have 

held up until the 1960s in America, but clearly no longer. Who would 

ever have guessed before then that America's chefs would be leading a

movement to save small farmers and reform America's food system? 

To talk to the chefs, customers, and farmers working together in  

> this

one corner of the country to rebuild a local food chain is to appre- 

> ciate

that it is a movement, and not merely a market. Or rather it is a

novel hybrid, a market as movement, for at its heart is a new concep-

tion of what it means to be a consumer —an attempt to redeem that 

ugly word, with its dismal colorings of selfishness and subtraction. 

Many of the Polyface customers I met (though by no means all of 

them) had come to see their decision to buy a chicken from a local 

farmer rather than from Wal-Mart as a kind of civic act, even a form of 

protest. A protest of what exactly is harder to pin down, and each person 

might put it a little differently, but the customers I met at Polyface had 

gone to some trouble and expense to opt out —of the supermarket, of 

the fast-food nation, and, standing behind that, of a globalized industrial 

agriculture. Their talk of distrusting Wal-Mart, resenting the abuse of an-

imals in farm factories, insisting on knowing who was growing their 

food, and wanting to keep their food dollars in town —all this suggested 

that for many of these people spending a little more for a dozen eggs 

was a decision inflected by a politics, however tentative or inchoate. 

Shortly before I traveled to Virginia I'd read an essay by Wendell 

Berry called "The Whole Horse" in which he argued that reversing the 

damage done to local economies and the land by the juggernaut of 

world trade would take nothing less than "a revolt of local small pro-

ducers and local consumers against the global industrialism of the cor-

poration." He detected the stirrings of such a rebellion in the rise of 

local food systems, and the growing market "for good, fresh, trustwor-

thy food, food from producers known and trusted by consumers." Berry 

would have us believe that what I was seeing in the Polyface salesroom THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" 255 

represented a local uprising in a gathering worldwide rebellion against 

what he calls "the total economy." 

# Why should food, of all things, be the linchpin of that rebellion? 

Perhaps because food is a powerful metaphor for a great many of the 

values to which people feel globalization poses a threat, including the 

distinctiveness of local cultures and identities, the survival of local 

landscapes, and biodiversity. When Jose Bove, the French antiglobaliza-

tion activist (and Roquefort farmer) , wanted to make his stand against 

globalization, he drove his tractor through the plate glass not of a bank 

or insurance company, but of a McDonald's. Indeed, the most powerful 

protests against globalization to date have all revolved around food: I'm 

thinking of the movement against genetically modified crops, the cam-

paign against patented seeds in India (which a few years ago brought 

four hundred thousand Indians into the streets to protest WTO intellec- 

> tual

property rules), and Slow Food, the Italian-born international 

movement that seeks to defend traditional food cultures against the global tide of homogenization. 

Even for people who find the logic of globalization otherwise com-

pelling, the globalization of food often stops them short. That logic  

> treats

food as a commodity like any other, and that simply doesn't 

square with people's beliefs or experience. Once the last barrier to free 

trade comes down, and the last program of government support for 

farmers ends, our food will come from wherever in the world it can be 

produced most cheaply. The iron law of competitive advantage dictates 

that if another country can grow something more efficiently —whether 

because its land or labor is cheaper or its environmental laws more 

lax —we will no longer grow it here. What's more, under the global 

economic dispensation, this is an outcome to be wished for, since it 

will free our land for more productive uses —more houses, say. Since 

land in the United States is relatively expensive, and our tolerance for 

agricultural pollution and animal cruelty is wearing thin, in the future  

> all

our food may come from elsewhere. This argument has been made  

> by,

among others, economist Steven Blank, in a book rather bloodlessly  

> titled

The End of Agriculture in the American Portfolio. 2 5 6 > THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

## And why should a nation produce its own food when others can pro-

duce it more cheaply? A dozen reasons leap to mind, but most of them 

the Steven Blanks of the world —and they are legion —are quick to dis-

miss as sentimental. I'm thinking of the sense of security that comes 

from knowing that your community, or country, can feed itself; the 

beauty of an agricultural landscape; the outlook and kinds of local 

knowledge that farmers bring to a community; the satisfactions of buy-

ing food from a farmer you know rather than the supermarket; the 

locally inflected flavor of a raw-milk cheese or honey. All those things 

# — 

> all

those pastoral values —globalization proposes to sacrifice in the 

name of efficiency and economic growth. 

Though you do begin to wonder who is truly the realist in this de-

bate, and who the romantic. We live, as Berry has written (in an essay 

called "The Total Economy"), in an era of "sentimental economics," 

since the promise of global capitalism, much like the promise of com-

## munism before it, ultimately demands an act of faith: that if we permit 

the destruction of certain things we value here and now we will achieve 

a greater happiness and prosperity at some unspecified future time. As 

Lenin put it, in a sentiment the WTO endorses in its rulings every day, 

you have to break a few eggs to make an omelet. 

Perhaps it is no accident that sentimental communism foundered 

precisely on the issue of food. The Soviets sacrificed millions of small 

farms and farmers to the dream of a collectivized industrial agriculture 

that never managed to do what a food system has to do: feed the nation. 

By the time of its collapse, more than half of the food consumed in the 

Soviet Union was being produced by small farmers and home garden- 

> ers

operating without official sanction, on private plots tucked away in 

the overlooked corners and cracks of the crumbling Soviet monolith. 

George Naylor, speaking from deep inside the American monolith, 

might be onto something when, during our conversations about indus- 

> trial

agriculture, he likened the rise of alternative food chains in Amer- 

> ica

to "the last days of Soviet agriculture. The centralized food system 

wasn't serving the people's needs, so they went around it. The rise of THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" 257 

farmer's markets and CSAs is sending the same signal today." Of course 

the problems of our food system are very different —if anything, it pro-

duces too much food, not too little, or too much of the wrong food. 

But there's no question that it is failing many consumers and produc- 

> ers,

which is why they are finding creative ways around it. 

So much about life in a global economy feels as though it has passed 

beyond the individual's control —what happens to our jobs, to the 

prices at the gas station, to the vote in the legislature. But somehow 

food still feels a little different. We can still decide, every day, what we're 

going to put into our bodies, what sort of food chain we want to par-  

> ticipate in.

# We can, in other words, reject the industrial omelet on offer 

and decide to eat another. This might not sound like a big deal, but it 

could be the beginnings of one. Already the desire on the part of con-

sumers to put something different into their bodies has created an $ 1

> 1

billion market in organic food. That marketplace was built by con-

sumers and farmers working informally together outside the system, 

with exactly no help from the government. 

Today the total economy, astounding in its ability to absorb every 

challenge, is well on its way to transforming organic from a reform 

movement into an industry —another flavor in the global supermarket.  

> It

took capitalism less than a quarter century to turn even something as 

ephemeral as bagged salads of cut and washed organic mesclun, of all 

things, into a cheap international commodity retailed in a new organic 

supermarket. Whether this is a good or bad thing people will disagree. 

Joel Salatin and his customers want to be somewhere that that jug-

gernaut can't go, and it may be that by elevating local above organic, 

they have found exactly that place. By definition local is a hard thing to  

> sell

in a global marketplace. Local food, as opposed to organic, implies 

a new economy as well as a new agriculture —new social and economic 

relationships as well as new ecological ones. It's a lot more complicated. 

Of course, just because food is local doesn't necessarily mean it will 

be organic or even sustainable. There's nothing to stop a local farmer 

from using chemicals or abusing animals —except the gaze or good 2 5 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

word of his customers. Instead of looking at labels, the local food cus-

tomer will look at the farm for himself, or look the farmer in the eye 

and ask him about how he grows his crops or treats his animals. That  

> said,

there are good reasons to think a genuinely local agriculture will 

tend to be a more sustainable agriculture. For one thing, it is much less  

> likely

to rely on monoculture, the original sin from which almost every 

other problem of our food system flows. A farmer dependent on a local 

market will, perforce, need to grow a wide variety of things rather than 

specialize in the one or two plants or animals that the national market 

(organic or otherwise) would ask from him. 

The supermarket wants all its lettuce from the Salinas Valley, all its 

apples from Washington State, and all its corn from Iowa. (At least un- 

> til

the day it decides it wants all its corn from Argentina, all its apples 

from China, and all its lettuce from Mexico.) People in Iowa can eat 

only so much corn and soybeans themselves. So when Iowans decide to eat locally, rather than from the supermarket, their farmers will quickly 

learn to grow a few other things besides. And when they do, they'll 

probably find that they can give up most of their fertilizers and pesti-

cides, since a diversified farm will produce much of its own fertility 

and its own pest control. 

Shopping in the organic supermarket underwrites important values 

on the farm; shopping locally underwrites a whole set of other values as 

well. That's because farms produce a lot more than food; they also pro-

duce a kind of landscape and a kind of community. Whether Polyface's 

customers spend their food dollars here in Swoope or in the Whole 

Foods in Charlottesville will have a large bearing on whether this lovely valley —this undulating checkerboard of fields and forests —will endure, 

or whether the total economy will find a "higher use" for it. "Eat your 

view!" is a bumper sticker often seen in Europe these days; as it implies, 

the decision to eat locally is an act of conservation, too, one that is prob-

ably more effective (and sustainable) than writing checks to environ-

mental organizations. 

"Eat your view!" takes work, however. To participate in a local food THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" » 259 

economy requires considerably more effort than shopping at the Whole 

Foods.You won't find anything microwaveable at the farmer's market or 

in your CSA box, and you won't find a tomato in December. The local 

food shopper will need to put some work into sourcing his food —into 

learning who grows the best lamb in his area, or the best sweet corn. 

And then he will have to become reacquainted with his kitchen. Much 

of the appeal of the industrial food chain is its convenience; it offers 

busy people a way to delegate their cooking (and food preservation) to 

others. At the other end of the industrial food chain that begins in a

cornfield in Iowa sits an industrial eater at a table. (Or, increasingly, in 

a car.) The achievement of the industrial food system over the past half 

century has been to transform most of us into precisely that creature.  

> All

of which is to say that a successful local food economy implies 

not only a new kind of food producer, but a new kind of eater as well, 

one who regards finding, preparing, and preserving food as one of the 

pleasures of life rather than a chore. One whose sense of taste has ruined 

him for a Big Mac, and whose sense of place has ruined him for shop-

ping for groceries at Wal-Mart. This is the consumer who understands 

# —

or remembers —that, in Wendell Berry's memorable phrase, "eating is an 

agricultural act." He might have added that it's a political act as well. 

This is precisely the mission that Slow Food has set for itself: to re-

mind a generation of industrial eaters of their connections to farmers 

and farms, and to the plants and animals we depend on. The movement, 

which began in 1 989 as a protest against the opening of a McDonald's 

in Rome, recognizes that the best way to fight industrial eating is by 

simply recalling people to the infinitely superior pleasures of tradi-

tional foods enjoyed communally. The consumer becomes, in founder 

Carlo Petrini's phrase, a "coproducer" —his eating contributes to the 

survival of landscapes and species and traditional foods that would oth-

erwise succumb to the fast-food ideal of "one world, one taste." Even 

connoisseurship can have a politics, Slow Food wagers, since an eater in 

closer touch with his senses will find less pleasure in a box of Chicken 

McNuggets than in a pastured chicken or a rare breed of pig. It's all very 2 60 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> Italian

(and decidedly un-American): to insist that .doing the right 

thing is the most pleasurable thing, and that the act of consumption 

might be an act of addition rather than subtraction. 

## On my last day on the farm, a soft June Friday afternoon, Joel and I sat 

talking at a picnic table behind the house while a steady stream of cus-

tomers dropped by to pick up their chickens. I asked him if he believed 

the industrial food chain would ever be overturned by an informal, im-

provised movement made up of farmer's markets, box schemes, metro-

politan buying clubs, slow-foodies, and artisanal meat-processing plants  

> like

Bev Eggleston's. Even if you count the organic supermarket, the en- 

> tire

market for all alternative foods remains but a flea on the colossus of 

the industrial food economy, with its numberless fast-food outlets and 

supermarkets backed by infinite horizons of corn and soybeans. 

## "We don't have to beat them," Joel patiently explained. "I'm not 

even sure we should try. We don't need a law against McDonald's or a

law against slaughterhouse abuse —we ask for too much salvation by   

> legislation. All

## we need to do is empower individuals with the right 

philosophy and the right information to opt out en masse. 

"And make no mistake: It's happening. The mainstream is splitting 

into smaller and smaller groups of like-minded people. It's a little like 

Luther nailing his ninety-five theses up at Wittenberg. Back then it was 

the printing press that allowed the Protestants to break off and form 

their own communities; now it's the Internet, splintering us into tribes 

that want to go their own way." 

## Of course! Joel saw himself as more of a Luther than a Lenin; the 

goal wasn't to blow up the Church, but simply to step around it. Protes-

tantism also comes in many denominations, as I suspect will the future 

of food. Deciding whether that future should more closely resemble  

> Joel's

radically local vision or Whole Foods' industrial organic matters  

> less

than assuring that thriving alternatives exist; feeding the cities may 

require a different sort of food chain than feeding the countryside. We 

## may need a great many different alternative food chains, organic and THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" * 261  

> local,

biodynamic and slow, and others yet undreamed of. As in the  

> fields,

nature provides the best model for the marketplace, and nature 

never puts all her eggs in one basket. The great virtue of a diversified 

food economy, like a diverse pasture or farm, is its ability to withstand any shock. The important thing is that there be multiple food chains, so 

that when any one of them fails —when the oil runs out, when mad 

cow or other food-borne diseases become epidemic, when the pesti-

cides no longer work, when drought strikes and plagues come and soils 

blow away —we'll still have a way to feed ourselves. It is because some 

of those failures are already in view that the salesroom at Polyface Farm  

> is

buzzing with activity this afternoon, and why farmer's markets in 

towns and cities all across America are buzzing this afternoon, too. 

"An alternative food system is rising up on the margins," Joel con-

tinued. "One day Frank Perdue and Don Tyson are going to wake up 

and find that their world has changed. It won't happen overnight, but  

> it

will happen, just as it did for those Catholic priests who came to 

church one Sunday morning only to find that, my goodness, there 

aren't as many people in the pews today. Where in the world has every-

body gone?" FOURTEEN 

# THE MEAL 

## Grass-Fed 

Before I left the farm Friday, I gathered together the makings for that 

evening's dinner, which I'd arranged to cook for some old friends who 

lived in Charlottesville. I had originally thought about filling a cooler 

with Polyface meat and bringing it home with me to California to cook 

there, but decided it would be more in keeping with the whole local 

food chain concept to eat this particular meal within a leisurely drive of 

the farm where it had been grown. After all, it was the sin of flying 

meat across the country that had brought me to Swoope in the first 

place, and I hated for Joel to think that an entire week of his instruction 

had left me unimproved. 

From the walk-in, I picked out two of the chickens we had slaugh-

tered on Wednesday and a dozen of the eggs I'd helped gather Thursday 

evening. I also stopped by the hoop house and harvested a dozen ears 

of sweet corn. (In consideration of my week's labors, Joel refused to ac-

cept payment for the food, but had I paid for it, the chicken would have 

cost $2.05 a pound, and the eggs $2.20 a dozen —-prices that compare 

very favorably with Whole Foods 's. This is not boutique food.) THE MEAL: GRASS - FED * 2 6 3

## On the way into Charlottesville, I stopped to pick up a few other in-

gredients, trying as best as I could to look for local produce and pre-

serve the bar code virginity of this meal. For my salad, I found some 

nice-looking locally grown rocket. At the wine shop I found a short, 

chauvinistic shelf ofVirginia wines, but here I hesitated. How far could  

> I

take this local conceit before it ruined my meal? I hadn't had a sip of 

wine all week and was really looking forward to a decent one. I'd read 

somewhere that wine-making in Virginia was "coming into its own," 

but isn't that what they always say? Then I spotted a Viognier for 

twenty-five bucks —the priciest Virginia wine I'd ever seen. I took this  

> as

a sign of genuine confidence on somebody's part, and added the bot- 

> tle

to my cart.  

> I

also needed some chocolate for the dessert I had in mind. Fortu-

nately the state ofVirginia produces no chocolate to speak of, so I was 

free to go for the good Belgian stuff, panglessly. In fact, even the most 

fervent eat-local types say it's okay for a "foodshed" (a term for a re-

gional food chain, meant to liken it to a watershed) to trade for goods  

> it

can't produce locally —coffee, tea, sugar, chocolate —a practice that 

predates the globalization of our food chain by a few thousand years. 

## (Whew . . .) 

During the week I'd given some thought to what I should make; the 

farm's varied offerings certainly gave me plenty of choices. Working 

backward, I knew I wanted to make a dessert that would prominently 

feature Polyface eggs, having heard so much from the chefs about their 

magical properties. A chocolate souffle, since it calls for a certain degree 

of magic, seemed the obvious choice. For a side dish, sweet corn was a

no-brainer; there 'd be kids at the table and no one had tasted corn yet  

> this

summer. But what meat to serve? Because it was only June, Polyface 

had no fresh beef or pork or turkey; Joel wouldn't begin slaughtering 

beeves and turkeys till later in the summer, hogs not till the fall. There 

was frozen beef and pork in the walk-in, last season's, but I preferred to 

make something fresh. Rabbit seemed risky; I had no idea whether 

Mark and Liz liked it, and the chances that their boys would eat bunny 

were slim. So that had left chicken, the animal with which I'd been 2 6 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

most intimate this week. Which, truth to tell, left me feeling vaguely 

queasy. Was I going to be able to enjoy eating chicken so soon after my  

> stint

in the processing shed and gut-composting pile? 

That queasiness perhaps explains the multistep preparation I finally 

settled on. When I got to Mark and Liz's house, there were still several 

hours before dinner, which meant there was enough time for me to 

brine the chicken. So I cut each of the two birds into eight pieces and 

immersed them in a bath consisting of water, kosher salt, sugar, a bay  

> leaf,

a splash of soy sauce, a garlic clove, and a small handful of pepper-

corns and coriander seeds. My plan was to slow roast the chicken pieces 

on a wood fire, and brining —which causes meat to absorb moisture 

and breaks down the proteins that can toughen it on the grill —would 

keep the chicken from drying out. 

But the brining (like the carving of the birds into pieces) promised 

to do something else, too, something for me as much as the meat: It 

would put a little distance between the meal and Wednesday's kill, cer-

tain aromas of which were still lodged in my nostrils. One of the rea-

sons we cook meat (besides making it tastier and easier to digest) is to  

> civilize,

or sublimate, what is at bottom a fairly brutal transaction be-

tween animals. The anthropologist Claude Levi-Strauss described the 

work of civilization as the process of transforming the raw into the 

cooked —nature into culture. For these particular chickens, which I had 

personally helped to kill and eviscerate, the brining would make a start 

on that transformation even before the cooking fire was lit. Both liter- 

> ally

and metaphorically, a saltwater bath cleanses meat, which perhaps 

explains why the kosher laws —one culture's way of coming to terms 

with the killing and eating of animals —insist on the salting of meat. 

After a few hours, I removed and rinsed the chicken pieces, and 

then spread them out to dry for an hour or two, so that the skin, now 

slightly waterlogged, would brown nicely. Since Mark and Liz had a gas 

barbecue, I'd have to simulate my wood fire. So I snipped a couple of 

twigs off their apple tree, stripped the leaves, and placed the twigs on 

top of the grill, where the green wood would smolder rather than 

burn. I turned the gas down low and, after rubbing a little olive oil on THE MEAL: GRASS-FED ''265 

the chicken pieces, arranged them on the grill among the apple 

branches, leaving some room to add the corn later. 

While the chicken roasted slowly outside, I got to work in the 

kitchen preparing the souffle with Willie, Mark and Liz's twelve-year- 

> old.

While Willie melted the chocolate in a saucepan, I separated the 

eggs. The yolks were a gorgeous carroty shade of orange and they did 

seem to possess an unusual integrity; separating them from the whites 

was a cinch. After adding a pinch of salt, I began beating the egg 

whites; within minutes they turned from translucent to bright white 

and formed soft, rounded peaks, which is when Julia Child says to be-

gin adding sugar, and to turn the beater on high. Now the egg whites 

rapidly doubled in volume, then doubled again, as billions of micro-

scopic air pockets formed amid the stiffening egg proteins. When the 

heat of the oven caused these air pockets to expand, the souffle would  

> rise,

assuming everything went according to plan. Once the egg whites 

formed a stiff, spiky snowscape, I stopped. Willie had already blended 

the yolks into his melted chocolate, so we now gently folded that thick 

syrup into my egg whites, then poured the airy, toast-colored mixture 

into a souffle dish and put it aside. I could see why pastry chefs in Char- 

> lottesville

swore by Polyface eggs: What Joel had called their "muscle 

tone" made baking with them a breeze. 

Willie and I brought the corn out on the deck to shuck. The ears were 

so fresh that the husks squealed as you peeled them back. I mentioned to 

Willie that our entire meal would be a celebration of the chicken —not 

only the eponymous entree, which we could smell sweetly roasting on 

the grill, but the souffle with its half-dozen eggs, and even this corn, 

which I explained had grown in a deep bed of composted chicken ma-

nure. Probably not the sort of detail you'd want to mention on a menu, 

but Willie agreed there was something pretty neat about the alchemy in-

volved, how a plant could transform chicken crap into something as 

sweet and tasty and golden as an ear of corn. 

Golden Bantam, the corn in question, is an heirloom variety intro-

duced in 1902, long before the hybridizers figured out how to amp up 

the sweetness in sweet corn. This momentous change in the genetics of 2 66 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

our corn is an artifact of an industrial food chain, which demands that 

vegetables be able to endure a cross-country road trip after picking so 

that they might be available everywhere the year round. This was a par-

ticular problem for corn, the sugars of which begin turning to starch 

the moment it is picked. So in the early sixties the breeders figured out 

a way to breed in extra copies of the genes responsible for producing 

sugars. But something was lost in the translation from local to cosmo-

politan corn: The kernels lost much of their creaminess, and the specific  

> taste

of corn was overwhelmed by a generic, one-dimensional sweet-

ness. The needs of a long industrial food chain might justify such a

trade-off, but when you can eat corn picked a few hours before dinner, 

there's no reason for it. Unless of course an industrial diet of easy sug- 

> ars

has dulled your taste for the earthy sweetness of corn, now that it 

has to compete with things like soda.  

> I

had made pretty much the same meal on several occasions at home, 

using the same basic foodstuffs, yet in certain invisible ways this wasn't 

the same food at all. Apart from the high color of the egg yolks, these 

eggs looked pretty much like any other eggs, the chicken like chicken, 

but the fact that the animals in question had spent their lives outdoors 

on pastures rather than in a shed eating grain distinguished their flesh 

and eggs in important, measurable ways. A growing body of scientific 

research indicates that pasture substantially changes the nutritional 

profile of chicken and eggs, as well as of beef and milk. The question 

## we asked about organic food —is it any better than the conventional 

kind? —turns out to be much easier to answer in the case of grass-

farmed food. 

Perhaps not surprisingly, the large quantities of beta-carotene, vita-

min E, and folic acid present in green grass find their way into the flesh 

of the animals that eat that grass. (It's the carotenoids that give these 

egg yolks their carroty color.) That flesh will also have considerably less  

> fat

in it than the flesh of animals fed exclusively on grain —also no sur- 

> prise,

in light of what we know about diets high in carbohydrates. (And THE MEAL: GRASS-FED * 167 

about exercise, something pastured animals actually get.) But all fats are 

not created equal —polyunsaturated fats are better for us than saturated 

ones, and certain unsaturated fats are better than others. As it turns out, 

the fats created in the flesh of grass eaters are the best kind for us to eat. 

This is no accident. Taking the long view of human nutrition, we 

evolved to eat the sort of foods available to hunter-gatherers, most of 

whose genes we've inherited and whose bodies we still (more or less) 

inhabit. Humans have had less than ten thousand years —an evolution-

ary blink —to accustom our bodies to agricultural food, and as far as 

our bodies are concerned, industrial agricultural food —a diet based 

largely on a small handful of staple grains, like corn —is still a biologi- 

> cal

novelty. Animals raised outdoors on grass have a diet much more  

> like

that of the wild animals humans have been eating at least since the 

Paleolithic era than that of the grain-fed animals we only recently be-

gan to eat. 

So it makes evolutionary sense that pastured meats, the nutritional 

profile of which closely resembles that of wild game, would be better 

for us. Grass-fed meat, milk, and eggs contain less total fat and less sat-

urated fats than the same foods from grain-fed animals. Pastured ani-

mals also contain conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), a fatty acid that some 

recent studies indicate may help reduce weight and prevent cancer, and 

which is absent from feedlot animals. But perhaps most important, meat, eggs, and milk from pastured animals also contain higher levels 

of omega- 3 s, essential fatty acids created in the cells of green plants and 

algae that play an indispensable role in human health, and especially in 

the growth and health of neurons —brain cells. (It's important to note 

that fish contain higher levels of the most valuable omega- 3 s than land 

animals, yet grass-fed animals do offer significant amounts of such im-

portant omega-3s as alpha linolenic acid —ALA.) Much research into 

the role of omega- 3 s in the human diet remains to be done, but the 

preliminary findings are suggestive: Researchers report that pregnant 

## women who receive supplements of omega-3s give birth to babies 

with higher IQs; children with diets low in omega- 3 s exhibit more be-

havioral and learning problems at school; and puppies eating diets high 2 6 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

in omega- 3 s prove easier to train. (All these claims come from papers 

presented at a 2004 meeting of the International Society for the Study 

of Fatty Acids and Lipids.) 

## One of the most important yet unnoticed changes to the human diet 

in modern times has been in the ratio between omega-3 and omega-6, 

the other essential fatty acid in our food. Omega-6 is produced in the 

seeds of plants; omega-3 in the leaves. As the name indicates, both kinds 

of fat are essential, but problems arise when they fall out of balance. (In   

> fact, there's

research to suggest that the ratio of these fats in our diet may 

be more important than the amounts.) Too high a ratio of omega-6 to 

omega-3 can contribute to heart disease, probably because omega-6 

helps blood clot, while omega-3 helps it flow. (Omega-6 is an inflam-

matory; omega-3 an anti-inflammatory.) As our diet —and the diet of 

the animals we eat —shifted from one based on green plants to one 

based on grain (from grass to corn), the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 

has gone from roughly one to one (in the diet of hunter-gatherers) to 

more than ten to one. (The process of hydrogenating oil also eliminates 

omega- 3 s.) We may one day come to regard this shift as one of the most 

deleterious dietary changes wrought by the industrialization of our 

food chain. It was a change we never noticed, since the importance of 

omega- 3s was not recognized until the 1 970s. As in the case of our im-

perfect knowledge of soil, the limits of our knowledge of nutrition have 

obscured what the industrialization of the food chain is doing to our 

health. But changes in the composition of fats in our diet may account 

for many of the diseases of civilization —cardiac, diabetes, obesity,  

> etc.

# —that have long been linked to modern eating habits, as well as for 

learning and behavioral problems in children and depression in adults. 

Research in this area promises to turn a lot of conventional nutri-tional thinking on its head. It suggests, for example, that the problem 

with eating red meat —long associated with cardiovascular disease 

# —

## may owe less to the animal in question than to that animal's diet. (This 

might explain why there are hunter- gatherer populations today who 

eat far more red meat than we do without suffering the cardiovascular 

consequences.) These days farmed salmon are being fed like feedlot cat-THE MEAL: GRASS-FED ''2 69  

> tie,

on grain, with the predictable result that their omega-3 levels fall 

well below those of wild fish. (Wild fish have especially high levels of 

omega-3 because the fat concentrates as it moves up the food chain 

from the algae and phytoplankton that create it.) Conventional nutri-

tional wisdom holds that salmon is automatically better for us than 

beef, but that judgment assumes the beef has been grain fed and the 

salmon krill fed; if the steer is fattened on grass and the salmon on 

grain, we might actually be better off eating the beef. (Grass-finished 

beef has a two-to-one ratio of omega-6 to -3 compared to more than 

ten to one in corn-fed beef.) The species of animal you eat may matter  

> less

than what the animal you're eating has itself eaten. 

The fact that the nutritional quality of a given food (and of that 

food's food) can vary not just in degree but in kind throws a big 

wrench into an industrial food chain, the very premise of which is that 

beef is beef and salmon salmon. It also throws a new light on the whole 

question of cost, for if quality matters so much more than quantity, 

then the price of a food may bear little relation to the value of the nu- 

> trients

in it. If units of omega- 3 s and beta-carotene and vitamin E are 

what an egg shopper is really after, then Joel's $2.20 a dozen pastured eggs actually represent a much better deal than the $0.79 a dozen in-

dustrial eggs at the supermarket. As long as one egg looks pretty much  

> like

another, all the chickens like chicken, and beef beef, the substitu-

tion of quantity for quality will go on unnoticed by most consumers, 

but it is becoming increasingly apparent to anyone with an electron 

microscope or a mass spectrometer that, truly, this is not the same food. 

Okay, but what about to someone equipped with a more or less 

standard-issue set of human taste buds? How different does a pastured 

chicken actually taste? It certainly smelled wonderful when I raised the  

> lid

on the barbecue to put the corn on. The chicken was browning  

> nicely,

the skin beginning to crisp and take on the toasty tones of oiled 

wood. The corn, on which I'd rubbed some olive oil and sprinkled salt 

and pepper, would take only a few minutes —all it needed was to heat 2 70 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

up and for a scattering of kernels to brown. The browning of the 

chicken skin and the corn looked similar but in fact it owed to com-

pletely different chemical reactions, reactions that were contributing to 

their flavors and smells. The corn was caramelizing, as its sugars broke 

apart under the heat and formed into hundreds of more complicated 

aromatic compounds, giving a smoky dimension to the corny sweet-

ness. Meanwhile, the chicken skin was undergoing what chemists 

called the Maillard reaction, in which carbohydrates in the chicken re-

act in dry heat with certain amino acids to create an even larger and 

more complicated set of compounds that, because they include atoms 

of sulfur and nitrogen, give a richer, meatier aroma and taste to the 

meat than it would otherwise possess. This, at least, is how a chemist 

would explain what I was seeing and smelling on the grill, as I turned 

the corn and chicken pieces and felt myself growing hungrier. 

While the corn finished roasting, I removed the chicken from the  

> grill

and set it aside to rest. A few minutes later I called everyone to the  

> table.

Ordinarily I might have felt a little funny serving as both dinner 

host and guest, but Mark and Liz are such close friends it seemed per- 

> fectly

natural to be cooking for them in their home. That's not to say I

didn't feel the cook's customary preprandial apprehension, com-

pounded in this instance by the fact that Liz herself is such a good cook, 

and holds very definite opinions about food. I certainly hadn't forgot-

ten the time she'd wrinkled her nose and pushed away a Polyface steak  

> I'd

served her. Grass-fed beef is flavored by the pastures it grows on, 

usually but not always for the best. It had tasted fine to me.  

> I

passed the platters of chicken and corn and proposed a toast. I of-

fered thanks first to my hosts-cum-guests, then to Joel Salatin and his 

family for growing the food before us (and for giving it to us), and 

then finally to the chickens, who in one way or another had provided  

> just

about everything we were about to eat. My secular version of grace,  

> I

suppose, acknowledging the various material and karmic debts in-

curred by this meal, debts which I felt more keenly than usual. 

"At the beginning of the meal," Brillat-Savarin writes in his chapter 

## "On the Pleasures of the Table" in The Physiology of Taste, "each guest eats THE MEAL: GRASS-FED * 27 1 

> steadily,

without speaking or paying attention to anything which may 

be said." And so we did, aside from a few sublingual murmurs of satis-  

> faction. I

don't mind saying the chicken was out of this world. The skin 

had turned the color of mahogany and the texture of parchment, al-

most like a Peking duck, and the meat itself was moist, dense, and 

almost shockingly flavorful. I could taste the brine and apple wood, of 

course, but also the chicken itself, which more than held its own 

against those strong flavors. This may not sound like much of a compli-

ment, but to me the chicken smelled and tasted exactly like chicken. Liz 

voiced her approval in similar terms, pronouncing it a more chickeny 

chicken. Which is to say, I suppose, that it chimed with that capitalized 

idea of Chicken we hold in our heads but seldom taste anymore. So 

what accounted for it? The grass? The grubs? The exercise? I know what 

Joel would have said: When chickens get to live like chickens, they'll   

> taste like

chickens, too. 

The flavors of everything else on the table had a similarly declarative  

> quality:

the roasted corn and lemony rocket salad, and even the peachy 

Viognier, all of them tasting almost flamboyantly themselves, their fla-

vors forming a bright sequence of primary colors. There was nothing  

> terribly

subtle about this meal, but everything about it tasted com-

pletely in character. 

Everyone was curious to hear about the farm, especially after tasting 

the food that had come off it. Matthew, who's fifteen and currently a

vegetarian (he confined himself to the corn) , had many more questions 

about killing chickens than I thought it wise to answer at the dinner  

> table.

But I did talk about my week on the farm, about the Salatins and 

their animals. I explained the whole synergistic ballet of chickens and 

cows and pigs and grass, without getting into specifics about the ma-

nure and grubs and composted guts that made the whole dance work. 

Thankfully all of that, the killing cones, too, had retreated to the men- 

> tal

background for me, chased by the smoky-sweet aromas of the meal, 

which I found myself able to thoroughly enjoy. 

The unexpectedly fine wine helped too, as did the fact that the din-

ner table conversation drifted off as it will do, from my Paris Hilton ad-272 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ventures as a farmhand to Willie's songwriting (he is, mark my words, 

the next Bob Dylan), Matthew's summer football camp, Mark and Liz's 

books-in-progress, school, politics, war, and on and on, the topics spi-

raling away from the table like desultory rings of smoke. Being a Friday  

> late

in June, this was one of the longest evenings of the year, so no one  

> felt

in a rush to finish. Besides, I'd just put the souffle in to bake when 

## we sat down, so dessert was still a ways off. 

In his chapter Brillat-Savarin draws a sharp distinction between the 

pleasures of eating —"the actual and direct sensation of a need being  

> satisfied,"

a sensation we share with the animals —and the uniquely hu-

## man "pleasures of the table." These consist of "considered sensations 

born of the various circumstances of fact, things, and persons accom-

panying the meal" —and comprise for him one of the brightest fruits 

of civilization. Every meal we share at a table recapitulates this evolution 

from nature to culture, as we pass from satisfying our animal appetites 

in semisilence to the lofting of conversational balloons. The pleasures 

of the table begin with eating (and specifically with eating meat, in 

Brillat-Savarin 's view, since it was the need to cook and apportion meat 

that first brought us together to eat) , but they can end up anywhere hu-

## man talk cares to go. In the same way that the raw becomes cooked, eat-

ing becomes dining. 

All such transformations were very much on my mind that evening, 

coming at the end of a week of farmwork that had put me in much 

closer touch with the biology of eating than the art. The line from com-

posting chicken guts to gastronomy is almost unimaginably long, but 

there is a line. While we talked and waited for the souffle to complete  

> its

magic rise, the smell of baking chocolate seeped out of the kitchen 

and filled the house. When at last I told Willie the time had come to 

open the oven, cross your fingers, I saw his smile blossom first, then the 

great crown of souffle puffing out from the cinched white waist of its 

dish. Triumph! 

Here was the most improbable transformation of all. There's some-

thing wondrous about any souffle, how a half dozen eggs flavored by 

nothing more than sugar and chocolate can turn into something so THE MEAL: GRASS-FED* 27 J

ethereally Other. Souffle, "to blow," comes from the Latin word for 

breath, of course, in recognition of the air that a souffle mostly is. But 

souffle has a spiritual sense, too, as in the breath of life (in English the 

word "spirit" comes from breath), which seems fitting, for isn't the 

souffle as close as cookery ever comes to elevating matter into spirit? 

This particular souffle was good, not great; its texture was slightly 

grainier than it should be, which makes me think I may have beaten the 

eggs a little too long. But it tasted wonderful, everyone agreed, and as I

rolled the rich yet weightless confection on my tongue, I closed my 

eyes and suddenly there they were: Joel's hens, marching down the 

gangplank from out of their Eggmobile, fanning out across the early 

morning pasture, there in the grass where this sublime bite began. PERSONAL 

# THE 

# FOREST FIFTEEN 

# THE FORAGER 

1. SERIOUS PLAY 

There was one more meal I wanted to make, and that was the meal at 

the end of the shortest food chain of all. What I had in mind was a din-

ner prepared entirely from ingredients I had hunted, gathered, and 

grown myself. Now, there are some people (though not all that many 

of them anymore) for whom such a radically self-made meal exists 

firmly in the realm of possibility. I am not one of them. The growing 

part was the only part I knew I could handle. I've been a gardener most 

of my life, and have made countless meals from my garden. These in-

cluded no animal protein, however, and I had decided that this meal 

should feature representatives of all three edible kingdoms: animal, 

vegetable, and fungi. I was about as ill prepared to hunt the former and 

gather the latter as an eater could possibly be.  

> I

had never hunted in my life. Indeed, I had never fired a gun loaded with anything more lethal than caps. Being a somewhat accident-prone 

individual (childhood mishaps included getting bitten in the cheek 27 8 THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

by a seagull and breaking my nose falling out of bed) , I have always 

thought it wise to maintain a healthy distance between me and 

firearms. Besides, you have to have had a certain kind of dad in order to 

join the culture of hunting in America, and mine, one of the great in-

doorsmen, was emphatically not that dad. My father looked upon hunt-

ing as a human activity that had stopped making sense with the 

invention of the steakhouse. As a recreational pursuit that involved the certainty of going outside and the possibility of the sight of blood, 

hunting in his opinion was something best left to the gentiles. So in 

hunting my own dinner I would be starting very much from scratch. 

Thanks to my mother's more extensive engagement with the natu- 

> ral

world, I did have some childhood experience as a gatherer. During 

the summer she would take us to the beach at low tide to dig for steam- 

> ers,

excavating by hand the airholes the clams had made in the sand  

> fiats

until they squirted us in self-defense. In the waning days of sum-

mer we would pick beach plums that she would transform into a deli-

riously tart jelly the brilliant color of rubies. All winter long her beach 

plum jelly summoned memories of summer vacation: August on toast. 

# My sisters and I also filled bowls with wild blackberries and huckleber- 

> ries

for dessert. Once as a teenager I gathered enough wild grapes to at-

tempt to make wine. My understanding of fermentation was shaky, 

however, and after a week or so the sealed container I had put the 

crushed fruit in exploded, splattering the ceiling and all four walls of 

the living room where I had left it with grape-skin confetti. Another 

time I tried to make root beer from the roots of a sassafras sapling. The 

resulting concoction smelled right, but that was about it. 

These elementary foraging expeditions were always accompanied 

by scary surgeon general— like warnings from my mother about the 

deadly poisons lurking in berries and mushrooms growing in the wild; 

she made it sound like it wouldn't take much for a kid to get himself  

> killed

snacking in the woods. So I never picked any but the most iconic  

> fruits,

and while I enjoyed eating store-bought mushrooms, I never so 

## much as touched one in the woods. My mother had inculcated a fear of 

fungi in me that put picking a wild mushroom in the same class of THE FORAGER •> 279 

certain-death behaviors as touching downed power lines or climbing 

into the cars of strangers proffering candy. 

So my fungiphobia was another thing I'd have to overcome if I

hoped to ever serve a personally hunted and gathered meal, because 

wild mushrooms had to be on the menu. Mushroom hunting seems to 

## me the very soul of foraging, throwing both the risks and rewards of 

eating from the wild into the sharpest possible relief. If I hoped to host 

representatives of all three kingdoms on my plate, learning to distin-

guish the delicious from the deadly among the fungi was a necessity. 

(Actually I hoped to wangle a fourth kingdom in there —a mineral —if  

> I

could manage to locate a salt flat within driving distance of my 

house.) 

# Why go to all this trouble? It's not as though the forager food chain 

represents a viable way for us to eat at this point in history; it doesn't. 

For one thing, there is not enough game left to feed us all, and proba-

bly not enough wild plants and mushrooms either. The prevailing the-

ory as to why, as a species, we left off hunting and gathering is that we 

had ruined that perfectly good lifestyle by overdoing it, killing off the 

megafauna on which we depended. Otherwise it's hard to explain why 

humans would ever have traded such a healthy and comparatively 

pleasant way of life for the backbreaking, monotonous work of agricul- 

> ture.

Agriculture brought humans a great many blessings, but it also 

brought infectious disease (from living in close quarters with one an-

other and our animals) and malnutrition (from eating too much of the 

same thing when crops were good, and not enough of anything when 

they weren't). Anthropologists estimate that typical hunter-gatherers 

worked at feeding themselves no more than seventeen hours a week, 

and were far more robust and long-lived than agriculturists, who have 

only in the last century or two regained the physical stature and 

longevity of their Paleolithic ancestors. 

So even if we wanted to go back to hunting and gathering wild 

species, it's not an option: There are far too many of us and not nearly 

enough of them. Fishing is the last economically important hunter-

gatherer food chain, though even this foraging economy is rapidly giv-280 ''THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ing way to aquaculture, for the same reasons hunting wild game suc-

cumbed to raising livestock. It is depressing though not at all difficult 

to imagine our grandchildren living in a world in which fishing for a

living is history. 

For most of us today hunting and gathering and growing our own 

food is by and large a form of play. That's not to say there aren't still sub-

cultures of people, especially in rural places, who hunt some portion of 

the protein in their diet, feed themselves out of their gardens, and even 

earn an income foraging for wild delicacies such as morels or ramps or 

abalone. But the exorbitant price these wild tastes bring in the market-

place is only proof that very few of us can be serious foragers anymore. So though a hunter- gatherer food chain still exists here and there to 

one degree or another, it seems to me its chief value for us at this point  

> is

not so much economic or practical as it is didactic. Like other impor-

tant forms of play, it promises to teach us something about who we are 

beneath the crust of our civilized, practical, grown-up lives. Foraging 

for wild plants and animals is, after all, the way the human species has 

fed itself for 99 percent of its time on earth; this is precisely the food 

chain natural selection designed us for. Ten thousand years as agricul- 

> turists

has selected for a small handful of new traits suited to our new 

existence (a tolerance for lactose in adults is one example) , but for the 

most part we still, somewhat awkwardly, occupy the bodies of foragers 

and look out at the world through the hunter's eye. 

## "We don't have to go back to the Pleistocene," wrote Paul Shepard, 

an environmental philosopher who exalted wildness and deplored 

modernity, "because our bodies never left." Somehow I doubted I

would feel quite that at home stalking game in the woods, but it was 

reassuring to think that in doing so I would be contesting only my up-

bringing, not my genes. 

# My wager in undertaking this experiment is that hunting and gath-

ering (and growing) a meal would perforce teach me things about the 

ecology and ethics of eating that I could not get in a supermarket or 

fast-food chain or even on a farm. Some very basic things: about the ties 

between us and the species (and natural systems) we depend upon; THE FORAGER "281 

about how we decide what in nature is good to eat and what is not; and 

about how the human body fits into the food chain, not only as an eater 

but as a hunter and, yes, a killer of other creatures. For one of the things  

> I

was hoping to accomplish by rejoining, however briefly, this shortest 

and oldest of food chains was to take some more direct, conscious re-

sponsibility for the killing of the animals I eat. Otherwise, I felt, I really 

shouldn't be eating them. While I'd already slaughtered a handful of 

chickens in Virginia, the experience had disconcerted me and left the hardest questions untouched. Killing doomed domesticated animals on 

an assembly line, where you have to keep pace with the expectations of 

others, is an excellent way to remain only semiconscious about what it  

> is

you're really doing. By contrast the hunter, at least as I imagined him,  

> is

alone in the woods with his conscience. 

And this, I suppose, points to what I was really after in taking up 

hunting and gathering: to see what it'd be like to prepare and eat a meal 

in full consciousness of what was involved. I realized that this had been 

the ultimate destination of the journey I'd been on since traveling to an 

Iowa cornfield: to look as far into the food chains that support us as I

could look, and recover the fundamental biological realities that the 

complexities of modern industrialized eating keep from our view. 

"[T]here is value in any experience that reminds us of our depend-

ency on the soil-plant-animal-man food chain, and of the fundamental 

organization of the biota," Aldo Leopold wrote in A Sand County .Almanac. 

## He was talking specifically about hunting, but the same might be said 

of gardening or hunting for mushrooms. "Civilization has so cluttered  

> this

elemental man-earth relationship with gadgets and middlemen  

> that

awareness of it is growing dim. We fancy that industry supports us, 

forgetting what supports industry." 

Leopold's injunction was back there somewhere behind my desire  

> to

do some hunting and gathering, as no doubt was a line of Henry 

David Thoreau's that had irritated me when I Erst came across it years 

ago. "We cannot but pity the boy who has never fired a gun," he wrote 

in Walden. "He is no more humane, while his education has been sadly 

neglected." That pitiable, uneducated boy was me. But this boy was de-282 + THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

termined now to take up Thoreau's and Leopold's challenges: to per-

sonally hunt down and drive into a corner that whole charged web 

of relations with other species we so blandly call "eating," reduce it to  

> its

lowest denominator, look at it squarely, and see whatever there 

was to see. 

2. MY FORAGER VIRGIL 

The desire was one thing, fulfilling it quite another. A whole host of 

hard questions now strode into view. How was I going to learn to fire 

a gun, let alone hunt? Did I need a license? What if I actually managed 

to kill something —then what? How do you "dress" an animal you've 

killed? (And what kind of euphemism is that, anyway?) Was it realistic 

to think I could learn to identify mushrooms with enough confidence 

to actually eat them? 

What I badly needed, I realized, was my own personal foraging Vir- 

> gil,

a fellow not only skilled in the arts of hunting and gathering (and 

butchering), but also well versed in the flora, fauna, and fungi of 

Northern California, about which I knew approximately nothing. You  

> see,

there was this whole other complication I've neglected to mention: 

## On the eve of this experiment I had just moved to Northern California, 

a place that is an ecological world away from the New England woods 

and fields that I knew my way around —a little. I was going to have to 

learn to hunt and gather and garden on what amounted to a different 

planet, for it was inhabited by dozens of exotic species about which I

possessed not the first useful fact. What did people hunt here, anyway, 

and when did they hunt it? Which Plant Hardiness Zone is Berkeley in? 

What time of year do the mushrooms mushroom around here, and 

where? 

As serendipity would have it, a foraging Virgil appeared in my life at 

exactly the right moment, though it took me a while to recognize him. 

Angelo Garro is a stout, burly Italian with a five-day beard, sleepy 

brown eyes, and a passion verging on obsession about the getting and THE FORAGER * 28 3

preparing of food. Shortly after we moved to California, I started run-

ning into Angelo at dinners to which we'd been invited, though I no-

ticed that only rarely did he play the typical, more or less passive, role 

of guest. No, Angelo was always intimately involved in the story of the 

meal. He'd gotten the halibut from a friend at the dock in Bolinas that 

morning, picked the fennel along the highway on the drive over, made 

the wine on the table, and brined the olives and personally cured the 

prosciutto being served. Inevitably he wound up in the kitchen cook-

ing the dinner or passing platters of his famous fennel cakes to whet 

our appetites while he explained the proper way to make farro pasta or 

boar salami or balsamic vinegar, this last assuming you had ten or twelve years and the right kind of barrels. The guy was a one-man trav-

eling food network, a poster boy for the Slow Food movement. 

Eventually I pieced together Angelo 's story. He is a fifty-eight-year-

old Sicilian, from the town of Provencia, who left home at eighteen, 

following a girl to Canada; twenty years later he followed a different  

> girl

to San Francisco, where he has lived ever since. He makes his living 

designing and forging architectural wrought iron; he lives in a forge  

> that

has been a blacksmith shop since the time of the gold rush. But 

Angelo will tell you his consuming passion is food and, specifically, 

recapturing the flavors and the foodways of his childhood, which he 

sometimes gives the impression was prematurely interrupted. A partic-

ularly successful dish, he will say, is one that "tastes like my mother." 

## "When I moved away I would call for recipes and for memory of 

smell and taste, and now I'm trying to replicate what I left behind." 

Several months after meeting Angelo he appeared again, this time, 

strangely enough, on my car radio. He was being interviewed on pub- 

> lic

radio for a segment on foraging produced by the Kitchen Sisters. 

Their microphones followed Angelo on a porcini hunt and then into a

duck blind at dawn. While he waited for the sun and the ducks to rise, 

Angelo spoke in an accented whisper about his past and his passions. 

"In Sicily I could tell by the smell what time of the year it was," he said. 

"Orange season, oranges, persimmons, olives, and olive oil." 

Angelo spends many of his days in California re-creating the calen-2 84 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

dar of life in Sicily, a calendar that is strictly organized around seasonal 

foods. "You know, food in Sicily doesn't come from the Safeway," he 

will say. "It comes from the garden, it comes from nature." So there are 

eels to catch for the traditional seven-fish dinner on Christmas Eve 

("You almost can't have Christmas without eel"); chanterelles to hunt 

in January; wild fennel to gather in April; olives to pick and cure in Au-

gust; grapes to harvest and crush in September; game to hunt and cure 

in October; and porcini to hunt after the first rains in November. Each 

of these rites is performed in the company of friends —and is accom-

panied by a good meal, homemade wine, and conversation.  

> "I

have the passions of foraging, passion of hunting, opera, my 

work," he told the Kitchen Sisters. "I have the passion of cooking, pick- 

> ling,

curing salamis, sausage, making wine in the fall. This is my life. I

do this with my friends. It's to my heart." 

Even before the radio segment ended I knew I had found my Virgil. 

The next time I bumped into Angelo I asked him if I could tag along on 

his next foraging expedition. "Sure, okay, we go hunt chanterelle in 

Sonoma. I call you when it's time." Emboldened, I asked about going 

hunting too. "Okay, we could hunt one day, maybe some duck, maybe 

the pig, but first you need license and learn to shoot." 

The pig? Clearly there was even more to learn than I had thought. 

3. HUNTER ED.  

> It

took me a couple of months to sort out the procedures for securing 

a hunter's license, which involved enrolling in a hunter education 

course and taking a test. It seems they'll sell a high-powered rifle to just 

about anybody in California, but it's against the law to aim the thing at 

an animal without first enduring a fourteen-hour class and a one-

hundred-question multiple-choice exam that demands some study. The 

next scheduled session was on a Saturday two months off. 

Yet now that I knew I would be going hunting eventually, for game  

> as

well as for mushrooms, something peculiar happened. I became an THE FORAGER 2 85 

incipient forager, a forager-in-waiting. The mere expectation of hunting 

and gathering abruptly changed what it meant —and what it felt like 

# —

to take a walk in the woods. All at once I started looking at, and think-

ing about, everything in the landscape in terms of its potential as a

source of food. "Nature," as the Woody Allen character says in Love and    

> Death, "is like

an enormous restaurant."  

> It

was almost as if I had donned a new pair of glasses that divided 

the natural world into the possibly good to eat and the probably not. 

Though in most cases of course I had no idea which was which; being 

so new to this, and to this place, my forager vision was far from perfect.   

> Still, I

began to notice things. I noticed the soft yellow globes of 

chamomile edging the path I hiked most afternoons, and spotted 

clumps of miner's lettuce off in the shade (Claytonia, a succulent coin-

shaped green I had once grown in my Connecticut garden) and wild 

mustard out in the sun. (Angelo called it rapini, and said the young 

leaves were delicious sauteed in olive oil and garlic.) There were black-

berries in flower and the occasional edible bird: a few quail, a pair of 

doves. Okay, this might not have been the most exalted way of experi-

encing nature, but it did sharpen my eye and engage my attention in a

way it hadn't been engaged in years. I began consulting field guides to 

help me identify the many unfamiliar species I'd been content to treat   

> as leafy,

fungal, and feathery background noise. 

Hiking in the Berkeley Hills one afternoon in January I noticed a

narrow shady path dropping off the main trail into the woods, and I

followed it down into a grove of big oaks and bay laurel trees. I'd read 

that chanterelles came up this time of year around old live oak trees, so  

> I

kept an eye out. The only place I'd seen a chanterelle before was over 

pasta or in the market, but I knew I was looking for a yellowish-orange 

and thickly built trumpet. I scanned the leaf litter around a couple of 

oaks but saw nothing. Just when I'd given up and turned to head back, 

however, I noticed a bright, yolky glimmer of something pushing up 

the carpet of leaves not two feet from where I'd just stepped. I brushed 

away the leaves and there it was, this big, fleshy, vase-shaped mushroom   

> that I

was dead certain had to be a chanterelle. 286 *THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Or was it? 

How certain was that?  

> I

took the mushroom home, brushed off the soil, and put it on a 

> plate,

then pulled out my field guides to see if I could confirm the iden- 

> tification.

Everything matched up: the color, the faint apricot smell, the 

asymmetrical trumpet shape on top, the underside etched in a shallow 

pattern of "false" gills. I felt fairly confident. But confident enough to eat it? Not quite. The field guide mentioned something called a "false 

chanterelle" that had slightly "thinner" gills. Uh oh. Thinner, thicker: 

These were relative terms; how could I tell if the gills I was looking at 

were thin or thick ones? Compared to what? My mother's mycophobic 

warnings rang in my ears. I couldn't trust my eyes. I couldn't quite trust 

the field guide. So whom could I trust? Angelo! But that meant driving 

# my lone mushroom across the bridge to San Francisco, which seemed 

excessive. My desire to saute and eat my first-found chanterelle squab-

bled with my doubts about it, slender as they were. But by now I had 

passed the point of being able to enjoy this putative chanterelle with-

out anxiety, so I threw it out.  

> I

didn't realize it at the time, but I had impaled myself that after-

noon on the horns of the omnivore's dilemma. SIXTEEN 

# THE OMNIVORE'S 

# DILEMMA 

1. GOOD TO EAT, GOOD TO THINK 

# My encounter with the chanterelle —or was it a false chanterelle? —put 

## me in touch with one of the most elemental facts about human eating:  

> It

can be dangerous, and even when it isn't dangerous, it is fraught. 

The blessing of the omnivore is that he can eat a great many differ-

ent things in nature. The curse of the omnivore is that when it comes to 

figuring out which of those things are safe to eat, he's pretty much on 

his own. 

As noted at the beginning of this book, the omnivore 's dilemma, or 

paradox, was first described in the 1976 paper, "The Selection of Foods 

by Rats, Humans, and Other Animals," by University of Pennsylvania 

psychologist Paul Rozin. Rozin studied food selection behavior in rats, 

which are omnivores, in the hopes of understanding something about 

food selection in people. Like us, rats daily confront the bounty of na-

ture and its manifold perils —perils designed to protect plants, animals, 

and microbes from being eaten. To defend themselves from predation, 288 * THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

plants and fungi produce a great many poisons, everything from 

cyanide and oxalic acid to a wide variety of toxic alkaloids and gluco-  

> sides; similarly,

bacteria colonizing dead plants and animals produce 

toxins to keep other potential eaters at bay. (Also similarly, we humans 

manufacture toxins to keep rats from eating our food.) 

## Among the more specialized eaters, natural selection takes care of 

the whole problem of food selection, hardwiring the monarch butter-  

> fly, say,

to regard the milkweed as food and everything else in nature as 

not food. No thought or emotion need go into deciding whether to eat 

any given thing. This approach works for the monarch because its di-

gestion can wring everything it needs for its survival from milkweed 

leaves (including a toxin that makes the butterfly itself unappetizing to 

birds) . But rats and humans require a wider range of nutrients and so 

must eat a wider range of foods, some of them questionable. Whenever 

they encounter a potential new food they find themselves torn between 

two conflicting emotions unknown to the specialist eater, each with its 

## own biological rationale: neophobia, a sensible fear of ingesting any-

thing new, and neophilia, a risky but necessary openness to new tastes. 

Rozin found that the rat minimizes the risk of the new by treating  

> its

digestive tract as a kind of laboratory. It nibbles a very little bit of the 

## new food (assuming it is food) and then waits to see what happens. The 

animal evidently has a good enough grasp of causality ("delayed learn-

ing," as the social scientists call it) to link a stomachache in the present 

to something it ingested a half hour before, and a good enough mem-

ory to store that finding as a lifelong aversion to that particular sub-

stance. (This is what makes poisoning rats so difficult.) I might have 

used the same strategy to test my chanterelle, eating a tiny bite of it and 

waiting to see what happened. 

Rozin 's early work on food selection behavior postulated that the 

"omnivoral problem" would explain a great deal, not only about how 

and what we eat, but who we are as a species, and subsequent research 

by him and others, in anthropology as well as psychology, has done 

## much to confirm his hunch. The concept of the omnivore's dilemma 

helps unlock not only simple food-selection behaviors in animals, but THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 289 

## much more complex "biocultural" adaptations in primates (humans 

included) as well as a wide range of otherwise baffling cultural prac- 

> tices

in humans, the species for whom, as Claude Levi-Strauss famously  

> said,

food must be "not only good to eat, but also good to think." 

The omnivore's dilemma is replayed every time we decide whether 

or not to ingest a wild mushroom, but it also figures in our less primor- 

> dial

encounters with the putatively edible: when we're deliberating the 

nutritional claims on the boxes in the cereal aisle; when we're settling 

on a weight-loss regimen (low fat or low carb?) ; or deciding whether 

to sample McDonald's' newly reformulated chicken nugget; or weigh-

ing the costs and benefits of buying the organic strawberries over the 

conventional ones; or choosing to observe (or flout) kosher or halal  

> rules;

or determining whether or not it is ethically defensible to eat 

meat —that is, whether meat, or any other of these things, is not only 

good to eat, but good to think as well. 

2. HOMO OMNIVOROUS 

The fact that we humans are indeed omnivorous is deeply inscribed in 

our bodies, which natural selection has equipped to handle a remark-

ably wide-ranging diet. Our teeth are omnicompetent —designed for 

tearing animal flesh as well as grinding plants. So are our jaws, which 

## we can move in the manner of a carnivore, a rodent, or an herbivore, 

depending on the dish. Our stomachs produce an enzyme specifically 

designed to break down elastin, a type of protein found in meat and 

nowhere else. Our metabolism requires specific chemical compounds  

> that,

in nature, can be gotten only from plants (like vitamin C) and oth- 

> ers

that can be gotten only from animals (like vitamin B- 1 2) . More than  

> just

the spice of human life, variety for us appears to be a biological ne-

> cessity.

By comparison, nature's specialists can get everything they need from a small number of foods and, very often, a highly specialized di-

gestive system, freeing them from the need to devote a lot of brain-290 *THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

power to the challenges of omnivorousness. The ruminant, for exam- 

> ple,

specializes in eating grass, even though the grasses by themselves 

don't supply all the nutrients the animal needs. What they do supply is 

food for the microbes living in the animal's rumen, which in turn sup-

ply the other nutrients the animal needs to survive. The ruminant's ge-

nius for keeping itself well fed resides in its gut rather than its brain. 

There does seem to be an evolutionary trade-off between big brains 

and big guts —two very different evolutionary strategies for dealing 

with the question of food selection. The case of the koala, one of na- 

> ture's

pickiest eaters, exemplifies the small-brain strategy. You don't 

need a lot of brain circuitry to figure out what's for dinner when all you 

ever eat is eucalyptus leaves. As it happens, the koala's brain is so small it 

doesn't even begin to fill up its skull. Zoologists theorize that the koala 

once ate a more varied and mentally taxing diet than it does now, 

and that as it evolved toward its present, highly circumscribed concept 

of lunch, its underemployed brain actually shrank. (Food faddists take 

note.) More important to the koala than brains is a gut big enough 

to break down all those fibrous leaves. By the same token, the diges-  

> tive tract

of primates like us has grown progressively shorter as we've 

evolved to eat a more varied, higher quality diet. 

Eating might be simpler as a thimble-brained monophage, but it's 

also a lot more precarious, which partly explains why there are so 

## many more rats and humans in the world than koalas. Should a disease 

or drought strike the eucalyptus trees in your neck of the woods, that's  

> it

for you. But the rat and the human can live just about anywhere on 

earth, and when their familiar foods are in short supply, there's always 

another they can try. Indeed, there is probably not a nutrient source 

on earth that is not eaten by some human somewhere —bugs, worms,  

> dirt,

fungi, lichens, seaweed, rotten fish; the roots, shoots, stems, bark, 

buds, flowers, seeds, and fruits of plants; every imaginable part of 

every imaginable animal, not to mention haggis, granola, and Chicken 

McNuggets. (The deeper mystery, only partly explained by neophobia,  

> is

## why any given human group will eat so few of the numberless nu- 

> trients

available to it.) THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 291 

The price of this dietary flexibility is much more complex and meta-

bolically expensive brain circuitry. For the omnivore a tremendous 

amount of mental wiring must be devoted to sensory and cognitive 

tools for figuring out which of all these questionable nutrients it is safe 

to eat. There's just too much information involved in food selection to 

encode every potential food and poison in the genes. So instead of genes 

to write our menus omnivores evolved a complicated set of sensory and 

mental tools to help us sort everything out. Some of these tools are fairly 

straightforward and we share them with many other mammals; others 

represent impressive feats of adaptation by primates; still others straddle 

the blurry line between natural selection and cultural invention. 

The first tool is of course our sense of taste, which performs some 

of the basic work screening foods for value and safety. Or as Brillat-

Savarin put it in The Physiology of Taste, taste "helps us to choose, from the various substances offered us by nature, those which are proper to be 

consumed." Taste in humans gets complicated, but it starts with two 

powerful instinctual biases, one positive, the other negative. The first 

bias predisposes us toward sweetness, a taste that signals a particularly 

rich source of carbohydrate energy in nature. Indeed, even when we're otherwise sated, our appetite for sweet things persists, which is proba-

bly why dessert shows up in the meal when it does. A sweet tooth rep-

resents an excellent adaptation for an omnivore whose big brain 

demands a tremendous amount of glucose (the only type of energy the 

brain can use) , or at least it once did, when sources of sugar were few 

and far between. (The adult human brain accounts for 2 percent of our 

body weight but consumes 1 8 percent of our energy, all of which must 

come from a carbohydrate. Food faddists take note two.) 

Our sense of taste's second big bias predisposes us against bitter fla-

vors, which is how many of the defensive toxins produced by plants 

happen to taste. Pregnant women are particularly sensitive to bitter  

> tastes,

probably an adaptation to protect the developing fetus against 

even the mild plant toxins found in foods like broccoli. A bitter flavor 

on the tongue is a warning to exercise caution lest a poison pass what 

Brillat-Savarin called the sense of taste's "faithful sentries." 2 92 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Disgust turns out to be another valuable tool for negotiating the 

omnivore's dilemma. Though the emotion has long since attached itself 

to a great many objects having nothing to do with food, food is where 

and why it began, as the etymology of the word indicates. (It comes from the Middle French verb desgouster, to taste.) Rozin, who has written 

or coauthored several fascinating articles about disgust, defines it as the 

fear of incorporating offending substances into one's body. Much of 

what people deem disgusting is culturally determined, but there are 

certain things that apparently disgust us all, and all these substances, 

Rozin notes, come from animals: bodily fluids and secretions, corpses, 

decaying flesh, feces. (Curiously, the one bodily fluid of other people 

that doesn't disgust us is the one produced by the human alone: tears. 

Consider the sole type of used tissue you'd be willing to share.) Disgust  

> is

an extremely useful adaptation, since it prevents omnivores from in-

gesting hazardous bits of animal matter: rotten meat that might carry 

bacterial toxins or infected bodily fluids. In the words of Harvard psy-

chologist Steven Pinker, "Disgust is intuitive microbiology." 

Yet helpful as it is, our sense of taste is not a completely adequate 

guide to what we can and cannot eat. In the case of plants, for instance,  

> it

turns out that some of the bitterest ones contain valuable nutrients, 

even useful medicines. Long before the domestication of plants (a 

process in which we generally selected for nonbitterness) , early hu-

mans developed various other tools to unlock the usefulness of these 

foods, either by overcoming their defenses or overcoming our own 

aversion to how they taste. 

That's precisely what people must have done in the case of the sap 

in the opium poppy or the bark of the willow, both of which taste ex-

tremely bitter —and both of which contain powerful medicines. Once 

humans discovered the curative properties of salicylic acid in willows 

(the active ingredient in aspirin) and the relief from pain offered by the 

poppy's opiates, our instinctive aversion to these plants' bitterness gave 

way to an even more convincing cultural belief that the plants were 

worth ingesting even so; basically, our powers of recognition, memory, 

and communication overcame the plants' defenses. THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 293 

## Humans also learned to overcome plant defenses by cooking or 

otherwise processing foods to remove their bitter toxins. Native Amer- 

> icans,

for example, figured out that if they ground, soaked, and roasted 

acorns they could unlock the rich source of nutrients in the bitter nuts. 

Humans also discovered that the roots of the cassava, which effectively 

defends itself against most eaters by producing cyanide, could be made 

edible by cooking. By learning to cook cassava humans unlocked a fab-

ulously rich source of carbohydrate energy, one that, just as important, 

they had all to themselves, since locusts, pigs, porcupines, and all the 

other potential cassava eaters haven't yet figured out how to overcome 

the plant's defense. 

Cooking, one of the omnivore's cleverest tools, opened up whole 

## new vistas of edibility. Indeed, in doing so it probably made us who we  

> are.

By making these foods more digestible, cooking plants and animal   

> flesh vastly

increased the amount of energy available to early humans, 

and some anthropologists believe this boon accounts for the dramatic 

increase in the size of the hominid brain about 1.9 million years ago. 

(Around the same time our ancestors' teeth, jaws, and gut slimmed 

## down to their present proportions, since they were no longer needed 

to process large quantities of raw food.) By improving digestibility 

cooking also cut down on the time we had to spend foraging for plants 

and simply chewing raw meat, freeing that time and energy for other  

> pursuits.
> Last

but not least, cooking abruptly changed the terms of the evolu-

tionary arms race between omnivores and the species they would eat by 

allowing us to overcome their defenses. Apart from fruits, which have  

> a

declared interest in becoming another species' lunch (this being their 

strategy for spreading their seeds), and grasses, which welcome graz-

ing as a strategy to keep their habitat free of shady competitors, most 

wild foods are parts of plants or animals that have no interest in being 

eaten; they evolved defenses to keep themselves whole. But evolution 

doesn't stand still, and eaters are constantly evolving counteradapta-

tions to overcome the defenses of nutrient sources: a new digestive en-

zyme to detoxify a plant or fungal poison, say, or a new perceptual skill 2 94 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

to overcome an edible creature's camouflage. In response, the plants, 

animals, and fungi evolved new defenses to make themselves either 

more difficult to catch or to digest. This arms race between the eaters 

and the potentially eaten unfolded at a stately pace until early humans 

came on the scene. For a countermeasure such as cooking bitter plants 

completely changed the rules of the game. All at once a species' 

painstakingly developed defense against being eaten had been breached 

and, assuming it could erect a new defense, that was going to take 

time —evolutionary time. 

Cooking is often cited (along with tool making and a handful of 

other protohuman tricks) as evidence that the human omnivore en-

tered a new kind of ecological niche in nature, one that some anthro-

pologists have labeled "the cognitive niche." The term seems calculated 

to smudge the line between biology and culture, which is precisely the 

point. To these anthropologists the various tools humans have devel-

oped to overcome the defenses of other species —not only food-processing techniques but a whole gamut of hunting and gathering 

tools and talents —represent biocultural adaptations, so-called because 

they constitute evolutionary developments rather than cultural inven-

tions that somehow stand apart from natural selection. 

In this sense learning to cook cassava roots or disseminate the hard-

## won knowledge of safe mushrooms is not all that different from re-

cruiting rumenal bacteria to nourish oneself. The cow depends on the 

ingenious adaptation of the rumen to turn an exclusive diet of grasses 

into a balanced meal; we depend instead on the prodigious powers of 

recognition, memory, and communication that allow us to cook cassava 

or identify an edible mushroom and share that precious information. 

The same process of natural selection came up with both strategies; one  

> just

happens to rely on cognition, the other goes with the gut. THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA* 2.95 

5. THE ANXIETY OF EATING 

Being an omnivore occupying a cognitive niche in nature is both a

boon and a challenge, a source of tremendous power as well as anxiety. 

Omnivory is what allowed humans to adapt to a great many environ-

ments all over the planet, and to survive in them even after our favored 

foods were driven to extinction, whether by accident or because of our 

## own too-great success in overcoming other species' defenses. After the 

mastodon there would be the bison and then the cow; after the stur-

geon, the salmon, and then, perhaps, some novel mycoprotein like 

"quorn." 

Being a generalist offers us deep satisfactions, too, enjoyments that 

flow equally from the omnivore 's innate neophilia —the pleasure of 

variety —and neophobia —the comfort of the familiar. What began as a 

> set

of simple sensory responses to food (sweet, bitter, disgusting) we've 

elaborated into more complicated canons of taste that afford us aes-

thetic pleasures undreamed of by the koala or cow. Since "everything 

that is edible is at the mercy of his vast appetite," Brillat-Savarin writes, 

"the machinery of taste attains a rare perfection in man," making "man 

the only gourmand in the whole of nature." Taste in this more culti-

vated sense brings people together, not only in small groups at the table 

but as communities. For a community's food preferences —the strik-

ingly short list of foods and preparations it regards as good to eat and 

think —represent one of the strongest social glues we have. Historically, 

national cuisines have been remarkably stable, and resistant to change, 

which is why the immigrant's refrigerator is the very last place to look 

for signs of assimilation. 

Yet the surfeit of choice that confronts the omnivore brings stresses 

and anxieties also undreamed of by the cow or the koala, for whom the 

distinction between The Good Things to Eat and the Bad is second na- 

> ture.

And while our senses can help us draw the first rough distinctions 

between good and bad foods, we humans have to rely on culture to re-

## member and keep it all straight. So we codify the rules of wise eating 2 9 6 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

in an elaborate structure of taboos, rituals, manners, and culinary tradi- 

> tions,

covering everything from the proper size of portions to the order 

in which foods should be consumed to the kinds of animals it is and is 

not okay to eat. Anthropologists argue over whether all these rules 

make biological sense —some, like the kosher rules, are probably de-

signed more to enforce group identity than to protect health. But cer- 

> tainly

a great many of our food rules do make biological sense, and they 

keep each of us from having to confront the omnivore's dilemma every 

time we visit the supermarket or sit down to eat. 

That set of rules for preparing food we call a cuisine, for example, 

specifies combinations of foods and flavors that on examination do a

great deal to mediate the omnivore's dilemma. The dangers of eating 

raw fish, for example, are minimized by consuming it with wasabi, a

potent antimicrobial. Similarly, the strong spices characteristic of many 

cuisines in the tropics, where food is quick to spoil, have antibacterial 

properties. The meso-American practice of cooking corn with lime and 

serving it with beans, like the Asian practice of fermenting soy and 

serving it with rice, turn out to render these plant species much more 

nutritious than they otherwise would be. When not fermented, soy 

contains an antitrypsin factor that blocks the absorption of protein, 

rendering the bean indigestible; unless corn is cooked with an alkali  

> like

lime its niacin is unavailable, leading to the nutritional deficiency 

called pellagra. Corn and beans each lack an essential amino acid (ly-

sine and methionine, respectively); eat them together and the proper 

balance is restored. Similarly, a dish that combines fermented soy with   

> rice is

nutritionally balanced. As Rozin writes, "[C]uisines embody 

some of a culture's accumulated wisdom about food." Often when one 

culture imports another's food species without importing the associ-

ated cuisine, and its embodied wisdom, they make themselves sick. 

Rozin suggests that cuisines also help negotiate the tension between 

the omnivore's neophilia and neophobia. By preparing a novel kind of 

food using a familiar complex of flavors —by cooking it with tradi-

tional spices, say, or sauces —the new is rendered familiar, "reducing 

the tension of ingestion." THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 2 9 7

Anthropologists marvel at just how much cultural energy goes into 

managing the food problem. But as students of human nature have long 

suspected, the food problem is closely tied to . . . well, to several other 

big existential problems. Leon Kass, the ethicist, wrote a fascinating 

book called The Hungry Soul: Eating and the Perfection of Our Nature in which he 

teases out the many philosophical implications of human eating. In a

chapter on omnivorousness Kass quotes at length from Jean-Jacques 

Rousseau, who in his Second Discourse on man draws a connection be-

tween our freedom from instinct in eating and the larger problem of 

free will. Rousseau is after somewhat bigger game in this passage, but 

along the way he offers as good a statement of the omnivore's dilemma 

as you're likely to find:    

> ...

nature does everything in the operations of a beast, 

whereas man contributes to his operations by being a free 

agent. The former chooses or rejects by instinct and the latter 

by an act of freedom, so that a beast cannot deviate from the 

rule that is prescribed to it even when it would be advanta-

geous to do so, and a man deviates from it often to his detri-

ment. Thus a pigeon would die of hunger near a basin filled 

with the best meats, and a cat upon heaps of fruits or grain, al-

though each could very well nourish itself on the food it dis-

dains if it made up its mind to try some. Thus dissolute men 

abandon themselves to the excesses which cause them fever 

and death, because the mind depraves the senses and because 

the will still speaks when nature is silent. 

Guided by no natural instinct, the prodigious and open-ended hu-

## man appetite is liable to get us into all sorts of trouble, well beyond the 

stomachache. For if nature is silent what's to stop the human omnivore 

from eating anything —including, most alarmingly, other human omni-

vores? A potential for savagery lurks in a creature capable of eating any-2 98 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

thing. If nature won't draw a line around human appetite, then human 

culture must step in, as indeed it has done, bringing the omnivore's eat-

ing habits under the government of all the various taboos (foremost the 

one against cannibalism), customs, rituals, table manners, and culinary 

conventions found in every culture. There is a short and direct path 

from the omnivore's dilemma to the astounding number of ethical 

rules with which people have sought to regulate eating for as long as 

they have been living in groups. 

"Without virtue" to govern his appetites, Aristotle wrote, man of all 

the animals "is most unholy and savage, and worst in regard to sex and 

eating." Paul Rozin has suggested, only partly in jest, that Freud would 

have done well to build his psychology around our appetite for food 

rather than our appetite for sex. Both are fundamental biological drives 

necessary to our survival as a species, and both must be carefully chan-neled and socialized for the good of society ("You can't just grab any 

tasty-looking morsel," he points out.) But food is more important than  

> sex,

Rozin contends. Sex we can live without (at least as individuals), 

and it occurs with far less frequency than eating. Since we also do rather 

more of our eating in public there has been "a more elaborate cultural 

transformation of our relationship to food than there is to sex." 

4. AMERICA'S NATIONAL EATING DISORDER 

Rozin doesn't say as much, but all the customs and rules culture has de-

vised to mediate the clash of human appetite and society probably 

bring greater comfort to us as eaters than as sexual beings. Freud and 

others lay the blame for many of our sexual neuroses at the door of an 

overly repressive culture, but that doesn't appear to be the principal cul- 

> prit

in our neurotic eating. To the contrary, it seems as though our eat-

ing tends to grow more tortured as our culture's power to manage our 

relationship to food weakens. 

This seems to me precisely the predicament we find ourselves in to-

day as eaters, particularly in America. America has never had a stable na-THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 29 9

tional cuisine; each immigrant population has brought its own food-

ways to the American table, but none has ever been powerful enough 

to hold the national diet very steady. We seem bent on reinventing 

the American way of eating every generation, in great paroxysms of 

neophilia and neophobia. That might explain why Americans have been 

such easy marks for food fads and diets of every description. 

This is the country, after all, where at the turn of the last century Dr. 

John Harvey Kellogg persuaded great numbers of the country's most af-

fluent and best educated to pay good money to sign themselves into his 

legendarily nutty sanitarium at Battle Creek, Michigan, where they sub-

mitted to a regime that included all-grape diets and almost hourly en-

emas. Around the same time millions of Americans succumbed to the 

vogue for " Fletcher izing" —chewing each bite of food as many as one 

hundred times —introduced by Horace Fletcher, also known as the Great 

Masticator. 

This period marked the first golden age of American food faddism, 

though of course its exponents spoke not in terms of fashion but of  

> "scientific

eating," much as we do now. Back then the best nutritional 

science maintained that carnivory promoted the growth of toxic bacteria 

in the colon; to battle these evildoers Kellogg vilified meat and mounted 

a two-fronted assault on his patients' alimentary canals, introducing 

quantities of Bulgarian yogurt at both ends. It's easy to make fun of 

people who would succumb to such fads, but it's not at all clear that 

we're any less gullible. It remains to be seen whether the current Atkins 

school theory of ketosis —the process by which the body resorts to burn-

ing its own fat when starved of carbohydrates —will someday seem as 

quaintly quackish as Kellogg 's theory of colonic autointoxication. 

What is striking is just how little it takes to set off one of these 

applecart-toppling nutritional swings in America; a scientific study, a

## new government guideline, a lone crackpot with a medical degree can   

> alter this

nation's diet overnight. One article in the New York Times Magazine 

in 2002 almost single-handedly set off the recent spasm of carbopho-

bia in America. But the basic pattern was fixed decades earlier, and sug-

gests just how vulnerable the lack of stable culinary traditions leaves us 3 00 » THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

to the omnivore's anxiety, and the companies and quacks who would 

prey on it. So every few decades some new scientific research comes 

along to challenge the prevailing nutritional orthodoxy; some nutrient 

that Americans have been happily chomping for decades is suddenly 

found to be lethal; another nutrient is elevated to the status of health 

food; the industry throws its weight behind it; and the American way 

of dietary life undergoes yet another revolution. 

Harvey Levenstein, a Canadian historian who has written two fasci-

nating social histories of American foodways, neatly sums up the beliefs 

that have guided the American way of eating since the heyday of John 

Harvey Kellogg: "that taste is not a true guide to what should be eaten; 

that one should not simply eat what one enjoys; that the important 

components of food cannot be seen or tasted, but are discernible only 

in scientific laboratories; and that experimental science has produced 

rules of nutrition that will prevent illness and encourage longevity." The 

power of any orthodoxy resides in its ability not to seem like one and,   

> at least

to a 1906 or 2006 genus American, these beliefs don't seem in 

the least bit strange or controversial.   

> It's easy,

especially for Americans, to forget just how novel this nu- 

> tritional

orthodoxy is, or that there are still cultures that have been eat-

ing more or less the same way for generations, relying on such archaic  

> criteria

as taste and tradition to guide them in their food selection. We 

Americans are amazed to learn that some of the cultures that set their 

culinary course by the lights of habit and pleasure rather than nutri-

tional science and marketing are actually healthier than we are —that is, 

suffer a lower incidence of diet-related health troubles. 

The French paradox is the most famous such case, though as Paul 

Rozin points out, the French don't regard the matter as paradoxical at  

> all.

# We Americans resort to that term because the French experience 

# —

a population of wine-swilling cheese eaters with lower rates of heart 

disease and obesity —confounds our orthodoxy about food. That ortho-

doxy regards certain tasty foods as poisons (carbs now, fats then) , fail-

ing to appreciate that how we eat, and even how we feel about eating, 

## may in the end be just as important as what we eat. The French eat all THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA •'• 301  

> sorts

of supposedly unhealthy foods, but they do it according to a strict 

and stable set of rules: They eat small portions and don't go back for 

seconds; they don't snack; they seldom eat alone; and communal meals 

are long, leisurely affairs. In other words, the French culture of food 

successfully negotiates the omnivore's dilemma, allowing the French to 

enjoy their meals without ruining their health. 

Perhaps because we have no such culture of food in America almost 

every question about eating is up for grabs. Fats or carbs? Three squares 

or continuous grazing? Raw or cooked? Organic or industrial? Veg or 

vegan? Meat or mock meat? Foods of astounding novelty fill the shelves 

of our supermarket, and the line between a food and a "nutritional sup-

plement" has fogged to the point where people make meals of protein 

bars and shakes. Consuming these neo-pseudo-foods alone in our cars, 

## we have become a nation of antinomian eaters, each of us struggling to 

work out our dietary salvation on our own. Is it any wonder Americans  

> suffer

from so many eating disorders? In the absence of any lasting con-

sensus about what and how and where and when to eat, the omnivore's 

dilemma has returned to America with an almost atavistic force. 

This situation suits the food industry just fine, of course. The more 

anxious we are about eating, the more vulnerable we are to the seduc-

tions of the marketer and the expert's advice. Food marketing in partic-

ular thrives on dietary instability and so tends to exacerbate it. Since it's  

> difficult

to sell more food to such a well-fed population (though not,  

> as

we're discovering, impossible), food companies put their efforts into 

grabbing market share by introducing new kinds of highly processed 

foods, which have the virtue of being both highly profitable and infi-  

> nitely adaptable.

Sold under the banner of "convenience," these processed foods are frequently designed to create whole new eating occasions, 

such as in the bus on the way to school (the protein bar or Pop-Tart) or 

in the car on the way to work (Campbell's recently introduced a one-

handed microwaveable microchunked soup in a container designed to    

> fit acar's

cup holder). 

The success of food marketers in exploiting shifting eating patterns 

and nutritional fashions has a steep cost. Getting us to change how we 3 02 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

eat over and over again tends to undermine the various social structures 

that surround and steady our eating, institutions like the family dinner, 

for example, or taboos on snacking between meals and eating alone. In 

their relentless pursuit of new markets, food companies (with some 

crucial help from the microwave oven, which made "cooking" some-

thing even small children could do) have broken Mom's hold over the 

American menu by marketing to every conceivable demographic —and 

especially to children. 

## A vice president of marketing at General Mills once painted for me 

a picture of the state of the American family dinner, courtesy of video 

cameras that the company's consulting anthropologists paid families to  

> let

them install in the ceiling above the kitchen and dining room tables. 

## Mom, perhaps feeling sentimental about the dinners of her childhood,  

> still

prepares a dish and a salad that she usually winds up eating by her- 

> self.

Meanwhile, the kids, and Dad, too, if he's around, each fix some-

thing different for themselves, because Dad's on a low-carb diet, the 

teenager's become a vegetarian, and the eight-year-old is on a strict ra-

tion of pizza that the shrink says it's best to indulge (lest she develop 

eating disorders later on in life) . So over the course of a half hour or so 

each family member roams into the kitchen, removes a single-portion 

entree from the freezer, and zaps it in the microwave. (Many of these 

entrees have been helpfully designed to be safely "cooked" by an eight-

year-old.) After the sound of the beep each diner brings his microwave-

able dish to the dining room table, where he or she may or may not 

cross paths with another family member at the table for a few minutes. 

Families who eat this way are among the 47 percent of Americans who 

report to pollsters that they still sit down to a family meal every night. 

Several years ago, in a book called The Cultural Contradictions of Capital-ism, sociologist Daniel Bell called attention to the tendency of capital-

ism, in its single-minded pursuit of profit, to erode the various cultural 

underpinnings that steady a society but often impede the march of 

commercialization. The family dinner, and more generally a cultural 

consensus on the subject of eating, appears to be the latest such casu- 

> alty

of capitalism. These rules and rituals stood in the way of the food THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 3 03 

industry's need to sell a well-fed population more food through ingen-

ious new ways of processing, packaging, and marketing it. Whether a

stronger set of traditions would have stood up better to this relentless 

economic imperative is hard to say; today America's fast-food habits are 

increasingly gaining traction even in places like France. 

So we find ourselves as a species almost back where we started: anx-

ious omnivores struggling once again to figure out what it is wise to  

> eat.

Instead of relying on the accumulated wisdom of a cuisine, or even 

on the wisdom of our senses, we rely on expert opinion, advertising, 

government food pyramids, and diet books, and we place our faith in 

science to sort out for us what culture once did with rather more suc- 

> cess.

Such has been the genius of capitalism, to re-create something 

akin to a state of nature in the modern supermarket or fast-food outlet, 

throwing us back on a perplexing, nutritionally perilous landscape 

deeply shadowed again by the omnivore's dilemma. SEVENTEEN 

# THE ETHICS OF 

# EATING ANIMALS   

> 1.

# THE STEAKHOUSE DIALOGUES 

The first time I opened Peter Singer's Animal Liberation I was dining alone 

at the Palm, trying to enjoy a rib-eye steak cooked medium rare. If that 

sounds like a recipe for cognitive dissonance, if not indigestion, well, 

that was sort of the idea. It had been a long time since this particular 

omnivore had felt any dilemma about eating meat, but then I had never 

before involved myself so directly in the processes of turning animals 

into food: owning a steak-bound steer, working the killing cones in Joel Salatin's processing shed, and now preparing to hunt a wild ani-

mal. The steak dinner in question took place on the evening before steer 

number 534's slaughter, the one event in his life I was not allowed to 

witness or even learn anything about, save its likely date. This didn't ex-

actly surprise me: The meat industry understands that the more people 

## know about what happens on the kill floor, the less meat they're likely 

to eat. That's not because slaughter is necessarily inhumane, but because 

most of us would simply rather not be reminded of exactly what meat THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS*. 105  

> is

or what it takes to bring it to our plates. My steak dinner, eaten in the 

company of the world's leading philosopher of animal rights, repre-

sented my somewhat tortured attempt to mark the occasion, and to 

> try

# —a bit belatedly, I know —to see if I could defend what I had done 

already and what I was about to do. 

Eating meat has become morally problematic, at least for people 

## who take the trouble to think about it. Vegetarianism is more popular 

than it has ever been, and animal rights, the fringiest of fringe move-

ments until just a few years ago, is rapidly finding its way into the 

cultural mainstream. I'm not completely sure why this should be hap-

pening now, given that humans have been eating animals for tens of 

thousands of years without too much ethical heartburn. Certainly there 

have been dissenters over the years —Ovid, St. Francis, Tolstoy, and 

Gandhi come to mind. But the general consensus has always been that 

humans were indeed omnivores and, whatever spiritual or moral dilem-

mas the killing and eating of animals posed, our various cultural tradi-

tions (everything from the rituals governing slaughter to saying grace 

before the meal) resolved them for us well enough. For the most part 

our culture has been telling us for millennia that animals were both 

good to eat and good to think. 

In recent years medical researchers have raised questions about the 

good to eat part, while philosophers like Singer and organizations like 

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) have given us new 

reasons to doubt meat is good to think —that is, good for our souls or 

our moral self-regard. Hunting is in particularly bad odor these days, 

even among people who still eat meat; apparently it's the fact of killing that these people most object to (as if a steak could be gotten any other 

way) , or perhaps it's the taking pleasure in killing an animal that is the 

trouble. It may be that as a civilization we're groping toward a higher 

plane of consciousness. It may be that our moral enlightenment has 

advanced to the point where the practice of eating animals —like our 

former practices of keeping slaves or treating women as inferior 

beings —can now be seen for the barbarity it is, a relic of an ignorant 

past that very soon will fill us with shame. 3 6 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

That at least is the animal philosophers' wager. But it could also be 

that the cultural norms and rituals that used to allow people to eat meat 

without agonizing about it have broken down for other reasons. Per-

haps as the sway of tradition in our eating decisions weakens, habits we 

once took for granted are thrown up in the air, where they're more eas- 

> ily

buffeted by the force of a strong idea or the breeze of fashion. 

Whatever the cause, the effect is an unusual amount of cultural con-

fusion on the subject of animals. For at the same time many of us seem 

eager to extend the circle of our moral consideration to other species, 

in our factory farms we're inflicting more suffering on more animals 

than at any time in history. One by one science is dismantling our 

claims to uniqueness as a species, discovering that such things as cul- 

> ture,

tool making, language, and even possibly self-consciousness are 

not, as we used to think, the exclusive properties of Homo sapiens. And yet 

most of the animals we eat lead lives organized very much in the spirit 

of Descartes, who famously claimed that animals were mere machines, 

incapable of thought or feeling. There's a schizoid quality to our rela-

tionship with animals today in which sentiment and brutality exist side 

by side. Half the dogs in America will receive Christmas presents this  

> year,

yet few of us ever pause to consider the life of the pig —an animal  

> easily

as intelligent as a dog —that becomes the Christmas ham. 

# We tolerate this schizophrenia because the life of the pig has moved 

out of view; when's the last time you saw a pig in person? Meat comes from the grocery store, where it is cut and packaged to look as little like 

parts of animals as possible. (When was the last time you saw a butcher  

> at

work?) The disappearance of animals from our lives has opened a

space in which there's no reality check on the sentiment or the brutal-   

> ity; it is

a space in which the Peter Singers and the Frank Perdues of the 

world fare equally well. 

## A few years ago the English writer John Berger wrote an essay called 

## "Why Look at Animals?" in which he suggested that the loss of every-

day contact between ourselves and animals —and specifically the loss of 

eye contact —has left us deeply confused about the terms of our rela-

tionship to other species. That eye contact, always slightly uncanny, had THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 3 7

brought the vivid daily reminder that animals were both crucially like 

and unlike us; in their eyes we glimpsed something unmistakably fa-

miliar (pain, fear, courage) but also something irretrievably other (?!). 

## Upon this paradox people built a relationship in which they felt they 

could both honor and eat animals without looking away. But that ac-

commodation has pretty much broken down; nowadays it seems we ei-

ther look away or become vegetarians. For my own part, neither option 

seemed especially appetizing; certainly looking away was now com-

pletely off the table. Which might explain how it was I found myself at-

tempting to read Peter Singer in a steakhouse. 

This is not something I'd recommend if you're determined to con-

tinue eating meat. v4nimal Liberation, comprised of equal parts philosoph- 

> ical

argument and journalistic description, is one of those rare books 

that demands you either defend the way you live or change it. Because 

Singer is so skilled in argument, for many readers it is easier to change.   

> .Animal Liberation

has converted countless thousands to vegetarianism, and  

> it

didn't take me long to see why: within a few pages he had succeeded 

in throwing me and my meat eating, not to mention my hunting plans, 

on the defensive. 

Singer's argument is disarmingly simple and, provided you accept  

> its

premises, difficult to refute. Take the premise of equality among peo- 

> ple,

which most of us readily accept. Yet what do we really mean by it? 

After all, people are not, as a matter of fact, equal at all —some are 

smarter than others, handsomer, more gifted, whatever. "Equality is a

moral idea," Singer points out, "not an assertion of fact." The moral 

idea is that everyone's interests ought to receive equal consideration, 

regardless of "what they are like or what abilities they have." Fair 

enough; many philosophers have gone this far. But few have then taken 

the next logical step. "If possessing a higher degree of intelligence does 

not entitle one human to use another for his or her own ends, how can   

> it entitle

humans to exploit non-humans for the same purpose?" 

This is the nub of Singer's argument, and right away, here on page 3 08 THE OMNtVORE'S DILEMMA   

> six, I

began scribbling objections in the margin. But humans differ from an-     

> imals in morally significant ways.

Yes they do, Singer readily acknowledges, 

which is why we shouldn't treat pigs and children alike. Equal consid-

eration of interests is not the same as equal treatment, he points out; chil-

dren have an interest in being educated, pigs in rooting around in the  

> dirt.

But where their interests are the same, the principle of equality de-

mands they receive the same consideration. And the one all-important 

interest humans share with pigs, as with all sentient creatures, is an in- 

> terest

in avoiding pain. 

Here Singer quotes a famous passage from Jeremy Bentham, the 

eighteenth-century utilitarian philosopher. Bentham is writing in 1789,  

> after

the French had freed their black slaves and granted them funda-

mental rights, but before the British or Americans had acted. "The day 

## may come," Bentham wrote, "when the rest of the animal creation may 

acquire those rights." Bentham then asks what characteristics entitle 

any being to moral consideration. "Is it the faculty of reason, or perhaps 

the faculty of discourse?" Bentham asks. "But a full-grown horse or dog  

> is

beyond comparison a more rational, as well as a more conversational 

animal, than an infant." 

"The question is not Can they reason? Or Can they talk? But Can 

they suffer?" 

Bentham here is playing a powerful card philosophers call the "ar-

gument from marginal cases," or AMC for short. It goes like this: There 

are humans —infants, the severely retarded, the demented —whose 

mental function does not rise to the level of a chimpanzee. Even though 

these people cannot reciprocate our moral attentions (obey the golden 

rule, etc.) we nevertheless include them in the circle of our moral con-

sideration. So on what basis do we exclude the chimpanzee?      

> Because he's achimp, I

furiously scribble in the margin, and they're human  

> beings!

For Singer that's not good enough. To exclude the chimp from 

moral consideration simply because he's not human is no different 

than excluding the slave simply because he's not white. In the same way 

we'd call that exclusion "racist" the animal rightist contends it is 

"speciesist" to discriminate against the chimpanzee solely because he's THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 3 09 

not human. But the differences between blacks and whites are trivial compared to the   

> differences between

my son and the chimp. Singer asks us to imagine a hypothet- 

> ical

society that discriminates on the basis of something nontrivial 

# —

intelligence, say. If that scheme offends our sense of equality, as it surely 

does, then why is the fact that animals lack this or that human charac- 

> teristic

any more just as a basis for discrimination? Either we do not 

owe any justice to the severely retarded, he concludes, or we do owe it 

to animals with higher capabilities. 

This is where I put down my fork. If I believe in equality, and equal-  

> ity is

based on interests rather than characteristics, then either I have to 

take the steer's interest into account or accept that I'm a speciesist. 

For the time being, I decided, I'll plead guilty as charged. I finished 

## my steak. 

But Singer had planted a troubling notion, and in the days afterward  

> it

grew and grew, watered by the other animal rights thinkers I began 

reading: the philosophers Tom Regan and James Rachels, the legal the-

orist Steven M. Wise, writers like Joy Williams and Matthew Scully. I

didn't think I minded being called a speciesist, but could it be, as these 

writers suggest, we will someday come to regard speciesism as an evil 

comparable to that of racism? Is it possible that history will someday 

judge us as harshly as it judges the Germans who went about their lives 

in the shadow of Treblinka? The South African novelist J. M. Coetzee 

posed precisely that question in a lecture at Princeton not long ago; he 

answered it in the affirmative. If the animal rightists are right, then "a 

crime of stupendous proportions" (in Coetzee 's words) is going on all 

around us every day, just beneath our notice. 

The idea is almost impossible to seriously entertain, much less to ac-

cept, and in the months after the restaurant face-off between Singer and 

## my steak at the Palm I found myself marshalling whatever mental power  

> I

could command to try to refute it. Yet one by one Singer and his col-

leagues managed to trump nearly every objection I could muster. 

The meat eaters' first line of defense is obvious: Why should we treat an-3 1 THE OMNIVORF. ' S DILEMMA 

imak any more ethically than they treat one another? Ben Franklin actually tried 

this tack long before me. He tells in his autobiography of one day 

watching friends catch fish and wondering, "If you eat one another,  

> I

don't see why we may not eat you." He admits, however, that this 

rationale didn't occur to him until the fish were in the frying pan, be-

ginning to smell "admirably well." The great advantage of being a "rea-

sonable creature," Franklin remarks, is that you can find a reason for 

whatever you want to do. 

To the "they do it, too" argument the animal rightist has a simple, 

devastating reply: Do you really want to base your moral code on the 

natural order? Murder and rape are natural, too. Besides, we can choose: Humans don't need to kill other creatures in order to survive; 

carnivorous animals do. (Though if my cat Otis is any guide, animals 

sometimes kill for the sheer pleasure of it.) 

Which brings up another objection for the case of domestic ani-

mals: Wouldn't life in the wild be worse for these creatures? "Defenders of slavery 

imposed on black Africans often made a similar point," Singer retorts. 

"[T]he life of freedom is preferred." 

But most domesticated animals can't survive in the wild; in fact, 

without us eating them they wouldn't exist at all! Or as one nineteenth-century 

political philosopher put it, "The pig has a stronger interest than any-

one in the demand for bacon. If all the world were Jewish, there would 

be no pigs at all." Which as it turns out would be just fine by the ani-

mal rightist: If chickens no longer exist, they can no longer be 

wronged. 

Animals on factory farms have never known any other life. The rightist rightly 

points out that "animals feel a need to exercise, stretch their limbs or 

wings, groom themselves and turn around, whether or not they have 

ever lived in conditions that permit this." The proper measure of their 

suffering, in other words, is not their prior experiences but the un-

remitting daily frustration of their instincts. 

Okay, granted the suffering of animals at our hands is a legitimate 

problem, but the world is full of problems, and surely solving human problems must 

come first. Sounds high-minded . . . and yet all the animal people are ask-THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 311 

ing me to do is to stop eating meat. There's no reason I can't devote my- 

> self

to solving humankind's problems as a vegetarian. 

But doesn't the very fact that we could choose to forego meat for moral reasons point       

> to acrucial difference between animals

and humans, one that justifies our speciesism? The 

very indeterminacy of our appetites, and the ethical prospects that 

opens up, marks us as a fundamentally different kind of creature. We 

alone are (as Kant pointed out) the moral animal, the only one capable 

of even entertaining a notion of "rights." Hell, we invented the damned 

things —for us. So what's wrong with reserving moral consideration for 

those able to understand it? 

Well, right here is where you run smack into the AMC: the moral 

status of the retarded and the insane, the two-day-old infant and the ad-

vanced Alzheimer's patient. These people ("marginal cases," in the de-

testable language of modern moral philosophy) cannot participate in 

ethical decision making any more than a monkey can, yet we neverthe- 

> less

grant them rights. Yes, I respond, for the obvious reason: They're one     

> of us. Isn't it

natural to give special consideration to one's kind? 

Only if you're a speciesist, the animal rightist replies. Not so long 

ago many white people said the same thing about being white: We look 

out for our kind. Still, I would argue that there is a nonarbitrary reason 

## we protect the rights of human "marginal" cases: We're willing to make 

them part of our moral community because we all have been and will 

probably once again be marginal cases ourselves. What's more, these 

people have fathers and mothers, daughters and sons, which makes our 

interest in their welfare deeper than our interest in the welfare of even 

the most intelligent ape. 

## A utilitarian like Singer would agree that the feelings of relatives 

should count for something in our moral calculus, but the principle of 

equal consideration of interests demands that given the choice between 

performing a painful medical experiment on a severely retarded or-

phaned child and a normal ape, we must sacrifice the child. Why? Be-

cause the ape has a greater capacity for pain. 

Here in a nutshell is the practical problem with the philosopher's 

argument from marginal cases: It can be used to help the animals, but J 1 2 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA   

> just as

often it ends up hurting the marginal cases. Giving up our 

speciesism can bring us to an ethical cliff from which we may not be 

prepared to jump, even when logic is pushing us to the edge. 

## And yet this isn't the moral choice I'm being asked to make here.    

> (Too bad! It

would be so much easier.) In everyday life the choice is not 

between the baby and the chimp but between the pig and the tofu. 

Even if we reject the hard utilitarianism of a Peter Singer, there remains 

the question of whether we owe animals that can feel pain any moral 

consideration, and this seems impossible to deny. And if we owe them 

moral consideration, then how do we justify killing and eating them? 

This is why meat eating is the most difficult animal rights case. In 

the case of laboratory testing of animals, all but the most radical animal 

people are willing to balance the human benefit against the cost to the 

animals. That's because the unique qualities of human consciousness 

carry weight in the utilitarian calculus of pleasure and pain: Human 

pain counts for more than that of a mouse, since our pain is amplified 

by emotions like dread; similarly, our deaths are worse than an animal's 

because we understand what death is in a way that they don't. So the ar-

gument around animal testing is in the details: Is that particular animal 

experiment really necessary to save human lives? (Very often it's not.) 

But if humans no longer need to eat meat to survive, then what exactly 

are we putting on the human side of the scale to outweigh the interests 

of the animal?  

> I

suspect this is finally why the animal people managed to throw me 

on the defensive. It's one thing to choose between the chimp and the 

retarded child, or to accept the sacrifice of all those pigs surgeons prac-

ticed on to develop heart bypass surgery. But what happens when the 

choice is, as Singer writes, between "a lifetime of suffering for a non-

## human animal and the gastronomic preferences of a human being?" 

You look away —or you stop eating animals. And if you don't want to 

do either? I guess you have to try to determine if the animals you're eat-

ing have really endured a lifetime of suffering. 

According to Peter Singer I can't hope to answer that question ob-THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 3 13   

> jectively as

long as I'm still eating meat. "We have a strong interest in 

convincing ourselves that our concern for other animals does not re-

quire us to stop eating them." I can sort of see his point: I mean, why 

am I working so hard to justify a dinner menu? "No one in the habit of 

eating an animal can be completely without bias in judging whether 

the conditions in which that animal is reared cause suffering." In other 

words, I'm going to have to stop eating meat before I can in good con-

science decide if I can continue eating meat, much less go hunting for 

meat. This struck me as a challenge I had no choice but to accept. So on 

a September Sunday, after dining on a delicious barbecued tenderloin 

of pork, I became a reluctant and, I fervently hoped, temporary vege-

> tarian.

2. THE VEGETARIAN'S DILEMMA 

Like any self-respecting vegetarian (and we are nothing if not self-

respecting) I will now burden you with my obligatory compromises 

and ethical distinctions. I'm not a vegan (I will eat eggs and dairy), be-

cause eggs and milk can be coaxed from animals without hurting or 

killing them —or so at least I thought. I'm also willing to eat animals 

without faces, such as mollusks, on the theory that they're not suffi-

ciently sentient to suffer. No, this isn't "racist" of me: Many scientists 

and animal rights philosophers (Peter Singer included) draw the line of 

sentience at a point just north of scallop. No one knows for absolute 

certain if this is right, but I'm joining many dedicated animal people in 

giving myself the benefit of the doubt. 

## A month or so into the experiment I'm still feeling reluctant about   

> it. I

find making a satisfying vegetarian dinner takes a lot more thought 

and work (chopping work in particular) ; eating meat is simply more 

convenient. It's also more sociable, at least in a society where vegetari-

ans still represent a relatively tiny minority. (Time magazine recently es-

timated there are 1 million of us in America.) What troubles me most 314* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

about my vegetarianism is the subtle way it alienates me from other 

people and, odd as this might sound, from a whole dimension of hu-

## man experience. 

Other people now have to accommodate me, and I find this uncom-

fortable: My new dietary restrictions throw a big wrench into the basic 

host-guest relationship. As a guest, if I neglect to tell my host in advance 

that I don't eat meat, she feels bad, and if I do tell her, she'll make some-

thing special for me, in which case I'll feel bad. On this matter I'm in-

clined to agree with the French, who gaze upon any personal dietary 

prohibition as bad manners. 

Even if the vegetarian is a more highly evolved human being, it 

seems to me he has lost something along the way, something I'm not 

prepared to dismiss as trivial. Healthy and virtuous as I may feel these 

days, I also feel alienated from traditions I value: cultural traditions like 

the Thanksgiving turkey, or even franks at the ballpark, and family tra-

ditions like my mother's beef brisket at Passover. These ritual meals link 

us to our history along multiple lines —family, religion, landscape, na-

tion, and, if you want to go back much further, biology. For although 

humans no longer need meat in order to survive (now that we can get 

our B- 1 2 from fermented foods or supplements) , we have been meat 

eaters for most of our time on earth. This fact of evolutionary history is 

reflected in the design of our teeth, the structure of our digestion, and, 

quite possibly, in the way my mouth still waters at the sight of a steak 

cooked medium rare. Meat eating helped make us what we are in a

physical as well as a social sense. Under the pressure of the hunt, an-

thropologists tell us, the human brain grew in size and complexity, and 

around the hearth where the spoils of the hunt were cooked and then 

apportioned, human culture first flourished. 

This isn't to say we can't or shouldn't transcend our inheritance, 

only that it is our inheritance; whatever else may be gained by giving up 

meat, this much at least is lost. The notion of granting rights to animals 

## may lift us up from the brutal, amoral world of eater and eaten —of 

predation —but along the way it will entail the sacrifice, or sublima-THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 3 1 5

tion, of part of our identity —of our own animality. (This is one of the 

odder ironies of animal rights: It asks us to acknowledge all we share 

with animals, and then to act toward them in a most unanimalistic 

way.) Not that the sacrifice of our animality is necessarily regrettable; 

no one regrets our giving up raping and pillaging, also part of our in-

heritance. But we should at least acknowledge that the human desire to 

eat meat is not, as the animal rightists would have it, a trivial matter, a

mere gastronomic preference. By the same token we might call sex 

# —

also now technically unnecessary for reproduction —a mere recre-

ational preference. Rather, our meat eating is something very deep 

indeed. 

4. ANIMAL SUFFERING 

Whether our interest in eating animals outweighs their interest in not 

being eaten (assuming for a moment that is their interest) ultimately 

turns on the vexed question of animal suffering. Vexed, because in a

certain sense it is impossible to know what goes on in the mind of a

cow or pig or ape. Of course, you could say the same about other hu-

mans too, but since all humans are wired in more or less the same way, 

## we have good reason to assume other people's experience of pain  

> feels

## much like our own. Can we say the same thing about animals? 

Yes —and no.  

> I

have yet to find any serious writer on the subject who still sub-

scribes to Descartes's belief that animals cannot feel pain because they 

lack a soul. The general consensus among both scientists and philoso-

phers is that when it comes to pain, the higher animals are wired much  

> like

## we are for the same evolutionary reasons, so we would do well to take the writhing of the kicked dog at face value. 

That animals feel pain does not seem in doubt. The animal people 

claim, however, that there are neo-Cartesian scientists and thinkers about 

## who argue that animals are incapable of suffering because they lack lan-316 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

guage.Yet if you take the trouble to actually read the writers in question 

(Daniel Dennett and Stephen Budiansky are two of the ones often  

> cited),

you quickly realize they're being unfairly caricatured. 

The offending argument, which does not seem unreasonable to me,   

> is that

## human pain differs from animal pain by an order of magnitude. 

This qualitative difference is largely the result of our possession of lan-

guage and, by virtue of language, our ability to have thoughts about 

thoughts and to imagine what is not. The philosopher Daniel Dennett 

suggests we can draw a distinction between pain, which a great many 

animals obviously experience, and suffering, which depends on a de-

gree of self-consciousness only a handful of animals appear to com-

mand. Suffering in this view is not just lots of pain but pain amplified 

by distinctly human emotions such as regret, self-pity, shame, humilia- 

> tion,

and dread. 

Consider castration, an experience endured by most of the male 

## mammals we eat. No one would deny the procedure is painful to ani-

mals, yet very shortly afterward the animals appear fully recovered. 

(Some rhesus monkeys competing for mates will bite off a rival's testi- 

> cle;

the very next day the victim may be observed mating, seemingly  

> little

the worse for wear.) Surely the suffering of a man able to compre-

hend the full implications of castration, to anticipate the event and con-

template its aftermath, represents an agony of a different order. 

By the same token, however, language and all that comes with it can 

also make some kinds of pain more bearable. A trip to the dentist would 

be an agony for an ape that couldn't be made to understand the purpose 

and duration of the procedure. 

As humans contemplating the suffering or pain of animals we do 

need to guard against projecting onto them what the same experience 

would feel like to us. Watching a steer force-marched up the ramp to 

the kill-floor door, as I have done, I have to forcibly remind myself this  

> is

not Sean Penn in Dead Man Walking, that the scene is playing very dif-

ferently in a bovine brain, from which the concept of nonexistence is 

thankfully absent. The same is true of the deer staring down the barrel 

of the hunter's rifle. "If we fail to find suffering in the [animal] lives we THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 3 1 7

can see," Daniel Dennett writes in Kinds of Minds, "we can rest assured 

there is no invisible suffering somewhere in their brains. If we find suf-

fering, we will recognize it without difficulty." 

Which brings us —reluctantly, necessarily —to the American factory 

farm, the place where all such distinctions promptly turn to dust. It's 

not easy to draw lines between pain and suffering in a modern egg or 

hog operation. These are places where the subtleties of moral philoso-

phy and animal cognition mean less than nothing, indeed where every-

thing we've learned about animals at least since Darwin has been 

simply . . . put aside. To visit a modern Concentrated Animal Feeding 

Operation (CAFO) is to enter a world that for all its technological so-

phistication is still designed on seventeenth-century Cartesian principles: 

Animals are treated as machines —"production units" —incapable of 

feeling pain. Since no thinking person can possibly believe this any-

more, industrial animal agriculture depends on a suspension of disbe- 

> lief

on the part of the people who operate it and a willingness to avert 

one's eyes on the part of everyone else. 

Egg operations are the worst, from everything I've read; I haven't 

managed to actually get into one of these places since journalists are 

unwelcome there. Beef cattle in America at least still live outdoors, al-

beit standing ankle-deep in their own waste eating a diet that makes 

them sick. And broiler chickens, although they get their beaks snipped 

off with a hot knife to keep them from cannibalizing one another un-

der the stress of their confinement, at least don't spend their lives in 

cages too small to ever stretch a wing. 

That fate is reserved for the American laying hen, who spends her 

brief span of days piled together with a half-dozen other hens in a wire 

cage the floor of which four pages of this book could carpet wall to 

wall. Every natural instinct of this hen is thwarted, leading to a range of 

behavioral "vices" that can include cannibalizing her cage mates and 

rubbing her breast against the wire mesh until it is completely bald and 

bleeding. (This is the chief reason broilers get a pass on caged life; to 

scar so much high-value breast meat would be bad business.) Pain? Suf-

fering? Madness? The operative suspension of disbelief depends on the j;<S*TH£ OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

acceptance of more neutral descriptors, such as "vices" and "stereo-

types" and "stress." But whatever you want to call what goes on in 

those cages, the 1 percent or so of hens that can't endure it and sim-

ply die is built into the cost of production. And when the output of the 

survivors begins to ebb, the hens will be "force-molted" —starved of 

food and water and light for several days in order to stimulate a final 

bout of egg laying before their life's work is done.  

> I

know, simply reciting these facts, most of which are drawn from 

poultry trade magazines, makes me sound like one of the animal peo- 

> ple,

doesn't it? I don't mean to (remember, I got into this vegetarian 

deal assuming I could go on eating eggs) , but this is what can happen 

to you when . . . you look. And what you see when you look is the 

cruelty —and the blindness to cruelty —required to produce eggs that 

can be sold for seventy-nine cents a dozen. 

## A tension has always existed between the capitalist imperative to 

maximize efficiency at any cost and the moral imperatives of culture, 

which historically have served as a counterweight to the moral blind-

ness of the market. This is another example of the cultural contradic-

tions of capitalism —the tendency over time for the economic impulse 

to erode the moral underpinnings of society. Mercy toward the animals 

in our care is one such casualty. 

The industrial animal factory offers a nightmarish glimpse of what 

capitalism is capable of in the absence of any moral or regulatory con- 

> straint

whatsoever. (It is no accident that the nonunion workers in these 

factories receive little more consideration than the animals in their 

care.) Here in these wretched places life itself is redefined —as "protein 

production" —and with it "suffering." That venerable word becomes  

> "stress,"

an economic problem in search of a cost-effective solution 

such as clipping the beaks of chickens or docking the tails of pigs or, in 

the industry's latest initiative, simply engineering the "stress gene" out 

of pigs and chickens. It all sounds very much like our worst nightmares 

of confinement and torture, and it is that, but it is also real life for the 

billions of animals unlucky enough to have been born beneath those THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 3 19 

grim sheet-metal roofs into the brief, pitiless life of a production unit 

in the days before the suffering gene was found. 

5. ANIMAL HAPPINESS 

Vegetarianism doesn't seem an unreasonable response to the existence 

of such an evil. Who would want to be complicit in the misery of these 

animals by eating them? You want to throw something against the walls 

of those infernal sheds, whether it's the Bible, with its call for mercy to 

the animals we keep, or a new constitutional right, or a whole platoon 

of animal people in chicken suits bent on breaking in and liberating the 

inmates. In the shadow of these factory farms Coetzee's notion of a

"stupendous crime" doesn't seem far-fetched at all. 

And yet there are other images of animals on other kinds of farms 

that contradict the nightmare ones. I'm thinking of the hens I saw at 

Polyface Farm, fanning out over the cow pasture on a June morning, 

pecking at the cowpats and the grass, gratifying their every chicken in- 

> stinct.

Or the image of pig happiness I witnessed in that cattle barn in 

March, watching the hogs, all upturned pink hams and corkscrew tails, 

nosing their way through that deep cake of compost in search of alco-

holic morsels of corn. It is true that farms like this are but a speck on 

the monolith of modern animal agriculture, yet their very existence, 

and the possibility that implies, throws the whole argument for animal 

rights into a different light. 

To many animal people even Polyface Farm is a "death camp" —

a

way station for doomed creatures awaiting their date with the execu- 

> tioner.

But to look at the lives of these animals is to see this holocaust 

analogy for the sentimental conceit it really is. In the same way we can 

probably recognize animal suffering when we see it, animal happiness  

> is

unmistakable, too, and during my week on the farm I saw it in abun-

dance. 

For any animal, happiness seems to consist in the opportunity to ex-320* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

press its creaturely character —its essential pigness or wolfness or 

chickenness. Aristotle talked about each creature's "characteristic form 

of life." At least for the domestic animal (the wild animal is a different 

case) the good life, if we can call it that, simply doesn't exist, cannot be 

achieved, apart from humans —apart from our farms and therefore 

from our meat eating. This, it seems to me, is where the animal right- 

> ists

betray a deep ignorance about the workings of nature. To think of 

domestication as a form of slavery or even exploitation is to miscon-

strue that whole relationship —to project a human idea of power onto 

what is in fact an example of mutualism or symbiosis between species. 

Domestication is an evolutionary, rather than a political, develop-

ment. It is certainly not a regime humans somehow imposed on ani-

mals some ten thousand years ago. Rather, domestication took place 

## when a handful of especially opportunistic species discovered, through 

Darwinian trial and error, that they were more likely to survive and 

prosper in an alliance with humans than on their own. Humans pro-

vided the animals with food and protection in exchange for which the 

animals provided the humans their milk, eggs, and —yes —their flesh. 

Both parties were transformed by the new relationship: The animals 

grew tame and lost their ability to fend for themselves in the wild (nat-

ural selection tends to dispense with unneeded traits) and the humans 

traded their hunter-gatherer ways for the settled lives of agriculturists. 

(Humans changed biologically, too, evolving such new traits as the  

> ability

to digest lactose as adults.) 

From the animals' point of view the bargain with humanity turned 

out to be a tremendous success, at least until our own time. Cows, pigs, 

dogs, cats, and chickens have thrived, while their wild ancestors have 

languished. (There are ten thousand wolves left in North America and  

> fifty

million dogs.) Nor does the loss of autonomy seem to trouble these 

creatures. It is wrong, the rightists say, to treat animals as means rather 

than ends, yet the happiness of a working animal like the dog consists 

precisely in serving as a means to human ends. Liberation is the last 

thing such a creature wants. (Which might explain the contempt many 

animal people display toward domesticated species.) To say of one of THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 321 

Joel Salatin's caged broilers that "the life of freedom is to be preferred" 

betrays an ignorance about chicken preferences that, around his place at  

> least,

revolve around not getting one's head bitten off by a weasel.   

> It is

probably safe to say, however, that chicken preferences do not in-

clude living one's entire life six to a battery cage indoors. The crucial 

moral difference between a CAFO and a good farm is that the CAFO sys-

tematically deprives the animals in it of their "characteristic form of life." 

But haven't Salatin's chickens simply traded one predator for 

another —weasels for humans? True enough, and for the chickens this  

> is

probably not a bad deal, either. It is precisely the evolutionary reason 

the species entered into its relationship with humans in the first place.  

> For,

brief as it is, the life expectancy of a farm animal would be consid-

erably briefer in the world beyond the pasture fence or chicken coop.  

> (Pigs,

which often can survive in the wild, are the exception that proves 

the rule.) It's brutal out there. A bear will eat a lactating ewe alive, start-

ing with her udders. As a rule, animals in the wild don't get good 

deaths surrounded by their loved ones. 

Which brings us to the case of animals in the wild. The very exis-

tence of predation in nature, of animals eating animals, is the cause of 

## much anguished hand-wringing in the animal rights literature. "It 

must be admitted," Peter Singer writes, "that the existence of carnivo-

rous animals does pose one problem for the ethics of Animal Libera- 

> tion,

and that is whether we should do anything about it." (Talk about 

the need for peacekeeping forces!) Some animal people train their dogs 

and cats to become vegetarians. (Note: The cats will require nutritional 

supplements to survive.) Matthew Scully, in Dominion, a Christian-

conservative treatment of animal rights, calls predation "the intrinsic  

> evil

in nature's design . . . among the hardest of all things to fathom."  

> Really?

Elsewhere, acknowledging the gratuitous suffering inflicted by 

certain predators (like cats), Scully condemns "the level of moral degra-

dation of which [animals] are capable." Moral degradation? 

## A deep current of Puritanism runs through the writings of the ani-

mal philosophers, an abiding discomfort not just with our animality, 

but with the animals' animality, too. They would like nothing better 3 22 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

than to airlift us out from nature's "intrinsic evil" —and then take the 

animals with us. You begin to wonder if their quarrel isn't really with 

nature itself. 

But however it may appear to those of us living at such a remove 

from the natural world, predation is not a matter of morality or of pol-  

> itics; it,

too, is a matter of symbiosis. Brutal as the wolf may be to the 

individual deer, the herd depends on him for its well-being. Without 

predators to cull the herd deer overrun their habitat and starve —all suf- 

> fer,

and not only the deer but the plants they browse and every other 

species that depends on those plants. In a sense, the "good life" for 

deer, and even their creaturely character, which has been forged in the 

crucible of predation, depends on the existence of the wolf. In a simi- 

> lar

way chickens depend for their well-being on the existence of their 

## human predators. Not the individual chicken, perhaps, but Chicken 

# —

the species. The surest way to achieve the extinction of the species 

would be to grant chickens a right to life. 

Long before human predation was domesticated (along with the se- 

> lect

group of animals we keep) it operated on another set of species in 

the wild. The fact of human hunting is, from the point of view of a

great many creatures in a great many habitats, simply a fact of nature. 

# We are to them as wolves. And in the same way the deer evolved a spe-  

> cific set

of characteristics under the pressure of hunting by wolves  

> (fleetness,

sensory acuity, coloration, etc.), so have the animals that hu-

mans have hunted. Human hunting, for example, literally helped form 

the American Plains bison, which the fossil record suggests changed 

both physically and behaviorally after the arrival of the Indians. Before 

then the bison did not live in big herds and had much larger, more out-

stretched horns. For an animal living in a wide-open environment like 

the Great Plains and facing a sophisticated predator armed with spears, 

mobbing in big groups is the best defense, since it affords the vigilance 

of many eyes; yet big, outstretched horns pose a problem for creatures 

living in such close proximity. It was human hunting that selected for 

herd behavior and the new upright arrangement of bison horns, which 

appears in the fossil record not long after the arrival of human hunters. THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 3 2 3

"While a symbol of the 'wild west,'" Tim Flannery writes in The Eternal  

> Frontier,

an ecological history of North America, "the bison is a human  

> artifact,

for it was shaped by Indians." 

Until the advent of the rifle and a global market in bison hides, 

horns, and tongues, Indian hunters and bison lived in a symbiotic rela-

tionship, the bison feeding and clothing the hunters while the hunters, 

by culling the herds and forcing them to move frequently, helped keep 

the grasslands in good health. Predation is deeply woven into the fabric 

of nature, and that fabric would quickly unravel if it somehow ended,  

> if

humans somehow managed "to do something about it." From the 

point of view of the individual prey animal predation is a horror, but 

from the point of view of the group —and of its gene pool —it is indis-

pensable. So whose point of view shall we favor? That of the individual 

bison or Bison? The pig or Pig? Much depends on how you choose to 

answer that question. 

Ancient man regarded animals much more as a modern ecologist 

would than an animal philosopher —as a species, that is, rather than a

collection of individuals. In the ancient view "they were mortal and im-

mortal," John Berger writes in "Looking at Animals." "An animal's 

blood flowed like human blood, but its species was undying and each 

lion was Lion, each ox was Ox." Which, when you think about it, is 

probably pretty much how any species in nature regards another. 

Until now. For the animal rightist concerns himself only with indi-

viduals. Tom Regan, the author of The Case for Aiimal Rights, bluntly asserts 

that because "species are not individuals . . . the rights view does not 

recognize the moral rights of species to anything, including survival." 

Singer concurs, insisting that only sentient individuals can have inter- 

> ests.

But surely a species has interests —in its survival, say, or the health 

of its habitat —just as a nation or a community or a corporation can. 

Animal rights' exclusive concern with the individual might make sense 

given its roots in a culture of liberal individualism, but how much 

sense does it make in nature? Is the individual animal the proper focus 

of our moral concern when we are trying to save an endangered species 

or restore a habitat? 3 2 4 •> THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

As I write, a team of sharpshooters in the employ of the National 

Park Service and the Nature Conservancy is at work killing thousands of  

> feral

pigs on Santa Cruz Island, eighteen miles off the coast of Southern 

California. The slaughter is part of an ambitious plan to restore the is-

land's habitat and save the island fox, an endangered species found on 

a handful of Southern California islands and nowhere else. To save the 

fox the Park Service and Nature Conservancy must first undo a compli-

cated chain of ecological changes wrought by humans beginning more 

than a century ago. 

That's when the pigs first arrived on Santa Cruz, imported by ranch- 

> ers.

Though pig farming ended on the island in the 1980s, by then 

enough pigs had escaped to establish a wild population that has done 

grave damage to the island ecosystem. The rooting of the pigs disturbs 

the soil, creating ideal conditions for the establishment of invasive ex-

otic species like fennel, now rampant. The pigs also eat so many acorns 

that the island's native oaks have trouble reproducing. But the most se-

rious damage the pigs have done has been to feed golden eagles with 

their piglets, sparking an explosion in the eagle population. That's when 

the island fox's troubles began. 

Golden eagles are not native to the island; they've taken over a niche 

formerly occupied by the bald eagle, which lost its place on the island   

> after a

chemical maker dumped large quantities of DDT into the sur-

rounding waters in the 1 950s and 1 960s. (Settlement money from the 

company is underwriting the habitat restoration project.) The DDT 

damaged the eggshells of the bald eagles, crashing their population and 

creating an opening for the more aggressive golden eagles. Unlike bald  

> eagles,

which dine mostly on seafood, golden eagles feed on small ter- 

> restrial

mammals. But while the golden eagles have a taste for pig, 

piglets are harder to catch than the cubs of island fox, which the eagles 

have now hunted to the edge of extinction. To save the fox, the plan is 

to kill every last pig, trap and remove the golden eagles, and then rein-

troduce the bald eagles —essentially, rebuild the island's food chain 

from the ground up. 

The wholesale slaughter of thousands of pigs has predictably drawn THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 325 

the protests of animal welfare and rights groups. The Channel Islands 

Animal Protection Association has been flying banners from small 

planes imploring the public to "Save the Pigs" and friends of the animal 

have sued to stop the hunt. A spokesman for the Humane Society of the 

United States claimed in an op-ed article that "wounded pigs and or-

phaned piglets will be chased with dogs and finished off with knives 

and bludgeons." Note the rhetorical shift in focus from the Pig, which  

> is

## how the Park Service ecolo gists would have us see the matter, to im-

ages of individual pigs, wounded and orphaned, being hunted down 

by dogs and men wielding bludgeons. Same story, viewed through two 

entirely different lenses. 

The fight over the pigs at Santa Cruz Island suggests at the very least 

that a human morality based on individual rights makes for an awk-

ward fit when applied to the natural world. This should come as no sur- 

> prise:

Morality is an artifact of human culture devised to help humans 

negotiate human social relations. It's very good for that. But just as we 

recognize that nature doesn't provide a very good guide for human so- 

> cial

conduct, isn't it anthropocentric of us to assume that our moral 

system offers an adequate guide for what should happen in nature? Is 

the individual the crucial moral entity in nature as we've decided it 

should be in human society? We simply may require a different set of 

ethics to guide our dealings with the natural world, one as well suited  

> to

the particular needs of plants and animals and habitats (where sen-

tience counts for little) as rights seem to suit us and serve our purposes 

> today.

6. THE VEGAN UTOPIA 

To contemplate such questions from the vantage of a farm, or even a

garden, is to appreciate just how parochial, and urban, an ideology an-

imal rights really is. It could only thrive in a world where people have  

> lost

contact with the natural world, where animals no longer pose any 

threat to us (a fairly recent development), and our mastery of nature 3 26 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

seems unchallenged. "In our normal life," Singer writes, "there is no 

serious clash of interests between human and nonhuman animals." 

Such a statement assumes a decidedly citified version of "normal life," 

certainly one no farmer —indeed, no gardener —would recognize. 

The farmer would point out to the vegan that even she has a "seri-

ous clash of interests" with other animals. The grain that the vegan eats  

> is

harvested with a combine that shreds field mice, while the farmer's 

tractor wheel crushes woodchucks in their burrows and his pesticides 

drop songbirds from the sky; after harvest whatever animals that would 

eat our crops we exterminate. Killing animals is probably unavoidable 

no matter what we choose to eat. If America was suddenly to adopt a 

> strictly

vegetarian diet, it isn't at all clear that the total number of ani-

mals killed each year would necessarily decline, since to feed everyone 

animal pasture and rangeland would have to give way to more inten-

sively cultivated row crops. If our goal is to kill as few animals as possi-

ble people should probably try to eat the largest possible animal that 

can live on the least cultivated land: grass-finished steaks for everyone. 

The vegan Utopia would also condemn people in many parts of the 

country to importing all their food from distant places. In New En-

gland, for example, the hilliness of the land and rockiness of the soil 

has dictated an agriculture based on grass and animals since the time of 

the Puritans. Indeed, the New England landscape, with its rolling patch-

work of forest and fields outlined by fieldstone walls, is in some sense 

a creation of the domestic animals that have lived there (and so in turn 

of their eaters) . The world is full of places where the best, if not the 

only, way to obtain food from the land is by grazing (and hunting) an-

imals on it —especially ruminants, which alone can transform grass 

into protein. 

To give up eating animals is to give up on these places as human 

habitat, unless of course we are willing to make complete our depen-

dence on a highly industrialized national food chain. That food chain 

would be in turn even more dependent than it already is on fossil fuels 

and chemical fertilizer, since food would need to travel even farther and 

> fertility

# —in the form of manures —would be in short supply. Indeed, it THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 327  

> is

doubtful you can build a genuinely sustainable agriculture without 

animals to cycle nutrients and support local food production. If our 

concern is for the health of nature —rather than, say, the internal con-

sistency of our moral code or the condition of our souls —then eating 

animals may sometimes be the most ethical thing to do. 

Are these good enough reasons to give up my vegetarianism? Can I in 

good conscience eat a happy and sustainably raised chicken? I'm mind- 

> ful

of Ben Franklin's definition of a reasonable creature as one who can 

come up with reasons for whatever he wants to do. So I decided I

would track down Peter Singer and ask him what he thought. I hatched  

> a

scheme to drive him down from Princeton to meet Joel Salatin and 

his animals, but Singer was out of the country, so I had to settle for an 

exchange of e-mail. I asked him about the implications for his position 

of the "good farm" —one where animals got to live according to their 

natures and to all appearances do not suffer.  

> "I

agree with you that it is better for these animals to have lived and 

died than not to have lived at all . . . ," Singer wrote back. Since the util-  

> itarian is

concerned exclusively with the sum of happiness and suffer- 

> ing,

and the slaughter of an animal with no comprehension of death 

need not entail suffering, the Good Farm adds to the total of animal 

happiness, provided you replace the slaughtered animal with a new 

one. However, this line of thinking does not obviate the wrongness of  

> killing

an animal that "has a sense of its own existence over time, and 

can have preferences about its own future." In other words, it might be 

okay to eat the chicken or the cow, but perhaps not the (more intelli-

gent) pig. Yet, he continued, "I would not be sufficiently confident of 

## my argument to condemn someone who purchased meat from one of 

these farms." 

Singer went on to express doubts that such farms could be practical 

on a large scale, since the pressures of the marketplace will lead their 

owners to cut costs and corners at the expense of the animals. Also, since 

humanely raised food is more expensive, only the well-to-do can afford 3 2 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

morally defensible animal protein. These are important considerations, 

but they don't alter what seems to me the essential concession: What's 

wrong with eating animals is the practice, not the principle. 

What this suggests to me is that people who care about animals 

should be working to ensure that the ones they eat don't suffer, and that 

their deaths are swift and painless —for animal welfare, in others 

words, rather than rights. In fact, the "happy life and merciful death" 

line is how Jeremy Bentham justified his own meat eating. Yes, the 

philosophical father of animal rights was himself a carnivore. In a pas-

sage seldom quoted by animal rightists Bentham defended meat eating 

on the grounds that "we are the better for it, and they are never the 

worse. . . . The death they suffer in our hands commonly is, and always 

## may be, a speedier and, by that means a less painful one, than that 

which would await them in the inevitable course of nature." 

# My guess is that Bentham never looked too closely at what actually 

happens in a slaughterhouse, but the argument suggests that in theory   

> at least

a utilitarian can justify eating humanely raised and slaughtered 

animals. Eating a wild animal that had been cleanly shot presumably 

would fall under the same dispensation. Singer himself suggests as 

## much in minimal Liberation, when he asks, "Why ... is the hunter who 

shoots a deer for venison subject to more criticism than the person 

## who buys a ham at the supermarket? Overall it is probably the inten-

sively reared pig who has suffered more." 

All of which was making me feel pretty good about eating meat 

again and going hunting —until I recalled that these utilitarians can also 

justify killing retarded orphans. Killing just isn't the problem for them 

that it is for other people, including me. 

7. A CLEAN KILL 

The day after my steak-and-Singer dinner at the Palm I found myself on 

a plane flying from Atlanta to Denver. A couple of hours into the flight 

the pilot, who hadn't uttered word one until now, came on the public THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS * 329 

address system to announce, apropos of nothing, that we were passing 

over Liberal, Kansas. This was the first, last, and only landmark on our  

> flight

path that the pilot deigned to mention, which seemed very odd, 

given its obscurity to everyone on the plane but me. For Liberal, 

Kansas, happens to be the town where my steer, very possibly that very  

> day,

was being slaughtered. I'm not a superstitious person, but this 

struck me as a most eerie coincidence. I could only wonder what was 

going on just then, thirty thousand feet below me, on the kill floor of 

the National Beef Plant, where steer number 534 had his date with the 

stunner.  

> I

could only wonder because the company had refused to let me see. 

## When I'd visited the plant earlier that spring I was shown everything but 

the kill floor. I watched steers being unloaded from trailers into corrals 

and then led up a ramp and through a blue door. What happened on the 

other side of the blue door I had to reconstruct from the accounts of 

others who had been allowed to go there. I was fortunate to have the ac-

count of Temple Grandin, the animal-handling expert, who had de-

signed the ramp and killing machinery at the National Beef Plant, and 

## who audits the slaughter there for McDonald's. Stories about cattle 

"waking up" after stunning only to be skinned alive —stories docu-

mented by animal rights groups —had prompted the company to hire 

Grandin to audit its suppliers. Grandin told me that in cattle slaughter, 

"there is the pre-McDonald's era and the post-McDonald's era —it's 

night and day." We can only imagine what night must have been like. 

Here's how Grandin described what steer 534 experienced after 

passing through the blue door: 

"The animal goes into the chute single file. The sides are high 

enough so all he sees is the butt of the animal in front of him. As he 

walks through the chute, he passes over a metal bar, with his feet on ei-

ther side. While he's straddling the bar, the ramp begins to decline at 

a twenty-degree angle, and before he knows it, his feet are off the 

ground, and he's being carried along on a conveyor belt. We put in a 

> false

floor so he can't look down and see he's off the ground. That 

would panic him." 3 3 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> I

had been wondering what 534 would be feeling as he neared his 

end. Would he have any inkling —a scent of blood, a sound of terror 

from up the line —that this was no ordinary day? Would he, in other 

words, suffer? Grandin anticipated my question. 

"Does the animal know it's going to get slaughtered? I used to won-

der that. So I watched them going into the squeeze chutes on the feed- 

> lot,

getting their shots, and going up the ramp at a slaughter plant. No 

difference. If they knew they were going to die you'd see much more 

agitated behavior. 

"Anyway, the conveyor is moving along at roughly the speed of a

moving sidewalk. On a catwalk above stands the stunner. The stunner 

has a pneumatic-powered 'gun' that fires a steel bolt about seven inches 

long and the diameter of a fat pencil. He leans over and puts it smack in 

the middle of the forehead. When it's done correctly it will kill the an-

imal on the first shot. 

"After the animal is shot while he's riding along a worker wraps 

one of his feet and hooks it to an overhead trolley. Hanging upside 

## down by one leg, he's carried by the trolley into the bleeding area, 

where the bleeder cuts his throat. Animal rights people say they're cut-

ting live animals, but that's because there's a lot of reflex kicking. What  

> I

look for is, is the head dead? It should be flopping like a rag, with the 

tongue hanging out. He'd better not be trying to hold it up —then 

you've got a live one on the rail. Just in case, they have another stunner 

in the bleed area."  

> I

found Temple Grandin 's account both reassuring and troubling. 

Reassuring, because the system sounds humane, and yet I realize I'm 

relying on the account of its designer. Troubling, because I can't help 

dwelling on all those times "you've got a live one on the rail." Mistakes 

are inevitable on an assembly line that is slaughtering four hundred 

head of cattle every hour. (McDonald's tolerates a 5 percent "error  

> rate.")

So is it possible to slaughter animals on an industrial scale with-

out causing them to suffer? In the end each of us has to decide for him- 

> self

whether eating animals that have died in this manner is okay. For 

# my part, I can't be sure, because I haven't been able to see for myself. THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 3 3 1

This, I realize, is why Joel Salatin's open-air abattoir is such a

morally powerful idea. Any customer who so desires can see how his 

chicken meets its end —can look and then decide. Few will take up such 

an offer; many of us would prefer to delegate the job of looking to a

government bureaucrat or a journalist, but the very option of look-

ing —that transparency —is probably the best way to ensure that ani-

mals are killed in a manner we can abide. No doubt some of us will 

decide there is no killing of animals we can countenance, and they 

probably shouldn't eat meat. 

## When I was at the farm I asked Joel how he could bring himself to  

> kill

a chicken. "That's an easy one. People have a soul, animals don't. It's 

a bedrock belief of mine. Animals are not created in God's image, so 

## when they die, they just die." 

The idea that it is only in modern times that people have grown 

queasy about killing animals is of course a flattering myth. Taking a life  

> is

momentous, and people have been working to justify the slaughter of 

animals to themselves for thousands of years, struggling to come to 

terms with the shame they feel even when the killing is necessary to 

their survival. Religion, and ritual, has played a crucial part in this 

process. Native Americans and other hunter-gatherers give thanks to the 

animal for giving up its life so the eater might live. The practice sounds 

a little like saying grace, a ceremony hardly anyone bothers with any-

more. In biblical times the rules governing ritual slaughter stipulated a

rotation, so that no individual would have to kill animals every day, lest 

he become dulled to the gravity of the act. Many cultures have offered  

> sacrificial

animals to the gods, perhaps as a way to convince themselves it 

was the gods' appetite that demanded the slaughter, and not their own. In 

ancient Greece, the priests responsible for the slaughter (Priests! Now we 

give the job to migrant workers paid the minimum wage) would sprin-

kle holy water on the sacrificial animal's head. The beast would prompdy 

shake its head, and this was taken as a necessary sign of assent. 

For all these people it was the ritual —the cultural rules and norms 

# —

that allowed them to look, and then to eat. We no longer have any ritu- 

> als

governing either the slaughter or eating of animals, which perhaps 332 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

helps explain why we find ourselves in this dilemma, in a place where 

## we feel our only choice is either to look away or give up meat. National 

Beef is happy to serve the first customer, Peter Singer the second. 

# My own wager is that there might still be another way open to us, 

and that finding it will begin with looking once again —at the animals 

## we eat, and at their deaths. People will see very different things when 

they look into the eyes of a pig or a chicken or a steer: a being without 

a soul, a "subject of a life" entitled to rights, a receptacle of pleasure 

and pain, an unambiguously tasty lunch. 

# We certainly won't philosophize our way to a single answer. I

remember a story Joel told me about a man who showed up at the 

farm one Saturday morning to have a look. When Joel noticed a PETA 

bumper sticker on the man's car he figured he was in for some unpleas-

antness. But the man had a different agenda. He explained that after be-

ing a vegetarian for sixteen years he had decided that the only way he 

could ever eat meat again was if he killed the animal himself. So Joel 

grabbed a chicken and took the man into the processing shed. 

"He slit the bird's throat and watched it die," Joel recalled. "He saw 

that the animal did not look at him accusingly, did not do a Disney dou-

ble take. He saw that the animal had been treated with respect while it 

was alive and that it could have a respectful death —that it wasn't being 

treated like a pile of protoplasm." I realized I'd seen this, too, which 

perhaps explains why I was able to kill a chicken one day and eat it the 

next. Though the story did make me wish I had killed and eaten mine 

with as much consciousness and attention as that man; perhaps hunt-ing would give me a second chance. 

Sometimes I think that all it would take to clarify our feelings about 

eating meat, and in the process begin to redeem animal agriculture, 

would be to simply pass a law requiring all the sheet-metal walls of all 

the CAFOs, and even the concrete walls of the slaughterhouses, to be 

replaced with glass. If there's any new right we need to establish, maybe   

> this is

the one: the right, I mean, to look. No doubt the sight of some 

of these places would turn many people into vegetarians. Many others 

would look elsewhere for their meat, to farmers willing to raise and kill THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 33 3

their animals transparently. Such farms exist; so do a handful of small 

processing plants willing to let customers onto the kill floor, including 

one —Lorentz Meats, in Cannon Falls, Minnesota —that is so confident 

of their treatment of animals that they have walled their abattoir in 

> glass.

The industrialization —and brutalization —of animals in America is 

a relatively new, evitable, and local phenomenon: No other country 

raises and slaughters its food animals quite as intensively or as brutally 

as we do. No other people in history has lived at quite so great a remove 

from the animals they eat. Were the walls of our meat industry to be-

come transparent, literally or even figuratively, we would not long con-

tinue to raise, kill, and eat animals the way we do. Tail docking and sow 

crates and beak clipping would disappear overnight, and the days of 

slaughtering four hundred head of cattle an hour would promptly 

come to an end —for who could stand the sight? Yes, meat would get 

more expensive. We'd probably eat a lot less of it, too, but maybe when 

we did eat animals we'd eat them with the consciousness, ceremony, 

and respect they deserve. EIGHTEEN 

# HUNTING 

## The Meat   

> 1.

# A WALK IN THE WOODS 

Walking with a loaded rifle in an unfamiliar forest bristling with the 

signs of your prey is thrilling. It embarrasses me to write that, but it is 

true. I am not by nature much of a noticer, yet here, now, my attention 

to everything around me, and deafness to everything else, is complete. 

Nothing in my experience (with the possible exception of certain in-

toxicants) has prepared me for the quality of this attention. I notice 

## how the day's first breezes comb the needles in the pines, producing a

sotto voce whistle and an undulation in the pattern of light and shadow 

tattooing the tree trunks and the ground. I notice the specific density of 

the air. But this is not a passive or aesthetic attention; it is a hungry at-

tention, reaching out into its surroundings like fingers, like nerves. My 

eyes venture deep into thickets my body could never penetrate, picking 

their way among the tangled branches, sliding over rocks and around 

stumps to bring back the slenderest hint of movement. In the places too 

deeply shadowed to admit my eyes my ears roam at will, returning with HUNTING: THE MEAT * 335 

the report of a branch cracking at the bottom of a ravine, or the snuf- 

> fling

of a ... wait: What was that? Just a bird. Everything is amplified. 

Even my skin is alert, so that when the shadow launched by the sudden 

ascent of a turkey vulture passes overhead I swear I can feel the temper-

ature momentarily fall. I am the alert man. 

Hunting powerfully inflects a place. The ordinary prose of the 

ground, the literally down-to-earth, becomes as layered and springy as  

> verse.

Angelo, my Virgil in this world, has taught me how to read the 

ground for signs of pig. Notice the freshly rototilled soil at the base of  

> that

oak tree? Look how the earth has not yet been crisped by the mid-

day sun; this means pigs have been rooting here since yesterday after-

noon, either overnight or earlier this morning. See that smoothly 

scooped-out puddle of water? That's a wallow, but notice how the water  

> is

perfectly clear: Pigs haven't disturbed it yet today. We could wait here  

> for

them. Angelo says that the pigs, who travel in groups of a half dozen 

or so, follow a more or less fixed daily routine, moving from place to  

> place,

feeding, sleeping, cooling off. This grove of oaks is where they 

root for acorns, tubers, and grubs. In the afternoon heat they snooze in 

oval nests scooped out of the dusty dirt beneath that protective tangle of 

manzanita. They cool off in these muddy wallows, the shores of which 

are letterpressed with dainty hoof prints. They scrape the mud from their 

backs on that pine tree there, the one where the lower bark is rubbed 

smooth and tan. And they move from one such pig place to another 

along narrow lanes that temporarily part the thick pelts of rattlesnake 

grass clothing the hillsides; since the grass springs back to erase their 

lanes after a few hours of sunshine, you can form a pretty good idea of 

## how recently they've passed through here. On their appointed rounds 

the pigs can cover forty square miles in a day. 

After hunting here for years Angelo has come to the conclusion 

there are three distinct groups sharing the oak forest and the grassy 

ridge above it like three overlapping nations, each with a slightly differ-

ent map of good pig places. The hunter maintains his own mental map 

of the same ground, marked with auspicious spots, the places he has 

encountered pigs before and the connecting routes he can navigate, 3.36 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

which of course are far fewer than those available to the pigs. Unlike 

that of the pigs, the hunter's map also contains legal things like prop-

erty lines and rights of way. 

The hunter's aim is to have his map collide with the pig's map, 

which, should it happen, will do so at a moment of no one's choosing. 

For although there's much the hunter can know about pigs and about 

their places, in the end he knows nothing about what is going to hap-

pen here today, whether the longed-for and dreaded encounter will ac-

tually take place and, if it does, how it will end. 

Since there's nothing he can do to make the encounter happen, the 

hunter's energy goes into readying himself for it, and attempting, by 

the sheer force of his attention, to summon the animal into his pres-

ence. The drama of the hunt links the actors in it, predator and prey, 

long before they actually meet. Approaching his prey, the hunter in-

stinctively becomes more like the animal, straining to make himself less   

> visible, less

audible, more exquisitely alert. Predator and prey alike 

move according to their own maps of this ground, their own forms of 

attention, and their own systems of instinct, systems that evolved ex-

pressly to hasten or avert precisely this encounter . . .

Wait a minute. Did I really write that last paragraph? Without irony?  

> That's

embarrassing. I'm actually writing about the hunter's "instinct," 

suggesting that the hunt represents some sort of primordial union be-

tween two kinds of animals, one of which is me? This seems a bit much.  

> I

recognize this kind of prose: hunter porn. And whenever I've read it 

in the past, in Ortega y Gasset and Hemingway and all those hard-

bitten, big-bearded American wilderness writers who still pine for the 

Pleistocene, it never failed to roll my eyes. I never could stomach the 

straight-faced reveling in primitivism, the barely concealed bloodlust, 

the whole macho conceit that the most authentic encounter with na-

ture is the one that comes through the sight of a gun and ends with a

large mammal dead on the ground —a killing that we are given to be- 

> lieve

constitutes a gesture of respect. So it is for Ortega y Gasset, the HUNTING: THE MEAT* J 37 

Spanish philosopher, who writes in his Meditations on Hunting that "the 

greatest and most moral homage we can pay to certain animals on cer-

tain occasions is to kill them." Please. 

And yet here I find myself sliding into the hunter's ecstatic purple, 

channeling Ortega y Gasset. It may be that we have no better language 

in which to describe the experience of hunting, so that all of us who 

would try sooner or later slide into this overheated prose ignorant of 

irony. Or it could be that hunting is one of those experiences that ap-

pear utterly different from the inside than from the outside. That this 

might indeed be the case was forcibly impressed upon me after my sec-

ond trip hunting with Angelo when, after a long and gratifying day in 

the woods, we stopped in at a convenience store for a bottle of water. 

The two of us were exhausted and filthy, the fronts of our jeans stained 

dark with blood. We couldn't have smelled terribly fragrant. And under 

the bright fluorescence of the 7 -Eleven, in the mirror behind the ciga- 

> rette

rack behind the cashier, I caught a glimpse of this grungy pair of  

> self-satisfied

animal killers and noted the wide berth the other cus-

tomers in line were only too happy to grant them. Us. It is a wonder 

that the cashier didn't preemptively throw up his hands and offer us the 

contents of the cash register. 

Irony —the outside perspective —easily withers everything about 

hunting, shrinks it to the proportions of boy's play or atavism. And 

yet at the same time I found that there is something about the experi-

ence of hunting that puts irony itself to rout. In general, experiences 

that banish irony are much better for living than for writing. But there    

> it is: I

enjoyed shooting a pig a whole lot more than I ever thought I

should have. 

2. A CANNABINOID MOMENT 

Part of me did not want to go. The night before I had anxiety dreams 

about hunting. In one I was on a bobbing boat trying to aim a rifle at a

destroyer that was firing its cannons at me; in the other the woods were 3 3 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

crawling with Angelo's Sicilian relatives, and I couldn't for the life of 

## me remember how my gun worked, whether the safety was on when 

the little button popped up on the left side of the trigger or the right.  

> I

had tried out my rifle only once before taking it to the woods, at afiring range in the Oakland Hills, and by the end of the morning my 

paper target had sustained considerably less damage than my left shoul- 

> der,

which ached for a week. I wasn't ready to buy a gun of my own, so 

Angelo had borrowed a fairly basic pump-action rifle, a .270 Winches- 

> ter

with an old-fashioned sight that I had trouble getting used to. After 

# my session at the range, the first-order worry that I wouldn't have 

whatever it takes to fire a rifle aimed at an animal was overtaken by a

second-order worry that, assuming I did manage to pull the trigger, 

nothing of consequence would happen to the animal. 

The plan was to hunt boar in the sparsely populated northern 

reaches of Sonoma County, on a thousand-acre property owned by a

friend of Angelo's named Richard. Angelo hunts deer and turkey and 

duck, too, but for a number of reasons I felt more comfortable going 

for wild pig. The animal is regarded as a pest in many parts of Califor-

nia and it seemed to me much easier to justify killing a pest than a wild 

native species that, like many waterfowl these days, is threatened by loss 

of habitat or over hunting. The pigs have been here a long time, but they 

are not native or even exactly wild; feral would be more accurate. They 

are also, by reputation, vicious; one of the nicknames the California pig 

has earned is "dog ripper." 

Columbus brought pigs to the New World on his second voyage, in 

1493. By the end of the following century the Spanish had introduced 

domestic swine into the American South and California; it was their 

practice to release the animals into the woods, let them fatten on acorns 

and grasses, and then hunt them as needed. In the 1840s, Russian set- 

> tlers

brought domestic pigs with them to Northern California and, 

some years later, landowners introduced an unknown number of wild 

Eurasian boar, probably as a big game species. The wild boar and the  

> feral

pigs have long since interbred in California and their hardy, intel-

ligent offspring have flourished in California's oak forests and chapar-HUNTING: THE MEAT*J39  

> ral.

(People commonly refer to the animals as boar, but from the looks 

of them the genes of domestic swine predominate; that said, Califor- 

> nia's

wild pigs do have longer snouts, straighter tails, and much thicker  

> bristles

than their domestic forbears.) In the absence of serious preda- 

> tors,

the population of wild pigs has overrun many habitats, threaten-

ing farmland and vineyards and forest; they rip up great swaths of land 

with their rooting, exposing it to erosion and invasive weeds. 

So there was a story I could tell myself about the environmental ra-

tionale for hunting wild pig in California. But I also wanted to eat wild 

pig, more than I wanted to eat venison or duck or all the more diminu- 

> tive

birds Angelo likes to hunt. I like pork, and since coming to Califor-

nia I'd heard how much tastier wild pigs are than either domestic hogs 

or the more full-blooded boar hunted in the South. (I'd tasted that once, 

in a stew, and found it a little too musky.) When I asked Angelo why he 

hunted wild pig he didn't hesitate (or utter a word about the environ-

ment) : rather, he just kissed the tips of his fingers and said, "Because it  

> is

the most delicious meat. And there is nothing that tastes so good as 

boar prosciutto. You'll see. You shoot a big one and we'll make some." 

In a sense, that's what Angelo was really hunting, not pigs so much  

> as

prosciutti. On one of our drives up to Sonoma he'd talked a little 

about his philosophy of hunting and fishing. "For me it is all about the  

> eating.

Not the 'sport.' I am not what you call a trophy hunter. I take 

what I need, enough to make a nice dinner for me and my friends, 

maybe some salami, a prosciutto, but then: That's it, I go home. My 

friend Xavier and I have this argument every time we go hunting or  

> fishing.

## He keeps on fishing even after he's caught the limit, throwing 

the fish back then catching it again. You know, 'catch and release.' I tell 

him he's catching the same fish oyer and over. To me that's playing with 

your food. You shouldn't play with your food." 

## On this, my first outing, we were joined by Richard, the property's 

owner (whom Angelo had introduced to pig hunting), and Angelo 's 

friend Jean-Pierre, a Frenchman who works as a chef at Chez Panisse in 

Berkeley. Jean-Pierre hadn't hunted in years, though he had grown up 

hunting boar with his relatives in Brittany. He had on one of those 3 40 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

green felt Alpine fedoras with the feather (a hat he managed to wear 

without so much as a trace of irony) and a pair of tall black riding 

boots. We didn't look much the part of an American hunting party (An-

gelo had on a pair of flouncy Euro-style black pants) , though Richard 

did have on the full international orange regalia and I was wearing my 

brightest orange sweater. We divided into pairs, me with Angelo, and 

went our separate ways, with a plan to meet back at the cars for lunch 

around noon. Jean-Pierre and Richard set off on the logging road that 

descended into the lower forest, while Angelo and I planned to recon-

noiter the grassy ridge in Angelo 's four-wheel-drive ATV —what he  

> calls

his "bike." The bike made a racket, but Angelo claimed it didn't 

bother the pigs and would allow us to cover a lot more ground than we 

could on foot. So we put our loaded rifles on mounts on the vehicle's 

hood, I arranged as much of my butt as I could fit onto the narrow ply-

## wood platform behind the driver's seat, and we set off in quest of Pig, 

bouncing noisily down the dirt road. 

"You are going to kill your first pig today," Angelo shouted over the 

roar of the engine. Given the nature of hunting, not to mention me, I

understood this as less a prediction than a prayer. Around every curve of 

road we came upon another "really good spot" or "very prevalent 

area," and each such place had a hunting story attached to it. Indeed, 

the whole landscape soon became an epic of pig death and pig death 

narrowly averted. There was the one about the sow Angelo couldn't 

bring himself to shoot because her piglets were trailing behind. ("But 

since then I learned that another pig would have adopted the babies,  

> that's

what they do, so maybe next time. . . .") There was the spot 

where he'd fired into a knot of pigs and hit two with one bullet. And 

then there was the place where he'd taken a long shot at a boar that 

must have been easily three, four hundred pounds, but missed. A story 

about the big one that got away is all-important, of course, since it im-

bues the hunting ground with mythical possibility. The big one was still 

out there, somewhere. 

After a while we parked the bike and set out on foot on our own. An-

gelo gave me a route and a destination —a wallow in a grassy opening at HUNTING: THE MEAT 341 

the bottom of a ravine —and told me to find a tree with a good view of  

> it

and wait there, perfectly still, for twenty minutes until I heard him 

whistle. He would make his way toward the same spot from another di-

rection, in the hopes of driving some pigs into my field of vision. 

## When I could hear Angelo's footsteps no more my ears and eyes 

started tuning in —everything. It was as if I'd dialed up the gain on all 

## my senses or quieted myself to such an extent that the world itself grew 

louder and brighter. I quickly learned to filter out the static of birdsong, 

of which there was plenty at that early hour, and to listen for the fre-

quency of specific sounds —the crack of branches or the snuffling of 

animals. I found I could see farther into the woods than I ever had be- 

> fore,

picking out the tiniest changes in my visual field at an almost in-

conceivable distance, just so long as those changes involved movement 

or blackness. The sharpness of focus and depth of field was uncanny, 

though, being nearsighted, I knew it well from the experience of put-

ting on glasses with a strong new prescription for the first time. 

"Hunter's eye," Angelo said later when I described the phenomenon; 

he knew all about it.  

> I

found a shaded spot overlooking the wallow and crouched down 

in the leaves, steadying my back against the smooth trunk of a

madrone. I rested my gun across my thighs and got quiet. The whoosh 

of air through my nostrils suddenly sounded calamitous, so I began in-

haling and exhaling through my mouth, silencing my breath. So much 

sensory information was coming into my head that it seemed to push 

out the normal buzz of consciousness. The state felt very much like 

meditation, though it took no mental effort or exercise to achieve that 

kind of head-emptying presence. The simple act of looking and listen-

ing, tuning my senses to the forest frequencies of Pig, occupied every 

quadrant of mental space and anchored me to the present. I must have  

> lost

track of time because the twenty minutes flashed by. Ordinarily my 

body would have rebelled at being asked to hold a crouch that long, but   

> Ifelt

no need to change position or even to shift my weight. 

Later it occurred to me that this mental state, which I quite liked, in 

many ways resembled the one induced by smoking marijuana: the way 3 4 2 * THE OMNI VO RE'S DILEMMA 

one's senses feel especially acute and the mind seems to forget every-

thing outside the scope of its present focus, including physical discom- 

> fort

and the passing of time. One of the more interesting areas of 

research in the neurosciences today is the study of the brain's "cannabi-

noid network," a set of receptors in the nervous system that are acti-

vated by a group of unusual compounds called cannabinoids. One of 

these compounds is THC, the active ingredient in marijuana; another is 

anandamide, a recently discovered neurotransmitter manufactured in 

the brain (and named by its discoverer for the Sanskrit word for inner   

> bliss) .

Whether made by the plant or the brain, cannabinoids have the  

> effect

of intensifying sensory experience, disabling short-term mem- 

> ory,

and stimulating appetite. Scientists still aren't certain what the 

evolutionary utility of such a system might be. Some researchers 

hypothesize that the cannabinoids, like the opiates, play a role in the 

brain's pain relief and reward system; others that they help regulate ap- 

> petite,

or emotion. 

The experience of hunting suggests another theory. Could it be that 

the cannabinoid network is precisely the sort of adaptation that natural 

selection would favor in the evolution of a creature who survives by 

hunting? A brain chemical that sharpens the senses, narrows your men- 

> tal

focus, allows you to forget everything extraneous to the task at hand 

(including physical discomfort and the passage of time) , and makes you 

hungry would seem to be the perfect pharmacological tool for man the 

hunter. All at once it provides the motive, the reward, and the optimal 

mind-set for hunting. I would not be the least bit surprised to discover 

that what I was feeling in the woods that morning, crouching against a 

> tree

avidly surveying that forest grove, was a tide of anandamide wash-

ing over my brain. 

But whether I was actually having a cannabinoid moment or not, in 

the moments before Angelo's whistle pierced my vigil I did feel as 

though I had somehow entered nature through a new door. For once I

was not a spectator but a full participant in the life of the forest. Later, 

## when I reread Ortega y Gasset's description of the experience, I decided 

that maybe he wasn't so crazy after all, not even when he asserted that HUNTING: THE MEAT 3 43 

hunting offers us our last best chance to escape history and return to 

the state of nature, if only for a time —for what he called a "vacation 

from the human condition." 

## When one is hunting, the air has another, more exquisite feel   

> as it

glides over the skin or enters the lungs, the rocks acquire 

a more expressive physiognomy, and the vegetation becomes 

loaded with meaning. But all this is due to the fact that the hunter, while he advances or waits crouching, feels tied 

through the earth to the animal he pursues, whether the ani-

mal is in view, hidden, or absent. 

The tourist in nature achieves no such immersion or connection; all 

he sees is a landscape, which is something made by history (and rather 

recently at that). His gaze conditioned by art and expectation, the 

tourist remains a spectator to a scene, unable to get outside himself or 

history, since the landscape he beholds is as much the product of his 

civilization as of nature. 

The tourist sees broadly the great spaces, but his gaze glides, it  

> seizes

nothing, it does not perceive the role of each ingredient 

in the dynamic architecture of the countryside. Only the 

hunter, imitating the perpetual alertness of the wild animal,  

> for

## whom everything is danger, sees everything and sees each 

thing functioning as facility or difficulty, as risk or protection. 

Ortega believed that in hunting we returned to nature because 

"hunting is the generic way of being a man" and because the animal 

## we are stalking summons the animal still in us. This is atavism pure and 

simple —the recovery of an earlier mode of being human —and that for 

Ortega is the supreme, and the exclusive, value of hunting. For perhaps 

his most outrageous claim is that the hunt is the only such return avail-

able to us —we can't ever, as he points out, go back to being Christian 

in the manner of St. Augustine, say, because once history begins it is ir-3 44 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

reversible. So how is it we can still go back to being Paleolithic? Because 

our identity as hunters is literally prehistoric —is in fact inscribed by 

evolution in the architecture of our bodies and brains. (Of course, the 

same might be said about gathering, too, which Ortega doesn't ad-

dress; my guess is that that way of being in nature is insufficiently dra-

matic or masculine for the Spaniard's taste.) Much that surrounds 

hunting nowadays is completely artificial, Ortega freely admits, yet the 

experience itself, the encounter of predator and prey, is no fiction. (Just 

ask the animals.) Even though the hunt takes place during a brief "va-

cation" from modern life, what occurs in the space of that electrifying 

parenthesis will ever and always be, in a word Ortega never shrinks 

from using, "authentic." 

3. READY. OR NOT. 

As I said, all this seemed much less crazy to me after I'd been in the 

woods that first morning with my gun, long before I even had occasion 

to fire it. I'm chagrined to report that that occasion never presented it-

self during that first hunting trip —or rather, when it did present itself  

> I

was in no position to do anything about it. I know, I've been talking 

here like Mister Big Game Hunter, comparing notes on the experience 

with the likes of Ortega y Gasset, but I returned from the woods that 

day not only empty-handed, which in hunting is entirely forgivable, 

but, what is not, having failed as a hunter because I was not ready.  

> I

blame this, at least partly, on lunch. 

By the end of the morning one animal had been shot, a small boar 

taken by Jean-Pierre. He and Richard had spotted two pigs in the lower  

> forest,

a big one and a little one, but by the time they could agree on 

whose shot it was (Richard politely deferring to his guest, Jean-Pierre 

to his host) the bigger one had bolted. On our way back up to the ridge 

in the ATV Angelo and I picked up Jean-Pierre's animal; it wasn't a

whole lot bigger than a poodle, with a florid red blotch erupting from HUNTING: THE MEAT 3 45 

the side of its bristly black head. Angelo hung it by its ankles from the 

limb of a tree near the cars; he planned to dress it after lunch. 

Being Europeans, as well as accomplished cooks, Angelo and Jean-

Pierre take lunch very seriously, even when out in the woods some dis-

tance from civilization. "So I brought with me a few little things to 

nibble on," Jean-Pierre mumbled. "Me, too," chimed Angelo. And out of  

> their

packs came course after course of the most astonishing picnic, 

which they proceeded to lay out on the hood of Angelo's SUV: a terrine 

of lobster and halibut en gelee, artisanal salami and prosciutto and mor- 

> tadella,

Angelo's homemade pate of boar and home-cured olives, cor-

nichons, chicken salad, a generous selection of cheeses and breads, 

fresh strawberries and pastries, silverware and napkins, and, naturally, a

bottle each of red and white wine.  

> It

was a delicious lunch, but arguably it took off some of my 

hunter's edge. One of the easier questions on my hunter education 

exam went something like this: "Hunting while intoxicated is an ac-

ceptable practice, true or false." Not that I was intoxicated, but I was 

feeling notably relaxed and loquacious when Richard and I set off to 

look for another pig, while Angelo dressed the little one and Jean- 

> Pierre,

having already shot a pig, had a postprandial snooze in the grass. 

Our rifles slung over our shoulders, we strolled down a shady trail toward 

a spot where Richard had once had some luck, all the while getting ac-

quainted and chatting about one thing or another. We soon discovered 

we'd both once worked for the same newspaper, so there was fresh gos- 

> sip

to be traded, scandals to dissect. Thoroughly absorbed in conversa- 

> tion,

our attention gradually floated off from these woods all the way 

to a building in midtown Manhattan. Until, that is, I happened to 

glance up ahead and saw directly in front of us, not thirty yards away, 

three or four large black shapes swimming in the shadows. The path 

ahead was deeply shaded by a steep embankment and a large oak, but 

the sight of these pigs, my first, was incontrovertible, and their sudden 

appearance violently wrenched my attention back to the forest's pres- 

> ent.

There they were, four large pigs milling beneath the oak, their 346 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

attention fixed on the acorns littering the path that connected us. In- 

> credibly,

they gave no sign that they'd spotted us or heard our yammering.  

> I

grabbed Richard by the shoulder, put my finger to my lips, and 

pointed ahead. He stopped. "It's your shot," he whispered. "Go ahead. 

Take it." It is the custom when hunting with companions that the first 

shot belongs to the person who spotted the animal, perhaps in recog-

nition of the fact that skill in hunting is as much about finding the 

game as killing it. In fact, in many hunter- gatherer societies, the first 

portion of meat belongs not to the hunter who kills the animal but to 

the one to whom it first appeared. These pigs were mine. 

## One little problem. I had neglected to pump my rifle before we set 

out on the trail. There was no bullet in the chamber, and to cock my 

gun now would almost surely alert the pigs to our presence. I could 

take the chance, but to do so probably meant the pigs would be on the 

run by the time I was ready to shoot. I explained all this in a whisper to 

Richard, whose own gun, a fancy new Finnish bolt-action job, could be 

loaded with little more than a click of the little bolt. I gave him my shot. 

Richard got down on one knee and slowly raised his rifle to his 

shoulder. I braced for the explosion, preparing to pump my gun the 

## moment it came; perhaps I could still get off a shot at one of the oth- 

> ers.

Richard took his time, aiming carefully, waiting for one of the ani-

mals to turn and offer its flank. The pigs had their heads down, eating 

acorns, utterly oblivious to our presence. Then the woods exploded. I

saw a pig stagger and fall back against the embankment, then struggle 

drunkenly to its feet. I pumped my rifle but it was already too late: The 

other pigs were gone. Richard fired again at the wounded pig and it 

crumpled. 

The other pigs had run down the path away from us, and we gave 

chase for a few minutes, but they took off around a bend and we lost 

them. By the time we returned to the scene Richard's pig was dead. It 

was considerably bigger than Jean-Pierre's poodle, and appeared to 

have taken a bullet in the butt. I felt a rush of adrenaline; maybe it had 

surged earlier, but only now did I feel all light-headed and shaky. It hadn't 

been my shot, yet I felt I'd been party to something momentous, some-HUNTING: THE MEAT*. J 47 

thing that felt like a collision of worlds. The shadowy realm of the pigs 

had crashed into our brightly lit world, and this emissary of that other 

nation had crossed over from wild life, become "meat." 

The pig, a sow weighing perhaps a hundred pounds, was too heavy to  

> carry,

so we took turns dragging it by its rear leg up the path back toward 

the cars; I now understood in a way I never had before the expression 

"dead weight." Holding the pig by the ankle just above its delicate 

hoof, I could still feel its warmth beneath the bristly skin, some fading 

remnant of its formidable energy. It felt wrong to be dragging the body 

over the rocky ground, and I had to remind myself that the pig, though  

> still

warm, felt nothing. By the time we had dragged the carcass all the 

way back to the cars its skin felt cool to the touch. 

Angelo trotted over to see the animal, excited and impressed and ea-

ger to hear our story. It's curious how the hunting story takes shape in 

the minutes after the shot, as you work through the chaotic simultane- 

> ity

of that lightning, elusive moment, trying to tease out of the adrena- 

> line

fog something linear and comprehensible. Even though we'd both 

witnessed the event together, Richard and I had taken turns carefully  

> telling

each other the story on the long march back, rehearsing our lack 

of readiness, reviewing the reasons Richard had taken the shot instead of 

me, trying to nail down the precise distance and number of pigs in-

volved, carefully unpacking the moment and turning our shaky recol-

lections into a consensus of fact —a hunting story. As I watched Angelo 

drink in our hunting story I could see the disappointment bloom on his   

> face. It

had been my shot, my pig, but I hadn't taken it. 

"You weren't ready," Angelo said, levelly. "In hunting you always 

need to be ready. So, okay, you learned something today. Next time you 

will be ready and you will take your shot." He was trying hard not to 

sound like the disappointed father; even so, I couldn't help feeling like 

the disappointing son. 

So what had really happened? I hadn't been ready to shoot. But 

why? The practical reasons seemed clear enough; surely it had made 

more sense to give my shot to Richard than to risk losing the animal. It 

was because of my unselfish decision that we now had this pig. Yet 3 4 8 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

maybe there was some deeper sense in which I hadn't been ready; 

maybe my failure to have a bullet in the chamber reflected some uncon-

scious reluctance about doing what I was asking myself to do. The fact   

> is I'd

blown it, and I wasn't sure how deep I should go in search of an 

explanation. And yet I had been, and still was, determined to shoot a

pig: I had a meal to cook, for one thing, but I was also genuinely hun-

gry for the experience, to learn whatever it had to teach me. So I spent 

the rest of the afternoon hunting intently alone, walking the ridge, rak-

ing the shadows for signs of pig, looking and listening as hard as I

could to will another animal out of the woods. When Angelo an-

nounced it was time to go home, I felt deflated. 

Jean-Pierre generously offered to give me some cuts of his pig. 

Since I needed the meat for my meal I was grateful for his offer, yet I

understood that to accept it underscored my inferior status in our little 

society of hunters. To the successful hunter goes the privilege of giving 

away the spoils, and I'd read a lot in the anthropological literature sug-

gesting just how important that privilege was. The sheer nutritional 

density of meat has always made it a precious form of social currency 

among hunter-gatherers. Since the successful hunter often ends up 

with more meat than he or his family can eat before it spoils, it makes 

good sense for him to, in effect, bank the surplus in the bodies of other 

people, trading meat for obligations and future favors. Chimps will do 

the same thing. Not to say that Jean-Pierre was lording it over me or de-

manding anything in return; he wasn't. But that didn't change the fact 

that here I stood, on the vaguely pathetic receiving end of the alpha 

hunter's meat gift. (I briefly considered trying to educate Richard about 

the traditional meat rights of the game spotter, but thought better of   

> it.) I

thanked Jean-Pierre for the gift. 

In the days after I wasn't sure whether I needed to go hunting again. I

had my meat. And I had been hunting: I felt like I had a good idea of 

what it was all about, or nearly all about —the hunter's way of being in HUNTING: THE MEAT* 349 nature and the way of the pigs. I'd spotted the prey and witnessed the   

> kill. I

had a pretty good story too. And yet everyone to whom I told it 

managed to remind me how unsatisfactory the ending was. You mean you       

> never even fired your gun?! I'd

violated the Chekhovian dramatic rule: Having 

introduced a loaded gun in Act One, the curtain can't come down un-     

> til it is fired. I

might miss, but the gun had to be fired. That at least 

seemed to be the narrative imperative. 

And then of course there was Serior Ortega y Gasset, who, as you 

might expect, was not about to accept me into the fellowship of 

hunters until I'd actually killed an animal. Mere spectatorship, or "pla-

tonic" analogues of hunting such as photography or bird watching, 

doesn't cut it for him. ("Platonism," he writes, "represents the maxi-

# mum tradition of affected piety") 

"One can refuse to hunt," he allows, "but if one hunts one has to 

accept certain ultimate requirements without which the reality 'hunt-

ing' evaporates." Killing is one of those requirements. And although Or-

tega says one does not hunt in order to kill, he also says that one must  

> kill

in order to have hunted. Why? For authenticity's sake. If for me this 

venture was about taking ultimate responsibility for the animals I eat, 

their deaths included, well, I hadn't done that yet, had I?  

> I

e-mailed Angelo and asked him to let me know the next time he 

planned to go hunting. He wrote back saying he would give me forty-

eight hours notice, to get ready. 

4. MY PIG 

## Word came about a month later, on a May Friday, that we were to meet  

> at

a gas station in Sonoma the following Monday morning, 6:00 a.m. 

sharp. This time it would be just the two of us. 

# We drove the last few miles together in Angelo 's SUV, following a

deserted road north of Healdsburg that curved extravagantly through 

deeply creased hills in the process of turning from winter green to J50*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

summery gold. To me that morning all the hills looked like the backs 

and shoulders of great beasts, the thick grasses covering them like pelts. 

Coming around the final bend before we reached Richard's gate I

spotted on my side a large group of pigs, big ones and babies together, 

right there on the hillside that sloped down to meet the road. Angelo 

pulled over onto the shoulder; the pigs were on Richard's land, he said.  

> I

remembered from hunter ed that you weren't allowed to shoot from 

a public roadway. So we decided we'd try to spook the pigs, force them 

up over the crest of the hill and down the other side, which would 

bring them into Richard's forest. We honked, we hollered, we got out 

of the truck and waved our arms like lunatics, and eventually the pigs 

started to move up the hill. 

"This gives me a very good feeling," Angelo said as we climbed 

back into the truck. And then he offered the prediction/ prayer: "You 

are going to shoot your pig today. A big pig." I had my doubts, yet see-

ing those pigs did seem like a promising sign: They were up and about, 

feeding and on the move. 

# We spent the first part of the morning doing the circuit of Angelo 's 

customary spots, patrolling first the ridge in the ATV and then moving 

## down into the lower forest on foot. The entire day I kept a round in my 

chamber. It was hotter than last time, so Angelo felt the pigs would be keeping to the shadier parts of the property. We staked out a wallow 

deep in the woods, and then a trampled clearing of ferns on the near 

side of the hill that abuts the road, but saw no signs of the group we'd 

tried to herd this way. 

## A little after nine in the morning we were walking together down a

logging road cut into a steep hillside when we were stopped in our 

tracks by a grunt so loud and deep and guttural that it seemed to be 

coming from the bowels of the earth. A very big pig was very close by. 

But where? What direction to look? The sound had no address; this was 

the grunt of the ground itself, omnipresent, more audible to my torso 

than my ears. We crouched down low, making ourselves as inconspicu-

ous as possible, and listened as hard as I've ever listened for anything HUNTING: THE MEAT * 3 5 1

before, listened the way you listen when you hear a strange sound in 

the night.  

> I

needn't have strained so, because the next sound we heard was 

nearly as loud as the first: the sharp clean crack of a branch coming 

from above us to our right, where the thickly oaked hillside climbed 

steeply to a crest. A stream ran down the hillside and crossed the path 

in front of us about thirty yards ahead. With my eyes I followed the sil-

very line of the stream up through the woods to the crest, and that's 

## when I saw it: a rounded black form, a negative of sunrise, coming over 

the top of the hill. Then another black sun, and another, a total of five 

or six, I couldn't be sure, popping over the crest in a line like a string of 

huge black pearls.  

> I

touched Angelo on the shoulder and pointed toward the pigs. 

What should I do? This time my gun was cocked, of course, and now, for 

the first time, I took off the safety. Should I shoot? No, you wait, Angelo said. 

> See

# —they're coming down the hill now. I followed the pigs with the barrel of 

## my gun, trying to get one of them in my sight. My finger rested lightly 

on the trigger, and it took all the self-restraint I could summon not to 

squeeze, but I didn't have a clear shot —too many trees stood in the way.  

> Take

your time, Angelo whispered. They will come to us. And so they did, fol-

lowing the streambed down to the road directly in front of us, moving 

toward us in an excruciatingly slow parade. I have no idea how long it 

took the pigs to pick their way down the steep hill, whether it was min-

utes or just seconds. At last the first animal, a big black one, stepped out 

into the clearing of the dirt road, followed by another that was just as 

big but much lighter in color. The second pig presented its flank. Now! 

Angelo whispered. This is your shot!  

> I

could sense Angelo a step or two behind me, preparing to take his 

shot the second I took mine. We were both down on one knee. I braced 

the rifle against my shoulder and lined up my sight. I felt calmer and 

clearer than I expected to; at least, when I looked down the barrel of the   

> rifle it

didn't appear to be wagging uncontrollably. I took aim at the 

shoulder of the grayish pig, aligning the site's U and I with the top of 3 5 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

the animal's front leg, and then inched down a shade, hoping to correct 

for the fact that at the rifle range my shots had all landed several inches 

high. I held my breath, resisted a sudden urge to clamp my eyes shut, 

and gently squeezed. 

The crystal stillness of the scene and the moment in time now ex-

ploded into a thousand shards of sense. The pigs erupted in panic, mov-

ing every which way at once like black bumper cars, and then the Warn! 

of Angelo's shot directly behind made me jump. One pig was down; 

another seemed to stagger. I pumped my gun to fire again but the 

adrenaline was surging now and I was shaking so violently that my fin-

ger accidentally pressed the trigger before I could lower my gun; the 

shot went wild, skying far over the heads of the rioting pigs. Something  

> like

the fog of war now descended on the scene, and I'm uncertain ex- 

> actly

what happened next, but I believe Angelo fired a second time. I

collected myself just enough to pump and fire one more poorly aimed 

round before the pigs dispersed, most of them tumbling down the 

steep embankment to our left. 

# We ran forward to the downed animal, a very large grayish sow 

beached on her side across the dirt road; a glossy marble of blood bub-

bled directly beneath her ear. The pig thrashed briefly, attempting to lift 

her head, then gave it up. Death was quickly overtaking her, and I was 

relieved she wouldn't need a second shot. We ran past her, looking for 

the others. Angelo said he thought he had grazed another one, and I

climbed down the embankment looking for it, but very quickly the go-

ing got treacherously steep and Angelo called me back up to the road to 

see what I'd done. 

Angelo clapped me on the back and congratulated me extravagantly. 

"Your first pig! Look at the size of it. And with a perfect shot, right in 

the head. You did it!" Did I do it? Was that really my shot? I thought my  

> first

shot had dropped the pig but already that moment was blurred ir- 

> retrievably,

and when I saw what a clean shot it was I suddenly had my 

doubts. Yet Angelo was adamant —he had fired at a different pig, a black 

one. "No, this is your pig, Michael, you killed it, there's no doubt in my 

mind." Our hunting story was taking form, the fluid confusion of the HUNTING: THE M E AT * 3 5 3

## moment rapidly hardening into something sturdier and sharper than it 

really was. "What a great shot," Angelo continued. "You got yourself a

big one. That's some very nice prosciutti!" 

Meat I was not yet quite ready to see. What I saw was a dead wild 

animal, its head lying on the dirt in a widening circle of blood. I

kneeled down and pressed the palm of my hand against the pig's belly 

above the nipples and felt beneath the dusty, bristly skin her warmth, 

but no heartbeat. My emotions were as surging and confused as the 

knot of panicked pigs had been on this spot just a moment before. The  

> first

to surface was this powerful up welling of pride: I had actually 

done this thing I'd set out to do, had successfully shot a pig. I felt a flood 

of relief, too, that the deed was done, thank God, and didn't need to be 

done again. And then there was this wholly unexpected feeling of grat-

itude. But for what exactly, or to whom? For my good fortune, I guess, 

and to Angelo, of course, but also to this animal, for stepping unbidden 

over the crest of that hill, out of the wild and into my sight, to become 

what Angelo kept calling her: your pig. More than the product of any la-

bor of mine (save receptiveness) the animal was a gift —from whom or 

what I couldn't say —but gratitude seemed in order, and gratitude is 

what I felt. 

The one emotion I expected to feel but did not, inexplicably, was re-

morse, or even ambivalence. All that would come later, but now, I'm  

> slightly

embarrassed to admit, I felt absolutely terrific —unambiguously  

> happy.

Angelo wanted to take my picture, so he posed me behind my pig, 

one hand cradling the rifle across my chest, the other resting on the an-

imal. I couldn't decide whether to smile or to compose a more somber 

expression. I opted for the latter, but I couldn't quite manage to untie 

the knot of my smile. "Every good hunter is uneasy in the depths of his 

conscience when faced with the death he is about to inflict on the en-

chanting animal," I'd read in Ortega y Gasset's Meditations, but I was un-

able to locate this feeling, either immediately before or after the fateful 

shot. Nor did I register, yet anyway, the slightest disgust at the creeping 

stain of the animal's blood on the ground, the stain that I remembered 

Ortega calling a "degradation." I was still too excited, too interested in 3 5 4 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> this

most improbable drama in which I had somehow found myself 

playing the hero's part. 

5. MAKING MEAT 

The sense of elation didn't last. Less than an hour later I found myself 

in a much less heroic role, embracing the pig's hanging carcass from 

behind to steady it so Angelo could reach in and pull out its viscera. I

was playing the nurse now, passing him tools and holding the patient  

> still.

Using a block and tackle and a stainless steel hanger with two 

hooks that Angelo had forged expressly for this purpose, we'd managed 

to raise and hang the pig by its rear ankles from the stout limb of an oak  

> tree.

## A scale attached to the rig gave the weight of the animal: 190 

pounds. The pig weighed exactly as much as I did. 

Dead bodies are awkward, among other things, and negotiating one  

> this

big proved a difficult, clumsy, and oddly intimate operation. It took 

us a while, but we managed to hoist the pig up onto the hood of the 

ATV, get it up the hill without falling off and then into this tree. I kept 

finding myself in awkward embraces with my pig, as when I had to 

press with all my weight against the carcass when it threatened to slide 

## down off the hood, or when Angelo needed me to wrap my arms 

around the pig to keep it from swinging while he cut into it. Dressing 

the pig was further complicated by the fact that we planned on making 

prosciutto, which requires that the hide covering the hams be left in- 

> tact.

So instead of skinning the hindquarters we had to shave them, 

painstakingly scraping the animal's dust-caked thighs with our knife 

blades to remove all her bristles. 

Next Angelo made a shallow incision along an equator circling the 

pig's belly and began to gently work the hide loose. I held down a nar-

row flap of skin while he cut into the fat behind it, leaving as much of 

the creamy white adipose layer on the carcass as possible. "This is really 

good fat," Angelo explained, "for the salami." The flap of skin grew 

larger as we worked our way down the body and then slowly pulled it HUNTING: THE ME AT * 3 5 5 

## down over the pig's shoulders, until the inside-out skin looked like a

discarded sweater caught in the instant it comes over the head. What 

hunters call dressing an animal is really an undressing. 

As we drew the skin down over the rib cage it exposed the bullet, or 

what remained of the bullet. It had torn a ragged slot in the last rib and 

come to rest there, just beneath the hide. "Here's a souvenir for you," 

Angelo said, extracting the bloody, mangled chunk of metal from the 

bone like a tooth and handing it to me. The bullet was too smashed up 

to easily identify its caliber, though it occurred to me a forensics expert 

could probably determine whether it had really come from my rifle,  

> settle

once and for all —the words "Warren Commission!" popped into 

## my head —whether or not there had been a second gunman. 

Angelo worked with a small cigar clamped between his teeth; the 

smoke discouraged the flies and yellow jackets, which had taken an 

avid interest in the dead animal. There were also a pair of turkey vul-

tures circling high overhead, patiently waiting for us to finish. What-

ever parts of this pig we didn't take the local fauna were preparing to  

> set

upon and consume, weaving this bonanza of fat and protein back 

into the fabric of the land. Using a short knife, Angelo made another 

shallow incision the length of the animal's belly, moving very slowly so  

> as

not to pierce any internal organs. A punctured bladder would give 

the meat a nasty, ineradicable taint, he explained, and cutting into the 

colon risked contaminating it with intestinal bacteria. 

Angelo talked while he worked, mostly, if you can believe it, about 

food. As he cut into the thin visceral membrane that held all the organs 

in the body cavity in a translucent bag, he told me all about ventricina, a

dish made in Abruzzi that involves stuffing the visceral membrane with 

various "noble cuts" of the pig and then hanging it to cure like a

salami. "It's tricky to keep the bag from tearing, but one of these days  

> I'll

make some."  

> I

could not believe Angelo was still talking about food. The pig was 

splayed open now, all its internal organs glistening in their place like 

one of those cutaway anatomy dolls from biology: the bluish links of 

intestine coiled beneath the stout muscle of the heart, beribboned with 3 56 "THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> its

## map of veins; the spongy pink pair of lungs like outspread wings be-

hind; and below, the sleek chocolate slab of liver. I'd handled plenty of 

viscera in the chickens I'd gutted on Joel's farm, but this was different 

and more disturbing, probably because the pig's internal organs, in 

their proportions and arrangement and colors, looked exacdy like hu-

## man organs. Which is why, I recalled, surgeons hone their skills by op-

erating on pigs.  

> I

held the cavity open while Angelo reached in to pull out the mass 

of organs, hoping to save the liver, which had a jagged tear across it. The 

bullet had apparently crossed the rib cage diagonally from upper left to 

lower right, tearing through a lobe of the liver. But Angelo thought the  

> liver

was salvageable ("for a nice pate"), so he cut it free and dropped  

> it

into a Ziploc bag. Then he reached in and pulled gently and the rest 

of the viscera tumbled out onto the ground in a heap, up from which 

rose a stench so awful it made me gag. This was not just the stink of pig  

> shit

or piss but those comparatively benign smells compounded by an 

odor so wretched and ancient that death alone could release it. I felt a

wave of nausea begin to build in my gut. The clinical disinterest with 

which I had approached the whole process of cleaning my pig col-

lapsed all at once: This was disgusting.   

> Istill

had my arms wrapped around the pig from behind, holding it 

steady and open, but I needed, badly, to break away for a moment to lo-

cate an uncontaminated breath. So I told Angelo I wanted to take a pic-

ture of him working on the pig. This was not a picture I particularly 

wanted (to the contrary), but the time and distance that snapping it 

## now promised suddenly seemed precious beyond reason. I turned away 

and gulped a breath of clean air, then went off —blessed errand! —in 

search of Angelo's camera. 

Since it was my plan to cook, serve, and eat this animal, the revul-

sion at its sight and smell that now consumed me was discouraging, to 

say the least. That plan was no longer just a narrative conceit either, 

since the moment I killed this pig I felt it descend on me with the 

weight of a moral obligation. And yet now the prospect of sitting down HUNTING: THE MEAT * 3 5 7

to a meal of this animal was unthinkable. Pate? Prosciutto? Ventricina? 

Just then I could have made myself vomit simply by picturing myself 

putting a fork to a bite of this pig. How was I ever going to get past this? 

And what was this spasm of revulsion all about, anyway? 

Disgust, I understood, is one of the tools humans have evolved to 

navigate the omnivore's dilemma. The emotion alerts us to things we 

should not ingest, like rotten meat or feces. And surely that protective 

reflex figured in what I was feeling as I beheld these viscera, which no 

doubt did contain things that could sicken me. The stink in my nostrils 

was probably the contents of the pig's intestines, which had split open 

on the ground, in various stages of digestion and decomposition. So 

here, I guess, was the "intuitive microbiology" of disgust at work. 

But there had to be more to it than that, and later, when I went back 

and reread Paul Rozin on disgust, I had a better idea of what else might 

underlie my revulsion. As Rozin has written, most of the things that 

disgust people universally do come from animals —bodily fluids and 

secretions, decaying flesh, corpses. This makes meat eating especially 

problematic, which might explain why cultures have more rules and 

taboos governing the eating of meat than of any other food, rules that 

specify not only which animals are okay to eat and not, but which parts 

of those animals and how they must be killed. 

Beyond the sanitary reasons for avoiding certain parts and products 

of animals, these things disgust us, Rozin suggests, because they con-

front us with the reality of our own animal nature. So much of the hu-

## man project is concerned with distinguishing ourselves from beasts 

that we seem strenuously to avoid things that remind us that we are 

beasts too —animals that urinate, defecate, copulate, bleed, die, stink, 

and decompose. Rozin tells a story about Cotton Mather, who confided 

to his journal the powerful revulsion he felt at finding himself urinat-

ing alongside a dog. Mather turned his self-disgust into a resolution of  

> self-

transcendence: "Yet I will be a more noble creature; at the very 

time when my natural necessities debase me into the condition of the  

> beast,

## my spirit shall (I say at that very time!) rise and soar." 3 58 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Exactly why we would strive so hard to distance ourselves from our 

animality is a large question, but surely the human fear of death figures 

in the answer. What we see animals do an awful lot of is die, very often  

> at

our hands. Animals resist dying, but, having no conception of death, 

they don't give it nearly as much thought as we do. And one of the main 

thoughts about it we think is, will my own death be like this animal's 

or not? The belief, or hope, that human death is somehow different 

from animal death is precious to us —but unprovable. Whether it is or  

> is

not is one of the questions I suspect we're trying to answer whenever 

## we look into the eyes of an animal. 

From the moment I laid eyes on my animal straight through to the 

## moment Angelo sawed off her head her eyes remained tightly shut be-

neath her disconcerting eyelashes, yet everything else about the episode 

asked me to confront these kinds of questions. What disgusted me 

about "cleaning" the animal was just how messy —in every sense of the 

word —the process really was, how it forced me to look at and smell 

and touch and even to taste the death, at my hands, of a creature my size  

> that,

on the inside at least, had all the same parts and probably looked 

an awful lot like I did. Such an encounter is no doubt more disturbing 

to someone who, like me, lacks the religious certainty that humans 

have souls and animals don't, period. The line between human and an-

imal that I could discern here was nowhere near that sharp. Cannibal-

ism is one of the things that most deeply disgusts us, and while this  

> isn't

by any reasonable definition that, you could forgive the mind for 

being fooled into reacting as if it were— in disgust. 

Here, I decided, was one of the signal virtues of hunting: It puts large 

questions about who we and the animals are, and the nature of our re-

spective deaths, squarely before the hunter, and while I'm sure there are 

many hunters who manage to avoid their gaze, that must take some do- 

> ing.

As Ortega writes in his Meditations, hunting plunges us into the inter-

twined enigmas of death and animals, enigmas that admit of no easy 

answers or resolution. This for him is the wellspring of the hunter's un-

easiness: "He does not have the final and firm conviction that his con-HUNTING: THE MEAT •> 359 

duct is correct. But neither, it should be understood, is he certain of the 

opposite." 

Ambivalence and ambiguity are the hunter's lot, and according to 

Ortega it has probably ever been thus. Like John Berger he believes that 

the mystery of animals —how they can be at once so like and unlike 

us —has always been one of the central mysteries of human life: "Hu-

manity sees itself as something emerging from animality but it cannot be sure of having transcended that state completely. The animal remains 

too close for us not to feel mysterious communication with it." Those 

moderns who have had the clearest idea about the animals, and there-

fore the least uneasiness about killing them, were the Cartesians, who 

decided animals were, in effect, mineral —insensible machines. Unfor-

tunately for us, they were wrong. 

So we are left standing there in the woods with our uneasiness and 

our disgust, and disgust's boon companion, shame. I mentioned earlier   

> that I

had not registered any such emotion in the moments after shoot-

ing my pig, but eventually it dawned, or fell, on me, like a great and un-

expected weight. It happened late that evening, when back at home I

opened my e-mail and saw that Angelo had sent me some digital pic-

tures under the subject heading Look the great hunter! I was eager to open 

them, excited to show my family my pig, since it hadn't come home 

with me, but was hanging in Angelo 's walk-in cooler. 

The image that appeared on my computer screen hit me like an un-

expected blow to the body. A hunter in an orange sweater was kneeling 

on the ground behind a pig the side of whose head has erupted in 

blood that is spreading like a river delta toward the bottom of the frame. The hunter's rifle is angled just so across his chest; clearly he is 

observing some hoary convention of the hunter's trophy portrait. One 

proprietary hand rests on the dead animal's broad flank. The man is 

looking into the camera with an expression of unbounded pride, wear-

ing a big shit-eating grin that might have been winning, if perhaps in-

comprehensible, had the bloodied carcass sprawled beneath him been 

cropped out of the frame. But the bloodied carcass was right there, 3 6 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

front and center, and it rendered that grin —there's no other word for 

> it

# —obscene. I felt as though I had stumbled on some stranger's 

pornography. I hurried my mouse to the corner of the image and 

clicked, closing it as quickly as I could. No one should ever see this. 

What could I possibly have been thinking? What was the man in that picture feeling?  

> I

couldn't for the life of me explain what could have inspired such a

## mad grin, it seemed so distant and alien from me now. If I didn't know 

better I would have said that the man in the picture was drunk. And 

perhaps he was, captured in the throes of some sort of Dionysian intox-

ication, the "bloodlust" that Ortega says will sometimes overtake the 

successful hunter. And what was I so damned proud of, anyway? I'd 

killed a pig with a gun, big deal. 

Like the mirror in the convenience store earlier that afternoon, An-

gelo's digital photo had shown me the hunt, and the hunter, from the 

outside, subjecting it to a merciless gaze that hunting can't withstand,  

> at

least not in the twenty -first century. Yet I'm not prepared to say that that gaze offers the more truthful view of the matter. The picture is a

jolting dispatch from the deep interior of an experience that does not 

easily travel across the borders of modern life. Angelo's pictures —there 

were more, and eventually I looked at them all —resemble in certain re-

spects the trophy photos sent home by soldiers, who shock their brides 

and mothers with images of themselves grinning astride the corpses of 

the enemy dead. They are entitled to their pride —killing is precisely 

what we've asked them to do —and yet do we really have to look at the pictures?  

> I've

looked at Angelo's pictures again, trying to figure out why they 

should have shamed me so. I realize it isn't the killing they record that   

> Ifelt

ashamed of, not exactly, but the manifest joy I seemed to be feel-

ing about what I'd done. This for many people is what is most offensive 

about hunting —to some, disgusting: that it encourages, or allows, us 

not only to kill but to take a certain pleasure in killing. It's not as though 

the rest of us don't countenance the killing of tens of millions of ani-

mals every year. Yet for some reason we feel more comfortable with the HUNTING: THE MEAT* 36 f

mechanical killing practiced, out of view and without emotion, by in-

dustrial agriculture. 

Perhaps there is a more generous light in which to regard the 

hunter's joy. Perhaps it is the joy of a creature succeeding at something 

he has discovered his nature has superbly equipped him to do, an ac-

tion that is less a perversion of that nature, his "creaturely character," 

than a fulfillment of it. But what of the animal in the picture? Well, the 

animal too has had the chance to fulfill its wild nature, has lived, and 

arguably even died, in a manner consistent with its creaturely character. 

Hers is, by the standards of animal death, a good one. But could I really 

say that yet? What if it turned out I couldn't eat this meat? I realized that 

the drama of the hunt doesn't end until the animal arrives at the table. 

"For one creature to mourn the death of another is a new thing un-

der the sun," wrote Aldo Leopold, himself a deeply conflicted hunter. It is a very good thing indeed, he suggests, but we would do well to rec-

ognize just how new it is, what a departure from the usual order of na-

ture this mourning represents. What shames at least some of us about 

hunting is the same thing that shames us about every other reminder of our origins: that is, the incompleteness of our transcendence of our an-

imal nature. 

So which view of me the hunter is the right one, the shame at the 

photograph or the joy of the man in it, the outside gaze or the inside 

one? The moralist is eager to decide this question once and for all, to 

join Cotton Mather in his noble quest for a more complete transcen-

dence. The hunter —or at least the grown-up hunter, the uneasy 

hunter —recognizes the truths disclosed in both views, which is why 

his joy is tempered by shame, his appetite shadowed by disgust. 

The fact that you cannot come out of hunting feeling unambigu-

ously good about it is perhaps what should commend the practice to  

> us.

You certainly don't come out of it eager to protest your innocence.   

> If I've

learned anything about hunting and eating meat it's that it's even 

messier than the moralist thinks. Having killed a pig and looked at my- 

> self

in that picture and now looking forward (if that's the word) to eat-3 6 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ing that pig, I have to say there is a part of me that envies the moral clar- 

> ity

of the vegetarian, the blamelessness of the tofu eater. Yet part of me  

> pities

him, too. Dreams of innocence are just that; they usually depend 

on a denial of reality that can be its own form of hubris. Ortega sug-

gests that there is an immorality in failing to look clearly at reality, or in 

believing that the sheer force of human will can somehow overcome it. 

"The preoccupation with what should be is estimable only when the 

respect for what is has been exhausted." 

"What is." I suppose that this as much as anything else, as much as a

pig or a meal, is what I was really hunting for, and what I returned from 

## my hunt with a slightly clearer sense of. "What is" is not an answer to 

anything, exactly; it doesn't tell you what to do or even what to think. 

Yet respect for what is does point us in a direction. That direction just 

happens to be the direction from which we came —to that place and 

time, I mean, where humans looked at the animals they killed, regarded 

them with reverence, and never ate them except with gratitude. 

There was one other picture in Angelo's e-mail that I didn't look at very 

closely until some time later, no doubt because it hadn't hit me over the 

head the way the trophy portrait had. This was the picture I took of An-

gelo cleaning my pig when I needed to break away. It's a straightfor-

ward snapshot of the pig hanging from the tree but taken from a

sufficient distance that you can see in that one frame the animal and the 

butcher and the oak tree against the sun-filled sky and the pig-plowed 

earth, sloping down to a brook below. You can't make out the buzzing 

yellow jackets or the turkey vultures doing lazy circles overhead or the 

acorns littering the ground, but I realized that here in this single picture 

you could actually observe this food chain in its totality, the entire cir-

cuit of energy and matter that had created the pig we were turning into 

meat for our meal. For there was the oak tree standing in the sun, light 

which it had transformed into the acorns that littered the ground and 

fed the pig that the man in the picture was turning into food. The man 

had done nothing to create this food chain, only stepped into a role HUNTING: THE MEAT 3 63 

prepared long ago for the Predator. And whatever of this Prey the man  

> left

behind the other animals here, the Scavengers, would in due course 

fold back into the earth, nourishing the oak so that it might in turn 

nourish another pig. Sun-soil-oak-pig-human: There it was, one of the 

food chains that have sustained life on earth for a million years made  

> visible

in a single frame, one uncluttered and most beautiful example 

of what is. NINETEEN 

# GATHERING 

## The Fungi 

Isn't it curious how in so many of our pastimes and hobbies we play at 

supplying one or another of our fundamental creaturely needs —for 

food, shelter, even clothing? So some people knit, others build things or 

chop wood, and a great many of us "work" at feeding ourselves —by 

gardening or hunting, fishing or foraging. An economy organized 

around a complex division of labor can usually get these jobs done for 

a fraction of the cost, in time or money, that it takes us to do them our-

selves, yet something in us apparently seeks confirmation that we still 

have the skills needed to provide for ourselves. You know, just in case. 

Evidently we want to be reminded how the fundamental processes that 

sustain us, by now hidden behind a globe-spanning scrim of economic 

complexity, actually work. It may be little more than a conceit at this 

point, but we like to think of ourselves as self-reliant, even if only for a

few hours on the weekend, even when growing the stuff yourself 

winds up costing twice as much as it would to buy it at the store. 

Playing at self-reliance takes different forms in different people, and 

you can probably tell a lot about a person by his choice of atavism: GATHERING: THE FUNGI 365 

whether he's drawn to the patient and solitary attentiveness of fishing, 

the strict mathematical syntax of building, the emotional drama of the 

hunt, or the mostly comic dialogue with other species that unfolds in 

the garden. Most of us have a pretty good idea which of these jobs we'd  

> try

for if somehow a time machine were to plunk us down in the Pleis-

tocene or Neolithic. 

At least until my adventures in hunting and gathering I'd always 

thought of myself as a Neolithic kind of guy. Growing food has been 

## my atavism of choice since I was ten years old, when I planted a "farm" 

in my parents' suburban yard and set up a farm stand patronized, pretty 

## much exclusively, by my mother. The mysteries of germination and 

flowering and fruiting engaged me from an early age, and the fact that 

by planting and working an ordinary patch of dirt you could in a few 

months' time harvest things of taste and value was, for me, nature's 

most enduring astonishment. It still is. 

Gardening is a way of being in nature steeped in assumptions of 

which the gardener is seldom more than vaguely aware —if at all. To 

work exclusively with domesticated species, for example, is bound to 

color your view of nature as being a fairly benign place, one that an-

swers to human desires (for beauty, for tastiness). In the garden you 

will also, understandably, come to think of whatever grows there as be-

longing to you, since it is more or less the product of your labors per-

formed on your land. And you will regard the wilder, less tractable 

residents of your garden, the ones you didn't invite, as "pests" —the 

Other. The gardener is a confirmed dualist, dividing his world into crisp 

categories: cultivated land and wilderness, domestic and wild species, 

mine and theirs, home and away. The gardener, like the farmer, lives in a well-marked and most legible world.  

> I

hadn't actually thought about the gardener's worldview in this 

light till I'd spent some time mushroom hunting, which proposes a

whole other way of being in nature. Hunting for mushrooms is an op-

eration that superficially resembles harvesting —you're looking around 

in nature for the ready-to-eat —yet you quickly discover that the two  

> activities

could hardly be more different. For starters, mushrooms are 3 66 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

usually hunted in an unfamiliar place where you stand a very good 

chance of getting lost, particularly since you are looking down at the 

ground so determinedly the whole time. Getting lost just isn't much of  

> a

problem in the garden. (Which is why gardeners looking to create  

> that

experience plant mazes.) And whereas in your garden the ready-

to-eat tomato beckons to you, flashing red from out of the undifferen- 

> tiated

green, mushrooms definitely hide. Picking and eating the wrong 

ones could get you killed, too, something not easily done in the gar-

den. No, gratifying human needs and desires is just not what mush-

rooms are about. Mushrooms, you soon discover, are wild things in 

every way, beings pursuing their own agenda quite apart from ours. 

Which is why "hunting," rather than harvesting, is the mycophile's 

preferred term of art.  

> 1.

## FIVE CHANTERELLES  

> It

was a Sunday morning in late January when I got the call from 

Angelo. 

"The chanterelles are up," he announced. 

## "How do you know? Have you been out looking?" 

"No, not yet. But it's been three weeks since the big rains." We'd had  

> a

torrential week between the holidays. "They're up now, I'm sure of  

> that.

# We should go tomorrow." 

At the time I barely knew Angelo (we had yet to go pig hunting) 

> ,

which made his invitation to come mushrooming with him all the 

more generous. Mushroom hunters are famously protective of their 

"spots," and a good chanterelle spot is a precious personal possession 

(though not quite as precious as a good porcini spot) . Before Angelo 

agreed to take me I'd asked a slew of acquaintances I knew to be my-

cophiles if I might accompany them. (The Bay Area is home to many 

such people, probably because mushroom hunting marries the region's 

two guiding obsessions: eating and the outdoors.) I was always careful 

to solemnly swear to protect the location of their spots. For some peo-GATHERING: THE FUNGI '• 367 

pie you could see at once that this was an entirely outrageous request, 

tantamount to asking if I might borrow their credit card for the after-

noon. Others reacted more calmly, yet always cagily. Angelo's friend 

Jean-Pierre is reputed to have good chanterelle spots right within the 

Berkeley city limits, but he repeatedly found polite ways to deflect my 

entreaties into the distant future. Several mushroom hunters responded 

to my request with the same joke: "Sure, you can come mushroom 

hunting with me, but I must tell you that immediately afterward I will 

have to kill you." What you fully expect to follow such a jokey warning  

> (a

warning I always parried with an offer to wear a blindfold coming 

and going) is some sort of conditional invitation, but it never arrives. 

Without ever exactly saying no, the mushroom hunter will deftly beg 

off or change the subject. I thought maybe the problem was that I was  

> a writer,

somebody who might do something as crazy as publish the lo-

cation of a favorite spot, so I emphasized that a journalist would sooner 

go to jail than reveal a secret from a confidential source. This swayed 

precisely no one. I was beginning to think it was hopeless, that I was 

going to have to learn to hunt mushrooms from books —a dubious, not  

> to

mention dangerous, proposition. And then Angelo called. 

Though I probably shouldn't overstate Angelo's generosity. The 

place he took me mushrooming was on private and gated land owned 

by an old friend of his, so it wasn't as though he was giving away the 

family jewels. The property was a vineyard outside of Glen Ellen, with 

several hundred untended acres of oak chaparral stretching to the 

northeast toward St. Helena. As soon as you stepped out of the mani-

cured vineyard the land relaxed into gently rolling savanna, with broad 

sloping passages of grass, verdant after the winter rains, punctuated by 

shady groves of live oak and bay laurel. 

The chanterelle is a mycorrhizal species, which means it lives in as-

sociation with the roots of plants —oak trees, in the chanterelle's case, 

and usually oak trees of a venerable age. Though there must have been 

hundreds of promisingly ancient oaks here, Angelo, who had been 

hunting chanterelles on the property for years, seemed to be on a first 

name basis with every one of them. "That one there is a producer," he'd 3 68 •:• THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> tell

me, pointing across the meadow with his forked walking stick to an 

unremarkable tree. "But the one next to it, I never once found a mush-

room there."  

> I

cut my own walking stick from an oak branch and set off across 

the meadow to hunt beneath the tree Angelo had declared a good pro-

ducer. He had instructed me to use the stick to turn over the leaf litter 

wherever it seemed uplifted. The stick also would carry spores from 

one tree to another, Angelo explained; evidently he regarded himself as 

something of a bumblebee to the chanterelles, transporting their genes 

from tree to tree. (In general mushroom hunters view their role in na-

ture as benign.) I looked around my tree for a few minutes, walking a

stooped circle under its drip line, flicking the leaf litter here and there 

with my stick, but I saw nothing. Eventually Angelo came over and 

pointed to a spot no more than a yard from where I stood. I looked, I

stared, but still saw nothing but a chaotic field of tan leaves and tangled 

branches. Angelo got down on his knees and brushed the leaves and  

> soil

away to reveal a bright squash-colored trumpet the size of his fist. 

## He cut it at the base with a knife and handed it to me; the mushroom 

was unexpectedly heavy, and cool to the touch. 

# How in the world had he spotted it? The mushroom hadn't even 

peeked up from the leaf litter yet. Apparently you had to study the 

leaves for subtle signs of hydraulic lift from below, and then look at the 

ground sideways, because the fat gold shafts of the chanterelles often 

reveal themselves before their tops break through the leaves. Yet when 

Angelo pointed to another spot under the same tree, a spot where he 

had obviously seen another mushroom, I was still blind. Not until he 

had shuffled the leaves with the tip of his stick did the golden nugget 

of fungus flash at me. I became convinced that Angelo had some other 

sense working for him besides sight, that he must be smelling the chanterelles before looking down to see them. 

But that's apparently how it goes with hunting mushrooms: You 

have to get your eyes on, as hunters will sometimes put it. And after follow-

ing Angelo around for a while, I did begin to get my eyes on, a little, 

though at first, oddly enough, this would only happen when I was in GATHERING: THE FUNGI * 369 

Angelo's presence, working the same oak tree. Other novices talk about  

> this

phenomenon, and I suspect it's a little like the trick of the counting 

horse, who is not really doing arithmetic, as it appears, but is merely 

picking up subtle clues in the body language of its trainer. Wherever 

Angelo lingered, wherever the beams of his gaze raked the ground with 

particular intensity, I would look and occasionally would see. I was the 

horse who could count, the man who could find a chanterelle using 

someone else's eyes. 

But before the morning was out I'd begun to find a few chanterelles 

on my own. I began to understand what it meant to have my eyes on, 

and the chanterelles started to pop out of the landscape, one and then 

another, almost as though they were beckoning to me. So had I stum-

bled on a particularly good spot or had I learned at last how to see 

them? Nature or nurture? There was no way of telling, though I did have the eerie experience of resurveying the very same patch of ground 

and finding a Siamese pair of chanterelles, bright as double egg yolks, 

in a spot where a moment before I could swear there had been nothing 

but the tan carpet of leaves. Either they had just popped up or visual 

perception is a lot more variable, and psychological, than we think. It is 

certainly ruled by expectation, because whenever I was convinced I was 

in a good spot the mushrooms were more likely to appear. "Seeing is 

believing" has it backward when it comes to hunting mushrooms; in   

> this case,

believing is seeing. My ability to see mushrooms seemed to 

function less like a window than a tool, a constructed and wielded 

thing. 

After spotting a couple of nice ones I developed a measure of con-

fidence that ultimately proved to be unfounded. Based on my still mod- 

> est

scores I worked out a snap theory of the Good Spot, which involved 

the optimal springiness of the soil and the distance from the trunk, but 

the theory didn't hold up. After a brief run of luck I promptly went 

blind again —and failed to find another mushroom all day. I would say 

there were no more mushrooms left to find, except that Angelo was still 

finding them under canopies I had supposedly exhausted; not a lot 

# —

## we were a few days early, he decided —but enough to fill a grocery bag. 3 70 » THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> I

had managed to find a total of five, which doesn't sound like much 

except that several of them weighed close to a pound each. My five 

chanterelles were tremendous, beautiful things I couldn't wait to taste. 

## And that night I did. I washed off the dirt, patted them dry, and then 

sliced the chanterelles into creamy white slabs. They smelled faintly of 

apricots, and I knew at once that this was the same mushroom I had 

found near my house, the one I had been afraid to taste. The squashy 

hue matched, and these had the same shallow gills, ridges really, run-

ning up the stalk, which flared out to meet the gently in-folded cap like 

a stout golden vase. I sauteed the chanterelles as Angelo had recom-

mended, first in a dry frying pan to sweat out their water, which was 

copious, and then with butter and shallots. The mushrooms were deli-

cious in a subtle way that could easily be overwhelmed or overlooked. 

They had a delicate flavor, fruity with a hint of pepper, and a firm but  

> silky

texture. 

You might reasonably ask if, eating my wild mushrooms, I felt the   

> least bit

concerned about waking up dead. Did I harbor any lingering 

doubts that these mushrooms were really chanterelles —edible delica- 

> cies

and not some deadly poison Angelo had mistaken for chanterelles? 

## An understandable question, yet oddly enough, in view of my myco-

phobic predilections, it was no longer an issue. Oh, maybe I felt the 

vaguest shadow of a doubt as I lifted the first forkful, but it was easily 

brushed aside. I trusted Angelo implicitly, and besides, these mush-

rooms smelled and tasted right. 

At dinner that night we joked about mushroom poisoning, recalling 

the time Judith had stumbled upon a prodigious patch of morels while 

biking with her friend Christopher in Connecticut. She came home 

with a trash bag half full of them, an astounding haul. But I could not 

bring myself to serve the mushrooms until we could get some kind of 

confirmation that these were indeed morels and not, say, the "false 

morels" that the field guides warned against. But how to be sure? I

couldn't quite trust the books, or at least my reading of them. The solu-

tion to the dilemma seemed obvious, if perhaps a little heartless. I pro-

posed to Judith we put the morels in the refrigerator overnight, and GATHERING: THE FUNGI * 371 

then give Christopher a call in the morning. Assuming he was suffi-  

> ciently alive

to answer his phone, he would undoubtedly mention 

whether he'd eaten the morels the previous night, and we would then 

## know ours were safe to eat. I saw no reason to mention his role as an 

experimental human subject. 

Well, that's one way of dealing with the omnivore's dilemma. Wild 

mushrooms in general throw that dilemma into particularly sharp re- 

> lief,

since they confront us simultaneously with some of the edible 

world's greatest rewards and gravest risks. Arguably, mushroom eating 

poses the starkest case of the omnivore's dilemma, which could explain 

## why people hold such strong feelings, pro or con, on the subject of 

wild mushrooms. As mycologists are fond of pointing out, you can 

divide most people, and even whole cultures, into mycophiles and 

mycophobes. Anglo-Americans are notoriously mycophobic, while 

Europeans and Russians tend to be passionate mycophiles, or so mush-

roomers will tell you. But I suspect most of us harbor both impulses in 

varying proportions, approaching the wild mushroom with a height-

ened sense of the omnivore's basic tension as we struggle to balance 

our adventurousness in eating against a protective fear, our neophilia 

against our neophobia. 

As the case of mushrooms suggests the omnivore's dilemma often 

comes down to a question of identification —to knowing exactly what   

> it is

you are preparing to eat. From the moment Angelo handed me that  

> first

mushroom, what is and is not a chanterelle suddenly seemed as 

plain to me as sunshine. I knew right then that the next time I found a

chanterelle, anywhere, I would recognize it and not hesitate to eat it. 

Which is peculiar, when you consider that in the case of the chanterelle  

> I

found in my neighborhood, a half dozen authoritative field guides by 

credentialed mycologists had failed to convince me beyond a reason-

able doubt of something I now was willing to bet my life on, based on 

the say-so of one Sicilian guy with no mycological training whatsoever. 

# How could that be? 

In deciding whether or not to ingest a new food, the omnivore will 

happily follow the lead of a fellow omnivore who has eaten the same 3 72 •> THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

food and lived to talk about it. This is one advantage we have over the  

> rat,

which has no way of sharing with other rats the results of his di-

gestive experiments with novel foodstuffs. For the individual human, 

his community and culture successfully mediate the omnivore's dilemma, 

telling him what other people have safely eaten in the past as well as 

## how they ate it. Just imagine if we had to decide every such edibility 

question on our own; only the bravest or most foolish of us would ever 

eat a mushroom. The social contract is a great boon to omnivores in 

general, and to mushroom eaters in particular. 

The field guides contain our culture's accumulated wisdom on the 

subject of mushrooms. Curiously, though, the process of imparting and 

absorbing this life-and-death information works much better in person 

than it does on paper, whether through writing or even photography. 

Andrew Weil discusses this phenomenon in a wonderful series of essays 

on mushrooms he's collected in a volume called The Marriage of the Sun and 

Moon. "One learns most mushrooms in only one way: through people 

## who know them. It is terribly difficult to do it from books, pictures, or 

written descriptions."  

> I

wonder if books fail us here because the teaching transaction 

# —        

> This one is good to eat, that one not

# —is so fundamental, even primordial, that 

we're instinctively reluctant to trust it to any communication medium 

save the oldest: that is, direct personal testimony from, to put it bluntly, 

survivors. After all, precisely what is meant by "this one," the myriad 

qualities embedded in that modest little pronoun, can be conveyed 

only imperfectly in words and pictures. Our ability to identify plants 

and fungi with confidence, which after all is one of the most critical 

tools of our survival, involves far more sensory information than can 

ever be printed on a page; it is, truly, a form of "body knowledge" not 

easily reduced or conveyed over a distance. But now that I have held a

freshly picked chanterelle in my hands, smelled its apricoty scent, reg-

istered its specific heft and the precise quality of its cool dampness (and 

absorbed who knows how many other qualities beneath the threshold 

of conscious notice), I'll recognize the next one without a moment's 

hesitation. At least in the case of this one species, my mycophobic in-GATHERING: THE FUNGI* 37 3 

> stinct

has been stilled, allowing me to enjoy. It's not every day you ac-

quire such a sturdy piece of knowledge. 

2. MUSHROOMS ARE MYSTERIOUS  

> I

put that knowledge to good use the following week, when I returned 

to the oak tree near my house and found beneath it a gold rush of 

chanterelles. I hadn't thought to bring a bag, and there were more 

chanterelles than I could carry, so I made a carrier of my T-shirt, folding  

> it

up in front of me like a basket, and then filled it with the big, mud-

encrusted mushrooms. I drew looks from passers-by —looks of envy, I

decided, though at the time I was so excited I may have gotten that 

wrong. So now I have a spot and, just like Jean-Pierre's, it's right here in 

town. (Please don't ask me where it is; I don't want to have to kill you.) 

Once the rains stopped in April the chanterelles were done for the  

> year,

and there wouldn't be another important mushroom to hunt un- 

> til

the morels came up in May. I used the time before then to read about 

mushrooms and talk to mycologists, hoping to answer some of the 

questions I had collected about fungi, a life form I was beginning to re-

gard as deeply mysterious. What made mushrooms mushroom when 

and where they did? Why do chanterelles associate with oaks and 

morels with pines? Why under this tree and not that one? How long do 

they live? Why do some mushrooms manufacture deadly toxins, not to 

mention powerful hallucinogens and a range of delicious flavors? I

brought the gardener's perspective to these plantlike objects, but of 

course they're not plants, and plant knowledge is all but useless in un-

derstanding fungi, which are in fact more closely related to animals 

than they are to plants. 

As it happens the answers to most of my questions about mush-

rooms, even the most straightforward ones, are elusive. Indeed, it is 

humbling to realize just how little we know about this, the third king-

## dom of life on earth. The books I consulted brimmed with confessions 

of their ignorance: "it is not known why this should be" . . . "the num-3 74 + THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ber of genders among fungi is as yet undetermined" . . . "the exact 

mechanisms by which this phenomenon occurs are not entirely under-

stood at this time" . . . "the fundamental chemistry responsible for the 

vivid hallucinations was a mystery then, and remains so today" . . . "it  

> is

not certain whether the morel is a saprophytic or a mycorrhizal 

species, or perhaps it is both, a changeling" . . . and so on, through 

thousands of pages of the mycological literature. When I went to visit 

David Arora, the renowned mycologist whose doorstop of a field guide, 

Mushrooms Demystified, is the West Coast mushroomer's bible, I asked him 

what he considered the big open questions in his field. Without a mo-

ment's hesitation he named two: "Why here and not there? Why now 

and not then?" 

In other words, we don't know the most basic things about mush-

rooms. 

Part of the problem is simply that fungi are very difficult to observe. 

What we call a mushroom is only the tip of the iceberg of a much big-

ger and essentially invisible organism that lives most of its life under-

ground. The mushroom is the "fruiting body" of a subterranean 

network of microscopic hyphae, improbably long rootlike cells that 

thread themselves through the soil like neurons. Bunched like cables, 

the hyphae form webs of (still microscopic) mycelium. Mycologists 

can't dig up a mushroom like a plant to study its structure because its 

mycelia are too tiny and delicate to tease from the soil without disinte-grating. Hard as it may be to see a mushroom —the most visible and 

tangible part! —to see the whole organism of which it is merely a com-

ponent may simply be impossible. Fungi also lack the comprehensible 

syntax of plants, the orderly and visible chronology of seed and vege- 

> tative

growth, flower, fruit, and seed again. The fungi surely have a syn-

tax of their own, but we don't know all its rules, especially the ones that 

govern the creation of a mushroom, which can take three years or  

> thirty,

depending. On what? We don't really know. All of which makes 

mushrooms seem autochthonous, arising seemingly from nowhere, 

seemingly without cause. 

Fungi, lacking chlorophyll, differ from plants in that they can't GATHERING: THF. FUNGI 3 75 

manufacture food energy from the sun. Like animals, they feed on or-

ganic matter made by plants, or by plant eaters. Most of the fungi we  

> eat

obtain their energy by one of two means: saprophytically, by de-

composing dead vegetable matter, and mycorrhizally, by associating 

with the roots of living plants. Among the saprophytes, many of which 

can be cultivated by inoculating a suitable mass of dead organic matter  

> (logs,

manure, grain) with their spores, are the common white button 

mushrooms, shiitakes, cremini, Portobellos, and oyster mushrooms. 

Most of the choicest wild mushrooms are impossible to cultivate, or 

nearly so, since they need living and often very old trees in order to 

grow, and can take several decades to fruit. The mycelium can grow 

more or less indefinitely, in some cases for centuries, without necessar-  

> ily fruiting.

## A single fungus recently found in Michigan covers an area 

of forty acres underground and is thought to be a few centuries old. So 

inoculating old oaks or pines is no guarantee of harvesting future 

mushrooms, at least not on a human time scale. Presumably, these fungi  

> live

and die on an arboreal time scale. 

Mycorrhizal fungi have coevolved with trees, with whom they've 

worked out a mutually beneficial relationship in which they trade the 

products of their very different metabolisms. If the special genius of 

plants is photosynthesis, the ability of chlorophyll to transform sun- 

> light

and water and soil minerals into carbohydrates, the special genius 

of fungi is the ability to break down organic molecules and minerals 

into simple molecules and atoms through the action of their powerful 

enzymes. The hyphae surround or penetrate the plant's roots, providing 

them with a steady diet of elements in exchange for a drop of simple 

sugars that the plant synthesizes in its leaves. The network of hyphae  

> vastly

extends the effective reach and surface area of a plant's root sys-

tem, and while trees can survive without their fungal associates, they 

seldom thrive. It is thought that the fungi may also protect their plant 

hosts from bacterial and fungal diseases. 

The talent of fungi for decomposing and recycling organic matter is 

what makes them indispensable, not only to trees but to all life on   

> earth. If

the soil is the earth's stomach, fungi supply its digestive en-376* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

zymes —literally. Without fungi to break things down, the earth would 

long ago have suffocated beneath a blanket of organic matter created by  

> plants;

the dead would pile up without end, the carbon cycle would 

cease to function, and living things would run out of things to eat. We 

tend to train our attention and science on life and growth, but of course 

death and decomposition are no less important to nature's operations, 

and the fungi are the undisputed rulers of this realm. 

That the fungi are so steeped in death might account for much of 

their mystery and our mycophobia. They stand on the threshold be-

tween the living and the dead, breaking the dead down into food for 

the living, a process on which no one likes to dwell. Cemeteries are 

usually good places to hunt for mushrooms. (Mexicans call mushrooms 

came de hs muertos —"flesh of the dead.") The fact that mushrooms can 

themselves be direct agents of death doesn't exactly shine their reputa-  

> tion, either.

Just why they should produce such potent toxins isn't well 

understood; many mycologists assume the toxins are defenses, but oth- 

> ers

point out that if poisoning the animals that eat you is such a good 

survival strategy, then why aren't all mushrooms poisonous by now? 

Some of their toxins may simply be fungal tools for doing what fungi 

do: breaking down complicated organic compounds. What the deadly 

amanita does to a human liver is, in effect, to digest it from within. 

The evolutionary reason many mushrooms produce powerful hal-

lucinogens is even more mysterious, though it probably has nothing to 

do with creating hallucinations in human brains. As the word intoxica-

tion implies, substances that poison the body sometimes can change 

consciousness, too. This might explain why mycophiles think civilians 

make far too much of the dangers of mushrooms, which they see as oc-

cupying a continuum from the deadly to the really interesting. The dose 

makes the poison, as they say, and the same mushroom toxins that can  

> kill

can also, in smaller doses, produce astonishing mental effects, rang-

ing from the ecstatic to the horrific. No doubt the mind-altering prop- 

> erties

of many common mushrooms, known to people for thousands 

of years, have nourished the cult of mystery surrounding the fungal 

kingdom, in this case feeding both mycophobia and mycophilia alike. GATHERING: THE FUNGI J 77 

Andrew Weil points out an interesting paradox about mushrooms:   

> It's difficult

to reconcile the extraordinary energies of these organisms 

with the fact that they contain relatively little of the kind of energy that  

> scientists

usually measure: calories. Because they don't supply many  

> calories,

nutritionists don't regard mushrooms as an important source 

of nutrition. (They do provide some minerals and vitamins, as well as a

few essential amino acids, which are what give some species their 

meaty flavor.) But calories are simply units of solar energy that have 

been captured and stored by green plants and, as Weil points out, 

"mushrooms have little to do with the sun." They emerge at night and 

wither in the light of day. Their energies are of an entirely different or-

der from those of plants, and their energies are prodigious and strange. 

Consider: 

There are fungi like the shaggy mane (Coprinus comatus) that can push 

their soft fleshy tissue through asphalt. Inky caps (Coprinus atramentarius) 

can mushroom in a matter of hours and then, over the course of a day, 

dissolve themselves into a puddle of blackish ink. Oyster mushrooms   

> (Pleurotus ostreatus)

can digest a pile of petrochemical sludge in a fort-

night, transforming the toxic waste into edible protein. (This alchemy 

makes more sense when you recall that what saprophytic mushrooms 

have evolved to do is break down complex organic molecules, which is 

precisely what petrochemicals are.) Jack o'lanterns (Omphalotus olivascens) 

can glow in the dark, emitting an eerie blue bioluminescence for rea-

sons unknown. The psilocybes can alter the texture of human con-

sciousness and inspire visions; Ananita muscaria can derange the mind. 

And of course there are the handful of fungi that can kill. 

# We don't have the scientific tools to measure or even account for 

these fungi's unusual powers. Weil speculates that their energies derive 

from the moon rather than the sun, that mushrooms contain, instead of 

calories of solar origin, prodigious amounts of lunar energy. 

Okay, it is hard, I agree, to avoid the conclusion that some of the 

people who write about mushrooms have themselves partaken, perhaps 

immoderately, of the mind-altering kinds. Their reverence for their sub- 

> ject

runs so deep that they will pursue it wherever it leads, even if that 378* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

means occasionally leaping the fence of current scientific understand- 

> ing.

In the case of mushrooms, that's not a very tall or sturdy fence. A

powerful and compelling strain of mysticism runs like branching 

mycelium through the mycological literature, where I encountered one 

incredible speculation after another: that the mycelia of fungi are liter- 

> ally

neurons, together comprising an organ of terrestrial intelligence 

and communication (Paul Stamets) ; that the ingestion of hallucino-

genic mushrooms by the higher primates spurred the rapid evolution 

of the human brain (Terence McKenna) ; that the hallucinogenic mush-

rooms ingested by early man inspired the shamanic visions that led 

to the birth of religion (Gordon Wasson) ; that the ritual ingestion of a

hallucinogenic fungus —called ergot —by Greek thinkers (including 

Plato) at Eleusis is responsible for some of the greatest achievements of 

Greek culture, including Platonic philosophy (Wasson again) ; that wild 

mushrooms in the diet, by nourishing the human unconscious with lu-

nar energy, "stimulate imagination and intuition" (Andrew Weil) 

> .

I'm not prepared to discount any of these speculations just because 

they're not provable by our science. Mushrooms are mysterious. Who's 

to say the day won't come when science will be able to measure the 

fungi's exotic energies, perhaps even calculate our minimum daily re-

quirement of lunar calories? 

3. WORKING THE BURN 

After the first pig hunt Jean-Pierre had driven me home, and I used the 

captive car time to probe him once again on the subject of mushrooms. 

## He yielded no ground, but did mention a mushroom hunter by the 

## name of Anthony Tassinello, who had shown up at his restaurant earlier 

in the week with several pounds of morels. Jean-Pierre offered to put 

# me in touch with Anthony. (It is amazing the lengths to which some 

people will go to deflect attention from their own mushroom spots.) 

True to his word, Jean-Pierre sent an e-mail to Anthony, who ex-

pressed a willingness to take me morel hunting. I was surprised he'd let GATHERING: THE FUNGI * 379 

a complete stranger tag along, but after some back and forth by e-mail,  

> it

began to make more sense. The morels were "on," and Anthony could 

use an extra pair of hands, especially ones that were asking for nothing 

in return. As for concerns I might compromise his spots (I swore my 

usual oaths) , the secrecy issue is not nearly so touchy in the case of the 

"burn morels" we would be hunting. These are morels that fruit in pro-

fusion the spring following a pine forest fire. Even if I were to disclose  

> classified

information, it would have little value beyond this spring 

# —

indeed, beyond the next couple of weeks, since he fully expected the 

entire California mycological community to descend on this burn the 

## moment the word got out. 

Anthony e-mailed that I should meet him in front of his house Fri-

day morning at 6:00 a.m. sharp, warning me to come prepared for a

harsh and unpredictable environment. "We'll go rain, snow, or shine. 

Don't laugh: It has snowed once already this spring, and we managed 

to find morels poking through the accumulation. It wasn't fun, but 

memorable. 

"The weather where we'll hunt can be very different from here, and 

even from the valley. We'll be hiking nearly a mile above sea level, 

and it can be hot, cold, or wet, all in a matter of hours. Bring light lay- 

> ers

and rain gear just in case. A solid pair of hiking boots with ankle 

support is a must: It is very steep, rocky terrain with huge, burned   

> fallen trees

and ground that is thoroughly soaked. Bring a hat, the sun  

> is

stronger at this elevation, plus it keeps cedar needles and spiderwebs 

out of your face and can double as a mushroom sack when your basket   

> is full."

Anthony also advised me to bring sunscreen and bug spray (for 

mosquitoes), at least a gallon of water, ChapStick, and, if I owned one, 

a walkie-talkie. 

Morel hunting didn't sound like much fun, more like survival train-

ing than a walk in the woods. I crossed my fingers that Anthony was  

> just

trying to scare me, and set my alarm for 4:30 a.m., wondering why    

> it is all

these hunting-gathering expeditions had to begin at such un-

godly hours in the morning. In the case of the pigs, I understood the 

need to be ready when the animals were still active early in the day, but J«0* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> it's

not as though these morels were going anywhere after lunch. Per-

haps when you're foraging you just want as much daylight as possible. 

Or maybe we wanted the early start to beat competing foragers to the 

best spots.  

> I

pulled up to Anthony's curb a little before six to find two thirtyish-

looking men in rain slickers loading an SUV with enough materiel to 

provision a weeklong campaign in hostile territory. Anthony was a rail- 

> thin,

angular six-footer with a goatee in the style of Frank Zappa; his 

friend Ben Baily was a somewhat rounder and softer man with an easy 

laugh. I learned on the long ride across the Central Valley that Anthony 

and Ben were childhood friends from Piscataway, New Jersey; after col-

lege they'd both made the pilgrimage to the Bay Area to become chefs. 

Anthony had been working as a pastry chef at Chez Panisse when one 

afternoon a backwoodsy-looking fellow dressed in camouflage showed 

up at the kitchen door with crates of wild mushrooms.  

> "I

love to eat mushrooms, so I put it in his ear that I wanted to go 

out with him some time, and eventually it happened. He took me up to 

Sonoma and we found boletes and chanterelles. We just went outside 

and found dinner! It was such a feeling of empowerment, to feed your- 

> self

by figuring out the puzzle of nature." Anthony still works as a chef, 

mostly doing private dinners, which leaves many of his days free for 

## mushroom hunting, usually with Ben (who also works as a chef). An-

thony mentioned that we were going to be joined today by someone 

they'd met at the burn the week before, a young guy known to them 

only by his mycological handle: Paulie Porcini.  

> I

gathered that Paulie Porcini was part of the subculture of mush-

room hunters who travel up and down the West Coast, following the 

seasonal fruiting of the fungi: porcinis in the fall, chanterelles in win- 

> ter,

morels in the spring. "These are people living out of vans," Ben ex-

plained, "not the types who ever watch the five o'clock news." They 

cobble together a living selling their mushrooms to brokers who set up 

shop in motel rooms near the forests, post signs, and pay the hunters in 

cash. Anthony and Ben aren't really a part of this world; they hold jobs, GATHERING: THE FUNGI* J 8f  

> live

in houses, and sell their mushrooms directly to restaurants. "We 

don't think of ourselves as professionals yet," Anthony said. 

## We drove for several hours through the valley and then gradually 

ascended into the Sierra to Eldorado National Forest, a twelve-hundred-

square-mile swath of pine and cedar stretched between Lake Tahoe and 

Yosemite. As we climbed into the mountains the temperature dropped 

## down into the thirties and a frozen rain began to pelt the windshield. 

Along the roadside patches of old, dirty snow grew steadily larger and 

fresher until they expanded to cover everything. It was early May, but 

## we had driven back into winter. 

The morels come up on pine fire lands just as the snow cover retreats 

and the soil begins to warm, so after entering the burn area at about five 

thousand feet we descended along a logging road, looking for the fron- 

> tier

of white snow and blackened earth. At about forty-five hundred feet 

we found it: a forbidding moonscape in black and white. We knew our  

> altitude

because Anthony and Ben, like many mushroom hunters these  

> days,

carry portable Global Positioning System (GPS) locators —to mark 

good spots, calculate their altitude, and keep from getting lost. 

# We parked the SUV and had an initial look around. Soon after, 

Paulie Porcini appeared, a bearded, self-contained fellow in his twenties 

## who carried a walking stick and had a bandanna wrapped around his 

head. Paulie, a man of few words, seemed like someone who was very 

comfortable in the woods. 

The forest was gorgeous, and the forest was ghastly. Ghastly because  

> it

was, for as far as you could see, a graveyard of vertically soaring 

trunks that had been shorn of every horizontal, every branch, by the  

> fire.

For five days the previous October the "power fire," as it was called  

> (it

began near a power station), had roared across these mountains, 

consuming seventeen thousand acres of pine and cedar before a change 

in the wind direction allowed firefighters to contain it. The fire had 

been so fierce in places that it had vaporized whole trees. The only rea-

son you knew this was because the flames, still ravenous for wood, had 

followed the trunks all the way down beneath the forest floor to con-3 8 2 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

sume the tree's roots, creating voids that reached deep into the earth. 

These blackened craters resembled molds that were you to fill them 

with plaster would yield a ghostly model of a pine tree's entire root sys-

tem, accurate to the last detail. Not much lived in this desolate land-

scape: a handful of raptors (we heard owls), the occasional dazed  

> squirrel,

and here and there a fresh green spray of miner's lettuce that 

shocked the black ground. 

## And yet if you achieved a slightly more aestheticized view of the 

scene, the same landscape exhibited a tranquil, almost modernist ab-

straction that was just beautiful. The dead-straight black verticals or-

dered the hillsides as evenly as bristles on a brush, their steady rhythm 

varied every so often by a heavy black slash angled weirdly across the  

> grid.

The underlying shapes of the land, which was deeply creased into 

ravines gushing with snowmelt, had the explicitness of a line drawing, 

everything in view reduced to its formal essentials. 

But this was virtually the last time all day I lifted my gaze to take in 

the panorama: As soon as Ben announced he'd spotted his first morel, I

began, exclusively and determinedly, looking down. There I found a

thick carpet of pine needles amid the charred carcasses of pine. A morel 

resembles a tanned finger wearing a dark and deeply honeycombed 

dunce cap. They're a decidedly comic-looking mushroom, resembling 

leprechauns or little penises. The morel's distinctive form and pattern-

ing would make it easy to spot if not for its color, which ranges 

from dun to black and could not blend in more completely with a

charred landscape. From a distance, the tiny stumps of burned saplings 

are easily mistaken for morels; so are the blackened pinecones, many of 

which stuck straight out of the ground like chubby thumbs and fooled 

you with their patterning, rhythmic like the morels. This was hard 

looking, and for the first hour or so, every auspicious sighting turned out on closer inspection to be one or the other of these morel im-

posters. 

To help me get my eyes on Ben —who by common consent had the 

best eyes on our team —began leaving in place patches of morels he'd 

found, so I could study them in situ, approaching a patch from various GATHERING: THE FUNGI * 3 8 3

angles until I'd settled on the proper focal length and angle. The 

trigonometry of the gaze was everything, and I found that if I actually 

got down on the ground —which just below the layer of pine duff 

formed a mattress of sliding mud —I could see the little hats popping 

up here and there, morels that a moment before had been utterly invis- 

> ible.

## When Ben spotted me hunting in a prone position, he approved. 

"We say, 'Stop, drop, and roll,' because you can see things at ground  

> level

you'll never see from above." 

Ben and Anthony had a slew of these mushroom-hunting adages 

and I collected them over the course of the day. "Seeing is boleting" 

means you never see any mushrooms until someone else has demon-

strated their presence by finding one. "Mushroom frustration" is what 

you feel when everyone around you is seeing them and you're still 

blind —until, that is, you find your first, thereby breaking your "mush-

room virginity." Then there's the "cluster fuck," when your eyes are on 

and other hunters crowd you, hoping your good fortune will rub off. 

Cluster fucking, I was given to understand, was bad manners. And then 

there was the "screen saver" —the fact that after several hours interro-

gating the ground for little brown dunce caps, their images will be 

burned on your retinas. "You'll see. When you get into bed tonight," 

Ben said, "you'll shut your eyes and there they'll be again —wall-to-

wall morels." 

Anthony and Ben had dozens of theories about mushrooms —as 

well as a healthy appreciation for the limitations of all theories involv-

ing something as mysterious as mushrooms. They cataloged for me the 

"indicator species" for morels: other, more conspicuous plants and 

fungi that signaled their likely presence. Dogwood in bloom was a

good sign that the soil had reached the proper temperature, as was, al-

legedly, the appearance of the ice plant, a big bright red phallus rising 

up from the otherwise lifeless forest floor; however, there were no 

morels in the vicinity of the one ice plant I spotted. A tiny brown cup 

fungus was another indicator species that proved somewhat more reli- 

> able.

Anthony and Ben were convinced the morels would appear at the 

same altitude in any given week, so wherever we wandered we con-3S4*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

suited the GPS to ascertain how high we were and tried to stay around 

forty-four hundred feet.  

> I

could see why you would want theories to organize your hunting;  

> I'd

worked up my own while hunting chanterelles with Angelo. There 

was so much ground to cover, and the morels were so damned quiet, 

that theories helped divide the field on which we were playing this 

game of hide-and-seek into warmer and colder areas. The theories told 

you when to intensify your attention, scrupulously combing the forest 

floor with your eyes, and when you could safely rest it. For the hunter-

gatherer, high-quality attentiveness is a precious but limited resource, 

and theories, by encapsulating past experience, help you to deploy it 

most efficiently. 

"But you must never forget the final theory, the theory of all theo- 

> ries,"

Ben warned near the end of my morning tutorial. "We call it 

TPITP: The Proof Is in the Pudding." In other words, when hunting 

mushrooms you should be prepared to jettison all previous theories 

and go with whatever seems to be working in this particular place, at  

> this

particular time. Mushrooms behave unpredictably, and theories can 

go only so far in pushing back their mystery. "It's a lot like gambling," 

Ben said. "You're looking for the big score, the mother lode. The con-

ditions might be perfect in every way, but you never know what you're 

going to find around the next bend —it could be a sea of mushrooms, 

or nothing at all." 

The morning was spent wandering in more or less the same square 

mile or so, the four of us with our heads down, tracing utterly random 

patterns across the steep hillside, following trails of morels that went hot 

and cold. My gaze locked on a point about six steps in front of me, I'd 

completely lose track of my location in space and time. In this, mush-

room hunting felt like a form of meditation, the morel serving as a kind 

of visual mantra shutting out almost every other thought. (Which was a

good thing indeed, because my socks were soaked and icy.) 

To regain my bearings I'd have to stop and reclaim the panoramic 

view, but because the day was foggy and the terrain was so heavily and 

deeply creased, I often had no idea in which direction the road was or GATHERING: THE FUNGI * 385 

the others had wandered. Every now and then a burst of static would 

shatter the meditative quiet, as my walkie-talkie erupted: "I've hit a

mother lode down here by the creek" or "Where the hell are you 

guys?" (That's another kind of pleasure mushrooming affords: Boys in 

the woods with walkie-talkies hunting treasure.)  

> It

was deeply satisfying when the morels appeared, a phenomenon 

you could swear was as much under their control as yours. I became, 

perforce, a student of the "pop-out effect," a term I'd first heard from 

mushroomers but subsequently learned is used by psychologists study-

ing visual perception. To reliably distinguish a given object in a chaotic 

or monochromatic visual field is a daunting perceptual task, one so 

complex that researchers in artificial intelligence have struggled to 

teach it to computers. Yet when we fix in our mind some visual quality 

of the object we're hoping to spot —whether its color or pattern or 

shape —it will pop out of the visual field, almost as if on command. To 

get your eyes on is to have this narrow visual filter installed and func-

tioning. That's why Ben had me practice on his finds, to fix in my 

mind's eye the pattern of morels as seen against the forest's layer of  

> duff.

To hunt for mushrooms makes you appreciate what a crucial evo-

lutionary adaptation the pop-out effect is for a creature that forages for 

food in a forest —especially when that food doesn't want to be found. 

Without the pop-out effect, finding one's dinner would depend on 

chance encounters with edible species and, of course, on fruit, the only 

important food source in nature that actually tries to pop out. Since the 

evolutionary strategy of fruiting plants is to recruit animals to transport 

their seeds, they've evolved to get themselves noticed, attracting us 

with their bright colors. In the case of the fruits and flowers, the pop-

out effect is, in effect, collaborative. But just about everything else you 

might want to eat in the forest is hiding. 

Wandering aimlessly and yet purposefully through the blackened  

> forest,

steadily turning blacker and blacker myself, I realized I had en-

tered the existential opposite of a garden. In the garden almost every 

species you encounter engages with you. Nobody hides; nobody means 

you harm; your place in the local food chain is established and ac-386* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

knowledged. Everything you sense in the garden —the colors and pat-

terns, the flavors and scents —is not only comprehensible but answers 

to your desires. Indeed, the plants have by now folded those desires 

into their genes, craftily exploiting them in order to expand their num-

bers and habitat. It is as much as anything else this mutualism that 

makes the garden the most hospitable of landscapes, for everything in   

> it is,

in some sense, an extension of ourselves, a kind of mirror. (And 

## we are in some sense an extension of the garden's plants, unwitting 

means to their ends.) The domestic species in a garden (or farm) are 

figures in our world, live under the same roof. You can forage in the 

garden, in the way Adam and Eve presumably did, but there isn't much 

to it: no dilemmas, no hunting stories. 

This forest proposes a completely different way of being in nature. 

The morels would just as soon I pass them by, and it will be a long time 

before the first berries return to this blasted landscape and declare their 

bright presence. It's a little like being in a foreign country: No one knows 

me here! In the forest you're encumbered by none of the agriculturist's 

obligations of citizenship; you feel some of the traveler's exquisite lightness of being in a place oblivious to his presence, as well as his hy-

perreal sense of first sight, first smell, first taste. That sense, too, of some-   

> thing for nothing,

for all this is coming to you simply by dint of walking 

around and deploying your senses. Of course the rush of newness is 

usually shadowed by worry: Am I getting lost? Should I pick that mushroom, too? 

## And yet though the burned forest does not welcome us like the gar-

den and exists completely outside the realm of our domestic arrange-

ments, you nevertheless feel certain strands of affiliation with these 

wild species you're looking for: the affinities of the hunt. When it's 

working, the pop-out effect —this amazing perceptual tool we've de-

veloped to defeat the arts of camouflage —feels very much like the 

manifestation of such an affinity. Alone in the woods out of earshot of 

# my fellow mushroom hunters, I found myself, idiotically, taunting the 

morels whenever a bunch of them suddenly popped out. "Gotcha!" I

would cry, as if this were a game we were playing, the mushrooms and GATHERING: THE FUNGI » 3 8 7I, and I'd just won a round. This is not something I can ever imagine 

saying to an apple in the garden; there, it just wouldn't be news.  

> I'd

completely lost track of time and space when my walkie-talkie 

blurted, "Break for lunch —meet back at the car." I had wandered nearly 

a mile from the car, mostly downhill, and by the time I worked my way 

back up to the road, clambering up ankle-twisting hills that slid out 

from under my feet, the others were standing around on the roadside 

munching trail mix and admiring their impressive hauls. "You couldn't 

have picked a better day," Ben gushed when I wandered over with my 

## own bag full of morels. "The mushrooms are so on today, I've never seen   

> it like this

# —we're killing them!" 

## We sat on a charred log (by now we were well charred ourselves) 

and ate our lunch, talking about the mushrooms and the "mushroom  

> trail"

and this summer's upcoming big mycological happening. Appar-

ently thousands of mushroom hunters were expected to descend on avast burn deep in the Yukon, some by helicopter, to await what was ex-

pected to be a world-historical flush of morels. Paulie Porcini was 

thinking of going. "You get twenty-two hours of hunting up there," 

Paulie said, as if this were an unquestioned boon. 

People have been gathering morels in burned forests forever; Ben 

mentioned that in Bavaria people would set forest fires for the express 

purpose of harvesting morels. I asked if mycologists had figured out 

what made the morels come up after forest fires. Were they saprophytes 

feeding on the roots of dead pines, suddenly plentiful, or mycorrhizal 

mushrooms that had suddenly lost their hosts? Nobody knew for sure, 

though one of Anthony's theories holds that "a bad year for the organ-

ism is a good year for us." 

Mycologists I talked to later confirmed Anthony's hunch. The cur-

rent thinking is that the morels found in pine forests are a mycorrhizal 

species for whom the death of their pine associates represents a crisis: 

Suddenly there are no more roots supplying them with food. So the 

fungus fruits, sending up morels to release trillions of spores that the 

wind will loft far from this blasted forest. In effect, the morels fruit in JS(S*THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

order to escape the burn, dispatching their genes to colonize new pine 

lands before the organism starves to death. Humans don't figure in 

their plans, though it may be that animals like us that eat morels do 

help them disperse their spores as we move them around on the way to 

our plates. Does hunting morels hurt the organism? Probably no more 

than picking apples hurts the tree, and because the morels do such a

good job of hiding from us, there will always be plenty that escape our 

notice, each capable of releasing literally billions of spores. 

Yet at the same time the morels are trying to escape the dying for- 

> est,

they also play a role in its renewal. The slightly sulfurous, meaty 

odor of morels attracts flies, which lay eggs in the safety of the mush-

room's hollow stalk. Larvae emerge and feed on the flesh of the morels; 

birds then return to the forest to feed on the larvae, in the process drop-

ping seeds that sprout on the forest floor. Mushrooms are hinges in na- 

> ture,

## now turning toward death, now toward new life. 

After lunch we wandered off our separate ways again for a few 

more hours. I worked my way downhill, slip sliding in the mud along 

a steep embankment that followed a stream until it emptied into a

creek. I had no idea where I was or where I was going: I was following 

the trail of mushrooms like a desultory train of thought, heedless of 

anything else. Including, as it turned out, property lines: I ran into a

forester who told me I was on his company's land. But that was okay 

with him, just so long as I promised to tell people that logging compa-

nies aren't always evil. Logging companies aren't always evil. The  

> forester,

evidently thrilled to have someone to talk to, told me to keep 

an eye out along the creek —it was called Beaver Creek —for large boul-

ders with blackened hollows scooped out of them like bowls. It seems 

the Washoe Indians would wash and mash acorns in these bowls and 

then bake them into a kind of flat bread.  

> I

never did find one of the Indian bowls, but hearing about them 

made me realize that this forest had been part of a human food chain 

for hundreds, perhaps thousands of years. The Indians understood that 

you could work out relations with wild species that didn't necessarily 

involve bringing them under your roof. Oaks have always refused the GATHERING: THE FUNGI 3 8 9

domestic bargain, clinging to their bitterness in the face of countless 

## human efforts to domesticate them. But the Indians found a way to live 

off these trees even so, by devising a way to detoxify the acorns. (We 

have to do something similar with these morels, which, uncooked, 

would sicken us.) So much here has changed. The oaks have given way 

to pine, obviously, and the forest food chain that once sustained the 

Washoe along Beaver Creek now, attenuated and extended, reaches clear 

to the coast, linking these woods to a pricey taste on tonight's menu at 

Chez Panisse. 

Along Beaver Creek that afternoon the morels were totally on, as Ben 

would say; almost everywhere I looked the honeycombed dunce caps 

appeared, and I filled a bag in less than an hour. My hands by now were 

black with soot and stunk of smoke, but I could still smell the meaty 

perfume of the morels, these fleshy buttons of protein popping out of 

the dead earth, this seemingly spontaneous combustion of food. I was 

talking to them, cheering on their every appearance, and they were 

talking to me, or so it seemed. I exulted at their sudden ubiquity, which  

> I

took, weirdly, as evidence of some new connection between us. It 

sounds crazy, but there is something reciprocal about the transaction, 

the looking and the appearing, as if we were each doing our part, 

throwing a line of affiliation across the gulf of wildness. I've no idea 

## how deep into the woods I'd wandered, but I was more outside than I can 

remember ever being, and more than a little lost, but not to the morels, 

## who weren't hiding from me any longer. Maybe I'd gotten good at this, 

had my eyes on; or maybe it was them, revealing themselves at last be-

cause I had found a way out of my world and into theirs. 

Whichever it was, here was the warm sun of fortune smiling on 

me, this sudden shower of forest flesh, and I felt, again, the gratitude I'd  

> felt

in that other forest, the moment that wild pig first appeared to me 

on the top of that ridge. Oh, it can be hard work, hunting and gather-

ing, but in the end it isn't really the work that produces the food you're    

> after, this effort

for that result, for there's no sure correlation between ef- 

> fort

and result. And no deserving of this: I felt none of the sense of 

achievement you feel at the end of a season in the garden, when all 3 90 * THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

your work has paid off in the bounty of the harvest. No, this felt more  

> like

something for nothing, a wondrous and unaccountable gift. 

By the end of the afternoon we'd all ended up down by Beaver Creek, 

and at around four we made our way back to the car. We changed our 

soaking socks on the tailgate and filled the entire cargo area of An-

thony's SUV with morels, trying as best we could to hide them from 

view. No reason, really, but a big haul of mushrooms just isn't some-

thing you want to advertise. (Earlier that afternoon a couple of mush-

## room hunters in an old conversion van stopped to ask if I was having 

any luck. For no good reason I had lied through my teeth.) We'd found 

sixty pounds of morels, it turned out —a personal best for Anthony and 

Ben. Before we climbed into the car to head home, Paulie took a picture 

of the three of us holding a crate loaded with morels, an obscenely 

huge one propped up on top of the pile. We were filthy and exhausted, 

but felt rich as kings. It was a Friday, and as we drove out of the forest, 

## we passed dozens of cars and vans and trucks driving in; the word on 

the Eldorado flush was apparently out on the Web, and the weekend 

morel hunters were arriving in force. That meant the price —now 

twenty dollars a pound —would probably collapse by Monday, so An-

thony wasted no time. He started working the cell phone, calling his 

chefs in Berkeley and San Francisco, taking orders for delivery tonight, 

and by the time we hit traffic outside of Stockton, all the wild mush-

rooms had been sold. TWENTY 

# THE PERFECT MEAL  

> Perfect?!

## A dangerous boast, you must be thinking. And, in truth, there 

was much about my personally hunted, gathered, and grown meal that 

tended more toward the ridiculous than the sublime. I burned, just 

slightly, the crust of the cherry galette, the morels were a little gritty, 

and the salt, which in keeping with the conceit of the meal I'd gathered 

myself in San Francisco Bay, tasted so toxic I didn't dare put it on the 

table. So I seriously doubt that any of my guests, assuming I was out of 

earshot, would declare this a "great meal." But for me it was the perfect 

meal, which is not quite the same thing.  

> I

set the date for the dinner —Saturday, June 1 8—as soon as my an-

imal was in the bag: Wild California pig would be the main course. 

# Now I had a couple of weeks, while the pig hung in Angelo's walk-in, 

to coordinate the entree with whatever else I could find to serve. In 

planning the menu the rules I imposed on myself were as follows (and 

the exceptions thereto follow what follows)    

> :39 2 *

THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA  

> 1.

Everything on the menu must have been hunted, gathered, or 

grown by me.  

> 2.

The menu should feature at least one representative of each edible 

kingdom: animal, vegetable, and fungus, as well as an edible min- 

> eral

(the salt)   

> .
> 3.

Everything served must be in season and fresh. The meal would re- 

> flect

not only the places that supplied its ingredients, but a particu- 

> lar

moment in time.  

> 4.

## No money may be spent on the meal, though already purchased 

items in the pantry could be deployed as needed. 

5 . The guest list is limited to those people who helped me in my for-

aging and their significant others. This included Angelo, Anthony, 

Richard, and a friend named Sue who took me on an unsuccessful 

chanterelle hunt on Mount Tamalpais. Plus, of course, Judith and  

> Isaac.

Unfortunately, Jean-Pierre was in France. There would be ten 

of us in all.   

> 6. I

would cook the meal myself. 

As the rules suggest, the meal was a conceit —an ambitious, possi-

bly foolhardy, and, I hoped, edible conceit. My aim in attempting it, as 

should be obvious, was not to propose hunting and gathering and 

growing one's own food as an answer to' any question larger than the 

modest ones I started out with: Would it be possible to prepare such a

meal, and would I learn anything of value —about the nature or culture 

of human eating —by doing so? I certainly don't mean to suggest that 

anyone else should try this at home, or that a return to finding and pro-

ducing our own food is a practical solution to any of our culture's 

dilemmas surrounding eating and agriculture. No, little if anything 

about this meal was what anyone would call "realistic." And yet no 

meal I've ever prepared or eaten has been more real. THE PERFECT MEAL* 3 93  

> 1.

# PLANNING THE MENU  

> I

had better start by getting out of the way some of the exceptions to 

the foregoing rules and various compromises forced upon me by real- 

> ity,

personal limitation, and folly. This was a meal far richer in stories 

than calories, and some of those stories, like the one about the salt, did 

not end well. 

Early in my menu planning I had learned that there are still a few  

> salt

ponds at the bottom of San Francisco Bay. You can see them flying 

into SFO, a sequence of arresting blocks of color —rust, yellow, orange, 

blood red —laid out below you as if in a Mondrian painting. The differ-

ent colors, I learned, are created by different species of salt-tolerant algae 

and archaea; as the seawater evaporates from the ponds, the salinity rises, 

creating conditions suitable for one species of microorganism or another. 

## On the Saturday before my dinner an exceptionally game friend and  

> I

drove down to a desolate stretch of shoreline beneath the San Mateo 

Bridge. After an interminable trek through acrid and trash-strewn wet-

lands, we found the salt ponds: rectangular fields of shallow water out-

lined by grassy levees. The water was the color of strong tea and the 

levees were littered with garbage: soda cans and bottles, car parts and  

> tires,

and hundreds of tennis balls abandoned by dogs. Here, I realized, 

was the West Coast's answer to the Jersey Meadowlands, a no-man's-

land where a visitor would not be wrong to worry about stumbling 

upon criminal activities or the washed-up corpse of a murder victim. 

This was definitely the sort of place where you could see too much . . .

... of anything, that is, except salt. This year the winter rains had 

persisted well into spring, making the ponds deeper and less saline than 

they would normally be in June. So instead of scraping snowy white 

crystals of sea salt off the rocks, as I'd anticipated, we ended up filling a

couple of scavenged polyethylene soda bottles with the cloudy brown 

brine. That night I evaporated the liquid in a pan over a low flame; it  

> filled

the kitchen with a worrisome chemical steam, but after a few 

hours a promising layer of crystals the color of brown sugar formed in 394 •> THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

the bottom of the pan, and once it cooled I managed to scrape out a few 

tablespoons. Unfortunately this salt, which was a bit greasy to the 

touch, tasted so metallic and so much like chemicals that it actually 

## made me gag, and required a chaser of mouthwash to clear from my 

tongue. I expect this was a case where the human disgust reflex proba-

bly saved lives. No doubt professional salt gatherers have sophisticated 

purification techniques, but I had no clue what these might be. So I

abandoned plans to cook with and serve my own salt, and counted my- 

> self

lucky not to have contracted hepatitis. 

Perhaps the hardest rule to obey was the one about seasonality and 

freshness. Based on my experience, I would venture that the daily 

menus of real hunter-gatherers were limited to loads of whatever hap-

pens to be plentiful that day and very little of anything else. I had in 

mind a more varied and ambitious menu, but bringing to the table on 

a date certain freshly killed game, freshly foraged mushrooms, ripe lo-  

> cal fruit,

and just-picked garden vegetables turned out to be no mean  

> feat,

even in California. In the end I was forced to make an exception 

for the fungi, since there are no good mushrooms to hunt hereabouts 

in June. Luckily I had dried a pound of the morels that I'd gathered in 

the Sierra the previous month, and decided that, especially since dried 

morels are more intensely flavored than fresh ones, this could be the 

exception that proved the rule of freshness.  

> I

also had to abandon my overly ambitious plans for a seafood appe- 

> tizer:

grilled abalone. Abalone is a large mollusk that grows on the un-

dersides of underwater rocks along the Pacific coast. Since the abalone 

population is languishing in California, it can no longer be hunted or 

sold commercially, but individuals crazy enough to do so may still har-

vest a strictly limited number: three per day. When, a few days after I'd 

bagged my pig, a friend who lives on Point Reyes invited me to forage 

abalone with him the following week —during a once in a blue moon 

low tide occurring, as you've no doubt guessed, at 5:30 in the morn-

ing —I figured I had nailed down my appetizer. So I set my alarm and 

managed to straggle down to the designated beach at dawn, not quite 

believing I would have to get into the ocean. THE PERFECT MEAL 3 95 

Alas, after surviving the experience of finding an abalone, I learned 

that it must be eaten absolutely fresh, since freezing abalone utterly 

ruins its texture. Which is ironic, or something, because looking for 

abalone, at least on the Northern California coast, involves utterly and 

completely freezing yourself. 

Abalone are gathered during unusually low tides by wading and 

diving among and beneath underwater boulders and feeling around 

blindly for their upside-down football-size shells with hands too numb 

to feel anything —except, that is, the barbed spines of sea urchins, 

which happen to occupy many of the same underwater crevices as 

abalone. And if you're lucky enough to avoid getting stuck by sea 

urchin spines, your probing fingers are liable to settle on the undulat-

ing slime of a sea anemone, recoiling abruptly therefrom in terror and 

disgust. All of this takes place beneath the bemused gaze of sea lions, 

the presence of whom I was informed is most welcome, since it indi-

cates an absence of man-eating sharks. I might not have frozen myself 

quite so stiffly had I been wearing a wet suit that actually fit, but the 

only one available —my friend's grandfather's —was two sizes too 

small. This had the effect of cutting off circulation to my extremities at 

the very moment when they needed circulation more than they ever 

had before. I was out of the water for an hour before I regained enough 

sensation in my fingers to zip up my fly. 

Gathering abalone was the most arduous foraging I did for my 

meal, and quite possibly the stupidest. I learned later that more Califor-

nians are killed gathering abalone each year —by getting dashed on the 

rocks, being attacked by sharks, or succumbing to hypothermia —than 

die in hunting accidents. Even if you're better at it than I was (my two 

hours in the water produced a single keeper), there's no question that 

you burn more calories looking for abalone than you can possibly col- 

> lect,

making this a perfectly absurd human enterprise. And yet one taste 

of fresh abalone supplies a fairly convincing explanation for the persis-

tence of this folly. 

## We ate mine right on the beach, cleaning and pounding the big 

muscle on a rock, then slicing it and pounding it some more. We built 3 9 6 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMA4A   

> afire

from some driftwood, and then cooked the abalone slices in a pan 

with butter, onions, and eggs. We ate our breakfast sitting on driftwood 

logs, watching the tide come in with the day, still fresh. The setting and 

the abalone, which has some of the chewiness of squid combined with 

the richer, sweeter flavor of a sea scallop, made this one of life's most 

memorable breakfasts, almost (though in honesty probably not quite) 

worth the trouble that went into procuring it. When I got home I made 

abalone another way, brushing thin, well-pounded slices with olive oil 

and quickly grilling them over wood. Delectable, but unfortunately for 

# my dinner guests, I had to serve this appetizer several weeks before 

they'd been told to arrive, making it a purely notional item on their 

menu. 

For the real menu's appetizer, I had to turn to the garden, where 

there were fava beans ready to pick. I'd planted them as a cover crop 

back in November, and by May had scores of fat glossy pods, which I

held off harvesting in anticipation of the big meal. The fava, which is 

the only bean native to the Old World, is a broad, flat, bright green 

shelling bean that if picked young and quickly blanched has a starchy 

sweet taste that to me is as evocative of springtime as fresh peas or as-

paragus. But by June many of my beans were a bit long in the tooth, so  

> I

decided to make fava bean toasts: I'd mash the beans with roasted gar- 

> lic

and sage and serve them on toasted rounds of homemade sour-

dough bread. (The younger, sweeter beans I'd reserve for the pasta.) For 

a second appetizer, I asked Angelo to bring a block of the pate he'd 

made from the liver of my pig. 

So yes, okay, here was another exception to the rules: Angelo made 

the pate. I also asked him to make the pasta for the first course: morels 

sauteed in butter with thyme and, for color, the tiny fava beans, over 

fresh egg fettuccine. 

Wild California pig was the main course, but which cut and how to 

prepare it? Angelo recommended slowly braising the leg, in his opin-

ion the most flavorful cut. I was curious to try the loin, and grilling 

outdoors over a fire seemed to me more in keeping with the season as 

well as the hunter-gatherer theme. Unable to choose between the two THE PERFECT MEAL* 397 

approaches, I decided to try both. I would braise the leg in red wine 

(Angelo's) and homemade stock, and serve it with a reduction of the 

cooking liquid. The loin I would brine overnight, to keep the lean meat from drying out on the grill, cover it with crushed peppercorns, and 

then roast it fairly quickly over olive wood. The stock I could make ear- 

> lier

in the week, and the olive wood I would forage not in an olive or-

chard but, with Jean-Pierre's blessing, in the woodshed behind Chez 

Panisse.  

> I

wanted to make my own bread and decided it would be fitting to 

use wild yeast, thereby introducing a second species of foraged fungus 

into the proceedings. I found a recipe (in an excellent cookbook called   

> Breod .Alone)

that gave instructions for gathering wild yeast, in a process 

that took several days but didn't sound too difficult. For the wine I had 

a couple bottles of Angelo's 2003 Syrah and he offered to bring a few 

more. 

After the main course there would be a salad, which I had originally 

hoped to assemble from foraged wild greens. Earlier in the spring I had 

found a lush patch of miner's lettuce and wild rapini in the Berkeley  

> Hills,

but by June the greens had begun to yellow, so I decided to go in-

stead with a simple salad of lettuces from the garden. 

Which left dessert, and for a while that posed a problem. My plan 

was to forage fruit, for a tart, from one of the many fruit trees lining the  

> streets

in Berkeley. I see no reason why foraging for food should be re- 

> stricted

to the countryside, so in the weeks before the dinner I em-

barked on several urban scouting expeditions in quest of dessert. 

Actually these were just strolls around the neighborhood with a baggie. 

In the two years we've lived in Berkeley I've located a handful of excel-

lent fruit trees —plum, apple, apricot, and fig —offering publicly acces- 

> sible

branches, but none of the usual suspects had quite ripened yet, 

with the exception of a Santa Rosa plum on Parker Street that was al-

ready past its peak. 

So I started asking around, hoping somebody might point me in the 

direction of a promising neighborhood dessert tree. It was my sister-in- 

> law,

Dena, who saved my dessert. She reported that her neighbor's Bing 3 98 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

cherry tree was so heavily laden with ripe fruit that several of its 

branches were at that very moment bending low over her backyard. I

wasn't quite sure if picking cherries from a neighbor's tree was exactly 

kosher, either by my lights or the law. But isn't there some old legal 

principle that confers the right to pick fruit from trees overhanging 

your property? I did a little research and discovered that indeed there  

> is.

The Romans called it "usufruct," which the dictionary defines as "the 

right to enjoy the use and advantages of another's property short of the 

destruction or waste of its substance." Bingo! Here was a venerable le-

gal principle that spoke to the very soul of foraging.* 

With dessert I would serve a tisane, or herbal tea, made from wild 

chamomile I'd picked in the Berkeley Hills earlier in the spring and 

dried, mixed with mint and lemon balm from the garden. I also had a

jar of honey made by a friend in town, the foraging in this case having 

been done in the Berkeley Hills by his bees. 

# Now I had my menu and I wrote it out on a card; this being Berke-   

> ley, Ifelt

compelled to add a few pretentious restaurant menu flourishes:   

> jFava

Bean Toasts and Sonoma Boar Pate 

Egg Fettuccine with Power Fire Morels   

> i
> Braised Leg

and Grilled Loin of Wild Sonoma Pig  

> l
> :

Wild East Bay Yeast Levain  

> ;

Very Local Garden Salad    

> \Fulton Street

Bing Cherry Galette 

Claremont Canyon Chamomile Tisane 

2003 Anaeh Garro Petite Syrah  

> It

was still just a menu, okay, and admittedly it broke several of my 

## own rules and leaned rather heavily on Angelo's generosity and talents, 

yet it promised an interesting meal and accomplished most of what I

had set out to do.    

> *There's a

Web site devoted to the principle of usufruct that offers maps to publicly accessible    

> fruit trees in

Los Angeles: fallenfruit.org. THE PERFECT MEAL 3 99 

As I looked over the menu, it occurred to me that besides represent-

ing several wild species and three edible kingdoms, not to mention the  

> city

and the country, this was a dinner drawn in large part from the for- 

> est.

Here was the meal at the end of a woodland food chain, and that as 

## much as anything else made it a little different. The pig and the morels 

came directly from the forest, obviously, but the cherry, too, is origi-

nally a woodland species that found its way to the orchard and then the  

> city.

(Cherry trees came originally from the forests of theTranscaucus, 

between the Black and Caspian seas. The Bing cherry is a chance 

seedling discovered in a Willamette Valley orchard in 1875 and named 

for a Mr. Ah Bing, the Chinese farmhand who tended it.) What this 

means is that the calories we'd be consuming represent energy captured 

by trees rather than, as is typical now, by annuals in farm fields or 

grasses in pastures. The sweetness of the dessert was made in the leaves 

of a cherry tree; the morels nourished themselves from sugars origi-

nally created in the needles of a pine tree and then absorbed from its 

roots by their mycelium; and the acorn-fed pig is a walking, snorting 

manifestation of the oak. Reversing the historical trajectory of human 

eating, for this meal the forest would be feeding us again. 

2. IN THE KITCHEN  

> I

started cooking Saturday's meal on Tuesday morning, when I made the 

stock and started the wild yeast culture for the bread. For the stock I

used bones from both my pig and, because I'd never heard of a pure 

pork stock, from a grass-fed steer. A neighbor had recently bought a

quarter of a beeve that arrived with a big bag of bones she didn't know 

what to do with, so I asked if I could forage them from her freezer. Sim-  

> ilarly, I

foraged from the depths of the produce bin in my refrigerator 

some past-due vegetables. After roasting the bones in the oven for an 

hour, I simmered them in a stockpot with the vegetables and some 

herbs for the rest of the day. 

Gathering wild yeast turns out to be no big deal. The spores of var-4 00 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

ious yeasts are floating in the air just about everywhere; collecting them  

> is

a matter of giving them a place to rest and something to eat. Some 

species of yeast taste better than others, however, and this is where ge-

ography and luck enter in. The Bay Area has a reputation for its sour-

dough bread, so I figured the air outside my house would be an 

excellent hunting ground for wild yeast. I made a thick soup of organic 

flour and spring water (the idea is to avoid any chemicals that might 

harm your yeast); then, after briefly exposing the mixture to the air on 

a windowsill, I sealed it in an airtight container and left it out on the 

kitchen counter overnight. By the following morning the surface of the 

chef, as it's called, was bubbling like pancake batter on a hot griddle, a

good sign. Each day, you're supposed to feed fresh water and flour to 

the young colony of microbes, and sniff it. The chef should smell  

> slightly

alcoholic, sour, and yeasty —a bit like beer. The absence of bub-

bles is a bad sign. So is the presence of off odors or colorful scums, 

which indicate you've probably snared wilder and weirder microbes 

than you want; throw out the chef and start over. I counted myself 

lucky that by the second day my chef already smelled promisingly 

beery and breadlike. 

Wednesday morning I drove into San Francisco to pick up the meat 

from Angelo at the forge. To get to his walk-in cooler you pass through 

a sequence of loftlike spaces of an almost Dickensian novelty and clut-  

> ter, filled

with metal scraps of every description, stacks of iron rods, 

ironworking tools and pieces of machinery, a small blast furnace raging 

heat and light, and, growing beneath an opening to the sky right in the 

middle of the forge, a fully grown fig tree. In the back there's a sunny 

kitchen with an industrial-duty espresso machine, a meat grinder, and 

a pasta machine and, to relieve the industrial clutter and clatter all 

around, big vases of fresh wildflowers. Industrial and domestic, hard 

and soft, metal and meat: The place was a lot like Angelo himself. 

The carcass was hanging alongside a couple of others in the walk- 

> in,

amid racks holding prosciutto, pancetta, and salami in various stages 

of curing. Just outside the walk-in stood more racks holding oak bar- 

> rels

of wine and balsamic vinegar, hundreds of unlabeled bottles of THE PERFECT MEAL * 401 

wine, and fifty-pound bags of wheat, both durum and semolina. An-

gelo carried the stiff carcass out to the kitchen table and, with a cleaver, 

began expertly to disassemble my pig. We trimmed and salted the hams 

for prosciutto and, with a few well-placed blows of the cleaver, Angelo 

separated the rib cage from the spinal column and then the loins, one 

on either side of the spine like saddlebags of meat. Eyeing the mount-

ing pile of trimmings —chunks of dark red meat and strips of snowy 

white fat —Angelo had an idea. 

"Hey, you know, we should make a nice little ragout with all these  

> scraps.

For our lunch." And so we did, pushing the scraps through the 

grinder, stewing the ground meat with a can of tomatoes, and, while 

the ragout bubbled on the stove, making a batch of fresh pasta on 

which to serve it. Angelo showed me how to cut handfuls of the yel-

lowy ribbons of fettuccine as they extruded themselves from the slots 

of his machine. 

Ready or not, this would be my first taste of my pig, and I was a lit- 

> tle

taken aback at the speed with which it had just gone from hanging 

carcass to ground-up scraps of meat to lunch. But the ragout was deli-

cious and, eating it at Angelo's kitchen table, even amid the raw cuts of 

meat arrayed on the counters around us, I suddenly felt perfectly okay 

about my pig —indeed, about the whole transaction between me and  

> this

animal that I'd killed two weeks earlier. Eating the pig, I under-

stood, was the necessary closing act of that drama, and went some dis-

tance toward redeeming the whole play. Now it was all a matter of 

doing well by the animal, which meant making the best use of its meat 

by preparing it thoughtfully and feeding it to people who would ap-

preciate it. Later, when I looked up the spelling of the word "ragout," I

learned that it comes from the French verb ragouter: "to restore the ap- 

> petite."

This one had done that, restoring my appetite for this meat  

> after

the disgust I'd felt cleaning the animal. I was reminded of what 

Paul Rozin had written about a traditional cuisine's power to obviate 

the omnivore's dilemma by clothing the exotic in familiar flavors. I left 

Angelo's with two gorgeous cuts of my pig neatly wrapped in butcher 

paper. 402 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

By the end of the week all the meal's raw ingredients were in place:  

> I'd

picked a gallon of cherries, harvested my fava beans, prepared the 

brine for the pig loin, made the stock and the chef, and soaked the 

dried morels in warm water to rehydrate them, a procedure that 

yielded an earthy black liquor that I decided would be good to add to 

the braising liquid. On Friday night, when I made a to-do list and 

schedule for Saturday, it hit me just how much I had to do, and, scarier  

> still,

## how much of what I had to do I had never done before, including 

bake a wild yeast bread, pit a gallon of cherries, make a galette, and 

cook a wild pig two different ways. I also hadn't toted up until now 

## how many total hours of oven time the meal would require, and since 

braising the pig leg at 250 degrees would take half the day, it wasn't 

clear how exactly I could fit in the bread and the galette. For some rea-

son the very real potential for disaster hadn't dawned on me earlier, or the fact that I was cooking for a particularly discriminating group of 

eaters, several of them actual chefs. Now, dawn on me it did, and it left 

## me feeling more than a little intimidated. 

To give you a more comprehensive idea of exactly what I'd gotten 

myself into, here's the schedule I wrote out Friday evening on an in-

dex card: 

8:00 brine the loin; shell and blanch and skin the fava beans. [Favas 

are one of nature's more labor-intensive legumes, requiring two 

separate peelings, with a blanching in between.] 

9:00 make the bread dough. First rise. 

10:00 brown the leg; prepare liquid for braise.  

> 1

0:30 pit the cherries. Make pastry crust; refrigerate. Preheat oven for pig, 250°.   

> 11

:00 Pig in oven. Skin fava beans. Roast garlic, puree favas. 

12:00 knead bread dough; second rise. 

12:30 clean morels; harvest and chop herbs, saute morels.  

> 1

:00 harvest and wash lettuce. Make vinaigrette. 

2:00 knead dough again; proof loaves. Prepare grill, teapot, cut flow-  

> ers, set table.

THE PERFECT MEAL* 403 

3:00 roll piecrust, make galette. Remove pig and heat oven for bread 

(450°). Score loaves and bake. 

3:40 remove bread; bake galette (400°). 

4:00 remove galette from oven; put pig back in (250°). 

5:00 build fire. Crush peppercorns. 

6:15 remove leg to rest; prepare loin (lard with garlic and herbs; roll 

in crushed pepper) . Put loin on grill. 

7:00 guests arrive. Remove loin to rest. 

That was my Saturday in the kitchen, though of course the reality of 

the day unfolded with none of the order or stateliness promised by the 

schedule. No, in reality the day was a blizzard of harried labors, miss-

ing ingredients, unscheduled spills and dropped pots, unscheduled  

> trips

to the store, unscheduled pangs of doubt, and throes of second-

guessing. There were moments when I sorely wished for another pair of 

hands, but Judith and Isaac were away all day. Why, I asked myself when  

> I

took a ten-minute break for lunch around 4:00, had I ever undertaken 

to prepare such an elaborate meal by myself? 

For a quick lunch I'd picked up a takeaway plastic tray of sushi 

# —

Japanese fast food —and, you know, it tasted just great. So how much 

better could I reasonably expect this dinner —this daylong (indeed, 

months-long) extravaganza, this extremely slow food feast —to taste? Did I

really need to cook the pig two different ways? For dessert, why not just 

serve the cherries in a bowl? Or open a can of beef stock for the braise? 

Or a packet of fast-acting yeast?! Why in the world was I going to quite  

> this

## much trouble?  

> I

thought of several answers while I wolfed my sushi, each of them 

offering some sliver of a somewhat elusive larger truth. This meal was 

## my way of thanking these people, my patient and generous Virgils, for  

> all

they'd contributed to my foraging education, and the precise 

amount of thought and effort I put into the meal reflected the precise 

depth of my gratitude. A bowl of fresh Bing cherries is nice, but to turn 

them into a pastry is surely a more thoughtful gesture, at least provided  

> I

managed not to blow the crust. It's the difference between a Hallmark 404 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

card and a handwritten letter. A cynical person might say that cooking 

> like this

# —with ambition —is really just another way of showing off, a

form of what might be called conspicuous production. It says, I have the   

> resources, sophistication,

and leisure time to dazzle you with this meal. No doubt 

there's often an element of truth to this, but cooking is many other 

things too, and one of them is a way to honor the group of people you 

have elected to call your guests. 

Another thing cooking is, or can be, is a way to honor the things 

we're eating, the animals and plants and fungi that have been sacrificed 

to gratify our needs and desires, as well as the places and the people 

that produced them. Cooks have their ways of saying grace too. Maybe  

> this

explains why I wanted to prepare the pig two ways, and to serve 

Angelo's pig pate. For me, doing right by my pig means wasting as lit- 

> tle

of it as possible and making the most of whatever it has to offer us. 

Cooking something thoughtfully is a way to celebrate both that species 

and our relation to it. By grilling one cut of my pig and braising the 

other, I was drawing on the two most elemental techniques people have 

devised for transforming raw meat into something not only more di-

gestible but also more human: that is, cooking meat directly over a fire 

and, with liquid, in a pot. Both techniques promise to turn the flesh of 

animals into something good to eat and good to think, but each reflects 

a slightly different stance toward the animal. The second proposes a

more "civilized" method of cooking meat, since it achieves a more 

complete transcendence or (take your pick) sublimation of the animal, 

and perhaps the animal in us, than the first. It leaves no trace of blood, 

which suits some meat eaters more than others, but it seemed to me I

should give both approaches to the pig their due.  

> It

was a long day of such transformations, as one after another the 

raw stuffs of nature —chunks of meat, piles of wild fungi, the leaves and 

pods of plants, and piles of pulverized grain —took on whole new forms, 

many of them wondrous. Bread dough magically rose and crisped; desic-

cated mushrooms came back to fleshy life; meat turned brown and 

caramelized; indigestible beans softened and sweetened; the leaves of THE PERFECT MEAL « 405 

herbs inflected whatever they touched; and all these unprepossessing 

parts of things combined into what promised to be greater and more 

delectable wholes. 

The repetitive phases of cooking leave plenty of mental space for re- 

> flection,

and as I chopped and minced and sliced I thought about the 

rhythms of cooking, one of which involves destroying the order of the 

things we bring from nature into our kitchens, only to then create from 

them a new order. We butcher, grind, chop, grate, mince, and liquefy 

raw ingredients, breaking down formerly living things so that we 

might recombine them in new, more cultivated forms. When you think 

about it, this is the same rhythm, once removed, that governs all eating 

in nature, which invariably entails the destruction of certain living 

things, by chewing and then digestion, in order to sustain other living 

things. In The Hungry Soul Leon Kass calls this the great paradox of eating: 

"that to preserve their life and form living things necessarily destroy  

> life

and form." If there is any shame in that destruction, only we hu-

mans seem to feel it, and then only on occasion. But cooking doesn't 

only distance us from our destructiveness, turning the pile of blood 

and guts into a savory salami, it also symbolically redeems it, making 

good our karmic debts: Look what good, what beauty, can come of this! Putting a

great dish on the table is our way of celebrating the wonders of form 

## we humans can create from this matter —this quantity of sacrificed 

> life

# —just before the body takes its first destructive bite. 

3. AT THE TABLE  

> It

remained to be seen whether my own cooking would redeem any of 

these ingredients, but by the appointed hour everything was more or  

> less

ready, except me. I raced upstairs to change and, before I had my 

shoes tied, heard the doorbell ring. The guests were arriving. They came 

bearing feast-appropriate gifts: Angelo with his wine and pate, Sue 

with a bouquet of lemon verbena picked from her garden, and An-406 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

thony with a small carafe of homemade nocino, a jet-black Italian diges- 

> tive

he'd distilled from green walnuts —yet another gift of the forest to 

our feast. I'd been too busy worrying about the food to worry much about 

the company, whether this somewhat haphazard assortment of people 

would gel or not. A couple of paths had apparently crossed before, but 

most of the guests were strangers to one another; what linked everyone 

was foraging —and me. But as we settled into the living room with our 

glasses of wine, it didn't take long for the stiffness of small talk to relax 

into conversation and for the conversation, oiled by Angelo's excellent 

Syrah, to steadily gain altitude. The fava bean toasts and boar pate drew 

appreciative murmurs and comments, launching a discussion about 

boar hunting. Anthony was curious to go some time, but warned An-

gelo that he doubted he could bring himself to actually shoot anything. 

"Maybe I could caddy for you," he proposed. When the mood in the 

living room seemed to have attained a sustainable effervescence, I dis-

appeared into the kitchen to ready the pasta course. 

Within minutes Angelo appeared at my side, with an offer of help;  

> I

think he was a little worried I was in over my head. While we waited 

for the pasta water to come to a boil, I asked him to taste the morels.  

> "It's

good, but maybe it needs a little more butter." I handed him a stick 

and he dropped the whole thing in the pan. (So that's how the profes-

sionals do it!) 

# We plated the pasta, and I called everyone to the table for dinner. Vo- 

> tives

were lit, wine was poured, the perfume of thyme and morels filled 

the room, and I raised my glass for a toast. I'd actually meant to write 

out something earlier in the day, because I'd wanted to organize my 

thoughts on the meaning of the meal and everyone's contribution to it, 

but the day had gotten away from me. So I kept it simple. I went around 

the table and spoke of each person's contribution to my foraging edu-

cation and to this meal that, though I had cooked most of it myself, was 

in the deepest sense our collaboration. I talked about Sue's unprece-

dented generosity in sharing three of her choicest chanterelle spots 

(one of them right in the front yard of an unsuspecting homeowner in THE PERFECT MEAL » 407 

West Marin), and told the story of the afternoon we'd spent hunting 

mushrooms in a downpour —with nothing to show for it. I talked 

about Anthony's gameness in allowing a complete, and completely 

green, stranger to accompany him hunting morels in the Sierra. I talked 

about hunting with Richard in Sonoma during that first failed outing, 

## how it had taught me the importance of preparedness, and temperance, 

in hunting. And lastly I talked about all the many things I'd learned from 

Angelo —things about mushrooms and pigs, about nature and the arts 

of cooking and eating well, and so much else besides. Then, worried I

was in danger of melting down into sentiment, I raised my glass again 

and urged everyone to start.  

> I

had actually wanted to say something more, to express a wider 

gratitude for the meal we were about to eat, but I was afraid that to of- 

> fer

words of thanks for the pig and the mushrooms and the forests and 

the garden would come off sounding corny and, worse, might ruin 

some appetites. The words I was reaching for, of course, were the words 

of grace. But as the conversation at the table unfurled like a sail amid the 

happy clatter of silver, tacking from stories of hunting to mother lodes 

of mushrooms to abalone adventures, I realized that in this particular 

case words of grace were unnecessary. Why? Because that's what the 

meal itself had become, for me certainly, but I suspect for some of the 

others, too: a wordless way of saying grace. 

As you might expect from this crowd and occasion, the talk at the  

> table

was mainly about food. Yet this was not the usual food talk you 

hear nowadays; less about recipes and restaurants, it revolved around  

> specific

plants and animals and fungi, and the places where they lived. 

The stories told by this little band of foragers ventured a long way from 

the table, the words (the tastes, too) recalling us to an oak forest in 

Sonoma, to a pine burn in the Sierra Nevada, to the stinky salt flats of 

San Francisco Bay, to slippery boulders along the Pacific coast, and to a 

backyard in Berkeley. The stories, like the food that fed them, cast lines 

of relation to all these places and the creatures living (and dying) in 

them, drawing them all together on this table, on these plates, in what 

to me began to feel a little like a ceremony. And there's a sense in which 408 THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

the meal had become just that, a thanksgiving or a secular seder, for 

every item on our plates pointed somewhere else, almost sacramentally,  

> telling

a little story about nature or community or even the sacred, for 

mystery was very often the theme. Such storied food can feed us both 

body and soul, the threads of narrative knitting us together as a group, 

and knitting the group into the larger fabric of the given world.  

> I

don't want to make too much of it; it was just a meal, after all. A

very tasty meal, too, I don't mind saying, though I don't doubt that all 

the words and memories and stories in which the meal had marinated 

gave it much of its savor, and that a guest who spoke no English might 

not have enjoyed it half as much. The wild pig was delicious both ways, 

with a nutty sweetness to it that tasted nothing like store-bought pork, 

though I noticed that when the platter went around for seconds, the 

tender slices of braised leg went faster than the pink slabs of the roast. 

The sauce for the leg I'd reduced from the braising liquid was almost 

jokingly rich and earthy, powerfully reminiscent of the forest. So were 

the morels and butter (or perhaps I should say butter and morels), 

which had a deep, smoky, almost meaty flavor. My self-criticisms were 

that I could have done a better job cleaning the grit from the morels, 

and that the galette was a shade overcooked —though the cherries 

themselves detonated little bursts of summer on the tongue, and no 

one seemed to have any trouble polishing it off. 

Angelo reserved his most enthusiastic praise for my bread, which  

> I'll

admit did have a perfect crust, an airy crumb, and a very distinctive 

(though not at all sour) flavor —the specific flavor, I guess, of the neigh-

borhood yeasts. It occurred to me that the making of this meal, by ac-

quainting me with these particular people, landscapes, and species, had 

succeeded in attaching me to Northern California, its nature and its 

culture both, as nothing I'd done before or since. Eating's not a bad way 

to get to know a place. 

There comes a moment in the course of a dinner party when, with 

any luck, you realize everything's going to be okay. The food and the 

company having sailed past the shoals of awkwardness or disaster, and 

the host can allow himself at last to slip into the warm currents of the THE PERFECT MEAL * 409 

evening and actually begin to enjoy himself. For me that moment came  

> just

around the time that the platter of wild pig made its second circuit 

of the table and found so many eager takers. I was enjoying myself now, 

the words and the food in equal measure, and that's when I realized 

that this was, at least for me, the perfect meal, though it wasn't until 

some time later that I began to understand what that meant. 

Was the perfect meal the one you made all by yourself? Not neces- 

> sarily;

certainly this one wasn't that. Though I had spent the day in the 

kitchen (a good part of the week as well) , and I had made most every-

thing from scratch and paid scarcely a dime for all the ingredients, it 

had taken many hands to bring this meal to the table. The fact that just 

about all of those hands were at the table was the more rare and impor-

tant thing, as was the fact that every single story about the food on that 

table could be told in the first person.  

> I

prized, too, the almost perfect transparency of this meal, the 

brevity and simplicity of the food chain that linked it to the wider 

world. Scarcely an ingredient in it had ever worn a label or bar code or 

price tag, and yet I knew almost everything there was to know about its 

provenance and its price. I knew and could picture the very oaks and 

pines that had nourished the pigs and the mushrooms that were nour-

ishing us. And I knew the true cost of this food, the precise sacrifice of 

time and energy and life it had entailed. Some of that sacrifice had 

proven expensive to me, emotionally speaking, yet it was cheering to 

realize just how little this preindustrial and mostly preagricultural meal 

had diminished the world. My pig's place would soon be taken by an-

other pig, and the life of these forests was little altered by our presence 

or what we had removed. Not just the Bing cherries but most of the 

meal owed its presence on our table to usufruct, which was a fact of na-

ture long before it became an axiom of law. 

Perhaps the perfect meal is one that's been fully paid for, that leaves 

no debt outstanding. This is almost impossible ever to do, which is why  

> I

said there was nothing very realistic or applicable about this meal. But  

> as

a sometimes thing, as a kind of ritual, a meal that is eaten in full con-

sciousness of what it took to make it is worth preparing every now and 410* THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

again, if only as a way to remind us of the true costs of the things we 

take for granted. The reason I didn't open a can of stock was because 

stock doesn't come from a can; it comes from the bones of animals. 

## And the yeast that leavens our bread comes not from a packet but from 

the air we breathe. The meal was more ritual than realistic because it 

dwelled on such things, reminding us how very much nature offers to 

the omnivore, the forests as much as the fields, the oceans as much as the 

meadows. If I had to give this dinner a name, it would have to be 

the Omnivore 's Thanksgiving.  

> It's

impossible to prepare and eat a meal quite so physically, intellectu- 

> ally,

and emotionally costly without thinking about the incalculably 

larger debts we incur when we eat industrially —which is to say, when 

## we eat without a thought to what we're doing. To compare my tran-

scendendy slow meal to the fast-food meal I "served" my family at that 

McDonald's in Marin, the one that set me back fourteen bucks for the 

three of us and was consumed in ten minutes at sixty-five miles per 

hour, is to marvel at the multiplicity of a world that could produce two 

such different methods of accomplishing the same thing: feeding our-  

> selves, I

mean. 

The two meals stand at the far extreme ends of the spectrum of hu-

## man eating —of the different ways we have to engage the world that 

sustains us. The pleasures of the one are based on a nearly perfect 

knowledge; the pleasures of the other on an equally perfect ignorance. 

The diversity of the one mirrors the diversity of nature, especially the  

> forest;

the variety of the other more accurately reflects the ingenuity of 

industry, especially its ability to tease a passing resemblance of diversity 

from a single species growing in a single landscape: a monoculture of 

corn. The cost of the first meal is steep, yet it is acknowledged and paid  

> for;

by comparison the price of the second seems a bargain but fails to 

cover its true cost, charging it instead to nature, to the public health and 

purse, and to the future. 

Let us stipulate that both of these meals are equally unreal and THE PERFECT MEAL 4 I I

equally unsustainable. Which is perhaps why we should do what a respon-   

> sible social scientist

would do under the circumstances: discard them both  

> as

anomalies or outliers— outliers of a real life. Or better yet, preserve 

them but purely as ritual, for the lessons they have to teach us about the 

different uses to which the world can be put. Going to McDonald's would 

be something that happens once a year, a kind of Thanksgiving in reverse, 

and so would a meal like mine, as slow and storied as the Passover seder. 

Without such a thing as fast food there would be no need for slow 

food, and the stories we tell at such meals would lose much of their in- 

> terest.

Food would be . . . well, what it always was, neither slow nor   

> fast, just

food: this particular plant or that particular animal, grown 

here or there, prepared this way or that. For countless generations eat-

ing was something that took place in the steadying context of a family 

and a culture, where the full consciousness of what was involved did not need to be rehearsed at every meal because it was stored away, like 

the good silver, in a set of rituals and habits, manners and recipes. I

wonder if it isn't because so much of that context has been lost that I 

> felt

the need, this one time, to start again from scratch. 

This is not the way I want to eat every day. I like to be able to open 

a can of stock and I like to talk about politics, or the movies, at the din-

ner table sometimes instead of food. But imagine for a moment if we 

once again knew, strictly as a matter of course, these few unremarkable 

things: What it is we're eating. Where it came from. How it found its 

way to our table. And what, in a true accounting, it really cost. We could 

then talk about some other things at dinner. For we would no longer 

need any reminding that however we choose to feed ourselves, we eat 

by the grace of nature, not industry, and what we're eating is never any-

thing more or less than the body of the world. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  

> I

had a lot of help in the kitchen with this one. 

First to Gerry Marzorati, my longtime friend and editor at the New 

York Times Magazine, who first suggested five years ago that I spend some 

time writing about food for the magazine. Unbeknownst to either of 

us, he was pointing me down the path that led to this book.  

> I

## am especially grateful to the farmers and the foragers I write about 

here. George Naylor in Iowa, Joel Salatin in Virginia, and Angelo Garro 

in California were my food-chain Virgils, helping me to follow the food 

from earth to plate and to navigate the omnivore's dilemma. All three 

gave unstintingly of their time, their wisdom, and their always excel-

lent company. Thanks, too, to the hunters and gatherers who graciously 

welcomed so rank an amateur on their expeditions: AnothonyTassinello, 

Bob Baily, Bob Carrou, Richard Hylton, Jean-Pierre Moulle, Sue Moore, and David Evans. 

In educating myself on food and agriculture, I've incurred a great 

many debts. Among my most generous and influential teachers have 

been: Joan Gussow, Marion Nestle, Fred Kirschenmann, Alice Waters, 

Todd Dawson, Paul Rozin.Wes Jackson, and Wendell Berry. Thanks also, 

for information and insight, to Bob Scowcroft, Allan Nation, Kelly 

Brownell, Ricardo Salvador, Carlo Petrini, Jo Robinson, David Arora, 

Ignacio Chapela, Miguel Altieri, Peter Hoffman, Dan Barber, Drew and 

Myra Goodman, Bill Niman, Gene Kahn, and Eliot Coleman. 

Many people supported the writing of this book in other ways. In 414 » ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

California, Michael Schwarz generously read the manuscript and of-

fered timely encouragement and helpful suggestions, reminding me 

what a good editor he was before he forsook print for television. In 

Berkeley, the faculty, staff, and students of the Graduate School of Jour-

nalism, and in particular Dean Orville Schell, have created a stimulating 

and supportive community in which to do this work. Mark Danner, an 

old friend and once again a colleague, has, as ever, provided a valuable 

sounding board. The students in my food chain class have taught me 

more than they probably realize about these issues over the past few  

> years.

Mesa Refuge, in Point Reyes Station, provided the perfect setting 

in which to write and research a key chapter. And the John S. and James  

> L.

Knight Foundation has supported my research in crucial ways. 

I'm especially grateful to Chad Heeter, for his dogged research and 

fact-checking, not to mention his willingness to accompany me on a 

> futile

quest to gather salt in San Francisco Bay. Nathanael Johnson, Feli- 

> cia

Mello, and Elena Conis nailed down several elusive facts just when  

> it

looked like they might get away. My assistant, Jaime Gross, con-

tributed to this project in many ways, but I'm particularly grateful for 

her superb research and fact-checking. 

In New York, I'm grateful for the excellent work and good cheer of 

Liza Darnton, Kate Griggs, Rachel Burd, Sarah Hutson, and Tracy Locke  

> at

the Penguin Press, my new publishing home. Thanks to Liz Farrell at 

ICM. At the New York Times Magazine, where some of the material in this 

book first appeared, I've profited handsomely from the superb editing 

of Paul Tough and Alex Star and (before they moved on to other maga-

zines) Adam Moss and Dan Zalewski. 

In a publishing industry not known for loyalty or continuity, I've 

been blessed by the constancy of both my editor and agent. This is the 

fourth book of mine that Ann Godoff has edited, albeit at three differ-

ent houses. At this point I can't imagine doing a book with anyone else, 

which is probably why I keep following her around Manhattan. Her 

moral, intellectual, emotional, and financial support is a critical ingre-

dient in the making of this book. This is also the fourth book of mine ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 415 

represented by Amanda Urban, a verb that doesn't come close to cap-

turing everything she does to keep me whole and on the proper path. 

Speaking of constancy, this is also the fourth time I've relied on 

Mark Edmundson to read and comment on a book manuscript; as ever, 

his editorial and reading suggestions, as well as his literary judgment, 

have been invaluable. This time around, he (and his family) contributed in 

another way as well, by joining me for one of the meals chronicled in 

these pages. Thanks to Liz, Willie, and Matthew for their gameness, 

good appetite, and hospitality. 

But the prize for gameness in the pursuit of a book chapter must 

go to Judith, who shared the two meals that bookend the book —the 

McDonald's cheeseburger at one end and the wild boar at the other 

# —

and so much more. A book becomes a sometimes disagreeable member 

of the family for a period of years, but Judith treated this one with pa- 

> tience,

understanding, and good humor. Far more crucial to the book, 

though, has been her editing. Since I first began publishing, Judith has 

been my indispensable first reader, and there's no one whose instincts 

about writing I trust more. 

Last but no longer least is Isaac. This is the first book Isaac has been 

old enough and sufficiently interested in to actually help me with. His 

## own approach to food —Isaac is the pickiest eater I know —has taught 

## me a great deal about the omnivore's dilemma. Though he declined to  

> taste

the boar, Isaac's contribution to this book —coming in the form of 

smart suggestions, stimulating conversations at the dinner table, and, 

on the bad days, the best comfort a father could wish for —has been 

more precious than he can know. Thank you. SOURCES 

Listed below, by chapter, are the principal works referred to in the text, as well 

as others that supplied me with facts or influenced my thinking. Web site URLs 

are current as of November 200S. All cited articles by me are available at 

www. michaelpollan.com. 

INTRODUCTION: OUR NATIONAL EATING DISORDER 

Berry, Wendell. "The Pleasures of Eating," in What Are People For? (New York: 

North Point Press, 1990), pp.145-52. 

Kass, Leon. The Hungry Soul (New York: The Free Press, 1994). I found the 

William Ralph Inge quote in this endlessly suggestive philosophical in-

quiry into how the particular nature of human eating defines us. 

Levy, Ariel. "Carb Panic," New York, December 12, 2002. 

Nestle, Marion. Food Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002). 

Rozin, Paul. "The Selection of Foods by Rats, Humans, and Other Animals" in 

Advances in the Study of Behavior, Volume 6, eds. J. Rosenblatt, R. A. Hide, C. Beer, 

and E. Shaw (New York: Academic Press, 1976), pp. 21-76.  

> .

"Food Is Fundamental, Fun, Frightening, and Far-Reaching," Social Re- 

> search

66, no. 1 (Spring 1 999). This is a special issue on food with many ex-

cellent essays. 

Taubes, Gary. "What If Fat Doesn't Make You Fat?" New York Times Magazine, July 7

> ,

2002. 

PART I

CHAPTER 1: THE PLANT: CORN'S CONQUEST 

In addition to the printed sources below, I learned a great deal about the nat-

ural and social history of Zea mays from my conversations with Ricardo Sal-

vador at Iowa State (www.public.iastate.edu/~rjsalvad/home.html) and 

Ignacio Chapela at the University of California at Berkeley. Ignacio introduced 418 * SOURCES 

## me to his colleague Todd Dawson, who not only helped me understand what 

a C-4 plant is, but generously tested various foods and hair samples for corn 

content using his department's mass spectrometer. 

The two indispensable books on the history of corn are: 

Fussell, Betty. The Story of Corn (New York: Knopf, 1 994). Columbus's quote on 

corn is on page 1 7 . The statistics on wheat versus corn consumption are on 

page 215. 

Warman, Arturo. Corn & Capitalism: How a Botanical Bastard Grew to Global Dominance. 

Trans. Nancy L. Westrate (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 

2003). 

Other helpful works touching on the history of corn include: 

Anderson, Edgar. Plants, Man and Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 

1952). 

Crosby, Alfred W Germs, Seeds & Animals: Studies in Ecological History (Armonk, NY: 

M. E. Sharpe, 1994).    

> .Ecological Imperialism:

The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900—1900 (Cam-

bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1986). 

Diamond, Jared. Guns, Germs, and Steel (New York: WW Norton, 1 997). 

Eisenberg, Evan. The Ecology of Eden (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998). Very 

good on the coevolutionary relationship of grasses and humankind.  

> litis,

Hugh H. "FromTeosinte to Maize: The Catastrophic Sexual Mutation," Sci- 

> ence

222, no. 4626 (November 25, 1983). 

Mann, Charles C. 1 49 1 : New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus (New York: Al-

fred A. Knopf, 2005). Excellent on the evolutionary origins of the plant and 

pre-Columbian maize agriculture. 

Nabhan, G. P. Enduring Seeds: Native American Agriculture and Wild Plant Conservation (San 

Francisco: North Point Press, 1 989). 

Rifkin, Jeremy. Beyond Beef: The Rise and Fall of the Cattle Culture (New York: Plume, 

1993). The quote from General Sheridan is on page 78. 

Sargent, Frederick. Corn Plants: Their Uses and Ways of Life (Boston: Houghton Mif- 

> flin,

1901). 

Wallace, H. A., and E. N. Bressman. Corn and Corn Growing (New York: John Wiley 

&Sons, 1949). 

Weatherford, Jack. Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas Transformed the World 

(New York: Crown, 1988). 

Will, George F., and George E. Hyde. Corn Among the Indians of the Upper Missouri 

(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1917). 

CHAPTER 2: THE FARM 

The best accounts of the history and workings of the commodity corn com-

plex in the United States are a series of studies by Richard Manning and SOURCES 419  

> C.

Ford Runge commissioned by the Midwest Commodities and Conservation  

> Initiative,

a joint project of the World Wildlife Fund, the American Farmland 

Trust, and the Henry A. Wallace Center for Agricultural & Environmental Pol- 

> icy:

All three studies are available online at: www.worldwildlife.org/ commerce. 

Manning, Richard. Commodities, Consensus, and Conservation: A Search for Opportunities 

and The Framework of a Commodities System (April 2001). 

Runge, C. Ford. King Corn: The History, Trade, and Environmental Consequences of Corn 

(Maize) Production in the United States (September 2002). 

In writing about the rise of industrial agriculture I also drew on the fol-

lowing works: 

Kimbrell, Andrew. The Fatal Harvest Reader: The Tragedy of Industrial Agriculture (Wash-

ington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002). 

Manning, Richard. Against the Grain (New York: North Point Press, 2004). 

Morgan, Dan. Merchants of Grain (New York: Viking, 1979). 

Russell, Edmund. War and Nature: Fighting Humans and Insects with Chemicals from 

World War I to Silent Spring (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 

2001). 

Schwab, Jim. Raising Less Corn and More Hell: Midwestern Farmers Speak Out (Urbana: 

University of Illinois Press, 1988). See the interview with George Naylor 

beginning on page 111. 

Scott, James. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have  

> Failed

(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998). Scott, an anthropologist 

and political scientist, puts industrial agriculture in the illuminating con-

text of other modernist schemes, including architecture and Soviet collec-

tivization. 

Smil, Vaclav. Enriching the Earth: Fritz Haber, Carl Bosch, and the Transformation of World Food  

> Production

(Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 2001). This indispensable book  

> tells

the story of Fritz Haber's life and work, explains the technology of 

synthesizing nitrogen, and explores its impact on the environment and 

world population.    

> .Feeding the

World (Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 2000). 

Wargo, John. Our Children's Toxic Legacy (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1 996). 

An important work on the regulation and biology of pesticides. 

For detailed information on individual pesticides, see the Web site of the 

Pesticide Action Network (www.panna.org). On atrazine, the herbicide most 

widely applied to U.S. cornfields, see Hayes, Tyrone, et al. "Atrazine-Induced 

Hermaphroditism at 0.1 PPB in American Frogs (Rana pipiens): Laboratory and 

Field Evidence," Environmental Health Perspectives 3, no. 4 (April 2003), and Hayes, 

Tyrone B. "There Is No Denying This: Defusing the Confusion about Atrazine,"  

> Bioscience

54, no. 12 (December 2004). 420 * SOURCES 

## On the question of industrial agriculture's dependence on fossil fuel, there  

> is

a rich and somewhat daunting literature. Marty Bender, at the Land Institute, 

helped me to navigate a great many complexities as did David Pimentel at Cor- 

> nell.

The figure of 0.2 S gallons of oil per bushel of corn comes from unpub-

lished research by Ricardo Salvador (see his Web site, cited earlier) ; David 

Pimentel, et al., offers a figure of 0.33 gallons in "Environmental, Energetic, 

and Economic Comparisons of Organic and Conventional Farming Systems,"  

> Bioscience

55, no. 7 (July 2005). For more on the general subject of energy use 

in agriculture, see chapter 9 following. 

## On the equally vexing topic of federal agriculture policy, I have had many 

fine tutors, foremost among them George Naylor himself, as well as the staff 

of the National Family Farms Coalition (www.nffc.net) , of which he is presi-

dent. Other sources for this material (which figures in chapter 3 as well) in-

cluded: 

Michael Duffy, Iowa State (www.sust.ag.iastate.edu/gpsa/faculty/duffy.html). 

Daryll Ray, University ofTennesse Institute of Agriculture (www.agpolicy.org). 

See especially his report "Rethinking US Agricultural Policy: Changing 

Course to Secure Farmer Livelihoods Worldwide" (issued by the Institute's 

Agricultural Policy Analysis Center in September 2003 and available at 

www.agpolicy.org/blueprint.html) 

> .

Dan McGuire, American Corngrower's Association (www.acga.org). McGuire 

generously shared his archive of documents on the history of U.S. agricul-

tural policy since the 1930s. 

Mark Ritchie, Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy (www.iatp.org). 

Other sources on the history of farm policy:  

> Critser,

Greg. Fat Land: How -Americans Became the Fattest People in the World (Boston: 

Houghton Mifflin, 2003). Critser summarizes the history of farm policy 

since the 1970s, linking it to the current surplus of food and the conse-

quent epidemic of obesity. 

Duscha, Julius. "Up, Up, Up: Butz Makes Hay Down on the Farm," New York 

Times Magazine, April 16, 1972. 

Rasmussen, Wayne D, and Gladys L. Baker. Price Support and Adjustment Programs 

from 1933 through 1978:A Short History (Washington, DC: USDA Economics,  

> Statistics

and Cooperatives Service, 1978). 

Ritchie, Mark. The Loss of Our Family Farms: Inevitable Results or Conscious Policies? A Look at    

> the Origins of

Government Policies for Agriculture (Minneapolis: League of Rural Vot- 

> ers,

1979). Ritchie also shared with me his archive of policy statements by 

the Committee for Economic Development. The CED, an influential business 

group from the 1950s through the 1970s, led the campaign to dismande 

## New Deal farm policy. See their "Toward a Realistic Farm Program" (1967) 

and "A New U.S. Farm Policy for Changing World Food Needs" (1974). SOURCES 42 1     

> ,et al. United States

Dumping on World Agricultural Markets (Minneapolis: Insti-

tute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, 2003). 

CHAPTER 3: THE ELEVATOR 

## My estimate of the portion of the U.S. corn crop that passes through the cor-

porate hands of Cargill and ADM is based on Richard Manning's reporting in   

> Against the

Grain (New York: North Point Press, 2004, p. 128) that ADM buys 

12 percent of the nation's corn crop, and on a 1999 estimate by Alexander 

Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair (Counterpunch, November 20, 1999) that Cargill 

buys 23 percent of the corn crop. 

Cronon, William. Nature s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West (New York: W. W. 

Norton, 1991). 

Kneen, Brewster. Invisible Giant: Cargill and Its Transnational Strategies (London: Pluto 

Press, 2002). 

Manning, Richard. Against the Grain (New York: North Point Press, 2004). Man-

ning uses the metaphor of biomass to describe the surplus of commodity 

grain on page 137. 

Sahagun, B. de (Historia general de las cosas de Nueva Espana, 1 558-69) Florentine Codex:A       

> General History of the Things of

New Spain. 1 2 vols. Trans. A. J. O. Anderson and   

> C. E.

Dibble (Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research and University of 

Utah, 1950-69). 

Michael Duffy and George Naylor helped me to sort out exactly what a

farmer receives for a bushel of corn from the market and the government. That  

> said,

the various formulae and contingencies involved, not to mention the 

nomenclature, are dauntingly complex, and neither Naylor nor Duffy bears re-

sponsibility for any oversimplifications or errors in my computations. What I 

> call

the county "target price" is technically a "marketing loan rate," but since 

the program is structured in such a way as to make taking out loans unattrac- 

> tive

(unlike the old nonrecourse loan program), the wording is confusing. 

However, it's important to understand that this price level is not a target price 

in the sense that it once was, when the USDA set a floor for commodity prices 

that it then supported by offering farmers nonrecourse loans. 

CHAPTER 4: THE FEEDLOT: MAKING MEAT 

This chapter had its origins in a piece I wrote for the New York Times called 

"Power Steer" (March 3 1 , 2002). In researching cattle and the U.S. cattle in-

dustry, I learned a great deal from Bill Niman of Niman Ranch in Oakland; 

Kansas feedlot operator Mike Callicrate; Colorado rancher Dale Lassiter; animal-

handling expert Temple Grandin (www.grandin.com); South Dakota bison 

rancher and writer Dan O'Brien; Cornell microbiologist James Russell; and 

Rich and Ed Blair, the South Dakota ranchers profiled in this chapter. Valuable 

published sources include: 422 SOURCES 

Carlson, Laurie Winn. Cattle: An Informal Social History (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 

2001). 

Durning, Alan B., and Holly B. Brough. Taking Stock: Animal Farming and the Environ-

ment (Washington, D.C.: WorldWatch Institute, 1991). 

Engel, Cindy. Wild Health: How Animals Keep Themselves Well and What We Can Learn from 

Them (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002). 

Frazier, Ian. Great Plains (New York: Picador, 1989). 

Grandin, Temple. Animal Handling in Meat Plants (video: Grandin Livestock Han-

dling System, www.grandin.com, undated). 

Johnson, James R., and Gary E. Larson. Grassland Plants of South Dakota and the North- 

> ern

Great Plains (Brookings, SD: South Dakota State University, 1 999). 

Hamilton, Doug. Modern Meat (a documentary for Frontline; aired on PBS, April 

18, 2002). 

Lappe, Frances Moore. Diet for a SmaU Planet (New York: Ballantine Books, 1991).  

> Still

the strongest case against eating beef, though in making it Lappe as-

sumes a production system based on grain. 

Luttwak, Edward. "Sane Cows, or BSE Isn't the Worst of It," London Review of Books 

23, no. 3 (February 8, 2001). 

Manning, Richard. Grassland: The History, Biology, and Promise of the American Prairie 

(New York: Penguin, 1997). 

Nierenberg, Danielle. Happier Meals: Rethinking the Global Meat Industry (Washington, 

D.C.: WorldWatch Institute, 2005). 

O'Brien, Dan. Buffalo for the Broken Heart: Restoring Life to a Black Hills Ranch (New York: 

Random House, 2001). This is a rancher's account of the cattle business 

and a promising alternative to it. O'Brien's ranch happens to share a fence 

with the Blairs'. 

Ozeki, Ruth L. My Year of Meats (New York: Penguin, 1999). Very funny, well-

researched novel about the U.S. meat industry. 

Rampton, Sheldon, and John Stauber. Mad Cow U.S.A.: Could the Nightmare Happen 

Here? (Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press, 1997). 

Rifkin, Jeremy. Beyond Beef (New York: Plume, 1993). 

Russell, James B. Rumen Microbiology and Its Role in Ruminant Nutrition (Ithaca, NY: 

self-published, 2002). 

Schell, Orville. Modern Meat: Antibiotics, Hormones, and the Pharmaceutical Farm (New 

York: Vintage, 1985). 

Schlosser, Eric. Fast Food Nation (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2001). 

Sinclair, Upton. The Jungle (London: Penguin, 1985). 

Smil, Vaclav. Feeding the World: A Challenge for the Twenty-First Century (Cambridge, MA: 

M.I.T Press, 2001). SOURCES 42 3

CHAPTER 5: THE PROCESSING PLANT: MAKING COMPLEX FOODS  

> I've

written about the imperatives behind the processing of food on several 

occasions (the articles are listed below), and on that subject have profited 

enormously from my conversations with nutritionists Marion Nestle and Joan 

Gussow, and my readings of industry trade magazines, especially Food Technology 

(Institute of Food Technologists, Chicago). Larry Johnson at the Center for 

Crops Utilization Research at Iowa State was generous with his time and ex-

pertise, showing and telling me all I wanted to know about the wet-milling of 

corn and soybeans. The Corn Refiners Association (www.corn.org) is an in-

valuable resource on the history, technology, and products of corn refining; 

see especially their annual reports, a trove of interesting statistics and history. 

Ford, Brian J. The Future of Food (New York: Thames & Hudson, 2000) 

> .

Goodman, Michael, and Michael Redclift. Refashioning Nature: Food, Ecology, and Cul- 

> ture

(London: Routledge, 1991). 

Gussow, Joan Dye, ed. The Feeding Web: Issues in Nutritional Ecology (Palo Alto, CA: 

Bull Publishing, 1978). This remains an invaluable anthology (unfortu-

nately out of print) on the entire range of food issues, and serves as a re-

minder that much of the discussion our culture is having about the politics 

and ecology of food today is a reprise of a discussion that took place in the 

1970s. The quote about the relationship between a food's identity and its 

raw materials and the excerpt from the IFF annual report appear in an essay 

by Gussow titled "Whatever Happened to Food? Or Does It Pay to Fool with 

Mother Nature?" pp. 200-4. 

Levenstein, Harvey. Paradox of Plenty (Berkeley: University of California Press, 

2003).      

> .Revolution at the Table:

The Transformation of the American Diet (Berkeley: Univer- 

> sity

of California Press, 2003). 

Nestle, Marion. Food Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002). 

Pollan, Michael. "Naturally," New York Times Magazine, May 13, 2001.  

> .

"The Futures of Food," New York Times Magazine, May 4, 2003.  

> .

"The (Agri) cultural Contradictions of Obesity," New York Times Magazine, 

October 12, 2003. 

Schlosser, Eric. Fast Food Nation (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2001). 

Tannahill, Reay. Food in History (New York: Stein and Day, 1973). The quote on 

manufacturing steak from petroleum is on page 394. 

Tisdale, Sally. The Best Thing I Ever Tasted: The Secret of Food (New York: Riverhead, 

2001). The quote from Massimo Montanari, the Italian food historian, 

about how processing food frees us from the vicissitudes of nature appears 

on page 66. 424 * SOURCES 

CHAPTER 6: THE CONSUMER: A REPUBLIC OF FAT 

Bray, George, et al. "Consumption of High-fructose Corn Syrup in Beverages 

May Play a Role in Epidemic of Obesity," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 79 

(2004), 537-43. 

Brownell, Kelly D., and Katherine Battle Horgen. Food Fight: The Inside Story of the 

Food Industry, America's Obesity Crisis, and What We Can Do About It (Chicago: Con-

temporary Books, 2004).  

> Critser,

Greg. Fat Land: How Americans Became the Fattest People in the World (Boston: 

Houghton Mifflin, 2003). 

Drewnowski, Adam, and S. E. Specter. "Poverty and Obesity: The Role of En-

ergy Density and Energy Costs in the American," American Journal of Clinical  

> Nutrition

79 (January 2004), 6—16. For this important article, Drewnowski 

and Specter studied how many and what kind of calories a dollar can buy 

in various parts of the supermarket. 

Kroc, Ray. Grinding It Out.The Making of McDonald s (Chicago: Contemporary Books, 

1977). 

Lender, Mark E., and James Kirby Martin. Drinking in America: A History (New York: 

The Free Press, 1982). 

Logsdon, Gene. Good Spirits: A New Look at 01' Demon Alcohol (White River Junction, 

VT: Chelsea Green, 1999). 

Love, John F. McDonald's: Behind the Arches (New York: Bantam, 1986). Love tells 

the story of David Wallerstein, pages 296-97. 

Narayan, K. M. Venkat, et al. "Lifetime Risk for Diabetes Mellitus in the United     

> States," Journal of the

American Medical Association 290 (2003), 1884-90. 

Nestle, Marion. Food Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002). 

Pollan, Michael. "The (Agri) cultural Contradictions of Obesity," New York Times  

> Magazine,

October 12, 2003. This chapter extends and elaborates the argu-

ment I made in this article.  

> .

The Botany of Desire (New York: Random House, 2001). See the material on 

sweetness in the chapter on apples, as well as the bibliography on sweetness. 

Rorabaugh, W. J. The Alcoholic Republic: An American Tradition (Oxford: Oxford Uni-

versity Press, 1 979). An eye-opening account of American drinking habits 

from the Revolution through the temperance movement. The book is the 

main source for my information on early American alcohol consumption; 

the quote from William Cobbett appears on page 59. 

Satcher, David. "The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent and Decrease 

Overweight and Obesity," (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health 

and Human Services, 2001); available on the Web at www.surgeon 

general.gov. 

Winson, Anthony. "Bringing Political Economy into the Debate on the Obesity 

Epidemic," Agriculture and Human Values 2 1 (2004), 299-3 1 2. SOURCES 42 3

CHAPTER 7: THE MEAL: FAST FOOD 

"A Full Serving of Nutrition Facts," pamphlet published by McDonald's (2003). 

Schlosser, Eric. Fast Food Nation (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2001). 

On ethanol and air pollution see Libecap, Gary D. "Environmental Phantasm:  

> Political

Forces Keep Dreams of Ethanol Alive," Property and Environment 

Research Center (PERC) (June 2003); www.perc.org/publications/perc 

reports/june 2003/phantasm.php and the Web site of the Sierra Club, 

www.sierraclub.org. 

PART II 

CHAPTER 8: ALL FLESH IS GRASS 

On the pastoral tradition, Leo Marx is invaluable. I learned a great deal about 

farming, grass, animals, and Joel Salatin from Salatin's books, all of which are 

worth reading, even if you aren't planning to raise chickens; he's a consistently 

entertaining writer. Stockman Grass Farmer, Allan Nation's monthly tabloid for 

grass farmers, is the indispensable media outlet for the movement. 

Klinkenborg, Verlyn. Making Hay (Guilford, CT: Lyons Press, 1997). 

Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000). 

The quote from Henry James is on page 352. 

Pollan, Michael. "Sustaining Vision," Gourmet (September 2002).   

> Salatin, Joel.

Family Friendly Farming (Swoope, VA: Polyface, 2001).  

> .

Holy Cows & Hog Heaven; The Food Buyer's Guide to Farm Friendly Food (Swoope, 

VA: Polyface, 2004).     

> .Pastured Poultry Profit}:

Net $25,000 in 6 Months on 20 Acres (Swoope, VA: 

Polyface, 1996).   

> .Polyface

Farm (video: Moonstar Films, www.moonstarfilms.com, 

undated)   

> .
> .Salad

Bar Beef (Swoope, VA: Polyface, 1995).  

> .

You Can Farm: The Entrepreneur's Guide to Start and $ucceed in a Farming Enterprise 

(Swoope, VA: Polyface, 1998).    

> Virgil. Eclogues, Georgics.Aeneid

1-6, Volume 1 .Trans. H. Rushton Fairclough (Cam-

bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986). 

Williams, Raymond. The Country and the City (New York: Oxford University Press, 

1973). 

CHAPTER 9: BIG ORGANIC 

Parts of this chapter are based on an article on the industrialization of organic 

food I published in the New York Times Magazine (May 13, 2001). Among the 

sources in the organic movement who have done the most to educate me are: 

Joan Gussow; Fred Kirschenmann at the Leopold Center at Iowa State 

(www.leopold.iastate.edu); Bob Scowcroft at the Organic Farming Research 426 > SOURCES 

Foundation; Michael Sligh and Hope Shand at ETC (www.etcgroup.org); the  

> late

Betsy Lydon; farmer and author Eliot Coleman; farmer Woody Derycks; 

farmers Tom and Denesse Willy; farmer Warren Weber; farmer and author 

Michael Ableman; Drew and Myra Goodman and Mark Merino at Earthbound 

Farm; George Siemens at Organic Valley; John Diener at Greenways Organic; 

Gene Kahn at General Mills; Miguel Altieri; Julie Guthman; Peter Rosset; 

Charles Benbrook; Roger Blobaum; and Maria Rodale. Several of the scientific  

> articles

comparing organic and conventional produce are included in the list 

of printed sources following; others are available at the Organic Center 

(www.organic-center.org)  

> .
> Altieri,

Miguel. Agroecology:The Science of Sustainable Agriculture (Boulder, CO: West-

view Press, 1995).  

> .

"The Ecological Role of Biodiversity in Agroecosystems," Aqrk. Ecosyst, 

ondEnv. 74 (1999), 19-31. 

Asami, Danny K., et al. "Comparison of the Total Phenolic and Ascorbic Acid 

Content of Free-Dried and Air-Dried Marionberry, Strawberry, and Corn 

Using Conventional, Organic, and Sustainable Agricultural Practices," Jour-   

> nal of Agricultural

and Food Chemistry 51 (2003), 1 237-41 .This is the study I dis-

cuss at some length. 

Barron, R. C. ed. The Garden and Farm Books of Thomas Jefferson (Golden, CO: Fulcrum,  

> 1

987). In a letter to his daughter, Jefferson suggests that the problems she's 

having with insects could be the result of exhausted soil; see page 156. Eliot 

Coleman first told me about this passage. Belasco, Warren. Appetite for Change; How the Counterculture Took on the Food Industry 

1966-1988 (New York: Pantheon, 1989). Belasco persuasively traces or-

ganic food's roots to the sixties counterculture. The contemporary accounts 

of People's Park and the "People's Garden" are on pages 19—22. 

Benbrook, Charles M. Elevating Antioxidant Levels in Food Through Organic Farming and   

> Food Processing:

An Organic Center State of Science Review (Foster, RI: Organic Center, 

2005). 

Berry, Wendell. The Gift of Good Land (San Francisco: North Point Press, 1981).  

> .

Home Economics (San Francisco: North Point Press, 1987).  

> .

The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture (San Francisco: Sierra Club 

Books, 1977). The quote from Sir Albert Howard about soil and health ap-

pears on page 46. 

Carbonaro, Marina, and Maria Mattera. "Polyphenoloxidase Activity and 

Polyphenol Levels in Organically and Conventionally Grown Peaches," Food 

Chemistry 72 (2001), 419-24. 

Coleman, Eliot. "Can Organics Save the Family Farm?" The Rake (September 2004). 

Curl, Cynthia L., et al. "Organophosphorus Pesticide Exposure of Urban and 

Suburban Pre-school Children with Organic and Conventional Diets," Environ-    

> mental Health Perspectives 3,

no. 3 (March 2003). SOURCES 427 

Davis, Donald R., et al. "Changes in USDA Food Composition Data for 43 Gar-

den Crops, 1950 to 1999," Journal of the American College of Nutrition 23, no. 6

(2004), 669-82.  

> .

"Trade-Offs in Agriculture and Nutrition," Food Technology 59, no. 3, 120. 

Dewhurst, R. J., et al. "Comparison of Grass and Legume Silages for Milk Pro-

duction," Journal of Dairy Science 86, no. 8 (2003), 2598-261 1. 

Diamond, Jared. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed (New York: Viking, 

2005). 

Freyfogle, Eric T., ed. The New Agrarianism: Land, Culture, and the Community of Life 

(Washington, DC: Island Press, 2001). 

Guthman, Julie. Agrarian Dreams (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004). 

Harvey, Graham. The Forgiveness of Nature: The Story of Grass (London: Jonathan 

Cape /Random House, 2001). For the great humus controversy, see chapter 

17, pages 300-19. 

Hayes, Tyrone, et al. "Atrazine-Induced Hermaphroditism at 0.1 PPB in Amer-

ican Frogs (Rana pipiens): Laboratory and Field Evidence," Environmental Health  

> Perspectives

3, no. 4 (April 2003).  

> .

"There Is No Denying This: Defusing the Confusion about Atrazine,"  

> Bioscience

54, no. 12 (December 2004). 

Howard, Sir Albert. An Agricultural Testament (New York: Oxford University Press, 

1943).  

> .

The Soil and Health (New York: Schocken, 1972). 

Lewis, W. J., et al. "A Total System Approach to Sustainable Pest Management," 

The Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences 84 (1997). 

Manning, Richard. Commodities, Consensus and Conservation (April 2001). In his 

study of commodity agriculture, Manning quotes Plato on agriculture's im-

pact on the environment, and the importance of healthy soils (page 2) 

> :

What now remains of the formerly rich land is like the skeleton of a sick 

man . . . Formerly, many of the mountains were arable. The plains that were full 

of rich soil are now marshes. Hills that were once covered with forests and pro-

duced abundant pasture now produce only food for bees. Once the land was en-

riched by yearly rains, which were not lost, as they are now, by flowing from 

the bare land into the sea. The soil was deep, it absorbed and kept the water in 

loamy soil, and the water that soaked into the hills fed springs and running 

streams everywhere. Now the abandoned shrines at spots where formerly there 

were springs attest that our description of the land is true. 

Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000). 

Rosset, Peter M. The Multiple Functions and Benefits of Small Farm Agriculture (Oakland: 

Food First, 1999). Rosset documents the ways in which small diversified 

farms are actually more efficient than large ones. 428 SOURCES 

Sligh, Michael, and Carolyn Christman. Who Owns Organic? (Pittsboro, NC: 

RAFI-USA, 2003).  

> Stoll,

Steven. The Fruits of Natural Advantage: Making the Industrial Countryside in California 

(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998). 

Tilman, David. "The Greening of the Green Revolution," Nature, 396 (Novem-

ber 19, 1998). 

Wargo, John. Our Children's Toxic Legacy (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996). 

Wirzba, Norman, ed. The Essential Agrarian Reader (Lexington, KY: University Press 

of Kentucky, 2003). 

Wolfe, M. S. "Crop Strength Through Diversity," Nature 406, no. 1 7 (August 2000). 

On the complex and contentious subject of energy use in conventional and 

organic agriculture, I relied on many sources, including David Pimentel, Rich 

Pirog at the Leopold Center, Marty Bender at the Land Institute, and Karen 

Klonsky and Peter Livingston at the University of California at Davis, as well as 

the indefatigable work of my researcher Chad Heeter. Pimental helped us cal-

culate the energy required to grow, pack, wash, cool, and ship across country a

pound of organic lettuce, using his data and additional information graciously 

provided by Earthbound Farm. Pimentel's numbers are sometimes criticized as 

high because he includes "embodied energy," i.e., the fossil fuel required to 

manufacture things like tractors. His numbers remain the most comprehensive, 

however, and whenever a specific figure is in dispute I've used the more con-

servative number or stated the range. On energetics in agriculture see also: 

Carlsson-Kanyama, Annika, and Mireille Faist. Energy Use in the Food Sector: A Data  

> Survey.

AFN-report 291 (Swedish Environmental Protection Agency: Stock-

holm, Sweden, 2000). 

Heller, Martin C, and Gregory A. Keoleian. Life Cycle-Based Sustainability Indicators        

> for Assessment of the U.S. Food System,

Report No. CSS00-04. (Center for Sustain-

able Systems, University of Michigan, 2000). This study is the source for 

## my figures on the portion of U.S. energy consumption devoted to the food 

system (one-fifth) and the portion of that amount (one-fifth) accounted 

for by farming (as opposed to packing, cooling, or shipping). 

Livingston, Peter. "A Comparison of Economic Viability and Measured Energy 

Required for Conventional, Low Input, and Organic Farming Systems over 

a Rotational Period." Unpublished thesis. California State University, Chico, 

CA, 199S. 

Lovins, Amory, L. Hunter Lovins, and Marty Bender. "Agriculture and Energy,"   

> Encyclopedia of

Energy Technology and the Environment (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 

1995). 

Pimentel, David, ed. Handbook of Energy Utilization in Agriculture (Boca Raton, FL: 

CRC Press, 1980). SOURCES 429 

Pimentel, David, and Marcia Pimentel, eds. Food, Energy, and Society (Niwot, CO: 

University Press of Colorado, 1996). 

Pimentel, David, et al. "Environmental, Energetic, and Economic Comparisons 

of Organic and Conventional Farming Systems," Bioscience 55, no. 7 (July 

2005), 573-82. The statistic on the energy savings of organic production 

(30 percent) comes from this study, though as Pimentel acknowledges, if 

the farm's fertility is not generated on the farm or nearby, this savings 

quickly disappears. 

Tourte, Laura, et al. "Sample Costs to Produce Organic Leaf Lettuce." Univer- 

> sity

of California Cooperative Extension, 2004. 

CHAPTER 10: GRASS: THIRTEEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT A PASTURE 

Benyus, Janine M. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature (New York: Perennial, 

2002). Offers a fine account of the Land Institute's project to perennialize 

agriculture. 

Eisenberg, Evan. The Ecology of Eden (New York: Knopf, 1 998). 

Farb, Peter. Living Earth (New York: Pyramid Publications, 1959). 

Harvey, Graham. The Forgiveness of Nature: The Story of Grass (London: Jonathan 

Cape /Random House, 2001). 

Hawken, Paul, Amory Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins. Natural Capitalism (New 

York: Bay Books, 2000). Another good account of the Land Institute's work. 

Jackson, Wes, et al., eds. Meeting the Expectations of the Land:Essays in Sustainable Agricul- 

> ture

and Stewardship (San Francisco: North Point Press, 1 984).  

> .

New Roots for Agriculture (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 

1985). 

Judy, Greg. No Risk Ranching: Custom Grazing on Leased Land (Ridgeland, MS: Green 

Park Press, 2003). 

Logsdon, Gene. All Flesh Is Grass: The Pleasures and Promises of Pasture Farming (Athens, 

OH: Swallow Press/Ohio University, 2004). 

Nation, Allan. Knowledge Rich Ranching (Ridgeland, MS: Green Park Press, 2002). 

Savory, Allan. Holistic Management: A New Framework for Decision Making (Washington, 

D.C.: Island Press, 1999). Savory is a pioneer in using intensive grazing to 

restore arid grasslands, and is changing the way environmentalists regard 

the role of grazing in ecosystem health. 

The Stockman Grass Farmer, published monthly. 

Vbisin, Andre. Grass Productivity (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1989). 

CHAPTER 11: THE ANIMALS: PRACTICING COMPLEXITY 

For further reading on the advantages of polyculture, see Permaculture magazine 

(www.permaculture.co.uk) ; Permaculture Activist (www.permacultureactivist.net) 

> ;

and the works of Bill Mollison. Also see: 43 * SOURCES 

Furuno, Takao. The Power of Duck: Integrated Rice and Duck Farming (Tasmania, Aus- 

> tralia:

Tagari Publications, 2 001). This is another example from another tra-

dition of a polyculture farm. Furuno is the Joel Salatin of Japan. 

Imhoff, Dan. Farming with the Wild: Enhancing Biodiversity on Farms and Ranches (San 

Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 2003). 

Rosset, Peter. The Multiple Functions and Benefits of Small Farm Agriculture (Oakland: 

Food First, 1999). 

CHAPTER 12: SLAUGHTER: IN A GLASS ABATTOIR 

Joel explains exactly how to kill a chicken and compost slaughter waste in 

chapters 15 and 16 of Pastured Poultry Profit$ (Swoope.VA: Polyface, 1996). 

## On slaughter practices, humane and otherwise, see Temple Grandin's Web site 

(www.grandin.com) 

> .

CHAPTER 13: THE MARKET: "GREETINGS FROM 

THE NON-BARCODE PEOPLE" 

To find local producers of meat, eggs, poultry, and milk in your area, go to 

www.eatwellguide.org and www.eatwild.com. The Web site for Slow Food 

USA is www.slowfood.com. 

Berry, Wendell. Citizenship Papers (Washington, D.C.: Shoemaker & Hoard, 2003). 

See especially the essays "The Total Economy" (pp. 63-76) and "The Whole 

Horse" (pp. 1 1 3-26), where the Berry quotes in this chapter are found. 

Blank, Steven. The End of Agriculture in the American Portfolio (Westport, CT: Quorum 

Books, 1998). 

Fallon, Sally. Nourishing Traditions (Washington, DC: New Trends Publishing, 

2001). Fallon is the president of the Weston A. Price Foundation: www 

.westonaprice.org. 

Fernald, Anya, et al. AWorld of Presidia: Food, Culture, and Community (Bra, Italy: Slow 

Food Editore, 2004). 

Gussow, Joan Dye. This Organic Life: Confessions of a Suburban Homesteader (White River 

Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2001). 

Halweil, Brian. Eat Here: Reclaiming Homegrown Pleasures in a Global Supermarket (New 

York: WW Norton & Company, 2004).  

> .

Home Grown: The Case for Local Food in a Global Market (Washington, DC: 

Worldwatch Institute, 2002). 

Kloppenberg, J., Jr., et al. "Coming into the Foodshed," Agriculture and Human Val- 

> ues

13, no. 3 (1996), 33-41. This article appears to be the first use of the 

term "foodshed": "The concept of a 'foodshed' (a term that elicits images 

of food flowing into a place) has been developed to promote discussion 

and action about the disempowerment and destructive nature of this cur-

rent system with regards to the community and the environment." SOURCES * 43 1

Lyson, Thomas A. Civic Agriculture: Reconnecting Farm, Food, and Community (Medford, 

MA: Tufts University Press, 2004). 

McKibben, Bill. "Small World: Why One Town Stays Unplugged," Harpers 307, 

no. 1843 (December 2003), 46-54. 

Nabhan, Gary Paul. Coming Home to Eat: The Pleasures and Politics of Local Foods (New 

York: WW Norton, 2001). 

Norberg-Hodge, Helena, et al. Bringing the Food Economy Home: Local Alternatives to 

Global Agribusiness (London: Zed Books, 2002). 

Petrini, Carlo, ed. Slow Food: Collected Thoughts on Taste, Tradition, and the Honest Pleasures of 

Food (White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2001). See also 

Petrini 's speeches on the Slow Food Web site. 

Pollan, Michael. "Cruising on the Ark ofTaste," Mother Jones (May 2003). An es-

say on the politics of Slow Food. 

Porter, Michael E. The CompetitiveAdvantage of Nations (NewYork:The Free Press, 1990). 

CHAPTER 14: THE MEAL: GRASS-FED 

For a digest of research on the health benefits of grass-fed meat, milk, and 

eggs, see www.eatwild.com. 

Brillat-Savarin, Jean-Anthelme. The Physiology ofTaste. Trans. Anne Drayton (Lon-

don: Penguin, 1994). 

Child, Julia. Mastering the Art of French Cooking (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 200 1 )

> .

McGee, Harold. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen (New York: 

Charles Scribner, 2004). 

Robinson, Jo. Pasture Perfect:The Far-Reaching Benefits of Choosing Meat, Eggs, and Dairy from 

Grass-Fed Animals (Vashon, WA: Vashon Island Press, 2004).  

> .

Why Grassfed Is Best! The Surprising Benefits of Grassfed Meat, Eggs, and Dairy Prod- 

> ucts

(Vashon, WA: Vashon Island Press, 2000). 

For recent research on the role of omega-3s and other fats in the diet, see 

the proceedings of the 2004 meeting of the International Society for the Study 

of Fatty Acids and Lipids (www.issfal.org.uk) . The research on the benefits of 

omega- 3s cited in my chapter came from the following articles: 

de Groot, R. H. M., et al. Correlation Between Plasma (N-3) Fatty Acid Levels and Cogni- 

> tive

Performance in Women. Report. Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsy-

chology, Nutrition and Toxicology Research Institute Maastricht (Maastricht 

University, The Netherlands, 2004). 

Kelley, R. L., et al. Effect of Dietary Fish Oil on Puppy Trainability. Report. The lams 

Company Technical Centre (Lewisburg, OH: 2004). 

Smuts, C. M., et al. The Effect of Omega-3 Rich Spread on the Cognitive Function of Learners 

6—9 Years Old from a Low Socio-Economic Community. Nutritional Intervention 

Research Unit, MRC. Report (Parow Valley, Stellenbosch, South Africa, 2004). 432 * SOURCES 

PART III 

CHAPTER 15: THE FORAGER 

Allport, Susan. The Primal Feast: Food, Sex, Foraging, and Love (Lincoln, NE: Universe, 

2003). 

Budiansky, Stephen. The Covenant of the Wild : Why .Animals Chose Domestication (New 

Haven: Yale University Press, 1 999).Thoreau's quote on hunting is on page 

157. 

Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac (New York: Ballantine, 1 986). The Leopold 

quotes are from page 177. 

Nelson, Davia, and Nikki Silva. Hidden Kitchens: Stories, Recipes, and More from NPR s The   

> Kitchen Sisters

(New York: Rodale, 2005). See especially the chapter onAngelo 

Garro, pages 172-89. 

CHAPTER 16: THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 

Allport, Susan. The Primal Feast: Food, Sex, Foraging, and Love (Lincon, NB Writers Club 

Press, 2003). (2003). 

Fernandez-Armesto, Felipe. Near a Thousand Tables: A History of Food (New York: The 

Free Press, 2002). 

Harris, Marvin. The Sacred Cow and the Abominable Pig: Riddles of Food and Culture (New 

York: Simon & Schuster, 1987). 

Kass, Leon. The Hungry Soul (New York: The Free Press, 1 994) 

> .

Katz, Solomon H. "Food and Biocultural Evolution: A Model for the Investiga-

tion of Modern Nutritional Problems," Nutritional Anthropology, ed. Francis E. 

Johnston (New York: Alan R. Liss, 1987), 41-63. 

Levi-Strauss, Claude. The Origin of Table Manners: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, 

Volume 3. Trans. John and Doreen Weightman (New York: Harper & Row, 

1978).  

> .

The Raw and the Cooked: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, Volume 1 . Trans. 

John and Doreen Weightman (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1 983). 

Mooallem, Jon. "The Last Supper: Living by One-handed Food Alone," Harpers 

(July 2005). My source for the statistic that 19 percent of American meals 

are eaten in the car. 

Pinker, Steven. How the Mind Works (New York: W W Norton, 1997). Valuable on 

hunting and gathering; visual perception; the cognitive niche; and the evo-

lution of disgust; the quote on "intuitive microbiology" is on page 383. 

Pollan, Michael. "Our National Eating Disorder," New York Times Magazine, Octo-

ber 17, 2004. 

Rozin, Paul, et al. "Attitudes to Food and the Role of Food in Life: Comparisons 

of Flemish Belgian, France, Japan and the United States," Appetite (1999).  

> ,

et al. "The Borders of the Self: Contamination Sensitivity and Potency 

of the Mouth, Other Apertures and Body Parts," Journal of Research in Personality 

29 (1995), 318-40. SOURCES* 43 3 

> ,

et al. "The Cultural Evolution of Disgust," in Food Preferences and Taste: Con- 

> tinuity

and Change, ed. H. M. Macbeth (Oxford: Berghahn, 1 997).  

> ,

et al. "Disgust," in Handbook of Emotions, 2nd ed., eds. Lewis M. and J. 

Haviland (New York: Guilford, 1999).  

> ,

et al. "Lay American Conceptions of Nutrition: Dose Insensitivity, 

Categorical Thinking, Contagion, and the Monotonic Mind," Health Psychol-

ogy IS (1996), 438-47.  

> ,

and A. E. Fallon. "A Perspective on Disgust," Psychological Review 94, no.  

> 1

(1987), 23-41.  

> ,

and J. Schulkin. "Food Selection," in Handbook of Behavioral Neurobiology, 

Food andWater Intake, Volume 10, ed. E. M. Strieker (NewYork: Plenum, 1990), 

297-328. 

Wrangham, Richard, et al. "The Raw and the Stolen: Cooking and the Ecology 

of Human Origins," Current Anthropology 40, no. 5 (December 1999). Wrang-

ham argues persuasively here and elsewhere that it is cooking that made us 

human. 

CHAPTER 17: THE ETHICS OF EATING ANIMALS 

Berger, John. About Looking (NewYork: Vintage International, 1991). 

Budiansky, Stephen. The Covenant of the Wild: Why Animals Choose Domestication (New 

York: William Morrow & Co., 1992). A valuable book on the evolution of 

domestication in animals.    

> .If a

Lion Could Talk: Animal Intelligence and the Evolution of Consciousness (New 

York: The Free Press, 1998). 

Coetzee, J. M. The Lives of Animals (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999) 

> .

Dennett, Daniel C. Kinds of Minds: Toward an Understanding of Consciousness (NewYork: 

Basic Books, 1996). 

Ehrenfeld, David. Beginning Again: People and Nature in the New Millenium (NewYork: 

Oxford University Press, 1995). 

Ovid. Metamorphoses. Trans. A. D. Melville. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998). 

Flannery, Tim. The Eternal Frontier: An Ecological History of North America and Its Peoples 

(NewYork: Atlantic Monthly Press, 2001). Flannery 's account of how the 

Plains bison evolved under the pressure of hunting by Indians is on pages 

223-29; the quote is on page 227. 

Regan, Tom. The Case for Animal Rights (Berkeley: University of California Press, 

1983).  

> ,

and Peter Singer, eds. Animal Rights and Human Obligations (Englewood  

> Cliffs,

NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989).  

> Scully,

Matthew. Dominion: The Power of Man, the Suffering of Animals, and the Call to Mercy 

(NewYork: St. Martin's Press, 2002). An eloquent defense of animals, and 

an indictment of factory farming, from the right. 

Singer, Peter. Animal Liberation (NewYork: Ecco, 2002). 43 4 SOURCES    

> .Practical Ethics

(Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1999).  

> ,

ed. In Defense of .Animals (New York: Basil Blackwell, 1985). 

Thomas, Keith. Man and the Natural World:A History of the Modern Sensibility (New York: 

Pantheon, 1983). 

Williams, Joy. Ill Nature: Rants and Reflections on Humanity and Other Animals (New York: 

Vintage, 2001). 

Wise, Steven M. Drawing the Line: Science and the Case for .Animal Rights (Cambridge, 

MA: Perseus, 2002). 

CHAPTER 18: HUNTING: THE MEAT 

Nelson, Richard. The Island Within (New York: Vintage, 1991). "The Gifts of the 

Deer" is one of the great accounts of hunting. 

Ortega y Gasset, Jose. Meditations on Hunting. Trans. Howard B. Westcott (New 

York: Scribner's, 1972). A remarkable book, brilliant and more than a little 

mad. My own meditations on hunting owe a large debt to Ortega's. 

Shepard, Paul. Coming Home to the Pleistocene (Washington, D.C. : Island Press, 1998).  

> .

Nature and Madness (Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 1998). 

Writing in the tradition of Ortega, Shepard's work offers a bracing reeval-

uation of Paleolithic culture and psychology.  

> .

The Tender Carnivore and the Sacred Game (Athens, GA: University of Georgia 

Press, 1998). 

CHAPTER 19: GATHERING: THE FUNGI 

## My education in the mysteries of the fungal kingdom profited from time 

spent in the field with Ignacio Chapela and David Arora, as well as with mush-

room hunters Anthony Tassinello, Bob Baily, Sue Moore, and Angelo Garro.The 

following books and articles were also valuable: 

Arora, David. Mushrooms Demystified (Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 1986). 

Hudler, George W Magical Mushrooms, Mischievous Molds (Princeton: Princeton Uni-

versity Press, 2000). 

Krieger, Louis C. C. The Mushroom Handbook (New York: Dover Publications, 1967). 

Lincoff, Gary H. National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Mushrooms (New 

York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2003). 

McKenna, Terence. Food of the Gods: The Search for the Original Tree of Knowledge (New 

York: Bantam, 1993). 

Rommelmann, Nancy. "The Great Alaskan Morel Rush of '05," Los Angeles Times 

Magazine, July 10, 2005. 

Schaechter, Elio. In the Company of Mushrooms: A Biologists Tale (Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press, 1998). 

Stamets, Paul. Growing Gourmet and Medicinal Mushrooms (Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 

2000). SOURCES* 43 5 

> .

Mycelium Running: How Mushrooms Can Help Save the World (Berkeley: Ten 

Speed Press, 2005). 

Treisman, Ann. "Features and Objects in Visual Processing," Scientific .American 

254, no. 11 (November 1986), 1 14— 2 5. Treisman, a research psychologist, 

developed the concept of the "pop-out effect" in human visual processing. Weil, Andrew. The Marriage of the Sun and Moon: Dispatches from the Frontiers of Conscious- 

> ness

(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2004). See chapters 7 to 9; the quotes 

come from chapter 8. 

CHAPTER 20: THE PERFECT MEAL 

Brillat-Savarin, Jean-Anthelme. The Physiology of Taste. Trans. Anne Drayton (Lon-

don: Penguin, 1994). 

Leader, Daniel, and Judith Blahnik. Bread Alone: Bold Fresh Loaves from Your Own Hands 

(New York: Morrow, 1 993). See chapter 1 3 on gathering wild yeast for the 

chef and baking a levain. I also learned about baking with wild yeasts from 

Robbie Barnett. 

McGee, Harold. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen (New York: 

Charles Scribner, 2004). 

Waters, Alice. The Chez Panisse Cafe Cookbook (New York: Morrow, 1999). The 

recipe for the galette dough is on page 227. INDEX 

abalone, gathering, 394-96 

Ableman, Michael, 1 69 

Adams, Bud, 188 

Adams, John, 101 

ADM (Archer Daniels Midland), 52, 63, 

86-87, 93, 95, 154   

> Agricultural Testament,

An (Howard), 145—46, 

149 

agriculture: 

alternative, 8, 143-45, 249-50 

corporate functions in, 63 

department, see Department of 

Agriculture, U.S. 

and evolution, 23, 129, 267 

exports, 51, 53, 62, 63 food chain modified by, 6-7, 52 

government policies in, 39, 41, 48-50, 

51-53, 61-63, 67, 103, 108, 154, 182, 200-201, 241, 243 

hunting-gathering vs., 279-80, 320 

individual farms in, 34—35; see also 

farming 

industrialization of, see industrial food 

chain 

natural world reshaped by, 10, 24, 62 

need for, 1

perverse economics of, 48, 53-55, 

61-63, 117 

premodern systems of, 145, 191 

solar energy in, 70, 188-89, 199 

surpluses in, 49-50 

yields in, 25, 103, 147 

Alar scare, 152-53, 154 

alcohol, corn as source of, 25, 100-101   

> Alcoholic Republic,

The (Rorabaugh), 100 

algae, 47, 83, 269 

alpha linolenic acid (ALA), 267 

amanita, 376, 377 

AMC (argument from marginal cases) 

> ,

308, 31 1-12 

American paradox, 3-5 

amino acids, 20, 42 

ammonium nitrate, 41 , 44 

Animal Liberation (Singer), 304, 307-9, 328 

animal rights: 

and animal happiness, 319-25, 328 

and animal suffering, 308, 310, 

312-13, 315-19, 328 

arguments with, 309-13 

ignorance of nature in, 320, 32 

> 1

increasing activism in, 305, 309 

and individual vs. species, 323-25 

and laboratory testing, 3 1

2

and marginal cases, 308, 311-12 

and predation, 321-23  

> vs.

speciesist viewpoint, 308-9 

and vegetarianism, 305, 313-15, 319, 

325-27 

animals: 

birds working with, 126,211,215 

in CAFOs, 67-68, 128, 130, 182,253, 

317 

cruelty to, 255 

domesticated, 10, 310, 320 43 8 INDEX 

animals (cont.) 

evolution of, 23 

factory-farmed, 39, 64, 118, 140, 254, 

306, 310, 317-19 

feed affecting taste of, 177 

in feedlots, 65-84 

grass-eating, 70, 126-28, 130, 186-91, 

208-56, 267 

happiness of, 319-25, 327 

human relationships with, 10, 306-7, 

320, 333, 357-58, 401 

lacking souls, 315, 331-32, 358 

learned helplessness of, 218  

> life

expectancy of, 321 

meat from, see meat 

mystery of, 359 

in organic systems, 149  

> sacrificial,

331 

slaughter of, 71,81, 227, 228-30, 235-36, 304, 329-33 

as species vs. individuals, 323-25 

suffering of, 308, 310, 312-13, 

315-19, 328 

sweet tooth of, 106 

in the wild, 321-23   

> Appetite for

Change (Belasco), 141-44  

> Aristotle,

298, 320 

Arora, David, 374  

> artisanal

economics, 249-50 

ascorbic acid, 1

8

Atkins, Robert C, 2

atrazine, 59, 132, 178 

Aztecs, maize revered by, 58, 1 19 

bacteria, 128, 160, 229-30  

> Baily,

Ben, 380-85, 387, 389, 390 

beef tallow, 74, 76 

Belasco, Warren J., 141-42  

> Bell,

Daniel, 302 

Bell Institute, 92 

Bentham, Jeremy, 308, 328 

Berger.John, 306, 323, 359 

Berry, Wendell, 1 1, 68, 145, 220, 254, 259 

Bing cherries, 397-98, 399 

biodiesel fuel, 1 64 

biodiversity, 9, 410 

on organic farms, 161, 197, 224, 255 

shrinking, 47 

in supermarkets, 16-17 

biophilia, 128 

bison, 24, 70, 322-23  

> Blair,

Ed and Rich, 68, 7 1 , 72, 76-77  

> Blair

Ranch, South Dakota, 68-72, 77 

Blank, Steven, 255-56 

blue baby alerts, 47 

Bosch, Carl, 43 

Bove, Jose, 255 

bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) 

> ,

75-76  

> Brillat-Savarin,

Anthelme, 3, 270, 272, 

291, 295 

Brix scores, 1 76 

Budger (cow), 193, 196-97, 198 

Budiansky, Stephen, 3 1

6

Butz, Earl "Rusty," 51-52, 103, 201 

CAFOs (Concentrated Animal Feeding 

Operations) 

> :

and cheap corn, 67-68, 200, 253 

and fossil fuels, 73 

in industrial food chain, 128, 130, 182, 

200, 317 

learned helplessness in, 2 1

8

manure lagoons of, 79, 130 

Cal-Organic Farms, 138n, 173, 174-75  

> calories,

75 

cheap, 107-8, 1 17 

daily intake of, 1 02  

> as

energy, 21-22, 106, 108, 118 

in fast food, 112, 118 

overproduction of, 103, 108 

cannabinoids, 342 

cannibalism, 76, 298, 358 

Capay farms, 138 

capitalism, cultural contradictions of, 

318 

caramel color, 1

9

carbohydrates, 20, 86, 91, 1 18, 179,266, 291 

carbon, 20-22,42,47, 117, 197 

carbon dioxide, 20 

carbon isotopes, 20, 22, 116 

carbophobia, 1-2  

> Cargill,

52, 63, 69, 86-87, 93 

Cascadian Farm, 144-45, 151-53, 154, 156, 162, 173-74   

> Case for

Animal Rights, The (Regan), 323 

cassava, 293, 294 INDEX * 439 

> cattle:

and cheeseburgers, 114-15, 117 

corn fed to, 66, 71, 74-75, 77-78, 82, 84, 200 

cow-calf operation (Blair Ranch), 68-72 

in a "cow day," 191 

diseases of, 75-76, 77-78, 237 

drugs fed to, 71, 73, 74, 76, 78-79, 81, 

178 

eating catde, 75-77 

and electric fences, 193 

on the farm, 38, 39, 193-97, 317 

fattening up, 75,81, 200 

on feedlots/CAFOs, 39, 65-68, 72-84, 

139, 194, 200-201 

grass fed to, 70, 75, 82, 83, 126, 

186-91, 194-95, 269 

protein matter fed to, 74-77 

range-fed, 134—35  

> ratio

of feed to flesh in, 8 1 , 115 

rumens of, 70, 72, 74, 75, 78, 82, 187, 

193, 197, 290, 326 

slaughter of, 71, 81, 329-33  

> stress-free,

135 

supplements fed to, 71, 74 

weaning of, 71-72 

chamomile, 398 

chanterelles, 285-86, 366-70, 380, 

406 

chemical fertilizers, 41-47, 68, 146-49, 

151, 220 

chemical pesticides, 45, 143, 148, 

152-53, 177, 212, 220-22 

Chez Panisse, Berkeley, 253 

Chicago Board of Trade, 60 

chicken: 

in grass-fed meal, 262-66, 269-71 

Maillard reaction in, 270 

McNuggets, 10,95, 110, 111-14, 

115-18 

in microwavable TV dinner, 139-40, 

173-74 

popularity of, 114 

price of, 235 

chickens:   

> as cattle

feed, 76 

eggs produced by, 126, 135, 170-71, 

211,212, 213, 251, 252, 262, 269, 317, 318 

factory life of, 39, 171-72, 182, 

317-18 

on the farm, 38, 39, 126, 140, 169-73, 

182, 210-13, 215, 216, 221, 319, 

321   

> Gallus jjallus,

10  

> killing,

226-38, 250, 332 

local markets for, 241-42 

organic, 170, 182  

> ratio

of feed to flesh in, 8 1 , 1 1

> 5

Child, Julia, 265 

China, fertilizer factories in, 43   

> citric acid,

86 

Cobbett, William, 26, 101 

Coca-Cola, 95, 104-5 

Coetzee, J. M, 309, 319 

Columbus, Christopher, 24, 104, 338 

commune movement (1960s), 141-44, 

152, 154 

community supported agriculture (CSA) 

> ,

153, 245, 257, 259 

conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), 267 

cooking, food chain modified by, 6

corn, 32—56 

botanical parts of, 86, 87 

C-4, 21-22, 104 

cheap, 47-50, 51-52, 53-54, 67-68, 

74, 75, 82-83, 95, 101, 103, 108,  

> 1

17, 1 18, 199-200, 253 

and chemical fertilizers, 41-47   

> cities of,

37-38, 1 18-19  

> as

commodity, 26, 34, 49, 58-63, 64, 66, 67, 73, 84, 93, 103 

dependence on humans, 26-28 

developing new uses for, 87, 90 

eaten as corn, 85 

evolution of, 23-26, 29-30, 60 

exports of, 51, 53, 62, 63 

F-l hybrids, 36-37, 104 

in fast food, 1 1

3in feedlots, 73, 74-75, 82-84, 200  

> as

foundation of food chain, 18-19, 31, 

51,117 

genetically engineered, 36 

genetic variability of, 25 

Golden Bantam, 265-66 

government and, 41, 48-50, 67, 74, 

103, 108, 200-201 

grading system for, 60, 200 440 INDEX 

corn (cont.) 

and grain elevators, 57, 59-61, 63, 86 

hybrid, 29-31,37,41,42,45   

> as intellectual

property, 30-3 1,92 

kernels of, 86 

the meal, 1 09-1 

9

monoculture of, 8, 38-40, 65, 67, 83, 

119,410 

in nonfood products, 1

9

Pioneer Hi-Bred 34H3 1,36,59 

planting, 35-36, 37, 128 

pollen, 28-29 

prices of, 39, 40, 47-50, 53-56, 60-63, 

67, 74, 101, 103 

processed foods from, 91-92 

processing of, 85—99 

quality of, 59, 60  

> rise

ofZeamays, 23-26, 60, 104 

sex change of, 27-28, 104 

sex life of, 28-31 

starch in, 87, 88, 89, 98-99   

> style of,

28 

in supermarket, 15-19   

> surfeit of,

57-58, 62, 67, 74, 101, 103  

> tassel,

28 

usage of, 26 

walking, 19-23 

yields of, 25, 30-31, 36-37, 39, 42, 45, 

46, 50, 60 corned beef, 2 5

cornmeal, 85, 86, 93 corn oil, 86, 88 

cornstarch, 88, 93, 96 

corn sweeteners, 1

8

corn syrup, 88, 89 

corn whiskey, 25, 100-101, 104 

cows, see catde    

> Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism,

The (Bell), 

302 

Cuyahoga River, on fire, 1 42 

cyclodextrins, 86 

dairy products: 

and bovine lifestyle, 135-36, 139, 158 

organic, 156, 158, 178, 182, 267 

Darwin, Charles, 150 

Dawson, Todd, 23, 116 

DDT, 141-42, 324 

Dennett, Daniel, 316,317 

Department of Agriculture, U.S.: 

and cheap corn, 51-52, 74 

direct payments to farmers from, 52, 

61-63 

and entrepreneurship, 246-47, 250 

and irradiation of meat, 82, 230, 250 

meat graded by, 75, 200 

and organic farms, 145, 154—57, 

178-79 

price supports from, 52, 53, 83 

and slaughtering animals, 227, 228-30, 

235-36 

Descartes, Rene, 306, 315 

Des Moines River, pollution of, 46-47 

dextrins, 86 

dextrose, 18, 88, 89, 1 16 

diabetes, 102, 107, 117  

> diets,

fads in, 1-3 

Diggers, 141 

disgust, 292, 355-59 

domesticated species, 10, 29-30, 310, 

320 

Drucker, Peter, 188  

> eagles,

324 

Earthbound Farm, 138, 162-68, 173, 

174-75, 176, 182, 183 

earthworms, 127, 147, 196, 216 

eating: 

in cars, 109, 110-11, 117, 119 

change in national habits of, 1 -3 

> ,

298-302  

> as

dining, 272 

ethics of, 280-81, 304-13, 405 

family dinners, 302 

food fads, 1-3, 299-301 

generalists in, 4; see also omnivore's 

dilemma 

and grace, 407  

> industrial,

10 

low on food chain, 1 1

8

and obesity, 62-63, 100, 101-2 

paradox of, 3-5, 405 

the perfect meal, 405-10 

Eatwild.com, 248 

EcoFriendly Foods, 242  

> E.coli

0157:H7, 62, 82, 83, 250 

ecology, 7, 47, 62, 143, 161 

Eggleston, Bev, 242, 246-50, 260 INDEX •:• 44 1

elements, fixing, 42, 45 

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 226 

End of Agriculture in the American Portfolio, The 

(Blank), 255-56 

energy: 

in calorie form, 21-22, 106, 108, 118, 

199 

in carbohydrates, 291 

cheap, 200 

in food processing, 1 1

8 

> solar,

21-22, 44, 45, 70, 73, 83, 

188-89, 199 

energy density, 107-8    

> Enriching the Earth

(Smil), 42 

enzyme hydrolysis, 89 

essential fatty acids, 267-69 

ethanol, 62, 86, 90, 103, 1 1 1, 1 16 

evolution: 

adaptation of species in, 10, 30, 1 19, 

320, 385 and agriculture, 23, 129, 267 and appetite elasticity, 106 

cannibalism in, 76 

Darwinian trial and error, 3

of domesticated species, 10, 29-30 

and food chain, 6, 103-4, 280 

industrial thinking vs., 68 

natural selection in, 150-51, 180, 280, 288, 289, 320, 342 

sex change in, 27-28 

Excel, 69 

factory farms, 45 

alternative food chain vs., 1 30—3 

> 1

animals on, 39, 64, 118, 140, 254, 306, 310, 317-19 

antibiotics used in, 73, 78-79 

economic logic of, 75, 81, 139 

excess production by, 62-63 

and human health, 67 

and organic food, 156-69 

pollution from, 46-47, 67, 201, 255 

productivity as goal in, 46, 3 1

8

Fallon, Sally, 248 

farmer's markets, 245, 246-49, 257, 259, 

260 

farming, 32-56 

artisanal production, 249-50 

buyers of the crops, 59, 60, 240 

chemical fertilizers in, 41-47, 68, 148, 151, 220 

chemical weed killers in, 40 

closed ecological loop in, 68 

corn, see corn 

corporate benefits from, 36, 63, 95, 

201 

crops owned in, 59 

direct purchase from, 240-42, 244, 

247-48, 254, 256 

diversity in, 38-39, 45, 67-68, 161, 

258 economic problems of, 94, 1 19, 138, 

161 

electric fences in, 193, 206 

fewer people in, 40  

> fish,

18, 268-69, 280 

"good farm," 327-28,332-33 

government policies in, 39, 41 , 48-50, 

51-53, 61-63, 83, 103, 108, 182, 

200-201, 227, 241, 243, 246 

and grain elevators, 59-6 1 , 63 

grass, see grasses 

income from, 34, 53-56, 61-63, 95 

industrial management in, 45, 52, 138 

integrity in, 240-41 

intellectual work of, 220 

monocultures of, 8, 38-40, 45, 65, 67, 

83, 119, 129, 162, 164-65, 214, 221, 258, 410 

Naylor curve, 53—56 

organic, see organic farming 

pests in, 149-50, 151 

and populists, 50, 245 

productivity in, 34, 36, 52, 53, 101, 103, 118, 161, 197-98, 213, 222, 

249 

relationship marketing in, 240, 242, 244, 247   

> soil for,

33,41-42, 127, 146-47 

sustainable, 131-33, 160, 161, 169, 

183-84, 198-99, 230, 240, 327, 41 

> 1

yields in, 32, 36-37, 60, 136  

> fast

food: 

appeal to children, 1 11

chemicals in, 1 1 3—14 

eating in the car, 1 09, 1 1 0-1 1 , 1 1 7, 

119 

generic fragrance and flavor of, 111 442 INDEX  

> fast

food (cont.)  

> at

McDonald's, 105-6, 109-19, 259, 

329, 330, 411 

meal of, 109-19 

supersizing, 105-6, 110, 117   

> fat, dietary,

179, 267  

> feedlots,

65-84 

as animal cities, 73 

antibiotics on, 73, 78-79 

commodity corn in, 39, 73, 74—75, 

82-84, 200-201 

feed mill, 73-74  

> fossil

fuels in, 73 

manure lagoons in, 79, 130 

organic, 139 

pen 63 in, 79-84 

pollution in, 68, 79 

sick cows in, 77—79 

waste products of, 79, 83   

> see also

CAFOs; factory farms 

> fertilizers:

chemical, 41-47, 68, 146-49, 151, 220 

and crop yields, 44—45  

> fossil

fuels in production of, 44 

Haber-Bosch process, 43, 47 

manure, 42,210,211,213,216 

N-P-K formula of, 146-49, 180-81 

in organic farming, 160, 165-66 

pollution from, 46-47   

> fish:
> as cattle

feed, 76 

farmed, 18, 268-69, 280 

reengineering, 18, 67 

wild, 135, 269 

fishing, 279-80, 339, 365 

Flannery, Tim, 323 

Fletcherizing, 299 

food:  

> abstract,

112, 114-15, 119 

cheap, 103, 117, 136, 200, 243 

cooking of, 293, 294 

energy cost of, 107-8  

> fads,

1-3, 299-301 

and fixed stomach problem, 94, 1 1

> 7

genetically modified, 36, 152, 154, 255 

globalization of, 255 

hidden costs of, 243-45, 250, 281 

and human nutrition, 1 79-8 1 , 266-68 

industrialization of, 62, 93-94, 249 

liberated from nature, 90-94, 95, 112, 

114 

macronutrients in, 179-81, 267-69  

> as

metaphor, 255, 257, 41 1

national cuisines, 295, 299, 301, 303 

neutraceutical, 93 

processed, 90-99, 106-7, 115, 118, 152, 243, 301 

quality of, 244, 251 

separation of producer from consumer, 

60, 153 

storied, 134-36, 137-39,411 

synthetic, 97, 98, 143, 177-78 

taboos of, 296, 298, 357, 358 

Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 76 

food chain: biological systems at ends of, 9

connectedness of, 146, 149, 151, 213, 

214, 226 

eating low on, 118 

and evolution, 6, 103-4, 280   

> forests in,

388-89 

foundations of, see corn; grasses 

of hunter-gatherers, 280-81, 362-63 

imbalance in, 62   

> industrial, see

industrial food chain  

> local,

236, 239-42, 249, 262 

modifications of, 6-7, 52 

in nature, 6, 62, 214-15, 388-89, 405 

obscurity of, 34-35, 195 

perfect meal at end of, 399 

reinvention of, 7, 260-61  

> scientific

investigation of, 20, 22-23, 

116-17 

solar-powered, 70-71 

food industry: 

and consumer expectations, 139, 184 and food fads, 301 

and government, 82 

growth rate of, 94—95 

industrialization of, 7, 93-94, 1 1 7; see  

> also

industrial food chain 

and omnivore's dilemma, 5 

> selling

convenience, 96, 301 

substitution in, 95 

supersizing in, 105—6, 1 17 value added in, 95-98, 103, 152 

food poisoning, 62, 152 

food scares, 152-53 INDEX •:• 443 

food science, 107, 111 

food security, 64, 92 

food systems, 93, 240  

> alternative,

143, 149-50, 153, 154, 

246, 249 

connectedness of, 146, 153 

consumers in, 95, 139, 184, 245,258-60 

distribution in, 138, 153, 250-52, 259 

energy density in, 107-8  

> local,

153, 240-45, 247-49, 252-54, 257-59, 260, 262 

foraging: 

for abalone, 394-96  

> for

mushrooms, see fungi  

> forbs,

127, 195 

> forests:

biological processes at work in, 149 

in food chain, 388-89 

mushrooms in, see fungi 

renewal of, 388  

> fossil fuels:

in chemical fertilizers, 44, 45 

consumed in processing food, 83-84, 

88, 1 17, 167, 182-84 

consumed in transporting food, 183, 

240, 249 

converted to food, 45-46, 83-84 

and global warming, 198 

in industrial food chain, 7, 30, 73, 

83-84, 182-84, 249 

from Middle East, 83   

> Francis, Saint,

305 

Franldin, Benjamin, 310, 327 

French paradox, 3, 300-301 

Freud, Sigmund, 298  

> fructose,

18, 86, 89, 107  

> Fry,

Gearld, 188 

fungi: 

autochthonous nature of, 374  

> chanterelles,

285-86, 366-70, 380, 406 

chlorophyll lacking in, 374—75  

> eating,

370-71 

foraging for, 278, 365-70, 379-85, 

386-90  

> as

hallucinogens, 373, 376 

hyphae of, 374, 375 

identifying, 371, 372 

morels, 378-85, 386-90, 394, 396, 408 

mycelium of, 127, 374, 375, 378 

mycorrhizal, 147, 374, 375, 387 

mysteries of, 373-78, 384 

organic matter decomposed by, 375-76 

poisons in, 278-79, 366, 370-71, 373, 

376 

saprophytic, 374, 375, 387 

theories about, 383-84, 387 

types of, 377 

Gandhi, Mohandas K., 305 

gardening, 365-66, 385-86 

Garro, Angelo, 282-84 

dressing the meat, 354—57  

> as

food lover, 339, 354, 356, 392 

mushroom hunting with, 366-70, 371 

and perfect meal, 392, 396-97, 398, 

400-401, 404, 405-8 

pig hunting with, 335-36, 337, 338, 

340-42, 344-45, 347, 349-54 

General Mills, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 144-45, 

151 

genetically modified organisms (GMOs) 

> ,

36, 152, 154, 255 

Gerrish, Jim, 187-88 

Glickman, Dan, 179 

global warming, 47, 198 

glucose, 18, 86, 88-89, 107, 291 

glucose isomerase, 89 

gluten, 88 

gluttony, 106 

Goodman, Drew and Myra, 1 62-68, 176 

> grain:

diet based on, 268  

> as

industrial commodity, 201 

grain elevators, 57, 59-61, 63, 86 

Grandin, Temple, 233, 329-30  

> grasses,

123-33, 185-207 

abstraction of, 185-86 

C-4, 21-22, 104 

chickens eating, 262-66, 269-71 

corn, see corn 

cows eating, 70, 75, 82, 83, 126, 

186-91, 269 

diversity of species, 197  

> edible,

24 

evolution of, 129, 293  

> as

foundation of food chain, 126-29, 

195, 196, 201-2, 239, 252, 266-70, 

326 444 INDEX 

grasses (cont.) 

growth pattern of, 189 

hay-making, 123-24, 125-29   

> lignification of,

189 

management-intensive grazing (MiG) 

> ,

187-91, 192-99, 209-11 

meal at end of food chain, 262-73 

overgrazing, 70, 190, 191 

pastoral idyll, 124-25, 128, 143, 209, 223, 230, 256  

> prairie,

33, 38, 149 

roots of, 195, 196   

> Crass Productivity

(Voisin), 188 

Greenways Organic, 159-62, 165, 176 

Grimmway Farms, 138, 174, 175 

Gussow, Joan Dye, 155-56 

Haber, Fritz, 42-44, 47 

Harvey, Arthur, 1 5 6n  

> hay,

74, 123-24, 125-29, 219 

Hemingway, Ernest, 336 

hens, see chickens 

heterosis, 3

> 1

high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS), 18, 19, 

89, 103-4, 108, 115, 139 

Horizon Organic, 156 

horses, 38, 39 

Howard, Sir Albert, 145-51, 155, 160, 

181 

humans: 

appetites of, 106, 272  

> atavistic

experiences of, 343-44, 

364-65  

> fear

of death, 358 and grasses, 128-29 

language of, 316, 337, 343  

> life

expectancy of, 102 

marginal cases, 311-12 

morality in lives of, 325 

nutrition of, 179-81, 266-68 

obese, 62-63, 100, 101-2, 107, 108, 117, 201  

> as

omnivorous, 6, 289-94, 305, 312, 

314 

pain and suffering of, 316-17 

relationships to other animals, 10, 

306-7, 320, 333, 357-58, 401  

> taste

buds of, 269, 291-92, 295 

tools developed by, 294 

humus, 147-48, 196 

Hungry Soul, The (Kass), 297, 405 

hunter-gatherers, 364—90   

> agriculturists vs.,

279-80, 320   

> diets of,

267, 268 

food chain of, 280-81, 362-63 

heightened senses of, 285, 334—35, 341-42, 368-69, 382-83, 385-86 

meals entirely from, 277-82, 391-41 

> 1

of mushrooms, 365-70, 379-85, 

386-90 

seasons of, 284 

hunting: 

author's experience with, 277-78, 284, 

344-54 

author's feelings about, 356-63, 389, 

403-4 

bloodlust of, 360 

dressing the meat, 354—57, 358, 362 and eating the meat, 361-62, 401  

> to

extinction, 1

and killing, 305, 358-61 

and predation in nature, 321-25, 328 

preparations for, 334—37, 339—44 

responsibility in, 281, 359-61, 401   

> skill in,

346, 348   

> stories of,

347, 349, 352-53 

Huntington, Sarah, 1 6

> 1

hybridization, 29-3 1 , 37, 41 , 42 

hydrogen, 42, 44 

hypoxic (dead) zone, 47  

> IBP,

69  

> litis,

Hugh, 27 

Indians: 

bison hunted by, 322-23 

corn hybridized by, 29, 30 

corn yields realized by, 3 7

maize planted by, 24—25, 26 

and the right to opt out, 132 

and wild species, 388-89 

industrial food chain:   

> alternatives to,

125, 130-33, 143-44, 

212-13, 214-18, 240, 249-50, 

256-57, 260-61 

animals in, see CAFOs; factory farms 

chemical pesticides in, 45, 143, 148, 

152-53, 177, 212, 220-22 

competitive advantage of, 255 INDEX 

complexity of, 17-19, 130 

convenience of, 259 

corn as foundation of, 1 8-1 9, 3 1 , 5 1

> ,

117 

distribution system of, 138 

efficiency in, 71, 81, 136, 161, 201, 214, 244, 249, 256, 318 

energy-dense foods in, 7, 107-8 

exports in, 53, 62, 63  

> fast

food in, 115-19    

> fertilization in, see fertilizers

and food-borne illness, 230, 250 

forgetting about nature in, 10-11, 68, 

73, 115, 245  

> fossil

fuels in, 7, 30, 73, 83-84, 

182-84, 249 

globalization of, 254-57 

government policies in, 41 , 61-63, 67, 

241, 243, 250 

hybridization in, 3

> 1

marketing in, 110, 112, 138,301-2 

and the meal, 109-19 

mechanical harvesting in, 37, 220 

and organic food, 131-32, 133, 

134-40, 144-45, 151, 152-69, 182-84, 257, 260 

price as focus of, 136, 249 

processing in, see processing plant 

species adapted for, 30, 201, 268 

Inge, William Ralph, 6 

> Institute

of Cereal Technology, 92 

International Flavors & Fragrances, 97 

Iowa:  

> cities

of corn in, 37-38, 118-19 

food imported by, 34  

> as

food source, 35, 108,239,259 

grain elevators in, 57, 61, 63, 86 

Greene County, 33, 38-39, 45, 61 

livestock farmers in, 3 9

pollution in, 46-47   

> soil in,

33, 41-42 

soybeans in, 35, 40, 87 

Iowa Farmers Cooperative, 61, 63, 86, 87 

Iowa State University, 87  

> Isabella,

queen of Spain, 1 04 

isotopes, 20, 22-23 

Jackson, Wes, 198, 214 

James, Henry, 1 24 

Jean-Pierre (chef), 339, 344-45, 348, 

367, 373, 378, 392, 397 

Jefferson, Thomas, 101, 124, 125, 148, 204 

Johnson, Larry, 87-88 

Judith (wife), 109-10, 112, 115-16,392 

Judy's Family Farm, 1 70-7  

> 1
> Jungle,

The (Sinclair), 250 

Kahn, Gene, 144-45, 151-53, 155, 156, 

157-59, 161, 168 

Kansas, feedlots in, 65-66, 239 

Kant, Immanuel, 311 

Karp, Walter, 50 

Kass, Leon, 297, 405 

Kellogg, John Harvey, 299, 300  

> ketosis,

299 

King, F. H., 145 

Kitchen Sisters, 283, 284 

koalas, 290 

Koestler, Arthur, 188,215 

Kroc, Ray, 105-6 

kuru, 76 

lacewings, 159, 165  

> lactic

acid, 18, 86 Land Institute, 198, 199  

> lecithin,

18 

legumes, 127, 165, 197 

Leopold, Aldo, 281, 282, 361  

> lettuce,

163-69, 183, 257 

Levenstein, Harvey, 300 

Levi-Strauss, Claude, 264, 289 

Liebig, Baron Justus von, 42, 146, 149, 180  

> lipids,

20 

lipophobia, 2 

> Livy,

254 

local food economy, 153, 240-45, 

247-49, 252-54, 257-59, 260, 262 

Lorentz Meats, Minnesota, 333 

Love, John, 1 05 

Luther, Martin, 260  

> lysine,

18-19 

Machine in the Garden, The (Marx), 137-38 

mad cow disease, 75-76, 152, 237 

Maillard reaction, 270 

maize: 

and American colonists, 24—25, 26 

Aztecs' reverence for, 58, 119 446 * INDEX 

maize (cont.) 

evolution of, 27-28 

planted by Indians, 24—25, 26, 37   

> see also

corn 

malnutrition, 102 

maltodextrin, 18, 86, 89, 96, 116 

maltose, 19, 89 

Mambelli, Stefania, 1 1

6

mannitol, 86    

> Marriage of the

Sun and Moon, The (Weil), 372 

Marx, Leo, 137-38 

Mather, Cotton, 357,361 

Maya, as corn people, 1

9

McDonald's, 94, 105-6, 109-19, 239, 

259,260,329,330,411 

McGovern, George, 5

> 1

McKenna, Terence, 378 

meals:  

> fast

food, corn-based, 109-19 

grass-fed, 262-73 

from hunter-gatherers, 277-82, 

391-411 

organic industrial, 173-76   

> perfect, see

perfect meal 

true cost of, 200-201, 410-1 

> 1

meat: 

avoidance of, 2

bacteria in, 81-82 

brining, 264 

cheap, 67 

cheeseburgers, 114—15, 117 

curing, 236 

from feedlots, 65-84, 268   

> fossil fuels

in production of, 83-84  

> free

range, 1 34—35 

from grass-eating animals, 70 

irradiation of, 82, 230, 250 

morality of eating, 233, 237, 264, 289, 

305-13 

packaging of, 306 

philosophy of cooking, 403—5 

price of, 235-36 

USDA grading system for, 75, 200 

meatpacking corporations, 69 

media, influence of, 2

metolachlor, 59 

metropolitan buying clubs, 248, 260 

Metzin, Mel, 77, 78-79, 80 

mill starch, 88 

Mission Ranches, 1 64 

molasses, 74 

monarch butterflies, 288 

monoculture, 8,9, 38-40, 45 

Monsanto Corporation, 36, 154 

Montanari, Massimo, 9

> 1

morels, 378-85, 386-90, 394, 396, 408 

MSG, 19, 86, 116 Muscle Shoals, Alabama, 41 

mushrooms, see fungi 

Mushrooms Demystified (Arora), 374 

mycelium, 127, 374, 375, 378 

Nation, Allan, 187, 188, 200, 215, 249-50 

National Beef Plant, 69, 329, 332 

National Park Service, 324—25 

nature: 

connectedness in, 225, 280-81 

diversity in, 9, 47, 410 

food chain in, 6, 62, 214-15, 388-89, 

405 

forgetting about, 10-1 1, 68, 73, 115, 

245, 325 

going back to, 149-51, 327, 343 

human manipulation of, 44, 62 

and human morality, 325 

imbalance in, 62 improving on, 97 

liberating food from, 90-94, 95, 112, 

114 

and machine, 148 

no waste in, 214 

and organic ideal, 160, 165, 183-84 

population crashes in, 56 

predation in, 321-25, 328 

reproduction in, 28 

tension between human industry and, 9

transformation of, 10, 62, 264, 272, 

404-5   

> see also

animals; plants 

Nature Conservancy, 324 

Naylor, George: 

and corn prices, 47—49, 53, 60 

and family farm, 33, 34, 50; see also 

Naylor farm 

on farm policy, 33, 48-49, 50,51, 

53-54, 61, 256 

and food chain, 34-35, 63, 64, 130, 

201, 239, 256 INDEX * 447 

and grain elevator, 57-64 

income of, 61-62, 95 

planting corn, 35-38, 40, 58, 108, 128 

productivity of, 34, 46 

Naylor, Peggy, 34 

Naylor curve, 53-56 

Naylor farm, 32-35, 44-45, 46, 67-68, 

73, 91, 130-31 

neophobia/neophilia, 288, 290, 295, 296 

neurons, 267 

neutrons, 22 

New Deal, 49-50, 52 

Newman, Paul, dressing by, 109  

> nitrates,

47 

nitrogen, 20, 41-47 

in compost, 224 

in feedlot wastes, 79  

> fixing,

42, 44 

in natural system, 42, 44, 150,1 60, 

165, 197, 213 

in N-P-K fertilizers, 146-47, 148 

pollution from, 46-47  

> synthetic,

42, 45, 74, 148, 1 76 

Nixon, Richard M., 43, 5 1-52 

nucleic acid, 42  

> obesity,

62-63, 100, 101-2, 107, 108, 

117, 201 

omega-3 fatty acids, 267-69 

omnivore's dilemma, 287-303 

abundance of food, 5, 7

American paradox, 3-5 

animal happiness, 319-25, 327 

animal rights, 305, 308-9, 310, 312, 

314- 16, 319, 320-22, 323, 325-28 

animal suffering, 308, 310, 312-13, 

315- 19, 328 

and disgust, 292, 355-59  

> ethics

of eating animals, 304—13 

and food chain, 6

and food industry, 5

food safety, 286, 287-88, 291-94, 366, 

370-72 

food selection, 287-89, 291, 295-98, 

303 

food taboos, 296, 298, 357, 358  

> free

agency in, 297-98 

morality of eating meat, 233, 237, 264, 289, 305-13 

morality of killing animals, 233, 237, 

356-63  

> reality

denied in, 362, 401 

vegetarianism, 305, 313-15, 325-27 

organic, use of term, 168-69 

organic farming: 

access to pasture in, 157, 172 

additives and synthetics in, 156, 157, 

177-78 

biodiversity in, 161, 197, 224, 255 

chemical-free, 159-60 

connectedness in, 146, 149, 150, 153, 161, 224, 242, 245, 257, 259 

conversion to, 162 

and countercuisine, 155-56 

economics of, 174, 176 farm as living organism in, 150-5 

> 1

government standards for, 131, 132, 

154-58, 160, 177, 178-79 

industrial trend of, 131-32, 133, 

134-40, 144-45, 151, 152-69, 182-84, 257, 260 

information distributed in, 1 3 6—3 9

input substitution in, 160, 169    

> Is it better?,

176-84,266 

local-food movement, 240-45, 247-49, 

252-54, 257-59 

modeled on nature, 160, 165, 183-84 

philosophical foundations of, 145-46, 

149, 150-51, 175, 258 

price of, 242-45  

> sixties

movement to, 141-43, 154   

> stories of,

134-36, 137, 244 

year-round production of, 174—75, 

253 

Organic Food and Production Act (OFPA) 

> ,

154     

> Organic Gardening and Farming

(Rodale), 142, 145, 204 

Ortega y Gasset, Jose, 336-37, 342-44, 

349, 353, 358-59, 362 

overnutrition, 102 

Ovid, 305  

> pellagra,

296 

People's Park, Berkeley, 140-41, 143 

Pepsi cola, 1 04—5 

Perdue, Frank, 261, 306 

Perdue chickens, 170 448 •:• INDEX 

perfect meal, 391-411 

costliness of, 409, 41 0-1 

> 1

in the kitchen, 399-405 

philosophy of, 409-1 

> 1

planning the menu for, 393-99 

rules for, 391-92 

schedule for, 402—3  

> at

the table, 405-10 

pesticides, chemical, 143, 148, 152—53, 

177, 212, 220-22 

PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of 

Animals), 305 

Petaluma Eggs, 170-7 

> 1

Petaluma Poultry, 135, 140, 159, 169-73, 221  

> Petrini,

Carlo, 259 

petroleum, see fossil fuels 

phosphorus, 79, 146-47 

photosynthesis, 20-21, 188, 195, 196, 197, 199, 375 

> pigs:

inCAFOs, 218   

> as cattle

feed, 76 

considering the life of, 306, 318, 320, 

332 

indoor lives of, 39 

in the perfect meal, 391, 396-97, 401, 

404, 406, 408, 409 

on Polyface Farm, 126,217-19,223,319 

surgeons practicing on, 356  

> tail

docking, 218, 318, 333 

wild or feral, 321, 324-25, 335, 

338-39; see also hunting 

Pimentel, David, 167, 183 

Pinker, Steven, 292 

> plants:

chemicals required for growth of, 

146-47 

cooking, 293, 294 

corn, see corn 

defenses of, 293-94 

energy gleaned from, 21—22 

evolution of, 23, 26-28, 180, 385 

extinction of, 26   

> grasses, see

grasses 

identification of, 372 

identifying with, 22   

> as intellectual

property, 30-3 1,255  

> as

medicines, 292-94 

photosynthesis of, 20-21, 188, 195, 

196, 197, 199, 375 

secondary metabolites in, 179, 

180-81 

symbiosis of, 147, 181, 386 

syntax of, 374  

> plastic,

manufactured from corn, 90  

> Plato,

148, 378 

Poky Feeders, 66, 72-73, 76, 77, 79, 81, 

83-84, 194 

Pollan, Isaac, 109-19, 392 

Polyface Farm: 

in alternative food chain, 130-33, 

212-13, 214-18, 240, 250 

bam, 2 1

> 7

catde grazing, 186-91, 194-95 

chickens, 208, 210-13, 241, 253, 

262-66, 319, 321 

customers of, 235, 239, 240-42, 

251-55, 257-58, 260, 331, 332 

diversity of, 1 2 5-2 7 , 2 1 2- 1

6

Eggmobile, 126, 210-12, 213, 215 

food chain of, 126-27, 212-15, 234, 

237-38 

Gobbledy-Go, 216 

hay-making, 123-24, 125-29, 219 

history of, 204—7 

holons of, 215-17  

> killing

chickens, 226-38, 331  

> as

labor-intensive, 220 

meals eaten at, 203 

pigs, 126, 217-19, 223, 319 

production of, 222  

> rabbits,

126, 216, 251 

Raken House, 215-16 

rotational grazing, 187-91, 192-99, 

209-11, 213  

> self-sufficient,

203-4, 221 

stacking system of, 215-17   

> trust in,

242, 254, 261 

turkeys, 126, 216 

woodlot, 222-25 

polyols, 19 

polyphenols, 179, 180-81 

Porcini, Paulie, 380, 381, 390 

Pordomingo, Anibal, 188  

> Porter,

Michael, 188, 249, 250 

potassium, 146-47  

> Price,

Weston, 248 INDEX * 449 

processing plant, 85-99 

liberating food from nature, 90-92  

> mill,

85-90 

processed foods, 90-99 

protein, 20, 42, 179 

corn converted to, 74, 88 

cows eating cows, 75—77 

grass converted to, 197, 326 

soy converted to, 9

> 1

supplements in cattle feed, 74 

protons, 22  

> rabbits,

on Poly face Farm, 126, 216, 251 

Raccoon River, pollution of, 46 

Rachels, James, 309  

> rachis,

27 

> rats:

food selection by, 287-88  

> as

omnivores, 4, 290 

research on appetites of, 107 

Regan.Tom, 309, 323  

> Retzloff,

Marg, 156-57 

Richard (property owner), 339, 340, 

344-48, 392, 407 

Robinson, Jo, 188 

Rodale, J. I., 142, 144, 145, 181, 204 

Rorabaugh, W J., 100 

Rosie (chicken), 135, 140, 159, 169-74, 

176, 177, 178 

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 3, 297 

Rozin, Paul, 3, 287-88, 292, 296, 298, 300, 357 

Rumensin, 74, 78-79  

> Russell,

Jim, 82 

Sahagun, Friar, 58  

> Salatin.Art,

240, 250-52, 253  

> Salatin,

Daniel, 123, 202, 203, 216, 227, 

228, 231-33, 251  

> Salatin,

Frederick, 204, 206  

> Salatin, Joel:

in alternative food chain, 125, 126-27, 

128, 130, 169, 198, 213, 240-42, 

249, 253-55, 257-58, 260-61, 270, 

271, 304, 321, 331 

books written by, 209-10, 230 

family background of, 204—7 

on government interventions, 229-30, 

243, 246  

> as

grass farmer, 123-27, 186-87, 189, 

190-91, 197-98, 201 

on industrial organic, 131-33, 213, 222, 230, 243-46, 248, 260 

and local markets, 240-42, 244—45, 248-50, 253-55, 257-58, 332 

natural systems of, 214—17, 221 

and rotational grazing, 192-98, 

216-17, 220 

self-sufficiency of, 203-4 

and sustainability, 131, 230, 240   

> see also

Polyface Farm  

> Salatin,

Rachel, 203  

> Salatin,

William, 204-7, 223   

> salt flats,

279, 393-94 

Salvador, Ricardo, 58  

> Sand

County Almanac, A (Leopold), 281 

Santa Cruz Island, 324—25 

science, reductionist, 146-48, 150, 180, 

181  

> Scully,

Matthew, 309, 321 

seeds, patented, 255 

Shainsky, Allen, 170 .

Sheridan, Philip, 24 

Shiva, Vandana, 41  

> Sinclair,

Upton, 250, 312 

Singer, Peter, 304-9, 311,312-13,321, 

326, 327-28, 332 

Slow Food movement, 255, 259-60 

Small Planet Foods, 154, 159, 161 

Smil, Vaclav, 42, 43, 47  

> soft

drinks, 18, 104-5, 107, 115, 117    

> Soil and Health,

The (Howard), 145  

> Soil

Conservation Service, 49  

> sorbital,

86  

> souffle,

chocolate, 272-73 

Soviet Union, food chain in, 256 

soybeans: 

planting, 35, 40, 42 

prices of, 103 

processed foods from, 91-92, 108 

research on, 87 

Squanto, 24—25, 26 

Stamets, Paul, 378  

> steer

number 534: 

author's purchase of, 66, 72 

death of, 250, 304, 329-30 

early days of, 69, 71, 83 

and fast food, 1 14 45 •:• INDEX  

> steer

number 534 (cont.) 

in the feedlot, 72-73, 79-84, 195-96 

Gar Precision 1680 as father of, 69, 77  

> as

link in food chain, 81,83 

number 9534 as mother of, 69, 71 

weaned, 71-72 

weight gain of, 80, 81 

Stockman Grass Farmer, 187, 249 

stomata, 2

> 1

Stonyfield Farm, 173, 182 

sucrose, 89, 107 

sugar, 104, 107 

sugarcane, 104 

sun: 

converted to food, 45, 46, 70-7 1 , 1 95 

energy from, 21-22, 44, 45, 70, 73, 83, 

188-89, 199 

and photosynthesis, 20-21, 188, 195, 196, 197, 199, 375 

supplanted in food chain, 7, 44 

superbugs, antibiotic-resistant, 78-79, 82 

supermarket, 15—19, 258 

bar codes in, 244—45 

biodiversity in, 16-17 

food prices in, 51-52, 243 

organic food sold in, 134—40, 145, 257, 258, 260 

SKU (stock-keeping units) in, 20 

Supermarket Pastoral, 137-39, 158, 

170-72 •

supersizing, 105—6, 110, 117 

sweeteners, 88-89, 93, 95, 103-5 

Swift & Company, 69 

Tanimura & Antle, 1 64  

> Tassinello,

Anthony, 378-81, 383, 387, 

390, 392, 406, 407 

TBHQ (tertiary butylhydroquinone) 

> ,

113-14  

> teosinte,

27-28, 104 

Thoreau, Henry David, 55,281-82  

> thrifty

gene, 106  

> Tolstoy,

Leo, 305  

> transfats,

88 

transgenes, 36 

TreeTop apple pieces, 97 

turkeys, on Poly face Farm, 126, 216 

Tylosin, 74, 78-79 

Tyson, Don, 252, 261 

Tyson foods, 69, 95-96, 1 14, 170 

usufruct, 398, 409 

vegetarianism, 118, 305, 313-15, 319, 

325-27, 362 

Voisin, Andre, 188, 189, 206 

Walden (Thoreau), 281-82 

Wallace, Henry, 1 04 

Wallerstein, David, 105-6, 1 1

> 1

Warman, Arturo, 26 

wasabi, 296 

Washington, George, 1 1

Wasson, Gordon, 378 

Waters, Alice, 253 

water table, pollution of, 46 

Weil, Andrew, 372, 377, 378 

Weston A. Price Foundation, 248 

wheat, in new world, 25 

wheat people, Europeans as, 22-23 

whiskey, 25, 100-101, 105 

Whole Earth Catalog, 142, 145 

Whole Foods supermarkets, 258-59 

author's shopping in, 173-76, 178, 183 

and industrial organic, 138-39, 161, 

178, 183, 248-49, 260 

and organic movement, 139, 141 

prices in, 1 76, 262 

Supermarkets Pastoral style, 134—39 

Williams, Joy, 309 

Wilson, E. O., 128 Wisconsin glacier, 33 Wise, Steven M., 309 

World War I, poison gas in, 43 

xanthan gum, 19, 86, 96, 156  

> yeast,

wild, 397, 399-400 

YieldGard gene, 3 6  

> Zea mays, see

corn 

Zyklon B, 43 ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

Michael Pollan is the author of three previous books: Second 

Nature, A Place of My Own, and The Botany of Desire, a New York Times 

bestseller that was named a best book of the year by Borders, 

Amazon, and the American Booksellers Association. Pollan is a

longtime contributing writer at the New York Times Magazine and 

teaches journalism at the University of California-Berkeley. He 

lives in Berkeley with his wife, the painter Judith Belzer, and 

their son, Isaac. To read more of his work, go to www.michael 

pollan.com.
