Title: Press Releases - Commissioners' Office

URL Source: https://www.lakecountyohio.gov/commissioners-office/press-releases/

Markdown Content:
**Lake County Celebrates Senior Volunteer Recognition at Captains Stadium**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 5, 2025– On September 3, 2025, the Lake County Board of Commissioners joined with the Lake County Volunteer Network (LCVN) and the Lake County Council on Aging (COA) in celebrating the remarkable contributions of senior volunteers at the 2025 Senior Volunteer Recognition event. The celebration took place at the Lake County Captains Stadium, where over 400 senior volunteers serving in Lake County were recognized amidst the lively atmosphere of the Lake County Captain’s game.

“The sunshine was shining down, the aroma of hot dogs filled the air, and the excitement of baseball made the event truly unforgettable. It was a perfect occasion to acknowledge the amazing dedication and spirit these volunteers bring to our community every day,” said Cristen Kane, Volunteer Services Coordinator of LCVN.

This year’s recognition event brought together 175volunteers, offering them an afternoon of fellowship, appreciation, and celebration.

“Lake County is blessed with senior volunteers who truly make a difference in the lives of our residents,” said Commissioner John T. Plecnik. “We are so grateful for their wisdom, compassion, and generosity, which create a ripple effect of kindness across our entire community. This event at Captains Stadium was a wonderful way to bring everyone together, celebrate their impact, and share in the joy that comes from serving others.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Celebrate Successful 2025 Lake County Fair**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 7, 2025– The 170 th Lake County Fair, held July 22–27, drew 102,728 attendees. Even amid record-breaking heat, the fair was a vibrant celebration of community spirit and another remarkable success.

The fair kicked off Tuesday with Veterans Day, offering free admission to all veterans. That evening’s annual Fair Parade featured over 200 entries, led by Ohio Fairs Queen Amberly Szczerbiak of Fayette County and Lake County Fair Queen Leigh-Ann Milo, a recent Riverside High School graduate. Later that night, Fair Board Director Mike Peplowski of Madison was inducted into the Lake County Fair Hall of Fame, and the Baked Goods Auction broke records, raising over $8,000.

“The Lake County Fair continues to bring our community together for a week of fun, tradition, and celebration,” said Commission President Richard J. Regovich. “From Senior Day to the Demo Derby, this fair had something for everyone. We’re proud to support such a safe, inclusive, and well-run event.”

“As Voice of the Fair and a proud supporter of our 4-H youth, I was honored to win the Grand Champion Chickens this year,” said Commissioner John T. Plecnik, who purchased the Grand Champion Chicken Pen raised by Josie Goldy. “The dedication and talent shown by Josie and her fellow participants truly embody the values of Head, Heart, Hands, and Health. I’m grateful to support them and be part of this incredible tradition.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County’s First Comprehensive Plan in 65 Years!**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, July 2, 2025– Lake County is proud to announce the launch of “VISION 2050”, the county’s first comprehensive plan in over six decades. Led by the Lake County Board of Commissioners, the Lake County Planning Commission, and their consulting partner Envision, this forward-thinking plan aims to shape the future of Lake County through 2050.

As the region faces rapid changes and emerging challenges, VISION 2050 provides a strategic blueprint to guide sustainable growth while preserving the community’s unique character. The plan addresses critical areas including economic development, agriculture, housing, industry, office and retail spaces, transportation, parks, recreation, education, and environmental stewardship—focusing on our relationship with Lake Erie, the Grand River, Chagrin River, Mentor Marsh, and other vital natural features.

“This plan marks a new chapter for Lake County,” said Commission President Richard J. Regovich. “It’s about thoughtful planning for growth while protecting what makes our community special. Importantly, VISION 2050 is designed to be inclusive and community-focused—not top-down—empowering local communities to thrive.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim May “Older Americans Month”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 8, 2025– At today’s Commissioners’ Meeting, the Board proclaimed May

2025, “Older Americans Month” in Lake County. Every May, the Administration for Community

Living leads the celebration of Older American Month (OAM). This year’s theme, Flip the Script

on Aging, focuses on transforming how society perceives, talks about, and approaches aging. It

encourages individuals and communities to challenge stereotypes and dispel misconceptions.

“Ageism has a real impact on how we perceive older adults and, importantly, how they

perceive themselves,” said Commission President Richard J. Regovich. “By challenging these

negative stereotypes and embracing a positive view of aging, we empower individuals to remain fully engaged and contributing members of our Lake County community.”

This May, the Board encourages Lake County to join as they recognize OAM and explore the many opportunities for staying active and engaged as we age, highlighting opportunities for purpose, exploration, and connection that come with aging. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Board of Commissioners Receives Federal Grant to Support Older Adults Age in Place**PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 8, 2025 – The Lake County Volunteer Network (LCVN), a division of the Board of Lake County Commissioners, is proud to announce a grant of $126,879 every year for the next three years — totaling over $380,000 — from AmeriCorps, the federal agency for national service and volunteerism. This significant investment will expand LCVN’s reach in Lake County and aid older adults with remaining independent and connected within their homes and communities.

“This highly competitive grant is a testament to the strength of our community and the dedication of our volunteers,” said Commission President Richard J. Regovich. “It is a major accomplishment that highlights the strength of our local programs and the growing need to support our aging residents.”

With this additional funding, LCVN is expanding efforts to recruit adults 55 and older into meaningful volunteer roles to strengthen three priority programs:

*   Meals on Wheels, through the Lake County Council on Aging, delivers nutritious meals to older adults who are unable to shop or cook for themselves.
*   Helping Hands for Seniors, operated by Lifeline, Inc., provides help with small but important

home repairs, maintenance tasks, and errands.
*   Phone Pal, managed by LCVN, matches volunteers with older adults for regular, friendly phone calls to reduce isolation and loneliness. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**May is National Foster Care Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 8, 2025– For over 30 years now, the U.S. government has issued annual proclamations in recognition of National Foster Care Month, celebrated in May, to show appreciation and gratitude to foster parents across the nation. Foster parents are those people in our community who step forward and provide a safe haven for children when they cannot remain in their home of origin.

Lake County currently has 38 licensed foster families who can care for children of all ages. Lake County also works with many relatives and kin who have opened their homes to children in need of care.

“We remain extremely indebted to our foster parents who provide the children in our custody with a consistent, nurturing, and safe environment to grow and thrive. Foster parents are often faced with extremely challenging situations, and we appreciate the many, many sacrifices they make to care for the children in agency custody,” said Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim National Telecommunicators Week**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 10, 2025– Lake County Commissioners proclaim the week of April 13-19, 2025, as National Telecommunicators Week in Lake County, Ohio. Established in 1994, when President William J. Clinton signed Presidential Proclamation 6667 declaring the second week of April National Telecommunicators Week. This week is a time to celebrate and thank our dispatchers/telecommunications. These outstanding professionals serve our Lake County communities and citizens, as well as public safety personnel, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

In 2024, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office Central Communications division handled _83,956_ emergency 911 calls. In addition to the noted 911 call volume, Central Communications also answered _249,062_ non-911 calls. This includes all non-emergency needs for service and public assistance. In total, Central Communications fielded _333,019_ calls in 2024!

The Lake County Sheriff’s Office operates the Central Communications Center at 8505 Garfield Rd. in Kirtland, Ohio. This facility is the primary 911 answering center for all cellular calls made in Lake County. This state-of-the-art facility utilizes advanced technology to provide emergency services and basic calls for service to the citizens of Lake County. This facility is also the primary dispatch center for 21 police and fire agencies throughout Lake County. This consists of twelve (12) law enforcement agencies and nine (9) Fire/EMS agencies. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner Morris W. Beverage III, Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Sheriff Frank Leonbruno, Suzanne Middendorf, Lt. Annie Lerman, Sgt. Angela King, Captain Daniel Bachnicki, and Commissioner Richard J. Regovich.

**Commissioners Proclaim April as Autism Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 4, 2025 – The Lake County Board of Commissioners proudly declared April 2025 as Autism Awareness Month at their April 3, 2025 Commissioners’ meeting. This initiative aims to promote understanding, acceptance, and inclusion for individuals diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in our community.

Autism is a developmental disability that affects individuals across various ages and backgrounds. According to recent statistics, approximately 5.8 million adults in the United States were diagnosed with Autism in 2023, including about 2.1% of adults aged 18-84 in Ohio. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that in 2024, one in 36 children in the United States will be diagnosed with ASD.

The Lake County Board of Commissioners emphasizes the importance of creating supportive policies and fostering positive attitudes that enable individuals with developmental disabilities to lead independent and fulfilling lives. By actively participating in community activities and recognizing everyone’s unique contributions, we create a culture of understanding and acceptance.Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioners Morris W. Beverage II, John T. Plecnik, Elfie Roman, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Josh Thompson and Rachael Urbanek.

**Commissioners Proclaim April as Child Abuse Prevention Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 3, 2025– Across the nation, including here in Lake County, the month of April is recognized as Child Abuse Prevention Month. This initiative is rooted in communities working together to ensure that children and families are provided with the support they need, especially during challenging times. During the April 3, 2025, Commissioners’ meeting the Lake County Commissioners passed a resolution proclaiming April 2025 as Child Abuse Prevention Month throughout Lake County.

Child abuse and neglect occurs across all cultures, races, and socio-economic groups and we are not immune to this issue in Lake County. During 2024, staff with the Children Services Division of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services responded to over 1,500 calls regarding child safety and worked with approximately 1,000 children who presented with a variety of needs requiring the assistance of the agency.

The Board of Lake County Commissioners supports the efforts of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services in ensuring that all Lake County Children have the opportunity to grow up in safe, supportive environments. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Mary Udics, Suzanne Casar, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich and Morris W. Beverage III.

**Senator Bernie Moreno Makes Visit to Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 1, 2025– Lake County was honored to welcome Ohio Senator Bernie Moreno to the Commissioners’ Office last week on Wednesday, March 26, 2025. The visit marked a significant opportunity for local officials and community members to engage directly with the Senator on important issues facing the Lake County region.

During his time in Lake County, Senator Moreno met with the Board of Commissioners to discuss vital community needs, economic development, and potential funding opportunities. The discussions focused on enhancing infrastructure, bolstering local businesses, and addressing the specific challenges that residents face.

“We appreciate Senator Moreno taking the time to visit our community and hear our concerns firsthand,” said Richard J. Regovich, President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners. “His commitment to Lake County will help us on our journey to continue improving the quality of life for our residents.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize Jim Tressel on Appointment as****Lieutenant Governor of Ohio**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 20, 2025– During today’s Lake County Board of Commissioners’ meeting, the board announced the adoption of a resolution recognizing Jim Tressel, a native of the City of Mentor in Lake County, on his appointment as Lieutenant Governor of Ohio.

The Board is especially proud of Tressel’s accomplishments as a Lake County and City of Mentor native, which exemplify the spirit of excellence and leadership that our community promotes. His remarkable tenure as the Head Football Coach at The Ohio State University from 2001 to 2010 brought unprecedented success to the program, including a National Championship in 2002 and multiple Big Ten Conference titles. Beyond his athletic achievements, Tressel instilled essential values of teamwork, discipline, academic excellence, and community engagement in his players, helping shape them into responsible and successful citizens. Notably, his teams achieved a signature upset over Michigan, a victory that showcased his ability to prepare his teams for the biggest stages and achieve historic wins.

Following his time at Ohio State, Tressel served as the President of Youngstown State University from 2014 to 2023. During this period, he implemented significant improvements in academic programs, increased student enrollment, and enhanced campus facilities, contributing greatly to the university’s growth and the economic development of the Mahoning Valley. His dedication to community service is further exemplified by his involvement with numerous charitable organizations, demonstrating a genuine commitment to improving the lives of young people throughout Ohio. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Proclaim January 9, 2025, as National Law Enforcement Appreciation Day in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 9, 2025– The Lake County Board of Commissioners has formally adopted a resolution declaring January 9, 2025, as National Law Enforcement Appreciation Day. This day serves as a tribute to the dedication and sacrifices made by law enforcement officers nationwide, including the brave men and women serving in Lake County.

“On January 9, let us take a moment to express our heartfelt gratitude to the law enforcement officers who work tirelessly to ensure our safety and security,” said Commission President Richard J. Regovich. “Their bravery and commitment to our communities deserve our recognition and respect.”

Established in 2015, National Law Enforcement Appreciation Day aims to honor over 800,000 officers across the nation. The Lake County Sheriff’s Office and local police departments exhibit unwavering valor, dignity, and integrity while serving the community.Please click here to read entire press release.

**Richard J. Regovich Elected President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 9, 2025– Commissioner Richard J. Regovich was elected President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners during the Organizational Meeting held on January 9, 2025. He first took office as the 81st Commissioner of Lake County on November 29, 2022, and won reelection on November 5, 2024. The Honorable Judge Robert J. Patton administered the oath of office for his second term.

Commissioner Regovich’s vision for Lake County emphasizes public safety, economic growth, and a high quality of life for all residents. He is dedicated to working with local school systems, trade schools, and universities to develop a skilled and talented workforce that will drive economic development and innovation in our community.

Born and raised in the City of Willowick, Commissioner Regovich has a deep understanding of the community’s needs and values. He is a lifelong resident who has been involved in public service for many years, serving on various local boards and commissions, including the Willowick Planning Commission, the Willowick Charter Review Committee, and the Willowick City Council. He also served as Mayor of Willowick for over six years. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Commissioner John T. Plecnik passing the gavel to new Commission President Richard J. Regovich

**New Flag Retirement Boxes Established in Administration Center Lobby**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, December 3, 2024– The Commissioners’ Office is excited to announce the installation of new Flag Retirement Boxes in the lobby of the Administrative Center, located at 105 Main St., Painesville, Ohio 44077. This initiative is made possible through the efforts of Paul Bernardo, a dedicated 9th grader and member of Scout Troop 165 / Zion Lutheran Church in Painesville.

Paul has recently completed his Eagle Scout project, which focuses on providing a respectful and responsible way for community members to dispose of worn or damaged American flags. This initiative demonstrates not only his commitment to service but also reinforces our community’s values of respect and patriotism.

The Flag Retirement Boxes are designed to ensure that flags are disposed of in accordance with proper protocols, allowing residents to honor their national symbol. The installation of these boxes in a public space like the lobby of the Administration Center makes it easier for community members to access them and participate in this important act of respect.Please click here to read the entire press release.

Paul with the Flag Retirement Boxes he built for his Eagle Scout Project.

**Commissioners Declare State of Emergency in Lake County, Ohio and Close County Offices on Monday, December 2, 2024**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, December 1, 2024– In a special meeting convened today, the Lake County Board of Commissioners unanimously declared a state of emergency in response to the severe winter storm affecting our region. This declaration allows for the immediate mobilization of resources necessary to ensure the safety and wellbeing of our residents.

In this snow emergency and now that Lake County and some of its communities have Declared a State of Emergency, this gives us the ability to work with the county, local communities to share resources, once they are requested. If resources aren’t available locally then we will submit a resource request to the State EMA to locate resources for those communities in need,” stated Emergency Management Director Joseph A. Busher.

The decision was made after a thorough assessment of the current weather conditions, which include heavy snowfall, freezing temperatures, and hazardous road conditions throughout Lake County. The forecast indicates that these challenging weather patterns are expected to continue, potentially exacerbating the situation for residents and first responders alike. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Recognize December as Be a Santa to a Senior Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 26, 2024– Home Instead Senior Care created the _Be a Santa to a Senior_ program to support lonely or isolated older adults. This program aims to give to those in need by partnering with local organizations to make sure isolated seniors receive gifts and companionship during the holiday season.

The Board of Commissioners is one such partner and has hosted a tree for the previous five years and are hosting a tree this year as well. The tree is decorated with ornaments featuring seniors’ first names and gift or gift card suggestions. The tree is located on the fifth floor of the Lake County Administration Center outside of chambers, at 105 Main St., in Painesville.

The Commissioners want to remind those who have taken an ornament from the tree to return the unwrapped gift item to the same location by December 6, 2024, in order to be delivered to seniors in time for the holidays. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Therese Zdesar, President of Home Instead, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich and John R. Hamercheck.

**Commissioners Honor the Lake County Captains with the 2 nd Key to the County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 26, 2024– At today’s Commissioners’ meeting, the Board presented the Lake County Captains with the 2 nd _Key to Lake County_ to recognize their great accomplishment of becoming the 2024 Midwest League Champions.

The Board of Lake County Commissioners established the _Key to Lake County_ program. For so long as Lake County persists, the _Key to Lake County_ shall be our community’s highest honor and most prestigious award. It shall be presented by the Lake County Board of Commissioners and given very selectively to honor an individual or organization who has made extraordinary and significant accomplishments and contributions to Lake County.

The 2024 First Overall MLB Draft Pick Travis Bazzana is the first in Cleveland franchise history and he began his minor league career this season with the Lake County Captains. The Captains talented lineup featured three players who drove in runs in the title-winning game; Ralph Velazquez hit a three-run homer in the sixth inning, and Travis Bazzana and Angel Genao plated runners with singles in the eighth inning. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Morgan Mattimore, Joey Blair, Andris Kampe, Jen Yorko, Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Horatio, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich, John R. Hamercheck and Allison Howard.

**Lake County Prosecutor’s Office Donates 360-Degree FARO Scanner to Chester

Township Police Department**PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 7, 2024– The Board of Lake County Commissioners is pleased to announce the donation of a 360-degree FARO scanner to the Chester Township Police Department on behalf of the Lake County Prosecutor’s Office.

The 360-degree FARO scanner being donated is no longer needed by the Lake County Prosecutor’s Office but can be utilized by the Chester Township PD’s Detective Bureau for comprehensive crime scene investigations.

“As elected officials, it’s our responsibility to lend support whenever we can, regardless of jurisdiction. The donation of the FARO scanner to Chester Township Police is an investment in public safety that emphasizes our shared commitment to protecting our neighbors and fostering a collaborative approach to law enforcement,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Proclaim November 2024 as National Adoption Awareness Month in Lake County**PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 7, 2024– National Adoption Month is recognized annually in November throughout the nation as a time to raise awareness about the urgent need for adoptive families for children and youth in foster care.

During the November 7, 2024 meeting, the Lake County Commissioners passed a resolution declaring November 2024 as National Adoption Awareness Month in Lake County.

“We urge all citizens in Lake County to recognize the amazing contribution of adoptive families to their communities. Your love saves lives,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik.

“Thank you to the many wonderful adoptive parents in Lake County who are providing children in our community with a safe, loving and forever family. We celebrate our adoptive parents each day at Job and Family Services and welcome the opportunity to highlight them during November Adoption Month. We also express our gratitude to the many important individuals who provide support to our adoptive families and adoptive children. If anyone is interested in learning more about becoming a foster or adoptive parent, I encourage them to call the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services. We need more foster and adoptive parents in Lake County.” said Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commission President John T. Plecnik, County Probate Court Judge Mark J. Bartolotta, Job and Family Services Director, Suzanne Casar, Supervisor of Job and Family Services Foster Care and Adoption Team, Gene Tetrick, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich and Commissioner John R. Hamercheck. 

**Lake County Celebrates the Lake County Captains: Midwest League Champions!**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 23, 2024– The Lake County Commissioners are thrilled to announce that the Lake County Captains have won their second Midwest League title in franchise history! The Captains (77-53) triumphed over the Wisconsin Timber Rattlers (77-54) with a 9-4 victory on Wednesday at Classic Auto Group Park, marking a sensational conclusion to an exciting championship series.

After falling short in Game 1 of the 2024 Midwest League Championship Series, the Captains rallied to win the final two games of the best-of-three set at home, clinching the series 2-1. The dramatic victory was propelled by a remarkable five-run bottom of the sixth inning, highlighted by key contributions from MLB prospects including RF Jonah Advincula, SS Angel Genao, and 1B Ralphy Velazquez.

To honor this remarkable achievement and to celebrate the team’s incredible journey, the Lake County Courthouse will be lit blue, starting September 23, 2024, and continuing throughout the rest of the month. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Third Annual Lake County Caregiver Forum Scheduled for October 29!**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 19, 2024– The Board of Lake County Commissioners, in collaboration with the Lake County Council on Aging and Lifeline, is excited to announce the third annual Caregiver Forum set for Tuesday, October 29, 2024, at 10:00 a.m. This free event will be held at the Holiday Inn Cleveland Northeast-Mentor located at 7701 Reynolds Rd., Mentor. The forum is sponsored by Laketran, How Money Works, the Legal Aid Society of Cleveland, Cornerstone Caregiving, the Enclave at Newell Creek, University Hospitals Lake Health, Western Reserve Area Agency on Aging, and Schraff Thomas Law.

This year’s forum will include a keynote presentation by Kristi Horner, CFPS, Founder and Executive Director of Courage to Caregivers, on the theme, “Finding Hope Amidst Uncertainty.” Attendees can also look forward to breakout sessions featuring Lake County Probate Judge Mark Bartolotta discussing advance directives, as well as CarePatrol of NE Ohio sharing insights on senior living options and how to pay for them.

The Caregiver Forum is open to everyone, but advance registration is required. A complimentary lunch will be provided to all registered participants. Interested individuals can register by visiting the county’s website at www.lakecountyohio.gov/senior-services/lake-county-caregiver-forum/ or by scanning the QR code below. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Juvenile Court Announces Sound Budgetary Policy**

For Immediate Release: September 9, 2024

Judge Michael DeLeone is amending the hours of the Juvenile Division’s Clerk’s Office. Effective October 14, 2024, filing hours of the Lake County Common Pleas Court, Juvenile Division, are 8:00am through 4:00pm, Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays.

**Lake County Maintains Aa1 Bond Rating from Moody’s**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 28, 2024– Moody’s has affirmed Lake County’s Aa1 bond rating in anticipation of the upcoming Public Safety Center Project.

According to a Moody’s Press Release, “Moody’s Ratings has assigned an Aa1 rating to Lake County’s Correctional Facilities Bonds, Series 2024, which will encompass a proposed par amount of approximately $70 million. Additionally, the County’s Correctional Facilities Notes, Series 2024, with a proposed par amount of about $50 million, have been assigned a MIG 1 rating.” The Moody’s release also stated, “Available fund balance and liquidity are exceptionally strong, totaling 49% and 143% of revenue, respectfully, at the close of fiscal 2022.”

In conjunction with these announcements, Moody’s has also reaffirmed the County’s overall Aa1 issuer rating, along with the Aa1 rating on its outstanding General Obligation Limited Tax (GOLT) debt. Following the completion of these sales, Lake County will retain approximately $146 million in total outstanding debt.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Board of Commissioners Plans Drive-Thru Food Distribution for Seniors**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, July 31, 2024 – The Lake County Commissioners, in collaboration with the Greater Cleveland Food Bank and Laketran, are organizing a one-time drive-thru food distribution set for Tuesday, August 13, 2024, at the Lake County Fairgrounds. This event is specifically for older adults aged 60 and above who reside in Lake County and will operate on a first-come, first-served basis.

“We are so grateful to have been granted additional funds from the Ohio Department of Aging through the Healthy Aging Grant,” stated Commission President John T. Plecnik. “Addressing food insecurity is a key focus of these funds, and this food distribution event will support our community.”

The drive-thru distribution will begin at 10:00 a.m. at the Lake County Fairgrounds, located at 1301 Mentor Ave. The distribution is first-come, first-served and does not require prior registration. A total of 475 boxes containing meat, eggs, dairy, and fresh produce will be available exclusively for seniors aged 60 and older. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Administrator Provides Update on New Safety Center Project**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, July 24, 2024– At last week’s Commissioners’ meeting, Lake County Administrator Jason Boyd provided a comprehensive update on the progress and status of the new Lake County Safety Center project.

The current facility, which has been in operation since 1990, is often at capacity in the current 353-bed facility and requires millions of dollars in renovations. To address this issue, the new facility will include 504 beds, providing a significant increase in capacity to meet the growing needs of the community.

“I want to extend my sincerest gratitude to Sheriff Frank Leonbruno and our County Administrator for their invaluable contributions to this project. As President of the Commission, I’m proud to say that we’ve been blessed to have national and international experts in jail and major construction on our team. Their expertise has undoubtedly pushed our project forward. I believe that Lake County residents will be pleased to know that their tax dollars are being used wisely,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik.

Boyd shared detailed design plans for the new facility, including schematic drawings and floor plans. While there are still some budgetary items that need to be finalized, the Administrator provided an overview of what is currently known about the project. An in-depth discussion and analysis of the financing plan is underway and is expected to be completed in late summer or early fall of 2024. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Front entry of New Public Safety Center. 

**Commissioners Proclaim World Elder Abuse Day in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, June 6, 2024– June 15, 2024, is World Elder Abuse Awareness Day. It is a time for communities across the U.S. and all over the world to highlight this important social issue affecting some of the most vulnerable in our society. At today’s Commissioners’ meeting, the Board proclaimed June 15, 2024, as World Elder Abuse Day in Lake County. The Board of Lake County Commissioners support and recognize the importance of World Elder Abuse Awareness Day.

To promote awareness of elder abuse in Lake County, the 3 rd Annual World Elder Abuse Awareness Day Walk will be held on June 13, 2024, at 11:45 AM beginning at Job and Family Services and concluding at the County Administration Center with a short presentation. All are welcome to attend, and participants are encouraged to wear purple, the color designated for elder abuse awareness.

“World Elder Abuse Awareness Day is an opportunity for Lake County to shed light on the often-overlooked issue of elder abuse and neglect, and to work towards a future where all older adults are valued and respected,” said John T. Plecnik, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Tyler VanDrei, Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Suzanne Casar, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich and John R Hamercheck.

**Commissioners Establish the Key to Lake County and Recognize David E. Anderson as the Inaugural Recipient**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 31, 2024– At yesterday’s Commissioners’ meeting, the Board presented David E. Anderson with the very first Key to Lake County to recognize his exceptional achievements and unwavering commitment to the betterment of our county.

The Board of Lake County Commissioners established the Key to Lake County program. For so long as Lake County persists, the Key to Lake County shall be our community’s highest honor and most prestigious award. It shall be presented by the Lake County Board of Commissioners and given very selectively to honor an individual who has made extraordinary and significant accomplishments and contributions to Lake County.

Commissioner John T. Plecnik proposed the Key to Lake County program with the support of Commissioner John R. Hamercheck and Richard J. Regovich. The Key to Lake County will only be awarded after unanimous consent of the Lake County Board of Commissioners. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioners John R. Hamercheck and Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, John Rampe (LDA Board Member), John Urhan (LDA Board Member), Tim Cahill (LDA), Debbie Conner (LDA), Myranda Keister (LDA), Donna and David E. Anderson, Commission President John T. Plecnik, Kevin Freese (LDA Board Member), Bill Martin (LDA Board Member), Amy Cossick (LDA).

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim May “Older Americans Month”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 2, 2024– At today’s Commissioners’ Meeting, the Board proclaimed May 2024, “Older Americans Month” in Lake County. Every May, the Administration for Community Living leads the celebration of Older American Month (OAM).

This year’s theme, Powered by Connection, offers the opportunity to explore the vital role that connectedness plays in supporting independence and aging in place by combatting isolation, loneliness, and other issues.

“Ensuring that older adults can age in place and afford to stay in their home benefits everyone,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. “Lake County is fortunate to have real support for senior services through the Lake County Senior Services Levy and 30% water and sewer discount for seniors in need.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

Pictured left to right: Cristen Kane, Alyea Barajas, Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, Paul Pahoresky, Joseph Tomsick, Carrie Dotson, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich

**May is National Foster Care Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 2, 2024– For over 30 years now, the U.S. government has issued annual proclamations in recognition of National Foster Care Month, celebrated in May, to show appreciation and gratitude to foster parents across the nation. Foster parents are those people in our community who step forward and provide safe haven for children when they cannot remain in their home of origin.

Lake County currently has 44 licensed foster families who are able to care for children of all ages. Lake County also works with relatives and kin who have opened up their homes to children in need of care.

“We are extremely grateful to our foster parents who provide the children in our custody with consistent, nurturing, and safe environments to grow and thrive. Foster parents are often faced with extremely challenging situations, and we appreciate the significant role they play in the lives of the children we work with every day,” said Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar.Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commission President John T. Plecnik, Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar, Eugene Tetrick, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Commissioners Proclaim Motorcycle Awareness Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 25, 2024– May marks the beginning of riding season for many motorcyclists in our community. At today’s Commissioners meeting, the Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed the month of May as Motorcycle Awareness Month.

The U.S. Department of Transportation’s National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) reminds all motorists that Motorcyclist’s Safety Is Everyone’s Safety. Motorcycle safety is an ongoing responsibility for all road users. By consistently following safe driving and riding practices and sharing them with others, all motorists can help reduce the number of motorcyclist fatalities on America’s roads.

“Motorcycle Awareness Month serves as a reminder for all road users to be mindful of their surroundings and watch out for motorcyclists. Let’s prioritize safety, respect each other’s space on the road, and work towards a shared goal of zero motorcycle-related accidents,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Vernon Hall of V-Twin Cruisers MC, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich, John R. Hamercheck.

**Commissioners Proclaim Workers Memorial Day in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 25, 2024– At today’s Commissioner’s meeting, the Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed April 28, 2024, as Workers Memorial Day to mourn workers who have lost their lives on the job and recognize the impact these tragic losses have on families, coworkers and communities.

“I sincerely appreciate the Lake County Commissioner’s Office for their recognition of Workers Memorial Day and the importance of safety and health for all workers. People value safety and health for themselves and their families. It really is—and should be—a fundamental value to people everywhere. A disabling injury or death of a family member at work significantly impacts families and changes lives. At OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration], we want to see every business make health and safety a core value so all workers can go home safe each day,” said OSHA Area Director, Howard Eberts.

Private industry employers reported 2.6 million non-fatal workplace injuries and illnesses, and close to 880,000 injury and illness cases were reported among state and local government workers. Work injuries involving transportation incidents were the most common fatal events in 2021, accounting for over 38.2% of deaths. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John T. Plecnik, OSHA Industrial Hygienist Kayla Flowers, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich, John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Approve Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds for the City of Willowick**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 18, 2024– Lake County Commissioners approved the use of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds for the installation of a generator for the Willowick Senior Center and ADA Curb Ramp replacements for the Vine Street Corridor, both projects totaling $249,500.00.

The purpose for the generator installation at the Willowick Senior Center is to support the seniors of the City of Willowick and adjacent areas with a safe space to congregate in the event of severe weather that would cause power losses to the surrounding grid. A generator would ensure the senior center would be able to maintain critical services as well as large space for congregation during severe weather or as a warming center during extreme cold. The center uses the kitchen daily to prepare approximately 150 meals for delivery and provides in-house lunches.

“This generator represents our commitment to the safety and well-being of our seniors. Utilizing funds for a generator at the senior center is more than a choice; it’s a responsibility. We are ensuring that the center remains a beacon of community and care, even in periods of heightened vulnerability,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**2024 Clean and Green Lake County Logo Contest Winners**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 18, 2024– Lake County’s Solid Waste District and the Board of Commissioners is pleased to announce the winners of their annual Clean and Green Art Contest. Area students were encouraged to design an original art piece showcasing the theme “Clean and Green Lake County” which promotes recycling and anti-littering education. The Lake County Solid Waste District oversees the Landfill and Recycling Center in Painesville Township.

Natalia Pérez Soto, a sixth-grade student at Harding Middle School in the Fairport Harbor District, won the middle school division and the overall prize for her design entry themed, “Keep Lake County Clean.” As the top winner, Natalia’s design will be displayed in the Lake County Commissioner’s chambers in the County Administration Building located in downtown Painesville. Additionally, her design will be used for marketing materials for the Solid Waste District and the Utilities Department.

“It was an honor to congratulate our overall winner, Natalia Pérez Soto, on her original conception of the ongoing work to preserve the natural beauty of Lake County. Natalia’s artwork will hang in the Commissioner’s Chambers for one year as a reminder of our shared commitment to protecting the future,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik.Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, Braylon Reglus, Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Natalia Pérez Soto, Ella Raddell, and Commissioner Richard J. Regovich.

**Commissioners Proclaim April as Child Abuse Prevention Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 28, 2024– Across the nation, including here in Lake County, the month of April is recognized as Child Abuse Prevention Month. This initiative is rooted in communities working together to ensure that children and families are provided with the support they need, especially during challenging times. During the March 28, 2024, Commissioners’ meeting the Lake County Commissioners passed a resolution proclaiming April 2024 as Child Abuse Prevention Month throughout Lake County.

Child abuse and neglect occurs across all cultures, races, and socio-economic groups and we are not immune to this issue in Lake County. During 2023, staff with the Children Services Division of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services responded to over 1,500 calls regarding child safety and worked with approximately 1,000 children who presented with a variety of needs requiring the assistance of the agency.

“We ask all of you to help Lake County Job and Family Services in this important work. If you see something, say something. It may not benefit you personally, but you have to be the voice for the voiceless. We join with Job and Family Services in this important task as we publicly announce Child Abuse Prevention Month in Lake County,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John T. Plecnik, Susan Cazar, Mary Udics, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich and John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim “National Agriculture Week”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 21, 2024– Lake County Farm Bureau volunteers visited with the Lake County Commissioners on Thursday, March 21, 2024, to promote agriculture in celebration of National Ag Day (March 19, 2024) and National Ag Week (March 17-23, 2024) where the Lake County Commissioners issued a proclamation in honor of National Agriculture Week. The proclamation states “American agriculture is the foundation of our country. It’s the backbone of a healthy and prosperous nation, made possible by the hard work of America’s farms and farm families.”

“Through our annual Ag Day proclamation, we celebrate the backbone of our community – agriculture. From the food on our tables to the clothes on our backs, agriculture touches every aspect of our lives. This event serves as a vital bridge, bringing consumers and producers together to honor and appreciate the hard work and dedication of those who feed and sustain us. Let us unite in celebration, as we cultivate awareness, foster appreciation, and nurture the roots of our agricultural heritage, ensuring that agriculture remains strong for generations to come,” said Mandy Orahood, Organization Director. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Mandy Orahood, Eric Cotton, Commission President John T. Plecnik, Steve Ohmes, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Ryan Wheeler, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Commissioners Appoint Kevin D. Freese and Tim O’Brien to Lakeland Community College Board of Trustees**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 12, 2024– The Lake County Board of Commissioners is unanimously voted to appoint Kevin D. Freese and Tim O’Brien to the Lakeland Community College Board of Trustees on March 7, 2024.

The Board of Commissioners appoints six of the nine members of the college’s Board of Trustees. The Governor appoints the remaining three, all of which are five-year terms.

Commission President John T. Plecnik stated, “As two of the most accomplished and successful members of our local community, the Board of Commissioners is confident that Kevin D. Freese and Tim O’Brien will bring invaluable experience and perspectives to the Lakeland Community College Board of Trustees. We are excited to see the positive impact they will have on guiding the future direction of the college. In particular, there is an ongoing search for the next president of Lakeland, so this appointment comes at a historic time and reflects the great trust Lake County has in both Kevin and Tim. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, Commission President John T. Plecnik, Kevin D. Freese and his sister, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich. (Tim O’Brien not pictured)

**Dr. David J. Keep Sworn in as the Acting Lake County Coroner**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 8, 2024– At the Commissioners meeting on March 7, 2024, Commission President John T. Plecnik swore in David J. Keep as the acting Lake County Coroner.

The Board of Commissioners appointed Dr. David J. Keep as the acting Lake County Coroner to perform the duties thereof until the time when the officer appointed by the Republican Central Committee qualifies and takes the office for the remainder of the Auditor’s current term ending January 5, 2025, or until his successor qualifies and takes office.

“Commissioners, thank you very much. It has been a real privilege and a challenge to serve as deputy coroner for a number of years now. I thank you for the opportunity to serve as acting coroner. Our office is a small group of very dedicated individuals who do the medical legal death investigation for the county. It is very specialized training and some of it is on the job training, but it’s very important for us to determine cause of death and manner of death. Our mission is to serve the most vulnerable people of Lake County; children, elderly, people who succumb to unexpected sudden deaths, often in violent circumstances. In the areas of public health and criminal justice, we want to do the best job for Lake County,” said acting coroner, Dr. David J. Keep. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commission President John T. Plecnik, Acting Coroner Dr. David J. Keep

**Lake County Sheriff’s Office Donates Police Cruiser to Grand River Village Police Department**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 7, 2024– The Board of Lake County Commissioners is pleased to announce the donation of a police cruiser, a 2017 Ford Explorer, to the Grand River Village Police Department.

The police cruiser being donated is a decommissioned police cruiser which is no longer needed by the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, but which is still operational.

“We are always glad to help our law enforcement partners in any way possible. Lake County is blessed with good collaboration with all police officers working hard to provide the best security possible to our residents,” said Lake County Sheriff Frank Leonbruno. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim March 2024 as Developmental Disabilities Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 7, 2024– Developmental disabilities are a group of conditions due to an impairment in physical, learning, language, or behavior areas. About one in six children in the U.S. have one or more developmental disabilities or other developmental delays. In order to highlight and empower these individuals and their contributions, the Lake County Board of Commissioners, at their March 7, 2024, meeting, has proclaimed March “Developmental Disabilities Awareness Month” in Lake County.

Throughout the years, thousands of people with developmental disabilities have been supported by their families, friends, neighbors, and co-workers and again this year, the Board of Commissioners are encouraging everyone in the Lake County community to enrich and engage, to provide vital support and resources to these incredible people. One of the most effective ways to increase awareness is through active participation in community activities that will enrich their lives by showing how much they are supported. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Ian Carter’s Family, Commission President John T. Plecnik,

Ian Carter, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Elfie Roman, Ashley Cozzens, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Vote for 30% Discount on Water and Sewer Bills for Low Income Senior Citizens**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 22, 2024– The Board of Commissioners and the Department of Utilities approved to increase the discount on water and sewer bills to all qualifying senior citizens from 25% to 30%. This decision comes as part of ongoing efforts to aid those in need.

Commissioner John T. Plecnik previously proposed a 25% discounted rate unanimously adopted on November 18, 2021. The Board of Commissioners now proposes the discounted water rate should increase from 25% to 30%, to serve the needs of senior citizens in Lake County, especially those facing the scourge of inflation and other economic challenges. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Board of Commissioners Appoint New Senior Citizen Advisory Panel Members**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 22, 2024 – On February 22, 2024, the Board of Commissioners appointed Emily R. Koenig and Lawrence W. Sterk to the Senior Citizens Advisory Panel. Both candidates were chosen based on their experience, skills, and dedication to serving the senior community.

The Panel serves as an advisory and recommending body to the Board of Lake County Commissioners to facilitate equitable and beneficial distribution of the funds derived annually from the Lake County Senior Services Levy. The Panel, with guidance from the county administrator and senior services manager, plays a crucial role in advising the Board of Commissioners on how levy funds should be prioritized and distributed to best meet the needs of older adults in the community. The recent expansion of the Panel from five members to seven members will strengthen the Panel’s ability to evaluate programs and services and ensure that the needs of Lake County seniors are met in the most effective and efficient way possible.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Celebrate David E. Anderson’s Retirement**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 22, 2024– At the Commissioners meeting on Thursday, February 22, 2024, the Board of Lake County Commissioners joined with the Lake Development Authority (LDA) to congratulate and celebrate David E. Anderson as he retires.

Anderson officially started with the LDA on June 29, 2020, in the position of Executive Director, and his final date of employment will be February 28, 2024.

“The Lake Development Authority has been fortunate to have such a talented and dedicated executive director at its helm. David Anderson’s leadership has been instrumental in positioning the organization as a key player in the region’s economic development. We look forward to building on Dave’s great legacy as we move forward,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commission President John T. Plecnik, David E. Anderson, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich and John R. Hamercheck

**Lake County Commissioners Passed Balanced Budget**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 19, 2024– The Lake County Commissioners unanimously passed a balanced county budget for 2024 at the January 19, 2024 commissioners meeting.

County Administrator Jason Boyd and staff, under the direction of the Commissioners, worked diligently with the elected officials and department heads to successfully create a balanced and sustainable budget for the County General Fund.

“The County budget is the single most important decision we make as Commissioners. I am extremely proud to support a balanced budget without raising taxes. The taxpayer is our boss, and we never forget it,” said Commission President John T. Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Juvenile Court Announces CARTEENS**

Judge Michael DeLeone is excited to announce a special collaboration with the Lake County OSU Extension, 4-H Youth Development Program and the Ohio State Highway Patrol to implement a special traffic safety program for first-time teen traffic offenders. CARTEENS (Care and Responsibility Teens) aims to keep teen drivers safe while having fun doing it. Youth and their parent or guardian will participate in an informational class with numerous engaging activities. Teen traffic offenders attending this program have typically been cited for speeding, stop sign violation, reckless operation, and other similar violations. The goal is to get them thinking about safety on the road and decrease teen traffic offenders. Ohio 4-H CARTEENS has proved to be a valuable tool in educating Ohio’s teen drivers and saving lives on Ohio Roads. Data collected from 4-H CARTEENS participants indicate a significant reduction in second-time traffic offenses, increased use of safety belts, reduced drinking and driving, and an increased use of caution when driving. More than 80 percent of participants in a recent survey said they planned to use more caution when driving and will increase their use of seat belts. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Lisa Manning (Lake County OSU Extension, 4-H Youth Development), Judge

Michael DeLeone (Lake County Juvenile Court), and Lieutenant Larry P. Jones (Post

Commander Ohio State Highway Patrol)

**John T. Plecnik Elected President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 4, 2024– Commissioner John T. Plecnik was elected President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners at the Organizational Meeting on January 4, 2024. Commissioner John T. Plecnik has served as both the 79th and 82nd Commissioner of Lake County after his appointment to Commissioner in 2021 by the Lake County Republican Party Central Committee and election to a second term in 2022.

“I would like to thank Commissioner Hamercheck for his leadership of this Board for so many years as President. I am confident Commissioner Plecnik will keep Lake County the best place to live, work, retire and raise a family,” said Commissioner Richard J. Regovich.

In the past, Commissioner Plecnik served as Vice President of Council, Chair of Finance and Councilman-at-Large for the City of Willoughby Hills, where he personally negotiated and drafted the tax abatement that brought over 300 good-paying jobs and the single biggest employer in the last decade to Lake County. He also served as Vice President of the Board of Trustees for Willoughby-Eastlake Public Libraries and Chairman of the Willoughby Hills Recreation Commission. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Releases Healthy Aging Grant Application**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 16, 2023– Recently, Lake County was awarded $447,954 in Healthy Aging Grant funds from the Ohio Department of Aging (ODA).

Established through House Bill 33 of the 135th General Assembly, Healthy Aging Grant funds will be used by ODA to provide grants to all Ohio counties to address social determinants of health and to foster improved quality of life for older Ohioans so they may remain in their homes and connected to their communities, preserve their personal assets, and promote a healthy, independent, active lifestyle. Healthy Aging Grants resolve to address the longstanding health and economic disparities, which amplified the impact of the pandemic in many of Ohio’s counties.

“We are ecstatic about this opportunity to award funds to the community that will enable older adults to remain in their homes and support those disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Proclaim Geographical Information Systems Day in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 16, 2023–At the Commissioner’s Meeting on Thursday, November 16, 2023, the Board of Commissioners, in and for Lake County, Ohio, proclaimed November 15, 2023, as Geographical Information Systems (GIS) Day.

The board recognizes that an understanding, use and application of geospatial technology is crucial to operating infrastructure, sustaining natural resources, and stimulating economic growth, thus benefitting the welfare of the general public throughout.

“I would to thank the Lake County Commissioners for commemorating this day in Lake County as well as the GIS Board, Dave Phares and Ryan Barshick for their unwavering support since I arrived. This Department would not be where it is today without their knowledge, experience, and advocacy throughout the years. Lastly, I would like to thank the Lakeland Community College Geospatial Department for their invaluable partnership. GIS is a field in constant motion, and our collaboration with the College has helped us keep up as new technology develops. It is truly an honor to receive this recognition, and we are proud to be a part of Team Lake County,” said GIS Director Caroline Petersen. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, GIS Technician Ryan Barshick, GIS Director Caroline Petersen, GISP – Senior GIS Application Specialist David Phares, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County to Support ‘Operation Green Light’ for Local Veterans**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 8, 2023– We are excited to announce that Lake County is joining our colleagues across the nation in supporting #OperationGreenLight for Veterans, an initiative designed to shine a light on the service of our Veterans and their families for the second year.

“Operation Green Light for Veterans is an idea that brings awareness to the care resources available for our amazing Veterans,” said Recorder Becky Lynch, member of the National Association of Counties (NACo) Veterans and Military Services Committee which launched Operation Green Light. “All across the country there are supporters lighting up green places and we are very grateful for our Lake County’s support on this! We’re keeping our green light on all year in the Recorder offices, and I am happy that National Association of Counties’ Veterans and Military Services Committee sponsors and distributes the information to join in. God Bless our Veterans.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

Lake County Courthouse Illuminated Green for #OperationGreenLight.

**Commissioners Proclaim November 2023 as National Adoption Awareness Month

in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 2, 2023– National Adoption Month is recognized annually in November throughout the nation as a time to raise awareness about the urgent need for adoptive families for children and youth in foster care.

During the November 2, 2023, meeting, the Lake County Commissioners passed a resolution declaring November 2023 as National Adoption Awareness Month in Lake County.

“There has been a growing number of individuals and families in our communities are becoming adoptive parents,” said Commissioner John R. Hamercheck. “The Department of Job and Family Services play a crucial part in educating the public about foster and adoption, thank you to everyone who continues to make a difference.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, County Probate Court Judge Mark J. Bartolotta, Job and Family Services Director, Suzanne Casar, Supervisor of Job and Family Services Foster Care and Adoption Team, Gene Tetrick, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich and Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Telephone Reassurance Programs Help Older Adults**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 1, 2023 – Two new programs for older adults in Lake County launched earlier this year by the Board of Lake County Commissioners and Lifeline, Inc. Both programs are designed to promote social connection, address loneliness, and enable older adults to remain independent at home.

The Phone Pal program works to match volunteers with older adults that might be lonely or isolated, and looking for a pal to chat with twice a week. The program works hard to ensure participants and volunteers are matched based on similar interests. “Our core of volunteers and the quality of matching has really made this program a success,” said Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. “Participants know their volunteer will be checking in on them regularly and if there are any concerns or unanswered calls, the volunteers are diligent about following up with staff.”

The program uses a software system that allows approved matches to call through a special phone line, eliminating the need to exchange phone numbers or report volunteer data. To learn more about Phone Pal, call (440) 350-2020. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Receives Healthy Aging Grant**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 26, 2023– Lake County, Ohio will be awarded $447,953.61 in Healthy Aging Grant funds from the Ohio Department of Aging (ODA).

Established through House Bill 33 of the 135th General Assembly, Healthy Aging Grant funds will be used by ODA to provide grants to all Ohio counties to address social determinants of health and to foster improved quality of life for older Ohioans so they may remain in their homes and connected to their communities, preserve their personal assets, and promote a healthy, independent, active lifestyle. Healthy Aging Grants resolve to address the longstanding health and economic disparities, which amplified the impact of the pandemic in many of Ohio’s counties.

“These grant funds will enable us to continue to recover from the recent COVID-19 pandemic by supporting older adults disproportionately impacted. Many older adults continue to struggle with health and economic consequences, these funds will help address that,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Mentor Schools, Lakeland Community College, and Lake County Commissioners Forge

Innovative Partnership to Strengthen Educational and Workforce Opportunities in Northeast

Ohio**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 16, 2023– Lake County is at the forefront of educational and workforce innovation as Mentor Schools, Lakeland Community College, and Lake County Commissioners announce a new transformative partnership that will allow for a newly created Workforce Development position for both Mentor Schools and Lakeland Community College.

This initiative is committed to enriching educational and workforce opportunities, bridging workforce training gaps, and enhancing prospects for students and residents throughout Northeast Ohio.

The partnership underscores our shared commitment to expanding and aligning workforce development in Lake County, ensuring brighter prospects for our students, and providing broader access to College Credit Plus (CCP) programs. Lake County Commissioners have generously supported this visionary collaboration, recognizing its potential to advance the educational and economic well-being of our residents. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Morris W. Beverage, Jr. President of Lakeland Community College, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Dr. Joe Glavan, and Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Commissioner John R. Hamercheck is Awarded the Walter F. Ehrnfelt, Jr. Award from NOACA**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 20, 2023– At the Northeast Ohio Areawide Coordinating Agency’s (NOACA) 2023 Annual Meeting & Luncheon held on October 20, 2023, Commission President John R. Hamercheck was awarded the 21st Walter F. Ehrnfelt, Jr. Award.

NOACA launched the Walter F. Ehrnfelt, Jr. Award for Outstanding Regional Contribution in 2004 to recognize an individual who has contributed significantly toward the betterment of the region by exhibiting outstanding leadership skills and accomplishments.

“I am honored to have received this year’s Walter F. Ehrnfelt, Jr. Award from NOACA and to be in great company with previous recipients including Steve LaTourette, George Voinovich, Armond Budish, James R. Gills, Daniel P. Troy, and many more,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Commissioner Hamercheck and his wife, Susan, at the NOACA 2023 Annual Meeting and Luncheon. 

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim Days of Prayer for the People of Israel**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 12, 2023– At today’s Commissioner’s meeting, the Board proclaimed Saturday, October 14, 2023, and Sunday, October 15, 2023, as Days of Prayer for the people of Israel as they face this unprovoked invasion of their country.

In the early morning hours of October 7, 2023, the civilian people of Israel near the Gaza Strip were bombed in a surprise attack at the hands of Hamas terrorists.

Our two nations share deep beliefs in the values of democracy, freedom, the rule of law, and we have maintained a 75-year alliance of mutual respect and support. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Proclaim Hispanic Heritage Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 28, 2023– At yesterday’s Commissioner’s meeting, the Board proclaimed September 15 through October 15, 2023, as Hispanic Heritage Month in Lake County, Ohio.

The month-long celebration recognizes the valuable contributions made by residents of Hispanic descent to all aspects of American life, including leadership in public service, business, the arts, education and civil rights.

The theme for this year’s observance is “Prosperity, Power and Progress” recognizing the significant achievements of the Hispanic community in economic, social and political industries. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Left to Right: Director at Job and Family Services, Suzanne Casar, Commissioner John Plecnik, Victim Advocate for the Lake County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office, Gladys Figueroa, Founding Executive Director of HOLA Ohio, Veronica Dahlberg, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich and Commission President, John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Dedicate Artwork in Main Lobby of Administration Building**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 22, 2023– Thursday morning, the Board of Commissioners joined with former Commissioners to dedicate the new artwork project in the lobby of the Lake County Administration Building. The project includes a large-scale map of Lake County and a digital information kiosk with information about County Officials and facts about the County’s 23 communities. The Board of Commissioners also unveiled a new building plaque recognizing all Commissioners who had a role in the new Administration Center.

“This building would not be possible without Jason Boyd, Mike Matas, Gary Fedak, and many others. Their efforts were exceptional. It is good to see friends and colleagues here together to celebrate,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

L to R, Former Commissioner and Representative Daniel P. Troy, former Commissioner Kevin Malecek, Commissioners Richard J. Regovich and John Plecnik, former Commissioner Ron Young, Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim Grandparent/Kinship Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 21, 2023– At the Commissioner’s meeting on September 7, 2023, the Board of Commissioners made a motion to proclaim September as Grandparent/Kinship Month in Lake County. This week, the Board recognized a few agencies who assist grandparents and kinship caregivers: Lake County Department of Job and Family Services, Lifeline, and Council on Aging.

The number of grandparents and kinship caregivers who raise their grandchildren or other relative children is increasing in Ohio. There are more than 297,000 children under the age of 18 who live in homes where the caregivers are relatives other than their parents, and of these, more than 189,000 live with grandparents. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Suzanne Casar, Carrie Dotson, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, Tim Rieder, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich.

**Lake County Juvenile Court Announces Appointments to the Citizens Review Board**

Honorable Judge DeLeone has appointed two new members to the Court’s Citizens Review Board. Cynthia Brooks and Bishop Gerard Mirbel were appointed for a term of (3) years, commencing October 1, 2023. Honorable Judge DeLeone has also re-appointed Elaine Waytes for a new term of 3 years commencing on October 1, 2023.

The Citizens Review Board is a panel that is appointed by the Judge to annually review cases of youth placed in Permanent Custody or Planned Permanent Living Arrangements. The Review Board meets on the third Thursday in January, May, and September. Per the Ohio Revised Code, the Board shall consist of one member representing the general public, and four members who are trained or experienced in the care of the placement of children and have training or experience in the fields of medicine, psychology, social work, education, and or any related field. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County US Semiquincentennial Commission Holds Initial Meeting**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 8, 2023– The Lake County US Semiquincentennial Commission held a meeting on September 7, 2023, where they established their new officers. The Commission also planned a Meet and Greet event from 5:00p.m. to 7:00p.m. on September 20, 2023, located at Riders Inn at 792 Mentor Avenue in Painesville, Ohio.

The Lake County, Ohio Commission for the United States Semiquincentennial, is established to inspire Lake Countians to participate in the planning of the event, and encourage, develop and coordinate the commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the founding of the United States.

At the Meet and Greet, light refreshments such as coffee, tea, and lemonade will be served. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Juvenile Court Announces Utilization of Family Law Forms**

Effective September 8, 2023 the Lake County Court of Common Pleas Juvenile Division will no longer accept for filing the form complaint for custody, parenting time, child support, and other family law matters. The Honorable Judge Michael L. DeLeone has implemented the utilization of standardized family law forms established by the Supreme Court of Ohio. The standard family law forms will be available on the court’s website, https://juvenile.lakecountyohio.gov/, and in person at the Juvenile Division’s Clerks Office. The forms can also be accessed directly from the Ohio Supreme Court’s website. Judge DeLeone believes this will improve public access to file motions, clarity of requested relief, as well as increase consistency of filings. The present complaint forms will no longer be accepted for filings.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Second Annual Lake County Caregiver Forum Scheduled**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 21, 2023 – The Board of Lake County Commissioners Senior Services is hosting their second annual Caregiver Forum on Thursday, October 5, 2023, from 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. The forum is sponsored by University Hospitals, Laketran, and the Western Reserve Area Agency on Aging and will be held at University Hospitals TriPoint Medical Center, located at 7950 Auburn Rd., Concord.

“We are thrilled to bring back the Caregiver Forum,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. “This event was very well received last year and we’ve decided that this is something we’d like to continue to grow annually.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Approve American Rescue Plan Act Funds for the City of Wickliffe and the City of Willowick**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 15, 2023– Lake County Commissioners approve the use of ARPA funds for the Willowick/Wickliffe East 288 th Street/Fairway Boulevard Storm Sewer Rehabilitation Project in the amount of $437,500.00.

The purpose of this project is to rehabilitate existing storm sewer pipe utilizing new technology that will require no excavation. The project area will yield the same structural and joint sealing benefits as open cut repairs, but will utilize a new injection method. The project benefits will reduce sink holes and reduce the overall cost as compared to open cut repairs.

“This project is a perfect example of how working together for the common good is so important for the community. I know that sometimes gets overlooked. Thank you to everyone who has helped this process move forward,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Appoint Nancy E. Fellows to the Lakeland Community College Board of Directors**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 9, 2023– At the August 3, 2023 meeting, the Lake County Board of Commissioners voted to appoint Nancy E. Fellows to the Lakeland Community College Board of Trustees. Fellows will complete the remainder of a term previously filled by Dr. Kathleen Malec, expiring on March 6, 2025.

Fellows completed her Master of Nursing in 2009, from the University of Phoenix and has worked as a Senior Clinical Education Consultant since 2010.

“We are pleased to welcome Nancy to the Lakeland Board of Trustees. Her insights and broad experience within nursing and teaching will serve Lakeland well,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Dale Fellows, Nancy Fellows, Nancy Fellow’s Manager, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Sheriff’s Training Facility Construction: Phase 1 Complete; Phase II Set to Begin**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 3, 2023– County and local officials celebrated two significant achievements at the Lake County Sheriff’s Training Facility on August 3, 2023. Located at 2041 Blasé Nemeth Road in Painesville Township, the County Commissioners, County Sheriff and Clerk of Court not only cut the ribbon for Phase I of the project, they also marked the beginning of construction of Phase II with a groundbreaking ceremony.

In early fall of 2021, Sheriff Leonbruno met with the Board of Lake County Commissioners and they agreed to fund a multi-jurisdictional training complex at their current shooting range.

This current site has been the Sheriff’s Office Shooting Range since the early 80’s. However, the property was equipped with only an outdoor shooting range and an old trailer. No classrooms or modernized training platforms existed. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Celebrate Successful 2023 Lake County Fair**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 3, 2023– The 168th Lake County Fair held between July 25 and July 30 was a notable success with 99,372 people in attendance. This year set an all-time Sunday attendance record with 39,856 people in attendance, beating the previous record of 37,528 set just last year.

“The Lake County Fair continues to bring more interest each year,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “From kids’ Day to Senior Day to Latino Day, there is something for everyone at the fair.”Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Fair Takes Off on July 25**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, July 24, 2023– The Lake County Fair opens on July 25 and goes through July 30. The Lake County Fairgrounds is located at 1301 Mentor Ave in Painesville Township, Ohio 44077.

The Lake County Fair is an annual event put on by the Lake County Agricultural Society, Inc. which is made up of over 500 Lake County residents. Lake County has a 19-member Fair Board, elected by the society membership. Each of the “original” townships in the county have representation as required by the Ohio Revised Code.

Lake County is one of the only fairs in Ohio that holds a kickoff parade. The parade will be on Tuesday, July 25, 2023 at 6 p.m. and begins at First Church of Christ/Zion Lutheran Church on Mentor Ave. to the Fairgrounds. This year’s parade Grand Marshall is going to be Rebekah Hardacre, who is the 2023 Ohio Fairs Queen. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**George Washington to be Keynote Speaker at NSDAR Event on July 4**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, June 28, 2023– On July 4, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. the New Connecticut Chapter of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution (NSDAR) will be hosting an event to kick off Lake County’s participation in the 250th Anniversary of the United States by dedicating a Bronze Marker honoring Revolutionary War Patriots who are buried in Lake County. The event will take place outside of the Lake County Courthouse in Painesville Square. Dale Fellows will portray George Washington as the Keynote Speaker.

The public is encouraged to participate in this event and can be part of a lasting memorial to those who served in the Revolutionary War and call Lake County their final resting place by sponsoring a brick for $100. Each Revolutionary War Patriot buried in Lake County will have their name engraved on a brick surrounding the dedicated marker. All proceeds from brick sponsorships will be used for on-going “America 250” celebrations. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Recognize World Elder Abuse Awareness Day in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, June 8, 2023 – June 15, 2023, is World Elder Abuse Awareness Day. On this day, communities across the United States and all over the world, including here in Lake County, will take time to highlight this important social issue affecting some of the most vulnerable in our society. “This is an opportunity for Lake County to promote a better understanding of abuse and neglect of older adults and raise awareness to ensure security and dignity for all seniors,” said John R. Hamercheck, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners.

It is estimated that 1 in 10 older Americans are victims of elder abuse, neglect, or exploitation. Even more alarming is that research suggests that as few as 1 in 14 cases of elder abuse ever come to the attention of authorities. Many seniors lack societal supports, making them more vulnerable to abuse and less likely to report maltreatment. “Lake County is not immune to the issue of elder abuse,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. “World Elder Abuse Awareness Day reminds us to look out for one another. When we come together, we can prevent elder abuse from happening.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Mary Udics, Suzanne Casar, April Haugabrook, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Board of Commissioners Support Jewish Federation of Cleveland**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 19, 2023– Lake County Commissioners attended the “2023 Public Officials Breakfast” on Monday, April 8, 2023, at the Jewish Federation of Cleveland.

The Jewish Federation of Cleveland aims to promote the well-being of the Jewish community, its members, and Jews throughout the world. The annual 2023 Public Officials Breakfast gather Federal, State and Local Public Officials to discuss legislative priorities and offer thanks for their support.

The breakfast also highlighted Stand Up to Jewish Hate, a national campaign designed to raise awareness about antisemitism and hatred against Jews. All people are encouraged to post and share the Blue Square to stand up against intolerance.The initiative uses the blue square to represent the approximately 2.6 percent of Americans who call themselves Jewish – but who are on the receiving end of 55 percent of all religious-hate crimes. Stand Up to Jewish Hate provides resources to educate the public about modern antisemitism and understand how they can take action and stand up against it.Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: South Euclid Mayor Georgine Welo, President at Opportunity Funds Association Shafron (Shay) Hawkins, Commissioner John Plecnik, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich.

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize “National Police Week 2023”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 18, 2023– At today’s Commissioners’ Meeting, the Board of Lake County Commissioner’s recognized the week of May 14-20 as “National Police Week 2023” in Lake County in order to remember and honor fallen law enforcement officers.

The Lake County Board of Commissioners resolution was intended to pay homage to the courageous men and women who have dedicated their lives to protecting citizens in large cities, small towns, and suburban neighborhoods all across America.

“We express our sincerest gratitude for these selfless public servants who put themselves in harm’s way in an effort to keep us safe and we honor those who have lost their lives,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Chief Deputy Robert Izzo, Commissioner John Plecnik, Captain Pat Paterson, Deputy Mike Reed, Jackie Tracz, Tony Osap, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Sheriff Frank Leonbruno, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim May “Older Americans Month”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 18, 2023– At today’s Commissioners’ Meeting, the Board proclaimed May 2023, “Older Americans Month” in Lake County. Every May, the Administration for Community Living leads the celebration of Older American Month (OAM). This year’s theme, Aging Unbound, offers an opportunity to explore a wide range of aging experiences and to promote the importance of enjoying independence and fulfillment by paving their own paths as they age.

“We want to take a moment to honor the more than 69,000 Lake County senior residents who contribute their strength, wisdom, and experience to our community – as family members, friends, mentors, volunteers, civic leaders, members of the workforce, and more,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Senior Services Manager Alyea Barajas, Commissioner Plecnik, Council on Aging CEO Joe Tomsick, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**May is National Foster Parent Recognition Month in Lake County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 4, 2023– For over 30 years now, the U.S. government has issued annual proclamations in recognition of National Foster Care Month, celebrated in May, to show appreciation and gratitude to foster parents across the nation. Foster parents are those people in our community who step forward and provide safe haven for children when they cannot remain in their home of origin.

Lake County currently has 46 licensed foster families who are able to care for children of all ages. Lake County also works with relatives and kin who have opened up their homes to children in need of care.

May is a time to recognize these unsung heroes in our community. “We are extremely grateful to our foster parents who do their best to provide consistent, safe and healthy environments for children to grow and thrive. Foster parents are often faced with extremely challenging situations, and we appreciate the collaboration between our foster parents and staff members,” said Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar, Eugene Tetrick, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Approve $2 Million of American Rescue Plan Act Funds**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 28, 2023– Lake County Commissioners approve the use of ARPA funds for the Concord Township Auburn Road Waterline Project, Girdled Road West Waterline Project, and Madison Township Route 20 Sanitary Sewer Project.

Concord Township has identified multiple areas that historically exhibited poor water quality for its residents. The construction/extension of a public waterline will address public health concerns for local residents and provide a “loop” which will increase water pressure in this portion of the township.

US Route 20 in Madison serves as the primary commercial corridor in the Township representing significant long-term growth opportunities. The Madison Township Route 20 Sanitary Sewer Project will provide businesses between Haines Road to Burns Road access to sanitary sewers. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim Workers Memorial Day**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 27, 2023– At today’s Commissioner’s meeting, the Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed April 28, 2023, as Workers Memorial Day to mourn workers killed and injured on the job.

“On behalf of OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] I want to thank the Lake County Commissioner’s Office for their support and recognition of Workers Memorial Day on April 28, 2023. We continue to remember the workers who have lost their lives on the job. We also recommit to our shared mission of preventing workplace injuries and illnesses. Together, we can create a safer workplace for all workers,” said OSHA Area Director, Howard Eberts.

Private industry employers reported 2.6 million non-fatal workplace injuries and illnesses, and close to 880,000 injury and illness cases were reported among state and local government workers. Work injuries involving transportation incidents were the most common fatal events in 2021, accounting for over 38.2% of deaths. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner Plecnik, OSHA Industrial Hygienist Kayla Flower, Commissioner Hamercheck, OSHA Area Director Howard Eberts, Commissioner Regovich.

**Delivering More than Just a Meal**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 24, 2023 – The Lake County Council on Aging’s Meals on Wheels program is in need of volunteer drivers to deliver meals at least one day per week Monday through Friday. Volunteer drivers deliver lunchtime meals to homebound seniors between 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.

In support of addressing this critical need, the Lake County Volunteer Network at the Board of Commissioners is offering $50 Giant Eagle gift cards to new volunteers who sign-up to deliver a route one time per week for at least three months.

“We are excited to offer this small incentive to new drivers,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “Funding for this is provided through an AmeriCorps Seniors federal grant which aims to help communities recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim April “Fair Housing Month”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 20, 2023– April 2023 marks the 55th anniversary of the passage of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act; commonly referred to as The Fair Housing Act of 1968. At today’s Commissioner’s meeting, the Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed April 2023 “Fair Housing Month” in Lake County, Ohio.

“It has been 55 years since the Fair Housing Act was passed, and FHRC will continue to commit our efforts to ensure true housing choice for all residents,” said Fair Housing Resource Center Executive Director, Patricia Kidd, Esq.

The Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination in housing due to race, color, national origin, religion, sex (including gender identity and sexual orientation), disability, and familial status. Fair Housing is the opportunity to choose where one lives. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Lake County Planning and Community Development Director David Radachy, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Places Thousands of Records Online**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 10, 2023– Jennifer Bell Commissioner’s Clerk announced today that the Lake Board of Commissioner Clerk’s office has completed an extensive digitization project, placing thousands of Board of Commissioner’s records online. Lake County staff and the public now have secure, remote access to data and images 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year.

Digitizing provides a valuable public service by providing convenient access to the information without needing to handle the original documents that are often fragile. Offering online access to records eliminates the need to travel to the office, helping to protect constituents during public health emergencies. By digitizing these documents, Jennifer Bell County Commissioner’s Clerk is also ensuring that the Lake County Board of Commissioners valuable records are preserved and backed up electronically in case of disaster.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaimed April as National County Government Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 6, 2023– The Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed April, 2023, National County Government Month (NCGM) in Lake County to showcase how the County achieves healthy, safe and vibrant communities.

The theme for this year’s celebration of NCGM is “Counties RISE!,” inspired by the signature focus of National Association of Counties (NACo) President Denise Winfrey. The theme is an acronym for and highlights Resiliency, Inclusion, Solvency, and Empowerment – all county priorities undertaken with energy and passion for building stronger counties. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim National Telecommunicators Week**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, April 6, 2023– Lake County Commissioners proclaim the week of April 9-15, 2023, as National Telecommunicators Week in Lake County, Ohio. Established in 1994, when President William J. Clinton signed Presidential Proclamation 6667 declaring the second week of April National Telecommunicators Week. This week is a time to celebrate and thank our dispatchers/telecommunications. These outstanding professionals serve our Lake County communities and citizens, as well as public safety personnel, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

In 2022, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office Central Communications division handled 82,628 emergency 911 calls. In addition to the noted 911 call volume, Central Communications also answered 265,070 non-911 calls. This includes all non-emergency needs for service and public assistance. In total, Central Communications fielded 347,748 calls in 2022! Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Declare April as Child Abuse Prevention Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 31, 2023– April is National Child Abuse Prevention Month across the country, including here in Lake County. It is an opportunity for cities and states to acknowledge the devastating impact of child abuse and neglect and call on their communities to work together to protect children.

Unfortunately, Lake County is not immune to the issue of Child Abuse. It is the responsibility of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services to provide protective services to children residing in Lake County. During 2022, Social Workers from the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services responded to nearly 1,700 calls concerning the safety of children. Staff worked with approximately 1,000 children who presented with a variety of needs requiring the assistance of the agency. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Lake County JFS Director Suzanne Casar, Mary Udics, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Passed Balanced Budget**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 30, 2023– The Lake County Commissioners unanimously passed a balanced county budget for 2023 at the March 30, 2023, commissioners meeting.

Finance Director Michael Matas, under the direction of the Commissioners, worked diligently with the elected officials and department heads to successfully create balanced and sustainable budgets for the inside and outside general funds.

“I would like to personally thank Finance Director Matas and his staff for preparing this budget, with a focus on public safety, that continues to meet the increased demands that our local businesses and residents expect in Lake County,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Recorder Launches New Land Record Center**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 30, 2023– Lake County Recorder, Becky Lynch reports the new Lake County Land Record Center is open to the public.

The new Land Record Center is compiled of 5,000 books previously stored in three locations on two floors. This new center benefits real estate agents, title examiners, attorneys and all residents of Lake County, and any looking to purchase real estate.

“It just took us a couple years, but we got everything together, brought the 1840 archives over to the new Records Room B and now these historic volumes are more accessible to the public. So far everyone has been appreciative of it,” said Lake County Recorder, Becky Lynch. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Recorder Becky Lynch and Commissioner John Plecnik in the new Lake County Land Record Center.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim “National Agriculture Week”**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 23, 2023– Lake County Farm Bureau volunteers visited with the Lake County Commissioners on Thursday, March 23, 2023, to promote agriculture in celebration of National Ag Day (March 21, 2023) and National Ag Week (March 21-27, 2023) where the Lake County Commissioners issued a proclamation in honor of National Agriculture Week. The proclamation states “American agriculture is the foundation of our country. It’s the backbone of a healthy and prosperous nation, made possible by the hard work of America’s farms and farm families.”

“As a grassroots organization that is committed to supporting our farm and food community, it is critical that we [Farm Bureau] build awareness and understanding of American agriculture. The Commissioners proclamation recognizing the importance of agriculture in the county is very much appreciated,” says Mandy Orahood, Organization Director. “Agriculture plays a vital role in each and every person’s daily lives, and Farm Bureau is proud to be a part of engaging and educating others about where their food, fiber, and fuel comes from.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Lake County Farm Bureau Public Policy Action Team Leader Eric Cotton, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim Women in Construction Week in Lake

County**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 10, 2023– The Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed the week of March 5-11, 2023, as Women in Construction Week at the commissioners meeting on March 9, 2023.

Women in Construction Week celebrates and promotes the role of women in the construction industry. National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) held the first WIC Week 25 years ago in 1998, and it has grown and expanded each year since.

“We all know that March 8 is International Women’s Day, and we celebrate it collectively in Lake County, recognizing the many contributions that women in leadership and all women make to our community. In celebrating International Women’s Day, there is a more specific focus for this week and that is Women in Construction Week, which helps to celebrate all the women who work to build up our community in the most literal sense. It has often been viewed as a male dominated profession, but that is no longer true and we need to recognize Women in Construction Week in Lake County,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Celebrate Lake County’s 183 rd Birthday**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 9, 2023– Many counties in Ohio, including Lake County, have celebrated their birthdays this past week. Lake County turned 183 years old on March 6, 2023.

Lake County is Ohio’s smallest county by land area and is adjacent to Cuyahoga, Geauga and Ashtabula counties. Lake County’s name comes from its location on the shore of Lake Erie and was created in 1840 from land formerly belonging to Cuyahoga and Geauga counties. While small territorially, Lake County has experienced significant population growth and ranks 11 th among all Ohio counties. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Lake County Administration Building 

**Lake County Treasurer’s Office Reports Record First-Half Property Tax Collection**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 3, 2023– The Lake County Treasurer’s office first-half property tax collection exceeded approximately $256 million dollars. The collection surpassed last year’s first-half collection by over $7 million. Considering the County has not changed property valuations since the last collection period and there were few new levies passed since 2022, the increase in the collection is attributed to many internal factors.

The Treasurer’s office implemented new procedures in 2022 such as upgrading online payment options including the use of QR Codes. (A user-friendly online payment platform is in the works). Treasurer Michael Zuren and Auditor Christopher Galloway offered free presentations at senior centers and libraries discussing tax reduction programs, grant programs and escrow payment options.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim March 2023 as Developmental Disability Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 2, 2023– An estimated 4.7 million Americans have an intellectual or developmental disability. Some of these may include autism, down syndrome, and cerebral palsy, to name a few. These conditions can cause an impairment in areas like language, learning, and physical behavior. In order to highlight and empower these individuals and their contributions, the Lake County Board of Commissioners, at their March 2, 2023, meeting, has proclaimed March “Developmental Disabilities Awareness Month” in Lake County.

Throughout the years, thousands of people with developmental disabilities have been supported by their families, friends, neighbors, and co-workers and again this year, the Board of Commissioners are encouraging everyone in the Lake County community to enrich, engage, and to stand “Side by Side” to provide vital support and resources to these incredible people. One of the most effective ways to increase awareness is through active participation in community activities that will enrich their lives by showing how much they are supported. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Heather Ryan, Diana Hollander, Ellen Petry, Commissioner John Plecnik, Larry Petry, Elfie Roman, Commissioner John Hamercheck, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich.

**Ohio Department of Job and Family Services Director Visits Lake County JFS**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, March 1, 2023– On Wednesday February 22, 2023, Ohio Department of Job and Family Services (ODJFS) Director Matt Damschroder paid a visit to the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services (LCDJFS). Mr. Damschroder was appointed interim director of ODJFS by Governor Mike DeWine in March 2021 and was named permanent director in July 2021.

Mr. Damschroder and his staff participated in a roundtable discussion with Lake County Commissioner John Hamercheck, members of his staff, and LCDJFS Director Suzanne Casar and several members of the management team at LCDJFS. Discussions centered around upcoming changes to SNAP benefits, the Medicaid unwinding, and the important work being done in Child and Adult Protective Services. Workforce initiatives and services offered through the Ohio Means Jobs Center in Painesville were also part of the discussion. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Anne Rasic, Ali Tomaselli, Michelle Herron, Suzanne Casar, Matt Damschroder, John Hamercheck, Cheryl Baibak, Cory Vojack, Colleen Connors.

**New Program Seeks Volunteers**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 28, 2023 – In 2021, the Retired and Senior Volunteer Program of Lake County, also known as RSVP, transitioned to the Board of Lake County Commissioners and was re-branded as the Lake County Volunteer Network (LCVN).

“Since the transition of the program, it has continued to flourish by working to connect adults, aged 55+, to meaningful volunteer opportunities in the community,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

Most recently, the LCVN partnered with Lifeline, Inc. on implementing a new program, named Helping Hands for Seniors. Helping Hands for Seniors matches eligible older adults, 60+, who reside independently in Lake County with vetted volunteers who will assist them with daily activities that are essential for their health and safety. Services that Helping Hands for Seniors can provide may include minor repairs and handy-person tasks, outside maintenance, various errands outside the home, technology services, and other in-home services. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners and Emergency Management Agency Planning and Preparing for 2024 Total Solar Eclipse**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 27, 2023– Lake County will experience a Total Solar Eclipse on April 8, 2024. The eclipse will enter Ohio near Greenville in Darke County and exit Ohio near Avon Lake in Lorain County. The eclipse will occur local time at approximately 3:12 p.m. and last 4 minutes.

Lake County will have several ‘prime’ viewing areas with the center line of the eclipse traversing Lake Erie approximately 10 miles due north of the eastern and western boundaries of the county and the center line of the eclipse approximately 5 miles due north of Mentor. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Board of Commissioners Launch Phone Pal Program for Isolated Seniors**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 24, 2023 – The Board of Lake County Commissioners is excited to announce the launch of the Phone Pal program, which is designed to promote social connection and address senior loneliness, thereby increasing the ability to age in place and remain independent.

The Phone Pal program is a telephone reassurance program that matches volunteers with older adults that might be lonely or isolated, and looking for a pal to chat with twice a week. The program is made possible by an AmeriCorps Seniors grant obtained by the Board of Commissioners with matching funds from the Senior Services Levy.

“We are thrilled to offer this program to Lake County seniors,” said Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. “The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated this growing public health crisis and we hope this program will help alleviate some of the residual effects.”Please click here to read the entire press release.

**NSDAR to Dedicate a Bronze Marker Honoring Revolutionary War Patriots**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 23, 2023– On July 4, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. the New Connecticut Chapter of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution (NSDAR) will be hosting an event to kick off Lake County’s participation in the 250th Anniversary of the United States by dedicating a Bronze Marker honoring Revolutionary War Patriots who are buried in Lake County. The event will take place outside of the Lake County Courthouse in Painesville Square.

The public is encouraged to participate in this event. The community can be part of a lasting memorial to those who served in the Revolutionary War and call Lake County their final resting place by sponsoring a brick for $100. Each Revolutionary War Patriot buried in Lake County will have their name engraved on a brick. All proceeds will be used for on-going “America 250” celebrations. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Join with Project Hope for the Homeless to Celebrate their 30th Anniversary**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 23, 2023– At today’s Commissioners’ meeting, the Board of Lake County Commissioners joined with Project Hope for the Homeless to celebrate their 30th Anniversary.

Project Hope for the Homeless has been renewing hope and restoring the lives of thousands of homeless men, women and children since 1193. Project Hope for the Homeless not only provides emergency shelter, but also care and guidance to individuals and families seeking independence. Project Hope for the Homeless continues to expand in order to meet the County’s changing needs.

Project Hope for the Homeless serves as Lake County’s only homeless shelter. In the last 30 years, they have served more than 8,500 guests. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, John Hutchison, Judy Burr, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, and Commissioner John R. Hamercheck. 

**Lake County Commissioners Join with Laketran to Celebrate ‘Ohio Loves Transit Week’**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 13, 2023– At the Commissioners meeting on February 9, 2023, the Board of Lake County Commissioners joined with Laketran CEO, Ben Capelle, to recognize the great work Laketran has done and continues to do to celebrate the sixth annual ‘Ohio Loves Transit Week’.

Laketran celebrated ‘Ohio Loves Transit Week’ from February 6 through 11. Last week, Laketran celebrated by hosting a Customer Appreciation Event on Tuesday and continued to surprise their customers along their route throughout the week. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner Plecnik, Ben Capelle, Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

**Lake County Commissioners Declare February as Black History Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, February 7, 2023– At the Commissioner’s meeting on Thursday, February 2, 2023, the Lake County Board of Commissioners declared the month of February 2023, as Black History Month in Lake County, Ohio.

Black History Month serves as both a celebration and a powerful reminder that their history is American History, and their stories are essential to the ongoing story of our struggles, our progress, and our aspirations. It is essential that we take time to celebrate the immeasurable contributions of Black Americans and honor the legacies and achievements of generations past. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Bishop Mirbel, Commissioner Plecnik, Deacon Jones, Derrick Abney, Reverend Dr. Motley, Commissioner Regovich, Commissioner Hamercheck.

**Lake County Board of Commissioners Vote to Rescind the Proposed Sales Tax**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 26, 2023– The Board of Commissioners voted 3-0 to rescind the proposed .5% sales tax increase. The motion was made by Commissioner Richard J. Regovich and seconded by Commissioner John R. Hamercheck.

The Board remains unified in providing professional and high-level services to our residents and businesses; most important of which is our criminal justice and public safety system.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Changes to the SNAP and Medicaid Program are Coming**

The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2023 which was signed by the President of the United States at the end of December 2022, contains several provisions of significance that are designed to end pandemic-related polices in SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) and Medicaid.

For close to three years, since a public health emergency was federally declared around the COVID-19 pandemic, SNAP and Medicaid programs have been operating under different federal regulations. Medicaid and SNAP benefits are now no longer tied to the public health emergency. This change is governed by federal law and State and county agencies have no control over this policy change.

Federal law had allowed states to request emergency allotments for households participating in SNAP until the end of either the federal public health emergency declaration or that state’s declaration and Ohio has been providing enhanced emergency allotments to SNAP households since March 2020. Congress has now set forth that the last month of emergency SNAP allotments, including maximum benefits, will be February 2023. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Eastlake Women’s Club Held Human Trafficking Awareness Forum**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 23, 2023– Eastlake Women’s Club hosted a Human Trafficking Awareness Forum on January 14, 2023, at Regovich Catering. The purpose of the forum was to inform attendees of the signs of Human Trafficking and what to do if they were to encounter a possible instance.

The Lake County Collaborative to End Human Trafficking spoke at the event teaching the signs and responses individuals can take should they encounter human trafficking.

At their January 12th meeting, the Lake County Board of Commissioners also declared the month of January 2023 as Human Trafficking Prevention Month in Lake County, Ohio. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**John R. Hamercheck Appointed to President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 6, 2023– Commissioner John R. Hamercheck was appointed to President of the Lake County Board of Commissioners at the Organizational Meeting on January 5, 2023.

“It has been a great honor to serve this board as President the last 5 years and I look forward to serving the residents and businesses another wonderful year,” said Commission President, John R. Hamercheck.

Commissioner Hamercheck’s first term as Commissioner commenced on January 3, 2017, and he was re-elected to a second term that commenced on January 3, 2021.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**John Plecnik Takes Office for Second Term as Lake County Commissioner**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio–On January 6, 2023 – Commissioner John Plecnik rejoined the Lake County Board of Commissioners after a month-long hiatus in between two nonconsecutive terms for the annual organizational meeting and first regular meeting of the year. Plecnik joins Commissioners Clarence A. Hine (1915 – 1917 and 1919-1922) and Roger E. Smart (1957-1964 and 1969-1972) as the third Commissioner since Lake County was founded in 1840 to serve multiple nonconsecutive terms. Plecnik was sworn in for his first term by Justice Pat DeWine of the Ohio Supreme Court on February 11, 2021, after his appointment by the Lake County Republican Party Central Committee to fill a vacancy. Plecnik received 79 votes from the Central Committee to become the 79 th Commissioner in the history of Lake County. After his election by a 16.92% margin on November 8, 2022, Plecnik was sworn in for his second term as Lake County Commissioner by Judge John Eklund of the Ohio 11 th District Court of Appeals on December 29, 2022, to also become the 82 nd Commissioner of Lake County. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Approve Fiscal Year 2022 CDBG Projects**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, January 5, 2023– The Board of Commissioners is pleased to announce the approval of the Fiscal Year 2022 Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) projects. In an effort to continue facilitating improvements within Lake County, $1,375,761 was awarded from the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to help fund the 28 selected projects. Along with the funds awarded by HUD, Lake County will utilize prior year funds and program income for a total of about $1.9 million.

“These grants are vital to counties like ours. This funding will address housing and infrastructure needs, create jobs, revitalize neighborhoods, and expand economic opportunity,” stated Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

The Community Development Block Grant Program funding, in general, is used for public improvements, public facilities, economic development programs, housing programs, public services and program administration to improve the quality of life for low- and moderate-income persons and communities.Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Approve use of ARPA Funds**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, December 19, 2022– Lake County Commissioners approve the use of ARPA funds for the Lake Metroparks Lakefront Trail and the Chagrin River Riparian Corridor Stormwater Management and Water Quality Project.

Lake Metroparks is working to construct a two-mile multi-purpose trail along with Lake Erie coastline from Fairport Harbor to Painesville Township Park. Upon completion, the 10-foot-wide asphalt trail will link Painesville Township Park and to Fairport Harbor. Together, the parks attract over 500,000 visitors annually. This will be the longest Lake Erie lakefront trail in Ohio. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Commissioners Hamercheck and Regovich attended the 2022 CCAO/CEAO Winter Conference**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, December 15, 2022– Lake County Commissioners John R. Hamercheck and Richard J. Regovich attended the 2022 County Commissioners Association of Ohio (CCAO) / County Engineers Association of Ohio (CEAO) Winter Conference at the Hyatt Regency in downtown Columbus, Ohio last week.

The 3-day event’s theme was “Innovation and Inspiration to Shape Ohio’s Future,” providing an opportunity for local officials to become inspired by a variety of experts who shared innovative ways to address important issues counties are facing.

“I continue to find great benefit by attending this annual event. The ability to network with other County officials, public policy experts, and other professionals allows me to share innovative ideas and strategies with our Lake County leadership team. More importantly, it also reminds me of the professional governmental structure that we have right here in Lake County,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Richard J. Regovich Sworn in as 81st Lake County Commissioner**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 30, 2022– Richard J. Regovich became the 81st Commissioner in and for Lake County as he was sworn in on the morning of November 29th, 2022.

“Thank you, Lake County! I worked hard for your vote; I will work hard to keep it. Thank you for the chance to serve this wonderful county of great people. Together, we move forward,” said Commissioner Richard J. Regovich. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Lynn Regovich, and Judge John P. O’Donnell.

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize December as _Be a Santa to a Senior_ Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 29, 2022– Home Instead Senior Care created the Be a Santa to a Senior program to support lonely or isolated older adults. This program aims to give to those in need by partnering with local organizations to make sure isolated seniors receive gifts and companionship during the holiday season.

The Board of Commissioners is one such partner and has hosted a tree for the previous three years. The Board of Commissioners will host a tree decorated with ornaments featuring seniors’ first names and gift or gift card suggestions. The tree will be located on the fifth floor of the Lake County Administration Center outside of chambers. Holiday shoppers can select an ornament and return the gift unwrapped with the ornament attached. Gifts are then delivered to seniors in time for the holidays.Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner Richard J. Regovich, Alyea Barajas, Nancy Brothers, Commissioner Mark Tyler, Commissioner John Hammercheck

**Lake County JFS Partnered with Sub Zero Mission for Stuff the Bus Event**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 29, 2022– The Lake County Department of Job and Family Services and Ohio Means Jobs Lake County partnered with the Sub Zero Mission on Tuesday November 22, 2022, to collect warming items for the homeless in Lake County. A “stuff the bus” event was held outside of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services building located at 177 Main St. in Painesville from 11a.m.– 1 p.m. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**4th Annual Career Bound: College Internship and Job Fair**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 28, 2022– Current college students and recent college graduates are invited to the 4th Annual Career Bound: College Intern & Job Fair on December 20, 2022, located at Mentor Paradigm, 6477 Center St., Mentor, Ohio 44060.

Let us help connect you with work opportunities right here in our community! By attending this event, you may be able to secure a 2023 summer internship or even a permanent position. Participating companies include Lincoln Electric, Dollar Bank, Fredon Corporation, Component Repair Technologies and more. Positions being recruited include engineering co-ops, business management, and accounting professionals to name a few. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County to Launch ‘Operation Green Light’ in Support of Local Veterans**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, November 3, 2022– We are excited to announce that Lake County is joining our colleagues across the nation in launching #OperationGreenLight for Veterans, an initiative designed to shine a light on the service of our Veterans and their families.

“It is so wonderful that our great Lake County will be among the supportive counties across the nation participating in Operation Green Light for Veterans on Veterans Day this year,” said Recorder Becky Lynch, member of the National Association of Counties (NACo) Veterans and Military Services Committee which launched Operation Green Light. “Monthly Veterans and Military Services conference calls present proactive ideas that consistently impact Veterans services and I am honored to be serving on the committee especially when projects like Operation Green Light shine so brightly on our cherished Veterans.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Receives two Ohio APA Great Places in Ohio Awards**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 27, 2022– The Ohio Chapter of the American Planning Association (APA Ohio) recently announced the winners of the 2022 Ohio APA Great Places Awards. The biennial awards program honors outstanding physical spaces that planners have made permanent through careful planning and unbridled imagination in Ohio.

APA Ohio presented the Great Places in Ohio Awards at the 2022 Cleveland Planning and Zoning Workshop on October 12, 2022.

Lake County, Ohio was recognized by the Ohio Chapter of the American Planning Association with two Great Places in Ohio Awards for Downtown Willoughby and Mentor Marsh State Nature Preserve. Downtown Willoughby is a beautiful, charming, historical neighborhood that goes by the nickname of the “Courtesy City.” The Mentor Marsh is home to many different local plant and animal species. Today, Mentor Marsh is one of the largest natural marshes that still remains along the shores of Lake Erie. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Launches Workforce Services Podcast**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 20, 2022– The Lake County Board of Commissioners and OhioMeansJobs Lake County are excited to announce the launch of a new workforce podcast series, North Coast Careers: Lake County’s Workforce Beacon.

The mission of North Coast Careers is to be an innovative platform to inform and inspire residents, jobs seekers, and business owners by generating open dialogue with community leaders, subject matter experts, and local industry specialists from the public and private sector to focus on workforce issues, career services, and local information that matter to the people of Ohio’s North Coast.

“I appreciate Director Vojack and his team putting forth this new means of communicating the workforce services Lake County provides,” stated Commissioner John Hamercheck. “Continuing to evolve our service delivery models will only benefit the citizens and workforce of Lake County.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Declare November as National Adoption Month** PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 20, 2022– National Adoption Month is recognized annually in November throughout the nation as a time to raise awareness about the urgent need for adoptive families for children and youth in foster care.

At any given time, nearly 15,000 children in Ohio are being cared for away from their parents. While most of these children will eventually be reunited with biological family members, more than 3,000 children in the State of Ohio are currently waiting to be adopted and over 1,000 of them are teenagers.

“Our Department of Job and Family Services plays a crucial part in educating the public about foster and adoption,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “Thank you to everyone who continues to make a difference.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

Left to right: Commissioner John Plecnik, Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar, Social Worker Megan Ash, Commissioner Mark Tyler, and Commissioner John Hamercheck.

**The Board of Lake County Commissioners Proclaim October 2022 as Breast Cancer Awareness Month in Lake County, Ohio**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 13, 2022– According to the Ohio Department of Health in 2021, 1 in 8 women in the United States who live to be age 85 will develop breast cancer. Not only women can develop breast cancer, 76 men in Ohio were diagnosed in 2018.

“Early detection is important, death rates due to breast cancer have significantly decreased 11% from 2010 to 2019,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “Spreading awareness is the key to increase public knowledge of early detection of breast cancer diagnosis and treatment.”

Breast Cancer Awareness Month serves as an opportunity to increase awareness of the disease and encourage individuals who plan to detect the disease in its early stages. The American Cancer Society continues to advise women to receive an annual mammogram screening upon reaching the age of 40.

**Lake County Officials Prove Commitment to Public Safety in Hostile Action Based Exercise**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 6, 2022– On September 27, 2022, over 500 Lake County Officials, including the Board of Lake County Commissioners and Sheriff’s Office, participated in the Radiological Emergency Preparedness, Full Participation, Plume Exposure Pathway Hostile Action Based (HAB) Exercise for the Perry Nuclear Power Plant.

“Lake County is extremely fortunate to have such a professional and dedicated emergency planning team. The expertise displayed our EMA Department, local police and fire, the Health District, County Sheriff and many more is second to none. This year’s HAB, along with our nationally recognized virtual drill completed in 2020, clearly shows our commitment to emergency preparedness in Lake County,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

The Hostile Base Action Evaluated (HAB) Exercise, for the Energy Harbor Perry Nuclear Power Plant (PNPP), was a culmination of over 18 months of planning by both public and private agencies. In the end, the drill included over 511 participants, being evaluated over multiple days, the week of Sept. 26th. The exercise includes portions of Ashtabula and Geauga County as well. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Board of Developmental Disabilities/Deepwood Joins Broad Effort to Observe National Disability Employment Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, October 6, 2022– The Lake County Board of Developmental Disabilities (LCBDD)/Deepwood today announced its participation in National Disability Employment Awareness Month (NDEAM), an annual awareness campaign that takes place each October. The purpose of NDEAM is to educate about disability employment issues and celebrate the many and varied contributions of America’s workers with disabilities. This year’s theme is “Disability: Part of the Equity Equation.”

The history of National Disability Employment Awareness Month traces back to 1945 when Congress enacted a law declaring the first week in October each year “National Employ the Physically Handicapped Week.” In 1962, the word “physically” was removed to acknowledge the employment needs and contributions of individuals with all types of disabilities. In 1988, Congress expanded the week to a month and changed the name to National Disability Employment Awareness Month.Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Ryan Wagner, Michael Null, Commissioner John Plecnik, Elfie Roman, Julie O’Neil, Katie Debly, Commissioner Mark Tyler, Commissioner John Hamercheck.

**Lake County Captains 2022 Season Comes to a Close**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 29, 2022– The Lake County Captains 2022 season has come to a close on Wednesday, September 21, 2022. The Lake County Captains advanced to the Midwest League Championships and fell one game short of winning the league championship to the South Bend Cubs. However, the team is still excited to celebrate earning the title of Midwest League Eastern Division Champions.

“It is a luxury to have such a wonderful minor-league baseball team so close to home. It’s great to see fans from all over the county attend each game,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

The Lake County Captains welcomed over 170,000 fans to Classic Park during Captains games in 2022. They also hosted the High School Baseball Captains Charities Classic, Lake Erie College baseball games,several high school and college graduation ceremonies, a car show, non-profit fundraisers and many private celebrations! Please click her here to read the entire press release.

**New Lake County Sheriff’s Training Facility Construction Underway**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, September 8, 2022– County Officials celebrated the groundbreaking of the new Lake County Sheriff’s Training Facility on September 8, 2022. This was located at the current Sheriff’s Shooting Range located at 2041 Blasé Nemeth Rd. in Painesville Township.

In early fall of 2021, Sheriff Leonbruno met with the Board of Lake County Commissioners who agreed to fund a multi-jurisdictional training complex at their current shooting range.

This current site has been the Sheriff’s Office Shooting Range since the early 80’s. However, the property was equipped with only an outdoor shooting range and an old trailer. No classrooms or modernized training platforms existed. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commission President John Hamercheck, Commission Vice President John Plecnik, Sheriff Frank Leonbruno, Commissioner Mark Tyler.

**Lake County Commissioners Announce Opportunity Lake County Website**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 30, 2022– The Lake County Board of Commissioners is proud to announce the launch of the Opportunity Lake County website.

The project has been a collaboration between local workforce, economic development, and education partners to develop an exciting new way for connecting the workforce to local opportunities right here in Lake County, Ohio. This website aims to become a talent attraction piece for Lake County and its employers providing links to education, housing, transportation, and careers in Lake County. The Opportunity Lake County website will be used as a hub that will link various partners like the Visitors Bureau, Lake Development Authority, and the Lake County MetroParks. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Board of Commissioners Hosting Lake County Caregiver Forum**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 25, 2022 – The Board of Lake County Commissioners Senior Services is hosting a free Caregiver Forum on Wednesday, October 12, 2022, from 3:00 – 6:30 p.m. The forum is sponsored by Laketran and the Western Reserve Area Agency on Aging and will be held at the Lake County Fairgrounds Youth & Community Center, located at 1301 Mentor Avenue, Painesville.

“Senior Services is hosting this forum in an effort to provide information on local aging and caregiving resources. We recognize this is a need and we are taking the beginning steps to address it,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners.

The public is invited to stop in to connect with other caregivers, learn about local resources, and meet with service providers to learn how to access services. Western Reserve Area Agency on Aging will be on hand throughout the forum to gather share your feedback on caregiving needs and gaps. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Laketran and Partner Agencies Continue Lake County Mobile Food Pantry for Another Year at Locations Countywide**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 25, 2022– The Lake County Mobile Food Pantry will continue to provide free, fresh produce to Lake County seniors with weekly distributions at locations across Lake County.

The Lake County Mobile Food Pantry is a retrofitted 12-passenger Dial-a-Ride bus operated by Laketran. With its traditional passenger seating replaced with shelving, the retired bus is now providing fresh produce to thousands of Lake County seniors on Tuesdays from 10:00 a.m. – 11:00 a.m.

“We are fortunate to have the resources to assist the seniors in our community,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “Thank you to all those involved in executing this wonderful service.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Awarded $306 Million in Opioid Litigation**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 17, 2022– Lake County Awarded $306 Million in Opioid Litigation Judge Dan Aaron Polster of United States District Court, Northern District of Ohio Eastern Division issued the Abatement Order in the National Prescription Opiate Litigation which awards Lake County $306.2 million over 15 years. Lake, along with Trumbull County, were participants in the Track Three case that began on October 4, 2021.

“Today marks the start of a new day in our fight to end the opioid epidemic. After years of doing what we could with limited resources, Lake County will finally receive the funds that are desperately needed to help abate the opioid epidemic from our community. Lake County remains committed to continuing the critical relief work performed by our incredible frontline workers consistent with the court’s ruling,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

It is estimated that 61 million pills were dispensed in Lake County from 2012 – 2016; 265 pills for every resident. Impacts of the epidemic are evident within countless local agencies including law enforcement, children services, local courts, coroner and local treatment facilities. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From left to right: County Commissioner Mark Tyler, Commissioner John Hamercheck, Lake ADAMHS Board Director Kim Frasier, Commissioner John Plecnik reviewing Abatement Order.

**Commissioners Declare August as National Immunization Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 11, 2022–August is National Immunization Month. The goal of this month is to highlight the importance of vaccination for people of all ages.

“Immunizations are an important factor in keeping everyone safe,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “It is a necessity that we raise awareness to increase the number of individuals getting vaccinated.”

National Immunization Month is particularly important in 2022, as the global vaccination rate suffered its largest drop in 30 years.

“Vaccinations remain an important prevention measure in public health, and Lake County General Health District is happy to be able to provide routine immunizations to promote health and protect the health of the public ,” said Dyan Denmeade, Director of Community Health Services. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Declare August Child Support Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 10, 2022– August is Child Support Awareness Month in the State of Ohio. Child Support Awareness Month is an important opportunity to recognize that support from both parents is essential to meeting a child’s physical, social, and emotional needs and lays the groundwork for their future success.

“Issuing this proclamation is a way to raise awareness and support the children in Lake County,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “Children deserve support from both parents to ensure a successful future.”

The Lake County Child Support Enforcement Agency (CSEA) located at Lake County Job and Family Services is responsible for the collection and enforcement of administrative and court ordered support payments. Lake County CSEA can also conduct free genetic testing for parents who need paternity established for their child or provide them with an Acknowledgment of Paternity Form to complete.Please click here to read the entire release.

**Commissioners Celebrate Jeffrey and Beverly Frischkorn’s 50th Wedding Anniversary**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 4, 2022– Lifetime residents of Lake County, Jeffrey and Beverly Frischkorn have been married since May 20, 1972. This year, they celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary.

“I can appreciate this, I was honored that my parents made it to 50 years. Thank you for standing as an example for our community,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

The couple was married at the Bible Community Church in Mentor, Ohio. Together they have a daughter, Rebecca who was a graduate of Mentor Schools. Rebecca currently lives in Knoxville, Tennessee with her husband Gabe, and their five children: Grace, Hope, Neimiah, Elijah, and Humility. Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner Plecnik, Jeffrey Frischkorn, Beverly Frischkorn, Commissioner Tyler, Commissioner Hamercheck.

**Commissioners Celebrate Successful 2022 Lake County Fair**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, August 3, 2022– The Lake County Fair held between July 26 and July 31 was a phenomenal success with 121,772 people in attendance. Sunday’s attendance was a record breaker with 37,528 people in attendance.

“The Lake County Fair continues to bring more interest each year,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “It was an honor to support the first ever school bus demolition derby in the County and we are pleased to recognize this achievement.”

Sunday included a Demolition Derby with over 3,000 people in attendance. This was a sell-out event; the derby included the first school bus feature in Lake County. The school bus feature was made possible by the financial support of the Lake County Visitor’s Bureau and the Lake County Board of Commissioners. Please click here to read the entire press release.

Commissioner John Plecnik and Grand Champion Duck Winner Marissa Muntain of 4-H during the 2022 Lake County Fair

**Lake County Fair Takes Off on July 26**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, July 25, 2022– The Lake County Fair opens on July 26 and goes through July 31. The Lake County Fairgrounds is located at 1301 Mentor Ave in Painesville Township, Ohio 44077.

The Lake County Fair is an annual event put on by the Lake County Agricultural Society, Inc. which is made up of over 500 Lake County residents. Lake County has a 19-member Fair Board, elected by the society membership. Each of the “original” townships in the county have representation as required by the Ohio Revised Code.

Lake County is one of the only fairs in Ohio that holds a kick off parade on July 26, 2022 at 6 p.m. and begins at First Church of Christ/Zion Lutheran Church on Mentor Ave. to the Fairgrounds. This year’s parade Grand Marshall is going to be former Lake County Commissioner Ron Young, a long-time supporter of agriculture and the Fair. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**Lake County Recognizes SUNsational Volunteers**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, July 15, 2022– The Board of Lake County Commissioners and the Lake County Council on Aging honored the hundreds of volunteers that impact many Lake County non-profit agencies through their dedication of time and talent. Volunteers were honored at the annual recognition event and six special volunteers were recognized for their exceptional service as this year’s SUNsational volunteers. All volunteers are members of the Lake County Volunteer Network, formally RSVP, and a division of the Board of Commissioners, and the Lake County Council on Aging and served in numerous roles throughout the county.

The Board of Commissioners recognized the SUNsational volunteers at the July 7, 2022, meeting. The volunteers were presented with a certificate of recognition during the meeting.

“The Board of Commissioners is honored to recognize these dedicated individuals for their service to others in need within our community,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck, President of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. “They donate their time and talents to benefit others without expecting anything in return.” Please click here to read the entire press release.

From the left: Diane Melsheimer, Arlene Sakach, Fred Kramer, Ohio Senator Kenny Yuko, Dave Henschel, Commissioner John Plecnik, Chris Palsa, Commissioner Tyler, Thomas Queen representing Congressman David Joyce.

**Lake County Commissioners Appoint Two New Members to the Laketran Board of Trustees**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, June 30, 2022– Laura Pizmoht and Kim Stenger have been appointed to the Laketran Board of Trustees by the Board of Lake County Commissioners.

“Laketran serves some of our most vulnerable communities. It’s important that our Board of Trustees for Laketran understands their needs,” said Commissioner John R. Hamercheck. “Having a Board that reflects all of our community will make for a more responsive and a better Laketran.”

Laketran is Lake County, Ohio’s regional public transportation system that offers local routes, door-to-door Dial-a-Ride, and Park-and-Ride commuter express services to connect employees and jobs between Lake County and Downtown Cleveland. Laketran proudly serves over 750,000 riders each year.Please click here to view the entire press release.

From the left: Laketran CEO Ben Capelle, Commissioner John Plecnik, Laura Pizmoht, Kim Stenger, Commissioner John Hamercheck, and Commissioner Mark Tyler.

LAKE COUNTY DREDGING FACILITY CONSTRUCTION UNDERWAY

_New facility will allow dredging of Fairport Harbor to be re-instated_

PAINESVILLE TOWNSHIP, Ohio – Federal, State, and County officials celebrated the groundbreaking of the North Park Sediment Recycling Facility on June 21, 2022. The State of Ohio’s Office of Budget and Management Controlling Board authorized $47 million to fund the construction of Sediment Recycling Facilities across the State of Ohio. Lake County will receive $11.3 million in funding to construct its facility in Painesville Township, which is planned to be operational this fall.

“Today’s event would not be possible without the leadership from Governor DeWine and our State delegation in Columbus. I want to thank Senator Jerry Cirino (R-Kirtland), Senator Matt Dolan (R-Chagrin Falls), Representative Jamie Callender (R-Concord Twp.), Senator Kenny Yuko (D-Richmond Heights), and Representative Dan Troy (D-Willowick) who stepped up to the plate when the community needed it the most,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

Sometimes called a confined placement facility, they are specifically designed for the containment of contaminated dredged material from Lake Erie that provides control of potential releases of contaminants to the environment. Kurtz Bros. Inc., out of Independence, Ohio will operate the facility.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS SUPPORT FUNDS TO ASSIST HOMEOWNERS IN KIRTLAND WITH MANDATED SANITARY SEWER PROJECT**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, June 10, 2022ꟷ The Board of Lake County Commissioners announced a significant investment of $1m in American Rescue Plan Act (APRA) funds and $250,000 in Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds to assist homeowners in the Kirtland Old Town Area with an Environmental Protection Agency mandated sanitary sewer project.

“The ARPA guidance clearly permits the investment in sewer and water infrastructure and this project checks all those boxes while assisting over 100 homeowners with a critical improvement to their neighborhood. Today’s announcement not only helps with the construction of the main line, but the CDBG commitment is available to income-qualified homeowners for the lateral connection,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

The Kirtland Old Town Area is comprised of parcels that date back to the 1800’s long before public water and sewers were available. In 2014, a storm sewer was found to contain untreated sewage from many failed household sewage treatment systems. Regulatory agencies routinely tested sewer catch basins with results indicating bacteria counts higher than the maximum amount allowable. Please click here to read the entire press release.

**LAKE COUNTY PUBLIC SAFETY CENTER PROJECT IS SET TO BEGIN**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, June 3, 2022– The Board of Lake County Commissioners signed the contract to begin a programming study for the Lake County Public Safety Center with HOK. The HOK team will work with key stakeholders to determine existing conditions, needs, and future forecasts with Lake County.

“Safety and law enforcement are a top priority for the County Commissioners,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “It is important our county has a facility to meet our long-term needs over the next 50 years. This project has been contemplated for over 10 years, and with the support of Sheriff Frank Leonbruno and the Lake County Corrections Board, we are excited for this next phase of the public safety center project to begin.”

A criminal justice system is the single most complex and perhaps most impactful program a county operates. A properly functioning justice system provides wide-ranging benefits to the community and contributes to Lake County being a vibrant and sustainable place to live and work, and does so in a cost-effective manner. Please click here to view the entire press release.

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS INVEST $1.2 MILLION FOR ALL POLICE AGENCIES**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 31, 2022 ꟷ The Board of Lake County Commissioners recently authorized the purchase of Lexipol for all police agencies in Lake County. The investment, which is applicable to every law enforcement agency in Lake County, will enhance policy documentation, ensure policies are in accordance with current legal standings, and facilitate better training of first responders by providing easy, real-time access to all policies as determined by the law enforcement agencies.

“Today’s announcement is yet another example of the Commissioner’s support and investment in our public safety system in Lake County. I want to thank the local Chiefs and Sheriff Leonbruno for their participation in this countywide initiative,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “From our understanding, this is the first countywide implementation of a public safety software in the State of Ohio. Once again, Lake County is exhibiting leadership throughout the State.”

Lexipol is a digital solution to assist with federal, state, and department-specific policies, manuals, and training requirements. This online platform allows police officers to stay current on all aspects of training in a flexible manner without needing large group sessions.Please click here to view the entire press release.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS DECLARE JUNE 15 WORLD ELDER ABUSE AWARENESS DAY IN LAKE COUNTY**

PAINESVILLE, OH, June 2, 2022 – June 15, 2022, is World Elder Abuse Awareness Day here in Lake County and across our country. It is the time of year when cities and states can take a moment to shed light on this significant issue. “This is an opportunity for Lake County to promote a better understanding of abuse and neglect of older persons and raise awareness of elder abuse ensuring security and dignity for all seniors,” said Commissioner Hamercheck, president of the Board of Lake County Commissioners.

Elder abuse is a widespread issue affecting every community across the country. It is estimated that 1 in 10 older Americans are victims of elder abuse, neglect, or exploitation. Even more alarming is that research suggests that as few as 1 in 14 cases of elder abuse ever come to the attention of authorities. “Lake County is not immune to the issue of elder abuse,” said Commissioner Plecnik. “When we come together, we can prevent elder abuse from happening. We can put support services in place, and direct the necessary community resources.”Please click here to view the entire press release.Please click here to view the resolution.

From the Left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Senior Services Coordinator Alyea Barajas, Assistant Administrator of Child and Adult Services Division of JFS Mary Udics, Director of Lake County Job and Family Servies Suzanne Casar, Lake County Council on Aging Chief Executive Officer, Joseph Tomsick, and Commissioner John Hamercheck.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS DECLARE MAY OLDER AMERICANS MONTH**

PAINESVILLE, Ohio, May 26, 2022 – Lake County Commissioners declare May as Older Americans Month (OAM). Every May, the Administration for Community Living leads the celebration of OAM. This year’s theme,_Age My Way_, focuses on how older adults can age in their communities, living independently for as long as possible and participating in ways they choose.

“We want to take a moment to honor the more than 63,000 Lake County senior residents who contribute their strength, wisdom, and experience to our community – as family members, friends, mentors, volunteers, civic leaders, members of the workforce, and more,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.Please click here to view the entire press release.

From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Lake County Council on Aging Chief Executive Officer Joseph Tomsick, Lake County Senior Services Coordinator Alyea Barajas, and Commissioner John Hamercheck

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AWARDED AMERICORPS GRANT**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 19, 2022 – The Board of Lake County Commissioners announced today that it has received an AmeriCorps Seniors demonstration grant of nearly $115,000 to support senior volunteer service. The grant will expand the Lake County Volunteer Network’s presence in the county, which was previously unserved by an AmeriCorps Seniors project. These new grant funds are made possible from the historic $1 billion investment in AmeriCorps, the federal agency for volunteerism and national service, through the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021.

“Lake County was one of only three grantees awarded in the state of Ohio,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck. “This grant will utilize senior volunteers to specifically focus on support for seniors who have been impacted by the pandemic.”

The Lake County Volunteer Network, formally RSVP Lake County and now part of the Board of Commissioners will leverage the skills and experience of volunteers to help increase food security, as well as increase social support and improve capacity for independent living for vulnerable and/or isolated seniors in Lake County.

“Much of this work will occur in collaboration with the Lake County Council on Aging,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. “This is just another example of nonprofits and agencies coming together in Lake County to meet the needs of some of our most vulnerable citizens.”Please click here to view the entire press release.

**COUNTY****COMMISSIONERS RECOGNIZE MAY 15th-21 st AS “NATIONAL POLICE WEEK”**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 19, 2022 – At their weekly meeting, the Lake County Board of Commissioners recognized the week of May 15 th– 21 st as “National Police Week 2022” in Lake County in order to remember and honor fallen law enforcement officers.

The Lake County Board of Commissioners’ resolution was intended to pay homage to the courageous men and women who have dedicated their lives to protecting citizens in large cities, small towns, and suburban neighborhoods all across America. “We express our sincerest gratitude for these selfless public servants who put themselves in harm’s way in an effort to keep us safe and we honor those who have lost their lives,” stated Board President John R. Hamercheck.

In 1962, President John F. Kennedy signed a proclamation designating May 15 th as “Peace Officers Memorial Day” and the calendar week that it falls in as “National Police Week”. Established by a joint resolution of Congress, “National Police Week” pays special recognition to law enforcement officers who have lost their lives in the line of duty providing safety and protection of others. Currently, tens of thousands of law enforcement officers from around the world converge in Washington, D.C. to participate in a number of planned events honoring those individuals who have paid the ultimate sacrifice. A Memorial Service began in Senate Park in 1982 and now, 40 years later, the event has grown to a series of events attracting 25,000 to 40,000 attendees made up of law enforcement officers, survivors, and various agencies. Residents can also participate virtually using the 2022 National Police Week mobile app available in the Google and Apple stores by searching “National Police Week 2022”.Please click here to view the press release.

_Picture from the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Sheriff Frank Leonbruno, Commissioner John Hamercheck_

**Commissioner John Plecnik is Appointed to the Lake County Investment Advisory Committee**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 13, 2022 – During the Commissioners Meeting on Thursday, May 12, 2022, the Board of Lake County Commissioners appointed, by resolution, Commissioner John Plecnik to the Lake County Investment Advisory Committee. The Committee has the important job of reviewing or revising its policies and advising the investing authority on Lake County investments in order to ensure the best and safest return of funds available to the County for deposit or investment.

“Commissioner John Plecnik is an expert on taxes and budget and he is a great benefit to the County because of his many years of experience in government and as a law professor,” said Commission President John Hamercheck.

“It is an honor to welcome Commissioner John Plecnik to the Investment Advisory Committee. I look forward to working with him to ensure that County money is invested wisely,” said Lake County Treasurer Mike Zuren. “The opportunity to work with Commissioner Plecnik is invaluable and I am personally grateful for him to be a part of the Advisory Committee.”Please click here to view the entire press release.

**County Commissioners Host Event Honoring Former Colleagues**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 12, 2022 – The Board of Commissioners held an event on May 12 th, 2022, to honor all former Lake County Commissioners. Previous commissioners were invited to attend the event and were recognized. There are (79) present and past Commissioners who faithfully dedicated their time and service in representing Lake County citizens for over 180 years.

County government plays a critical role in all Ohioans’ lives and the role of a county commissioner is numerous and varied. They act as the administrative division of their states and when the state and federal government enact laws, the counties are responsible for implementing them. They are also faced with the task of approving budgets and maintaining sufficient revenue to administer the government and provide services to their constituents through the adoption of the annual county budget.

“This recognition is well-deserved as these individuals have served with distinction, some of them for many years,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck, “On behalf of Lake County, this Board is proud to commend their leadership and legacy,” he continued.Please click here to view the entire press release.

_Picture from the left: Senator Jerry Cirino, Former Commissioner Dale Fellows, Commissioner John Plecnik, Former Commissioner Ron Young, Commissioner John Hamercheck, Former Commissioner Judy Moran, Former Commissioner Kevin Malecek, Former Commissioner_

**Lake County Commissioners Proclaim May 2022, Skin Cancer Awareness Month in Lake County, Ohio**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 12, 2022 – During the May 12 th Commissioners Meeting, the Lake County Board of Commissioners issued a special resolution proclaiming May 2022 as “Skin Cancer Awareness Month” in Lake County, Ohio.

Skin cancer is a serious disease. It is the most common type of cancer and it is also one of the most preventable. It is estimated that 197,700 new cases of melanoma, will be diagnosed in the United States in 2022. Skin cancer affects everyone and, as the weather gets warmer, it is important to take precautions.

Exposure to UV light is the most preventable risk factor for all skin cancers. The American Academy of Dermatology encourages everyone to stay out of indoor tanning beds and protect their skin outdoors by seeking shade, wearing protective clothing, and applying a broad-spectrum, water-resistant sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher and reapply often to all skin not covered by clothing. Regular skin self-exams are extremely important to check for any signs of skin cancer.

Founder and CEO of Apex Dermatology and Skin Surgery Center Dr. Jorge Garcia- Zuazaga recommends annual screenings. “Early skin cancer diagnosis saves lives. It is vital to schedule regular, timely screenings to detect any changes or new lesions,” Dr. Garcia-Zuazaga advises. “You should also stay aware of any differences in your skin and see a dermatologist about any suspicious lesions.”Please click here to view the entire press release.Please click here to view the resolution.

_Picture From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, David Glass, Genevieve Glass, Dr. Jorge Garcia-Zuazaga, Commissioner John Hamercheck_

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize May 2022 as National Nurses Month in Lake County, Ohio**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 12, 2022 – In their weekly meeting on May 12th, the Lake County Board of Commissioners issued a special resolution designating May 2022 as “National Nurses Month” in Lake County, Ohio.

The advent of modern nursing is credited to Florence Nightingale, who laid the foundation for professional nursing through her tireless work during and after the Crimean War. As a nursing manager, on the frontlines, Nightingale introduced hygiene protocols and other measures that drastically reduced infections and death in battlefield hospitals. Nurses Month in May coincides with the birthday of Florence Nightingale.

“The Board is very happy to draw attention and reflect on all the critical contributions that nurses have made here in Lake County to promote safe, high-quality health care to our residents. Nurses touch the lives of families through every stage of life,” stated Commission President John Hamercheck.

Commissioner John Plecnik added, “Nurses serve on the front lines, risking their lives treating the injured and sick during wartime, natural disasters, and public health emergencies. We are so grateful for their expertise and for keeping pace with new technologies and methods of treatments thereby expanding their role in our health care system.”Please click here to view the entire press release.Please click here to view the resolution.

_Picture: From the Left Commissioner John Plecnik, from Lake Health University Hospitals Ashley Carlucci, Bill Osterman(Chief Nursing Officer), Valerie Kovacic-Mauer and Ann Rodenbucher, and Commissioner John Hamercheck_

L**ake County Commissioners Recognize National Pet Therapy Day and Apraxia Awareness Day**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 5, 2022 – In their weekly meeting on May 5 th, the Lake County Board of Commissioners issued multiple proclamations designating April 30 th as “National Pet Therapy Day” and May 14 th as “Apraxia Awareness Day”.

Geralyn Hawk, a registered handler with “Pet Partners” (a therapy animal team), recently reached out to the Board for their support of “National Pet Therapy Day”. With a growing body of research demonstrating the wide variety of ways therapy animals can make a difference in people’s lives, “Pet Partners” has played an essential role in improving the health and well-being of others through the human-animal connection. This national organization makes millions of visits per year to hospitals, nursing/hospice homes, and schools bringing comfort and healing to those in need. Along with her husband Mike, Geralyn has worked with therapy animals for over 20 years.

“The Board is very happy to draw attention to all the contributions that Geralyn and “Pet Partners” have made. We are hopeful this awareness in our county will aid in their mission of benefitting the lives of some of our most vulnerable people and at times when they need help most,” stated Commission President John Hamercheck. Commissioner John Plecnik added, “Out four-legged friends greatly reduce stress and anxiety so the benefits are clear.”

In regards to Childhood Apraxia Speech (CAS), Monica Karpovitch asked the Board if they would acknowledge “Apraxia Awareness Day” in order to get the word out about this complicated speech disorder that affects 1 out of every 1000 children. As a mother to Joshua, her 7-year-old son diagnosed with CAS, she understands firsthand the struggles that are associated with this condition. Children like Joshua generally have a good understanding of language and while they may know what they want to say, they have difficulty learning or carrying out the complex series of movements required for intelligible speech. She feels it is important for everyone to know that this can result in children struggling to grow friendships with their peers due to this lack of communication and her hope is this resolution will unite community members, along with friends and family, with children who have CAS. Monica is a volunteer with “Apraxia Kids”; an organization in Lake County dedicated to raising awareness.

Commissioner Hamercheck explained, “Our hope is that getting this resolution on the record and acknowledging this condition will, in essence, give a voice to the voiceless. Every child desires communication and deserves to be heard.” “It is our job as community leaders, neighbors, friends, and family to take an active and supportive role in advocating for these children whose only desire is to have the opportunity all other children have; a true connection with others,” included Commissioner Plecnik.

Pet Therapy Resolution

Apraxia Resolution

_For more information about these organizations, you can visit “Pet Partners” at petpartners.org or “Apraxia Kids” at apraxia-kids.org._

_From the left: Commissioner Plecnik, Mike with dog Wyatt, Geralyn with cat Pearl and Commissioner Hamercheck_

_From the left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Dale, Monica and Joshua, Commissioner John Hamercheck_

**Commissioners Celebrate National Foster Parent Appreciation Month in May**

PAINESVILLE, OH, May 5, 2022 – May is recognized nationally as Foster Parent Appreciation Month. The Lake County Department of Job and Family Services is proud to recognize and express appreciation for the 44 licensed foster homes in our county.

Fos­ter par­ents are ordi­nary peo­ple who do extra­or­di­nary things for children in our community. Foster parents provide comfort, understanding, and safety to children who have oftentimes experienced trauma.

May is a time to recognize these unsung heroes in our community. “Fos­ter par­ent­ing can be chal­leng­ing, and fos­ter par­ents deserve our support and recognition each and every day. We are extremely grateful to our fos­ter par­ents who do their best to cre­ate sta­ble, safe and healthy envi­ron­ments for children to grow and thrive,” said Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar.

The Lake County Department of Job and Family Services’ foster parents are fortunate to receive continued support and recognition from the Lake County Commissioners each May and this year has been no different. During their May 5, 2022, meeting, the Lake County Commissioners graciously passed a resolution declaring May 2022 as National Foster Parent Appreciation Month.Please click here to read the entire press release

Click here to view the resolution.

_Picture: from the left Commissioner John Plecnik; Assistant Administrator Foster Care Adoption Alison Tomaselli; Lake County Job & Family Services Director Suzanne Casar; Kelly Kolberg social worker for Lake County Children’s Services; and Commissioner John Hamercheck_

**Recent Efforts Conducted by Lake County Treasurer’s Office in Regards to Tax Collection**

The Lake County Treasurer’s Office is reporting that, as of this year, they have already contacted delinquent taxpayers for the first half collection period. In the past, delinquent taxpayers were not contacted until after the second half of collection.

In addition to working with the Lake County Information Technology Department for assistance in collecting taxpayer contact information, Treasurer Mike Zuren spoke with Treasurers in other Ohio counties to garner knowledge of their processes. “Taking a proactive approach to assisting delinquent homeowners with options and grant programs has significantly increased tax collections. The Lake County Treasurer’s Office is here to help residents who are facing financial difficulties. We offer a variety of repayment options and diligently strive to share grant program information with homeowners,” stated Zuren. He explained how repayment options were offered to those individuals along with information regarding various grant programs that are available

“Treasurer Zuren’s initiative is a bold and worthy endeavor,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “His resourcefulness and efforts are helping to reduce delinquency and increase tax dollar collections for the benefit of Lake County and its residents.”Please click here to read the entire press release.

**County Commissioners Schedule Event Honoring Former Colleagues**

The Board of Commissioners will be holding an event on May 12th, 2022 to honor all former Lake County Commissioners. Previous commissioners are invited to attend the event that will recognize (79) present and past Commissioners who faithfully dedicated their time and service in representing Lake County citizens for over 180 years.

County government plays a critical role in all Ohioans° lives and the role of a county commissioner is numerous and varied. They act as the administrative division of their states and when the state and federal government enact laws, the counties are responsible for implementing them. They are also faced with the task of approving budgets and maintaining sufficient revenue to administer the government and provide services to their constituents through the adoption of the annual county budget.

“This recognition is well-deserved as these individuals have served with distinction, some of them for many years,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck, “On behalf of Lake County, this Board is proud to commend their leadership and legacy,” he continued. Please click here to view the entire press release.

**FINANCIAL LITERACY COURSE OFFERED FOR STUDENTS**

**_Lake County— Spring 2022_** Lake County Treasurer, Michael Zuren and Lake County Auditor, Christopher Galloway are excited to announce the launch of a Financial Literacy course geared towards middle and high school-aged students. The course topics will include planning and goals, career preparation, spending and credit, consumer protection, income, money management, saving and investing, and risk management. Please click here to view the entire press release.

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS PROVIDE ADDITIONAL RESOURCES TO THE PROSECUTOR’S OFFICE**

The Lake County Commissioners recently approved a request for additional prosecutors and staff for the Lake County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office, which represents an additional investment of approximately $250,000 per budget year. The request was submitted during the 2022 budget hearings conducted in February, where County Prosecutor Charles E. Coulson requested two additional Assistant Prosecutors, one Legal Secretary, and one Victim’s Advocate.

“Today’s announcement by the Board to increase funding for the County Prosecutor’s Office shows their commitment to public safety and support for law enforcement. The Prosecutor’s Office has experienced its highest caseload ever. Additionally, due to increases in technology and new multiple sources of evidence the complexity and the difficulty in prosecuting each case have increased. And most, unfortunately, there has been a significant increase in criminal violence and the use of firearms. Commissioner John Plecnik has been an advocate and supporter of my office and instrumental in recognizing our budgetary needs. The additional prosecutors, a secretary, and a victim advocate are important to keeping Lake County safe. I also want to acknowledge appreciation for Commissioner President Hamercheck and Commissioner Young for this unanimous support of my office,” said Prosecutor Coulson. Please click here to view the entire press release.

Commissioner John Plecnik and Prosecutor Charles Coulson discussed current issues with Lake County’s victim’s advocates.

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND CITY OF EASTLAKE APPROVE CLUBHOUSE UPGRADES FOR LAKE COUNTY CAPTAINS STADIUM**

Eastlake City Council unanimously approved an American Rescue Plan (ARPA) agreement with the Board of Commissioners at the April 27, 2022, Council meeting. The agreement, approved by the Commissioners on April 14, 2022, will fund clubhouse upgrades using the Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds (SLFRF) program.

Recent guidance from Major League Baseball (MLB) has mandated a series of renovations/upgrades to the Club House and other ancillary items. As noted in the “Captains Stadium Renovation” document, “Major League Baseball (MLB) has instituted player safety protocols to reduce the potential for contact spreading of the COVID-19 virus.” This project will address those concerns. The estimated cost is $3.6m. Project costs will be finalized after public bidding in accordance with Federal procurement procedures.

“The Commissioners fully realize the importance of local attractions and quality of life amenities as it relates to the economic growth of Lake County.Having a beautiful facility and professional baseball in Lake County will continue to assist in the attraction of new residents, businesses, and visitors to our area,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.Please click here to view the entire press release.

Eastlake Mayor Dennis Morley and Council President John Meyers presented County Commissioners John R. Hamercheck and John Plecnik “keys to the City” in appreciation of the County’s commitment to the City and the Lake County Captains.

**LOCAL OFFICIALS PARTICIPATE IN EARTH DAY CELEBRATION**

PAINESVILLE, OH, April 25, 2022 — County Commissioners John Hamercheck and John Plecnik, along with County Treasurer Michael Zuren, participated in an Earth Day celebration at Parkside Elementary in Painesville.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONER RON YOUNG ANNOUNCES RETIREMENT: COLLEAGUES REFLECT ON HIS CAREER IN PUBLIC SERVICE**

Today, Lake County Commissioner Ron Young announced his retirement from his seat on the Board of Lake County Commissioners. His final date of service is set for May 4 this year. He has served Lake County first as a State Representative from 1997 to 2004. After being term-limited in 2004, he returned to running his business TES Inc. TES is a professional placement firm Young founded in 1982 and that is now run by his daughter in Texas. In 2010 Young was re-elected State Representative and served another four terms. After winning his election in 2018, he became Lake County Commissioner in January of 2019.Please click here to read the entire news release.

Commissioner Ron Young

**CLEAN & GREEN LOGO CONTEST WINNERS ANNOUNCED**

Lake County’s Solid Waste District is pleased to announce the winners of their annual Clean and Green Logo Contest. Area students were encouraged to design a logo showcasing the theme “Clean and Green Lake County” which promotes recycling and anti-littering education. The Lake County Solid Waste District oversees the Landfill and Recycling Center in Painesville Township.

Rees Erickson, a fifth-grade student at The School of Innovation in the Willoughby-Eastlake School District, won the elementary division and the overall prize for her design entry themed, “Help Keep Lake County Clean & Green.” As the top winner, Rees’s design will be displayed in the Lake County Commissioner’s area in the County Administration Building located in downtown Painesville. Additionally, her design will be used for marketing materials for the Solid Waste District and the Utilities Department.

Other winners were Middle School Division Winner, Cameron Adkins from Eastlake Middle School and High School Division Winner, Haley Horen from Lake Catholic High School.

Elementary School Division Honorable Mentions listed in alphabetically order:

*   Molly Canfield – Madison North Elementary; Raegan Huffman – Parkside Elementary; Brynley Schneider – School of Innovation; Rosalie Siegel – Parkside Elementary

Middle School Division Honorable Mentions listed in alphabetically order:

*   Charlie Gallman – Wickliffe Middle School; Luci Hinde – School of Innovation; Lailah Lewis-Kerslake – Wickliffe Middle School; Kaiten Schultz – Shore Middle School;

High School Division Honorable Mentions listed in alphabetically order:

*   Jillian Haith – South High School; Sara Hussain – South High School; Mallory Mosnik – North High School; Jason Renaud – South High School

Thank you to all 875 student artists who submitted entries from thirteen elementary schools, six middle schools, and five local high schools.Please click here to view the entire news release.

COMMISSIONERS APPOINT MATTHEW HEBEBRAND TO LAKELAND COMMUNITY COLLEGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES

PAINESVILLE, OH, April 21, 2022 — The Lake County Board of Commissioners is unanimously voted to appoint Matthew Hebebrand to the Lakeland Community College Board of Trustees. Mr. Hebebrand will complete the unexpired term previously held by 14-year Trustee Ryan Callender who recently resigned after moving to Cuyahoga County. A City of Painesville resident, Mr. Hebebrand will complete the current term that expires March 6, 2026.

“Mr. Hebebrand’s experience as an attorney will provide valuable insight and leadership to the Board of Trustees. I want to extend my appreciation to Mr. Callender for his commitment to Lakeland Community College,” said Commission President John Hamercheck.

The Board of Commissioners appoints six of the nine members of the college’s Board of Trustees. The Governor appoints the remaining three all of which are five-year terms.Please click here to view the entire press release.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS CELEBRATE “NATIONAL COUNTY GOVERNMENT MONTH**

PAINESVILLE, OH, April 21, 2022 — The Lake County Board of Commissioners is recognizing April as “National County Government Month” in an effort to highlight the work that is done every day to improve the lives of our residents and to celebrate those who make it all possible.

The Ohio Constitution defines a structure of county government that is organized around elected officials consisting of a 3-member Board of Commissioners, along with a Prosecutor, Auditor, Treasurer, Recorder, Engineer, Clerk of Courts, Sheriff, and Coroner. Lake County also supports the Court of Common Pleas (General Division, Domestic Relations Division, Probate Division, and Juvenile Division).

“Lake County is home to over 232,00 residents and not everyone realizes all the roles that county government plays on a daily basis,” stated Board President John Hamercheck, “and this designation is intended to recognize the professional efforts of our fellow public servants and staff.”Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Commissioner John Plecnik Gets First Hand View of Ohio Means Jobs Lake County**

April 18, 2022, Commissioner Plecnik toured the Ohio Means Jobs (OMJ) Lake County Career Center as well as the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services (JFS).

OhioMeansJobs Lake County is a group of public, private, and non-profit agencies and partner organizations that have joined forces to create a coordinated system to provide workforce services to employers and job seekers. Staff members are eager to determine and immediately address the needs of every customer entering the Career Center.

“I am grateful to JFS Director Suzanne Casar and Workforce Development Director Cory Vojak for their continued commitment to providing the necessary programs and tools to ensure quality and sustainable employment opportunities for our job seekers and employers,” noted Commissioner John Plecnik.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**BOARD APPROVES PETIT & GRAND JURORS COMPENSATION INCREASE**

The judges of the General Division of the Lake County Court of Common Pleas reached out to the Lake County Board of Commissioners for approval of a resolution to raise the per diem compensation of petit and grand jurors from the current rate of $15 per day to a new rate of $25 per day.

“Jury duty is one of the most important civic responsibilities someone can perform,” stated Commission President John R. Hamercheck, “and with the role of a juror being so vital to our system of justice, it was an easy decision to approve the court’s request for an increase,” he continued.

The Ohio Revised Code, Sections 2939.04 and 2313.22(A), authorizes Boards to fix compensation for jury service payable out of the county treasury, and the resolution was unanimously approved at the April 7t h meeting of the Board of Commissioners.

Judge Eugene Lucci, the administrative judge of the court, stated that “although jury service is both a legal obligation and a civic duty required by our American republican system of government, raising the fees is only a small gesture of appreciation for the necessary sacrifice provided by jurors.”Please click here to read the entire news release.

**LAKE COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ANNOUNCE FACEBOOK PAGE**

The Lake County Board of Commissioners is excited to announce our Lake County, Ohio official Facebook page ( @lakecountyohiousa ). This page will be used to communicate to citizens the programs and services offered by the County and general news and updates from the Commissioners’ Office. “Having a more visible social media presence in 2022 is vital to serving our citizens to the best of our abilities, and I encourage all the citizens of Lake County to follow the page,” stated Commissioner John Plecnik. Initially, the page will be used to showcase the Emergency Rental Assistance Program but will expand to showcase all of the programs and services offered to Lake County residents over time. **“I**look forward to showcasing the work of our staff through social media and expanding access to the programs the County provides to our citizens,” stated Commissioner John Hamercheck. Commissioner Ron Young added, “I want to thank my colleague, Commissioner Plecnik, and staff for taking up the mantle on this initiative. I look forward to our office using social media to modernize the County’s service delivery model moving forward.” https://www.facebook.com/LakeCountyOhioUSA/

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS ANNOUNCE GRANTS TO SUPPORT LAKE COUNTY EVENTS**

PAINESVILLE, OH, April 14, 2022 — The Lake County Board of Commissioners, at its April 14, 2022 meeting, agreed to appropriate funds from the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) to support nearly 40 different events that will take place in Lake County in 2022.

Over the past two years, due to the Covid-19 pandemic, events across the county had to be canceled, postponed, and/or modified in the interest of public safety. These unavoidable changes caused significant financial hardships for the organizations and communities who work tirelessly to host great events, large and small, that Lake County residents and visitors from outside the area look forward to attending every year.

The County is partnering with the Lake County Visitors Bureau, Remarkable Lake County, OH, to direct these funds. Remarkable Lake County promotes travel and tourism for the County and has its own Arts & Culture Grant program, introduced a Community Events Grant program in 2021, and has long-supported major events that bring in thousands of visitors from outside the region. Remarkable Lake County scores and evaluates applications and awards grants based upon criteria such as the number of overnight visitors, the total number of attendees, and the value the event adds to Lake County’s Arts & Culture scene. Please click here to read the entire news release.

**LAKE COUNTY BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE CONDUCTS SECOND MEETING**

The Lake County Treasurer’s Office, along with the Board of Lake County Commissioners, welcomed a new group of local businesses, chamber representatives, and government officials to the second meeting of the “Lake County Business Roundtable Discussion Series” on Wednesday, April 6th. The roundtable discussions serve as an open forum for local businesses to share their experiences over the previous two years and provide their opinions on improving the local business environment.

In addition to the County Commissioners, representatives from various other County agencies including the Lake Development Authority, Planning, and Community Development, and Council on Aging were in attendance to answer questions and address concerns presented by the business community. Topics included but were not limited to, workforce, resource collaboration, real estate trends, and overall economic conditions.

10 local businesses, ranging from daycare to manufacturing to real estate, spoke on current concerns and issues they are experiencing given the current economy and pandemic aftereffects and they vocalized what their needs are.

“Today’s meeting was another opportunity to meet even more businesses and I continue to be impressed with the turnout we have received,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “These individuals offered some invaluable input that will greatly impact the future success of other Lake County businesses.”Please click here to view the entire news release.

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS SELECT DESIGN PROFESSIONAL FOR PROPOSED PUBLIC SAFETY CENTER**

The Lake County Commissioners passed a resolution on April 7, 2022, to enter contract negotiations with HOK for the new Lake County Public Safety Center, which includes the Sheriff’s Office, Road Patrol, Correction Officers, and Court Services. HOK firm was recommended unanimously to the Commissioners by the Selection Committee over three different firms. The selection committee consisted of:

Commissioners John R. Hamercheck

Commissioner John Plecnik

Commissioner Ron Young

Sheriff Frank Leonbruno

Captain Cynthia Brooks (Corrections)

Chief Craig Berry (Adult Probation)

Jason Boyd, County Administrator

Paul Stefanko, Telecommunications Director

Mark lafelice, Buildings and Grounds Superintendent

The HOK team will be responsible for the programming phase and criteria architectural services which will provide the foundation for the project moving forward.

“Since 2012, the Commissioner’s and Sheriff’s Offices have been proactively analyzing the current Sheriff’s Office and jail. After much review, research and deliberation, I fully support the concept of a new facility. Today’s action is the first of many steps needed to ultimately construct a new comprehensive mixed-use facility that addresses the needs of the Sheriff, Adult Probation, and our Courts. Unfortunately, the current facility was poorly designed and functionally obsolete the day the County took possession of the facility,” said Commissioner President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to read the entire news release.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS DECLARE THE WEEK OF APRIL 3-9, 2022, NATIONAL LIBRARY WEEK IN LAKE COUNTY, OHIO**

PAINESVILLE, OH, April 7, 2022 – Lake County Commissioners declare the week of April 3-9, 2022, as National Library Week in Lake County, Ohio. It is the time of year when communities acknowledge the positive impact of libraries, promote our local libraries and their staff, and wholeheartedly thank our libraries for the role they play in transforming lives and strengthening communities.

National Library Week started in 1958 and is observed by libraries across the country during April. The theme for this year’s celebration is “Connect With Your Library.” This week is a chance to learn more about what our Lake County libraries offer the community. The library is no longer just for books, but so much more.

Libraries are places where communities connect to things like broadband, computers, programs and classes, books, movies, video games, and more. But most importantly, libraries connect us to each other.Please click here to view the entire news release.Resolution.

The Lake County Board of Commissioners and Library Directors from throughout the County celebrate National Library Week.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS DECLARE THE WEEK OF APRIL 10-16, 2022, NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATORS WEEK IN LAKE COUNTY, OHIO**

PAINESVILLE, OH, April 7, 2022 – Lake County Commissioners declare the week of April 10-16, 2022, as National Telecommunicators Week in Lake County, Ohio. Established in 1994, when President William J. Clinton signed Presidential Proclamation 6667 declaring the second week of April National Telecommunicators Week. This week is a time to celebrate and thank our dispatchers / telecommunications. These outstanding professionals serve our Lake County communities and citizens, as well as public safety personnel, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. In 2021, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office Central Communications division handled _147,203_ emergency 911 calls. In addition to the noted 911 call volume, Central Communications also answered _187,082_ non-911 calls. This includes all non-emergency needs for service and public assistance. In total, Central Communications fielded _334,285_ calls in 2021!

The Lake County Sheriff’s Office operates the Central Communications Center at 8505 Garfield Rd. in Kirtland, Ohio. This facility is the primary 911 answering center for all cellular calls made in Lake County. This state-of-the-art facility utilizes advanced technology to provide emergency services and basic calls for service to the citizens of Lake County. This facility is also the primary dispatch center for 21 police and fire agencies throughout Lake County. This consists of twelve (12) law enforcement agencies and nine (9) Fire/EMS agencies.

“We thank our Lake County Telecommunicators and Dispatchers, not only here at the Lake County Sheriff’s office but at every dispatch center throughout Lake County, for their service and commitment. They are the first voice you hear when you call for help and it is their calm during the storm that gets help started your way,” said Lake County Sheriff Frank Leonbruno.Please click here to read the entire press release.Resolution

From the Left: Sheriff Leonbruno, Commissioner Plecnik, Captain Bachnicki, Commissioner Hamercheck, Captain Brooks, Chief Deputy Sherwood, and Commissioner Young

**STATE APPROVES $11.3 MILLION IN FUNDS FOR LAKE COUNTY DREDGING FACILITY**_New facility will allow dredging of Fairport Harbor to be re-instated_

PAINESVILLE, OH – On April 4 th, 2022, the State of Ohio’s Office of Budget and Management Controlling Board authorized $47 million to fund the construction of Sediment Recycling Facilities across the State of Ohio. Sometimes called a confined placement facility, they are specifically designed for the containment of contaminated dredged material from Lake Erie that provides control of potential releases of contaminants to the environment. Lake County will receive $11.3 million in funding to construct its facility in Painesville Township, which is planned to be operational this fall.

The need for these facilities was prompted by ORC 6111.32 which bans the disposal of dredged sediment from federal navigation channels into Lake Erie. As a result, the dredging of the Grand River in Fairport Harbor came to a halt last year. “That action posed a significant economic problem for the County,” stated David Anderson, Executive Director of the Lake Development Authority. “This is Lake County’s only commercial port. Losing the ability to conduct maritime commerce threatens about 170 jobs and over $371 million of commodities handled through the port each year.” Please click here to view the entire news release.

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS DECLARE APRIL 2022 AS CHILD ABUSE PREVENTION MONTH**

PAINESVILLE, OH, March 31, 2022 – Lake County Commissioners Declare April as Child Abuse Prevention Month April is National Child Abuse Prevention Month here in Lake County and across the country. It is the time of year when cities and states acknowledge the devastating impact of child abuse and neglect.

Unfortunately, child abuse and neglect occur in Lake County, too. The Lake County Department of Job and Family Services has the responsibility and authority to provide protective services to children residing in Lake County. During the year 2021 alone, Social Workers from the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services responded to over 1,900 calls concerning the safety of children. As a result, staff worked with approximately 1,000 children who presented with a variety of needs requiring the assistance of the agency.

“Our social workers are dedicated to investigating allegations of child abuse and neglect and protecting the most vulnerable members of our community. We are grateful to the concerned citizens and mandated reporters who call our child abuse hotline to report their concerns regarding the safety of a child,” said Job and Family Services Director Suzanne Casar.Please click here to read the entire news release.

From left: Mary Udics, Suzanne Casar, Shayna Jackson, Commissioner Plecnik, Doug Battisti, Majorie Battisti, Amber Thomas, Commissioner Hamercheck, and Commissioner Young

**LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS RECOGNIZE NATIONAL VOLUNTEER WEEK**

This year, National Volunteer Week is recognized from April 17-23. Established by the United States government in 1974, National Volunteer Week seeks to encourage volunteerism and salute the services of the volunteers who have given countless hours for the betterment of their communities. “This is an opportunity to celebrate volunteers and recognize their impact on building stronger communities,” said Commissioner John R. Hamercheck. “Simply put, volunteers keep many services in Lake County running.”

The Lake County Volunteer Network, a division of the Board of Commissioners, in partnership with the Lake County Council on Aging and the Lake County Visitor’s Bureau, is recognizing volunteers for National Volunteer Week by offering discounted coupons to several Lake County businesses and organizations.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE MEETING ANNOUNCED: APRIL 6, 2022**

The Lake County Treasurer’s Office and Board of Lake County Commissioners will be holding the next meeting of the “Lake County Business Roundtable Discussion Series” on April 6th, 2022 at 8:00 a.m.

The roundtable discussion series serves as an open forum for local businesses to share their recent experiences and provide opinions and assistance on improving our business community. Topics include, but are not limited to, workforce, resource collaboration, supply chain concerns, and overall economic conditions. The second meeting will include approximately ten local businesses including real estate and banking professionals.

“We were thrilled with the response we received from the inaugural meeting in February,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck, “and I look forward to hearing from even more local Lake County businesses on the 6 t h” he continued.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**JAMES A. GARFIELD HISTORIC SITE TO HOST UPCOMING EASTER EGG ROLL**

**PAINESVILLE, OH,**March 29, 2022 —The James A. Garfield National Historic Site will be holding an Easter Egg Roll on Monday, April 18 th from 1:00-3:00 pm (weather permitting). Hosted by First Lady Lucretia Garfield, this free, family-friendly event includes various activities, egg hunts, and a visit from the Easter Bunny in addition to the egg roll. Origami artists will be also be featured along with balloon twisters.

As one of the oldest and most beloved events in presidential history, children have enjoyed gathering on the west grounds of the U.S. Capitol building to roll decorated hard-boiled eggs down the terraced lawn for over 140 years and the egg hunt at Garfield’s site is modeled after that tradition. Although Garfield was only President for 200 days, he participated in the White House Egg Roll in 1881.

“We are proud to recognize Lake County as the home of President Garfield and I look forward to the annual Egg Roll that is held there; one of their most attended events,” said Lake County Commissioner. John Plecnik. It typically draws over 500 participants every year. Plecnik will be in attendance this year to present certificates to the event winners.Please click here to view the entire news release.

Lake County Commissioners Proclaim March 21-27, 2022 National Agricultural Week in Lake County, Ohio
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Posted on March 24, 2022

PAINESVILLE, OH, March 24, 2022 – Lake County Farm Bureau volunteers recently visited with the Lake County Commissioners to promote agriculture in celebration of National Agriculture Day and National Agriculture Week where the Lake County Commissioners issued a proclamation in honor of National Agriculture Week. The proclamation states “American agriculture is the foundation of our country. It’s the backbone of a healthy and prosperous nation, made possible by the hard work of America’s farms and farm families.Please click here to view the entire press release.Please click here to view the resolution.

From the left: Commissioner John Hamercheck, Lake County Farm Bureau Trustee Samantha Bly, Board Trustee Stephanie Woodman Sufka, Organization Director Mandy Orahood, Trustee on the Board and Public Policy Action Team Leader Eric Cotton, Commissioner John Hamercheck, and Commissioner Ron Young.

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize Volunteer Heroes**

On Thursday, March 17, 2022, the Board of Lake County Commissioners recognized Lake County Volunteer Network volunteer Sue Huber for receiving the Lakeland Community College Women’s Center Woman of Achievement Award. The 2022 awards were focused on honoring women who have led with light.

Sue Huber led with light by dedicating her time and talents as a senior to serving other seniors in need. She volunteers at the Lake County Council on Aging Mentor Meals on Wheels in the kitchen to keep seniors living safely and independently in their own homes, she serves as a volunteer guardian for three individuals in nursing homes, and she registered people for COVID vaccines at the Health District COVID hotline. She recently added volunteering at the Lake Humane Society assisting animals in need. For fun, Sue leads with light by volunteering her time at the Lake Metroparks in a variety of roles to ensure there are quality programs for all ages and abilities. Most people may volunteer for one agency, but Sue is volunteering at four agencies, and in each volunteer position she is making a significant impact on others. Sue volunteered all through the pandemic, never missing a beat! Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Board of Commissioners Proclaim March 2022 Developmental Disabilities Awareness Month**

PAINESVILLE, OH, March 17, 2022 – An estimated 4.7 million Americans have an intellectual or developmental disability. Some of these may include autism, down syndrome, and cerebral palsy, to name a few. These conditions can cause an impairment in areas like language, learning, and physical behavior. In order to highlight and empower these individuals and their contributions, the Lake County Board of Commissioners, at their March 17, 2022 meeting, has proclaimed March “Developmental Disabilities Awareness Month” in Lake County.

Throughout the years, thousands of people with developmental disabilities have been supported by their families, friends, neighbors, and co-workers, and this year, the Board of Commissioners are encouraging everyone in the Lake County community to enrich, engage, and to stand “Side By Side” to provide vital support and resources to these incredible people. One of the most effective ways to increase awareness is through active participation in community activities that will enrich their lives by showing how much they are supported.Please click here to view the entire news release.Please click here to view the resolution.

**County Commissioners Passed Balanced Budget**

The Lake County Commissioners unanimously passed a balanced county budget for 2022 at the March 17, meeting.

The Commissioners, under the direction of Finance Director Michael Matas, worked diligently with the elected officials and department heads to successfully create balanced and sustainable budgets for the inside and outside general funds.

“I would like to personally thank Finance Director Matas and his staff for preparing a fiscally conservative budget that continues to meet the increased demands and services that our local businesses and residents expect in Lake County,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

The County General Fund is the chief operating fund of the County and accounts for the financial resources required to administer daily operations with exception of those funds required by the Ohio Revised Code to be recorded in other accounts. The 2022 General Fund revenue is projected to be $61,237,875 representing a 7.7% increase from the 2021 budget. The estimated revenues are attributed primarily to a stronger local economy, which is resulting in a projected increase in sales tax and conveyance fees due to the real estate market. Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Lake County Elected Officials Announce the “Academic Excellence Award”**

PAINESVILLE, OH, March 15, 2022 – County Commissioners John Hamercheck, John Plecnik, and Ron Young, along with Lake County Treasurer Michael Zuren and County Auditor Chris Galloway, are proud to announce that they will be sponsoring the “Academic Excellence Award” to Lake County students who have received all A’s for the full calendar year.

“On behalf of my fellow elected officials, I want to congratulate our wonderful students throughout Lake County who have exhibited a tremendous work ethic during what has been a challenging couple of years. Their commitment to excellence will help create future leaders in our communities,” said Treasurer Michael Zuren.

Please click here to read the entire news release.

**Board of Commissioners Honor Eastlake Mayor Dennis Morley; President of the Lake County Mayors and Managers Association**

PAINESVILLE, OH, March 11, 2022 – On Monday, February 28 th, at the most recent meeting of the Lake County Mayors and Managers Association, Eastlake Mayor Dennis Morley was recognized for his commitment and dedication to the organization.

Morley has begun serving his 4 th term as President of the association that was established as a means for Lake County mayors and managers to meet, share ideas and resources, and familiarize themselves with each other’s communities. He responded, “It is my pleasure to serve with so many professionals and elected officials. We have worked through many difficulties over the last few years and am humbled by the resolution from the commissioners.” Please click here to read the entire news release.

**Lake County Business Roundtable Unites Business and Local Leaders in Successful First Meeting**

The Lake County Treasurer’s Office and Board of Lake County Commissioners welcomed two dozen local businesses, chamber representatives, and government officials to the inaugural meeting of the “Lake County Business Roundtable Discussion Series”. The roundtable served as an open forum for local businesses to share their experiences over the previous 18 months and provide opinions on improving the local business environment.

In addition to the County Commissioners, representatives from various other County agencies, including the Lake Development Authority, Planning and Community Development, and the Department of Utilities were in attendance to answer questions and address concerns presented by the business community.

“Today’s meeting was a great opportunity for me to simply listen and absorb first-hand all the needs, ideas, and expectations of our business community,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. “I am so pleased by the turnout and enthusiasm represented here today that has further educated our Board along with other county departments. We have no doubt that Lake County businesses will continue to rebound and ultimately set the stage for even more new ones to join our community.”Please click here to view the entire news release.

__________________________________

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS PROCLAIM THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 2022 “JAMES A. GARFIELD MONTH” IN LAKE COUNTY**

PAINESVILLE, OH, February 17, 2022 – The Lake County Board of Commissioners has proclaimed February as “James A. Garfield” month in Lake County. “It is an honor to dedicate this month to the life and legacy of James A. Garfield. We are proud to recognize Lake County as his home for several years until his untimely death,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

As the last of the log cabin presidents, James A. Garfield was born in Cuyahoga County in 1831 and made Ohio his home for all but his college years. In 1876, while serving in the U.S. House of Representatives, he and his wife Lucretia purchased their farm in Mentor, referred to as Lawnfield, named for the many reporters camped out on the lawns around the house. Shortly thereafter, Garfield began to expand their home to accommodate their five children who they taught how to farm. During a three-year period, the home was enlarged from nine rooms to 20, a porch was added onto the front, and the interior was refurbished.

“The life of James Garfield was tragically cut short, but beyond impactful. From humble beginnings, President Garfield attacked political corruption and changed the United States and the entire world in his roles as Minister, Professor, State Senator, Congressman, General, and President. That is why his fellow Lake Countians admire President Garfield to this day,” said Commissioner John Plecnik.Please click here to view the entire press release.Please click here to view the resolution.

During the February 17, 2022 Commissioners Meeting Todd Arrington, Site Manager of the James A. Garfield National Historic Site in Mentor, Ohio, was presented with a resolution from the Commissioners proclaiming February 2022 as National James A. Garfield Month in Lake County, Ohio.

_________________________________

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS PROCLAIMED FEBRUARY 7 TH-14 TH “CONGENITAL HEART DEFECT AWARENESS WEEK”** I**N LAKE COUNTY**

PAINESVILLE, OH, February 17, 2022 – The Lake County Board of Commissioners proclaimed the week of February 7 th– 14 th“Congenital Heart Defect Awareness” week in Lake County. CHDs are present at birth and can affect the structure of a heart and the way it works. It affects how blood flows through the heart and out to the rest of the body. They can vary from mild (a small hole in the heart) to severe (missing or poorly formed parts of the heart).

Thousands of patients and families are affected and/or impacted by congenital heart defects; the number one birth defect in the United States, affecting 1 in every 100 births amounting to approximately 2 million Americans living with congenital heart defects. Currently, there is no cure for CHD and it is a lifelong disease requiring ongoing specialized care. “As fewer than 10% of adults with CHD receive recommended care, it is crucial that individuals planning a family, fetal clinicians, obstetric physicians, pediatricians, and others in the medical field have a greater understanding of the potential for congenital heart defects,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.Please click here to view the news release in its entirety.Please click here to view the resolution.

From the Left: Commissioner Plecnik, Gabriella-Marie Dettrey, April-Marie Hubbard, Commissioner Hamercheck, and Commissioner Young presenting the resolution proclaiming Congenital Heart Defect Awareness Week in Lake County.

——————————————————–

All buildings under the jurisdiction of the Lake County, Ohio County Commissioners will be closing at 12:00 pm today (Feb. 3, 2022). The offices will open tomorrow at 8:00 am unless notified.

Stay Safe.

COMMISSIONERS APPR**OVE LIGHTING UPGRADES FOR LAKE COUNTY CAPTAINS STADIUM**

The Board of Commissioners, at is January 27, 2022 meeting, authorized an agreement with the City of Eastlake to fund lighting upgrades using the Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds (SLFRF) program, a part of the American Rescue Plan (ARPA).

In 2020, the Lake County Captains Stadium went dark as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. It could not have hit at a worst possible time for the Captains as their last games were played Labor Day weekend of 2019 and facility planning was in progress to stay in compliance with Major League Baseball.

As the owner of the baseball facility, the City of Eastlake is tasked with maintaining the stadium. The COVID-19 pandemic placed a significant economic burden on the operating revenues associated with the City of Eastlake and the Captains. Please click here to view the entire news release.

**MILLION-DOLLAR MILESTONE FOR LAKE COUNTY GENERAL FUND**

The Lake County Commissioners expect efficiency and transparency with local taxpayer money entrusted to Lake County and the efforts of Recorder Becky Lynch were highlighted during a recent budget hearing with the Board.

Commission President John R. Hamercheck said, “Becky Lynch’s proactive budgeting approach and constant communication with the Commissioner’s Office continues to be the model for a unified approach when working within the County’s budget limits.”

At the Board of Commissioners budget Hearing on January 24, 2022, the Recorder program earned accolades from the Lake County Commissioners as she eclipsed a million-dollar milestone by reducing General Fund expenditures through a more efficient use of fees collected and responsible budgeting.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**BUSINESS RESOURCE NETWORK SUBGRANT FUNDING:** The Lake County Workforce Development Board was recently awarded $250,000 from the Business Resource Network (BRN) Subgrant funds through the State of Ohio. The purpose and spirit of this funding are to creatively expand business service teams, business outreach, and employer engagement. “As we continue to navigate through and out of the pandemic, we are learning and embracing additional ways to engage employers,” Commissioner John Hamercheck said. “We hope to use these grant dollars to expand the knowledge and reach of the services at OhioMeansJobs Lake County.”

Please click here to view the entire news release.

LAKE COUNTY COMMISSIONER JOHN R. HAMERCHECK APPOINTED PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD FOR NOACA; JACKSON STREET INTERCHANGE ANNOUNCED IN PAINESVILLE

On January 21, Lake County Commissioner John Hamercheck was unanimously voted to serve as President of the Northeast Ohio Areawide Coordinating Agency (NOACA), which is the transportation and environmental planning agency representing Lake, Cuyahoga, Geauga, Lorain, and Medina Counties. NOACA is the conduit for federal transportation dollars to Lake County. In the recent past, a majority of the funding for the Vrooman Road bridge and Vrooman Road resurfacing project in Perry and Leroy Townships came through NOACA. Today, the Jackson Street Interchange was announced by NOACA as one of their major upcoming projects in the City of Painesville.

Please click here to view the entire news release.

Board of Commissioners Recognize Willoughby Hills Councilwomen Fellows, Lenz, Majka and Pizmoht

Posted on December 30, 2021

The Lake County Board of Commissioners proudly recognized Nancy Fellows, Laura Lenz, Janet Majka, and Laura Pizmoht as the first City Council in the history of Lake County to have a board comprised of a majority of women. Collectively, they have served the City of Willoughby Hills with distinction since 2018.

Nancy Fellows was elected in 2001 and has continued to serve for 20 years. Janet Majka came on board in 2015, followed by Laura Pizmoht in 2017. Once Laura Lenz began in 2018, the first women-majority board was officially in place.

“On behalf of the Board of County Commissioners and all of Lake County, I want to personally thank Nancy, Laura, Janet, and Laura for their commitment to public service,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck. Please click here to view the entire news release.

**The Commissioners recognized Home Instead- Mentor at their December 7 th meeting for their continued work in Lake County with the Be a Santa to a Senior program.**

The program supports older adults who may be overlooked, isolated, or alone during the holiday season. “We are pleased to participate again this year in the program to show older adults in Lake County that they are valued, especially during the holiday season,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

Home Instead partners with local organizations, such as the Board of Commissioners, to provide gifts to over 250 local seniors. Local agencies host a tree decorated with ornaments featuring seniors’ first names and gift or gift card suggestions. Holiday shoppers select an ornament and return the gift unwrapped with the ornament attached. Gifts are then delivered to seniors in time for the holidays. “This small act of kindness can make a big difference in the lives of our most vulnerable senior citizens,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. Please click here to view the news release.

Commissioner Plecnik, Commissioner Hamercheck, and Commissioner Young present Home Instead Executive Director Nancy Brothers with a certificate proclaiming “Be a Santa to a Senior” month in Lake County.

**Lake and Trumbull****Counties Win Opioid Litigation**

A jury of 12 individuals recently announced their verdict in favor of Lake and Trumbull Counties against Walmart, CVS, and Walgreens in the National Prescription Opioid Litigation. The verdict, announced in the United States District Court Northern District of Ohio Eastern Division, was read by Judge Dan Aaron Polster.

“On behalf of all the residents in Lake County who have been impacted by this epidemic, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the jurors who spent seven weeks listening to the impact opioids have had in our communities,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

The trial began on October 4, 2021, and included over 30 witnesses from the Counties and defendants. Lake and Trumbull Counties were selected by the Court as a bellwether trial, or a test case to gauge where future trials may end up. This lawsuit is one of thousands filed throughout the United States.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Lake County Department of Job & Family Services and Ohio Means Jobs Lake County Partnering with Sub Zero Mission**

The Lake County Department of Job and Family Services and Ohio Means Jobs Lake County are partnering with the Sub Zero Mission on Tuesday, November 23rd, 2021 to collect warming items for the homeless in Lake County. A “stuff the bus” event will take place outside of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services building located at 177 Main St. in Painesville from 11 AM – 1 PM. Individuals can stop by and drop their donations in the bus. Needed items include adult coats, boots, socks (new only), hats, gloves, sleeping bags, and tents. Barra de Taco Food truck will also be onsite at Lake County Department of Job and Family Services if you’d like to purchase lunch the day of the event.Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Third Township Accepts Lake County COPS Grant**

The Board of Lake County Commissioners approved the third COPS grant at their November 23, 2021 meeting. The Concord Township Trustees approved the contract on November 17, 2021 becoming the third township in the Sheriff’s patrol area to take advantage of this localized grant program. Concord will be hiring one (1) new deputy in a contract with the Lake County Sheriff’s Office. Additionally, they will accept an additional deputy sheriff paid for by the Commissioners to add to local patrol in Concord Township.

With the assistance of Clerk of Courts Faith Andrews, the Commissioners created the program to help immediately fund increased Sheriff’s Deputies in the townships by offering to provide a second deputy for every deputy added to current policing contracts.

“As with Perry and Painesville, I want to thank Concord Township for participating in the COPS grant and providing increased patrol in their ever-growing community,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Board of Commissioners Proclaim the Week of November 13-22, 2021 as National Hunger and Homelessness Awareness****Week**

PAINESVILLE, OH, November 18, 2021 – With more than 37 million Americans at risk of suffering from hunger and 3.5 million without shelter every year, the Board of Commissioners were proud to join the “National Coalition for the Homeless” and the “National Student Campaign Against Hunger and Homelessness” in proclaiming the week of November 13 th-22 nd as “National Hunger and Homelessness Awareness Week”. Please click here to view the entire news release.

From the left: Commissioner Plecnik, John Hutchison Grants and Communications Coordinator for Project Hope for the Homeless, Commissioner Hamercheck, and Commissioner Young

**Lake County Commissioners Vote for 25% Discount on Water and Sewer Bills for Low Income Senior Citizens**

In an effort to assist low-income senior citizens with utility costs, the Board of Lake County Commissioners and the Department of Utilities established a program to provide a 25% discount on water and sewer bills to all qualifying senior citizens. Commissioner John Plecnik proposed the senior discount earlier this year, which was unanimously adopted by the Board of Commissioners on November 18 th. Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Business Roundtable Meeting Announced** – The Lake County Treasurer’s Office and Board of Lake County Commissioners announce the “Lake County Business Roundtable Discussion Series.” The initial meeting of this planned series will be in early 2022.

The roundtable discussion will serve as an open forum for local businesses to share their experiences over the previous 18 months and provide opinions on improving the local business environment. Topics include, but are not limited to, workforce, resource collaboration, supply chain concerns, and overall economic conditions. In addition to the County Commissioners, representatives from the various County agencies and the Chamber of Commerce’s will be in attendance.

“Over the past year and a half, we have all had to rethink how we run our businesses. Large, small, independent or corporate, the COVID pandemic has changed the way businesses operate and Lake County wants to be receptive to their needs,” said Commission President John R. Hamercheck.

Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Lake County Commissioners and Clerk of Courts Announce Additional Sheriff Deputies in Painesville Township**

The Board of Lake County Commissioners approved the second COPS grant at their November 9, 2021 meeting. With the assistance of Clerk of Courts Faith Andrews, the Commissioners created the program to help immediately fund increased Sheriff’s Deputies in the townships by offering to provide a second deputy for every deputy added to current policing contracts.

The Painesville Township Trustees signed the contract and have become the second township in the Sheriff’s patrol area to take advantage of this localized grant program. The Painesville Township Trustees explained that they would be hiring two (2) new deputies in a contract with the Lake County Sheriff’s Office to patrol Painesville Township. Additionally, they will accept the second two (2) deputy sheriffs paid for by the Commissioners to add to local patrol in Painesville Township.

Please click here to read the entire news release.

**Lake County Commissioners Declare November as National Adoption Month**

National Adoption Month is recognized annually in November throughout the nation as a time to raise awareness about the urgent need for adoptive families for children and youth in foster care. At any given time, over 16,000 children in Ohio are being cared for away from their parents. While most of these children will eventually be reunited with biological family members, more than 3,000 children in the State of Ohio are currently waiting to be adopted and nearly 1,400 of them are teenagers. Please click here to read the entire news release.

The Lake County Commissioners present a resolution to Lake County Job & Family Services Director Suzanne Casar and the Supervisor of the Foster Care and Adoption Unit at Lake County Department of Job and Family Services Eugene Tetrick.

**County Commissioners and Treasurer Return Taxpayer Funds**

The Lake County Board of Commissioners, along with Treasurer Michael Zuren, announced a renewed effort to return surplus taxpayer funds to local property owners at the September 30, 2021 board meeting. The Treasurer’s Office, per the Ohio Revised Code, is responsible for a surplus overage account. Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Lake County Commissioners, Clerk of Courts, and Perry Township Trustees Announce Additional Road Patrol in Perry Township**

As crime has increased across the United States the Lake County Commissioners recognized the growing need for a stronger law enforcement presence across the townships. Recognizing the financial constraints of township government to address the immediate need for increased policing with limited revenue the Lake County Commissioners created a local COPS grant.

With the assistance of Clerk of Courts Faith Andrews they created a program to help immediately fund increased Sheriff’s Deputies in the townships by offering to provide a second deputy for every deputy added to current policing contracts. The program would continue to fund the additional deputy(s) for a period of four (4) years to enable enough time for the township to find alternative funding sources to assume the financial responsibility of the added deputies after four years.

Today the Perry Township Trustees announced that they would be the first township to take advantage of this localized grant program. The Perry Township Trustees explained that they would be hiring two (2) new deputies in a contract with the Lake County Sheriff’s Office to patrol Perry Township. Additionally, they would accept the second two (2) deputy sheriffs paid for by the Commissioners to add to local patrol in Perry Township. Their intent would be to then explore alternative funding sources to increase localized patrol throughout their area.

Please click here to view the entire news release.

**Willow Praise Church & Volunteers recognized by Lake County Board of Commissioners for providing over 23,000 lunches to children in need during COVID-19 Pandemic**

On Friday, August 13, 2021, the Board of Lake County Commissioners issued a formal Certificate of Recognition to Willow Praise Church and their volunteers for providing over 23,000 free lunches to children in need during the COVID-19 pandemic and government lockdowns. Commissioner John Plecnik presented the Certificate to Pastor Larry Bogrenrief and volunteer Michael Zuren at Willow Praise Church in Willowick. The Certificate thanks local businesses, churches, elected officials, nonprofits, and volunteers who came together in March 2020 to feed the hungry. Please click here to view the entire press release.

Please click here to view the certificate.

**COUNTY COMMISSIONERS CELEBRATE RECORD-BREAKING 2021 FAIR SEASON; THE BIGGEST COUNTY FAIR IN 169 YEARS**

PAINESVILLE, OH, August 12, 2021 – The Lake County Fair (held from July 27 th– August 1 st) was a phenomenal success with 133,384 people in attendance; a new record that surpassed the previous one set in 2001. In their August 12 th meeting, the Lake County Board of Commissioners issued a resolution honoring the Fair Board and staff who played such a key role in its success. Please click here to view the entire press release.

The Lake County Commissioners present a certificate of achievement to the Lake County Fair Board for a record-breaking season.

**LAKE COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS AND LAKE COUNTY GENERAL HEALTH DISTRICT PARTNER ON MOBILE MEDICAL CLINICS**

The Board of Lake County Commissioners has partnered with the Lake County General Health District to purchase a mobile medical unit for use throughout Lake County. The mobile medical unit will be used to help bring the COVID-19 vaccine to all areas of Lake County and ensure that all Lake County citizens have the opportunity to receive the COVID-19 vaccination. The mobile medical unit is accessible for individuals with physical disabilities and will allow the Lake County General Health District to better serve the whole community, including persons with disabilities and persons who are homebound. Please click here to view the entire press release.

**Commissioner John Plecnik graduates from Ohio Public Leadership Academy**

On Friday, July 16, 2021, the Board of Lake County Commissioners announced Commissioner John Plecnik graduated from the Ohio Public Leadership Academy for state and local elected officials at the John Glenn College of Public Affairs.

“Selection for the Ohio Public Leadership Academy is a great honor reserved for local leaders with the highest potential,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck, president of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. “It’s official, Commissioner John Plecnik is a rising star.”

The Glenn College is named for astronaut and U.S. Sen. John Glenn and is the public policy school at The Ohio State University. According to the Glenn College, “The Public Leadership Academy brings together a bipartisan group of rising Ohio elected officials to learn from each other and build lasting relationships across political boundaries. The intensive, one-week, residential Academy builds trust among participants who return to political life with a better understanding of their colleagues and a renewed commitment to public service.”

Please click here to view the press release in its entirety.

Class of 2021 of the Ohio Public Leadership Academy

Commission John Plecnik and Dean Trevor Brown of the Glenn College at the Ohio State University.

**UNANIMOUS SUPPORT FOR NEW JAIL BY LAKE COUNTY LOCAL CORRECTIONS PLANNING**

June 30, 2021 — The members of the Lake County Local Corrections Planning Board (Corrections Board) in attendance voted unanimously to support the Sheriff and Board of Commissioners initiative to construct a new Jail and Public Safety Center in Painesville, Ohio. The Corrections Board is chaired by Chief Probation Officer Craig Berry and is comprised of elected officials and agency directors from the county courts, municipal courts, adult probation, local law enforcement, mental health, and community correction agencies. The Ohio Revised Code requires each County in the State of Ohio to form a Local Community Correction Planning Board to establish a comprehensive plan for corrections and its implementation.

Sheriff Frank Leonbruno, Commissioner John Hamercheck, and Commissioner John Plecnik provided the Board an update on the current status of the existing jail and long-term concerns with capacity, physical condition and operational challenges. Opened in 1990, the current jail averages approximately 360 Lake County Court inmates per day. “The current facility was obsolete from the day it opened and the County is now faced with the challenge of providing the proper facilities for Sheriff’s Office that meets our current and future needs,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

Lake County Court of Common Pleas Judge Vince Culotta made the motion “to support the recommendation of Sheriff Leonbruno to the Lake County Commissioners to construct a new jail.” His motion was seconded by Painesville Municipal Court Judge Paul Malchesky who added: “the need for the proposed jail facility that includes expanded services for mental health and drug/alcohol treatment is vital to keep Lake County safe.”

“First and foremost, Lake County stands with law enforcement, and I am so grateful for the leadership of our judges and community leaders on the Corrections Board,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. “My vote in favor of constructing a new public safety facility to house the Jail and Sheriff’s Office is a vote in favor of law and order, in favor of expanding services for those suffering from mental illness and addiction, and for fiscal responsibility. Over the long-term, the construction of a new facility, as opposed to putting a band-aid on the old jail and kicking the can down the road, is the most affordable option for the taxpayer. Our best estimate to date is the annualized cost of a new jail is less than half the cost of rehab. We can’t afford to spend $50 million to $70 million to extend the life of a dilapidated building for only 10 years or so when we could invest $70 million to $100 million in a modern facility with a useful life of 50 to 60 years.”

Previous studies completed in 2014 and 2019 indicate significant renovations are needed for the current facility which is also at capacity. As Sheriff Frank Leonbruno explained, “Since 1990 we have experienced a 250% growth in our jail population. Additionally, we need to address ADA compliance issues, flexible programming space deficiency, intake deficiency, and mental health treatment for nearly 70% of the jail population. The modern design can provide remote

access areas for court arraignments and other hearings for both municipal and courts of common of pleas. It will reduce law enforcement transports throughout the county, which keeps more municipal officers patrolling in their communities. After significant evaluation, based on experiential data, as well as two major studies on the current jail facility over the past five years, Lake County must begin the process of building a new adult detention facility.”

The Corrections Board also oversees the needs of correction services for the County. The Board puts extensive time studying the needs of the correction system to include the needs of the offender population, this may include the capacity to deliver services and programs to offenders either in custody or on community control.

**Commissioners and Workforce Development Board Appoint Director of Workforce Development**

The Lake County Board of Commissioners and the Workforce Development Board announced on June 24, 2021, that they have selected Cory Vojack as the new Director of Workforce Development to begin July 19, 2021. Vojack has been employed at United Labor Agency since 2017 working with Lake County on employment services and recruiting to connect local job seekers with positions for Lake County companies. He holds a Bachelors’s Degree in Communication from Ohio University and is certified as a Six Sigma White Belt.

Vojack has worked in his current role on workforce-related projects in Lake County and is excited about the opportunity. “I am looking forward to working with the Commissioners and am honored that they have selected me for this role. I am passionate about workforce development and helping people, and I can’t wait to share that passion with the job seekers and employers of Lake County.” Robert Dawson, of Middlefield Bank and the Chairman of the Lake County Workforce Development Board, said of Vojack, “he brings significant experience to the role previously serving in a supervisory position for one of our key program vendors. Cory has strong ties to the local business community through that service and brings a passion for the cause of developing our local workforce. It is my belief that the combination of his experience and passion is exactly the right fit for continuing the momentum within our workforce region.”

“I think that the County will really benefit from having Cory in this position,” Commissioner John Hamercheck said. “He is well respected in the community and his passion for workforce development evident during his interview.” Commissioner John Plecnik echoed those thoughts. “I am excited to work with Cory, and I know he will be a great addition to our Team. The key for Lake County to emerge as the place to be for citizens and businesses is economic development and specifically workforce development, and Cory is going to be a big part of that.” Commissioner Ron Young added, “Cory will continue to advocate for strong relationships with our community partners to help the next generation of the Lake County workforce succeed. We are stronger if we are all working in the same direction.”

**Lake County Commissioners Announce High School Tech Internship Pilot Program**

The Lake County Board of Commissioners is excited to announce our partnership with the Governor’s Office of Workforce Transformation to participate in the High School Tech Internship Pilot Program. The State is encouraging businesses to hire high school students or recent graduates to tech internships while, also, providing partial reimbursement of the costs for employers. “Partnering with the Governor’s Workforce Team and Auburn Career Center to host these interns over the summer shows the commitment of Lake County to collaborate in the expansion and enrichment of our local workforce,” stated Commissioner John Hamercheck. In the pilot program, Auburn Career Center and a dozen other pilot sites will place a total of 100 interns over the summer. “Workforce development starts at home, and incentivizing our local, brilliant, students to intern here and potentially take jobs here is the foundation of moving Lake County out of the pandemic and into a stage of further economic growth,” stated Commissioner John Plecnik. Commissioner Ron Young applauded the efforts of all organizations involved in the Pilot Program. “We are very proud of the work our Auburn Career Center has done to bring this opportunity to participate in the Pilot Program to Lake County. The partnership will only strengthen our economy and retain our home-grown talent to our workforce where we not only have great jobs but affordable housing and amenities that are second to none.”

The Lake County Telecommunications Department will host the interns over the summer focusing their work, alongside County Technicians, on IP-based cameras, card reader systems, telephones, radios, and security systems. “I applaud the Lake County Commissioners in their decision to hire these two young men and will do my best to help them learn while they work for Lake County. I, also, would like to recognize Brian Bontempo, Superintendent, and Michelle Rodewald, Director of Adult Workforce, at Auburn Career Center for their efforts to continue to lead Ohio in educating our young adults and preparing them for the workforce,” stated Paul Stefanko, Director of the Lake County Telecommunications Department.

**Criminal Justice Community Engagement and Outreach Program Announced**

Lake County Commissioners today approved funding for a new Criminal Justice Community Engagement and Outreach Program administered through the Lake County Public Defender’s office. Funding for the program comes due to the work of Lake County Clerk of Court Faith Andrews and her staff in generating excess title funds for the county’s general fund.

The new program is designed to increase community involvement in the criminal justice system and assist individuals who have been in jail to return to their communities to live productive, crime-free lives. The genesis for this program was a collaborative effort between the late Bishop Roderick Coffee and Commissioner President John Hamercheck. Bishop Coffee, a well-known and respected senior pastor of the Union Community Church in Concord Township, was passionately committed to community involvement in the criminal justice system and was one of the original members of Begin the Conversation, a group of community leaders that formed almost seven years ago to address race relations and justice in Lake County. As part of his work with this group, Bishop Coffee raised the idea of the creation of a community-liaison-type program that would benefit the local community.

Please click here to view the entire press release.

**Lake County Launches Program To Assist with Rent and Utilities For Renters and Landlords Impacted by COVID-19**

Earlier this year the Lake County Board of Commissioners accepted an allocation of $6.8 M made available as a part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021. The United States Department of Treasury is administering the Emergency Rental Assistance Program (ERAP) and today the Commissioners entered into an agreement with partner agencies to get those funds where they are needed most.

Funds can be used in a variety of ways to help landlords and tenants maintain stability, maintain utility connections and prevent eviction. Eligible costs under the grant include rental arrears, current rent, future rent in three-month qualifying periods, and the cost of major utilities, case management, and administration. Program guidelines are based on detailed guidance that has been issued by the Treasury over a sequence of FAQs that can be viewed online.

Please click here to view the entire press release.

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize Volunteer Heroes**

On Thursday, June 17, 2021 the Board of Lake County Commissioners recognized two volunteer heroes for their exceptional service to Lake County. Both Don Berlin and Deborah Hahn were presented with a Certificate of Recognition during the meeting.

“The Board of Lake County Commissioners is honored to recognize both Don and Deborah for their dedication to serving others during the pandemic,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck, president of the Board of Lake County Commissioners. “They volunteered without hesitation to benefit those in need.”

Don Berlin volunteered at several food distributions, including the Lake County Mobile Food Pantry beginning in May 2020 and continues today. Don also assisted at the Lake County General Health District COVID vaccine hotline for several months assisting seniors to register for an appointment. Don is also an active Meals on Wheels and Northeast Ohio Drug Repository volunteer.

Deborah Hahn is a regular volunteer for the Vineyard Food Pantry in Wickliffe. During the pandemic, she continued to volunteer each week preparing the food pantry for the weekly distribution. Deborah does not drive and took Laketran to and from the food pantry, to provide food to those in need.

“We are fortunate to have such dedicated volunteers providing much-needed services throughout Lake County during the pandemic,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. “They are both deserving of this recognition for their hard work in providing essential services.”

Commissioner Ron Young added, “It is individuals like these two volunteers that inspire us all to assist others. They are a true testament to the generosity of the human spirit.”

The Lake County Volunteer Network assists individuals interested in volunteering by finding a meaningful volunteer assignment. For more information on volunteering in Lake County contact Volunteer Services Coordinator, Cristen Kane, at 440-350-5360 or email cristen.kane@lakecountyohio.gov.

**Lake County Commissioners Recognize World Elder Abuse Awareness Day – June 15, 2021**

June 15, 2021, is World Elder Abuse Awareness Day here in Lake County and across our country. It is the time of year when cities and states can take a moment to shed light on this significant issue. “This is an opportunity for Lake County to promote a better understanding of abuse and neglect of older persons and raise awareness of elder abuse ensuring security and dignity for all seniors,” said Commissioner John R. Hamercheck, president of the Board of Lake County Commissioners.

Elder abuse is widespread. Every year an estimated 1 in 10 older Americans are victims of elder abuse, neglect, or exploitation. And that’s only part of the picture: Experts believe that elder abuse is significantly under-reported, in part because so many of our communities lack the social supports that would make it easier for those who experience abuse to report it. Research suggests that as few as 1 in 14 cases of elder abuse come to the attention of authorities. “Lake County is not immune to the issue of elder abuse,” said Commissioner John Plecnik. “When we come together, we can prevent elder abuse from happening. We can put support services in place, and direct the necessary community resources.”

From Left: Commissioner John Plecnik, Job & Family Services Director Susan Casar, MPA, MSW, LSW, Assistant Administrator Alison Tomaselli, Commissioner John Hamercheck and Commissioner Young

**County Leaders Attend Voting Equipment Demonstration**

The Lake County Board of Election Demonstrated a proposed voting system offered by Election Systems and Software (ES&S) to the Board of County Commissioners at the April 29th meeting. The Board of Elections have been researching and evaluating options for three years. Most recently they have conducted a week-long mock election, attended pubic demonstrations, solicited input from local stakeholders, and received suggestions from precinct election officials to ensure all concerns and input is considered.

Commissioner Plecnik and Board of Election Director Ross McDonald demonstrate a proposed voting system.

**Commissioners Commend Clean and Green Poster Contest Winners** on **April 29, 2021**

Lake County’s Solid Waste District is pleased to announce the winners of their annual Clean and Green Logo Contest. Area students were encouraged to design a logo showcasing the theme “Clean and Green Lake County” which promotes recycling and anti-littering education. The Lake County Solid Waste District oversees the Landfill and Recycling Center in Painesville Township.

Julia Franz, a fourth-grade student at South Elementary School in the Madison Local School District, won the elementary division and the overall prize for her design entry themed, “Keep Lake County Clean & Green.” As the top winner, Julia’s design will be displayed in the Lake County Commissioner’s area in the County Administration Building located in downtown Painesville. Additionally, her design will be used for marketing materials for the Solid Waste District and the Utilities Department.

Other winners were Middle School Division Winner, Jessica Gajendran from Willoughby Middle School, and High School Division Winner, Erin Panchula from North High School.

The Lake County Board of Commissioners presenting the award to the Overall Winner Julia Franz from South Elementary School in Madison.

The Lake County Board of Commissioner presenting a certificate to Middle School Winner Jessica Gajendran of Willoughby Middle School, and her proud parents.

Commissioners Plecnik and Hamercheck hanging up the winning poster in Chambers where it will be proudly displayed for the year.

**Commissioners Recognize May as National Foster Parent Appreciation Month**

The Lake County Board of Commissioners presented a resolution to Gene Tetrick, Supervisor, Substitute Care Unit, Assistant Administrator Foster Care Adoption, Suzanne Casar,and Matthew Battiato, of the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services.

May is recognized nationally as Foster Parent Appreciation Month. The Lake County Department of Job and Family Services is proud to recognize and express appreciation for the 48 licensed foster homes in our county. The Board of County Commissioners officially recognized May 2021 as Foster Parent Appreciation Month at the April 22 nd Board meeting. “Not only today, but every day, we must come together as a community to recognize the important role foster parents play by providing safe and stable homes for children and youth in need,” said Commissioner President John R. Hamercheck. Read the resolution here…

**Commissioners Declare April 15 through May 31, 2021 Clean and Green Lake County**

**T**he Board of Lake County Commissioners proclaimed April 15 through May 31, 2021 CLEAN AND GREEN LAKE COUNTY, which includes EARTH DAY on April 22, to encourage the youth and adults in the community, schools, businesses, agencies, and civic organizations to identify areas in their neighborhoods in need of attention and to undertake clean-up activities. During the April 22 nd Commissioners Meeting they presented a resolution to David Schick, Public Service Coordinator. Read the resolution here…

Lake County Department of Utilities, and Mr. Randy Rothlisberger, Lake County Sanitary Engineer.

**CLEAN AND GREEN LAKE/ COUNTY**is widely supported in our community, including by this Board, the Ohio State University Extension, and the Lake County Solid Waste Management District, to facilitate this important operation. The Lake County Solid Waste Management District has scheduled newly expanded Electronics Collections on Saturday, April 24 and Saturday, August 14, a Scrap Tire Collection on Saturday, May 1, Television and CRT Monitor Collections on Saturday, May 8 and Saturday, August 14, and Household Hazardous Waste Collections on Saturday, June 5 and Saturday, September 25, to assist residents with their efforts during CLEAN AND GREEN LAKE COUNTY.

Click here to see the Clean and Green Winners…

**Lake County Announces Scholarship Program**

The Board of Lake County Commissioners, with support from the Clerk of Courts, announced the Lake County Emergency Services Telecommunicators Scholarship at the March 25, 2021 board meeting. The program will be offered to qualifying students who are enrolled in Auburn Career Center’s Emergency Services Telecommunicators Program.

“The Board of Commissioners provided funding in 2020 and have been looking to establish a scholarship program to grow enrollment. The Board of Commissioners have enjoyed a great relationship with Clerk of Courts Faith Andrews. When she was made aware of the initiative, she had no hesitation to provide assistance in this very important public safety need,” said Commission President John Hamercheck.

The program is designed to give students the requirements and references needed to obtain the job skills for necessary employment as an Emergency Service Telecommunicator (EST). EST are public safety dispatchers or 911 operators whose duties and responsibilities include answering, receiving, transferring, and dispatching functions related to 911 calls; dispatching law enforcement officers, fire rescue services, emergency medical services, and other public safety services to the scene of an emergency; providing real-time information from federal, state, and local crime databases; and supervising or serving as the command officer to a person or persons having such duties and responsibilities.

“This will be a premier program in Ohio and I am grateful to the Clerk of Courts for funding this very important effort. Today’s announcements will provide a qualified talent base for local dispatch centers, including Lake County Central Dispatch,” said Commissioner John Plecnik.

Society and communications are becoming increasingly more mobile and accessible. With that mobility, the ability to access 9-1-1 services at any time and in any place has become a constant, and the need for consistent minimum training for the telecommunicator has been recognized by the 9-1-1 community. The program is for people who are searching for a career that is Covid proof, helps their community and also helps local law enforcement.

“Lake County has once again shown the strength of community partnerships. Thanks to Auburn Career Center, Clerk of Courts Faith Andrews and the Sheriff’s Office for their vision to bring this program to fruition,” noted Commissioner Ron Young.

“Auburn Career Center is excited to have the support of the Lake County Commissioners as well as the Clerk of Courts for our new Emergency Services Telecommunicator program. With this generous donation, we will be able to assist candidates with their tuition for this class. The new program meets the needs of the surrounding communities by providing a consistent and comprehensive training program for new telecommunicator dispatchers,” said Michelle Rodewald of Auburn Career Center.

Noted Clerk Faith Andrews, “I am thrilled to be able to provide $20,000 in seed funding to support the scholarship program. The seed money comes from Title surplus because of the hard work of my dedicated staff.”

The program includes an internship component that will give students opportunities to shadow and receive hands-on training. Students will have many job opportunities as a result of taking this program. There is a shortage of local dispatchers and already communities are calling Auburn and asking for students.

Auburn looks forward to continuing to meet the needs of the local business community by offering in-demand career training. The next class starts soon! If you are interested in learning more, contact the Adult Workforce office at Auburn Career Center or visit the website at www.auburncc.org.

Click here to view the PDF version.

* * *

Lake County Commissioner John Plecnik administers the oath of office to newly appointed North Perry Village Councilperson Derek S. Foley prior to the Village Council Meeting on March 18, 2021.

* * *

**Fraudulent Unemployment Claims Affect Citizens in Lake County**

Many individuals throughout the State of Ohio have been victims of unemployment fraud throughout the past few months. Lake County Department of Job and Family Services Director Matthew Battiato shared that “this is a problem statewide and is affecting many individuals in Lake County. While the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services cannot assist with fraudulent unemployment claims, we are providing members of the public with information on how they can report these concerns to the State.” One way victims have been discovering identity theft is by receiving an IRS 1099-G form for unemployment benefits that were never received.

“The Commissioners Office understands the frustration of our residents. We have been in contact with our colleagues in Columbus to ensure protective measures are being taken to prevent future fraudulent activities,” said Commissioner John Hamercheck.

Unemployment benefits are issued by the State and the Lake County Department of Job and Family Services does not have jurisdiction to assist with fraudulent unemployment claims. Fraudulent unemployment claims must be reported directly to the State by contacting the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services.

The Ohio Department of Job and Family Services (ODJFS) has established a toll-free number for**individuals**to notify the agency if they believe their personal information was compromised and used to file a fraudulent unemployment claim: (833) 658-0394. This number is staffed by 50 dedicated, cross-trained customer service representatives, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday.

The phone number complements a secure online portal ODJFS established in January 2021 to provide a direct way for victims to report identity theft. Individuals who believe their identity was stolen and used to file a fraudulent unemployment claim can visit unemployment.ohio.gov, click on the “Report Identity Theft” button and follow the guidance for individuals.

Please click here to view the entire news release.

* * *

**Commission President John Hamercheck Named to Agency Boards**

Lake County Commissioner John R. Hamercheck was recently named the First Vice President of the Northeast Ohio Areawide Coordinating Agency (NOACA) and appointed to the Board of Directors for the County Commissioners Association of Ohio (CCAO).

NOACA is the transportation and planning agency that represents Lake, Cuyahoga, Geauga, Lorain and Medina counties. In addition to significant input on multiple public policies that impact Lake County, NOACA is also a significant funding agency for transportation projects and long-term community planning initiatives. “Participation on regional boards are important, but my role as First Vice-President will allow me to strategically align Lake County’s projects with future state and federal funding opportunities. Lake County has made significant investment in our road infrastructure over the past 3 years and this role on NOACA will help further this strategy,” noted Commissioner Hamercheck.

Please click here to read the entire press release.
