Title: the_little_missionary.pdf

URL Source: https://dassel.com/sites/default/files/fileattachments/historical_society/page/2531/the_little_missionary.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2020 20:55:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 151

Markdown Content:
The Little Missionary 

# of Lake Jennie 

# The Stor ies  of Lydia 

# Anderson Nelson 

# Lydia Nelson, Author 

# William Ward, Editor & Storyteller The Little Missionary of Lake Jennie 

## The Story of Lydia Anderson Nelson 

William Ward, Editor and Sto ryteller 

Copyright © 2020 Dassel Area Historical Society 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 

distributed or transmitted on any form or by any means without the 

written permission of the Dassel Ar ea Historical Society, 901 F irst 

Street North, Dassel, MN 55325. 

ISBN uassigned 

The stories and narrative in this book come from the collection of four 

handwritten journals of Lydia Anderson Nelson, accessed with 

considerable assistance from her descendants . While great effort has 

been made to relate each story as accurately as possible, the editor 

recognizes that there may be errors in detail due to the great span of 

time between many of the events recorded and the author ’s memory of 

them many years later. 

Photos are used extensively throug hout this book. In most cases a 

caption is provided for identification. Pictures with a generic caption ,

or no capt ion a re not historical to the author, but included for the 

purpose of illustrating the story and for additional historical insig ht. 

Cover Photo: Lydia as a young adult, age unknown. Contents 

The Back Story . . . . . . . . . . . 1

The Beginning . . . . . . . . . . . 2

Papa’s Bad Leg . . . . . . . . . . . 8 

Mother Makes a Home . . . . 13 

Tragedies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 6

Daily Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

Trouble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 8

Johannah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 4

Neighbors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

Preachers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 

More Neighbors . . . . . . . . . 54 

Me Again . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 4

Papa’s Mission. . . . . . . . . . . 69 

My Mission . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 4

Lost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81

The Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 3

Wolves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86 

Ghosts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 

Music Lessons. . . . . . . . . . . 9 2

Danger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 4

Hijinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 

The Lady. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 

Babies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2

Assaulted. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4

Papa’s Leg. . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 05 

The City . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 09 

Wedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 17 

Miracles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 19 

Mother. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 28 

Prayers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 38 1

# The Back Story 

At the request of her family, i n

1959 Lydia Anderson Nelson , age 

79 , sat down to record her story 

for the benefit of her children and 

grandchildren . The process 

involved her hand writing the 

story into a notebook, six times, 

one handwritten copy for each. 

She completed at least part of this 

project while lying in bed with a 

broken hip. The six notebooks 

were scattered through the family 

and then time marched on. In 

2013 a photocopy of two of the 

notebooks was donated to the 

Dassel Area Historical Society. In 

working with the Nelson family, a 

third and fourth copy surfaced. 

Each copy varies slightly in 

stories and details from the others. This book is a compilation of the many 

storie s provided in the four known versions. 

This book has been edited extensively for grammar, spelling, punctuation 

and flow of content in order to offer an easily readable version. The stories 

themselves , however, are true to the original author. Items listed in 

parenthesis are clarifications of information provided by the editor. 

“This book is written on request for my children and grandchildren, God 

bless them all. May it be to some blessing and encouragement to someone. 

Written in 1959 .” Lydi a Anderson Nelson 2

# The  Beginning 

y grandfather on my father’s side was born January 8, 1808 in 

Halmstad Hallande Län Sweden. He was a cabinet maker by trade, 

what in Swedish is called fin snickare. But he drank so they were 

always poor. He made fine furni ture for the house , but the children had to go 

out and work hard labor when much too young. 

My grandmother Anna Swans dotter Anderson was born November 9, 

18 20, in Halland, Sweden. She was the mother of seven children, a kind 

mother. 

My mother’s f ather’s name was Pher Pherson, nicknamed Pell Pherson. He 

was born December 30, 1798 , in Hernsanel Angermasse Län, Sweden. 

Mother’s mother’s name was Christina Margarita Sillsted t, born in 

Angermassland, Sweden. My grandfather got the name Tjellden when he was 

in government training. He was a farmer , and they had three sons and one 

daughter. 

My husband’s father’s name was Lorin Nelson, born November 15, 1841 in 

Östmark, Värmla nd, Sweden. His mother, Gertrude Halsten, was born in 

Östmark, Värmland, Swede n on November 25, 1840. They had seven children 

in all , Pete, Lina, Ida, John, Minnie, Emma and Albert. Nels Peter Nelson is 

my husband. He was born and raised on a farm north of Dassel. 

My father had four brothers and two sisters, namely, Peter and Ph er in 

Sweden, Swan, Johannah, Christina and John in this country. They are all 

dead now. 

My Father Ingel Anderson, was born September 7, 1842 in Halland and 

died in Dassel, Minnesota . My Mother, Anna Margrita Tjellden Anderson was 

# M3

> Early Anderson family with Greta, I ngel, Albert, Lydia,
> Anna and Hulda.

born October 18, 1842 in Ängermanland, Swede n. She came to America in 

1867. 

My mother and father had nine children. Lydia Margreta burned to death. 

Lydia Amanda died with whooping cough , and John Ludvic died with croup 

diphtheria . Joel Ludvic is also now dead, but Pher Alb ert, Hulda, Amelia, 

Emma, Julia and Jemina are all living as this is being written . I am the third 

Lydia named in this family. 

My father Ingel Anderson died January 17, 1915 , and my mother Anna 

Margreta Anderson died April 2, 1909 . Oh , how these dear p arents are missed. 

They are with the Lord .

My father came to America in 1866, a half a year after the Civil War was 

over. He came in a sail boat , and it was very stormy on the crossing. He told 

us the sail boat would roll so that they had to be tied down so as not to be 

thrown from one side of their cabin to the other. The mast would dip down to 

the water on one side then roll and dip in on the other side. The sailo rs were 

exhausted and the pumps had to be going day and night. The people were 

dreadfu lly sea sick. 

Passengers were required to bring their own bedding, food and water. I can’t 

understand how they could plan for so long a trip. My father was nine weeks 

on the ocean. 4

> Prag -sofa used to store bedding and supplies
> on the voyage.

My mother came across to America a half year later, but she c ame on a 

steam boat. They were 

five weeks on the 

ocean. My dear Auntie 

Johannah and August 

Sanngren came a few 

years later. They had 

packed a sofa full of 

things to bring. It had a 

cover on that was 

clamped down and a

little back rest. It was used to slee p on, and to bring clothes and bedding in. 

They used it for many years in their front room to sit on in the day time and 

someone s lept on it at night. It looked fine with the cover and cushions on top. 

Auntie Johannah shared the story that she shared a cabin with a mother who 

had a pair of twins. Everybody was deathly sick, but the little twins sat on the 

floor and as the boat ro lled, they slid on the shiny floor to one side. When it 

rolled back , they slid floor back again, and they laughed and had a gr eat time. 

The ones who watched them had to laugh too, although the y were so very ill. 

Margaret Hedlund and M ama were chums . When they came to Duluth, they 

worked in some boarding houses. There were many Green Swedes (new 

arrivals) in Duluth who worked there and boarded at the boarding house. 

There were some Irish girls there too who asked mama to teach them 

something to say to t hose boys. Mama taught them to say, “You pretty boy, I 

love you.” (du söt pojke jag älskar dig.) The Swedish boys got a big kic k out 

of these young Irish girls. 

Momma hired out to bake bread for the railroad workers. She had been 

baking in her cousin’ s bakery in Sweden. The railroad brought along 

equipment for a kitchen to serve the workers. They put up camps where she 

could bake. One was in Hinkley, another in Sandstone, etc. Mother baked 

bread from morning until evening. She set a big trough of dough every 

evening and another one every morning, so she kept baking night and day. 

Her sleep she got at intervals. 5

They had very big sacks of flour and 

they were made of firm but fine thread ,

and there was no printing on the sacks. 

Mother could have eve ry sack she 

emptied. When she left , she had two 

hundred sacks. When she came to

Cokato to visit the Lars Hedlu nds, she 

brought them along. 

The cook was a big and fat Irish girl 

who weighed three hundred pounds ,

and she was strong as an ox. She 

empti ed the sacks into a barrel for 

mother. No men worked as cooks in 

those days. 

While our family began gathering in Minnesota af ter the Civil W ar, many 

others had come earlier. These people eventually became our neighbors and 

friends. Many of them had ta les of great adventures of their journeys and 

early years in Minnesota. None was more harrowing than that of the John 

Brown family , who had also come from Sweden. 

The Brown family came from Sweden before the Civil War in a sailboat. 

The whole family, John, his wife Bengta, Charles, Peter, Benjamin and Anna, 

came together. Their boat drifted off course because it was too stormy, and 

way down to South America. They nearly starved to death and some people 

on the ship died. Eventually, the ship made it bac k to New York. There they 

rented a room, and looked for work. They worked and earned money to get 

farther inland. With enough save d, they came as far as Duluth . Then they 

worked there again for a while. Finally , the y came to the area that is now 

Brownton. The town of Brownton is named after this John Brown, the first 

settler there. 

Their first tragedy happened e arly in their tim e in this area . Their oldest 

daughter, age 14 (whose name is not in the records ) went to fetch water one 

day. She encountered some Indians who happened to be passing by and was 

never seen again. There were rumors that a white girl was seen with the 6

> First Stockholm Church

Indians , but no one knew if it was true. The pioneers went through much 

sorrow and hardship, but they were very brave and did not give up. 

They eventually made friends with area Indians and the chief was friendly. 

One day he came to John Brown and told him to get out before they would 

scalp him. He said they were starting a war dance and he be st take his family 

to safety. The Browns obeyed and also warned two neighbors to come away 

too. They said “ We are friends with the Indians, they won’t hurt us.” With that 

confidence, they stayed. 

John took his oxen and homemade wagon and piled in all he could plus his 

family, but they could not find three -year -old Anna. She had heard of the 

danger about the Indians coming and she hid herself between the wall and 

cooki ng stove, where she fell asleep. 

They searched and cal led but failed to find her. At last they started off 

without her. When they had gone about a mile, Mrs. Brown got so frantic, 

John had to go back. He 

heard Anna crying, 

having awakened. He 

put her on his shoulder 

and brought her to the 

wagon, and away they 

went to Moore ’s Prairie, 

now known as the 

Stockholm Church 

vicinity , where they had 

friends from Sweden. 

About the same time 

the city of Hutchinson was burned down by the Indians. There was a railroad 

in Hutchinson , and the Indians tore that up a nd some white children were 

stolen. People saw some whites amon g the Indians , but they never came back. 

After the railroad was ruined, the mail and other merchandise was carried 

by the stage coach from Cokato, right past our home on the way to 

Hutchins on. I can still remember the stage coach. Sometimes the mail was 

carried on horseback. 

About two weeks later the Browns went back to their farm place. Their log 

cabin and rail fence were standing, but on each side of it, their neighbor’s 7 

> Road scene in front of the second Stockholm
> Lutheran Church.

cabins were bu rned down and their scalped heads were on poles in front of 

their burnt homes. (This may be a reference to the four members of the 

Samuel White family slain near Lake Addie on September 33, 1862, or o thers 

who may not have been yet identified.) In spite of the terrible scene, the 

family, believing the danger was now passed, stayed and farmed again. 

One Christmas one of the children was looking for a toy that had rolled 

under a bed. The child took a lighted candle to look for the lost toy , and 

somehow l it the straw mattress on fire. Mr. Brown rescued his family, some 

bedding and a few other thing s. With their home now burned, and it being a 

cold winter, they returned to Moore ’s Prairie, never to retu rn to Brownton 

again. 

After all these things had happened to them , t hey bought land and started 

farming in Moore ’s Prairie . They were very prominent members of the 

Stockholm Lutheran Church. 

The Stockholm Lutheran Church was built by the people who came from 

Sweden ; it was made both well and big. It is still there as a big and wonderful 

church. Some of the newcomers were skilled workers in Sweden ; some were 

carpenters, stonemasons 

and painters. They still 

have the picture in front 

that was painte d by one 

skilled artist from 

Sweden. 

The church came first. 

They built a real church 

while they lived in small 

log cabins themselves. 

The church was built of 

logs too. It has been 

remodeled some, but is 

the same church otherwise in size, etc. It is a wonder what these people from 

Sweden could do, how they sacrificed and worked. They were all poor people ;

however, they wanted their children to have a C hristian foundation . T heir 

church came first. 8

# Papa’s B ad Leg 

# When Papa was in Dul uth, he worked for th e railroad, helping to 

build the line between Duluth and St. Paul. Sometime while he was 

working he traveled around and bought forty acres of heavy timber 

land one mile north of Lake Jennie. He paid five dollars an acre for this very 

fine land. A couple of other men helped him erect a one room log cabin on his 

land. Then he went back to work on the railroad. 

He was working with the 

company that built the railroad to 

Fon d du Lac, Wisconsin when he 

got a pimple on his knee. It got 

very inflamed so he put his leg 

into a pail of ice water to cool it 

off. The circulation in his sick 

leg stopped and he got gangrene 

in his leg. 

He became violently sick. The railroad company fetched him to St. Paul 

where they had no hospi tal, so he was in a boarding house . Uncle John was 

his nurse. When Father had come to America , he had brought his brother 

John, age 19 , with him, paying his fare. 

There was only one doctor in Minneapolis , or St. Anthony , and St. Paul 

and he was called. H e brought seven young men along who were studying to 

become doctors. He sat papa on a chair and put his leg up to lean on another 

chair. Then he said to the boys, what would you do if this was your c ase? One 

by one they had to examine P ap a’s leg and say what they thought should be 

done. 9

When they were through , he said. “No , my boys, this is what I’ll do.” He 

slit his knife through Papa’s leg and severed the calf of his leg from the bone, 

then he cut away all the dead flesh fr om his leg. Carefully he cut away from 

the knee and down, and pee led the sick flesh from and between his toes and 

he el. 

They had no anesthetic in those days. Papa started to faint several times but 

the doctor roared, “Sit up man and don’t faint.” He did not seem to know that 

fainting is nature’s anesthetic. When he was finished , he bandaged the leg up 

and placed some yellow powder all over it. It did not take more than a month 

before Dad could see flesh starting to cover the bone of his leg. The calf of the 

leg , still be ing sound , seemed to help the growth of the new fles h. 

Then Uncle John cared for him. After a while dad started to walk with 

crutches and he told t he doctor, “I have a piece of land near Dassel and I will 

go out there. I can not afford to be here any longer.” The doc promised to send 

him some more salv e later to use, but the salve never came. Papa asked how 

much he owed the doctor and was told , “ $1,00 0, the price of your leg. ” That 

much he did not have, but the doctor got what he had. He was very poor now, 

having spent all the money he had on the doctor and boarding house. 

Then John, his brother, helped him co me out to his log cabin where he had 

bought school land for $5.00 an acre. It was heavy timber land a mile north of 

Lake Jennie and about 4 ½ miles south of Dassel. 

He had a pail of herrin g, some hard tack and a few potatoes with him. He 

started to worry about what he would eat and drink, and what he would cloth e

himself with since his provisions were dwindling. Uncle John went back to 

his work , and P apa started to wonder if there is a God and what shall I do. In 

Matthew 6:31 Jesus said that these are the worries of the world, and in 

Matth ew 6:33 he says , “Seek you first the kingdom of God, and his 

righteousness , and all these things shall be added unto you.” 

As he was in such dire need he wondered how he could get to know if there 

is a God, and his whole being was in a cry or prayer to a God he did not know. 

Then he heard a voice calling, “Ingel.” It sounded like his own voice. “Ingel, 

seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousnes s and all these things shall 

be added unto you.” Papa said, “Thank you God. I will get my need filled . I 

will get a living all right.” 10 

As he lay , he saw his sins piling up like a high pile that reached way up to 

the sky. His sins got so heavy that he c ould not bear it, so he started to call 

upon the Lord for mercy. He had not heard a revival sermon in his life, and 

never went to church. When he was confirmed, the priest was so drunk that he 

was carried into the little study and laid on a couch, so someo ne else had to 

take over. It made Papa so mad he said the priests are worse than anyone else. 

He swor e he would never go to any church. But his mother put a Bible and a 

hym nal in his trunk near the bottom so that he should find it some time. 

His trunk was huge and looked like a large crate, full of food and bedding 

and clothes. Yes, everything had to be brought for the trip to America so it 

needed to be very big. It had two bottoms in it so things could be sorted and 

that way they did not get things mix ed up. 

As he was calling in his heart for forgiveness for his sins , he got a 

wonderful peace. It entered his heart like a sun ray from above. He got so 

happy he crept to the trunk and found his Bible and hymnal. He read and 

thanked God, singing songs of praise from his heart. He sai d he forgot that he 

was of need of food or anything. 

God heard his cry and sent Mrs. Bonniwell, whom we called Aunt T amar to 

him. The Bonniwells lived by a creek that went from Lake Jennie to Wolf 

Lake. They had a saw mi ll there, and they lived in a on e room log cabin. 

Inside the door there was a box nailed to the wall that had partitions in it for 

people’s mail. The mail was brought there from Cokato on h orseback. Letters 

had come for P apa, but no one called for them so she found out that Papa had 

a so re leg. She made up a basket with food for Papa, biscuits and fried 

partridge that Bonniwell had shot, and some other articles of food. She also 

included some clean bandages for his leg and some salve made from herbs 

that sh e had bought from the Indians. 

She found her way to Papa’s cabin through the woods on an Indian path. 

She knocked at his door and he said “Come in.” She greeted him as Brother 

Anderson. He did not speak English, but he thought that brother was the same 

as broder. She knelt by his bed and prayed for him. From that day my Papa 

always got something to eat. The Americans around and near Bonniwell s got 

to know him , and w ere all good to Papa, thanks to the Bonniwell’s example. 

Praise God! He provided. From t hat day on someone came now and then with 

what he needed most, and my father praised God. 11 

Dad read and studied his Bible and God’s word became precious to him. He 

sang hymns to the glory of God every day and was a happy soul saved by 

grace. 

He wen t to the Stockholm church. He go t a deep desire to hear God’s word 

proclaimed ; so as soon as he could get along with the help of a crutch, he 

started real early to go to the church in Moore ’s Prairie. It was ten miles , on 

what was just a path, but he start ed at dawn and got there in time . He had to 

sit down on a log now and then to rest. 

One day a man named Sven Janson asked him to come home with him for 

dinner, so he did. Mr. Janson spoke to dad about a fine strong, healthy young 

lady who stayed at Lar s Hedlunds that would make him a good wife. She was 

visiting some friends in the area, the Hedlund family. The y were Dala folk 

(likely meaning the y came from the Dalarna region in central Sweden.) 

The Hedlun ds found out who Papa was and said to Mama, “He is a nice 

looking man. He is lame in one leg, but is improving. He will soon be well we 

think.” 

They asked Papa home the next Sunday for dinner and the two met. Then 

Papa and Mama were invited to Sven Johns on’s one Sunda y. They fell in love 

and one Sunday they were married. Their wedding trip was to walk home 

from the Stockholm Church to Pap a’s log cabin ten miles away. No good 

roads existed, and it was mostly an Indian path. 

Their farm was one mile north of Lake Jennie. Dassel was about four and a 

half miles north. The nearest post office was at Bonniwell Mills. The mail was 

brought there on horseback from Cokato. Papa named his farm Pleasant 

Grove Farm. 

It was very hard work to clear the timber off the land. In the beginning they 

rolled the logs into piles and bu rned them up. Later they hauled logs to the 

sawmill. There was Bonniwell’s, and in a few years, Swanberg ’s saw mill 

west of our home. 

My father bought a team of horses from John Burgeson. Burgeson bought 

and sold horses. The horse s were shy of anything that moved or rustled. When 

Dad was hauling a log, one horse got frightened by a branch that moved 

alongside of him and bolted, which started the other horse with him. The 

horses got out of control for a little while. Father got his weak leg between the 12 

lo g and a stump and squeezed off the flesh on the front of his leg. It was 

winter and cold so it took long for dad to be able to navigate. In fact, my 

father’s leg never got healed. My dad prayed to God to keep him close to the 

Lord an d he said, “This I had to go through so that I would not forget how I 

got saved and God’s wonderful mercy.” 13 

Flour Sack 

# Mother Makes a Home 

# Mother ha d saved money baking bread for the railroad company , and 

now it really came in handy. She bought a cow, a hen a nd some eggs. 

The hen wanted to set , so mother set the hen on 13 eggs. All hatched 

and the cow had two calves, lively and healthy. Soon they had their cattle herd 

growing and even raised their own oxen. 

There were many wild animals in the woods , and th ey had to watch over 

the hen and chicks . At night they took them into the house so that the rats, 

minks, weasels , and skunks would not get them. Then there were the hawks 

that would fly and try to take the chicks in the day time . The mother hen made 

such a loud call for help so Mother knew that there was danger and scare d the 

hawk away. 

There were also deer, fox, wolves, porcupines , raccoons and wild cats that 

were called b obcats. Also beaver , crows and hoot owls. A little fa rther west 

they would see herds of buffalo and eagles. Even muskrats came up from the 

sl ough below the place. The wild animals were afraid of the people and kept 

their distance. They would not harm the 

people unless they wer e molested. 

The wild people were Indians. They 

were not bad if the white people were kind 

to them. They would never forget a

kindness done to them. 

Mother made a lot of nice and useful 

things out of the flour sacks she got when 

she baked for the railroad company. They 

held 200 pounds of flour and had no 

pri nting on them. They were made from 

fine firm material. I remember Mother had 

an underskirt that had nineteen small tucks around the bottom. It looked so 14 

nice, and it seemed never to wear out. She had it as long as she lived and used 

it for best. Mother mad e sheets and pillow cases, and table cloths and curtains. 

She knew how to dye the sacks so the c olor was fast. She used the old way 

she learned from Sweden. She bought the crystals she used for dye in the 

Swedish drug store in Cokato, and she made nice dre sses and aprons and 

quilts of the sacks that she dyed. She bought what she called fer brite that 

made the color fast. 

The American ladies taught her to use Sumac tops to make a nice brownish 

color. She used to that to make even and nice colors for rags that she used to 

make carpets. Nothing that was worth anything went to waste. 

They had no fences , so the cattle were let loose to go where they liked to 

find food. They had one that carried a bell on a str ap around her neck, and she 

always took the l ead. She was called the bell cow. They would seldom wander 

too far, but sometimes they did and i t was hard to find them. My mother was 

once out looking for the cows near Lake Jennie where Lake Spencer ran into 

Lake Jennie. There was a creek there . One day Mother counted nine nice deer 

drinking out of the creek. The wind blew her kerchief. It flickere d, causing the 

deer to run like the wind. 

However, the cows usually could find the way home to be milked. Mother 

was very kind to the cows. She petted them and talked kind to them. She got 

angry if anyone was mean to them. She said if they are gentle to them, they 

would give the milk much more and it was easiest to milk them. 

If they kicked wh en milked , Mama said there was a reason for that. Their 

milk b ag or their teets were sore. She would look after that and treat it with 

salve or something. She would wash the teets and bag with luke warm water 

before milking. Often , they were muddy, and it was a job, but she did it and 

the cows seemed to like it. 

She churned the cream and made butter. She made espe cially good butter, 

so she got c ustomers in turn who asked for Mrs. Ingel Anderson’s butter at the 

general store where she brought it to sell. After a few years she bought a form 

that when it was pressed full with butter had one pound. Some liked that the 

form had a design of a cow and palm trees th at pressed into the butter. Ma 

thought that was quite a thing to serve the whole pound of butter in form on a 

plate when we had company. 15 

One day a heifer was missing, a 

heifer that was expecting a calf. It had 

not come home when the other cattle 

came home. Mother set out to search 

for her. She noticed the tracks the herd 

made just like a sort of path and she 

followed, calling , “Selmi, Selmi. ”

Mother walked many miles before she 

found the cow standing not far from 

Bear Lake south of Lake Jennie. The 

cow stood there and when Mama 

came , she bellered to Mama. She had 

a baby calf by her side. Mother had t o

go for help. Th e cow walked , and they 

carried the calf. 16 

# I n 1870 Lydia Margreta was born. She was a sweet little girl, and Papa 

used to take her by the hand and walk her back and forth on the floor as 

soon as she started to walk. He would sing, “God thou loves the little 

children, lo ok down to one so young and frail,” something like that. She 

would limp on one leg a little like Papa did. To her , that was a nice way to 

walk, for Papa walked that way. She learned to talk and sing early when she 

was only one and a half years old. 

Mo ther had to do a lot of the chores, because Papa had that sore leg. 

Mother would lead the cows to get water once a day. She would do this after 

noon while Lydia took her nap. Papa would be out in the clearing working. 

The well was dug right in the line bet ween our land and Haglunds west of u s. 

They made a trough out of a hollowed -out log, and filled it with water by 

putting a wooden pail down in the well . It was pulled up with a long stick 

with a hook in the end to get a hold on the handle. It took a while to pull up 

water and then bring home a pail full to use for cooking and to drink. 

Mother had been putting her baby to sleep many times just like that, and 

then gone and watered the cows. One day it was 3:30 in the afternoon when 

she left home. She was sure that li ttle Lydia would sleep until she came back. 

However, Lydia had awakened and crawled out of her bed. She went to the 

stove, where she could see coals burning in the front. She took a stick and 

poked it in, as she had seen her mother do. The stick caught fir e, and they 

could see later that she tried to wipe off the fire on her dress. That dress 

caught fire too. Lydia then crawled up on the bed and the bed caught fire. It 

had a hay mattress that burned, and only corners were left of the silk quilt 

mother had m ade from her Grandmother’s wedding dress. W hen Mother cam e

back home, she smelled smoke. When she opened the door, the house was 

filled with smoke. She heard Lydia whimper in the bed. She fumbled and got 

# Tragedies 17 

her and wrapped he r up and rolled her so the fire was quenched but she had to 

kill the fire in the bedding too. Lydia’s body was badly burned, and her 

stomach was black. Her back was not burned at all but in dealing with her 

cover, Mother got a blister on Lydia’s back, whic h grieved her much . She took 

Lydia out and made the call that they used in Sweden to summon help. By 

putting her hands to her mouth, she could be heard a long way. 

Mrs. Dahlberg, a neighbor, had an understanding that when Mama took 

sick, she would make that call and Mrs. D ahlberg would come right away. 

Mother was expecting and Mrs. Dahlberg thought that was it and ran as fast as 

she could to Mother. There was Mama crying with the burnt baby in her arms. 

Mrs. Dahlberg started to grate potatoes and lay the potato shavings on the 

burn and told Mama to keep it up. She would go to Haglunds and get more 

help and more potatoes. Lydia had no feeling on her stomach, which was 

burned black, but she had that large blister on her back. They had to 

concentrate on taki ng the pain out of t hat blister so they kept grating. 

When Papa came back from the work, he was so very sorry. He said, “Are 

you going to Jesus now little Lydia?” She asked “What song shall I sing when 

I come to Jesus?” Papa said a new, new song. 

Then she became uncon scious. She never came out of it. She was burned at 

3:30 in the after noon and died at 3:30 the next morning , on February 3, 1872. 

Mrs. Dahlberg was both doctor and undertaker, and there were only the 

closest neighbors at the funeral. A b ox was made for a co ffin, and flowers 

were picked. There was no cost, no nothing. Papa said the Lord gave and the 

Lord took her away. It was very empty in the home after her going. 

Not a long time afterwards, on February 24, 1872 little Lydia Amanda w as 

born. She was lit tle and frail, and when she was nine months old, she got the 

whooping cough. She nearly died several times. Mama would run to Mrs. 

Carrie Haglund and have her help to get Lydia’s breath back. However, one 

time it could not come back and she died. It was on November 23, 1873. Just 

think, both the first two children died. My poor mother and dad! 

These two Lydias are buried near Steelesville. Mother and Father kept 

reading the word of God for comfort in their sorrow. 

In February 1874 , they got a son. He was named John Ludvic, and he had 

red curly hair, like me. (I was not yet.) He had big clear blue eyes, and a very 

happy disposition. John liked to sing and started very early. Mother and Papa 18 

would not leave him. They kept close watch so nothing would ha ppen to him. 

After a couple years , in 1876, another son was born, brother Pher Albert. Then 

two years more and I came, on March 5, 187 8.

One time when I was just a baby in my mother’s arms, my papa got his 

small boat to take us out in. Mama was a big woman and there was my 

brother Albert too. Mr. Dahlberg had a bigger boat and Johannah was only a 

small person. 

The two families went to Lake Jennie to fish. Dahlberg told Papa, “Your 

boat is too small for such a big load. Let us change cargo. ”

My father said fine. My mother handed me to Mr. Dahlberg to hold while 

she would step into his boat. Just as she was going to sit down, she got dizzy 

and sat down outside the boat. Down, down she went, nine feet, and she could 

not swim. Neither could the men. When she came up to the top, they grabbed 

her and pulled her into the boat. Mama was glad that she had handed the baby 

to Dahlberg to hold while she climbed into the boat. Otherwise I would have 

gone to the bottom and been dro wned. 

When Lu dvic was four years and Albert two years and I three months, 

Ludvic awoke and had croup. In the morning he stood on his knees and sang 

In the Sweet Bye and Bye . He struggled through the first verse and the chorus. 

When Mama said, “Littl e Ludvic, you had better wait until you are well and 

sing then,” he answered, “Yes, Yes.” 

Papa looked into his throat and saw that it was real dark with white dots on 

it. He got on the horse and rode as fast as he could to Cokato, to the doctor. 

The do ctor asked Papa to describe Ludvic’s condition and how his throat 

looked inside. He said, “I can do nothing for him. He has the black diphtheria. 

You best turn right back home. He may be dead before you reach home.” 

Papa swung his horse around and rode back fast. When h e arrived home, 

Mama stood on the door step with her apron over her face crying her heart 

out. Ludvic was already dead. Now Papa made a third coffin and painted it 

blue. Ludvic died on May 25, 1878. 

Mrs. Haglund told me mother knelt on her knees on one side and dad on his 

knees on the other side of the little coffin. Through his sobs Papa said, “The 

Lord gave and the Lord took away, blessed be his Holy name.” The closest 19 

neighbor s were there when he was buried until resurrection day. T hey sang 

the song In the Sweet Bye and Bye . We shall meet on the beautiful shore. The 

comfort we have is that we know he is safe with Jesus , and we must not doubt 

what God does. He knows how to get us to look homeward and upward. 

Nothing just happens. It is all in God’s plan. Mother saw now that only God 

could really take real care of them and their children. 

You might wonder where and how Ludvic learned to sing. Mama had to 

help Papa a great deal out in the field with clearing the land, sowing, 

ha rvesting, haying a nd weeding. However, they did not risk leaving the 

children alone. Sometimes cousin Bandina Anderson, later Mrs. Svedberg of 

Merrian Park, would watch the children. More often Carolina and Christina 

Hagman of Lamson, then Section 36, woul d. Mr. Hagman was from Dalarna, 

Sweden. He was a wholehearted Christian. Christina and Carolina were very 

good singers and they took turns staying in our home and caring for the 

children. Ludvic learned singing from them. 

He had learned many verses of songs from them an d he just loved to sing. 

Hagman also had a son, Ole Hagman. Also, after many years, I came to know 

a sister of Mr. Hagman. She went to the Bethlehem Covenant church while 

they were using the Academy (likely Minnehaha Academy in Minneapoli s.) 

Her son was th e first of our Covenant boys killed in the First World War . I met 

with her , and we prayed together. She got her comfort from God. 

Our oldest daughters met some nephews of Hagman that came from Daka. 

Mr Hagman from Section 36 was very interested in God’ s work . He donated 

an acre to build the Lamson Church on, and he helped to get it built. He was 

chairman there for a long time. I was little then but I will never forget Mr. 

Hagman. He stood with one hand laid on the other, and with his k ind face and 

kind eyes, how he prayed. He had so much to thank his nice and kind and 

loving heavenly Father, so full of mercy and grace for . How he blessed God’s 

Holy name. 20 

# Daily Life 

Anderson house built in 1878. This house 

burned down in the 1940s. 

Our frame house was built by the lay preacher Wicklund. I was born there 

on March 5, 1878, before it was quite finished. Mr. Wicklund preached about 

Christ returning and that we should always be ready to go when he comes to 

take his bride home. Once h e preached about Jesus coming in the sky. I got so 

happy th at I was starting to float up to the sky to meet Jesus. Mr. Wicklund’s 

farm was in Lamson, Section 36. 

Everywhere Wicklund 

went , he told people about our 

wonderful Lord and Savior. 

Rev. John Daniels, formerly 

called John Johnson, was 

converted when Wicklund 

preached. Wicklund had taken 

a load of molasses to Bethany, 

near Litchfield, to sell. He 

had a place where he stood 

and offered the molasses for 

sale. Then he preached the 

gospel to the people between the sales. One that asked for prayer was young 

John Johnson Daniels. 

I was two years and two days old when my sister Hulda Amelia was born 

on March 7, 1880. Mother was in the bedroom. I slept in the living room. 

Mrs. Dahlberg was there to assist Mother. I awoke hearing the new baby 

crying. I got v ery excited and called Papa! “Papa, let the kitty out quick. She 

is crying by the door and needs to get out.” But our dog and cat were in the 21 

barn where they had to stay. It was very cold and there was lots of snow. The 

cat used to sleep on top of one of t he cows to keep warm. 

One night about 1881 , I had a very bad dream. I was about three years old .

I just l oved to watch when the stage came driving by. It was an old -fashioned 

buggy pulled by horses. Sometimes only a house back rider came past. The 

stag e brought the mail and other things from Cokato to Hutchinson. There had 

been a train that went to Hutchinson , but the Indians had destroyed it. 

In the dream I stood looking through the window for the stage . To my 

surprise, i t came running without hor se power. It had two lights as large as 

plates in front that lit up the road way down the hill to where our b arn was. It 

came so fast that I got so scared I screamed in my sleep. My mother woke me 

up and said, “You must have had a bad dream. You moaned and then you 

screamed.” I told her what I had dreamt. She said that was surely a horrid 

dream! Thank God it is n ot true. Later when I saw the first automobile I said, 

“Now my dream has come true.” 

When Carrie Haglund 

expected Christina, my 

mother went there to 

visit. I went along with 

her. I can never forget the 

pretty red flan nel cape 

Mrs. Haglund was 

sewing , and I watched 

her sew on the hand 

power sewing machine. It 

was to my notion, the 

most beautiful garment I 

did ever see. I t was made like a littl e red riding hood cape. Shortly afterwards, 

Christina came there to stay. 

My job was to stand by and rock the cradle when sister Emma was a little 

baby. M y mother was very busy. She baked bread for the lumber camp that 

was right across the road in the woods on the land my papa bought later. They 

> Hand crank sewing machine

22 

had a cook whose name was Wil lie Night. We were very fond of him for he 

was full of fun and played with us a lot. 

Willie would come and get the bread in the evening. One evening when 

Papa was out and Mama was in the barn milking the cows, Willie came for 

the bread. He was going to have some fun with us children. This time he had 

blackened his face and looked like a Negro. I had never heard of a Negro or 

knew there was such a being as a black person. But I heard one of our 

neighbors say to his son if he did not behave himself the black one would 

come and get him, meaning the devil. I also heard several times the devil 

referred to as the “black one.” 

When Willie Night came in our door and saw me, he put out his black 

hands toward me and said, “I am come to get you now.” 

I shrieked and took a beeline for the bedroom and crawled way under the 

bed in the furthest corner. I laid there trembling of fear. My papa came just 

then and saw and took in the situa tion. He said to Willie, “Go back to your 

camp and wash off all that black, and don’t you ever come again to scare the 

life out of the children.” He went without the bread, and came back later for 

it. 

My papa used to invite the lumbermen to come in and sit and chat a while. 

Papa would read a chapter out of the Bible and have prayer while they were 

there. 

There was not any church except the large Lutheran church in Stockholm 

so the people held meetings and Sunday School in their little log cabins. 

These were at Israel Erik Haglund ’s west of us and Aron Nelson ’s west of 

Hag lunds. East of us was Burgesons and close to them east was Israel 

Dahlbergs. In Section 36 there were also a few neighbors. Mr Hagman, who 

had three children, and also Asps and Wick lunds. Mr. Wicklund was a gifted 

speaker and studied the word of God . All t hese people were converted 

Christians who had a wonderful fellowship together. 

Our church services were often held in our neighbor J. E. Haglund’s log 

cabin . His wife , Carrie, was lame, and holding services in their home allowed 

her to attend. She was a good singer and gave testimonies about God’s 

wonderful grace. 23 

> Flax brake

The cabin was very small with two paned windows and one low door. It 

had a high legged bed with a

trundle bed u nder it, a table, some 

homemade benches, a few chairs, a

cupboard and a wood box with a 

shel f for the water pail. She had a 

sewing machine that had to be run 

by han d and sewed only chain 

stitches. 

When Carrie Haglund was able ,

she would work hard. S he helped 

to prepare the flax to make cloth 

of. First, they would sow it, then 

when ready cut, dry and br ak e it. 

(Separating the woody stems from 

the fiber.) Then it was soaked and 

eventually spun. Mrs. Haglund did 

most of that, then wove it into 

cloth on a loom. 

She sewed pants for Haglund. One time when I was there, he came in and 

said, “Mama, just when I think I have got pants on , I am without pants.” The 

seam had caught on something and it ripped up the whole leg. That was not 

funny for him. She wove shirts and suits for the boys, towels, and many 

things, but, oh my, what a lot of work. Those chain stitches were a nuisance. 

Often someone had to run into the house because the seams were ripped open. 

Many a laugh was had about it. 

If they wanted the ir linen to get white, they would lay it under snow in the 

winter and the snow and moisture would bleach the cloth. They had to watch 

it and keep a little snow on top of it for a long time, but then it would bleach 

real white 

When Charlie was a baby, he would crawl and climb and often frighten his 

mama. One time he wanted a drink and climbed on the edge of the wood box 

and grabbed the edge of the big copper water pail and it tipped right over him 

so it was on his head, soaking him all over. The poor litt le lad screamed. His 

mother was in bed sick but his father came running from outside. 24 

One time when Mr. Wicklund was preaching there w ere many gathered in 

th e Haglund house. The Lord’ s S upper was celebrated. I was about three years 

old. The planks to sit on were placed across some log ends and the people 

were very interested in the message . I saw a tall man, Mr. Swanberg, come in. 

He had to bend his head down to get through the low door opening. He sat 

down right back of where I sat. I had a long way to reach the floor so I was 

swinging my feet back and forth. 

People did not dress up in style at all. Some had a red kerchief tied arou nd 

the neck and Swanberg was wearing a new one. While Mr. Wicklund prayed , I

heard Swanberg sob . I saw tear drops f all on the floor as he was bending 

forward with his elbows on his knees. He had another red kerchief that he 

wiped his tears with. My heart went out to him and I turned and put my arms 

around his neck and said, “Don’ t cry Swanberg, you are good. ( Du är all t bra .) 

Don’t cry.” 

I thought he wept because he was not good enough. Maybe so. I remember 

that they sang ”W ash me and I shall be whiter than snow. ” I sang and meant it 

too. 

In 1882 we had the Sunday School in our home. Johannah Dalberg was my 

teac her. On our first Su nday school we were asked to learn a Bible verse to 

recite. We were also told we would receive a Sunday school card. The evening 

before , my father was reading about Stephen in Acts 7 when he read the 49 th 

verse. I thought it was so beau tiful that I said, “ Papa, I want to learn that verse 

to read in Sunday School tomorrow.” Papa thought it was too long but I 

wanted to. I kept reading it over and over until I fell asleep. 

The first thing in the morning Mother told me to pick some flowe rs and put 

in water for decorations. I picked so many that there were several dishes or 

vases with flowers and when Mrs . Burgeson came in, she said the perfume of 

those flowers was too strong. It made her head ache. Most of them were set 

out on the back por ch. 

Sunday schoo l began, songs were sung, texts were read and then the 

children were going to read their Bible verses. When my turn came, I got up 

and read loud and clear. “Heaven is my home and the earth is my footstool. 

What house will you build me, o r what room is for m y rest. Have not my hand 

made all these things sa yith the Lord.” Instead I read correct until I came to 

the part, “have not my hand.” I read “my hand has made every bit of it sa yith 25 

the Lord. I was real enthused, lifting my hands up. Th e people laughed out 

loud. I got so frightened that I crawled under the bench and my tears started to 

flow. I did not make a sound. I wished there had been a hole in the floor so I 

could slide down to the cellar. After that I was too scared to recite anyth ing 

for years. I sti ll forget what I am to say when I am before a crowd. 

When we received our Sunday school cards in 1882 I got a very beautiful 

card. I still think it is so beautiful, there is no card as nice as this one. My 

mama kept it in her green trunk that her grandfather made in 1791. There was 

a drawer in it that was safe. Once in a while I would look a t that card. It has 

round corners now from handling. Not long ago I framed it so it would not 

fall apart. 

One Sunday a bunch of children wer e walking home from Sunday school 

on a very hot day. I was the smallest of all the kids. There were some older 

boys and girls, among them Annie Nelson and Lina Nelson Dahlberg. The 

boys got so thirsty they said, “Let’s climb this fence into the pasture and get a 

drink from the well where they water the cows.” They had no pail nor nothing 

to drink out of, but boys n ever get stuck, no how. So, they held one by the legs 

and let him fill his hat with water, and they all had a drink. I would not drink 

out of tha t dirty felt hat. I looked into the well and saw a frog down in the 

water, and near the top ran a mouse into a little hole. No how could the boys 

drink that water, but they did, and were no worse for it. 

In March, 1884 my mother and sisters made our f irst birthday party for my 

sister Hulda and me. We only celebrated our birthday every fifth year. I was 

six on March 6 and Hulda’s birthday was March 7, so we celebrated both on 

March 6. That year the spring came early, the sun shone warm and the grass 

was green. 

Mother invited Auntie Johannah and Cousin Annie Sangren, and Mrs. 

Wedelin and daughters Marie and S elma. Also Mrs. John Edward Johnson, 

Bocklabs and daughter Ida , Mrs. Dahlberg and Lina, Mrs . Haglund and 

Christina. By the way, Mrs. Johnson used to be the cook for the old Pillsburys 

in Minneapolis before she got married. 

Mother made brown bread with raisins in, white bread, rusks, molasses 

cake with raisins, sandbakelser , molasses cookies, ginger cookies, homemade 

sylta (head cheese), homemad e cheese, and a pudding made from wild grape 26 

juice sweet with a little potato flour for thickening with cream a nd cinnamon 

on top. This is what was served at those little coffee parties and birthday 

parties. 

My aunt Johannah gave us each a beautiful c hina vase and Johannah 

Dahlberg made a dress for each of us. We tried them on and my dress had a 

sleeve that wa s a little too short and my sister Hulda had one sleeve too long 

on her dress. They all had a good laugh. Johannah Dahlberg, laughing, said 

that can soon be fixed, and ripped the wrong sleeves out and put them right. I 

still remember how pretty the materia l was in those dresses. It was white with 

little green leaves with blue forget -me -nots, just as pretty as could be. 

One day going throug h the wheat field, my mother cut through on a little 

path. She carried sister Hulda and I ran alongside of her. My brother Albert 

must have been with Papa in the field some place. As we were walking along 

the wheat was very tall and to me it seemed much ta ller than it really was 

because I was so short. 

I saw a large purple flower and I called to Mama saying, “M ama, can I pick 

that pretty flower?” 

“Oh no. that is a nasty thistle and it sticks. It has sharp stickers on it.” I will 

never forget how sor ry I felt that such a beautiful flower should prick. I really 

felt that it was too bad. 

Uncle Swan sold his forty acres of land to Papa. It was next to our land on 

the north side. Uncle Swan moved to the prairie where there was no timber to 

cut down , and it would be easier to farm. His log cabin was being torn down. 

One day Albert and I w ent to take some lunch for Papa. He was removing 

doors and windows from the log 

cabin. 

I was curious and looked if I 

could find anything to play 

with. I found so me small 

cracked dishes and a little clay 

pipe. I looked behind a door 

that was set up lean ing against 27 

the wall, and there was a big woodchuck. I looked at him and h e looked at me. 

I called Papa and he came. Then the woodchuck ran out scared worse than I 

was, through the door and down the hill. 

A family moved into our log cabin. They had thr ee boys and a girl. Mr. 

Gilberg was a lay preacher and they cam e from Kerkhoven, near St. John. 

Every time the little girl got mad about something she would say, “Ja g skall 

gä til St. John jag.” (I am going to St. John, I am.) 

Mrs. Gilberg and mother m ad e soap. Mother would provide her with fat 

and lye. Mother made her soap first . It turned out fine. Mrs. Gilberg made 

hers and it stood in that huge kettle overnight . There came a little shower . It 

was not much but in the morning Mrs. Gillberg’s soap was too soft. She did 

not know that there had been a little shower and she said to mother, “You 

poured water into my soap so it would be sloppy.” Mother felt bad becaus e

she said that. Of course, someone told Mrs. Gilberg about the shower. Mr. 

Gillberg made a beautiful little rocking chair of willows for Lina Nelson 

Dahlberg. I did admire that chair so much. 

I remember that old log cabin. It was left there a few yea rs after our frame 

house was built. Newcomers could use it when needing a home until they 

could get one. 

It had clay plaster between the logs. I liked to sit on the big flat stone on the 

door stoop. That stone glistened like gold and silver. I would s it and bask in 

the sun and watch the bumble bees that had their holes in the cl ay between the 

logs. Their buzzing was music to my ears. There were also quite a few 

hummingbirds. They were so beautiful with their green and purple and bluish 

bodies and long, long bills. Those days there were many beautiful bluebirds 

and cardinals and o riole s, and so many pretty birds th at we don’t see now 

days. 

My sister Hulda seemed to hypnotize these birds. She would walk up to 

some and put her hand on them. One day whe n Ole Berg was building our 

granary, there were only loose boards lying across the rafters upstairs. Hulda 

saw a red bird and said, “I am going to catch that bird.” We warned her about 

stepping on the loose end of some board, but up she went and tried to c atch 

the red bird. She mis -stepped and fell through. Ole Berg watched her as she 

fell and caught her by one of her legs and saved her. There were bare stones 28 

> Scything

below so she would ha ve gotten badly hurt, if not killed. Ole was her guardian 

angel that time. 

One time sister Emma came running and fell forward right on the cycle of 

the reaper. She got a finger cut off. 

Another time my papa was cutting a row around the wheat field for the 

reaper to go. Mother sent me to him in the north field with some lunc h. While 

Papa was resting, I took his big cradle, a large scythe , and cut a row of wheat 

with it. It went down and I was proud of my work, so I said, “How does it 

look ?” Just the n I let the scythe down toward my leg and it cut clear to the 

bone. I was so ashamed. I should not have let that scythe down against my 

leg. 

I told Papa I felt sick and wanted 

to go home. I did not tell him that I 

was cut, but started home .

Otherwise I was to stay and help 

Papa bind the wheat. When I got a 

little way my shoe top was running 

over with blood. I yanked off my 

other shoe string and took that and 

tied hard around the leg, put the 

shoe on and walked a quarter mile 

home. When I g ot home no one was 

there, so I went to our nearest 

neighbor for help. She said, “ Oh, tha t is an ugly cut.” She took arnica and 

poured the wound full. I bit my teeth together. It burned like red pepper. She 

wrapped it and I went home, but it took a long tim e before it healed. It had to 

be cut open once. I have a scar there now. 

The Sunday school was meeting at J. E. Haglund ’s to celebrate the 

Christmas Festival. The Haglund boys did not know much about Christmas 

trees but Johnnie told me they were going to have a nicer Christmas tree than 

anyone ever saw. They got a fine shaped maple and t rimmed the branches 

with colored paper and tied a few candles on with strings, along with apples 

and cookies and stick candies. I thought it was very pretty. 29 

Everybody came except for one family , Edward Johnson’s, that never went 

to meeting or Sunday school. We had a very good program, then someone 

looked outside and saw red a little ways off. It looked like someone’s house 

was burning . T hen someone said, “Look, Edward Johnson’s house is on fire !”

Every man ran out and grabbed buckets and shovels or a nything they could 

get ahold of and headed toward the Johnson house, about three -fourths of a 

mile away. The house was an old log cabin, a one room hous e. They thought 

the fire started where the stove pipe went out through the logs. It had not been 

insulat ed enough .

The house burned down and only the family was rescued along with some 

clothes and bedding. They had to take refuge at his brother Pher Jo hnson’s 

home. Pher Johnson owned the sawmill and provided him and many others 

with work. Pher Johnson ha d been at our Christmas celebration when the fire 

started. Now the neighbors all got another chance to help someone in need. 

Pher Johnson’s daughter Amanda used to walk to school with me. Later, 

Pher Johnsons moved to Idaho. 

Mother and Dad used to get some older girls to come over and look after us. 

One time it was Mary ( Maria ) Wedelin. She was in her early teens, about five 

year s older than I, but I think she did not know much more. She did not have 

the Christian training that we had. She knew not hing about praying to God. 

She was a good girl none -the -less. 

When M ama and Papa were gone, she said we didn’t dare stay in the hous e. 

We learned what a fraidy cat she was and she made us afraid, too. Someone 

might come , and she made us , Albert, Hulda a nd me, climb up into the hay 

shed. She told us to keep real quiet so if anyone would come on the road they 

would not hear us. There we sat in the heat. She hardly let us whisper, she was 

so scared. 

Our dog was a gentle dog but would bark a little at st rangers only. The dog 

started to bark real mad -like and we saw through the cracks a man coming up 

towards the house carrying a bundle o n the end of his cane on his shoulder. 

The dog barked real loud and the fur on the back of his neck stood up. The 

man too k the cane from his shoulder and started to hit toward the dog, and the 

dog got even madder. Finally, the man ran back to the road and w alked away. 

It seemed then that when anyone came carrying a cane it scared the dog. 30 

Another time, Mother and Dad went to some special meetings in Dassel. 

The y let my brother go , too. Mother used to say the girls got along better 

without anyone bossing them. After supper we went to bed. I laid on a couch 

near the window. It was a pretty moonlit night. I laid and looked ou t the 

window . W hen the dog started to bark , I saw a man coming towards the 

house. He also had a cane ; as he came closer , the dog barked louder. I started 

to pray, “Dear Jesus, don’t let that man come way up to the porch.” Jesus will 

take care of me. The do g got real mad , and the man hit at it. He was close up 

to the house when he turned about and went back to the road. Then I thanked 

Jesu s for not letting him come closer. Right then my papa and mama came 

down the hill. 

Mother made her own potato flour. She said it was better to use for 

thickening than wheat flour or corn starch. She used to hire a couple of 

newcomer girls to help her. The potatoes were carefully washed, and then they 

used about three wash tubs with water in. The water had to be carried up from 

the well. Each girl sat down and grated the potatoes until a dish was filled, 

then they shoved the gratings into the tub of col d water. When they thought 

they had enough, they stirred up the mess in the water and let it sink to the 

bottom, then the y would stir it again. Finally the water and the refuse that 

floated up to the surface was poured off. 

Then new water was poured on to the starch that had settled to the bottom, 

then the mix was stirred again. This process was repeated two or three time s

over, at which point the starch will be nice and clean and white. Then all the 

water is poured off and the starch is scraped off the bottom and put on clean 

cloth to dry. It is eventually placed into cloth sacks and hung up in a clean dry 

place, ready fo r use. 

We always raised some corn so that the fields would get all weeds and wild 

oats removed. Then the next year the wheat or ot her small grains were sowed 

where the corn had been. That way the corn was planted in different places 

each summer. 31 

We used to hire some young folks that had no cornfields to come and husk 

corn so that we could get it done before it got too cold. Mama was a fast 

husker, and sister Emma was as good at husking. She kept up with Mama 

when she was only nine years old. S he got her bushel basket filled much 

faster than I who was much older. She was left -handed and we said that was 

why the y flew out of her hands so very fast. We would have sort of a party 

when we were finished, and would play games and laugh. It was a lot o f f un. 

When a cold snap came 

before we were done, 

though, it was harder. We 

had to dress warmer and 

hated to sit down on our 

knees, so we would sit on 

a corn bundle. 

Cooking sorghum was 

fun, too. When the 

sorghum cane was ripe, 

we had two long bladed 

wo ode n knives. They 

were smooth with a long handle like a bat with a flat, two -edged blade. We 

use d the knives to hit the leaves or blades off the cane. Then someone would 

come after and cut the seed brooms off the top. We called that “topping the 

cane.” Nex t t he cane was cut off and laid in piles, then hauled to the sorghum 

press. 

Haglunds and we used the same press and pans to cook the sorghum in. We 

owned the press together and it was put up between Haglunds and our land. 

We helped e ach other to press an d cook the juice. The stone press roller was 

pulled around with a horse. A child would give the horse a touch of the whip 

if it stopped. Someone would bring the cane to the one that was feeding the 

cane into the rollers. The juice woul d run into a big barr el. When the barrel 

was full it was poured into a big flat pan to cook. This pan was placed over an 

oven made of stones, with cord wood placed for fuel underneath it. The pan 

had two handles on each side and It took two men to lift the pan onto and off 

of that oven. One person had to stand and keep watch, skimming the froth off 

the top. Two pans and oven were used so one would be ready while the other 

would be starting to cook. 

> Cooking sorghum

32 

This was a lot of fun, and we children just loved it, although we worked 

ha rd. My father would cook barrels of real good sorghum. Some he would 

sell ; some he would give to poor people .

Mother told me the year I was born, 1878, that all the seeding was done in 

March. It was such a warm and early spring. M other did all the sow ing, as she 

did for many years, because Papa had a bum leg. That year Mama got an 

abscessed breast after she had knocked her arm against it while swinging her 

arm sowing the wheat. Mama worked way too hard and even nursed all her 

babie s. 

In the fall, the grain was cut by hand using a grain cradle, and tied into 

bundles, making bands to tie the bundles together with wheat stalks. It was 

quite a trick if you did not know how it was done. Then it was shocked, and 

when dry, stacked, t hen thrashed. After a few years we had a reaper that cut 

the wheat. S omeone followed and raked the wheat into bundle size ; then 

someone tied the bundles like before. 

I remember when the thrashing was done with horse power. It took lots of 

men and horse s, too. I believe the y had three teams at a time that went around 

and around pulling the thrasher. Someone in the middle cut the band ; someone 

else fed the bundle into the thresher. The wheat was gathered into a sack that 

someone had to hold under the machine to catch it when it came out. On the 

other side someone had to pitch the straw away, and someone else had to 

throw it further away to where it was stacked. It all involved so much labor. 

Later the thrashing was done with a steam en gine and separator. Someone 

had to ha ul water from the lake for the steam in a huge water wagon . We still 

had to hold a sack to 

catch the grain, but the 

machine threw the 

straw into a pile, where 

yet another man had to 

pitch it into a straw 

stack. 33 

Finally, they were able to use self -binde rs. These cut the wheat and tied the 

bundles with twine. Then someone went and pulled the bundles together eight 

in a bunch. Someone else came after and chocked the bundles, putting one on 

top to act as a cover against rain or heavy dew. When the wheat dri ed out it 

was hauled and stacked, and later thrashed. 

After the harvest was over, the wheat that was spilled in the field s would 

grow and soon there was enough green grain to herd the cows and cattle on 

bef ore the plowing had to be done. Haglund’s boy s herded their cattle on their 

side of the road and we herded our cattle on our side. There was a straw stack 

not too far away so we build sort of a church out of the straw. It did not have 

any roof, only sides to it. 

Willie Haglund carried a red test ament in his pocket , and I carried a song 

book along . There were three Haglunds and three of us. Willie would read and 

preach on the text, then we prayed, not just in fun, we really prayed. Then we 

sang songs. We all sang real lustily, not one verse, but i f the song had six or 

eight or ten verses, we would sing all the verses. Willie and I did not always 

agree what song was to be sung, but we would sing the one he liked first, and 

then my selection. And how we pra yed real prayers, not pretending, but real 

pr ayers. I remember that I thought that the old folks were getting sort of dry 

spiritually , so I prayed that God should anoint them with the Holy Spirit so 

they would not squeak in the services like a rusty hinge. We had a wonderful 

time but we had to have a stick nearby so if any of the cattle started to 

trespass, we could head them off. I was much afraid of Haglund’s bull. He 

was a little mad, and even the boys had to be cautious. 

We girls were taught to wor k. My job was to do the dishes. I was so smal l I 

had to stand on a chair to reach. The huge dishpan was set on the table before 

me. I did not mind if I only had cups, saucers and plates to wash . However, 

the heavy earthen pans we used to strain the milk in to so that the cream could 

rise to be skimmed off to make butter with were quite heavy. My little 

shoulders would ache from handling them , but it never occurred to me to say I 

didn’t want to do them. 

I remember wh at my sister -in -law Ida told me. She wa s real tired of doing 

the dishes and said in Swedish, “J ä ä so lessen te j är dissa d iska , men d ä ä34 

inga ann r å än te g är d äm. ” It would be in English “I am sorry about doing 

dishes , but I know there is no way out of it, so I best do them.” 

I also was often told to rock the baby cradle and put the baby to sleep .

However, my folks read an article that it was not good to rock the baby so 

they put the cradle away f or good. After that our baby cri ed much more. I 

didn’t think the cradle was such a bad idea. After all, the youngsters like a lot 

of motion , more the better. 

While we were doing the dishes , Papa would read stories for us . T hat made 

us want to rattle as little in the dis hes as possible. We were so anxious to hear 

the story and we always wanted him to read to us while we did the dishes in 

the evening. Sometimes he read out of the children’s paper The Barna V äimen 

(The Children’s Way), sometimes a story out of Chicago Blade t, or the 

Christian Herald . That was a Swedish paper. There were continued stories 

too. Mother would save them and for a time, she matched the stories together 

and posted them on the wall in the summer kitchen. 

Marie Janson worked for us one winter wh en Mama was sick. Marie got 

married and lived in a log cabin near Lake Jennie. She came over and got the 

papers , and she also matched the stories together and papered her cabin wall 

with stories. She told us that when her first baby was born, she had to stay in 

bed . S he laid and read stories from the walls , which helped keep her from 

getting lonesome. 

My dearest memory is of how Papa used to take the Holy Bible down from 

the shelf and open it with much reverence. He would read a portion of God’s 

word before starting the day’s work. He read a chapter and then, although he 

had a sore leg, he would kneel and pray for his fa mily, for the neighbors, for 

all the faithful servants, for our government, for the missions and for the 

Jewish people. We children p rayed a prayer in chorus, but as we got a little 

older, Papa said, “You are old enough to pray to God with your own words, 

and thank God for his love and mercy. 35 

> Anderson family about 1890. Surrounding Ingel
> and Anna (clockwise) Albert, Lydia, Julia, Em ma
> & Hulda.

Papa’s first thought in 

the morning was to 

praise the Lord for a new 

day of grace. He would 

take the broom stick and 

pound on the ceiling and 

call, “Children, now it is 

time to get up.” Then he 

would first kindl e a fire 

in the cook stove a nd set 

the tea kettle on to heat 

water. Then he would go 

down to the barn and 

feed the horses and 

cows. He sang as he 

walked beating time with 

his cane. Later after his 

leg was amputated, he 

would beat time with his 

peg leg. 

Right after breakfast we wo uld have devotions, and we prayed and sang 

hymns together. Our neighbor that was doing some work for us said, “If I 

would take time to wash before every meal I would never get my work done. 

And if I would take time to read and p ray and sing, my farm would go to 

weeds.” Well his farm did. But ours is still in the hands of our family. Right 

now, Papa’s grandson (Alvin Anderson) owns the place , and he is a Christian. 

I do hope and pray that the home farm will always be run by a Chris tian, 

because I think how ma ny prayers have gone up to Go d on that farm. I think 

every stump that Papa grubbed out was a scene of prayer. 

When evening came it was for us all to wash and come around the table 

together. As soon as we were done eating , Da d would take down the Holy 

Bible and read a whole chapter again . I see in my memory how Papa reached 

for the Holy Bible on the shelf and brushed away any crumbs on the table 

with his hand. Then he opened the Bible with such gentle care as he would 

say, “I will now in the name of the Lord read a chapter from God’s Holy 36 

word.” He always read slow enough that not a word was lost. He would close 

the book and put it up on the shelf again , and we would kneel and pray. 

We would all kneel around the table. Papa would pray first ; then we prayed. 

When we were real small , we read a prayer in chorus. When we became a 

little older , Papa would tell us to pray to God using our own words. Pray and 

talk to Jesus as if you coul d see him. Tell Him your wishes ; thank the Lo rd for 

all his goodness. 

I would sometimes pray too long and Papa would say, “Fatta dig kort,” 

meaning to pray short and to the point. I could not understand why. I should 

think we could pray for all our fri ends and pray for the unsaved that they 

would turn to God and get save d. There w ere so many to pray for! 

Afterwards we would sing, and if we were not too tired, he would read us a 

story. We would wash the dishes, then play a game or two. Dad used to let us 

sit on his back two and three at a time. He would creep on the floor playing 

that he was a horse. I wonder at this now because his leg was sore at that time. 

He used to wash that sore in water with a little carbolic acid in the water to 

keep it cl ean. He bandaged it up with long bandages rol led on little sticks. He 

would first put a little suave on some gauze he had to always have on hand, 

then he put the bandage on. He did this every morning after breakfast and 

every evening after supper. In the h ot summer, he would also do it after our 

noon dinner. It pained him a great deal , but we never heard him complain. 

We also sang a lot in our home. There are dozens of songs that I learned to 

sing. Every morning dad would knock on the ceiling with th e broom stick and 

say, “It is time to get up now.” Then he would go singing down to the barn, 

and as he walked, he would beat time with his wooden led. He would sing real 

joyful songs to his Lord. I can still remember those songs by heart, he sang 

them so o ften. Here is one I remembered and translated from Swedish in 

1954. Papa would sing it nearly every morning when he walked down to feed 

the horses and cows. 

Peace With God 

1. Like a bird upon a branch is singing, peace and joy to me the Lord is 

bringing. Jesus is my friend, for me he’s pleading, His sp irit leading 

every day. 37 

2. He has brought my soul from sin’s disaster, I will love Him, he’s my 

master. When err he chastise me so tender, I will surrender to his will. 

3. When the darkening clouds the su n is hiding, to the throne of grace 

the way I’m finding. A ll the trouble soon is disappearing, light is 

appearing to my soul. 

4. Like a child in mother’s arms is resting, and from storms the sailor’s 

harbor reaching, to my loving Savior I’m clinging, peace He is 

bringing to my soul. 

5. With God’s children rou nd his tab le feasting, there reminded of his 

suffering bleeding. There the wind of grace is blowing, to us is 

showing his wondrous love. 

6. Soon the trial of this world is ending. Christ went home and is a place 

preparing. In beauty nothing on this earth comparing the music we’re 

hearing praising God. 38 

# Trouble 

ne day Mama sent me with lu nch to Papa. He was chopping away 

willows that were growing in the edge of a sl ough in the north field. I 

walked through the pasture, and near a big log I spot ted a big garter 

snake. I never liked the look of a snake, they reminded me of the serpent. I got 

on top of the log an d looked at him, and all of a s udden there were many little 

baby snakes. I don’t know what I did, but the little ones just fled to the big 

snake. To me it looked as 

if it had swallowed the 

little snakes. I have heard, 

though, that snakes don’t 

swallow their young. 

Maybe there was a hole in 

the ground near the mother 

and they went into it. I

don’t know, but I took to 

my feet and ran to Papa 

with the lunch. 

One day I when I was 

very little I went out to the pump in our yard and stood looking. There came a 

huge muskrat w alking up from a sl ough across the big road. It was a very big 

rat, an old, mean one. She came right toward me and started to walk on her 

hind legs and hissed. I called and Mama came quick. “What is it?” she asked. 

Then she saw the furious rat. She took th e clothes pole and could barely drive 

the rat away with it. The muskrat did take to her feet and off down into the 

marsh s he went, where there were many muskrat piles. In the middle it was a 

place where there was water all the time, and there was seaweed a round and 

many cattails growing. Now that place is dry and made into a field. 

# O39 

> Mission Friends Church in Dassel

On the shore I heard a catbird cry. I sa id to Papa that sounds just like a cat. 

He said it was a catbird , so I went and looked around. There was a little 

stream with long grass, and in that long grass the catbird had her nest. There 

were four pretty sp eck led eggs in it. Papa said not to touch th e eggs because 

then the bird will not hatch them or go to her nest. I learned something then 

worth remembering. 

In about 1885, 

when I was very 

young this story 

happened. My 

sister Annie was 

born in January 

and this 

happened the 

summer before 

Annie w as born. 

Mama and Papa 

were going to 

Dassel for the day to a convention in the Mission Friends Church. It was a 

straight building with a platform in the front of the church. The re were three 

windows on each side and kerosene lamps were fastened to the wall s between 

the windows for light. In front there were two large kerosene lamps so the 

minister could see to read when evening services were held. There was a 

small organ on which songs were played for services. Rev. J. A. Sjoquist was 

the pastor. 

Once every year the Mission Friends held a convention when the ministers 

and people would gather from far and near until the church was crowded. 

People would have to stand outside and listen to the sermon through the open 

windows. 

This particular time Moth er said, “Lydia is a big girl now and she can take 

care of Emma and Hulda. We will take Albert along with us because he might 

boss around and tease the girls. He is old enough to attend the services now.” 

I meant to be a very good girl. I wash ed the di shes and straightened up the 

house the best I knew how. I swept the floor. Mother had a big homemade 40 

broom that was made of a lot of twigs tied together that was used to sweep the 

yard around the house and down the path. I got the bright idea to s weep the 

yard and path. Everything was to be nice when Mother and Dad were coming 

home, and how pleased they would be. I worked hard and fast until I 

perspired all over. Then I went into the house and took Hulda and Emma with 

me and went up the road where there wer e a lot of luscious wild strawberries. 

I had a large dish and picked until it was filled. I would not let the girls eat 

any berries out of the dish. “You just pick and eat what you want,” I told them 

we were going to save these berries until Mama and Papa come home. 

They said when they went that they would bring a missionary with them 

back to our home and told us to keep it nice. I was so happy to think that a 

blessed missionary was coming to our home. Mama had said, “Don’t forget to 

feed the Brown Hea d.” That was a ewe sheep that had twin lambs. “And you 

must remember to feed the hen with all the little chicks. This is real important, 

and if you forget to feed them you will have to go without supper yourself.” 

Oh, I wanted to be good and d o all the se things that I was told. After we 

were back in the house after the berry picking there was a knock on the door. I 

went to open it and there stood a fine looking young man with a little black 

grip (suitcase) in his hand. He had a fine black suit on and si lk stovepipe hat. 

He had a white, shiny shirt front with bright stud buttons and white collar and 

cuffs, plus a bow necktie. There was a gold chain that led to his watch pocket. 

He had black hair and a little black mustache with a curl on each sid e. 

Well, he looked very fine and I thought he surely is a minister. No one else 

would dress so fine , and the grip he had looked li ke the grip some of our 

ministers used to carry when they came to hold meetings in the homes. They 

used to bring books an d literat ure along to distribute to people. 

I said, “Come right in,” and he did and saw the big dish of those lovely 

wild strawberries on the table. My mama and papa were very hospitable 

Everyone that came to our home was asked to stay and dine with us . The 

you ng man asked, “May I have lunch with you?” “Oh, yes indeed. Come right 

in.” 

I hurried and put Mama’s best linen table cloth on the table. That table cloth 

was white with yellow roses woven in it and a striped border, yellow and 

white, and long heavy fr inges around. It was beautiful. Well, I put dishes on 

and large goblets with milk, a dish of berries and a cream pitcher full of 41 

cream, and then sugar in the sugar bowl. I got some of Mama’s homemade 

sweet toast and some cookies that were Sandbakk else (san d tarts), and bread 

and butter. When this was done I said, “Be so good and sit up to the table and 

eat.” 

Then I looked at Emma and Hulda and they had not been washed since we 

were picking the berries. Their faces had berry stains , and I can ye t feel ho w I 

blushed. My ears felt hot. Well, there was only one thing to do, take them out 

on the back porch and wash their hands and faces. While I was doing this, I

heard a noise in the pantry. I ran in and found the man in the pantry skimming 

the cream off one p an of milk. I got so mad I said, “You are a bad, bad man. 

You steal. Go your way.” 

I took the broom and held it over his head thinking that surely would scare 

him away. I thought that instead of a minister of the gospel, he was a false 

prophe t that my father read about in the Bible. He looked at me and I must 

have looked fierce. Then he laughed and held out his hands to me and said, 

“You are such a nice little girl, come and give me a kiss and then I will give 

you a pretty card.” 

I forgot my anger and I pictured in my mind a beautiful card with roses and 

Bible verses or a nice girl with a kitten, and all sorts of pretty flowers and 

shells. I was just as forgetful of what he had done and I went to him, threw my 

arms around his neck and kisse d him. I was never told that anyone could not 

be kissed. As soon as I had kissed him, I really came to and I felt just as if I 

had kissed a snake. I said, “Now where is that pretty card you said that you 

would give me?” 

He opened his suitcase and handed me a car d, a great big one with a sewing 

machine and a little lady sewing on it. On the border were spools of thread all 

around. Oh, I thought that was the homeliest card I ever saw. What did I care 

about sewing machines? I told him, “Nasty card. I don’t want it. Go your way. 

You are a thief and a bad, bad man.” 

He laughed again and said, “No, you are a nice little girl. Look at the nice 

long red curls.” Then he said, “Can you show me the way to Bonniwell’s 

Mills?” 

I said to go up the hill and go until he g ot to the cross, then turn south and 

go un til he reached Bonniwell’s Mills, about two miles. He went, but that man 

ate all the strawberries I had picked and that was a deep plate he aping full. He 42 

ate all the cookies and toast I had piled on the pl ates and bread and butter and 

drank all the milk in the goblet and used all the cream in the pitcher . He was 

not satisfied but was skimming off the cream from a gallon pan of milk 

besides. I got so frightened that I took the children and went to our neighbor 

Mrs. Borgesen. I thought he might come back and want another kiss. I 

thought I’d best lock the door so I climbed on top of the table so that I could 

reach to get the door key out of the clock. It had a door and a little drawer 

where we kept the ke ys. I tried to lock the front door but that was warped so I 

could not get it closed tight enough. I thought that won’t matter. No one will 

come that way. We always use the back door and that I locked and off we 

went. 

When we went down the road, Hulda w ould not walk. She sat down in the 

middle of the road in the sand so I carried Emma piggy back up the hill, sat 

her down and ran down the hill bare foot. The dust flew. Then I took Hulda 

piggy back up the hill and so. I took Emma again and carried her on m y back 

aways, then back and carried Hulda. At last we got to Mrs. Burgeson's’ She 

was always kind to us , and I told her the story. She said, “I will teach you how 

to treat such rascals. You take a slice of bread and put some butter on the 

slice. Spread it in with your t humb and tell him, ‘Here, you take and eat this if 

you want any lunch.’ You will soon get rid of such a fellow.” I thought, “Oh 

horrors, I could never do a thing like that to the worst person.” 

Mother and dad stayed at the convention , so it was late wh en they came 

back. I went out to the road and we were met and picked up by them. There 

was a lady along too. The first thing Mama said was, “Did you feed the sheep 

and the chicken?” 

I started to cry bitterly. I forgot all about that and I felt so bad. Mother said, 

“You shall go to bed without supper.” I was so sorry because I had forgotten 

to feed the hen and chicks and sheep with the lambs. After a while I heard 

Papa say, “Go int o the bedroom and give Lydia her supper. She may be very 

hungry.” When Mam a came with the food I told her I didn’t want anything to 

eat. The sheep and the lambs are hungry. I don’t want anything. I wept myself 

to sleep. 

I never told Mama about the man and why we went to Mrs. Burgeson until 

I got big. We were not supposed to go to the neighbors anyway , and the thing 

was a hard taste in my mouth. Mama did not understand. She maybe thought 43 

that I went visiting instead of tending to business. I felt bad bec ause the man 

had eaten up the berries. I had nothing to treat Mama and Dad and the 

missionary with. Bad luck, was it not? 44 

# Johannah 

# J

Johannah Dalberg 

ohannah Dalberg was born in Nora Socken , Örebro County in Sweden in 

1835 , to poor parents. Her home was on an island on a big lake. There 

they lived tax free. They had a p ig and a cow and some chickens. They 

raised a garden and were 

thrifty people. Her father 

worked in a coal mine in 

Nora. In the winter they used 

skis to g et to land and in the 

summer a boat. Sometimes 

they could not get across 

when there was flooding , and 

they had to stay put. 

Johannah started to work 

in town for some rich people 

and also went to school. She 

was very bright , and got a job 

with a doctor. Because sh e

was his good helper , he 

trusted some cases to her. 

She was a wonderful mid -

wife. She was also a fine singer and could do most anything. 

Johannah worked in the home of Frans Ersson and Maria Nilsdtr There, as 

midwife , she delivered Fredrik Franson and his brother into this world. 

(Franson was later to become a very prominent evangelist a nd missionary. In 

that work he ministered to the large Swedish immigrant population in the 

Midwest, travel ed oversea s to minister, founded eight churches in Nebraska 

and Utah, and was also a founder of the Evangelical Missionary Alliance, an 45 

organization t hat still functions today.) She was in Franson’s home as a tutor 

for fourteen years. 

One time in Swede n she went to a dance. When she went onto the dance 

floor , she had a vision of demons behind the dancers. She went home to the 

Ersson house and called upon the Lord to save her soul and was converted. 

She became a true and living witness to the Lord. Later she got married to 

Israel Dalberg and came to America where they bought forty acres of land to 

the east of our land. 

She was good help on the far m and a good housekeeper. She became the 

backbone of the Dassel Lutheran Church , teaching Sunday School an d

Swedish school in Steelesville. 

Now I will say that Johannah received all of us children into this world, 

along with hundreds of other children. She was the midwife, but would also 

do the first washing for a new mother and would ta ke care of them onc e a day 

for a week. 

She had a light body and good feet so she would run instead of walking. 

When someone was sick, Johannah was called because it was too far to a 

doctor. Also, w hen someone died , she was the undertaker as there was no 

other. She also made a home for two homeless boys until they could take care 

of themselves, and was foster mother to Lina Nelson Dahlberg. She also 

adopted a little ho meless girl named Hannah, whom she had until she was 

confirmed. Then Hannah took sick and died. 

Johannah also adopted another boy, Bennet Dahlberg. Bennet grew up and 

later we nt to the Minneapolis . He was a floor walker at Donaldson ’s Store. 

When he go t typhoid, Johannah came and stayed with him ; however, he too 

died. His death sorrowed the Dalbergs greatly. They had been hoping that he 

would be their standby in old age. But God planned differently. 

She became a widow but she willed what she had to the one handicapped 

son of Lina, her fo ster daughter. Johannah died in Mrs. Otto Olson’s home, 

but we will not forget her many good deeds. She did never seem to think of 

herself. (As a widow, Johannah married Nels Benson at the age of 81.) 

Sin was r ampant in the country as well as in the city those days too. (In 

1880) t here was a man by the name of (Erick) Lind (in Stockholm Township) 46 

who was married to a very sweet German girl (Julia) . However, he fell in love 

with another man’s wife. They called he r Myr Maria. She had several 

children , and sh e was very nice looking and sociable. Her husband left. No 

one knew why. Then Myr Maria went out here and there and cared for sick 

people, especially at child birth. She was real good in assisting. 

Well, th is Mrs. Lind had a baby , and Myr Marie was he r nurse. Johannah 

Dahlberg, our dear neighbor, was also helping there . Mrs. Dahlberg said she 

did not like the way Lind acted with Mrs. Myr Marie. 

Word came that Mrs. Lind was dying , and Johannah Dahlberg w ent there. 

Mrs. Lind died. Johannah sent for the doctor and he said it looked as if she 

was poisoned. However, she was buried, and Lind and Ma ria seemed to fit 

good together like a couple. 

Someone said that it really should be looked into, so Mrs. Lin d was dug up 

and was tested. They found she h ad so much poison in her that it would kill a 

horse. They also found out that Lind had bought poison shortly before. He 

was tried and found guilty and was sent to Stillwater (life sentence) . He was 

there for twe lve years. 

Some years later, Lind’ s brothe r went around with a petition all through the 

county , and Lind was released from prison after only twelve years . As soon as 

he go t out Myr Maria married him. They seemed to live in peace together. 

Later, Mrs . (Myr Marie) Lind came to my place (in Minneapolis) and said, 

“I hear your baby crying every time I pass by to go to the store. Maybe I 

could help you.” Baby Gertrude did cry a lot. Mrs. Lind really was a good 

helper and then she sent her daughter Clara o ver to help me . She was so jolly 

and she would get the baby quieted in a little while. She was a good helper. 

When I wanted to pay she would not receive any money. She said it was a 

privilege to get a chance to walk the floor with the baby. She used to sin g, 

“By ä by ä Bocken har skä lever han sä vasper han ägg,” and many silly songs 

that made me laugh, and the baby would go to sleep. Maybe she was so tired 

from being carried and tossed about. I don’t know. 

One day Myr Marie came in and helped me so I c ould get some work done. 

Either she or I would take care of Gertrude while the other would scrub and 

clean. Then Mr. Lind came to get her in h is horse and buggy. It was quit e far 

for her to walk so he came for her. I cooked coffee and treated them to a 

lun ch. He said , “ A man like me should not be worthy to sit down to a table 47 

with good folks. ” I suppose that the sin was eating him. I never heard if he 

expected the savior or not. 

(This story is likely that of Erick Olson Lind of Stockholm Township, 

Wrigh t County. He a ppears in the 1875 Stockholm census as married to a wife 

named Julia. He was 26 years of age and she was 24. They had one child at 

the time, Carl, age 3. Julia is listed in the census as of German heritage. In 

October, 1880, Erick Olson Lind is listed in p rison records as entering 

Stillwater Prison. The 1895 census shows Erick Lind now married to a 

woman named Bertha Maria, age 46. There were no children listed. It is 

unknown who the first husband of Bertha Maria was.) 48 

# Neighbors 

# There was a log cabin near Lake Jennie, up on a hill that was on our 

side from the lake. There was a family living there by the name of 

Davis. We liked Mr. Davis, but we were afraid of Mrs. Davis. She had 

a couple of small children. She was always thre atening them. She would say, 

“If you do this or that, I’ll take the broomstick to you.” They were so very 

young. 

Mr. Davis would come over to our place. I don’t remember if he worked for 

Papa or not but he was there f or meals. I overheard Papa say to M ama, “I feel 

sorry for Mr. Davis. His wife is not true to him and she is sort of mean.” I 

remember one day Mr. Davis came over and talked with Papa. He was crying 

or weeping. He said his wife had left him and run away wit h another man who 

came for her. 

Papa prayed with Mr. Davis and told him to commit himself into God’s 

hands and all his trouble, too. Well, Mr. Davis moved away and I don’t think 

anyone has heard of them since. The log cabin was empty, and in the summe r

when we went berry picking, we wo uld go in and look around. I thought what 

a cute play house that cabin would make. There were two small windows and 

a stairway to the attic. 

Later there came a lady with two little girls, Annie and Fanny. They stored 

their surplus things in our shed, a nd used all the things they could find room 

for in that log cabin. I cannot understand why she came out so far to live. She 

must have been well off sometime before, judging what they had and their 

clothes were nice. They had food along and fruit that we ch ildren never even 

had seen before. I thought now we will have nice times together with these 

girls, and we sort of did. However, although they were not any older than we, 

they poked fun at our ignorance lots of times. And that we had to take. We had 49 

never been anywhere except right on the farm, and they had traveled quite a 

bit. 

One day in the winter Mrs. Weaver told Mama that she was bitten by a wild 

cat, a bobcat, once. The cat must have had some disease. Every year she 

would get real sic k at the same time of the month that she had been bitten . She 

told Mama after that cat bite she got crazy and they had to tie her in bed. She 

foamed around the mouth and would meow like a mad cat, and grab and try to 

bite anyone that came close to her. She said she alw ays felt when she was 

going to get sick. She knew also because it re -occurred the same time every 

year, so she would tie herself up real firm so that she would not hurt anyone. 

Her girls were trained to run for help. She told mother that time was not far 

away and if the girls would come for my mama, that she would please come 

and help. 

Well, they came and got Mother. Mama said Mrs. Weaver was a sight. 

Thick, white froth stood around her mouth and she had a high fever. Mama 

went up to her bed and said, “Poor Mrs. Weaver,” and was going to give her a 

drink. “Graw meow rrrr,” she said, and raised her head up and opened her 

mouth, and snatched with her head. If Mama had not known she would have 

bitten Mama. 

I think it was less than a week after and she was well again, and could be 

untied. Poor little Anna and family. I cannot remember how long they lived 

there. 

Mrs. Weaver had so many beautiful piece quilts with different patterns. One 

day she asked us to come up to the attic and see how nice she h ad fixed it up 

there, so that they would not have to have their only living room used for a 

bedroom She had tacked beautiful piece quilts all around the walls, so that the 

rough walls would be covered. She had rugs on the floors. It looked real 

attractive to us. She had many nice things . When she moved away she gave 

Mama three of the nice quilts in pay for butter, eggs and potatoes and meat. 

Later there was a family named Hardy that moved in. Mrs. Hardy’s mother 

and father lived in Steelesville . They had three children. I remember how Mrs. 

Hardy would come walking through real deep snow pulling a little homemade 

sled with a box on it, wher e she had the baby. She would stop at our place on 50 

her way to her home to get warmed. The little boy that was next to the oldest 

had to walk. Poor little thing. It was a long walk for him, or for anyone. 

When she came in, she said the little boy had to go, so she went to the 

outhouse with him. He was crying and seemed afraid. Well, after they had 

left, Mother found the little boy’s underpants in a bad shape in the outhouse. 

Mother was furious. “Why did Mrs. Hardy not tell me, poor boy. I wonder if 

she h ad anything to put on him. He will be frozen.” I felt like crying too. If 

they had not gotten so good a head start Mother would have caught up and 

made her take some more wraps. “Why did she not stay home?” Mama asked. 

Later it got stormy and Mrs. Hard y stayed at her mother’s all night. When 

she returned home she found her thirteen year old girl bleeding and weepin g, 

telling that her father had done something terrible to her. The neighbors said 

that they would tar and feather him if he ever showed up ag ain. Mrs. Hardy 

never wanted to see her husband ever again. Poor girl and mother! 

I have taken notice of the in fluence homes have on the children’s life. Yes, I 

know that there are children from ungodly homes that become good 

Christians. God can do won ders with lives when the heart’s door is opened so 

that Jesus can enter in. 

But what we s ow, we have to reap. T here are folks who are Christians. I 

dare not say otherwise, but they do not take it seriously. Sometimes they will 

tell a lie, and the child ren hear it. That is very wrong and will give a bad 

impression on the child. Many are so concerned about finery tha t it seems to 

take such a big part of their time, that Christ’s interest is pushed back. What a 

sin. And gossip, oh how much sin there has be en committed with gossip. 

There are a few Christian homes that let Jesus be the head of the house, where 

humble Chr istians love Jesus and put him first. They are the ones that s ow

good seeds into the hearts of their children. Faulty? Yes. We have all come 

short of the glory of God because we sin. Thank God for the cleansing blood 

that flowed from Golgotha, from Calvary . Jealousy is likened to the rottening 

of the bones. We should pray to God to take it out of our hearts. And the love 

of money, it is the roo t of all evil. 51 

# Preachers 

Rev. John Sjoquist 

ld John G. Sjoquist was 

the minister in Dassel for 

many, many years. Almost 

every yo ung person who was not a 

Lutheran, who lived in the 

community around Dassel was 

confirmed by Sjoquist. There was a 

girl who lived not very far from my 

home whose name was Mary 

Regel. She was a pretty, blond girl. 

She read for Sjoquist. She loved to 

chew gu m and she was always 

chewing gum in the confirmation 

class. One day Sjoquist stopped 

short and said, “My dear Mary, are 

you really that hungry? Go in to 

Mother Sjoquist and tell her to give 

you a piece of bread to chew on 

because this will never help a bit .” 

She never chewed gum in class after that. 

There was another girl who chewed gum way too much. He told her, “Anna 

Maria Kajson, take that gum between your thumb and f or efinger and work it 

up and down. Y ou will get just as good a result and save your jaws a bit. She 

never chewed gum again either. 

J. G. Shoquist was very witty and had a good sense of humor . Some liked 

him for it. I don’t know anyone who got angry with him for it. If anyone was 

sick or in some kind of distress, he was very sympathet ic and understanding. 

# O52 

He owned a bay horse and had a buggy. However, he also had a two wheeled 

vehicle, sort of a cart that he would use more often, because he loved to drive 

very fast, almost in a runaway pace. 

There was a convention north of Dassel in one of the churches that Sjoquist 

served as pastor. They had invited Rev. Skogsberg to come as a guest speak er. 

Shoquist was supposed to meet Skogsberg at the station, which he did. It had 

been raining and the road was full of puddles. Can you imagine what Sjoquist 

said to Skogsberg? “Why do you come dressed up like a lord when you come 

to the country to preach . You should come more dressed like the rest of us , not 

with a stovepipe hat and black suit and white shirt. Sit up in the cart. I’ll take 

you to the convention.” 

Sjoquist on purpose had taken his cart. Now in that cart, when the roads are 

so wet, the mud will splash on the clothes. So Skogsberg got in the cart and 

off they went in a runaway speed, and Sjoquist did not dodge any of the 

puddles either. When they arrived at the church north of Dassel , Skogsberg 

had to go into the house near the church to try to clean some mud of f himself. 

People said to Rev. Sjoquist, “Why did you drive like that? Our guest 

speaker Skogsberg’s clothes are just about ruined.” “Well,” Sjoquist answered 

with a smile, “he needed a lesson not to dress up for farmers.” 

When they were up on the platform, and the people were crowding in, 

Sjoquist even sat down on Skogsberg’s stovepipe hat. Skogsberg was not a 

dress y man, but he was very short and he always wore a stovepipe ha t to 

make him look a little taller and more digni fied. Rev. Sjoquist was also short 

and a little hunch backed. He used to go around the country, both in Sweden 

and in this country, carrying heav y loads of books. When he traveled and 

preached the gospel, he was a very good speaker. Sometimes he was sarcas tic 

to his brother speakers. 

I remember once he was a guest speaker at our church at Lake Jennie. He 

was talking about the people who want su ch good order in their church that no 

one will be disturbed, not even a sleeping Christian. “I hope that the da y will 

come when it will scare the Christian person when it gets so deathly quiet, so 

that they will really wake up thinking that it was so quiet like in the 

graveyard. My wife likes to keep it real quiet when I come home from a 

preaching tour. She will sa y, ‘Come children, we will go out for a walk so that 

your father can get some sleep and rest.’ Away they would go, and do you 53 

know it gets so dea thly quiet that I get wide awake from pure quietness. I 

would rather be where the children smatter a little. Th en I know there is life. 

Christians, wake up ou t of your sleep . Don’t get so formal that we cannot hear 

you breathe. You need to breathe and pra y to God. Let there be life in and 

around you.” 

Another preacher, Rev. Lidman, was an old minister who wou ld come and 

preach the gospel. He was real lively. By the way, he baptized me when I was 

a baby. The old storekeeper Norgren and Mrs. Norgren wer e the sponsors. 

Years later I heard Lidman preach a sermon that I will never forget. He 

spoke about the Br ide of Jesus Christ. He said Jesus Christ came down to 

earth to get a bride for himself. Can you imagine that he would want such 

miserable p erson s as you and I for a bride? But he did. 54 

# More Neighbors 

Aron Nilson and family 

eter Aron N ilson lived on a farm one quarter of a mile west fro m us. 

(Historical records show spelling of both Nilson and Nelson, 

although Nilson is found most frequently.) When he and his wife 

Catharina came from 

Swe den and settled down 

there ; they had very little. 

Aron was a big and 

strong man and who was 

God fearing. They were 

poor and they made their 

home in a hillside cellar. 

The y used split logs to 

make a floor and door. 

Mrs. Nelson’s oldes t son 

was Pher. He had a hard 

will like his father ; the 

second son Karl also was 

hard willed. Anna, the 

daughter, had a milder temper. The mother was dreadfully homesick but tried 

to make the best of it. 

One day a young bear came lumbering into the y ard. He smelled food, 

wal ked over the leaning plank door and fell into the room. There Nelson 

stabbed the surprised bear to death. Now they had bear pork, and the 

neighbors also had a taste of it. It tasted better than pork from a pig they said. 

Th cel lar house was unsatisfactory and Catherine got TB and died. So, 

Nelson was all alone with the three small children. The mother was buried 

under a big tree a little ways from their home. 

# P55 

1880 Map of Lake Jennie Area 

Mr. Israel Haglund’s farm was between Aron N ilsons and ours. One day in 

1870 he and N ilson were talking. N ilson needed a mother for his children and 

a wife, and Haglund needed a wife, so they got together and sent to Sweden 

for a couple of young ladies that they kne w a little. When they arrived, Aron 

said, “I will take my pick, then you can have the other.” And so it was. The 

new Mrs. N ilson , Maria, was very beautiful and had a wonderful singing 56 

voice. Carrie, whom I have told of earlier, was the new Mrs. Haglund. Sh e

also had a pretty singing voice. 

Mrs. N ilson found her life hard. She had a son they named John, and then 

Lina was born. The new Mrs. Nelson also contracted TB and died whi le Lina 

was real tiny. Johannah Dahlberg moved over to the N ilson place to car e for 

the children. Her husband would work on his farm ; in the evening he would 

go to N ilsons to be with his wife. 

Little Lina got some sickness that required an operation on the neck. 

Johannah did that operation. She cut out the affected parts on Lina ’s neck ,

which took a long time to heal. Howe ver, under Johannah’s care she got well 

again. She was left with big scars. Johannah and all the neighbors were 

Christians so there were many prayers going up to God for help, for mercy, 

for thanksgiving. There were prayers for sin forgiveness and singing songs of 

praise to the Lord. 

Johannah Dalberg moved back to her own home and took Lina along with 

her. 

Aron N ilson built a large log cabin , one of the nicest cabins of anybody. It 

would hold many people. Johanna Pearson (Pehrson) , her husband and their 

four little girls (Hilma, Elma, Selma and Emma) came from Sweden in about 

188 3. They came from Mora in Bergslagen, Sweden. The story is that Johanna 

was a child without a real father. Her mother died while she was young, and 

that her mother used to work at the palace. One of the princes was her father. 

The mother had to leave and go to her own folks, and then she died early. 

Johanna Pearson was a nice looking woman, and I remember that Aron N ilson 

drove to town with his lumber wagon and two white ho rses to meet them. 

They were to stay at N ilson ’s until they could establish a home. 

They stopped right in front of our house and asked for a dri nk of water. 

“We are very thirsty,” the children all said. Mother told N ilson to stop awhile 

and she would cook coffee and serve lunch to them all. We children were 

amazed at their beautiful clothes , and in their pretty Swedish language and 

how they curtsi ed. They seemed so limber and their hair laid in ringlets 

around their shoulders. The thin g that took my ey e was a black baby buggy. 

The front wheels were small, the back wheels were very high and it had a top 

like on a real buggy that could fold back. Tha t was the first baby buggy I ever 

saw. 57 

Mrs. Pearson worked for Aron N ilson, and the family stayed ther e. She kept 

house for the family . I don’t know how little Anna N ilson fared. She did not 

look like much and felt left out a lot. 

The summer was h ot and when they worked in the field during harvest, Mr. 

Pearson got very hot. One day he went out in the o rchard. Aron had apple and 

lots of plum trees full of fruit, and also wild berries. Pearson was walking in 

the garden and got a stroke and fell dead to the ground. How sad we all were! 

The widow and children could hardly be comforted. They were in a strang e

country with nothing. They had just made a down payme nt on a farm with a 

very poor cabin. One could see out through the cracks between the logs. 

We were sitting on the grass on the ground where Mr. Pearson was laying 

on a blanket. Selma, his daughter crept right to him and patted his cheeks so 

tenderly and said, “Dear Papa, wake up. You are sleeping too long. Oh, dear 

Papa, are you not going to g et up. Please sweet and dear Papa, wake up.” 

There was not much of a funeral service. A coffin was made which he was 

laid in and buried in simplicity. We sang “In the sweet bye and bye, we shall 

meet in that beautiful sky.” 

Johanna Pearson moved i nto that log cabin and the neighbors made her a 

gift, a sewing machine. She was a very good dressmaker. She never used 

patterns, just a tape measure. Every garment fit just slick. She sewed cloaks 

and overcoats and men’s suits and all kinds of dresses. For style she used a 

fashion magazine. She did dressmaking and she made the pretty little dresses 

for her girl s out of an old dress that was given to her. They always looked so 

stylish. It was so much fun to go to Mrs. Pearson’s. She would laugh and sing 

and sew. She wanted her little girls to be happy although so very poor. It 

seemed as though they were happy. Th ey were so acrobatic and played many 

tricks that surprised us others. 

Poor little Anna N ilson had to take over the household when much too 

young. She had a bad, aching eye but she was so patient. She churned butter 

and baked bread, fried pork and coo ked potatoes for four hungry men , Aron, 

Pher, Carl, cousin August, and little brother John. He r eye got worse and it got 

so bad that she would hit it. Her eye actually came out of its socket, and all 

that was left was a mess of yellow stuff. But she lived and worked and 

suffered no compliments and no encouraging words, just work and no play. 58 

An na had nice hair, and there was a girl from Section 36, Carrie Asp, who 

also had sore eyes. She used to come and stay with Anna real often. How 

these girls used t o primp their hair. It was real nice, I thought. 

When Pher was fourteen he told his father he did not believe in God. On 

Sunday afternoons they were visiting a man named Li ttle Gyllsen who lived a 

mile east of Anna. This neighbor was an infidel and had a very bad influence 

over the young people. He was not ashamed to spread that kind of mission 

among the young people from Christian homes. He would invite the boys in 

the neighborhood and fill them with atheism. He would play cards with them 

and tell them stories, and they thought it was great fun to go to Little 

Gyllsen ’s place. He planted the se ed, or weed, of unbelief in their hearts. 

Pher went there with his brother Carl. Pher was a big boy for his age. His 

mother was dead and the father was very t ired and wanted to rest on Sunday 

afternoons. The boys would go over to this Gyllsen ’s , and he would take over 

teaching them how foolish it was to believe that there is a god. 

One day Pher, who was very grown up in his ways, and big too, told his 

fat her, “I am not staying home and listening to that rot,” pointing to the Bible. 

He tied up some belongings into a kerchief and started away from home. 

Because he was very big, they hired him to be a brakeman on a freight train. 

At a sudden stop he fell off and was run over and cut to bits, on his very first 

trip. If that atheist had not filled the b oys with the idea of not believing in God 

this would not have happened. His brother Carl hired out to work in a saloon 

selling liquor. He died as a bar tender. He never visited his home in many, 

many years. What sorrow! 

Aron N ilson bought an organ for his son John, so he could learn to play. He 

had a good voice, and it was easy to learn. He was in the army for a while but 

came home when his health broke down. He got better after a while and got 

married. 

Aron Nilson then built a nice frame house while Lina was still at 

Dahlbergs . He became a delegate to a mission meeting at S auk Rapids . There 

he met a fine lady. She had been married two times and had a daughter, Edla, 

my age, from her first marriage. She had then married a widow er who had a 

couple children. One of those children died, and then the second husband also 

died. She said, “Her hair turned grey overnight.” 59 

A man named Mr. Finnstrom adopted her husb and’s daughter, so now she 

had only her own Edla Bergestrom. Finnstrom introduced N ilson to Edla’s 

mother Cathrina Johnson, and in a short time they were married. 

I chummed around with Edla, and one day we went walking and picked 

some wild flowers by t he roadside. I saw a little book laying by the road. I 

picked it up and glanced at it. “You may read it first, and then I can read it.” 

So, next time we met I asked her for the book. She said her mother said it was 

about sex and it was poison to read! She threw it in the stove and burnt it up. 

Thank God that I did not get a chance to read that book. I would have 

poisoned my heart maybe. I think my angel guarded me that time, too. 

There came a man to N ilsons from Sweden . H e saw how Anna slaved and 

worked . There was no future for her. He was what they in Sweden called, En 

god templure, he was a white ribboner, or a temperance man and a Christian, 

a cousin to F. Franson, the great missionary. He married Anna. Th ey moved to 

a place not far from N ilson’s befo re Aron got married for the third time. They 

had several children. Anna is still living at this writing (1957) and is over 90 

years old. 

Jette Sanberg and I were Godmothers to their youngest son. They have one 

son who belongs to the Bethlehem Covenant Church in Minneapolis. His 

name is Clarence Johanson . He was a Sunday School superintendent at Lake 

Jennie, and a chairman of the church at one time. He was a fine man. 

When the new Mrs. N ilson came to liv e there , everything became so sunny 

and nice i n the N ilson home. She had a fine taste and had many beautiful 

things she brought along. She had center tables, beautiful crocheted table 

covers, fine wall pictures, rocking chairs, curtains and rugs. She was n eat and 

sweet. Lina came home to live then , an d the new Mrs. N ilson learned to love 

her. 

We three, Lina, Edla and I took music lessons together from Esther Johnson 

from Beckville. The other name for the place was Bethany, south of 

Litchfield. This is where John Johnson, William Johnson and Esther 

Johnson’s folks lived. They were all Johnsons. Finally, one of the Johnsons 

called himself Daniels, the other T. M. Johnson, and the third, William or John 

Williams was a son of William Johnson. William’s son Paul is married to one 

of our church girls, Fran cis Johnson. 60 

Esther Johnson was quite a good organist . S he came out our way to Lake 

Jennie. Lina Nelson and Ella Bergquist, Lina’s step sister, took lessons from 

Esther Johnson also. Sometim es Esther would stay over a couple of days so 

that she could p lay at our mid -week meetings. She was a very fine singer, too. 

She sang a story song; I will tell you this story. 

It was a time in Sweden wh en all the Christian people were persecuted by 

the pastors of the State church. It was the pastors, the schoolma sters and the 

sheriff that were driving the law against every lay minister and anyone who 

would hold religious gatherings in their home. The story is about a young, 

beautiful girl named Mimmie. Her parents owned a big estate and had many 

servants. She was their only child. She could play the piano and had a good 

voice to sing . Her parents were very anxious that she would have a good time. 

Sometimes she seemed unsatisfied. Her father and mother to ld her to be glad 

and dance and sing. You can have lots of fun . There is nothing too good for 

you. You have all the silver and gold you want. 

One day Mimmie heard about meetings held in one of the homes on their 

estate. She was not supposed to associat e with the working class, but she went 

there one evening to he ar a young man preach the gospel of salvation. She felt 

that was what she needed to be happy. She listened, accepted the salvation and 

wept for joy. She rejoiced over her new found friend Jesus. 

One evening when she was in her room, her father and moth er stood 

outside the door and hearing her talking with her Lord, the father opened the 

door and roared. “What in the world are you up to?” 

Her mother was weeping. She answered, “Mamma, Jesus has saved my 

soul and Papa’s Minnie is so happy in her Lord.” 

Her father got so very angry. He had never been like that before. He 

threatened her and told her if she would not give up this foolish religion, she 

would be driven away from her home. Her answer was that she would never 

give up her Savior. 

The y told her then to go to her friends. “We hate them.” 

As time went on, they were hoping that she would leave her, what they 

called foolish notion. Her father and mother made a big dance party that they 

called a ball. All the rich friends were invited. M immie said it was hardest for 

her when all her old friends asked her for a dance but she refused. She was 61 

sitting in a chair dressed in a snow -white gown. One came up to her and said, 

“We have h eard that this is the last time you are with us. Won’t you sin g a 

farewell song and play?” 

She took her seat at the piano and played and sang, “With the crucified 

throng, my lot I will share, that are marching to glory under the banner of the 

cross. Ev en if no one else of my loved ones will bear that cross, that’ s the sign 

we are marching to victory and with Christ we, his glory in heaven shall 

share.” 

Just as she finished her singing, she saw a wonderful sight. Her father and 

mother were kneeling by her side weeping, and her father said, “Will you 

forgive your hard -hearted father for Jesus sake?” Her father and mother were 

gloriously saved, and many of her friends asked for prayers. Mimmie said it 

was so wonderful that we can never express how great it was. A real revival 

started there. Mimmie’s home had many m eetings in it after that first one. 

Souls were saved and poor and rich, young and old rejoiced together. 

The late Mrs. Aron N ilson (Carolina) was a servant in this home and Nels 

Frykman was the young minister. Mrs. Aron N ilson told us all about it when 

we visited in their home with E dla and Lina. To think that Mimmie wrote the 

song in story form. Esther sang and played it in Mrs. Aron Nelson’s home and 

she recognized the story right away. How wonderful it all seems to be. 

Aron N ilson’s wife told me one day that she had been a former sweetheart 

of Nils Frykman, the song writer , back in Sweden . As she told me her story, 

she said after her father died he r brother took over at her home , and he was 

her boss. She was converted at a meeting that Frykman was holding. They fell 

in love , but her brother would not let her see him. He sent her far away to 

work in another church district, so that broke them apart. She felt sorry for a 

long time about it . (Frykman immigrated to America in 1888. He wrote over 

300 hy mns in his lifetime and served as pastor of the Salem Covenant Church 

in Pennock, Minnesota for many years.) 

Carrie Haglund was crippled in one hip and had a hard time getting around. 

However, she was real ambitious and would help to blade the sorg hum cane. 

Little Anna would be left in the house, but the boys had to run into the house 

often to see if Anna was sleeping. Sometimes she would send one of us into 62 

see. One time as I came in the door one of her brothers had lifted her up and 

she started to run around the cradle and her mouth was frothing. I told her 

mother , and she ran in and held her. Anna had a real convulsi on ; and in a little 

while she died. 

Johnie and Albert were working in the field. Johnie stopped and pointing to 

the sky said to A lbert, “Titta! Titta, en ängel far med Anna up te himmel.” 

When he came in his sister was gone. Johnie had seen a vision of an angel 

taking his sister to heaven. 

Mrs. Johanna Dahlberg, our doctor, the one who always was ready to come 

when there was any one born, anyone sick, or any one died, was called. She 

stopped in at our house and said she wanted Lydia to go with her and help 

dress this little baby. They let me go. She washed Anna, combed her, and 

fixed the coffin that Mr. Haglund nailed together. He painted it pale blue. 

While the coffin was drying Anna was laid in the cradle. Mrs. Dahlberg put a 

white dress on her and m ade me button it. When she was ready, she told me to 

put a little bouque t in her little hand. Afterwards she was laid in the coffin. 

Mrs. Dahlberg told me to lay this nice wreath over her head and put flowers 

all around in the coffin. 

Johanna was a nur se and doctor and school teacher from Sweden , and she 

knew children. She talked to them about Jesus and heaven and gave a very 

sweet impression on the young heart. I remember her say, “Little Anna has 

gone to be with Jesus. The angels took her home to that beautiful place. This 

is only the shell of her. The body is what Anna lived in.” 

I can never forget how Johannah used to sing. E arly in the mornings she 

used to go out to the pasture and get the cows. She would raise her voice and 

sing , “ Morn Amidst t he Mountains ” or “God is Ever Good ” and many other 

songs that I was thrilled to hear her sing. I would go back on a little hill and 

li sten to her singing so early that the grass was filled with dew. 

I was wishing to sing like that when I got older. I lo ved Jesus. I loved 

everybody. I would shed tears easily. I was naughty and felt very sorry and 

would ask forgiveness, and I prayed, “ Jesus I don’t want to sin anymore. Help 

me, forgive me and cleanse me.” 

Then the first thing I would forget , and then I would almost despair. I 

wondered if Jesus could forgive me just once more. It is terrible to never be 63 

able to watch against sin and temptation. I hated myself but after a little talk 

with Jesus the clouds would rol l away , and I would be happy as a lark. 

I had a dream. I dreamt that all the garden was full of fruit trees that were 

loaded with prunes so thick and fat. The ground was also covered with prunes. 

I climbed up on the crooked rail fence and called Mama many times. My dad 

told me to be quiet. “M ama has gone away.” I said, “I am longing for my 

mother.” Then I woke up and I think the reason for the dream was that they 

were talk ing about how they were longing back to Sweden when they were 

newcomers to America. My mother said she was longing to see h er mamma 

and papa. I was much impressed by their stories. 64 

# Me Again 

y sister Hulda had pretty curls all over her head. Her head, and 

especially her ears, were very tender because she had scarlet fever 

when quite small. Mother said she believed it best to cut Hulda’s 

hair off as it was too hard to comb those curls. I asked Mama if I could cut it 

and she said she didn ’t care if I did. As Mama was about her work, I took the 

scissors and made one long cut right in front. It made a straight white line at 

her hairline. I saw that was not the way to cut hair. I felt real sorry abo ut that 

white line. I got the comb and held it just so far from the scalp and the rest 

was cut real careful and looked fine. However, that first white line made me 

sick. 

Mama did not say anything. I think Papa and Mama laughed about it when 

I did not see. I cried and prayed to Jesus to let Huld a’s hair grow over that cut 

in the night so Mama would not see it in the morning. I don’t remember any 

more about that horrid line. 

One day when I went to Mrs. Pearson’s for some garment, Mr. Dahlberg 

came i n. He said, “I was thinking that it is so aw ful cold, maybe I should saw 

a few logs and split some wood so you won’t freeze.” Mrs. Pearson was very 

grateful. After a little while she put on her Swedish copper coffee pot and set 

the table. She had some fres h flat bread and new butter. She asked him t o

come in and get refreshed. When he came in, he sat down on a chair near the 

box heater and, lo and behold, the legs on the chair went right through the 

floor. “Oh, oh!” he said. I will be landing in your cellar if I don’t look out. So, 

he got another job o n his hands to strengthen that rotten floor. 

# M65 

One day little Emma came real close to Dahlberg where he was sitting and 

put her little foot on his knee and quietly sobbed. Dahlberg said, “What is the 

matter Emm a?” 

“Selma has got some new shoes.” Then she looked sadly at her own shoes 

with her toes sticking out. Mrs. Dahlberg gave Selma some shoes the week 

before. Now Mr. Dahlberg had to see to that Emma got a pair also. 

One day Mama sent us over to Dahlb ergs to tell Mrs. Dahlberg to come 

over. Mot her was expecting a new baby. We then stayed at Dahlbergs all 

night ; Selma Pearson was also there. She was there a lot. It was like a second 

home to her. We said our prayers and went to bed. We woke up because 

so mebody rapped at the window. 

I looked o ut and there was someone in all white singing, “Beautiful angels, 

beautiful angels is out tonight.” It sounded like Selma’s voice so we looked to 

see if she was in her bed. She was not, so we ran out to catch her . She was 

wrapped in a sheet and floated aro und the apple trees flapping her arms like 

wings singing beautiful angels. We really had fun, and then we had to feast on 

ripe strawberry crabapples before we went to sleep. 

Another time I was sent on an errand to Carrie Haglund’s. It was after dark ,

and the night was very dark. As I came to the little hill between Haglund’s 

farm and ours, there jumped three boys out of the brush right on me, and 

grabbed my arms real hard and growled. Just then the clouds separated a little 

so I could see. Well, one h ad a sheepskin fur coat on and a nasty looking cap. 

The other had sort of a cap that was like a chimney sweep used to wear. The 

boys had white stripes down the side of their pa nts. I just shuddered. They had 

funny faces and corncob pipes in their mouths. T hen one of them grabbed me 

and held me. In defense , I grabbed him by his whiskers and pulled. He cried 

out, “Don’t do that. You’re tearing my whiskers off.” 

I knew right aw ay Johnie Haglund’s voice so I said, “Go away you mean 

Haglund boys.” Just then Johanna Pearson came leading little Emma by the 

hand. Emma let out a scream that was enough to frighten anyone . I told her it 

was only the Haglund boys that wanted to scare us . The boys were playing 

Holy Eve tricks. I had never heard about that before . I learned something. 66 

After that every year there was plenty said and done for Holy Eve tricks. I 

want to tell you what the boys wore. Johnie had turned his sheepskin coat 

ins ide out and he had turned his pants too. They were homemade with muslin 

lining s o that was the dark strips on light pants that looked so funny. The other 

boys had also turned their pants inside out. They made masks out of stiff 

brown paper and blackened ov er the whole side and front to make a long 

beard. They had holes for eyes with b ig black eyebrows, and a hole for the 

pipe or for the mouth so they could hold the pipe. 

Later we learned that some boys went in flocks and did mischief without 

end. For instance, they would take cobs from one farm barn and put them in 

another farmer’ s barn. They traded ho rse s, etc. They took wagons apart and 

put them together again on the roof of some barn. They would trade buggies 

and tip outhouses over, etc. When they got started, what one did not think of 

the others did. 

In about 1886, when I wa s six or seven years old , I went to the first Sunday 

school picnic. Mrs. Israel Erickson was the Sunday school teacher or 

superintendent. The picnic was held on the island in P igeon Lake. We rowed 

over in boats. There were some big trees there and they put up swings for us 

children. There they put up a long board table with nice table cloths and 

decorated. Mrs. Johannah Pearson supervised that part. On each end of the 

table they had a little pig roasted with dressing. They put a little corn cob in 

the mouth of each pig so that they would look real. I cannot figure out how 

they got those pigs to stand up on the platters, but they did. There was rice 

pudding and cookies and cakes a nd all sorts of goodies. 

We had a meeting first, and Erickson had a very lar ge heart cut out of stiff 

white paper. He asked us children what the heart contained. Some said farms, 

others horses, many said gold, pretty clothes, well everything imaginable . He 

started at the top a nd wrote what the heart had in it. Finally, he said ther e is 

something that is missing. I was too scarred but I braced up and said, “Is Jesus 

not going to have some place in the heart?” “It does not seem so,” the teacher 

said. “It i s just a very small place left right down here in the low point of the 

heart. ” T hat gave him a chance to speak about opening our hearts and letting 

Jesus in, and letting Him have the highest and best place in our heart. And 

what the heart is full of the mo uth speaketh. 67  

> Sara Christop herson Wolters, in later
> years, in her m otor car chair.

Another picnic I remember was held at Butternut Lake, southea st of Dassel. 

There was a little girl, a daughter to Christoffersons. She was born with a 

defect in her ankle. She wore special shoes and walked with crutches. She 

could turn h er feet so that the toes headed the right way but as soon as she 

stood up and st arted to walk , her feet would turn front to back and the toes 

would be where the heal ought to be pointing backwards. The joints in her 

ankles had a ball and socket that swung clear around. 

This little girl took my attention . S he saw that I was intere sted in her, so she 

said, “You and I are sisters. We will be together today. ” Her name was Sara 

(Christopherson, later Wo lters) . I thought that she was very sweet. Later she 

was sent away to some school for cripples. She became a real fine dressmaker. 

She married a man who was also a cripple, almost the way she was. They 

lived in Dassel. Later he died. She g ot around in a motor car chair any place 

she wants to go. 

At the picnic, this little girl 

took all my attention. I loved 

her , and she was very 

in telligent and interesting. 

There were a lot of swings, 

some made of heavy rope, 

others were chains fastened to 

the limbs of the big trees. It 

was a very pretty location with 

Butternut Lake right across the 

road. 

There were a few Ame ricans who used to g ather and have English Sunday 

school. They lived around Lake Jennie. John Quick , the judge we all called 

him, was one of the teachers. He had some girls, Mary, Sadie, Phoebe and 

Josie. We went to public school together with these girls .

We were invit ed to go to their Sunday school picnic which was held south 

of Lake Jennie at Comer’s place . There were many high swings set up in big 

trees for the children to swing. However, we were backward Swedes and were 

never given a chance to get a swing, although we would have liked very much 68 

to get a chance at least once. That ought to teach us a lesson never to be 

selfish. 

When we were going home Mother stepped into a boat to cross the lake .

She thought she would get home quicker that way , but the boat sank close to 

shore. 

There was no harm but we then had to walk after Mr. Quick’s big wagon all 

the way home. Mother said that old Quick could at least let these little tots get 

a ride. But he did not think in those terms, only of himself and his own. In 

con trast, t he Scandinavians were always looking out for others, and should. 

When we got home, we were so very tired we could hardly drag our feet. 69 

# Papa’s Mission 

ur neighbors , the Asplunds had twelve children . T hey were sent out 

to work for other people real early in life. In 1887, when Hulda 

Asplund was thirteen -years -old, Mother was making cheese and 

sausage and salting down meat, and there w ere the vegetables and much to do. 

Mama hired Hulda to help. 

One day she was helping to make b reakfast . We had fried pork and eggs. 

She was pouring the lard into a crock and it slipped. She burned her hand 

badly. She went home to her mama. When her hand was healed, she wanted to 

come back to us. She loved to be here, but her da d said, “No, she gets too 

much religion at Andersons. I will let her work for Ola an d Gropa.” 

They were not Christians and they would have drinking and card parties. 

Hulda did not want to go there. She was not there very long before she got the 

typhoi d fever. She was deli rious and cried, “I want to go to Ingel Andersons. 

He talks about Jesus to us children. I want to go. I want to go there.” 

Mrs. Asplund (Carolina) asked us to pray for Hulda . Hulda was a Christian ,

but she died and went to be with the Lord. 

A few y ears after John Asplund took sick and was bedridden for two years. 

My father would go there to see him every Sunday afternoon, winter and 

summer. It was about three -fourths of a mile to walk and Papa had a bum leg, 

but he walked. When he got there he would ask, “How is Asplund?” 

Mrs. Asplund ushered Papa in to his bedroom. Dad would read a portion 

out of the Bible and pray, then sing a hymn, and go back home. Asplund 

would turn his face to the wall and close his eyes and pretend th at he was 

asleep. He did this Sunday after Sunday, but Papa did not give up. He kept 

going there every Sunday, just the same. 

# O70 

One stormy , snowy Sunday the weather was so bad that Papa could not 

venture out. As the time came when Papa used to arrive, A splund started to 

say to his wife Caroline, “I wonder if Anderson is not coming today. I don’t 

think so, it is so stor my.” A little later he said, “Caroline, my how it seems so 

very lonesome because Anderson did not come.” 

She never dared to contradict him when he was well , but now he laid there 

helpless, so she said, “You should be ashamed of yourself. When Anderson 

comes Sunday after Sunday, you won’t even say hello or goodbye. You turn 

your face from him to the wall. I would not wonder a bit if Mr. A nderson 

never would c ome again to see you. He has a hard time walking with his bum 

leg. I often wondered how he had so much patience as to keep coming as he 

has been doing.” 

The following Sunday it was calmer weather. Papa went to Asplunds. For 

the fir st time Asplund had h is eyes open and his face turned from the wall. He 

said, “Hello, Mr. Anderson. I am so glad that you came over. Last Sunday it 

was so awfully lonesome because you did not come. Call in Carolina.” 

Papa did. Then Asplund said, “Caro lina, will you forgiv e me? All the things 

you accused me of doing have been true. I have been unfaithful to you.” 

There was some great confessing done. He said, “Ingel Anderson, do you 

think that there is salvation for a big sinner like me?” He asked P apa to pray 

to God fo r him that he might be saved. 

There was a wonderful meeting at Asplund ’s that Sunday afternoon. Papa 

went home with joy in his heart and thankful to God. Not very long 

afterwards Asplund died. He died with peace in his heart. Praise the Lord for 

salva tion! 

Mr. Roy Case lived near Lake Jennie , a mile south 

from our place. I remember when Roy and Anna Grant 

got married and came there to live. I remember her 

beautiful wedding dress. It was made of nice soft silky 

velvet and had pretty lace pleated ar ound the neck and 

on the cuffs. It had a polona ise and bright golden 

buttons way down the front with tiny mirrors in them. I 

must make a picture here so you can see how the dress 71 

> Anna Grant Case

was made. She really looked very 

stylish in her pretty , red velvet dress. 

We saw very few that were so pretty .

She was nice looking with coal black 

hair, long eyelashes and blue, blue 

eyes. Mr . Case was very kind to 

children , and she was nice to children 

too. 

They never had any children of 

their own. Mr. Case used to play 

vi olin at all the dances around Lake 

Jennie. He had an instrument that he 

called a piano harp and an organ too. 

We children liked to visit the Cases 

because they were so nice. 

We never knew when the change 

came in Mr. Case’s life. He quit 

playing for da nces and there was a 

little white ch urch built south of the 

lake, a Methodist church. Soon Mr. 

Case was their preacher. 

Mrs. Case used to make good 

taffy for us. Once she made 

chocolate candy with sorghum 

instead of sugar. Oh, it was very 

good. That was the first time I

tasted chocolate. They used to 

invite us over and have popcorn 

feasts. I just loved to see Mr. and 

Mrs. Case come over to our home. 

They always came holding hands 

and were so sweet to one another. 

That lasted all their years. 

My Un cle Swan moved from Kerkhoven and lived near Spencer Lake. 

Aunty died and Uncle married again and lived in Dassel. His second wife also 

> Roy Case

72 

died and he moved to Darwin to live with his son, Alfred. When Uncle Swan 

died, Mr. Case held his burial service. He sai d something tha t made me very 

glad. I quote, “You see this man Swan Anderson here? I don’t know how he 

has it with his Lord, if he is saved or not, but I know his brother Ingel 

Anderson. He lived a Christian life and it was his Christian living and 

testimo ny that led me to accept Christ as my savior. That is how I am now a 

preacher of the gospel.” Well, you know that Ingel Anderson was my father. 

There were revival meetings a whole winter. We met in Israel Haglund ’s

home. Now they had built a large hou se and their fr ont room was big. The y

put cut off logs to lay planks on so people had something to sit on. A few 

blankets were thrown over some so it would not be too hard to sit on, but 

there were no back rests. Papa did not seem to mind that. 

People would walk in f locks, some way from Moore’s Prairie, ten miles, to 

get to the meetings. The house was more than packed every night. 

The little children were tossed up on top of a high bed that had a trundle 

bed under it. There they had a plain view ove r the whole aud ience. I would sit 

there and really pray for certain ones that they would get saved. When 

someone put up their hands and asked for prayer it made me real happy. We 

children learned to sing the revival songs faster than the older folks would. 

How we sang wi th the young and old blending their voices. 

Some came just to disturb the meetings and were hard at so doing. Some 

acted like maniacs, making nasty sounds and groaning in the outer room. 

More than one time some boys got a rope and laid i t across the ro ad. One boy 

would lay hidden in a ditch holding one end, and across the road someone else 

held the other end. When the minister left to go home, they tripped him, and 

sometimes others, too. Many that came to disturb later came under conviction 

and with bitter te ars, wept over their sins, confessed, and were led to Christ. 

Every evening there was someone who asked for prayers. Those were glorious 

days. 

The house was filled every night, only on Saturday and Monday there was 

no meeting. During the times the meet ings were held there were several 

preachers. Most of them were from the Free Mission. Some were Baptists, 

and some were straight Missions, but souls turned to God and that was the 

important thing. 73 

When some new preachers came, they would divide, some g oing to Section 

36, some to Section 11 and some to Section 16, our section. 

One evening Olive Dille y and her brother Ben asked for prayer . Then one 

evening when the preacher was going to Section 36 to preach, he was walking 

on the road w ith Ben on one side and Olive on the other. Their father had been 

dreadfully mad about the whole thing and when he learned that the preacher 

was going to 36 to have meetings, he laid for him. When the three of them 

came walking by, and the preacher was giv ing them some g ood advice, their 

father jumped up from the ditch and quickly hit the preacher on his nose. The 

preacher fell back and his hat flew away. It was dark, but after a minute, the 

preacher, wiping the blood from his face said, “I thank you Lord J esus that I 

am worthy to suffer a little persecution for thy name’s sake.” 

The father slid down in the ditch out of sight, but the da ughter knew him 

and cried out it was their father. Frightened, they hurried home. But, the father 

could not sleep that night. He kept hearing, “Thank you Lord Jesus that I am 

worthy to suffer a little for thy name’s sake.” 

The following morning Olaf Dilley came to my father and asked , “D o you 

think that there is salvation for such a big sinner as I am?” He said three t imes 

he was fac ing death and each time prayed to God and promised if his life was 

spared, he would turn to Him and serve Him. He said once he was near 

drowning at sea in a shipwreck, but got to a plank and was rescued. Another 

time he was driving a team ove r Lake Jennie a nd broke through, and both the 

team and he were near drowning but were rescued. He also mentioned a third 

time but it has slipped my memory. 

My father said, “If you confess your sins He is just and righteous to forgive 

your s ins and clea nse you from al l ini quity.” Then Papa and Mr. Dilley went 

into the bedroom and prayed. After that there were me etings in Dilley’s home. 

I remember being there as a small girl for the meetings. 

The devil was very mad and much was done by the non -Christ ians to 

disturb the meetings. Mr. Dille y was great, great grandfather to the younger 

Dill es of the Minnehaha Academy. Here we see that some seed that was sown 

bore fruit to life everlasting. Pra ise God for that! (The family at some point 

dropped the “y” fr om the name and became Dille.) 74 

# My Mission 

fter this there were meetings in different homes. I remember 

meetings at our neighbor Asplunds, Pher Jenson and Dahlberg, at my 

home , and Haglunds, at Ericksons , and John Hager s, and later at the 

Settergrens. I rem ember our neighbor’s favorite songs. Aron N ilson used to 

sing,” Oh Jesus dear, when will you take me home, from this country? I am a 

stranger here.” Mrs. Carrie Haglund use d to sit by the spinning wheel and 

sing, “I think on thee dear Jesus while I work.” Mrs. Asplund, or Carolina, sh e

would always suggest a song that I have never seen translated that means 

Jesus is just the same. Mr. Dahlberg’s favorite song was I Have A Fu ture All 

Sublime . My mother’s was a song of joy that Jesus is coming and putting an 

end to all sin and disappointment. Mrs. Dahlberg had so many favorite songs, 

and so did my dad. Halstrom Settergren’s favorite song was My Beautiful 

Home , where the glorifi ed ever shall live. There were other beautiful hymns 

and one that was a favorite of Betsy Petterson Satterlee and her sister 

Christina (Mrs. Engquist) went, “Is it true that Jesus is my brother? Is it true 

the heritage belongs to me?” 

Oh, how I loved t o hear these friends sing their favorite songs . M any 

children had certain songs that were their favorites too. There was much 

singing . Wh en people sing and rejoice in the Lord, that is the time when God 

can use them to bring blessings to others. 

In 1886, Rev. C. O. Sahlstrom was having some meetings near my home. 

He was a shoema ker from Sweden , so he was mending our shoes when he 

was not studying his sermon or text. We children had revival meetings too. 

One time we met in Lina Nelson Dahlberg’s ho use. Lina was alone at home; 

# A75 

Mrs. Dahlberg was out so often caring for some sick. Sh e was young then ,

and we invited children to come. There were three Benson girls , Clara, 

Hannah and Ida, that came. Their mother had gone to town. Their folks 

belonged to A ugustana Lutheran Church in Dassel ; however, they seldom 

went to church. The Bensons believed if they went to communion, then their 

sins were forgiven . If they were baptized and confirmed and belonged to 

church, that was all that was needed for their salva tion. They had three boys 

and three girls. 

We read and prayed and sang many son gs. We had a very blessed time. 

When we knelt in prayer, the Benson girls started to sob so we asked them if 

they wanted to be saved. They said they would like to be Christ ians too but 

their brothers would make fun of them and call them names, and their ma ma 

would get awful mad. 

Before we knew it, as we were happy thinking only good thoughts, Mrs. 

Benson came home from town. She stopped outside and heard us singing 

hymns and praying. She jerked open the door and hollered , “Kids, what are 

you up to?” I s aw Lina turning pale , and the girls looked very frightened. “We 

are having a glorious meeting,” I answered. She had a very sharp voice and 

she actually screamed, “Who is the preacher?” I again said, “We all are.” 

She grabbed her girls one by one by the hair and shoved them out through 

the door, as she said, “Kids, if you never had a lickin’ before you will get one 

now!” They started down the hill to their home crying. We stood there and felt 

more sorry than I can tell for them. They lived only an eighth of a mile away 

and w e heard them cry terrible when she, in her rage, beat them when they 

arrived home. When I came home, I was sort of sad. There I found that the 

preacher, C. O. Sahlstrom was sitting there mending our shoes. He was a 

cobbler in Sweden and he would spend h is extra time mending shoes where 

he stayed. He asked how our meeting went . M y reply was that we had a 

blessed meeting , but the devil came and spoiled our meeting. I gav e the devil 

the credit, not Mrs. Benson. 

Again, the seed that was sown bore fruit. The middle girl’s name was 

Hannah. She let Christianity sink in and later she got a guitar and sang and 

played the songs we sang. After a few years she got married to a Christian 

man . T he two would sing and play at small meetings . Hann ah sang the lovely 76 

so ngs , and the message sunk into the new sister -in -law’s heart. She had five 

children and worked hard . She loved the Lord. 

Her brother married and took over the home farm. As an adult, I went to see 

the sister -in -law in the hospital , and she asked me to sing for her. I did . T hen 

she pulled out from under her pillow the song book that Hannah sang and 

played out of. I sang more and she seemed so glad. Soon she had gone back 

home to the farm. I thought that she had gotten well but when I came to my 

brother Albert’s place to visit that summer, Olaf Benson, her husband, heard I 

had come to Dassel. He wanted me to come because his wife had just died. He 

asked me to sing at her funeral . I called up my old friend Lina Dahlberg Olson 

and asked her to help me. She played the organ and I sang those songs. Lina 

had to go home to her baby , but the pastor asked me if I would come and sing 

by the grave. I did. A couple of years later I got a telephone call from a nur se

in the hospital saying I was wa nted by a young girl that was dying. 

I was in the midst of washing clothes. In those days we washed the hard 

way ; all white clothes had to be b oiled in strong soap suds. My water was hot, 

but I let the fire go down and got ready as fast as I could. I told the children to 

be good and I would soon be back, and if they needed help to go to 

Isaacson’s. Then I was off. 

The call had come from St. Andrew’s Hospital. When I arrived I found the 

young girl was unconscious. I stood there sort of helpless , pra ying. The girl 

was Ha nnah Benson, whose mother was dead and she had to take over the 

household. Finally, she opened her eyes . I greeted her and read a Bible verse 

to her. She followed me with her lips and then she died. I wish that I could 

have known sooner that she was in the hospital. After she was gone, while I 

was still there, her father and her brothers and sisters arrived from Dassel. Her 

life was short, but she had sown the good seed. I am glad I can believe that 

she went to be with the Lord. Sow the good seed in season and out of season 

and it will bear fruit wherefore it is sent. Praise God! 

Reverend Sahlstrom had been holding meetings and was going to leave and 

go to Section 36, now called Lamson, to hold meetings. My papa went out 

and hitched up the horses to the cutter. It started to snow and the horses were 

prancing. They were very lively because they were well fed and had been 

standing too long in the barn. While my papa was struggling to hold the 77 

horses, Mother treated Sahlstrom to a cup of coffee and h omemade rusks. I 

stood close by and said to Sahlstrom, “Oh how I wish that you would write 

the song about the shepherd and the little lambs for me. I would like to sing 

that in Sunday school.” What do you know ? Sahlstrom sat down again and 

scr ibbled down t hat song for me, while I stood by the window watching Papa 

sitting in a snow storm holding the unruly horses. I really was scared that my 

dad would lo se his patience. 

Sahlstrom handed me the song and said, “You cannot read writing yet , bu t

you will le arn that little by little.” 

Then he said goodbye and left for Section 36. I went into the bedroom and 

got on my knees and prayed that God would teach me to read writing. I got up 

from my prayer and read the whole song for my astonished mot her. She coul d

not understand how I could read. I never went a day to school and she had 

only taught me to read printed letters. I read and sang . W hen my papa bought 

me a rainbow tablet that had different pastel colors, I started to copy the song 

on every page. When Su nday came I could sing it to the class. 

To me it was no wonder or miracle. I felt like a little child does who asks 

Mama for a drink and gets it, so simple it seemed to me. Later when I was 

going to public school , I told Ph oe be Quick, my s eatmate, about it. Some of 

the children laughed at me and said I must have dreamt it. I felt sorry that they 

did not believe me , so I sat down and wrote it into a song, the whole story. I 

was then 12 years old. I said they don’t believe but I will have the story in a 

song how God answered my childish prayer. That was my first poem, and it 

was in Swedish. 

By about 1888, there were a few Yankees settled by Lake Jennie. Mr. Quick 

sent for more Yankees from Kentucky. There were a lot of little log cabins 

quite close together and it was named The Bugg Town. 

One log cabin was used for a school house. I was ten years old then and 

started school there. I had a girl for a seat mate. We sat two in the seat with 

not much elbow room. I tried to sit real near my side of the seat because she 

used to scratch her hea d. I thought that she was lousey and it used to turn my 

stomach to see her pick her nose. It was not very long before word came that 78 

the school was closed. Someone had gotten diphtheria. Then there was n o

more school for me before the new school house was built. 

I studied as good as I knew how. I got a nice little story book for a prize for 

winning in spelling. Now I am no good at spelling. I loved the Quick girls ,

especially Phoebe. Sadie was two yea rs older than I and Josie two years 

younger. We had l ots of fun together. The school teachers roomed and 

boarded at John Quick’s. 

In about 1890, when I was quite young, Mrs. Ann Case and her twin sister 

Jane asked my mama if she could spare me to go and stay with their mother ,

Rebecca Grant . She was si ck with dropsy and her husband James was over 8 5

years old and not very good at waiting on his wife . When I came there, I saw 

a real old -fashioned bed with a real old -fashioned spring on it. It had a roun d

log with sort of pegs that rope ends were fashioned to and the long logs turned 

as to tighten the spring. It then had a mattress on top. She said it was 

comfortable to sleep on. 

She was a hard -working lady and had a three -gallon crock on the kitchen 

table filled with sugared wild gooseberries. They had been picked and 

preserved before she got sick. One day my sister Emma came with me over to 

Grants . S he liked those gooseberries so well that after having two bowls of 

them, she wanted a third. I said, “ No more.” She whimpered. The old man 

was such a horri d looking man, he would scare anyone. He had a fringe of 

white hair that would reach down to his coat collar and a white beard that 

formed a fringe under his chin and went from ear to ear. He had three l ong, 

yellow teeth in his mouth that did not meet and he spoke with a decidedly 

Scottish brogue. He opened his mouth and said to Emma, “I’m going to eat 

you up.” She got so scared of the old man I had to take her back home. 

Mr. Grant read a chapter out of his Bible every morning and night and held 

devotions, and that seemed good to me. 

One evening when I was co ming from Section 36 , I stopped in at a little log 

cabin that was owned by John and Nancy Warden. (Nancy was married to 

John at the age of 16 .) John was the son of an old Methodist preacher. Their 79 

cabin was on the shore of Wolf Lake. He was a great hunter and trapper and 

had a farm, too. 

When I came in to call on them, she was making supper. She set the table 

for me and invited me to stay a nd eat with them. It smelled so good , and I was 

hungry. I can still smell it in my memory. They had fried pork, Fre nch fried 

potatoes with onions, homemade bread and butter, and tea. Mrs. Warden told 

me her mother, an Indian, used to stop in at my mother’s years before. 

Time passed by , and I stopped in again at Warden’s. By now they lived in a 

small frame house an d had two sons. Nancy Warden was on a couch sick with 

TB. There were newspapers around her bed for her to spit on. There were no 

screens on t he windows or doors and the house was full of flies. I was 

horrified! John was sitting on a chair taking it easy wh ile the flies were thick 

on her. I tried to fan the flies away from her. I asked him if she knows Jesus. 

His answer was she is only an Indian , a heathen. She don’t understand 

nothing. He said his father was a Methodist preacher. I said, “Then why don’t 

you tell her what you know about God?” 

I read a little for her and prayed, and then I left. Shortly afterward she died .

It was not long befo re he married again to a woman named Clara . When he 

was dead many years afterward, the youngest son Joseph had take n over the 

farm . H e married Hannah Newman, a niece of my sisters Emma and Annie .

Joseph and Hannah had a dozen children. I don’t think that any of them 

went to any Christian school. Instead they were busy raising white and dark 

mink by the thousands. It required many hands to see that the mink farm was 

run right. They had to be fed and watered the right way or the loss would be 

great. The ir grandfather was a hunter, fisher and trapper. Like father, like son 

and grandson too. 

That next year, when I was 13 years old, but on March 5 would have been 

14, the church board voted me in as a Sunday school teacher. I was scared but 

glad and I w ould try to teach the younger children. I loved all the little 

children very much. 

Swanberg, that tall man wh o had to bow his head so that he could enter 

through the door of Haglund’s cottage started a sawmill near Lake Spencer 80 

across the road on the south side. It was between Aron Nelson’s and 

Haglunds’ place. He sold the saw mill to Pher Johnson . W hen I would g o past 

the house of Mrs. Pher (Clara) Johnson , she would come out and call, “Lydia, 

come in and visit with my Amanda,” and I always would. 

There were many newcomers from Varmland, Sweden , who started to work 

at the mill. One family that had many children was Erik Ostlund. They lived 

in a very small log cabin and had very little in the beginning. Mother used to 

bring them clothes and sheets and pillowcases, etc. They were happy. Now a 

grand daughter to Ostlund is married to my brother’s son Joseph. 

There was a man named (Andrew) Olson. He was a bro ther -in -law to 

George Kinnick. Hi s wife Beata was a sister of Matilda Kinnick and 

Shamrock W edelin. The Olsons had three boys. Mr. Olson worke d at Pher 

Johnson’s sawmill. One day the sad news came that Olson had slipped while 

riding a log and fell right on the great saw. He was badly sawed so that his 

lungs were showing. The doctor did what he co uld. 

I was small then but oh, how I prayed for him. I knew that he was not a 

saved man. I said, “Papa, can I not go down to Pher Johnsons and tell Olson 

Jesus loves him and will wash his sins away if he asks Jesus to do it and if he 

believes?” My mothe r and papa said, “No child, it will be too hard fo r you to 

see him. Some older person can speak to him and we can pray for him.” He 

died. I never found out if he turned to the Savior. 81 

Lydia 

# Lost 

n Sundays I was free. I went to Sunday school in the morning, and in 

the evening I went to Section 36 for evening services because that 

was closer to Grants. One evening as I started home from church 

there was a bunch of boys and girls coming part of the way. That was fine 

with me , however I had heard th at 

some of those boys were not to be 

trusted, so I wanted to be cautious. A 

couple of the boys came up to me and 

took my arm and said they would see 

me home. I said, “You are not!” 

As soon as I found a chance I snuck 

behind a bush. I don’t think they 

missed me. They were so many 

anyway. I waited there until no one 

would see me. I was still a little afraid 

to take the main road, so I figured if I 

went through that pasture it would 

bring me closer to Grants than going 

the long road around. I did just tha t. I walked and walked. I t was moonlit and 

finally I discovered that I was walking in circles because I came to the same 

light log three times. By now I was tired and climbed on the log to rest. I lay 

down and fell asleep. 

I had been praying to God to protect me from danger. I have no idea how 

long I slept when I heard an owl hooting up in a tree. I knew what it was but I 

did not like to lay there and liste ne d to an owl. I thought, “How can I get away 

from this place?” 

# O82 

I looked around and saw a hig h stump a ways off. I too k that for a marker 

to follow. I kept my eyes on that mark and not looking what I walked into I 

got full of murdocks and there was some that we in Swedish call präst lus and 

fär nälas. Präst lus were the same as sand burrs and fär nälas translated would 

me an sheep needles. They would stick to your clothes from all three points 

and were hard to remove. So, then I had to stop and pick all sorts of stickers 

from my clothes. 

After walking awhile I got into a sl ough , and my mark was on the other 

side of that sl ough. On the east side was Wolf Lake. I had to step on the high 

tufts but sometimes my foot would go down in a hole and my feet got wet. 

Finally, I reached the high stump and there was a clearing and I saw a fence so 

I hurried un til I reached that fe nce. I was just going to climb over when I 

heard someone walking on a road so I ducked and peered to see if I knew the 

man. He was a stranger to me so I waited until he was far enough away so he 

would not see me. Then I climbed over , and when I stood on th e road I knew 

where I was. I saw Grant’s cottage across a plowed field. I ran straight across 

that field and thanked God that I got back. 

I had to clean myself outside. They had a box with a wash dish and a 

towel. I washed and cle aned as good as I cou ld, then removed my shoes and 

went in real quiet. However, Mrs. Grant heard me and said, “That you 

Lydia?” and asked what time it was. 

I struck a match and lit the lamp. It was two o’clock in the morning. Mrs. 

Grant said she was re al concerned. “I neve r thought that you, Lydia, was that 

kind of a girl.” 

I felt real bad but I was real tired and did not try to explain to her. I was 

afraid that she would not believe me, and I never did tell her. She had heard of 

girls in Section 36 that did not have go od reputations. She did not live long 

afterwards. Mr. Grant had an old Scottish Bible that he read out of most every 

day. He was a real old timer. 83 

# The Party 

ur nearest neighbor to the north was George Kinnick. He was a 

German but could speak Swedish fluently . His wife Matilda was 

from Käna in Sweden. She had gone to Germany to work for some 

rich people and had met George. They got married and came to America. 

They built a log cabin on their farm and had three daughters, F redrika , Louisa, 

and Albertina. Then came three boys, John, George and Walter, followed by 

Betty. 

They got very little schooling, if any, and Mr. Kinnick ruled with an iron 

rod. He was a loud, commanding sort of person. He drove all the family like a 

man drives his oxen. He himself did not work ; he just commanded. His oldest 

girls had it hardest as they had to go before or beside the oxen while he sat all 

wrapped up on top of the cordwood load going ten miles to Hutchinson with 

the wood to sell. They w ould wear coarse men’s clothing and felt boots, etc. 

in cold and snowy roads. He had no mercy. He said if any of his young ones 

would come home dressed with fine clothes or wear a hat, they wo uld be 

sorry. That went on for years. 

John took after his fa ther as soon as he got big himself. He wore a stove 

pipe ha t and fine clothes and walked around with a cane. He bought a buggy 

and a horse, a runner, and then the neighbors saw him really go. 

The girls did leave home. The oldest, Fredrika, married a fa rmer north of 

Kinnicks whose name was John Bredeson. She got so crippled by rheumatism 

that she was tied by that in her house most of the time. She could not walk or 

get around. People said it was no wonder, the way she fared when she was a 

girl. Betty mar ried Ola f Regel, a neighbor boy. Mrs. Ki nnick was short and fat 

and sort of jolly. 

# O84 

Mr. Kinnick boasted about how he was an atheist , and he planted that into 

the hearts of his family . He would curse and swear terrible so we children 

were afraid of him. His many pigs fed in the neighbor’s corn fields. He would 

see to it that the fence between our cornfield and his land was torn down real 

often. My father, although he had a bum leg, had to walk a half mile and fix 

that fence. Then it was taken down again t ime and time again , and Kinnick’s 

pigs would have a feast. 

In the spring of 1889 Mr. Kinnick died of a stroke. No one mourned him. 

The olde st son John took over and acted much like his father. He went about 

swinging a cane and wearing a stove pipe hat acting like a dude. He bought a 

new buggy and was seen out riding real often. 

Mrs. Kinnick had never had a party for her neighbors but now she was 

going to have a real party inviting all the neighbors. She was having a cheese 

party. Every neighbor was to bring a pale of milk, and then she would make a 

big cheese. 

They would get their milk luke warm in a very large wash boiler. Then they 

took the stomach of a young calf that had been slaughtered. The stomach had 

curds of milk in it. They took them o ut, washed and dried the stomach skin 

and put it in a salt solution . Then it was dried and they put the curds back into 

the stomach bag. They t hen pulled that curdled milk, called rennet, with a 

stick around and around through the warm milk. In a few minut es cheese 

formed in the milk. Gently they packed it together and lifted it into a large 

colander or stea mer pan, then let the whey drain off. T hen they put it under 

weights to press more whey out of the cheese. When the cheese was done , it 

was put up to ag e before it was ready to serve. The secret to getting good 

cheese was how it was aged. 

The whey was cooked until it formed a brown, thick m ess. This was made 

into sort of a brown cheese spread for sandwiches. Some would put parts of 

the first cheese in to the whey and when the mess was ready, was called sweet 

cheese. Cheese parties were fun. 

When that work was done Mrs. Kinnick served an elaborate lunch. The 

ladies that had to hurry home ate by the first table . After they were about 

finished Mrs. Ki nnick sai d, “I forgot to serve you that sausage that I dried. It 

is just right by now. Mama answered that she was so full she couldn’t possibly 85 

eat any more, as did all the other ladies at the table. When the second table 

dined, all had some of that dried sausage except one. 

When Mama had been home awhile someone came and told her to hurry 

and go over to Kinnicks because Mrs. Kinnick was very sick. They went to 

Cokato after the Doc and he came too. Mrs. Kinnick turned stiff and was in 

very hard pain. Ma ma asked her, “Have you eaten anything that has not been 

well cooked or fried?” She said, “No, no.” Then Mama said, “How about that 

dried sausa ge? Then she said, “Oh my God! I ate the most and will die first.” 

The doctor took a piece from Mrs. Ki nnick’s ar m and sent it to be tested. They 

found trichinae. Mrs. K innick said that pig we killed seemed so healthy and so 

big. “She got out once onto the island at Pigeon Lake. I don’t know what she 

lived on out there. She was on that island I think about three week s. She must 

have eaten rats and the like. She was very sick for awhile but then she got 

well, and got so very fat. She was the nicest pig we ha d.” 

Soon her sister Shamrock, and then Marie Wedelin were sick, and then 

John Kinnick , and the Regal boys and John Bredeson . Mother tried to tell 

Matilda how important it was to get right with God, but to Mama’s sorrow, 

Matilda said she only wished to die as calm as her husband did, and he did not 

believe in God. Mrs. Ki nnick died. Mary Wedelin and her mother als o died. 

John Ki nnick, the son, also died, with just a little time between. The rest that 

were sick were thinking they would also die. However, they got better 

gradually. There were eleven sick with trichinosis . Seven recovered and some 

of them were sick al l winter. When the doctor studied the cases, he said that 

they got well the same way that old sow did. The trichinae got interwoven 

into little bumps on their bodies. We cannot understand it, but that is what 

happened. Mrs. Bredeson, Ki nnich’s daughter, sa id, “They have been 

aggravating all the neighbors with their horrid pigs and now a pig has to be 

the cause of their death.” 

I think God protected those that did not get it from eating that sausage. 

They were our ladies, Mama and others that sat at the first tabl e setting, when 

Mrs. Kinnick forgot to serve it before it was too late. I am sure that nothing 

just happens, it is planned. God is interested in his own people. L et us always 

put our life trust in him, and be willing to do his will. For we know t hat all 

th ings work together for good to them that love God, and are called after his 

purpose. 86 

# Wolves 

n 1891 there was a mission conference up near Kerkhoven. My father 

said that I could go with him. There we were guests at Dahlberg’s home. 

What a wond erful time we had. Mrs. Dahlberg made us feel at home. The 

dinners were served in church. Everybody who l ived out there brought food in 

abundance. I remember one thing that Mrs. Dahlberg made to bring was a roll 

cake, chocolate roll if you please. I had ne ver seen one before. 

One evening after church the Dahlbergs said, “You girls can walk home 

to night. W e are giving some old people a ride.” 

As we were on our way, I heard some hoots and I said, “Tillie, what is that? 

It sounds like you have hooting boys here as we have at home. The boys at 

home used to stop at the crossroads and hoot at each other. It was a mile from 

the east to the west crossroad and they would stand and hoot and answer each 

other.” 

But Tillie said, “Stop! Listen! Oh, the wolves are coming.” The other girl 

and Tillie ran as fast as their legs could carry them. Poor me ! I was short and 

only 13 years old. I could not keep up with them because they were tall, long 

legged 20 year old girls. I got way behind. We crossed the North Cro w River 

and went through a wire gate into a sheep pasture. Tillie called to me, “Be 

sure to close the gat e after you when you enter.” I did. The gate was covered 

with wire way down and up, and the fence was quite high with sharp wire 

way down to the ground so that the wolves could not get through to get the 

sheep. 

While I was running, I heard when the wolv es ran against the wire fence. It 

rattled and they let out a chorus of howls. Then they followed on the outside 

around the pasture. 

I kept running and the grass was wet with dew. I just about ruined my 

clothes. The girls got so far ahead that they look ed like specks in the 

# I87 

moonlight. When I got to the sheep house , the y called me to come inside and 

rest. 

The Dahlberg boys were already home and the dogs barked. The boys heard 

the commotion and took their guns and shot up in the air. The wolves 

disappe ared. Then we girls ventured out of the sheep pasture up to the house. 

We were glad to be in and safe. Tillie and her friend dream t that the wolve s

were coming up the walls into the house all night , and they were very tired in 

the morning. But I slept like a log , all tired out. When I was afraid, I said to 

the Lord, “Take care of me,” and he always did. Praise his holy name. 

One day, I don’t reme mber how old I was, it was winter and there was 

snow on the ground. I was on my way to Sunday school. Whe n I came to the 

road that led up to the highway that leads by Erickson ’s Hill to the church, I 

saw a huge grey wolf slowly walking ahead of me up the b end in the road. 

Goose pimples went up my spine but I thought of what Dad used to say. 

Never run away if you are frightened. Face it and pray. If you run it will 

surely get you. 

I kept walking and was in prayer. It was an old wolf, stiff legged, a high 

one. He walked so slow and turned and looked at me. Finally, he walked off 

the road and up the side of th e sloping hill. When he got way up the hillside, 

he turned and looked at me. I turned and looked at him. The he went his way 

and I went mine , on to Sun day School .

One cold winter the snow fell very heavy. Sometimes it thawed between 

times. We used to cross Lake Spencer on our way to school. There were huge 

drifts on the lake. The Haglund boys made a big tunnel through the drift. It 

froze solid and a fterwards we would walk through the tunnel. How terrible if 

it would have caved in on us, but all went we ll. 

One very cold morning I was bound to go in spite of the cold. When I came 

a ways into the tunnel I saw an animal come towards me. I prayed God 

protect me. I kept walking and so did the beaver. We met and he held himself 

close to one side and I to t he other side. We went slowly past each other 

saying nothing. I felt thankful. I strongly believed in the angel who protected 

the children. 88 

I do be lieve that Christian parents should teach their children to pray at all 

times and thank God for help and protection. They will not become overly 

frightened, but they will be more trusting and brave when they are in need. 89 

# Ghosts 

here was an old lady who had a thirteen -year -old daughter. People 

believed that the lady was beset with an evil spirit. She was very mean 

to her daughter and she kept threatening her. She said, “When I am 

dead, I will come back and molest you.” 

Well, o ne day she died and the poor girl was very frightened. The thrashing 

machine was in the neighborhood at one of the neighbors of this woman. In 

the middle of the night the thrashers were awakened by a very sharp whistle. 

They were tired and it seemed too ea rly to get up , but the whistling kept on .

They dressed and went out thinking that it must be the morning. You see, the 

workers used to get up before daylight to get an early start. When they looked 

toward the thrashing machine the engine was fiery red. The y ran to it, but 

when they arrived the engine was black and stone cold. 

A little girl came running to the men crying asking them to protect her. Her 

mother was after her. Every night after that, while the corpse of the mother 

was still lying in the co ffin in the shed, there was someone there, as the men 

would stay to watch the girl. They said there were unearthly noises, rapping, 

pounding, and scratching. As soon as they turned out the light the pillows 

started to fly back and forth out of the bed and many other things happened. 

They called the Lutheran minister from th e Stockholm church at Moore’s 

Prairie. He came over and read scripture and prayed but it did not help. After 

the woman was buried, I don’t know when the noise and commotion stopped. 

There was an old couple who said, “Did you hear that clapping, just like 

someone clapped their hands together with a wet cloth between the hands?” 

They all heard that. “Well,” the couple said, “that is a sign that you won’t hear 

any more noises or see distu rbing things anymore.” And no one did. The little 

girl was never bothered anymore either. 

There was a young lady who I knew real well who went to that house with 

her sweetheart. She heard and saw what was going on. She used to be very 

# T90 

much afraid of the dark. But after the visit there she was never afraid any 

more. She said she had been as close to spooks as anyone could be and lived 

through it. The lady’s name was Christina Molin Larson. 

Many years later I had been in the City working and came home for a visit. 

My sisters and I went to a meeting held in a little church e ast from us about a 

mile or mile and a half. We went past a house where a lady had been living 

with her three daughters. The girls all married and moved away. By then there 

was a corn field close to the road way back from the house. I stopped and said 

to my sister, “How come Mrs. Sheck is running around the corn shocks like 

that?” My sister looked and we saw her and watched her. Then we walked 

home. My sister said, “Have you not heard t hat Mrs Sheck died some time 

ago? Mrs. Lundin has seen her running about until she too was so frightened 

that she is sick in bed.” “No,” I said. “I never heard a word about that.” I had 

not ever known that Mrs. Sheck was dead. 

Later I was told that the windows in that house pounded, from all the 

windows at the same time and light was seen on the window panes. But that 

did not last but a few weeks, and nothing more was seen or heard. One of our 

Covenant pastors went there. Of course, he was requested to go and order the 

evil out. Someone said that this lady had something on h er conscience that she 

would not confess, and she was terribly afraid to die. 

One evening I was sent to get Johannah Dahlberg because Mama was ill. It 

had rained before so the ro ad was soft. I saw a light that looked like sulfur 

burning. It was red an d blue and yellow and I saw it coming from a stump. 

Then I saw two more like it. It was good that mother had told me that some 

kinds of wood gave off that light when they are rotting. (This is a

phenomenon called foxfire cause by a fungus in rotten wood.) 

What was more scary was something that came towards me up on the hill. I 

did not understand what it could be so I prayed to God whatever it was, that it 

should not harm me. My fat her told us we should not run if we were afraid, 

but pray. To run would n ot help if it was dangerous. It could catch up with us 

and if it was not, it was good to stay and find out what it was. 

It was (Olaf) L owhalt Forsberg. He carried a lantern and as he walked the 

light went high with one step and low with the next. (Olaf Forsberg walked 

with a profound limp.) Up and down, the shadow and light in front of each 91 

step went in sort of a circle. It looked queer. And when I met him he said, “It’s 

a great wo rld! Oh, it is such a little girl out walking this late at night.” As soo n

as he said “a great world” then I knew who it was because someone once said, 

“Great World Forsberg was here today.” He and his whole family would use 

that expression. 

I said, “I s it not Mr. Forsberg I meet?” He said, “Yes.” I told him I was 

coming from Dahlbergs and had been there on an errand. Well, I ran the rest 

of the way, so happy and when I came there Mrs. Dahlberg asked me if I had 

met Forsberg. My way home seemed real sh ort. I was running bare foot and 

the road was smooth and soft. 

I used to go and visit Mrs. Forsberg (Emma) in her little home when she 

was sitting there all alone in the summer. I would bring my guitar and sing 

some songs for her. When her husband was in the hospital on his very last , I

went to see him and tell him about the wonderful Savior who died for his sin 

and the wonderful love He has for His children, and the home He is preparing 

for his own. Mr. and Mrs. Forsberg are home now where no poverty w ill ever 

be, no sorrow, no death, but joy forever more. 92 

# Music Lessons 

First Lake Jennie church, built in 1886. Ingel 

Anderson, Ar on Nilson and Israel Haglund were 

instrumental in the founding of this church. 

# We had a fine school teacher, Lizzy Roser. She was a Christian. Every 

morning before she would start her classes, she would read some 

scripture and pray to God. How I loved her and what a good 

influence she had on the school children. Sometimes she would co me with us 

home and stay overnight , and we were happy to have her. 

She always had a motto for each day. One was politeness . “D o and say the 

kindest thing in the kindest way. ” Lizzy Roser had a brother , George, who 

taught singing lessons in the little M ethodist church across the lake. He had 

two boys and two girls at that time. He was a music teacher and led a brass 

band in Hutchinson. It was fun to attend that singing school. G eorge Roser 

would walk on foot way from Hutchinson to teach that singing clas s. 

Sometimes it was bad walking and cold and a lot of snow, but he would troop 

through and be sure to come. 

One evening Albert and I started across the lake on the ice. It had been 

very cold and the ice was very thick. Then it had thawed a day or two and 

there was water on 

the lake, which 

froze on the 

surface. Well, we 

got out a ways and 

the second freeze 

broke and we 

stepped into water 

over our feet. There 

was still ice und er 

and we crossed the 

lake that way. When we 93 

arrived we were soaking wet. The church was cold and our clothes froze to 

ice. When I stood up to sing my skirts were frozen so that the shape was l ike a 

knee sticking out in front. 

When singing was over, we went home across the lake the same way. It had 

turned very cold and the walking was very hard. Sometimes we stepped 

through the last ice. Well, I was sure that I would catch a bad cold. We had a

mile home after we crossed the lake and the snow had drifted across the road 

in many places. I walked so that the perspiration just poured from me. When 

we got home, we took every stich off and put dry clothes on and crawled to 

bed upstairs in a room that had no heat. What a wonder we woke up rested 

and fresh in the morning, without a sign of a cold. Now I understand that it 

was that hard walking and sweating that saved us, and that while we still were 

very warm, got dry clothes on. For the rest I thank Go d. I know it was His 

help and mercy and guidance, as I have kno wn many, many times in my life. 

God is ever good. 

George Roser held a concert in the Lake Jennie church one evening when 

his four children sang lovely quartets. One song that I thought was lovely was 

Listen to the Mocking Bird. Another evening he broug ht his brass band , and 

they played for our Lake Jennie church audience. It turned out to be a wild 

snow storm and mother and dad invited them for lunch after the church 

concert was over. They c ame. I wonder how they could drive home to 

Hutchinson. They mus t have had a hard time to get home through the snow 

drifts and the storm. 94 

# Danger 

outh of Litchfield lived Dave Hull. He came to my mother one day and 

asked her if she could spare me for a couple of weeks. Mrs. Hull 

needed extra help because his mother and father and young niece were 

coming to visit them. The young ladies name was Clara Millard. Mother said 

if I wanted to do it, it was all right. 

I h ad to get my clothes ready as I had to take the train. Dave would meet 

me in Litchfield. I had a dress that I bought the material for and sewed myself. 

It was fitting to wear for the 4 th of July. It was red and white striped and blue 

and white for trimmin g. I took that dress with me and packed the suitcase with 

clothes. 

When I arrived in Li tchfield I stood there waiting for Dave. The circus was 

in town and there were crowds of people. Finally, a man came up to me and 

spoke to me asking, “Have you been w aiting long?” My answer was, “Yes.” 

Then he said, “I will carry your suitcase and we will g o to the circus.” I said, 

“No, I wish that you would get your buggy and put them in and take me 

home.” I thought it was Dave Hull. He resembled him and had brown eye s

and a little mustache. “No, let’s go to the circus,” he said. I again said no and 

he aske d, “Why not?” I told him I didn’t think Mama and Papa would 

approve. 

“That’s silly,” he said. “Don’t you want to see all those fine animals 

perform? Are you not hungry?” “Yes,” I said. So, he said, “Let’s go to the 

restaurant and have dinner, alright.” 

He took both my suitcases and we went to a restaurant and had a good 

dinner. While we were eating, he tried to talk me into going with him to the 

circus. When din ner was over, I asked him if he knew where the post office 

was. “Yes,” he said, “Right there .” I said, “Let’s go there.” 

# S95 

We left my suitcases in the restaurant and went to the post office. I asked 

for Dave Hull’s mail and the postman handed it to me. T hen I asked, “Do you 

know Dave Hull?” “Yes,” was the answer. “Do you know this man?” I aske d. 

“No, I think he is a circus man.” I gave the mail back and told the man to take 

me right back to the restaurant. 

As we came to the restaurant I saw my uncle A ugust Sangren and Dave 

Hull standing there talking. The circus man disappeared . I was so gl ad to see 

Uncle Sangren and Dave Hull. Now I saw that Hull was a taller man. I was 

glad to get to Hulls safe. 

I got real busy with work at Hulls. I soon found out that I really had to 

work. I washed and ironed and cooked and cleaned as fast as I could go 

because the company was arriving from Iowa the next day. Dave Hull was 

giving a big ball for his niece Clar a Willard . He had a paid band from 

Minneapolis come out to play for the ball. He had a huge hayloft with a floor 

to dance on, and a platform for the band. 

Mrs. Hull (Addie) and I made cakes, and he had ice cream made in 

Litchfield to order. The hall wa s beautifully decorated. Clara was dressed very 

beautifully. I asked what I should wear that would be fitting and she said, 

“That red and white s triped dress with the blue and white trimming is very 

fitting,” so I wore my 4 th of July dress. 

After every thing was ready Hull wanted to teach me to dance, but I said, 

“No, no, I don’t want to.” If I had been convinced to learn to dance who 

knows wher e or what I would have been now. I was afraid it looked like sin to 

others. 

A couple of days after the ball Dave’s father asked if he could take the 

buggy and horse to take his wife out for a ride. That would be so much fun for 

her. They knew someone that lived not so far away. Dave said yes , and the old 

folks started out. The y drove about a mile, when something scared the horse. 

The old man lost control. They had a runaway. The buggy was broken and the 

horse went back to the farm. They found Dave’s fa ther trying to console his 

wife. She had a broken hip. 

There was no hosp ital in Litchfield then so she was brought home to Hulls. 

Clara was so sweet to her old grandmother but Mrs. Hull was so mad because 96 

the buggy was her own that Mr. Hull had given her as a present. She was so 

mad she would not even see her mother -in -law or ask how she was. She went 

to bed and would not get up to help make the meals or anything. Poor old 

lady, poor old man and poor Dave. But Clara was so sweet, she cared so 

sweetly f or her grandmother and carried out bed pans without a complaint. 

She was only 17 years old. I heard Dave say to his wife, “You think more of 

your buggy than of my mother.” She was so bitter, the poor unhappy and 

selfish woman. I don’t know if the old Mrs. Hull ever recovered. 97 

# Hijinks 

nna, John and Lina N ilson became Christians. Anna is past 80 years 

now and is still living and trusting in the Lord in 1957. 

I mentioned that Aron N ilson built a big nice house that had many roo ms 

both upstairs and downstairs. Anna was to leave h ome. John, the younger 

brother was full of tricks , and he really went too far with his tricks. The night 

after Anna and August got married, John managed to put strings from the 

different doors so that he could open and shut doors with out being seen. He 

cre pt under the bed in August and Anna’s room. After they had gon e to bed he 

started to pull strings, first one string, then another opening and shutting 

doors. It made them real nervous and they could not u nderstand why all this 

opening and shutting of doors was going on all night. 

John did not get any sleep but he did not care. In those days the people had 

only straw mattresses and no springs, only slats to lay the mattress on. John 

cut a hole in the ca sing that held the straw and gradually picked the st raw little 

by little. Finally Anna and August were lying on the bare slats. 

Well, they had been disturbed by the opening and shutting of doors all night 

and by the way, he had a cow bell on one door and a sheep bell on the other. 

He kept ringing those bells at intervals too. What do you think? Don’t you 

think that he was real naughty? 

Towards morning he sneaked into his own room and bed and got a little 

sleep. Poor Anna and August were so worried and tired. They found out how 

it all was done in th e morning and decided not to make any fuss about it. Just 

a little laugh. 

# A98 

# The Lady 

hen I was between 13 and 14 (about 1891) there came a one -armed 

man from Hutchinson and asked Mama is she could spa re me for a 

couple of weeks. He had been driving around and could not find a 

girl to come and help out in the hotel while the Adventists had their 

convention there. They were housing and feeding many of the guests of that 

convention. Mother told him I coul d. I packed my suitcase and put my Bible 

and song book in it, and also brought my guitar along. I figured to play in my 

room evenings and pr actice. 

When I came there, I was to share a room with two other girls . I was 

surprised to find both the perso nnel and the hotel owner, a lady, so ungodly. I 

felt bad about that but I thought they are not bashful to show whom they serve 

so why should I be. 

My job was to peel potatoes and all sorts of vegetables, and to help to toast 

bread over hot coals holdin g the slices on a fork with a long handle. I also 

washed dishes. When evening came my feet were aching because I only 

brought my Sunday shoes in the morning when I came. 

When we came to our room at night, two girls slept in a big bed on one side 

of our room and I had a single bed on the other side. The other girls had 

another room. I felt very alone but I tuned my guitar and played and sang in 

Swedish. Then I read a chapter of scripture. I read audible but low and then I 

sat down listening to their chat ter. Finally, I knelt down and prayed for them 

and the owner of the hotel and myself. I slept good all night. One night when I 

was playing and singing the song about Mimmie, one of the girls started to 

sob. The other girls asked her what the matter was. She said, “If y ou could 

understand what this little girl sings and prays about you would weep too. 

# W99 

Then she wanted me to interpret for her. I could not do it very well but I did 

my best. I think had I known that one girl was Norwegian I would have been 

more b ashful. The other girl was German, and I sang Swedish. 

Miss Simmons, t he lady who owned the hotel , was not married to the man 

she lived with. She used to come out in the kitchen and dance on the floor and 

laugh and cut up. She was very nice looking, bl ack curly ha ir, brown sharp 

eyes, long eyelashes, always powdered face and she wore rich brocade d silk 

dresses and many petticoats with embroidery ruffles on. She wore a gold 

watch and chain and armlets of gold. There was no imitation on her. She wore 

real high heels and was dressed like a queen every day. 

One time she and the man she lived with came into the kitchen and she 

danced and kicked up as usual, and then she kicked the man in the seat. I was 

so shocked that I stared at her. She gave me an ang ry look and said, “You 

stare at me as if you’ve never seen people before.” After that I never looked at 

her. When she came in, I turned the other way. I prayed that the ungodly 

woman would repent and turn to God. You can understand how lonesome I 

was for my home. I nev er dreamt that I would ever see Mrs. Simmons 

anymore. 

When the two weeks were up, I was so glad. My mama came and had my 

little sister Annie with her, and I could go home. 

Many years later I met that same lady again when I was sent by th e church 

to do visitations at the hospital . Our committee consisted of six plus Pastor 

and Mrs. O.B. Olson. The pastor read some of the Holy word and we ladies 

sang and I accompanied them with the guitar. Then Pastor Olson said a few 

words to the sick. I h eard sort of a cry and sob from the room across the hall 

and stepped in there. One of the ladies said, “Those Swedes are getting so 

many callers but we don’t get any.” I asked her if she would like to have us 

come in here and hold devotion and she said, “Y es.” 

I w ent back and told our committee and Pastor Olson and we all went in 

there and held devotions and sang and I played the guitar. There was a woman 

lying in a corner bed near the door. She fastened her eyes on me. Every time I 

looked at her she wa s watching m e. She seemed familiar to me so I went to 

her and said, “Hello.” She was very crippled and could hardly speak to be 

understood. She started to cry and I thought she was trying to say, “I, I know 

you .” I asked Pastor Olson to talk to her, but sh e could not talk so she could 100 

be understood. I said, “Goodbye,” and she tried to say, “Come back soon,” but 

I could only guess what she tried to say. 

On the streetcar o n my way home it dawned on me who she was, the Miss 

Simmons that I had worked for in Hutchinson. The next time I went there she 

had been moved to the hospital up north for the incurable. 

Time went by and we made a trip up north to the hospital for the incurable. 

As soon as I got into the long ward, I saw Miss Simmons laying right the re in 

the se cond bed from the door. I started on the opposite side and said a few 

words to each person, then through the sun room and down the other side until 

I came to her. The other ladies stopped and visited by the beds, but I wanted to 

spend my time w ith Miss Sim mons. I was glad that she knew me. She could 

talk more understandably now. She asked me, “Where is your husband, the 

one you had with you the other time?” I told her he was not my husband, he 

was our pastor. My husband is home. She asked, “How did you get here? Did 

you ride in the buggy from Dassel? I told her I lived in Minneapolis now and 

my husband runs a grocery store. 

I asked her, “Are you not the Miss Simmons that had the hotel in 

Hutchinson?” She said, “Yes, I had one in Dassel and a hotel in Co kato, too.” 

I asked if she had given her heart to Jesus yet. She started to cry and said, 

“No, no . I am a big, big sinner.” Then I could tell her that, “Jesus came to save 

sinners. He did not come to save the self -righteous but sinners. And who -so -

ever com eth unto me, he said, I will in no way cast out.” 

I read and sang to her, and when the ladies caught up to me, we started back 

home. She said, “Come back soon, soon!” 

I was sorry that I did not have an easy time returning to that hospit al. It was 

quite a long time before I went there again. When I got there, she was gone; 

she had died. I asked the lady next to her whom I remembered being there 

when I was last there, about her. She told me that Miss Simmons used to have 

a man that came to see her at first. He ha d stolen a hat from a man on the 

street car and was put in prison. There he tore something and hung himself. 

After that she cried more than before. She was all crippled with arthritis and 

very unhappy. The only one who ever visited her was gone . Her jewelry was 

gone. Her riches were gone . Her health was gone. She went on, “And then 

there came a young lady with a guitar. She played and sang and prayed for 

her, and after that visit she became calm and quiet until she died.” 101 

Her bod y was taken to the morgue. I went to the office and got some more 

information. W hen I told them how she used to own a hotel in Cokato, Dassel 

and Hutchinson and how she was elaborately dressed, and how she danced 

and joked, etc. , that office girl said, “Th ere is nothing swell about her now.” 

She was buried in a potter’s grave. I expect to meet her up yonder someday, a 

sinner saved by grace , who found peace in her soul. 102 

# Babies 

n 1893, when I was 15, my sister Hulda and I were co ming home from 

the city. We were down at Union Depot when a young man came 

carrying two three -month -old babies. A boy was with him, carrying a 

couple of pillows and some other things. The boy laid down what he carried 

beside the man with the babies and hur ried out. He had brought the man and 

babies from the Children’s Home in a buggy and had to return. There the poor 

young man sat holding two crying babies in his arms. What could he do? I 

could not stand to see his predicament so I went to him and said, “Sh all I help 

you?” He was so glad and grateful. I was real puzzled and asked, “Where do 

you live?” 

He said, “Fourteen miles south of M orris . My wife will meet me in Mo rris 

and she will know what to do.” 

He told me, “We are Catholics, but we have no c hildren. My wife should 

have come down to pick out some orphans to adopt, but she has never been in 

the big city, so she said she would take care of the stock and do all the work if 

I would go to the orphanage and bring home a baby. So, I went and there wer e

two cute babies, and boy and a girl, the same age , three months . They are not 

related but I could not resist adopting the two of them. I called my wife and 

asked her what to do and she said to b ring them both to her.” 

She told him she would do the ch ores and then drive to M orris to meet 

them and bring lots of blankets to keep them warm. “How are you ever going 

to get along until you get there?” I asked. He said, “It will go somehow 

alright. A s soon as I reach M orris , the worry will be over. My wife wi ll know 

what to do.” 

I changed those cold, wet babies and gave them their bottles, one after the 

other. The milk was getting cold but they seemed to be so hungry . I helped 

# I103 

him to get on the train. My sister had to take care of both mine and her 

suitcas e. There were nice looking ladies in the depot. I heard them say, “Poor 

young mother, she is just a young girl,” etc. I did not care. I thought, “You old 

heartless women, why d on’t you lend a hand?” 

When we arrived in Dassel, I said goodbye to the man a nd wished him 

good luck. I told him to write me and tell me how it went. After a few days, I 

heard from him. He said his wife had driven fourteen miles through stormy 

weather t o meet him, and they had that long way to drive back in very cold, 

snowy weather . The little girl survived, but the boy died. What a pity! He did 

ask me to help him until he reached home but I could not do that. I don’t think 

even I could have survived tha t long in cold, blizzard wind. Then I would 

have had that long way to get back h ome again alone. I think that I should 

have gone way home with them. May that not be counted against me, I was so 

young and so homesick at the time. 104 

# Assaulted 

hen I was in my teens my sister Hulda had an errand to Cokato. 

We went to a d rugstore where one young man, a friend of my 

sister was a druggist. He wanted to show us his nice room 

upstairs, next to the doctor’s offic e. The doctor was in and asked me to come 

into his office. He showed me what he had there. He was a young doctor who 

weighed three hundred pounds. 

I held myself aloof from him. My sister Hulda was visiting with her friend 

when all of a sudden the docto r grabbed me and pulled me into his lap. I 

struggled back but he was strong. I prayed from my heart for help to get a way. 

He kissed and kissed me. I called for sister Hulda and her friend for help. He 

said, “You are a hard one.” Then they happened to come in. He dropped his 

hold on me. I felt very humiliated but thanked God that he did not get the best 

of me. I think now that an angel protected me and delivered me from that 

man. We learned later that man ruined a sweet young girl for life. It could 

have been me. 

# W105 

# Papa’s Leg 

apa’s sore leg got worse. He went to Cokato to Dr. Cassel, who put 

him to bed in a hotel the re. When Papa went there , he asked Mama if 

I could come with him and wait on him and give reports back home 

for him. I worked for my board in the hotel where Papa had his room. 

Dr. Cassel did what he could. He scraped Dad’s sore with a sharp brush 

unti l the sore bled freely , then took 32 hunks out of Papa’s arm and tried to 

graft flesh in the wound whil e it was red and bleeding. Then he bandaged up 

the sore, hoping that it would take life and grow skin on the big wound. Every 

effort failed and the piece s of skin fell off. His woun d got ten times more than 

before. When he went there, he walked with a cane, but when he returned, he 

walked with a crutch. That made me cry. 

Finally , he decided to go to Minneapolis to see some doctor there because 

the treatm ent had been a failure. Dr. Soderlind and Dr. Lind planted big hunks 

of flesh from his other arm into t he sore that was so much larger now after the 

first attempt. They too deteriorated and it was hopeless. Then Papa told them 

to amputate his leg. 

Wh ile he was there , we children did the harvest all alone, plus all the farm 

work. Albert drove the binder, and Hulda, Emma and I shucked the wheat. 

When it was time to stack , my brother Albert drove around in the country to 

find a man that he could hire, bu t there were none to be had except for a 17 -

year -old boy, Emil Nelson. He pitched the bundles to Albert when Albert laid 

the wheat stock. My sister sat in front of the wheat rack and drove the horses. 

Hulda laid the wheat load and I pitched the bundles o nt o the racks. We drove 

with two racks and two teams. When one was by the stack unloading the other 

was in the field loading. 

One time sister Emma turned the load to o sharp and the whole wheat load 

fell on top of us girls. No one was hurt but we strugg le d to get out of the load 

and found that we came out of it crawling on the ground. We had to reload the 

# P106 

whole load. When Ray Nor dstrom and his thrashing crew came to thrash, they 

wondered how the stacks could be dry , on account of the rain that came just a s

we were through with the stacking. Not one stack had taken in water when it 

had rained so much. Albert got a lot of praise for his skill in stacking the 

wheat. Our neighbor ’s stacks had started to sprout some but we got No. 1 A 

on our wheat because it was real dry. That made me glad. 

The last stack was made on a Saturday evening, because we were afraid of 

rain and to be sure, we work ed after supper until eleven at night. We were so 

happy to be through so we called our neighbors kids over and we had a t re at 

and played hide and go seek until twelve o’clock at night. We did our chores 

in the morning and went to Sunday school and church and were no worse off 

for it. We had a fine time. At first , I got real stiff in my body, but after three 

days I was feeling real limber and strong. One can really work to get muscles. 

Papa came home and was glad that everything had gone so well, but he had 

to go to the city again and have his leg amputated. He again asked if I could 

go with him. He went to Deaconess Hospi ta l. It was only a house then with a 

small shed on the side for the ones that had thyroid fever. Many in the city had 

typhoid fever. It was found out that they got it from the water they drank. 

The nurses were so nice to me. They had me for a play nurs e. I was dressed 

up in one of the smaller nurses’ uniforms and I could sit with them at the table 

to eat. 

Papa told Dr. Soderlind and Dr. Ring ni ll that he wanted me by him when he 

was operated on. I stood there until they started to saw and then I was in the 

side room until the leg was off. I was to talk to him first and call him. When 

he started to come to himself from the ether chloroform he calle d out loud and 

clear, “God bless you Doctor Soderlind, God bless you Doctor Ringnill,” and 

to everyone he kn ew there he said, “God bless you.” When he came into his 

room, he recited loud and clear one Bible verse after another. He called to 

Olson, “Seek fir st the kingdom of God and his righteousness and all these 

things will be added unto you,” and to Johnson, “A ll things work together for 

good for them that love the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord and again I say rejoice.” 

I never knew he knew so many by heart. 107 

I did not have to pay anything because the nurses kept me real busy doing 

something all the time. Sometim es I was sent to bring home a load of 

medicine from a drugstore, a triangle building on Riverside Avenue. 

When we had breakfast , Sister Ingeborg was the head nurse. She sat at the 

head of the long table and always asked the grace. Every morning we alwa ys 

had family alter. Sister Ingeborg read the first verse and we all read a verse as 

our turn came until the whole chapter was read. We knelt around the table and 

prayed, then we stood up and sang a hymn. After breakfast we went to hold 

devotions in the si ck room. 

I was sent to a young man, 20 years old, who had a broken neck. He broke 

it diving into water that was too shallow. I brought my guita r, read scripture, 

sang and prayed for him .

Six years later , I was married and living in Lamson by the h ighway . My 

husband was a store clerk in Danielson’s General Store in Lamson. We lived 

in an old and big farm house. One day two men came to our door . They asked 

if they could put their horses and big load in the empty barn. They wanted to 

get into shelter because it looked like a rain storm was coming soon. 

I said they were welcome to and the barn was clean and there was plenty of 

clean straw. It seemed to me that one of the men looked familiar, and he sort 

of looked at me more than the other. When they were making their supper ,

they came to the house and asked if they could cook some coffee on our stove. 

I said they could, and when Pete came home, I told him about our company 

in the barn. He went out there and invited them to come into the house for the 

evening and night. They accepted and one of them looked at my father’s 

picture on the wall. He asked, “Is that your father?” When I said yes, he said, 

“I think I know him. He visited me at Deaconess Hospital before he went 

home. Are you the little girl who sang and played the guitar and held 

devotions in my room when I was paralyzed?” “Yes,” I answered. What a 

surprise to meet him again! 

Afte r we had gone to bed, we heard the men reading the Bible and praying. 

I was wishing that I could have joined them, but was already in bed. I regret 

that I did not ask them where they were moving to with their printing press. 

They were editors of a paper and were moving from Hutchinson, but I don’t 

know what paper they were editors of. This happened shortly before Gertrude 108 

was born and I felt sort of bashful and clumsy so I did not ask questions. I was 

glad they were Christians. 109 

# The City 

hen we had come home from the city I felt lonesome for the lovely 

young people meetings that were hel d in the tabernacle. It was 

called Dät Swänska Tabernacle. When I was sixteen, I asked Papa if 

I could go back to the city and get a job and work. Then I could go to the 

young people’s meetings in the Tabernacle. I had already gotten acquainted 

with some o f them. One nice memory was that when Dwight L. Moody and 

Ira Sankey were in the Tabernacle, I had a chance to hear Mr. Moody speak 

on how God so loved the world. I heard Sankey sing The Ninety and Nine. I

loved the choir. 

When I arrived, I went to an i ntelligence office close to the Tabernacle, 

Mrs. Stromberg’s office, and I accepted the first job offer I got. I was afraid I 

might not get a job so I took it and it brought me way out to Merria m Park. I 

worked in a restaur ant there. The kitchen was in a h alf basement and two of us 

girls had a bedroom right off the kitchen. I was real lonesome. My job was to 

keep the big cooking stove filled with coal and two gasoline stoves filled with 

gasoline. 

I had no idea how dange rous it was to handle gas with fi re nearby. If my 

guardian angel had not watched over me , I might have blown up the whole 

kitchen or building. I would fill the gasoline stove close to a roaring hot 

cooking stove many times a day. I would turn down the arm t hat held the 

gasoline and fill it while the burners were lit. No one warned me and I did not 

know. God really protected me. 

One day I went to St. Paul to buy a new hat. Before leaving I got on my 

knees and prayed to God that I could meet someone whom I knew that was a 

Christian. As so on as I boarded the street car my eyes fell upon a preacher that 

# W110 

I knew. I was bashful and blushed, but I had prayed about meeting someone 

and this was him. I went up to him and said, “Hello.” 

“Oh hello,” he said. “Why are you way down here Lydia?” he asked, and I 

told him. I also told him how sorry I was to be so far from the Tabernacle and 

that it was impossible for me to attend meetings there. I asked him if he knew 

any Christians in Merriam Park. He said there were a few that meet in a small 

chapel they rent for Sunday evening and Wednesday night. They have a 

Sunday school in the park when weather permits. He also gave me the address 

of two of the families. One was the chairman and the other the vice -chairman. 

They li ved in the same house, the Sybles and the Bjorks, one family upstairs 

and one downstairs. 

On my first afternoon off I looked them up. They welcomed me with open 

arms. I felt at home with these plain people right away. I was in the Syble’s 

home, saw an organ, and sat down and played a nd sang. They said, “ Praise the 

Lord. Now H e has sent us an organist. You will play for us because we have 

none in our little group that can play.” I felt like a spoon in soft butter. I 

played the organ and helped with the Sunday school . I was happy with t hese 

kind people. 

One evening a lady came up to me and said, “You are my cousin Lydia.” I 

thought she looked familiar to me. I had seen her on a photograph. It was my 

cousin Josephine from K erkhoven. 

Some time late r, my ankle started to ache fierc ely. I could not sleep for 

many long nights. On Sunday I asked for permission to be free for the 

afternoon. The lady said yes, if the other girls would do my work, and they 

agreed. I could not get a stocking or shoe on my foot; it was so swollen and 

feveri sh. I had inflammatory rheumatism in that ankle. I tore an old sheet into 

strips and wrapped my ankle and foot. Then I started for the church at noon. 

I could not lift my foot off the ground. I had to drag it along. It felt as if it 

was falling off whe n I tried to lift it for a step forward. I dragged it, then 

stepped quickly on the good foot. I kept that up all afternoon. I had to rest 

every once in a while. I arrived at the church at eight o’clock and they were 

singing when I came in. I slunked inside and sat down on a seat by the wall 

next to the door. 111 

> Young Lydia

When Mr. Syble saw me, he said, “Sister Lydia is here and she will play for 

us.” That was too much for me to hear. My tears started to run. An old, 80 -

year -old woma n said in her Dahla brog, “Ho, ho , kom hit Ja mener ho gräter.” 

(Come here, she’s crying.) Then they came down to me Mr. and Mrs. Syble 

and Mr. and Mrs. Bjork. They asked me if I had an accident. I told them that I 

had inflammatory rheumatism 

in my ankle and I came 

because I wanted them t o pray 

for me. I did not want to be a 

cripple for all my life. 

They stood there and 

looked at me sort of crest 

fallen, as if to say, “What are 

we going to do about it ?”

When the old lady heard that 

she said in a comman ding 

voice, “You are going to pra y

for her aren’t you?” 

That took. They melted 

down on their knees and 

prayed right to the point. 

“Dear Lord, if it is thy Holy 

will to heal her do so!” It felt like an electric shock went through me and I felt 

the pain leave instantly. I told no one. Mrs. Larson told me to c ontinue to pray. 

“You’ll see. You’ll get well. Anoint yourself as it says in James 5.” 

“What oil should I use?” She told me kerosene or whatever I had handy. 

She said God did not care what oil I used. I did leave and go home. I t took me 

less than half an hour. Just think, going there took all afternoon. I thanked the 

Lord for taking my pain away, but I said I didn’t know why I was anointing 

myself with oil. I did it because I was told to do so. 

I went to bed and slept sound all night. When I awakened in the morning, I

felt so rested that I thought I must have overslept. I jumped out of bed but 

then I remembered that I had such a sore ankle. I looked at it and the swelling 

was more than half gone, and by the third day there was not a sig n of swelling 112 

left. I have never had any touch of it since, and I am over 79 now. I am not 

looking for that ailment to come back. 

It was a wonder to all the girls in the restaurant. I went singing about my 

work and they looked with respect at me. This wonderful thing did not happen 

to me because I am or was any better than anyone else. It happened because 

my Lord Jesus , in mercy, heard the child’s prayer in my heart. I did not s ay, 

“God you must make me well.” No, who was I to command God? I f ind that 

to pray if it is God’s will is best. If not, I will serve you just the same. Thy 

way is the best way. He knows whatever he sends us is the best. He is 

bringing up a people for himself. We are His and he care s for His own. 

A few weeks later I went to th e Syble’s for a prayer meeting one evening ,

and we celebrated the Lord’s Supper. It got pretty late before we were going 

home. A girl named Marie lived further up in the park than I did. We would 

have company together going home to our places whe n we worke d. Then Mrs. 

Syble and Mrs. Bjork said, “You two girls are not going home alone . It is too 

late and dangerous.” 

I was quick to answer, as usual. I said, “No one will harm decent girls.” But 

they insisted Syble and Bjork would escort us home. I said, “I don’t th ink that 

would be right. They have to get up so early in the morning to load the ice 

wagon and they need their rest. We will get home all right.” 

No, the men went with us. We had to walk through some woods on a small 

road. The two me n were walking a little ahead of us girls and were talking. 

We girls were talking and laughing. All of a sudden Marie nudged me and 

whispered, “A man is in back of u s.” 

I felt a hard poke in my back. I did not turn to see but Marie did see he had 

somet hing in his hand that he poked me with in my back. He walked so close 

behind me that for each step that I took I felt his toes on my he els. It was 

awful, but we did not summon the men. 

By the time we got into the open, we did not see where he disappear ed to. 

We said nothing to the men. We felt sort of ashamed that someone had 

followed us. When I came to the big brick building where I worked in the 

restaurant, I sa id goodnight to the men and Marie. The y walked fast to take 

Marie home. I had two keys with me, one for the door that went into the half -113 

basement where the kitchen was and one for the hall on the street level on the 

other side of that kitchen door . The kit chen door was on a platform with steps 

that led down to the sidewalk. Down there was also a low window in sort of a 

hole where newspapers blew. On the south side was a big door that led into 

the hall on the main floor. I had never gone in that way, but aft er the scare in 

the woods, I thought that someone could be down at the bottom of that stair s. 

I wanted to go straight in through the heavy big door. Just as I stood on that 

stone platform and had the key in my hand, a man seemed to come from 

nowhere and gr abbed around me and held me real tight. I did not dare to try to 

scream . I was afraid he wo uld hold his hand over my mouth. I just prayed 

from my heart to the Lord for protection. He said to me, “Good night Marie.” 

He thought I was Marie. 

He said, “You come with me. We are going up in the park and we will have 

fun.” Something told me that I should pretend that I was interested so he 

would loosen his hold on me. I started by asking where about in the park shall 

we go, and he dropped his hold. He was a sw arthy man, he looked like a dark 

Italian. He stood real close to that hole where the window was where rubbish 

would blow down by. I put my one hand around my back where I held the key 

and I talked. I don’t remember what I said to him but he got the idea th at I 

was going with him . I felt with my fingers for the keyhole and pushed the key 

into it. I shoved slowly on the heavy door until it was out of its latch. I prayed 

for strength and courage, then gave him a hard and fast hit on his nose with 

my right fist . He took one step back and tumbled down into that window hole. 

I flew , in and slammed the door shut. When I was safe inside my knees started 

to knock together violently. 

I had to stand awhile and think and thank God that I got in safe. I had 

never been in that hall before. I had to feel along the wall until I could find the 

stairway down t o our kitchen. I did not dare to light the gas light, for if that 

man was outsid e he could see me. The basement was coal black and I was real 

quiet and felt my way. I remembered th at in the middle of the stairway was a 

window that opened on hinges like a d oor. It had no lock and it w as held shut 

only by a spring. Being a brick buildin g it had wide window sills so it came to 

me that I’d better put some big hotel canned peas, corn and tomatoes on that 

window sill. I would hear when the cans rolled onto the fl oor. I went quietly 

to where the cans were and put several on the sill. Below th at window stood a 114 

table. A couple times one of the girls had pushed open that window and 

stepped in on that table, and then jumped to the floor. 

I prayed and went to bed. I was very tired and fell asleep. I don’t know how 

long I had been sleeping when someone pushed that window open, and with a 

terrific noise the cans fell on the table and rolled onto the floor and kept 

rolling. I jumped up fast and ran to the window, think ing that noise was 

enough to scare the man so he had not gotten in. I slammed th e window shut 

with a bang and then felt for the cans on the floor. I put them all back and 

went to bed in my room, praying God to watch over me. I fell asleep again, 

when once again the cans started to roll. Quickly I was up. This time the 

window was open just half ways, and I slammed it again and put the cans 

back and went to bed. I prayed, “Dear Jesus, don’t let that man s hove the 

window again. I cannot take any more.” I cover ed my head and fell asleep. I 

woke up sa fe in the morning, nothing more happened . I was frightened but 

still I had a feeling that the guardian angel was holding around me. 

Another time our neighbor’s daughter Emily Asplund and Anna Samuelson 

and I wer e coming home from the evening service in the Swedish Tabernacle, 

now called the First Covenant Tabernacle. We had a long wa y to walk and it 

was late. We never thought of any danger. We were three of us. We had to 

cross a bridge on our way to Br yn Mar. 

Just as we were walking and talking, two men jumped up out of th e low 

side and started after us . We ran and ran, and they after us. We reached the 

house where Emily lived first, and got inside in a hurry. The men were on the 

porch just as we shut the doo r. We were out of breath, but thanked God for 

getting in. 

We went up to Emi ly’s bedroom and we undressed in the dark. Anna lived 

just a few houses away from there. We looked out through a hole in a shade, 

and what do you think we saw? We saw that the two men were sitting on a 

stump watching the house. It was a bright moon light s hining right on them. 

Anna was just going to start for home thinking that the men had left. I was 

staying all night with Emily Asplund. When we saw them sitting out there, we 

ch anged her mind. She stayed. The men stayed there until two o’clock in the 

mornin g before they left. I knew that we would be protected because we were 

trusting in His help. 115 

On the way home from a prayer meeting in the tabernacle I had company 

with some other girls part of the way. Then I had to walk alone. I thought, 

“Why not cut through this park? T hat will bring me home much faster.” 

I walked a little ways and saw a couple, a man and a lady, going the same 

direction. I thought fine, I can sort of keep not too far from them. The young 

man spied me and called to me, “Hey littl e girl, you be my girl.” 

“No sir, no sir,” I said. He grabbed me. “I’ll take care of you!” 

“No sir, you won’t,” I said, but he held on to me. Then his girl companion 

sa id, “Let her go. She is a little descent on e. Let he go her way.” 

How I thanked God, and ran home real fast. One never knows what all this 

meant. I think, don’t walk through parks alone. I was supposed to be home at 

ten o’clock sharp , and it was good t o be able to do just that. 

Many years later I went to Merriam Park to look up Brother and Sister 

Syble and the Bjorks, but they had moved out some place on a farm. After I 

was married several years and we lived at 2112 31 st Av. S, and Gertrude, 

Margar et and Myrtle were going to Minnehaha Acadamy, Margaret came 

home and was talking about a boy who went the Acadamy named Syble. I 

wondered if that could be a son to the Sybl es I knew. She asked him if his 

folks used to live in Merriam Park once. His answer was , “Yes, and we live 

there now again.” 

I told her to ask if they remembered a Lydia Anderson who used to play in 

their chapel. He answered, “Yes, my folks used to talk about that happy Lydia, 

and wonder what became of her.” “That was our mother,” th e girls told him. 

The following Sunday they came over to visit me, and we had a glorious 

time together. Phyllis was six months old at that time, and how they made 

over her I can not describe. 

The brothers and sisters as they were all called, had a meeting and they 

washed each other’s feet. They read the tex t about when Jesus washed his 

disciple’s feet. I felt that was the custom those days, when they used sandals, 116 

but I would not for one minute think or make anyone else think that I held 

mysel f too good to really wash anyone’s feet, so I did. I felt glad tha t I had. 

I went to visit a young couple, Charles and Hulda Johnson, who were very 

poor. They had a small baby. The wife was a pretty lady and they were 

newcomers to our church. Her name had been Hulda Peterson and she was a 

cousin to some Lake Jennie f olks. Her address was given to me by her 

relative, Anna Nelson Johnson. They lived below Washington Avenue by the 

railroad track, upstairs in a house. They had just two small rooms and the 

stairway went up on the outside of the house. They hardly had any f urniture, 

but had a real small cooking stove, a bed, a chair, a stool, and a small kitchen 

table. It gripped my heart to see their poverty. I tried to tell her that better days 

would be comi ng. 

When I left there and was going home to the place I worke d I passed a big 

empty warehouse. It had iron bars on all the windows. Just as I was passing, I

heard the most terrifying screams from inside. So curious was I that I peered 

through the iron bars and saw a beautiful, tall, blond lady with her hair 

flowing d own over her shoulders and back. She was running and hollering, 

“Let me out of here! Let me out of here!” She wore a sheer, pink, long dress 

like a formal and had a low neckline. A fine, pa le blue vale hung over her 

shoulder and one arm. She ran back and forth screaming. 

I called to her and she came close to the window just once. She looked so 

frightened. She only said, “Let me out of here.” I told a man I met about her 

but he just looke d at me and hurried on his way. Another said he would find 

out, an d a third said she is someone that lost her mind and is just being held 

there between trains to be taken away to some asylum. 

It bothered me every time I thought about that girl in such a place . I had to 

be back at a certain time so I went back to my p lace. Every time I ride past 

13 th  -14 th Avenue on Washington I see that sight in my memory . I was not 

acquainted much in the City and was nervous about getting back to the place 

where I work ed. I have asked myself why should I have to see her and what 

woul d I have done if it had been now. Why? Why did I not do something 

more? If I knew what I know now I would have reported about that girl to 

some policeman or someone that could have seen to w hy she was there or 

found out who she was. God have mercy on poor, innocent people in our land 

who do not know their mind, the hungry, the sick, the poor, and the homeless. 117 

# Wedding 

n 1894 Lina N ilson and Otto Ollson got married. I was hostess at their 

wedding, a home wedding. It was very nice indeed. Their friends were 

invited to the wedding. Lina looked so nice in her wedding outfit. Otto 

was very happy, too. 

The old man, Aron Nelson had mar ried for the third time a few years before 

this. The new Mrs. Nelson stood at the helm to arrange everything beautifully 

at Lina’s wedding. 

Otto used to live in Minneapolis before, but came out to Lake Jennie and 

bought a house and started a chicken fa rm. All the boys around were sort of 

jealous of any outs ider who came and took a girl from their neighborhood and 

the y pestered Otto a lot. Every evening he would go to call on Lina . S omeone 

would know , and they would lay for him . Either they would crow like 

roosters, or both crow and cackle li ke a hen. On Sund ay night Lina and Otto 

would come home from church , and a flock of boys would lay for them. 

When they came past, they would start a real chorus of cackling and crowing, 

and sit on a fence rail f lopping their arms about as if they had wings. They 

kept this s ort of thing up for months. They were having fun . I don’t think it 

was very funny for Lina and Otto, but they got used to it. 

After the wedding they were sitting around with friends at the home. Mr. 

Nilson told his wife he was tired and they should go to bed. The old folks 

retired and had just gone to sleep. All of a sudden, a gang started to chivaree 

(mock parade.) They rang bells and the men carried a round saw blade from a 

saw mill on an i ron rod. Others were beating it with iron rods. That made a 

lou d ringing noise . The wind came from the south . T he clang could be heard 

all the way to Dassel, five miles north of their place. They would stop a little 

# I118 

and then shoot in the air. Then it all s tarted over, Otto got scared . H e said, 

“Lina, we will blow out the lamps, then they can’t see through the window.” 

But they would put lights right up to the glass that made the room light. They 

saw some of the people trying to hide and they laughed. Otto c rept under the 

table to hide. 

Aron . N ilson got up and went out to the gang in his shirt only and said, 

“What does this mean?” 

The boys told Jamie Haglund, “You talk to him. You are the captain.” He 

said, “We want a treat.” Mr. N ilson said, “Why di d you not come today when 

there were things ready to eat?” Jami e answered, “We were not invited you 

know.” 

It was customary to give a treat to the chivaree crowd. It would not have to 

be much, some cigars or something else. But N ilson did not know that . So, the 

boys kept on until they were tired , and then they went home ; however, they 

decided to come back the next night again. Aron N ilson’s horses got so 

frightened they would neither eat nor drink. The boys kept on night after 

night. They said they would keep it up until the old miser gives them a treat .

They to ok water and poured it on the porches and scrubbed with brooms 

until they scrubbed every bit of paint off and wore out the brooms. While 

some carried water and sand, they kept on crowing and ca ckling . O thers 

complain ed about how hard it was to clean after all the dirty chickens. 

Some intervened and told them to quit coming there any more, that it was 

sin to scare the horses and cows. They quit, but after Lina and Otto moved to 

their own home, they started all over again. The boys did not want to be mean ,

but Otto had been the leader on other chivaree and they said he had it coming. 

He could have come out and showed them his bride and given them a little 

treat and all would have ended. 119 

# Miracles 

hen I was in my teens I went to Bible schoo l. Professor and Mrs. 

Josephina Princell had a Bible study course in White Hall at the 

Free Church. Ellen Modin had a rest h ome for missionaries in her 

house. (Modin founded a school for female evangelists and a rescue shelter 

for women and children.)  She personally invited me to come and take part in 

that Bible course. I was happy to do so. 

She was hoping that I would be a missionary someday. I was sincere and 

interested. I never will forget the blessed times I experienced there. This home 

was run on faith. I remember that one morning, just as we were sitting down 

at the breakfast table, Miss Modin said grace, and added, “Dear Jesus, we 

have no more milk.” We had a dish of oatmeal in front of us and no milk. Just 

as she said, “Amen,” the doorbell rang. A milkman stood there with a pail of 

milk and said, “I was passing by and came to think maybe you would like to 

get some milk. In those days milk was measured out from a big container to 

the purchaser, based on how much he would need. He gave Ellen a whol e pail 

full of milk. She poured it into a pitcher and said, “The Lord sent us milk. 

Thank you, Jesus, for the milk.” 

On another time our bread wa s used up. Ellen prayed, “Jesus we have put 

the last of the bread on the table.” Before we were through eatin g the last slice 

of bread, there came a woman to the door carrying a big bundle. She said the 

thought came to her while she was baking, that being that you are so many 

here to eat, you might like some bread. “I made a batch just for you.” Her 

husband was d riving past so she brought it right over. Ellen again said, 

“Thank you Jesus for the bread.” 

I was helping in the kitchen, peeling potatoes, and believe you me, I took 

real thin peelings. I thought those potatoes were holy. They were also sent in 

to E llen’s home by a farmer, a whole sack of fine potatoes. We had all the 

# W120 

food we needed, but no luxuries like cake or fine deserts. Everything tasted so 

very good, not a crumb was wasted. 

We went out to visit the poor. We went two and two to do visitati on in the 

homes in the river flats. One day I was sent along with two other sisters in 

Christ to make home calls. We came to a little hut with two small rooms. We 

knocked and were admitted. There sat a mother with red eyes from crying . We 

told our mission to her and she sobbed out her sad story. She was a poor 

widow and did day work for her living. Her work really was hard work, not 

any conveniences and with hard hearted ladies. 

Her daughter was a good girl but she got acquainted with a fellow who 

made love to her. She was so thrilled about him, but one day she came home 

weeping, telling her mot her that she was pregnant. He told her he did not want 

to get married to her, and left for another city to live in. She cried herself to 

sleep . H er mother wept to o and could not sleep. What could they do? 

The girl was just desperate. One day the mothe r found her daughter soaking 

matches in a little water. She was just going to drink it to poison herself to 

death. And then we came. She showed us the solution. I think the girl was 

helped. We talked and prayed with her and reported our visit to Ellen Mod in. 

We should never look down on any poor soul who has fallen, but try to help. 

To step on the one who is down will never bring us to a higher ground. 

More f allen girls came to Ellen for help, but how could she mix fallen girls 

with the missionaries that had come to her home for rest. That would give the 

home a bad reputation. Ellen kept praying to God for a home for defenseless 

fallen girls. She prayed that i f it was God’s holy will, he would give her a 

home to have to rescue fallen girls. Meanwhile t he Lord was working. 

Some years later my husband and I moved to Minneapolis and bought a 

grocery store on 25 th and Riverside Avenue. We had a very fine lady as a 

customer. She had two daughters and a son. They went to the Salvation Army. 

Later one of the daughters became a captain in the Salvation Army. I loved 

this widow. Her name was Mrs. Sandee. She would act like a real Christian 121   

> Anderson Children –Annie, Emma, Albert,
> Hulda & Lydia about 1900.

and I had her daughters to baby sit for my children if I had to go away 

sometimes. One day she told me her story , and it was real interesting. 

This was her story. She and her husband were both Christians, and her 

husband was a contractor. He built houses. When she asked him an y questions 

about his business, his answer was, “Don’t worry about the business. You 

ha ve the children and your house to tend to. I will tend to the business.” 

So, she knew nothing about his affairs. One day a messenger came with the 

sad news that her husband had fallen dead with a heart attack. She was just as 

numb as could be for a while . She did not know what to do. Bills came in and 

she did not know what she was owed or what she owed to people. 

One day 

while she was 

hanging out 

clothes , a

neighb or came 

to her and 

asked her why 

she was 

crying. She 

told the 

neighbor about 

her troubles. 

“It would not 

be so bad if 

only I knew 

more about my 

husband ’s affairs.” This lady was a spiritualist and she tol d Mrs. Sandee that if 

she came to their place of worship, she could get her affairs straightened out. 

Mrs. Sandee did go and had a talk with some spirit that was purported to be 

her husband. Sure enough, she got to know that she owned a house on 

Columbus Av enue that was all paid for, and other things. She wa s so very 

glad. 

Then a medium told her that she had a very strong spirit and would make a 

wonderful medium. The woman would help her to become one. However, she 

said, “There is something that you hold too dear to your heart that you must 122 

let go of.” Mr s. Sandee said she knew of nothing, but they insisted. Then Mrs. 

Sandee got on her knees and prayed, “Dear Jesus, you know that there is 

nothing that is too dear to me.” The medium told her to shut up. “I t is he, it is 

he that you hold too dear.” 

She g ot cold of fright, got up and went to her home and asked Jesus to 

forgive her. She could not believe her sin could be forgiven. That night her 

house was really haunted. Spirits knocked and scratched. They were objects 

moving in the dark. Her little childre n were so haunted that they were scared 

out of their wits almost. She fell on her face and prayed to Jesus to forgive 

her. 

Just before the dawn started, she saw a bright light shine through the house. 

In a corner she saw a vision of the crucified Jesus looking so tenderly at her. 

At that same moment there was a terrific noise throughout the whole house. 

All the evil spirits that haunted the house flew out through the windows and 

doors and walls and a w onderful peace came into her heart. After that time, 

they never were bothered by bad spirits. 

Mrs. Sandee wanted to give the house that she owned to the Lord as a thank 

you to Jesus for his help, so she kept praying for guidance. She start ed 

through some incident to think about the poor fallen girls that needed help to 

be rescued from sin. She mentioned it to someone who knew Ellen Modin, so 

she went to Ellen for advice. Ellen had been praying for the Lord to give her a 

home for such girls if she could help to rescue them. Mrs. Sandee decided that 

the hom e was to be given to Ellen for a home of shelter. 

One day I was greatly surprised. Ellen, Mrs. Sandee and someone else 

came upstairs to me and the deed to the house was written in our fro nt room 

over the grocery store. Mrs. Sandee lived in a poor tene ment row on 25 th 

Avenue just a little ways from our store. Ellen’s prayers were answered and so 

was Mrs. Sandee’s. Many fallen girls were rescued in the home of shelter. A 

bigger house was lat er bought on 2010 19 th Avenue in North East 

Minneapolis. Many we re the time when our Dorcas Ministry went to that 

home to give a little cheer to that house. Later the home was turned to a rest 

home for older people because the world had made it too difficu lt to run such 

a home. There were too many girls so the state ha d to take the girls in some 

other way. Our dear sister Ellen went to be with the Lord. 123 

One time, after I was married and had six children, I was sent by the Dorcas 

Society to visit some s ick. I was shown into a ward with four beds. I stopped 

and talke d to Mrs. Bergren, and she introduced me to the lady in the bed next 

to her. She was from Roseau, Minnesota. “Oh,” I told her. “I know only one 

person in Roseau. Her name is Lydia S joquist. He r mother and father were 

great friends of my mother and father a nd used to visit at my home often. This 

lady said, “Why, Mrs. Lydia Sjoquist is my nearest neighbor and a friend of 

mine,” so we were acquainted and I had a visit with her. 

She then introd uced me to the lady in the bed next to her. I asked her where 

sh e came from and she said from Hibbing. Hibbing was the town that one of 

my Sunday school girls moved to after she got married. She asked me what is 

her name? I said she was Mrs. Effal Carlin. “Oh, my dear,” she said. “ She is 

my best friend. She and I have s uch nice time together. We went on our 

vacation together.” 

We talked about spiritual things and soon I had to leave. But I said, “This 

last bed is empty or I might find someone that has some connection to my 

friends in that, too.” Just as I was leavin g the lady came who belonged to that 

bed. She gave me a loo k and then put her arms around me and said, “My dear, 

are you not Lydia Anderson, or Mrs. Nelson?” 

I was very much surprised that she was my seatmate, Phoebe Quick , a 

schoolmate of mine . Then s he said, “Will you pray for me? I have never 

forgotten the time you told me how you prayed to God to teach you to read 

writing and he did. It impressed me so, so pray for me.” 

Then she told me her sad story. Her home was now in Hutchinson. I am 

sure th at God led my coming and going. (Phoebe recovered and lived until 

1943) .

I don’t remember an afternoon with the sick folks where I got more out. 

May I be a blessing to some sick soul, and be a help to some person. Here we 

meet to part again. May I be r eady when Jesus comes and have oil in my lamp 

so that I can meet my dear bridegroom when He comes. 

There were dangers living everywhere , but I know from experience that if 

we commit our life unto God, and are willing to do his will, we are protected 

from the evil one in a marvelous way. 124 

One day a man cam e to me when I was working for the Dunwoodys. Evans 

Dunwoody was the brother of the man who built Dunwoody Institute. I had 

wanted my mother and father’s picture painted from a smaller picture. Thi s

man came and was advertising just that kind of work. I ga ve my father’s and 

mother’s picture to him and he gave me a receipt and an address where the 

work was done. He came back after a few days and wanted a down payment. I 

gave it to him and he told me what day I could come to see the pictures. 

I went ther e on the day appointed. He showed me the partly finished 

painting of my father and it was good so far. Then he told me to come into a 

sitting room. He wanted to show me some work. He gave me a recl ining chair 

and asked me if I would make a deal with him. H e would give me $300 cash 

and finish my mother’s and father’s pictures too. He said he wanted me to 

come and strip myself and be painted nude. “Oh no!” I said. “I would not do 

that for any money.” 

I prayed for help to get away from him. He came real cl ose and shoved his 

hand under my skirt. He said, “I am not going to harm you. I just want to test 

your limbs.” 

However, he stopped like he was frightened, and looked about. I got up and 

shot ou t through a long hall with rooms on both sides. I went back to 

Dunwoody’s and told Mrs. Dunwoody, and she told her husband. I was 

ashamed to tell about the offer he made me. I thought it was a disgrace to me, 

but I told them what he said about that I would n’t get my picture finished 

unless I paid out a lot more mo ney. 

Mr. Dunwoody told her to tell me that he had heard about a little white 

slavery gang that was operating like that and now this maybe will help them 

to catch these guys. How thankful I was that I got away from them. 

Mr. Dunwoody got a detective to follow me to claim the picture, and Mr. 

Dunwoody came along also, staying a little behind. When I asked the man to 

give me the pictures, it was already past the time they were to be ready. Well ,

the man said one was ready but not the other. They wanted a little more 

money. Then the detective stepped forward and told him to finish the other 

picture, frame it and deliver it without any more money. Now he read the law 

for these scoundrels and told them just what they were. He snooped around 

and saw those l ittle rooms with cots in and he knew. 125 

The man got furious and said, “This girl has told you a lot of rot and you 

believe her.” The fact was that I had told them nothing, but he seemed to 

know it anyway. I did not have to say anything about what the ma n said or 

did, only that he was not doing what he should about the painting. My father’s 

picture was fine but my mother’s was not quite so good. He did deliver them 

and did not ask for a cent more for his work. 

Many more times I have been in danger but God has protected me because 

I trusted in him. I was too ignorant about the dangers. I never seemed to 

realize how careful one ought to be. 

I remember a friend in my youth, my childhood frien d Hannah. She was an 

orphan girl adopted by Johannah Dahlberg and her husband Israel. They 

brought up several children during their married life. 

Hannah was a very smart girl. She had a very fine memory and she learned 

her lessons easily, by heart and she knew her c onfirmation lessons perfect. I 

really was not as bright as her. She took lessons on the organ from me and we 

would sing and play together, and enjoyed being together. 

One Sunday afternoon I was on my way over to visit Hannah. When I was 

about an eighth of a mile away, I saw Hannah and Ellen Asplund at the 

crossroad . Elle n had been over to see Hannah and Hannah went with her on 

the way home. I saw that Ellen spied me and said something to Hannah, took 

Hannah by the arm and they both ran as fast as they c ould towards Ellen 

Asplund ’s home. It hurt me so. Well , I always liked to go over to D ahlbergs so 

I went there anyway, thinking Mrs. Dahlberg and I would sing. 

There, Mrs. Dahlberg said, “Hannah should have been home by now. She 

went a wa ys with Ellen. ” “Yes,” I said. “I saw them at the crossing when I 

came. Ellen tapped on Hannah and they ran fast towards Asplund ’s home. I 

think Ellen wanted to prevent Hannah from seeing me and visiting with me.” 

Mrs. Dahlberg said she would talk to H annah about it . She did and Hannah 

denied it all. Mrs. Dahlberg told me that Hannah and Ellen never saw me. But 

I know they did , and I felt worse yet about the whole thing. 126 

> Lydia was married to Nels
> Peter Nelson of Dassel.

A couple or three years afterwards Hannah took very sick and they found 

out th at she had TB of the lungs. I was then in Minneapolis. I got a letter from 

Mrs. Dahlberg saying that Hannah wanted me to come home. She wanted to 

see me. I could not leave so I wrote that to her and then I got another message. 

Hannah was asking me for forg iveness for ly ing to me and to Mrs. Dahlberg 

and for making a liar out 

of me. She knew that she 

hurt me too. Well surely, I

forgave her, and she told 

Mrs. Dahlberg that now 

she could die in peace. It 

is very important to 

always tell the truth. 

Hannah went h ome to be 

with the Lord and to sing 

the new song. 

I have disobeyed my 

precious Lord many times. 

I know the Lord has 

forgiven me , but I will 

lose some of my reward. 

One time when we were running the grocery store at Riverside and 8 ½ Street 

there was a minister who held meetings in the old Bethany Church. He was 

young and his name was Magnus. Souls came forward for prayers. 

There were two sisters who went forward. They wept bitterly. We prayed 

for them th ree evenings in the campaign. I asked the gi rls what was bothering 

them. The oldest girl said, “I wish I could talk to someone about it.” 

I asked them to come home to our place and have Sunday dinner with us. 

The y were glad to and came. 

On Sunday afternoon I talked with them. What they told me was so terrible 

that I cannot mention it. I wanted to go and look them up afterwards, but m y

husband refused me to go. He thought that it was not my business. But, I 127 

prayed that the Lord would send some help to them. Did I obey man more 

than God was a q uestion. T his happened about forty -nine or fifty years ago. 

Then about two months ago, som eone told me that she met a lady, crippled 

in a wheelchair, who asked if she knew a Mrs. Nelson who was running a 

grocery store. She said, “Yes, she still goes to our church.” 

This crippled lady said that I invited her home for dinner when she was a 

st ranger. I still don’t know if she was one of those sisters because we often 

asked strangers home for dinner on Sundays. 

My first baby kept me awake until I lost my need of sleep. I started to think 

that sleep was a habit, not always needed. I was gre atly mistaken. 

I lost my memory so completely, that I did not remember my own name or 

my father or husband’s name, or anybody else. My husband got real disgus ted 

with me. He would tell me something, the next minute I could not remember 

that I ever hear d it. 

I got so frightened about it that I went on my knees many times a day and 

prayed to Jesus for help. I did not forget Jesus, nor doubt him. The prayers 

were answered. The baby started to sleep a little longer and I started to sleep. 

Gradually, I g ot my memory back again. 128 

# Mother 

n 1909, Mother was called to go to Clay Center, Kansas, to care for a 

sick nephew, Anton Tjellden, who was on his de athbed. He wanted his 

only aunt (his father Jonas’s sister) to come to him. He did not know the 

Lord and Mama led him to Christ. On the same day that he died mother took 

sick. My mother’s cousin Edling was the administrator of the estate that was 

left to A nton by his father. His father and mother and two sisters were already 

dead. 

My mother and Mrs. Edling had been standing out in the yard planning the 

arrangements for Anton’s funeral when Mama said, “I feel ill, and I will go in 

and lie down awhile.” S he did not come out again , so Mrs. Edling went in to 

look after her. She found Mama lying across the bed unconscious. She called 

to the unde rtaker who was there getting Anton’s body ready for the funeral. 

He came running and he saw what had happened and pu lled the phlegm from 

mother’s throat that was chocking her, so that she could breathe again. 

The Edlings sent a telegram home to Father and Albert saying that Mother 

was very sick and someone must come to her. Albert phoned me, and I 

answered the tele phone and he told me someone has to go to Mother. She is 

very sick and the telegram said to hurry. 

I had a premonition. We had paper h angers at our home and one of them 

had a bad headache, so I cooked coffee for them in the forenoon and 

afternoon. I was so anxious that they should get finished. I had much to do 

because we had Jette Sanberg and Annie Hillstad boarding at our place and 

one roomer. 

I heard something like a train passing by our store, and we lived upstairs. I 

went to the window to lo ok but saw nothing. This was repeated and then I 

heard a voice real clear saying, “So you are going out traveling.” Then I heard 

someone sin ging in the other room, “I am a Pilgrim, I am a stranger,” etc. I 

# I129 

thought how strange. I wondered if Pete is going t o sell our grocery store and 

we’ll be moving from here. He had been saying it would be better to sell than 

to get so much on the credit book s. Some did not pay for their groceries. 

I soon found out the reason for the mysterious happenings. There came a

telegram from Albert. I answered, “It won’t be anyone else. I will have to go 

to Mama.” 

When Pete came home , in the evening I thought it would be best to give 

him his dinner and then the daily paper before I told him about the telegram 

Albert h ad received from Kansas. Then I told him and added that I thought I 

should go to Mama. He got real excited and put his f ist hard down on the table 

and said, “You! You! Not you. Anyone of your three sisters has easier to get 

away than you have. Oh, no. Not you.” 

I did not answer one word but I breathed a prayer to God. If it was His 

Holy will that I should go He would ar range so that I could go. 

My Pete went to Enoch Nelson and told him about Mother. Enoch said 

Mother Anderson is so husky and strong, she will so on come home well. I am 

sure that Mother did not know that they had sent that telegram. If she had, she 

woul d have stopped them from sending it. 

Then sister Hulda came out of her bedroom and said, “I am afraid that 

Mama is going to die. I dreamt last night that Mama was very sick in Clay 

Center and no one could go to her. I woke up disturbed. Someone must g o to 

her. I am not feeling to well and Deloris is too small to travel with, so I cannot 

go.” 

Enoch phoned out to Albert . H e said Papa was just getting over the flu and 

he could not leave Jennie as she was pregnant, and there were a lot of chores 

to attend to. And, a man is not much good by a sick bed anyway. He thought 

that Annie would be most suitable to go and they also said, “Wha t about 

Emma?” Albert answered, “She is not the right person.” But they tried to 

reach Emma, who lived near Atwater on a farm, but they could not reach her 

by telephone. If they had reached her, it would have been too late before she 

would have gotten read y. She would have arrived too late, and she was also 

pregnant we found out later. 130 

Then Enoch and Pete went Northeast to see Annie. She was pregnant and it 

was i mpossible for her to go to Mama. When they came back to me Pete was 

real calm and said, “It looks like there is no other way but you will have to go 

to your mother.” Then it was my turn to start considering how c ould I leave 

my three dear little girls, not k nowing that they would be cared for. So, I said I 

could not leave the children before I kne w that someone dependable would 

care for them. Pete answered, “I know where we can get a girl.” 

“Who?” I asked. Pete answered, “Miss Minnie Ahlstrom was in our store, 

and she said that her sister is better now so she was going to look for a job. 

She di d not go today because the weather was so bad. Do you know Minnie 

took care of your sister Emma when she was sick and Em ma told me about 

her two weeks ago when Minnie passed by here when Emma was visiting us. 

Emma also said that Minnie was the only girl th at she would trust to care for 

her children if she went away someplace.” 

Pete went and asked Minnie and she came rig ht over in the morning. I 

worked and combed the girls and they had breakfast. I forgot to eat breakfast 

myself. Pete called up from the store , “It is 55 minutes until your train is 

leaving. Are you ready? I’ll drive down in the grocery wagon.” 

I threw my things into the suitcase and said goodbye , and we were off. 

When we came to the depot the train was not in yet. Pete said he would no t

have time to wait so I had to watch out and get on the train myself. We had 

already bought the ticket. Pete went to te ll Annie that I did get going . T hen he 

went to the market for provisions for the store. 

I sat there like a bump on a log. I was almo st petrified. Then Enoch came 

and asked me if I had taken some lunch to eat on the way. “No!” “I’ll go out 

and buy somet hing for you,” he said. He came back with a bag of donuts and 

buns and said the train is in now. If Enoch had not come I might have been 

sitting there yet! I did not see nor hear when the train pulled in. He took me 

onto the train and bought me a sleeper. When on the train all day it was a 

blessing to lay down when night came and rest. 

As soon as I closed my eyes I saw two candles lit and in my sleep I heard 

someone saying, “You’ll see Mama in two nights and two days.” When after 

riding on the train for two nights and two days I arrived, it was in the 

morning. Edling’s son met me, He took me to a restaurant to get something to 

eat. I or dered a soft -boiled egg. Then he said, “ No, that will take too long, 131 

have it fried.” So, I had a cup of coffee, a piece of toast and a fried egg, and 

then we started for Edling’s house. 

He had driven fast coming to Clay Center and it was seven miles to his 

home so he whipped up his runners and they went as fast as they c ould run. 

He said there is no time to lose. Your mother is very, very sick. 

When I arrived the nurse met me in the yard and asked, “Are you Mrs. 

Lydia Nelson from Minneapolis? Your mo ther is very sick. You must be calm 

and don’t show any emotion. She cannot stand it.” 

I tried to control my feelings. The nurse told Mama, “Your daughter Lydia 

is here.” Mama answered, “Oh, Oh,” and then she went unconscious again. I 

patted her cheek and said, “Poor little Mama. You are awfully sick.” 

Then she woke and asked, “Who is it that calls me Mama so far away from 

home?” I answered, “It is your daughter Lydia.” “Oh, is it you? You was good 

to come to your Mama. How are the children? Who tak es care of them?” 

I told her we got a good and dependable girl so we don’t need to worry 

about them. She will care for them. Then she was unconscious again. 

She laid that way quite a while. When again I said, “Poor Mama, you got so 

sick,” she said, “Who is it callin g me for Mama so far away?” I said again, “It 

is your daughter Lydia.” “Oh, is it you? How is it with Papa and the other 

children?” 

I told her that they would have liked to come to her, but that was 

impossible. Dad was better but he h ad been sick and w as not well enough to 

take this long trip. “I can greet you from them.” Then she became 

unconscious again. 

The Edlings came and said, “You best go to bed and get some rest. 

Tomorrow night you will have to watch alone. 

In the morn ing they told me M other had been very restless all night. Her 

cousin Bretta Kajser (Karin Lindquist) came to see her, and she knew her. 

Then the pastor and his wife came. As he stood there he said, “I was going to 

read some scripture for her, but I see tha t she is unconscio us so that won’t do 

any good.” I said, “Please read anyway. I have heard that the last that leaves a 

person when they are dying is the hearing, if they otherwise can hear.” 

He came close up to her and read slow and clear the 23 rd Psal m and when 

he came to these words, “Ye though I walk through the shadow of the valley 132 

of death I will fear no evil, for th ou art with me , thy rod and thy staff , the y

comfort me,” she took ahold and read thes e lines herself. She almost hollered 

them out bec ause she had a har d time to speak. Her tongue was big and 

swollen and purple. Her head sat back between her shoulders, although she 

used to be a little round shouldered before. They had removed the end 

mattress and put the pillows on the spring so her head could lay on it. She was 

so bent back from the pain. Now when she got unconscious they saw that she 

was dying, so the doc took ahold of her and pulled her hard to straighten her 

while she was warm. That was the only way. They then put the end mattress 

bac k in place. 

Sh e opened her eyes and said, “Help me up.” They tried to help her up but 

she stopped breathing. They felt for her pulse but it had stopped and she was 

dead they all thought. Then I started to cry. I said, “I have come so far and did 

not ge t to say goodbye t o you Mama, and here are letters from home I would 

have liked to read to you. Oh Mama, are you leaving me now?” 

Then she gave out a loud sigh and said clearer than ever before, “This was a 

hard fare we ll for you Lydia.” 

“Oh Mama, I thought that you went to Jesus now.” She answered, “No. Not 

today, but tomorrow maybe.” 

I asked her if she could hear if I read the letters that came that day from 

home. She said, “Read, read.” 

I read Papa’s first, the n Albert’s. He asked Mama if she could forgive him 

for all the times he had disobeyed her and hurt her feelings. I asked her, 

“What shall I tell Albert?” She laughed out loud and said, “That’s done a long, 

long time ago.” 

Then I read Hulda’s and Enoch’s and Annie’s and Ben’s and P ete’s and our 

thre e little girl ’s letters to her. When that was done, I sent a telegram to Dassel 

saying, “Mama says that she will go to Jesus tomorrow, maybe. ”

The pastor prayed and asked a blessing on her. She asked me to sing It Is 

Pleasant to Prai se the Lord , a song of A. L. Skoog that she often heard me 

sing and she loved it. Then we all sang, In the Sweet Bye and Bye , we shall 

meet on that beautiful shor e. 

The next day at the same time of day, she went to be with the Lord. I sent 

that telegra m home too. When the first telegram went through Kansas City, 133 

> Anna’s g rave marker at the Lake Jennie
> Cemetery. The stone is barely legible today.

the operator there was a friend of the one in Clay Center. He wired back and 

said he wished he could say that when he had to die. The Clay Center operator 

wired back, “Live for Jesus and you may .” 

When the first telegram arrived in Dassel the agent told my brother, “Here 

is a telegram for you from Clay Center , Kansas that I can’t read.” Albert said, 

“Spell it then.” He did and Albert said, “It means exactly what it says. Mama 

says that she wi ll go to Jesus tomorrow maybe.” 

The agent knew Mama , H e did not understand, but was touched by it. 

When the second telegram came the next day that Mother has gone to be with 

the Lord, he saw what it really meant. I had wanted to prepare them at home. 

That’s why I sent the first 

message. 

Now the task was to 

get her ready as fast as I 

could and take her home. 

There was a lot to attend 

to. Edlings helped me. 

We got the coffin in Clay 

Center and I bought 

myself a black outfit. 

When we came back to 

Edl ings , the undertaker 

had mother fixed and laid 

in the coffin. The 

neighbors came and 

brought flowers. It 

touched me much to see 

the love they showed to 

us strangers. I had never 

expected to see a single 

flower on her coffin. The 

pastor read and held a shor t service in Edling’s home. The pastor’ s daughter 

played the organ and sang a solo, then we all sang In the Sweet Bye and Bye .

Then we started for Clay Center. 134 

The Edlings and I were invited to have supper at the undertaker’s. There 

was a string of te ams that followed us more than half way to town and some 

all the way to tow n. After supper they went with me to the depot and got my 

ticket f or me and mother’s corpse. The depot agent was invited out for a 

wedding but had a boy who was learning and he made out the fare for us, but 

did not know how. I was sent on a wrong train in a wrong direction. I had both 

a wrong kind of ticket and a wrong claim check for the corpse. 

When the depot agent came back and questioned the boy, he found out the 

mistake. He was responsible so he sent a telegram after the train. When we 

came to McFa rland, the red cap came running by the train and was calling 

loud, “Is there a Lydia Nelson on this train?” 

I answered, and had to stop there for two hours for another train to take me 

back the right way. I said, “God, what do you mean?” I soon found o ut why 

this mistake had to be made. 

When I entered the depot, I saw a poor woman crying. She held a tiny baby 

in her arms and one small child clung to her skirt on each side, and another 

little one tootled behind her. All were crying. 

I went right u p to her and asked, “What can the matter be my dear lady 

when you are weeping so bitterly?” 

She answered, “I am so afraid that my mama will die before I can reach her. 

I must a sk her to forgive me for running away from home and marrying a 

good for nothing man. He won’t work and support us. Oh, if she would only 

live until I can ask her forgivenes s. The children are hungry .” 

“How did you get money to make this trip?” She said she begged the train 

fare from her neighbors. Then I told her that my mother was in a coffin with 

me, and told her what my brother said in his letter. He asked Mama, “Can you 

forgive me for disobeying you and hurting your feelings so many times. Do 

you kn ow, I asked my mama what I should tell my brother, and she laughed 

and said, ‘That was done long, long ago.’ That is a mother’s heart for you. 

They’ll forgive before they are asked. All you need to do is to ask Jesus t o

forgive you . He will. He said , “W hos oever cometh unto me I will in no wise 

cast out.” 

I had a basket of apples that Edlings raised and gave me to bring along. I 

gave each of the children an apple and they were quiet. I gave my lunch to her 135 

along wit h the basket of apples. I thought I co uld get along without. Soon her 

train took her along, and I went on to Kansas City. When I arrived there, I had 

to be driven across the whole city on cobble stone streets in a wagon with 

horses to another station on the outskirts of the city. I was afraid s o I walked 

over a lot of train tracks to find out if mother’s coffin and trunk were along. It 

was there, and I waited in that station for five hours. 

When I got on the train for Des Moines, the conductor told me my ticket 

was not good and I should pay $1.70 more. I was puzzled. I told him my story 

and he promised to help me get a right ticket when we reached Des Moines. I 

asked him to write a l etter for me to explain. I said I was so tired I wish he 

would do that, a nd he did. When that was done , and the y looked into the 

mistake, they said I had paid too much instead of too little for the ticket. Then 

when I was on the train to St. Paul they said when I reached St. Paul , that was 

my destination. I told them I had paid for a ticket all the way to Dassel, 

Minnesota and through Minneapolis. How glad I was when Constantine 

Olson, my pastor , and Pete came and met me on the train in St. Paul and 

everything was corrected. It was fine that I had that letter to show, too. 

They took me to Minneapolis and I then had to go with the corpse to 

Dassel, then out to my home, and then take the next train back to Minneapolis 

to get my family ready so we could attend the funeral the next day. It was held 

in my old home. Many were the f riends that came. Pastor Bryngelson sp oke 

kind and comforting words to us all. A service was held, then she was laid to 

rest in the Lake Jenn ie Church cemetery . We sang Mother’s favorite song and 

then In the Sweet Bye and Bye . We shall meet on that beautif ul shore. Mother 

is resting now at Lak e Jennie until the day of resurrection. (Ingel eventually 

remarried and moved to Dassel for his final years.) 

Now I will mention about something that helped us to decide that we 

should see to it that someone would be sure to go to Mother when she was 

sick. Hulda dreamt that no one could go to mother, and she was far from 

home and very sick. Jenna dreamt that her father and my mother came up to 

the house talking confidentially. She told Albert, “I wonder if Mother 

An derson is sick. You see, my father jus t died a short time ago.” It seemed 

odd for Jenny to dream like that and I already mentioned the fo reboding I had. 

Sister Annie did not see or hear anything but the three other occupants in 

the four -family flat whe re Annie lived heard what they claimed was a 136 

foreboding. One lady down stairs said she heard someone run up the stairs to 

Annie’s door and ran like a horse and pounded three times real hard on the 

door. Then he took ahold of the door knob and shook it viol ently, then turned 

about and ran down just as noisily, like a horse. She went to see but saw 

nothing. She went to the other lady downstairs and she had heard exactly the 

same. She had also gone to see what it could be and saw no one. Then both 

these ladies went upstairs to the third lady and t old her, and she also had heard 

the very same thing. She too had gone to see and saw nothing. The three 

ladies then went to sister Annie. Annie said, “Oh, you’ve heard something out 

from the street.” They said that the y had heard plainly that someone ran u p the 

stairs like a horse and knocked three times at Annie’s door, then took ahold of 

the door knob and shook it violently, then turn about and ran down just as 

noisily. They looked and saw nothing. There was nothing i n that street. 

Amanda Nyman often had visions and she would tell about what she had 

seen. We never took much notice of it , but her mother said , “It gets one 

thinking. Things really happen.” Amanda sa id that she saw a funeral pass by. 

It was not a sad funeral. Everyone and everything was so clean and white, and 

it was the funeral of one of our dear friends. She did not say whom, and no 

one asked her . Then when the news about Mama’s death came, she said, “Ja, 

Ja, I dreamt about it. I had a vision. I s aw it.” 

Now I know if these warnings ha d not come to us , we would have thought 

just like my brother -in -law, that Mother was so husky and strong she would 

be well again and come home. Also, maybe she never knew that the Edlings 

sent that telegram. Maybe they got frightened when she got suddenly ill. 

Mother always worked very hard because Papa had his bum leg. She took 

many steps extra to save him. In her short life she accomplished a lot. She 

helped Papa to clear the land in what was the heavy timbe r section of Meeker 

County. She took care o f the cattle, did the milking, and made butter and 

cheese. She made many useful things out of all those flour sacks. She sheered 

the sheep, carded, spun and wove, and made clothes out of the yarn. She took 

care of every scrap of cloth and cut them into rag s, gut sewed and made 

carpets out of them. She was a good dyer. She dyed materials and made them 

look like new again. She always helped to slaughter and take care of the meat. 

She did the curing of the pork hersel f, smoking the hams with hickory wood, 137  

> Undated photo of a gathering of the John Anderson, Nels Anderson,
> Settergren and Quanstrom families. Thes e were all neighbors of Ingel about
> 1910. Note the fashionable men’s hat s and white shirtwaists on all the ladies.

maki ng very fine smoked pork. She made her own lye to cure the lutefisk, and 

made the lye for her own soap. She made her own potato flour and she roasted 

the green coffee for our household use. She helped make the sor ghum and 

husked corn and all kinds of outsi de work. She washed, ironed and baked and 

cooked our meals. She sewed our clothes too, everything from panties, 

petticoats to dresses and bonnets. No wonder she started to be worn out. 

Now all her children we re married. She had the joy of seeing our o ldest 

girls and sister Hulda’s DeLores . Albert’s son was on the way. He became a 

Covenant pastor and now has a church in Litchfield, Minnesota. She did not 

see Delma, Annie’s oldest nor Louise, Emma’s oldest daugh ter. They were 

also on the way. All they wi ll ever know about Mother is what I am telling 

them about in my writings. 138 

# Prayers 

s I am nearly finished with this book, I would like to add more stor ies 

about God’s answer to prayers. One time I had gotten the seven -year 

itch (scabies) from a pers on related to me. She came as a guest to us 

from California , and she said she had gotten it at a camp where she stopped 

on the way over. My daughters said they w ould not sleep with her, but we had 

so many that we had to double up some way. I said Pete can sleep with Lowell 

and Lillian can sleep with me. 

I was in the middle of canning and it was hot weather. It made me real 

susceptible to the itch. I got it so badly that I thought there was no way for me 

to get to a doctor. I could not get out. Every joi nt in my body was raw 

although I refused to scratch. I was awake all night and got dreadfully tired. 

One evening I knelt by my bed, and called upon the Lord. I said, “Dear Jesus, 

you see how miserable I am. Oh, if it is thy holy will, make me well again. 

You see how tired I am. If you don’t see best to heal me , give me more 

patience. I will love and serve you just the same.” Then I went t o bed, and I 

slept all night. 

I woke up like a new person. I thought I must have overslept. I felt so 

refreshed, so r enewed, so good. Then I remembered that it was I who had the 

seven -year itch. I looked at the inside of my elbow in the joint. It was a ll 

healed and it was so white it looked like it was powdered. I brushed with my 

hand over it and it fell like fine white dust from my arms. I looked under my 

arms and all other folds. All were healed and white. I was so surprised that I 

called out, “Oh, oh ! Praise the Lord. I am healed. I am healed.” I ran from 

room to room and showed the children. It was just wonderful. 

# A139 

However, all the rest had that itch . I had to go to the doctor with them . He 

gave me some dark sal ve they had to leave for three days, then wash it off 

with warm, soapy water. All laundry had to be boiled and the blankets and 

coats had to be sent out for special cleaning. My cleaning bill was sixteen 

dollars and really, I was poor, but it had to be done. 

The doc said that if one appli cation did not work, they had to wait two or 

three days before a second application after a thorough bath. My husband had 

to take the cure two times and also Phyllis. Lowell never got the itch. 

If we are willing to obey, just keep on praying. Thy will be done. I have not 

always been willing to let God have his way. Then I would not have the peace 

that only Jesus can giv e. Then I would have to be asking Jesus to cleanse me 

and make me willing to do his will. 

How anxious I have been to have any child ren love the Lord and put him 

first in the lives. I am unwise at time s, but there is nothing I would put before 

God in my life or in their life. 

I remember once when two of my daughters went to California for a 

vacation, I prayed that God would be with them and that they would be kept 

away from falling into temptation. After they left and I committed them into 

God’s care I did not worry. But one night I was abruptly awakened. It seemed 

that someone grabbed me by my arm and said, “You must get up and pray .” 

My thoughts went straight to the girls. I got up and fell to my knees and 

prayed earnestly to the Lord for my girl s, then I went back to bed and fell 

asleep. I did not think any more about it, and did not worry in the least. When 

the girls came home, I had prepared a nice dinner. As we were sitting at the 

table, one of the girls said to the other, “Shall we tell her?” 

“Tell me what?” I asked. “Mama, after we had our suitcases packed to go 

home and were about to leave, there cam e an invitation for us to go to the 

Rose Bowl with a friend from Minneapolis. We said, “Oh, it is too bad that we 

are leaving and will miss out on the get together.” 

Then My rtle said, “We don’t have to take this train, let us go to the Rose 

Bowl and then take the followi ng train home.” It was said and done. The girls 

had a very fine time and when they came back, they took the next train for 

home. They rode along and were happy. The train stopped up in the 140 

mountains and a red cap came and told them that it was a train wreck ahead of 

them. 

People helped the girls and other passengers to climb over the wrecked 

train to where another train m et them to take them on the way. The engineer 

and the fireman had been killed and people were hurt. The mountain was on 

one side high a nd on the other side it was a great depth. 

After they told me I asked what time it happened. They told me and that 

wa s the time I had been awakened and told to pray. I knew that God could 

take care of them without my prayer, but He has told us to make all our 

requests known to him. God really loves to have his children speak to him and 

to be trusting him for his answers. He is wonderful mercy and grace. 

Another time my Margaret and Ada Glemaker from St. Paul rented a 

cottage by Lake Minnetonka. They promised me that they would come 

straight home on a Saturday when the week was up, so that they could get to 

Sunday sch ool and service on Sunday. Ada Glemaker had Mr. Olson’s Ford. 

He worked with her father who sold fur goods. On Saturday a couple boys 

came to visit the girls and they were riding in the back seat of the car. The 

girls were riding in the front seat. They we re laughing and talking and 

chewing gum. 

When they came to a sharp turn in the road, Margaret called out, “Ada, 

there is a sharp turn,” but it was too late. She drove over the edge and the car 

fell against a tree and the door broke. It laid on one sid e. 

They were frightened. The boys got out and helpe d the girls out. The boys 

had each a bump, but the girls were not hurt but they had to pay for the 

mishap. The boys helped and got a man with a derrick to lift the car up and 

take it to a garage to be fixed. When they came to their cottage, they thanked 

God that they were alive and not hurt. One of the girls had a piece of glass in 

her chewing gum, but was not scratched. The other had glass in her shoe, but 

was not cut. 

When they did not come home fo r church or Sunday school, I felt really 

bad. I woke up in that night and prayed for the girls, that the Lord should 

speak to them and bring them home. As soon as they got the car fixed, they 

came home and I said, “Oh girls, why did you not come home Saturda y141 

evening? I was so sorry because you had been spending all week playing, and 

forgetting to come home for Sunday school and church. We cannot live on 

bread alone.” 

But when they told me I really felt sorry for them but thankful to God. 

One day whe n I was preparing lunch for myself, I was home alone. M y

husband brought his lunch with him and the children were at the Minnehaha 

Academy . There came a man to the back door and he said he was hungry. He 

looked real decent so I told him to come in and sit by the table. I asked the 

Lord to bless the food, and w e were eating when he told me that he was 

Swedish, and that he was a Mohamaden by faith. He started to explain this 

sort of religion to me. Of course, it would not sink into me, but I noticed he 

looked at me with a very passionate look and it frightened me . He said , “I can 

tell by your complexion that you have pure blood in your veins.” 

I saw what danger I had gotten myself into and I prayed in my heart to God 

for protection. Just as he stood up fro m the table and walked towards me, I

said, “Lord help me ,” and there the front door opened and my husband walked 

in. The man ran out through the back door so fast he did not even thank me 

for the food. “I suppose you wonder why I came home this time of the day,” 

Pete said. “I forgot to take my chisel along and I needed it.” 

But I know why he was sent home. Before you call on me, I will answer 

thee God has said. He had planned it all and after that I would feed hungry 

men out on the back steps. 

Much l ater, in about 194 4, my son was married and had two little boys, 

Doug and Greg. He came home to me one day and asked me to pray to God to 

keep him out of the war. He said I am Number 1A and can be called any day. 

His oldest son Doug had heard when Lowell w as planning with his wife 

Florence what to do when he had to leave th e family and go into the service. 

The little fellow started to cry and said, “Daddy, daddy, you cannot leave us 

and go to war.” 142 

He told the little boy, “Daddy cannot do anything about it, but you just pray 

to Jesus to keep your daddy out of war. You se e, if I am called, I have got to 

obey and go.” 

The little boy went to the bedroom and prayed, “Jesus, keep my daddy out 

of the war, amen.” 

After that he was glad and played as usua l. The day came that Lowell was 

called to Fort Snelling, and they cal led the names and the boys answered. 

Then when Lowell’s name was called, they said the quota was full. Lowell 

Nelson can go home. In three months, they would call him again. 

The boy c ried when he left, but when he came back and could stay home, 

he said, “I did pray to Jesus to keep Daddy out of war.” 

So, Lowell came home and told me to pray too. He would not want to have 

Doug’s faith shaken. When the three months were gone, he was ca lled again, 

and then too he was called last. Again, they said, “Lowell Nelson can return 

home. The quota is filled, and after three months he will be called again. 

Again, he was called and the quota was filled, and he returned home. And 

for the fourth t ime when he was called the quota was filled. Now a whole year 

had pas sed and he was so confident that he would not be called. Each time we 

really thanked God that the quota was filled, so he could stay with his family. 

After a short time, one of the d raftees took sick and Lowell was called to 

take his place. Doug reall y mourned. Lowell went through the training and 

was booked for Japan. Some soldiers asked to come home and see their 

families but were refused. Some had farms and grain was going to waste for 

lack of men to take care of it. Lowell had two little boys who h ad hernias, one 

had double hernia. Lowell had cared for their ailment and seen to it that they 

got new trusses when the old ones got too bad. He would get up at night and 

care for them. H e was needed at home, but the later part of their time was 

spent doin g nothing and they were not even allowed to go home and say 

goodbye. So, they went to higher up officials and got permission to go home. 

Lowell took his family to the Red Cross and as ked them to see to it that the 

boys could get trusses when they neede d. The nurse said, “Why, you are 

needed much more in your home than in Japan. I will send a telegram out to 

your post and have them release you.” 143 

Lowell waited for that telegram and h eard nothing. He wrote to me, asking 

me to pray about keeping him fro m going across to Japan. Finally, the day 

arrived that the ship was going to leave the port but they were detained for 

two hours because they had to take off some of the cargo and put the things on 

first that were put on last. The boys stood in formation a ll the while. Just as 

they were on the gang plank there came by loudspeaker an order that Lowell 

Nelson had to stay and go back. The girl who was keeping file had stuck the 

telegram in ba ck on the file and forgotten about it. After the boys were gone, 

she discovered her error and sent a telegram to the boat to hold Lowell 

Nelson . After some red tape, he was sent back home to stay. There was joy 

and thanksgiving in the home. Doug’s faith wa s strengthened. 

There were people who got angry at me when I told them. “Oh, you are not 

any better than we are.” I said, “Oh, no, I am not.” 

One lady said, “I hope that Lowell will be sent to war and get killed.” Oh, 

the hate some could sling out at me. I learned that I could not mention it. Lots 

of complaints? Yes . But if there was anything to be thankful for, no, nothing 

doing. 

I often think if it had not been for God’s wonderful grace I would be 

wandering far away from God. I love pretty th ings , and I would surely 

become very worldly. I thank God for the Christian influence I got from my 

home, for the prayer meetings, for Sunday school and for Christian friends. 

Best of all Jesus became my very best friend and my Savior, my Redeemer, 

my King , my hope for time and eternity. I think of the poor people who never 

heard about the Savior. 144 

Anderson farm as it looks in 20 20 . There is little 

evidence remaining of any original buildings. 

Marking the passage of time  – The barn on the Anderson farm as it 

stands in 20 20 . It is mostly collapsed. This barn was built in the early 

1900s, likely by Albert. The names of Albert’s sons are engra ved into 

concrete inside the barn. 145 

Nels Peter Nelson died in April 1943 at the age of 71. Lydia continued 

in life until her passing in April 1959, shortly after completi on of this 

manuscript. 

Peter & Lydia with all their children. 

Back row: Gertrude, Ma rgaret, Myrthel. 

Front row: Lowell, Phyllis, Connie. 146 

Lowell Gertrude Lydia Myrthel Margaret 

Connie Phyllis 

The family all grown up. 147
