Title: Are We All #NastyWomen? The Rhetoric of Feminist Hashtags and Respectability Politics

URL Source: https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1041&context=english_etds

Published Time: Mon, 08 May 2023 13:30:30 GMT

Markdown Content:
Old Dominion University Old Dominion University 

# ODU Digital Commons ODU Digital Commons 

English Theses & Dissertations  English 

Spring 2018 

# Are We All #NastyWomen? The Rhetoric of Feminist Hashtags Are We All #NastyWomen? The Rhetoric of Feminist Hashtags 

# and Respectability Politics and Respectability Politics 

Kimberly Lynette Goode Old Dominion University , Kgood035@odu.edu 

Follow this and additional works at:  https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/english_etds 

Part of the  Rhetoric Commons 

Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 

Goode, Kimberly L.. "Are We All #NastyWomen? The Rhetoric of Feminist Hashtags and Respectability 

Politics" (2018). Master of Arts (MA), Thesis, English, Old Dominion University, DOI: 10.25777/6bj5-7f60 

https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/english_etds/43 

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the English at ODU Digital Commons. It has been 

accepted for inclusion in English Theses & Dissertations by an authorized administrator of ODU Digital Commons. 

For more information, please contact  digitalcommons@odu.edu .ARE WE ALL #NASTYWOMEN? 

THE RHETORIC OF FEMINIST HASHTAGS AND RESPECTABILITY POLITICS 

by 

Kimberly Lynette Goode 

B.S. August 2015, Old Dominion University 

A Thesis Submitted to the Faculty of 

Old Dominion University in Partial Fulfillment of the 

Requirements for the Degree of 

MASTER OF ARTS 

ENGLISH 

OLD DOMINION UNIVERSITY 

May 2018 

Approved by: 

Candace Epps -Robertson (Director) 

Julia Romberger (Member) 

Avi Santo (Member) ABSTRACT 

ARE WE ALL #NASTYWOMEN? 

THE RHETORIC OF FEMINIST HASHTAGS AND RESPECTABILITY POLITICS 

Kimberly Lynette Goode 

Old Dominion University, 2018 

Director: Dr. Candace Epps -Robertson 

In a ti me where misogynistic phrases from political figures such as Donald Trump and 

Mitch McConnell are being reclaimed by feminists on Twitter, it is crucial for feminist rhetorical 

scholars to pay close attention to the rhetorical dynamics of such reclamation efforts. In 

particular, the reclamation of the phrase nasty woman via #NastyWoman, #NastyWomen, 

#IamANastyWomanBecause, #IamANastyWoman, etc. is a fruitful site for analysis. In this 

thesis, the reclamation efforts of Twitter feminists will be analyzed to gauge the underlying 

discourse at work in the hashtag. Based on the origins of the hashtag and the way the tweeters 

have come to define the term nasty woman, the hashtag is a discourse of respectability politics. 

Meaning, the tweeters are not merely recla iming the phrase to repudiate Donald Trump, 

empower themselves, or highlight the gendered insults levied at women who exhibit 

assertiveness, confidence, and other “masculine” traits ; they are also denouncing the 

respectability politics that governs women. However, the reclamation efforts have caused, to use 

Kenneth Burke’s concept, alienation in certain tweeters because the type of respectability the 

tweeters are denouncing is one that pertains to European American women. This thesis will 

present a study of the rhetoric of respectability within #NastyWomen and its variations as well as 

how such a rhetoric has contributed to the formation of a stock story of respectability that 

excludes the experiences of respectability from African American women. iii 

© Copyright, 2018, by Kimberly Lynette Goode, All Rights Reserved. iv 

This thesis is dedicated to every woman who has been on the receiving end 

of respectability politics as well as to all the women who felt alienated 

in popular movements because their experiences do not align 

with the dominant experiences touted within those movements. v

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

There are many people who have contributed to the completion of this project. First and 

foremost, I would like to thank my thesis director. Without you, this thesis would not have been 

possible. I thank you for all the time, dedication, and energy you put towards this project. There 

have been many times I struggled with getting drafts into you on time due to snow storms and 

power outages, issues concerning how to accurately report my data, and many other challenges. 

Ever understanding, you accepted my drafts without any complaints concerning deviating from 

the deadline. Further, the feedback you gave was not only timely, but e ssential to the many 

revisions I made. Your feedback inspired me to dig deeper into my research materials, highlight 

finer details concerning how I introduce researchers in my text, and take special care as to how I 

structure certain content within my text . Such mechanics I believe has contributed to the overall 

quality of my thesis. Again, I am incredibly grateful for your support, advice, and everything that 

you have done to see this project to the finish line. I could not have had a better chair. 

Second , I would like to express my gratitude for the rest of my thesis committee. I am so 

thankful for all the wonderful advice and suggestions both of you gave. You provided alternative 

perspectives in which to approach my argument. Such advice helped me to hon e in on my 

argument. My project would not be where it is now without your advice. Working with you 

certainly taught me that it takes a village to write a thesis. 

Finally, I would like to thank my parents. I am thankful for the support you gave me. You 

enc ouraged me greatly throughout my thesis project. Without your love and reassurance, I could 

not have completed this project .vi 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

LIST OF FIGURES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ vii 

Chapter 

I. THE POLITICS OF BEING #NASTYWOMEN ................................ ....................... 1

1.1 ORIGIN OF #NASTYWOMEN & NASTY WENCHES ................................ . 3

1.2. THE RHETORIC OF RESPECTABILITY POLITICS ................................ ... 10 

1.3 STOCK STORY V ERSUS COUNTER STORY OF RESPECTABILITY ...... 12

1.4 CHAPTER OUTLINE ................................ ................................ ....................... 18

II. METHODOLOG ICAL CONSIDERATIONS & SCREENCAPTURE AS FEMINIST 

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH METHOD ................................ ................................ ......... 20 

2.1 SELECTED FEMINIST METHODOLOGIES ................................ .................. 21 

2.2 TWITTER HASHTAGS AS DIGITAL ARCHIVES ................................ ........ 23 

2.3 SCREENCAPTURE AS FEMINIST ARCHIVAL RESE ARCH METHOD ..... 24

2.4 CONCULSION ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 32 

III. THE RHETORICAL CONSTRUCTION OF STOCK STORY AND COUNTERSTORY 

IN #NASTYWOMEN ................................ ................................ ................................ . 34

3.1 IDENTIFICATION & ALIENATION ................................ ............................... 35

3.2 STOCK STORY OF #NASTYWOMEN ET AL. ................................ ............... 40 

3.3 COUNTERSTORY OF #NASTYWOMEN ET AL. ................................ .......... 62 

3.4 CONCLUSION ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 69 

IV. A CRITICAL REFLECTION: THE PROBLEM WITH FEMINIST RECLAMATION 

................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 70

4.1 SLUTWALK & ALEINATION IN FEMINIST RECLAMATION .................. 70

4.2 THE PROBMLEM WITH RECLAMATION ................................ .................... 74

4.3 CONCLUSION ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 75

REFERENCES ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 77

VITA ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 83vii 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure Page 

1. meg’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 1

2. First Page of Word Doc Repository ................................ ................................ .................... 28

3. Search Function in Word Doc Repository ................................ ................................ .......... 29

4. The Heading of Section 1 ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 30 

5 Example of How Tweets are Included & Annotated ................................ ........................... 30 

6. Section 2 Heading ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 31 

7. Annotated Tweet Example ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 32 

8. Warrior Mom’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 41 

9. UniteWomen.org CT’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ............................. 45

10. Melynda Heying’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 47

11. HerRoyalHoeliness’ Tweet ................................ ................................ ............................... 49

12. Liz Tambascio’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 51 

13. Melanie St -Pierre’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ 53 

14. TamTam’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 54

15. Asa Soltan Rahmati’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ............................. 56

16. Danielle Cox’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 58

17. Kalebogile Zvobgo’s Tweet ................................ ................................ .............................. 60 

18. Sydney Writers’ Fest’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ........................... 63 

19. The Libyan’s Tweet ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 64

20. Victoria M. Massie’s Thread ................................ ................................ ............................ 661

CHAPTER 1 

THE POLITICS OF BEING #NASTYWOMEN 

Figure 1. meg’s Tweet 

In this thesis, I examine the rhetoric of respectability and feminist hashtags via 

#NastyWomen and other variations of the hashtag (e.g. #NastyWoman, #IAmANastyWoman, 

etc.). Through efforts to reclaim the phrase nasty woman, tweeters have illuminated latent 

ideologies . Precisely, the se ideologies are, respectively, the respectability that governs European 

Ame rican women and the notion of European American women’s experiences being 

representative of all women’s experiences regardless how race complicates the respectability that 

governs women of color, namely African American women. I posit that the reclamation of nasty 

woman has resulted in a stock story (otherwise known as meta -narrative) of respectability within 

the hashtags. As a response to the stock story, a counter story (or counter narrative), has 

developed as well. The counter story, in critiquing the st ock story, asserts the reclamation of 

nasty woman poses an issue for African American women. Due to the respectability that polices 

the bodies and sexuality of Black women, nasty woman would present a completely different 2

undertone for African American wom en than European American women in terms of embracing 

the word as a term of empowerment. However, I will explain this premise in much more detail 

later in the chapter. 

In this project, I analyze the rhetorical construction of both the stock story and coun ter 

story to ascertain how they are constructed. The significance of studying both the rhetoric of 

respectability and of feminist hashtags is to flesh out how certain narratives of oppression gain 

more salience while other narratives are obscured. In a wor ld, where the #WomensMarch and the 

#MeToo movements are popular and powerful forces that have the ability to change the narrative 

of gender dynamics in a society, it is important to comprehend whose narrative is being 

championed and whose narrative is bein g, for lack of a better term, forsaken (Gambino). If 

contemporary feminist movements are to fight for issues of women everywhere then it is 

important that these movements are sure to include the issues that affect all women. 

Thus, for this thesis, it is important to focus on how race shapes the way respectability 

governs women. Specifically, it is vital to gauge the role race plays in who is able to reclaim the 

phrase nasty woman as a means of empowerment and as a means of dismantling the 

respectability t hat governs them. The following research questions will be addressed: Who is the 

“we” in we’re all nasty women? In other words, does #NastyWomen represent all women? Are 

“we” all nasty women? What about African American women? Do African American women 

fee l the same sense of empowerment from embracing the term as white women (tweeters) 

proclaim? Does embracing the term “nasty woman” help to combat the notions of respectability 

that govern African American women? Will it help to dismantle societal perception s of African 

American women in terms of femininity and womanhood? Will it start a conversation about the 

forms of respectability African American women deal with? Or, are tweeters universalizing this 3

form of respectability? To put differently, what does “n asty” connote for African American 

women? Before I begin to address these questions, it is critical I offer a bit of context regarding 

#NastyWomen and the phrase nasty woman (or women). Also, just as a reference, it is vital I 

emphasize my utilization of t he term participants. By participants, I am referring to the Twitter 

users in the hashtag, not participants in my research study. Though I will expound upon this in 

greater detail in Chapter 2, I must stress the distinction because I refer to Twitter users in 

subsequent sections of this chapter as participants. But I digress. 

1.1 Origin of #NastyWomen & Nasty W enches 

On October 19, 2016, the third and final presidential debate took place at the University 

of Nevada, Las Vegas between candidates Hillary Cl inton and Donald Trump. Award winning 

Fox News anchor, Chris Wallace served as moderator. The debate went on in a similar fashion as 

the previous debates with Trump making a bevy of interruptions (48 total) while Clinton was 

speaking (King ; Johnson and Wil son). In the first debate, Trump interrupted Clinton 40 times (25 

of which were in the first 26 minutes of the 90 -minute debate) and in the second debate he 

interrupted 18 times (Wagstaff; Bennet). However, one interruption, in particular, during the 

third presidential debate would elicit an outrage among Twitter feminists and allies alike. The 

comment was “such as nasty woman” (Diaz). Specifically, 

Wallace: Secretary Clinton, same question because at this point Social Security and 

Medicare are going to run out -- the trust funds are going to run out of money. 

Will you, as president, consider a grand bargain, a deal that includes both tax 

increases and benefit cuts to try to save b oth programs? 4

Clinton: Well, Chris, I am record [sic] as saying we need to put more money into Social 

Security Trust fund. That’s part of my commitment to raise taxes on the 

wealthy. My Social Security payroll contribution will go up as will Donald’s 

assuming he can’t figure out how to get out of it, but what we want to do is —

Trump : Such a nasty woman .

Clinton: Replenish the trust fund by making sure that we have sufficient resources, and 

that will come fr om either raising the cap and/or finding other ways to get more 

money into it. I will not cut benefits. I want to enhance benefits for low -income 

workers and for women who have been disadvantaged by the current Social 

Security system… . (P olitico) 

To contextualize the above quote, Wallace asked both Trump and Clinton if they would consider 

saving Social Security and Medicare by taking a grand bargain. Trump, moments before Wallace 

directed the question to Clinton, insisted that he would sa ve Social Security and Medicare by 

ending Obamacare (Politico). When Clinton gave her answer, she was interrupted with Trump’s 

remark. Granted, she did make a jibe at Trump’s alleged inability to pay his taxes (e.g. “My 

Social Security payroll contribution will go up as will Donald’s assuming he can’t figure out 

how to get out of it”). However, that did not stop Twitter feminists from voicing their shock and 

ire at Trump insulting his female opponent during a presidential debate ( Grey ). 

Many of these tweet ers were quick to note the role Clinton’s gender played in Trump’s 

utilization of the term on two grounds. One, tweeters were quick to notes the irony of Trump’s 

insult because moments before he called Clinton nasty, he stated “nobody has more respect for 

women than I do” in the third debate as well (Chan). For a man who claims to have a plethora of 5

respect for women, he does seem to make an abundance of misogynistic comments. The tweeters 

also took note of other misogynistic comments Trump has made through out his run for office 

(Chan; Plank). 

For instance, at the very beginning of Trump’s presidential bid, he made a slew of sexist 

statements. As Trump commenced his campaign for the Republican nomination in April of 2015, 

he tweeted, in allusion to the Moni ca Lewinsky scandal, that Hillary Clinton could not satisfy her 

husband, so “what makes her think she could satisfy America” (Cohen). Here, Trump is 

implying that it was the lack of satisfaction that she gave her husband that made him seek out 

Monica Lewin sky. Further he’s implying that if she failed to satisfy her husband, then she will 

fail to satisfy America as president. Also, after the first Republican debate for party nomination 

(August 8, 2015), Trump referred to moderator Megyn Kelly as a bimbo afte r she questioned 

him concerning the accusations of sexism people have levied against him; he even stated that her 

questioning was the result of her being on her menstrual cycle (Cohen). Trump called his 

Republican nomination rival, Carly Fiorina ugly when he stated in an interview with Rolling 

Stone magazine to, “Look at that face. Would anyone vote for that? Can you imagine that, the 

face of our next President? I mean, she’s a woman, and I’m not supposed to say bad things, but 

really, folks come on. Are we serious?” (Cohen). Finally, and arguably, the most salient sexist 

statement would have to be Trumps “grab them by the pussy” comment he made in a 2005 

Access Hollywood (a popular entertainment tv show) tape where he admitted to kissing women 

and “grabbing” their genitals without their permission (Cohen). Together, these comments lend 

credence to the accusation that gender played a role in the nasty woman insult and it f alls in line 

with the previous derogatory comments made .6

Second, tweeters charged that nasty woman was a “debate -acceptable stand -in for more 

overtly offensive, women -specific insults, like “bitch” or “cunt ,” ” functioned as a “personal, 

deeply sexist, di smissal” of Clinton, as well as represented a common situation numerous women 

find themselves in (e.g. being name -called by less qualified coworkers and/or managers simply 

because they are female and especially if they are an qualified or overqualified fem ale at that, 

being name -called by men because they rejected them, etc.) ( Grey ; Plank). Hence, in an effort to 

support Clinton in her election bid and repudiate Trump, the tweeters began to reclaim the term 

nasty woman (and the plural nasty women). However, the reclamation of the phrase became 

something more. The reclaimed phrase began to be utilized as a form of empowerment 

(Samakow). In #NastyWoman, #NastyWomen, #IAmANastyWoman, #NastyWomenForHillary, 

#IAmANastyWomanBecause, #MadamePresidentIfYourNasty, an d so on, tweeters exclaimed 

how proud they were of being a nasty woman as well as how proud they were of the nasty 

women in their lives (Grey; Quinn). Further, the tweeters utilize each of the aforementioned 

hashtags (henceforth will be referenced as #Nast yWomen, the nasty women or woman hashtags, 

or #NastyWomen et al.), to share first -hand or second -hand accounts of being called a nasty 

woman or similar invectives as well as to highlight other instances of women in the mainstream 

media being called a gende red slur for acting like, for all intents and purposes, nasty women 

(Hollander; Campuzano). 

What is interesting about the reclamation of nasty woman is that tweeters have altered the 

original meaning of the term. Since it would be an impossibility to kno w Trump’s intended 

meaning of the invective, research into the denotation of nasty is needed. Nasty, from the Old 

French word nastre, can mean either bad, strange, cruel, dirty, foul, morally filthy, indecent, 

offensive to smell, or disagreeable (Gorog 276 -277). Language specialist, Ralph De Gorog, notes 7

the word nasty has been historically utilized to refer to people. It was very common in the 1470s, 

to call people “na stre persones” (nasty people) (276 -277). Thus, it would not be a stretch to 

suggest that by calling Clinton a nasty woman Trump was really calling her a bad, strange, cruel, 

dirty, foul, morally filthy, indecent, or disagreeable woman. I make this claim since Clinton took 

a dig at Trump about his inability to pay his taxes whilst discussing he r plan on how to save 

Social Security and Medicare (Politico). Regardless, the connotation of nasty in Trump’s 

utilization seems to imply an unfavorable woman. Trump’s inclusion of woman in the nasty 

woman comment seems to suggest this as well. Trump did n ot state Clinton was such a nasty 

person, he specifically called her a nasty woman. Why didn’t he just call her nasty? Why did he 

have to include woman? Journalist, Megan Garber corroborates my assertion, in that 

“Nasty” for a long time functioned in exactly the way Trump seemed to want it to 

on Wednesday -as an efficient insult that impugns women prismatically. In 

referring to Clinton as “a nasty woman,” Trump was insulting her as both a 

physical and a moral ent ity: He was denigrating her looks, her personality, and 

her moral character. He was suggesting ugliness, and ickiness, and lasciviousness. 

He was replicating, essentially, the regressive assumptions that are rampant in a 

culture that still demands that women be, above all, pleasing. (Garber) 

Although it is debatable whether Trump’s comment was intended to insult Clinton based 

on her looks or lasciviousness, it is highly feasible he was insulting her personality or moral 

character. Garber’s commentary al so supports my inquiry as to the gendered nature of Trump’s 

meaning of the term. Historically and even presently, Western society expected women to be 

passive, modest, quiet, nice, generous, subservient, and chaste (e.g. respectable) (Campbell 5). 

Whereas, men are expected to be assertive, aggressive, tough, competitive, dominant, intelligent, 8

and blunt (Campbell 12). Further, the term nasty woman or, rather, nasty wenches as it was 

historically termed, actually has a sordid history in terms of its utilizat ion. Since Colonial times 

(e.g. 16 th -17 th century Europe and American colonies), nasty has been an insult levied against 

women who refuse to remain in their “proper place as defined by men” and “who challenges 

male authority” (Garber; Brown 1 -9). Colonial men considered such women to be “nasty 

wenches” (Paquette). As historian Kathleen Brown remarks, men referred to women who 

challenge male authority or refuses to stay in their place nasty. In contrast, women who did abide 

by respectability were deemed to b e “good” wives and, eventually, “good” women (Brown 1 -2, 

16). The “good” wife was a woman who was submissive, hardworking, pious, pure and quiet 

(16 -17). This wife did what she was told and stayed in her proper place (e.g. the private sphere, 

behind their husbands as the submissive wife, etc.) in society (Brown 1 -2, 16 -17). 

Granted, I am not accusing Trump of calling Clinton a nasty woman because she 

challenged his male authority. Nevertheless, what I am suggesting as numerous participants in 

the nasty woma n hashtags have argued is that his insult does not occur outside of a vacuum 

(Samakow; Campuzano). Neither does the redefinition (e.g. rebranding the phrase to mean 

something else) of the term nasty woman. 

In celebration of being nasty women, some tweeters have come to define a nasty woman 

as a bold, strong, intelligent, confident, ambitious, assertive woman who is not afraid to speak 

her mind (Samakow). As journalist, Alexia LaFata proclaims, nasty woman is the new bitch 

(LaFata). Not too long ago, the term bitch was reclaimed to connote a more positive meaning. 

Instead of women being shamed for being bitches (e.g. assertive, domineering, boisterous, 

ambitious, tough, aggressive, blunt, independent, demanding, etc.), feminists sought to reclaim 

the word as a form of empowerment indicating that it is okay to be a bitch in that women who 9

are bitches take up a lot of space, are ambitious, and know what they want and go after whatever 

they wanted to go after (Stevenson 107 -109). Nasty woman has taken on a similar valence. 

Again, nasty woman has come to mean an assertive, confident, intelligent woman. Essentially, 

Hillary Clinton, for the tweeters, has come to personify what a nasty woman is in the redefinition 

of the word. Feminist author, Kate Harding as serts a lot of women could relate to Hillary Clinton 

in that moment of debate when Trump called her a nasty woman (Harding) . A lot of women have 

been in similar experiences in which they acted in a confident and forthright manner and they 

were insulted for it by men. #NastyWomen et al., as Harding proclaims, was a visceral reaction 

to that moment (Harding) .

One could say, the rhetoric within the nasty woman hashtags are, technically, a 

denouncement of respectability politics. Instead of adhering to expecta tions that women should 

be submissive, quiet, or pious, these tweeters are suggesting that it is okay for women to be nasty 

women or wenches and embrace being smart, confident, ambitious, among many other 

“masculine” traits. That it is okay not to be the “ good” wife or woman. It is okay to be the “bad” 

woman because the “bad” woman has only been rendered “bad” since she fails to adhere to the 

politics of respectability that governs her gender (Fernando and Cohen 151; Garber; Harding). 

The problem with suc h a trajectory of thought is that it obscures the realities of women 

who may have never stood a chance of accessing the position of the “good” wife. Due to race, 

African American women were only considered to be the nasty wenches by dominant (white) 

societ y (Brown 9). In other words, Black women were rendered the “bad” women, arguably, 

since the very beginning (e.g. their arrival to the United States of America). Thus, as much as 

“nasty woman” is a gendered slur, it is equally a racial one, if not more so. However, before I 

expound upon my assertion, it is imperative that I define what exactly the rhetoric of 10 

respectability politics is and how I conceptualize respectability politics in this project (e.g. how I 

am personally defining it). 

1.2. The Rhetoric of Respectability Politics 

Commonly associated with the Victorian era, respectability politics is an “ideological 

construct” concerning “behavioral norms”. For women, respectability has governed the bodies, 

dress, sexuality, and disposition of every woman in a society. To be perceived as respectable, 

women had to dress modestly, demonstrate self -restraint, be well -mannered, and confine 

themselves to the private sphere. It was expected of women to be “dutiful mothers and effective 

housekeepers” (Fernando and Cohen 149). 

Historian Mike J. Huggins posits that respectability was an extremely powerful rhetoric 

that regulated each member of society in the Victorian era. Though it is related to expectations 

society puts forth regarding gender, the rhetoric of resp ectability is also a class -based and 

generational/familial construct that gets entire families to concertedly modify their behavior in 

order for their family to be perceived as respectable in society. To be respectable in society 

means modifying ones and t heir entire families’ behavior to suit leading middle -class and/or 

upper -class values. If any member of the family acted in a manner that was deem unrespectable 

than it would condemn the entire family. In other words, the act of one would make it so the 

wh ole family was viewed as unrespectable and they would lose their standing in society. Such an 

ideological force, Huggins remarks, fosters active participation the maintenance and 

promulgation of the rhetoric. Thus, causing the ideology underlying the rheto ric of respectability 

to be preserved and spread as well (Huggins 585 -587). 11 

Feminist, activist, and author, Roxanne Gay, noting how respectability politics is still a 

dominant force in contemporary society, contends that respectability politics pertains t o how 

society holds each member to “unspoken rules about who and how they should be, how they 

should think, and what they should say” (257). Gay uses stereotypes as an example. She insists 

that we, as a society, hate stereotypes yet we take issue when peop le deviate from them (Gay 

257). In our society, we hold the expectation that men should not cry, but when they do, many 

are shunned for it (257). What can be gleaned from this definition is that respectability is a tacit 

expectation of how people should be have. At least that is the way in which I am defining it for 

the purpose of this thesis. Respectability, in the context of femininity, is the tacit expectation that 

women should be weak (weaker than men), demure, pious, pure (at least in comparison to men) ,

and so on (Campbell 9 -12). Essentially, women’s behavior should correspond to the stereotypes 

associated with their gender and other markers of social identity. For instance, race, another 

common marker of social identity, plays a crucial role as to wha t expectations society holds for 

certain groups of women. As I have mentioned numerous times throughout the chapter so far, the 

societal expectations that governs White women differs from the ones that governs Black 

women. 

Therefore, it is best to look at both the stock story and the counter story of the hashtags as 

two very different narratives of respectability. As I observed in my aggregation of tweets 

pertaining to the counter story, the rhetoric of the nasty women hashtags does not speak to the 

respec tability politics that governs African American women due to different racial histories of 

respectability. However, it is significant that I discuss what a stock story and a counter story is 

prior to discussing the stock story and counter story of respecta bility in the nasty women 

hashtags. 12 

1.3 Stock Story versus Counter Story of Respectability 

As legal theorist and critical race scholar, Richard Delgado astutely puts, “stories 

create…bonds, represent cohesion, shared understandings, and meanings” (2412). By stories, 

Delgado is referring to an individual or group’s experiences, knowledge, perspective, or social 

reality (Delgado 2411 -2412). For instance, one’s story of 9/11 would pertain to either their 

knowledge of the event, their experiences of the event (e.g. witnessed it first hand, knew 

someone who was there, or saw it on television as it was happening, etc.), their opinions 

concerning the event, or the impact the event had on their lives such as racial profiling, increased 

discrimination, etc. (i.e. s ocial reality). Since there are a bevy of individuals or groups that 

comprise a society, there are multiple narratives within a society. However, Delgado narrows in 

on two general narratives that highlight the difference in realities between those who comp rise 

the ingroup of society (e.g. the majority) and those who comprise the outgroup of society (e.g. 

the minority). The ingroup’s narrative is termed the stock story or meta -story of a society and the 

outgroup’s is termed the counter story of a society. 

Stock stories are stories crafted by the ingroup “to establish a shared sense of identity, 

reality, and naturalization of their superior position” (Martinez 69). Stock stories tells of the 

experiences, knowledge, perspectives, and social reality of the domi nant groups in a society. In 

the context of the United States of America, for example, the racial ingroup would be European 

Americans because they are the racial majority and, due to European colonialism and racism, 

European Americans have been placed in a superior position in America relative to racial 

minority groups. The ingroup also has the power to present a “picture of the world that best fits 

and supports their positions of relative power” (70). In other words, their reality, or rather 

narrative, bec omes the reality of society. The ingroup’s perspective dominants other perspectives 13 

and renders these other perspectives marginal, untrue, biased, or not very credible (70). Stock 

stories feign neutrality and are repeated so often that they become canonize d or normalized (70). 

Whereas, counter stories represent a counter reality (Delgado 2412). These stories are 

told by the outgroup and they aim to subvert the ingroup’s reality (2413). The outgroup’s counter 

stories stand in direct opposition to the storie s put forth by the ingroup to show a different, more 

obscure perspective that lacks the power and salience of the stock stories. They are meant to 

challenge, expose, or analyze the knowledge, experience, opinions, and social realities present by 

the ingrou p in stock stories (Martinez 70). Often told utilizing irony, satire, or humor, counter 

stories “open new windows into reality,” that destabilizes the reality the ingroup has normalized 

(Delgado 2414). 

In application to my thesis project, the stock story in #NastyWomen et al. is comprised 

by the dominant group in the hashtag. Since it is hard to gauge the racial makeup of the Twitter 

users in the hashtags, we can surmise the dominant group in the hashtag are the participants who 

define a nasty woman as a confident, intelligent woman, who shares stories either first hand or 

second hand about being called names for acting like nasty women, as well as make statements 

such as “we’re all nasty women”. Essentially, the dominant group are the people who aid in th e

construction of the major conversation frames I’ve found in my aggregation of tweets. However, 

I discus the conversation frames and my aggregation in greater detail in Chapter 2. The counter 

story in #NastyWomen et al., on the other hand, is comprised of a more marginalized group in 

the hashtag. Since I only collected a handful of these tweets, I can confidently state the users are 

an extremely small group that has garnered very little attention. Their narrative stands to critique 

the dominant narrative, but it does not have the power to alter the dominant narrative. 14 

Therefore, the stock story of respectability pertains to the respectability politics of upper 

class European American women. Whereas, the counter story (at least the one I studied) relates 

to the respectability of African American women as well as critiquing the invisibility of 

European American women’s respectability in efforts to reclaim nasty woman. That is, efforts to 

reclaim nasty woman has resulted in the denouncement of respectability p olitics. Yet, the 

respectability politics that is being denounced is one that tends to govern primarily European 

American woman. With the use of phrases such as “we’re all nasty woman,” the tweeters of the 

stock story are ignoring that not all women are pe rceived as nasty because they possess 

intelligence, confidence, ambition, etc. Though I have stated in the previous section of this 

chapter, that attributes such as submissive, subservient, meek, pious, chaste, etc. the tweeters are 

denouncing in their re clamation of nasty woman or women pertains to societal gender 

expectations of women. As accurate as this may very well be, it is slightly misleading. These 

attributes might possibly be desired in all women, but it is European American women with 

whom domin ant society truly holds to possess these attributes. 

Due to their whiteness, European American women have been historically placed on a 

“pedestal” of femininity in which they were expected to be pious, modest, chaste, demure, and 

submissive women who were subordinate to the authority of their husbands and/or male family 

members ( Harris -Perry 55 ). In contrast, African American women were historically expected to 

be either sexually promiscuous or asexual, inhumanely strong, and belligerent women (55). In 

fact, African American women often turned to respectability politics in order to alter societal 

perceptions of their femininity. Afro -American studies professor, Evelyn Higginbotham notes, 

historically, especially during Reconstruction and the Jim Crow sou th, within the Black 

community and within the church context, African American women fostered respectability 15 

politics in hopes of bettering the Black race by behaving, dressing, and acting as if they were 

worthy of being respected. The African American wom en who typically employed respectability 

politics were low -income and “primarily maids and teachers” (Foster). The politics of 

respectability “offered these women a perceived weapon [especially] in defense of their sexual 

identities. It gave them a sense o f themselves as good …[since] their status is derived by what 

they would define as their character, and it’s a character that says we have to conduct ourselves a 

certain way at the very time that we fight for our rights” (Foster). I this sense, respectabil ity was 

more about self -determination than shame and blame (Foster). It was a Christian (moral) 

ideology which prompted wielders to proclaim to the world that “I am worthy of respect” and 

that “I am an equal” despite how I am treated (Foster). However, res pectability politics as a 

weapon did not eradicate the prevailing images dominant society has of Black women’s 

femininity and sexuality. 

Feminist psychological theorists, Elizabeth R. Cole and Alyssa N. Zucker, citing Patricia 

Hill Collins, suggest domina nt society positions Black women, in terms of their femininity and 

sexuality, as the opposite of White women. Where white women are expected to be delicate, 

pious, submissive, chaste, Black women were expected to be sexually promiscuous, aggressive, 

and em asculating. This juxtaposition of White femininity with Black femininity served to elevate 

the superior status of White women. The scholars also refer to this juxtaposition as hegemonic 

femininity. These stereotypical traits associated with White and Black femininity is part of a 

larger framework of femininity that positions White women on top of the gender hierarchy (since 

their whiteness is associated with the most desirable conceptions of femininity) and Black 

women on the bottom of the gender hierarchy (since their blackness is associated with the least 

desirable traits of femininity) (Cole and Zucker 1). 16 

As political scientist Melissa Harris -Perry asserts, historically, blackness has been 

associated with masculinity and “masculine traits” such as asser tiveness, strength, promiscuity, 

etc.) have been associated to enslaved African women to justify the rigorous field labor they 

were expected to perform as well as to justify the sexual violence inflicted upon them (Harris -

Perry 55 -69). The justification wa s so poignant that it led to the creation of a myriad of sexist, 

racist tropes of African American women such as Mammy, Jezebel, and Sapphire (Harris -Perry 

33). 

Similar to Huggins conception of respectability being linked to families in section 1.2, 

Mammy was a figure that greatly aided the respectability of White families. She was the non -

threatening, devoted, asexual, omnicompetent servant. Instead of risking the ruin of the White 

family structure with her “sexual temptation” of the White patriarch with her lasciviousness (e.g. 

the sexual “relations” between the master and the slave woman was a frowned upon but tolerated 

since society did not regulate the sexual behavior of White men), she was construed as a dear 

servant to the White family (Harris -Perry 71; Mamrak 7 -9). Mammy “was a trusted advisor and 

confidante whose skills were used exclusively in service of white families to which she was 

attached” (Harris -Perry 72). However, Mammy’s blackness prevents her from attaining the 

respectability of White wo men despite her subservience. Rather her race coupled with her 

asexuality and subservient behavior makes her a “figure of acceptable black womanhood” (77). 

Again, this acceptability is in stark contrast to respectable white femininity. Mammy was not the 

me ek, demure, pious White female, she was more of a “grandmother” figure who boldly 

protected her white family. In instances of protection, she was assertive, confident, and even 

aggressive (73 -79). 17 

The troupes Jezebel and Sapphire, on the other hand, did no t possess a shred of 

submissiveness. Jezebel was sexually wanton, and she was characterized as a seducer of men, 

especially the white master. Jezebel’s promiscuity was deemed a symptom of her blackness 

since the “science” of eugenics considered all Black people as hypersexual due to their enlarged 

sexual organs and their animalistic and aggressive sexual appetite. Aggressive and wanton, 

Jezebel was the “bad black woman” to the good white mistress. Sapphire, however, was the 

angry, toughminded, “no -messin’ around ,” emasculating, “eye -rolling ,” “neck -popping” woman. 

She is commonly referred to as the Angry Black woman in contemporary society. Sapphire did 

not submit to the White master, she was seen as more of a threat to both White masculinity and 

Black masc ulinity, and she was related to the most arduous physical labor on the plantation. Her 

assertiveness, demandingness, aggressiveness, and so on made her the opposite of the demure 

White woman whose gentility and submissiveness made her worthy of protection (Harris -Perry 

55 -98). 

With these characterizations in mind, the tweeters of the counter story of #NastyWomen 

et al. are suggesting the embracement of nasty woman will not do much to turn the negative 

attributes associated with the word into a positive as sociation if you were always seen in the light 

of the negative attributes. In other words, the tweeters are saying how do you embrace “nasty” 

when society, out of racist and sexist stereotypes, deem you to be “nasty ” in the first place 

regardless of your b ehavior. By behavior, I am suggesting that the only way European American 

women would be perceived as unrespectable is if they did not embrace the attributes they were 

expected to possess. African American women do not have the same luxury . The negative 

at tributes are tied to their blackness just like the positive attributes are tied to White women’s 

whiteness. In this sense, blackness is associated with negative attributes such as promiscuity 18 

whether or not they are promiscuous (e.g. Black women, whether c haste or promiscuous, are 

seen as promiscuous because their blackness is associated to the trait). Whereas, whiteness is 

impervious to be seen in a negative light unless those under the protection of whiteness do 

something contrary to their whiteness (e.g. White women being promiscuous would surely have 

them labeled as nasty women) (Harris -Perry 55 -97; Cole and Zucker 1). 

As I will demonstrate in Chapter 3, the stock story and counter story in the nasty women 

hashtags corroborates my claims. Each story pu ts forth a certain narrative regarding the 

respectability of a certain group of women. The only difference is that the counter story is 

critiquing the stock story for rendering invisible the respectability politics that governs White 

women that makes it po ssible for them to embrace the term nasty woman. Therefore, as you 

encounter the third chapter, bear in mind the only narrative explicitly speaking of respectability 

is that of the counter narrative. The stock narrative is merely alluding to respectability in the 

tweeters’ reclamation of nasty woman or women. 

1. 4. Chapter Outline 

In Chapter 2, “ Methodological Considerations & Screencapture as Feminist Archival 

Research Method ,” I discuss the research method and methodologies I utilized for gathering my 

data. Since my project calls for an examination of the rhetoric of feminist hashtags, I needed a 

method and methodologies to aid my exploration in a digital environment with living 

participants. Thus, the methodologies I chose to use are the feminist rhetorical methodologies of 

social circulation and critical imagination. Both of these methodologies guide my analysis of the 

tweets in terms of, respectively, how each tweet works in t andem to construct an overall 

discourse (rhetoric) of respectability and how to perform an ethical close reading of the tweets’ 

text. Since feminist methodologies place an abundance of emphasis on ethical practices and I am 19 

dealing with subjects as oppose to participants, it is important that I try to proximate the intended 

meaning of the text. 

As I will show in Chapter 2, Twitter hashtags function as digital archives due to the 

collaborative nature of the social media site. In order to gather the data, I had to listen 

rhetorically to the conversations as hand in the hashtags as well as attend to the ephemeral nature 

of tweets within Twitter hashtags, interpreting the statements made in the tweets without, again, 

misconstruing the intended message, and payi ng attention to the conversations the tweets are 

embedded in and the contexts in which the tweets were created. In the chapter I will explain in 

more detail why I chose to title the method I am advancing as screencapture and all it entails. 

In Chapter 3 , “The Rhetorical Construction of Stock Story and Counter Story in 

#NastyWomen ,” I will explore how a meta -narrative (stock story) and counter -narrative (counter 

story) are developed within #NastyWomen et al. For this chapters the rhetorical concepts, 

iden tification and alienation, both advanced by Kenneth Burke, will be used as a lens in my 

analysis. I will examine the ways in which both alienation and identification are occurring within 

each tweet of my representative samples. I am positing, respectively , identification and 

alienation leads to the construction of a stock story and a counter story with the hashtags. 

Finally, I conclude this project with Chapter 4, “A Critical Reflection: The Problem with 

Feminist Reclamation,” which will situate the issue of feminist reclamation in the nasty women 

hashtag with a similar instance of feminist reclamation. In this chapter, I offer a detailed 

reflection on the problem feminist reclamation brings about in terms of perpetuating and 

promulgating dangerous ideolog ies concerning African American women’s femininity and 

sexuality. 20 

CHAPTER 2 

METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS & SCREENCAPTURE AS FEMINIST 

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH METHOD 

For this study, it was prudent to utilize feminist rhetorical methodologies as well as a new 

met hod of feminist archival research. Since the research covered lived experiences of real people 

expressed through tweets (text), there is an ethical dilemma that feminist research methodologies 

in rhetoric and an archival research method helped to address. As feminist rhetorical scholar, 

Gesa Kirsch proclaims, feminist research is governed by ethics, “ not epistemological grounds 

because they strive to produce research that empowers participants and communities” and “such 

a focus on ethics …lead to better emp irical information, information that is more detailed, rich, 

and nuanced” (11). The dilemma at hand concerned how I could ethically select tweets without 

the permission of the tweeters, fairly represent the tweets in my data that does not misconstrue 

the i ntended meaning, and accurately gauge the tweets that concertedly contributed to the 

dialogue within the nasty women hashtags versus the tweets that sought to overtly or implicitly 

obstruct the conversation via trolling, spamming, and other harassing behav ior. Feminist 

principles, as Kirsch notes, prioritizes the participants, or in the case of my study, subjects over 

the data. That is, feminist methodologies are reflexive (e.g. pays special attention to each 

component and actor in the research), validating of the subjects’ experiences, critical of the 

socio -historical and cultural factors that “shapes the research site ,” and attentive to responsibly 

representing the subjects in the research (3 -5). Therefore, the research methodologies and 

method I chose had to ethically accommodate the research subjects in a manner that would 

respect them as individuals as oppose to as mere subjects. 21 

2.1. Selected Feminist Methodologies 

Though there are a bevy of feminist research methodologies, the ones that suited the 

project the best were social circulation and critical imagination. Gesa Kirsch and Jacqueline 

Jones Royster defines social circulation as a methodology that pertains to th e ways in which 

women interact and connect with others as well as utilizing language with intention via social 

networks (Kirsch and Royster 101). Since tweets are ephemeral in nature, social circulation was 

helpful in tracing the interactions of the tweets . Although roughly the majority of the tweets 

collected were isolated tweets not in conversation with other tweets, it is still important to 

conceive of these tweets as interacting with the overall conversation of the hashtags. As 

mentioned in Chapter 1, t he stock story of #NastyWomen et al. pertained to expressions of 

empowerment (e.g. proud to be a #nastywoman), critiques of women being reproached for acting 

as #nastywomen in the media, and personal accounts of women being called similar invectives 

for ac ting like #nastywomen. Whereas the counter story of #NastyWomen et al. pertained to 

expressions of anger or frustration over the appropriation of Black female iconography, figures, 

and jargon to embrace the phrase nasty women and/or support Hillary Clinton , critiques of white 

privilege, and admissions of doubt that African American women could truly embrace the term 

nasty woman. 

The isolated tweets, again, are still in conversation with the strands of discourse in 

respectively the stock story and counter story of the nasty women hashtags. They contributed to 

the overall expressions of empowerment, the critiques, and personal accounts. For tweets in 

conversation with other tweets (e.g. a part of Twitter threads), it was slightly easier to trace the 

interac tions and see how each response in the conversation contributed to the overall discourse in 

the hashtags. Social circulation, essentially, helped me to see how tweets circulate across and 22 

within “ever -changing, often ever -broadening circles of interaction ” ( Royster and Kirsch 101). 

Due to, again, the ephemeral nature of tweets, it was important that I maintained close attention 

to the responses occurring within each thread accumulated. Social circulation led me to 

continuously revisit certain threads to se e if there were new tweets engaging in the 

conversations. 

Critical imagination, on the other hand, assisted in interpreting the information within the 

tweets. Royster and Kirsch describe critical imagination as a methodology that accounts “for 

what we “kn ow” by gathering whatever evidence that can be gathered and ordering it in a 

configuration that is reasonable and justifiable in accord with basic scholarly methodologies. The 

… [goal] is to think between, above, around, and beyond this evidence to specula te methodically 

about probabilities, that is, what might likely be true based on what we have in hand” (71). For 

the isolated tweets, critical imagination allowed for me to synthesize the overall conversations 

within the hashtags (e.g. the discourse of the stock story and counter story mentioned in the 

previous paragraphs). For instance, I had to rely solely on the tone, mood, and context of the 

tweets to interpret its meaning. Juxtaposing each tweet, I could connect the dots, so to speak, and 

see the simil arities of what was being discussed. I noticed that there was tremendous overlap in 

terms what was being articulated. Conversely, for the tweets a part of a Twitter thread (e.g. in 

dialogue with the one or more tweeters or in dialogue with themselves), I h ad to pay special 

attention to the mood, context, and tone of all the tweeters involved. However, it is important to 

note that critical imagination alone did not inform the way in which I would go about carefully 

reading the tweets in terms of paying close attention to the tone, mood, and context. I found that 

I would need another theoretical tool to assist in that endeavor. Hence, the creation of my own 

archival research method. 23 

2. 2 Twitter Hashtags as Digital Archives 

Due to the emergence of Web 2.0 tec hnologies (second generation tools used to enhance 

collaboration on the world wide web), archivist such as Kate Theimer have contemplated the 

affordances such technology has made to archives (Ramsey -Tobienne 5 -6). Historically, archives 

have been defined a s a record or repository of “documents, drawings, and printed matters” 

curated by an administrative body (Leavitt 175). Generally, the materials within an archive is 

related to each other based on an overarching topic (176 -177). With Web 2.0 technologies, 

archives are now construed as digital records, repositories, or collections (Theimer 58 -58). 

Archives 2.0, as Theimer and other archival scholars’ terms, are less about physical space and 

are more about “establishing various level of connectivity: between user and archivist, between 

users and users, between users and multiple collections (Ramsey -Tobienne 7 -10). These archives 

are participatory, they invite all parties of the archive to participate not only with the curation of 

contents in the archive, but a lso with each other. For some archives 2.0, the content is primarily 

created by the users in them instead of a single archivist curating the material for the users 

(audience) to see (8 -11). 

Hence, Twitter hashtags can be construed as digital archives (ar chives 2.0). The tweeters 

have the ability to organize their accounts of events or experiences, links to articles, memes, and 

words via a hashtag in which they can engage in an equally directed and free conversation with 

other tweeters (Burgess and Bruns). The tweeters utilizing hashtags can develop a repository of 

information based on the topic of the hashtag. For instance, the nasty women hashtags are 

several archives pertaining to Trump calling Clinton a nasty woman, the repudiation of Trump 

for calling Clinton a nasty woman, embracing the term nasty woman or women, critiquing 

popular instances of women being called similar gendered insults, sharing experiences of being 24 

called similar insults, as well as criticizing the overall discourse within the hashta gs ( e.g. the 

counter story of #NastyWomen et al.). Each strand of discourse relates to nasty woman. 

Therefore, the hashtags functioned as digital archives. The Web 2.0 technologies employed by 

Twitter, allows the users to instantly respond to each other’s tweets and threads which makes 

them incredibly participatory (Panzarino). 

Such participation calls for a method that accommodates the participatory nature of the 

hashtags. Since the nasty women hashtags are comprised of countless individuals who have 

sha red personal experiences of being reproached as well as general exclamations of pride and 

critiques of Trump and other men who have reproached women in the popular culture, it is 

important that the method utilized ensures that the intended meaning of each tweet is represented 

and that the tweets will not be exploited to suit the purpose of the argument. 

2. 3. Screencapture as Feminist Archival Research Method 

Screencapture is a feminist archival research method which allows researchers to build 

their own repository of data. Specifically, the method calls for the printscreening (fn + prt sc 

functions) of tweets and depositing them into a Microsoft Word document. This method, in a 

sense, is a form of digital curation. However, instead curating my own archiv e within another 

social media site, I am curating my own archive of data in a Microsoft Word document. 

Nevertheless, printscreening tweets into a document is merely a portion of the method. The other 

aspect of the method calls for close attention to the co ntext, mood, and tone of the tweets as well 

as the careful curation of the data in the document. The method is an amalgamation of the 

rhetorical concepts rhetorical listening and textual curation. In order to attend ethically and 

efficiently to both the te xt and the authors of the text, I had to listen carefully to what is being 

stated in the text, the conversations the text is situated in (the overall conversations the text is a 25 

part of), and how I organized the texts (data) in a manner that permits accura te synthetization of 

the texts to capture every strand of discourse the texts are articulating (e.g. the major 

conversations frames found based on all the tweets in the word doc). 

Before I begin to discuss the concepts that contributed to the development of my method, 

I wish to include vital details regarding the duration of my data collection and the number of 

tweets collected. Though I have been working on this project since October of 2016 (when the 

nasty women hashtags were created), I officially began to collect my data June of 2017. I have 

accumulated a total of 2, 357 tweets. For the stock story or, as I term in my word document 

repository, meta -narratives, I have gathered 2, 332 tweets. For the counter story, or as I termed in 

the repository counter -narratives, I collected 25 tweets total. I called the stock story and the 

counter story different terms to indicate the major conversation frames I found that make up the 

stock story of #NastyWomen et al. and the counter story of #NastyWomen et al. To ens ure each 

conversation of both narratives was carefully attended to, I had to weave rhetorical listening and 

textual curation into my method. 

Rhetorical listening, as defined by rhetorical scholar Krista Ratcliffe, is “a trope of 

interpretive invention and…a code of cross cultural conduct…[that] signifies a stance of 

openness that a person may choose to assume in relation to any person, text, or culture… [or in] 

cross -cultural exchanges” (1). Though Ratcliffe offers it as a tactic to negotiate, in her terms, 

“troubled identifications” that tend to occur in rhetorical exchanges, it is fruitful to use in relation 

to archival research (27). In this instance, it is important to conceptualize the research process 

(i.e. where the research engages the researched text, subjects, etc.) as a rhetorical exchange 

besmirched by the complex identification (e.g. race, culture, etc.) of each party involved. In th e

context of the nasty women hashtags, “troubled identifications” can be construed as not only the 26 

multi -cultural and racial identification of the tweeters, but the political identifications, economic 

identifications (poor, middle class, wealthy), and othe r social identifications (queer, trans, 

nationality, celebrity, etc.) as well. Again, this is important because my overall thesis centers on 

the advancement of a narrative of resistance against respectability politics and a narrative that 

counters said nar rative of resistance. Since both of these narratives are centered on American 

and/or Western conceptions of respectability politics, I had to keep in mind the identification of 

the tweeters whose tweets I collected. This was especially important concerning the tweets I 

selected regarding the counter story of #NastyWomen. 

For instance, when it came to decide the types of tweets I wished to select for the counter 

story, I had to make sure the critiques the tweeters made concerned either African American 

wome n in relation to respectability or concerned American and/or Western respectability (e.g. 

critiques about whiteness, white privilege, and femininity). That is not to say countries in Asia, 

Africa, South America, or non -Western European counties do not have similar issues regarding 

respectability and race (White women construed as pure, modest, chaste and Black or dark skin 

women construed as sexually promiscuous, tough, angry, etc.), it is just the history of 

respectability may be vastly different in said l ocations than in America or other areas in the 

West. I wanted to make sure the tweeters who critiqued #NastyWomen were talking about 

roughly the same dynamics within American culture. Therefore, I had to “listen” very closely for 

any words in the text that may indicate a different cultural dynamic being discussed. I think it is 

easy to assume as an American that the critiques regarding respectability and whiteness are 

referring to an American cultural context. Ratcliffe insinuates that the identification of the 

researcher does influence the way the researcher perceives the message (text) (2 -16, 19 -23). 27 

In addition, rhetorical listening imbued in my method a sense of accountability. Ratcliffe 

defines accountability as the belief that “we are indeed all membe rs of the same village, and if 

for no other reason than that (and there are other reasons), all people necessarily have a stake in 

each other’s quality of life” (31). In application, I was accountable for how I represent the data in 

my repository as well a s in my thesis. I had to ensure the interpreted meaning I walked away 

with or described in my thesis was as close as possible to the intended meaning of the tweeter. In 

this sense, I owed it to the tweeter as a fellow human being and perhaps even as a fell ow woman 

and a woman of color to maintain the integrity of their tweets. Thus, I had to cultivate an ethics 

of care since I was not a participant in the conversations (Ratcliffe 106). I was merely an 

observer trying to comprehend the conversations occurrin g. 

Equally, textual curation, as rhetorical theorist Krista Kennedy posits, is the arrangement 

of “prior texts into innovative, flexible textual ecologies” (177). In other words, textual curators 

take texts that are written by others and repurpose them in to a new text(s). Screencapture 

involves a similar process. Tweets functioning as texts, are being ‘printscreened’ and pasted into 

a single Microsoft Word document which functions as a “new unified text” or, rather, an archive 

(Kennedy 177). Further, much like textual curation, there is an annotative quality of this process. 

Textual curators, often collaboratively, collect, filter, recompose, taxonomize, and manage a 

repository of texts. In the new text, the other texts are hyperlinked, tagged, cross -refere nced, 

edited, etc. With screencapture, the ‘printscreened’ tweets are organized and itemized (177 -178). 

For example, on the first page of my word document, there’s a title, keywords below the title, 

underneath the keywords is a table with tweet totals in i t (tweet count of all the tweets collected, 

the stock story tweet count, and the counter story count), and a two -column table, titled Tweet 

Index, below the totals (the index goes on for the next 6 pages). In the table, on the right column 28 

is the heading S ection 1: Meta -Narratives (Stock Story) and on the left, is Section 2: 

Counternarratives (Counter Story). In the rows of both columns, I have numbered and included 

the name of the tweeter for all the tweets I accumulated. 

Figure 2. First Page of Word Doc Repository 

My rationale for using keywords and numbers is to aid with searchability. With Microsoft 

Word, I was able to use the search function within the document (ctrl + f). By entering a 

keyword or number in the search bar, I could see a list of all the locations of the number or the 

term. This made it easier for me to review specific tweets. For instance, see the below figure. 29 

Figure 3. Search Function in Word Doc Repository 

Following the Tweet Index is Section 1: Meta -Narratives. Below the hea ding (Section 1: 

Meta -Narratives), are the conversation frames (categories) I found pertaining to meta -narratives. 

These include (1) definition(s) of nasty women (e.g. the types of attributes that constitute 

“nastiness” in a woman), (2) accounts of their e xperiences for being reproached for acting like 

nasty women, and , (3) comments exclaiming we’re all nasty women, nasty women or all women 

should unite, and/or signs of inclusivity (e.g. mentioning women of color, visual representations 

of multiple races of women via emojis, memes, video clips, or other images). Below each 

‘printscreened’ tweet, is meta -data such as the tweeter’s profile name, keywords, summary of the 

tweets contents, and which conversation frame the tweet belongs to. 30 

Figure 4. The Headi ng of Section 1 

Figure 5. Example of How the Tweets are Included & Annotated 

The final section of the Word Doc is Section 2: Counter Narratives. The organization 

used in Section 1 is repeated for Section 2. The conversation frames for this section are (1) White 

privilege regarding White women’s ability to embrace nasty women without racial implications ,31 

(2) White women’s silence on the unique issues of African American women despite their call 

for unity, in general, or to get Hillary Clinton elected , and (3) s tatements expressing frustration, 

anger, or dissatisfaction with racial blindness of the hashtag(s) (e.g. how it only empowers White 

women, how it does not serve, represent, or empower African American Women, or how White 

Women have appropriated Afri can American women images, gifs, and slang and use in their 

attempt to empower themselves or to elect/support Hillary Clinton). 

Figure 6. Section 2 Heading 32 

Figure 7. Annotated Tweet Example 

2.4 Conclusion 

For the majority of this section, I have detailed what screencapture is, but I have yet to 

delineate what exactly makes the method feminist. Without further ado, what makes this method 

feminist is the feminist rhetorical practices which undergird the metho d. That is, feminist 

rhetorical practices highlight the ethical implications such a method entails. As mentioned, 

rhetorical listening invites researchers and scholars alike to cultivate an ethics of care when it 

comes to listening to rhetorical locations comprised of multiple identifications (Ratcliffe 19 -23, 

106). Kennedy asserts textual curation must deal with issues such as “rhetorical agency and 

intention” because the texts being “curated” are authored by other people (177). Therefore, it is 

important to understand the context in which the texts were written and the intended meaning of 

the authors. In application, my project must contend with these issues because there’s a chance 

the meaning of the tweets could be misconstrued, as mentioned in the discu ssion of my 

methodologies, since I do not have the time nor approval to inquire as to the real meaning of 33 

tweets from the tweeters. Hence, I must, as Christine Mason Sutherland stresses, consider the 

“link between the researcher and the researched” (114). Feminist scholars, if not all scholars, 

have a responsibility to the subjects of their research (Sutherland 114 -115). There must be an 

element of emotion in the research (114). The tweeters are real people, many of whom belong to 

disenfranchised groups (e. g. women, women of color, etc.), and they and their intellectual 

property (tweets) should be treated with care and respect. With screencapture, social circulation, 

self -reflexivity, and critical imagination, I believe I have done so. 34 

CHAPTER 3

THE RHETORICAL CONSTRUCTION OF STOCK STORY AND COUNTER STORY 

IN #NASTYWOMEN 

In Chapter 1, I analyzed how the rhetoric being espoused in #NastyWomen et al. is one of 

respectability politics. Via an attempt to reclaim nasty woman, tweeters have redefined nasty 

woman (and the plural nasty women) to mean a confident, bold, intelligent , assertive woman 

who speaks her mind (Garber; Berg; Griggs). However, as I have explained, the redefinition of 

nasty woman as well as the historical context of the term alludes to respectability politics. That 

is, the tweeters, in their act of reclamation and redefinition, are denouncing the respectability 

politics that governs American and/or Western women. In this society, historically and even 

presently, women are expected to be pleasing, chaste, modest, nice, kind, and demure (Garber). 

Hence, when wome n much like Clinton act in a forthright and confident manner, there is a 

tendency that they will be reproached by men for exhibiting such behavior (Garber). 

Nevertheless, not all the tweeters of the nasty women hashtags felt the rhetoric spoke to 

their ow n unique experiences of respectability. In fact, a number of tweeters (25 in my sample) 

created an alternative narrative concerning the respectability that pertained to African American 

women as well as non -White, heterosexual, cisgender women in general. These tweeters charge 

the respectability politics being denounced in the embracement and redefinition of the term nasty 

woman is that of Western, European -American women. African American women, they assert, 

were held to a much different standard of respec tability than the former. Strength, confidence, 

assertiveness, and sexual “liberation” has historically been a part of the femininity and sexuality 

of African American women due to American slavery (Harris -Perry 55). 35 

As stated in Chapter 1, both rhetorics -the one embracing nasty woman and the one 

denouncing the embracement - function as a stock story and counter story of respectability. 

Therefore, utilizing Kenneth Burke’s concepts of identification and alienation, I will study how 

the rhetoric the tweeters in my sample espouses contributes to the formation both the stock story 

and counter story in #NastyWomen et al in this chapter. Yet, I must provide a detailed definition 

of the rhetorical devices before I commence my analysis (e.g. explicate how identific ation and 

alienation are at work in the nasty women hashtags via my sample). 

3.1 Identification & Alienation 

Famed rhetorical theorist, Kenneth Burke has offered a bevy of fruitful theories and 

concepts to rhetorical studies. The most relevant, to this project, are, again, identification, 

consubstantiality, and alienation (otherwise known as warfare). In Rhetoric of Motives , Burke 

advances the notion of identification as “an accessory to persuasi on” (xiv). Identification, he 

asserts, is more of an accurate fit then say rhetoric, “for describing the ways in which the 

members of a group promote social cohesion by acting rhetorically upon themselves and one 

another” (xiv). Instead of using “language as a symbolic” means to induce compliance into 

getting your audience (you as the agent) to act in a certain way you want them to act, you are 

utilizing “language as a symbolic means” to induce a rapport with your audience (43). This 

means that the language the agent utilizes functions as a symbol in which his or her audience can 

identify with or vice versa if the audience utilizes certain symbols in which the agent can identify 

with. For instance, Burke notes, “A is not identical with his colleague, B. But insofar as their 

interests are joined, A is identified with B. Or he may identify himself with B even when their 

interests are not joined, if he assumes that they are, or is persuaded to believe so” (20). 36 

What Burke is saying is that it is natural or rath er common for individuals to identify with 

each other based on mutual (joined) interests regardless if they are truly mutual interests. 

Sociologists such as Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith -Lovin, and James M. Cook even refer to 

this dynamic as homophily. Homo phily is “the principle that a contact between similar people 

occurs at a higher rate than among dissimilar people” (McPherson et al. 415). Within social 

networks (i.e. friends, colleagues, associates, social media networks), McPherson et al. explains, 

peo ple with similar qualities (attitudes, beliefs, values, etc.), occupations, or backgrounds (race, 

gender, age, religion, education etc.) tend to gravitate towards each other and those with 

dissimilar qualities, occupations, or backgrounds tend to deviate f rom each other (415 -416). 

However, what is rhetorical about identification is the symbolic language being utilized to 

convey such similarities. How does one know if they have a similar interest with another person 

without those similarities being communica ted? Burke also mentions people can identify with 

each other as far as they believe or are persuaded to believe their interests are mutual even if they 

may not be. Such persuasion, I’m sure, must entail some sort of symbolic language. 

Other scholars seem to share my understanding of Burke regarding identification and the 

use of language symbolically. In particular, communications scholar, Brook L. Quigley insists, 

“Burke’s concept of identification needs to be seen within the context of his understanding o f

language as symbolic action” (Quigley) . What he is postulating is that humans are actors and 

language use is one way of acting within the world since our language, as humans, is one of most 

defining characteristics. It is the nature of humanity to respon d to symbols, use symbols, and 

even abuse symbols (e.g. rhetoric’s of hate or violence). 

In addition, it is significant to note that there are three forms of identification. For the 

sake of my analysis, I thought it prudent to describe each of these since I noticed they were 37 

occurring within many of the tweets in my sample. Therefore, in his 1973 article, “The 

Rhetorical Situation,” Burke delineates three ways in which a rhetorical agent can identify with 

others within a rhetorical situation (White 4). Gra nted, I am not suggesting the nasty women 

hashtags function as a rhetorical situation; however, it is helpful to look at these forms of 

identification within the context of each individual tweet and the overall context of the nasty 

women hashtags (i.e. the hashtags started as a backlash against Trump for insulting Clinton). 

Thus, the first type of identification is called “identification by sympathy” (White 4 -5). It 

is a way to “establish rapport by stressing sympathies held in common”. Burke suggests thi s

form “comes [the] closest to downright persuasion” (Burke 268). Identification by sympathy is 

deliberate, the agent is purposely seeking to create some type of relationship with the audience 

by “stressing… [the] sympathies held in common” (268). For exam ple, a traveler who is far from 

home and he or she meets a stranger from the same home town and in the same profession might 

develop a rapport with one another is identification by sympathy (268). 

The second form of Burke’s identification is “identificati on by antithesis”. It is, as Burke 

describes it, “the most urgent form of congregation by segregation where union is achieved by 

some opposition shared in common” ( qtd. in Re -Examining Kenneth Burke , White 5). In this 

form, there is an external enemy or sc apegoat that unites the people within a rhetorical situation 

who would’ve probably been each other’s opposition (5). In other words, without an enemy, the 

people within a specific rhetorical situation would’ve not have come together. This builds on the 

ide a (of Burke’s) that for there to be identification, some sort of division must be present. In 

order for identification to take place, the division must be overcome. Burke uses temporary 

alliances in war as an example (Burke 268). Countries that would’ve po se as a threat to each 

other might ally with each other in the face of a common adversary. 38 

The final form of identification is known as “identification by inaccuracy or 

unawareness” (Burke 269). This type of identification is based on the yearning of indi viduals to 

belong into some type of group regardless of “whatever material differences might exist” amid 

members (e.g. race, class, occupation, etc.) (White 6). Desiring to fit in, individuals begin to co -

opt certain phrases, slogans, and even linguistic f eatures to adopt to the overall identity of a 

group. For instance, to adopt the “street cool” identity of urban youth that is made popular by the 

commercialization of Hip Hop culture, middle class White suburbanites started to use the slang, 

dress, and man nerisms associated with such youth (6). However, this identification is extremely 

problematic because in an attempt for individuals to fit in, they are obfuscating the systemic 

poverty, crime, and other concerns urban youth face that contributes to the “st reet cool” identity 

of urban youths (6). 

Conversely, Burke argues that as much as people can identify with each other or rather 

the symbolic language being employed, the very same language can also cause alienation among 

people when there is an absence o f commonalities. Burke terms this phenomenon alienation or 

warfare. In the same way people come to identify with each other, people can be alienated by 

each other as well. The symbolic language someone employs can cause alienation among the 

people the lang uage is directed towards if the people cannot find any aspect to identify with 

(Burke 22 -23). 

Burke goes a step further to insinuate that for there to be identification, there must be 

division. He states if men were not already apart from each other than there would be no need to 

strive for unity. For Burke, identification, in a sense, leads to division. He uses war as an 

example (hence why he also refers to alienation as warfare). When government officials, 

politicians, and other pertinent people unite a country for the sole purpose of going to war with 39 

another country, these people are facilitating a division. A division between one country and 

another, a division between those in favor of the war and those who are not, and a division 

between those who ar e part of the dominant group of a country and those who are part of a 

minority group that may be scapegoated for the war ( e.g. Hitler rallying the German people 

during the Holocaust and World War 2 at the expense of the Jewish people) (Burke 22 -24, 30 -

32). 

Using identification and alienation is a useful lens for my analysis of both the stock story 

and the counter story becaus e the term nasty woman functions as a sort of symbolic language in 

which the rhetorical actions of embracing the term has caused either cohesion or division 

amongst the tweeters in the nasty women hashtags. As mentioned in Chapter 1, nasty woman is a 

histo rical gendered invective that was used to refer to women who were outspoken, assertive, 

and did not stay in their proper place in society (e.g. did not abide male authority) (Brown 94 -

100). What nasty woman has, historically, signified was that a woman in society should not act 

in a way contrary to the expectations of her gender. A woman should not be bold, forthright, 

confident, and assertive; instead, she should be pious, meek, demure, and, again, know her place 

in society. Trump’s use of nasty woman as a n invective towards Clinton caused many women to 

identify with Hillary Clinton and subsequently to identify with the insult in efforts to reclaim it, 

and with other tweeters who too identified with the reclaimed phrase. Conversely, the way the 

reclaimed pe jorative was employed in the nasty women hashtags contributed to the alienation 

amongst a certain subset of tweeters. Though it may be impossible to know the exact racial 

makeup of the tweeters, I can assuredly say these tweeters critiqued nasty women base d on the 

perception that the phrase does nothing to empower African American women. Therefore, in the 

following sections I will analyze the stock story and the counter story of respectability to 40 

illustrate these claims (e.g. reclaiming nasty woman caused b oth identification and alienation 

amongst twitters). 

3.2. Stock Story of #NastyWomen et al. 

Though I have gathered 2, 332 tweets that pertain to the stock story of the nasty women 

hashtags, I will present the following 10 tweets as a representative sample of the tweets I 

selected for the meta -narrative. My selection was based on how illustrative each of these 10 

tweets were of the major conversation frames. Like I mentioned in Chapter 2, the major 

conversation frames for the stock story are definition(s) o f nasty women (e.g. the types of 

attributes that constitute the reclaimed meaning of nasty woman), accounts of tweeters’ 

experiences of being reproached for acting like nasty women, and general comments exclaiming 

how “we’re all nasty women”, nasty women o r all women should unite, and/or signs of 

inclusivity (e.g. mentioning women of color, visual representations of multiple races of women 

via emojis, memes, video clips, or other images). These 10 tweets out of the 2, 332 total tweets 

best captured each of the conversation frames. 

As I report each tweet, I will analyze how the text is fostering identification. Afterwards, 

I will offer an analysis of how the tweets work in concert with each other to establish a stock 

story. 41 

Figure 8. Warrior Mom’s Tweet 

I selected this tweet first because it represents the first major conversation frame which is 

the definition(s) of nasty woman or women. Warrior Mom explicitly refers to nasty women as 

tough, smart, and are capable of voting. The significance is that Warrio r Mom is offering an 

alternative definition for the term numerous #NastyWomen tweeters deemed an as insult 

(Garber, Berg, Griggs). Instead of being a remark that indicates a foul, spiteful, malicious 

woman, the tweeter is turning it around to mean a tough, smart, voting woman (Garber). Also, 

the tweeter could be noting that nasty women are women who will not be silenced, and they will 

persist despite the adversity. I say this due to the incorporation of the image of Elizabeth Warren 

in the text. 42 

In 2017, # ShePersisted was created after Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell stopped 

Warren from finishing her reading of Coretta Scott King’s letter in repudiation of Jeff Sessions’ 

suitability during his attorney general nomination hearing. In justification of stoppi ng Warren, 

McConnell explained that “she was warned. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, she 

persisted” (Fang; Carney). The tweeter is symbolically communicating that nasty women are 

women who will persist no matter how many times they are warned a nd, again, will not be 

silenced. Hence, the image of Warren as well as the linking of nasty woman with the words 

tough, smart, and vote, may resonate with other tweeters who perceive nasty women in the same 

light. 

Second, it is indicative of how tweeters t end to utilize their definitions of nasty woman to 

call for some sort of political action. As the meme in the tweet states, “nasty women are tough,” 

“nasty women are smart,” and “nasty women vote”. As previously stated , most of the tweeters a 

part of the stock story of the hashtag define nasty women as smart, confident, intelligent, 

ambitious, etc. On the surface, it seems the tweeters use of the meme is a way of identifying with 

the other tweeters who too have come to define nasty woman in a similar ligh t. However, the 

identification occurring in this tweet is a lot more complex than this. Identification by antithesis 

is happening in this tweet. 

Warrior Mom is calling for the tweeters of #NastyWomen to vote the GOP out of office 

in 2018. Warrior Mom expl icitly states, “Vote all the @GOP out in 2018!” It is directed towards 

the women of the nasty women hashtags for two reasons. One, Warrior Mom inquires, “where 

are all the #NastyWomen?” Also, she includes a meme or cover art from a Huffington Post 

article (there is a Huff Post logo on the bottom right of the graphic), that has a quote from 

Elizabeth Warren on it. I say it is a quote because there is a very tiny, practically unnoticeable 43 

dash or even a hyphen (e.g. -) next to Warren’s name. The punctuation m ark is also in white like 

the quote and Warren’s name. The quote says, “Nasty Women are tough. Nasty Women are 

smart. And Nasty Women vote. ” Together, all the information reads as if Warrior Mom is stating 

‘tough and smart women are nasty women and nasty w omen vote so nasty women should vote 

the GOP out of power in 2018’. The use of #BlueWave2018 seems to suggest the tweeter is 

calling for nasty women to be a part of the ‘blue wave’ (e.g. the informal attempt by Twitter 

democrats to elect Democrats into ava ilable Congressional seats in 2018) (Daily Kos). Through 

her use of “where are all the #NastyWomen” and her call for voting the GOP out of office, it 

seems identification by antithesis is occurring within the text. The tweet reads as if she is calling 

all the nasty women to vote the GOP out of office. The GOP serves as a common enemy in 

which all women who consider themselves to be nasty women should come together and defeat. 

Warrior Mom is calling for nasty women to come together and get rid of the GOP. T he 

identification is in being a nasty woman as well as having a desire to vote the GOP out of office. 

Also, with the incorporation of the graphic of Warren and the quote, Warrior Mom is evok ing the 

definition of a nasty woman to elicit support in her quest against the GOP. 

The issue with such identification is that , in the tweeter’s attempt to get “all” the nasty 

women to vote the GOP, she doesn’t specify as to who all the nasty women are. Most of the 

tweets in my sample lack such specificity. Who are all the nasty women the tweeter is calling on 

to vote? Who are all these smart, tough, voting women? As I explained in my description of 

identification by antithesis, individuals who may be in opposition to each other tend to identify 

with each other based on a common enemy. In such identification, differences or rather divisions 

tend to be mitigated. By using the generic all without discussing who constitutes that all , the 

tweeter is ignoring other tweeters conceptions or issues with #NastyWomen. In relation t o44 

Warrior Mom’s call for voting out the GOP, how does she know nasty women are all Democrats 

and/or against the GOP? Her inquiry to all the nasty woman is based on the assumption that 

voting women, whom are nasty women, would not vote for a Republican cand idate. Again, her 

tweet is emblematic of how tweeters’ attempt -explicit or implicit -to define nasty women and call 

for some sort of action results in ignoring the role difference plays in who or what constitutes a 

nasty woman (e.g. any woman who is tough, smart, and votes is, by definition, a nasty woman so 

that could include a bevy of women around the world regardless of their race, sexual orientation, 

political affiliation, or even if they identify as a nasty woman or not). 

In addition, the tweeter is remarking that nasty women are women who will not be 

silenced, and they will persist despite the adversity. I say this due to the incorporation of the 

image of Elizabeth Warren in the text. In 2017, #ShePersisted was created aft er Warren was 

stopped form finishing her reading of Coretta Scott King’s letter in repudiation of Jess Sessions’ 

suitability during his federal judgeship nomination hearings. In justification of stopping Warren, 

Mitch McConnell explained that “she was warn ed. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, 

she persisted” (Fang). The tweeter is symbolically communicating that nasty women are women 

who will persist no matter how many times they are warned and, again, will not be silenced. 

Therefore, the image of Warren as well as the linking of nasty woman with the words tough, 

smart, and vote, may resonate with other tweeters who perceive nasty women in the same light. 45 

Figure 9. UniteWomen.org CT’s Tweet 

UniteWomen.org CT is the Connecticut chapter of the non -profit organization called 

UniteWomen.Org (UniteWomen.Org). The aim of this organization is to change the public 

dialogue concerning women and equality (UnitedWomen.Org). Therefore, this is a Twitter 

account that has a straightforward mission and set of intentions. I selected this tweet because it is 

both representative of the definition conversation frame and emblematic of the organizational 

and celebrity tweets that partook in the reclamation of nast y woman. 

The adoption of the term by, what communication scholars Sarah Jackson and Sonia 

Banaszczyk term, conversation influencers are a contributory factor in the adoption of use by 

other tweeter s (Jackson and Banaszczyk 396). I make this assertion bas ed on Jackson’s and 

Banaszczyk’s suggestion that conversation influencers, otherwise known as “crowdscourced 

elites,” or users with the highest level of engagement with their tweets, tend to inform and 

influence the most salient narrative frames in hashtag ged Twitter conversations” (396). More 

specifically, I position UniteWomen.org CT as a conversation influencer because it is a part of 46 

large organization whose official Twitter account has over 17.7K twitter followers and has 

numerous state chapter account s much like UniteWomen.org CT, with several thousand 

followers as well (ergo high engagement) (UniteWomen.org). Tweeters who might stumble 

across this tweet, might feel embolden to participate in the nasty woman hashtags themselves if 

they see an official organization partaking in the hashtag. Additionally, if you consider Burke’s 

identification by inaccuracy or unawareness, it seems those who form this sort of identification 

are doing so because they wish to be associated with a popular identity. Therefore , I am not 

saying the account could make other tweeters embrace nasty woman, but the account, due to its 

organizational ethos, could contribute in the popularization of embracing nasty woman. The 

desire to associate with a popular identity is identificatio n by inaccuracy or unawareness. 

However, there is another type of identification at work in the text. 

UniteWomen.org CT clearly tweeted that, “If #NastyWomen are intelligent, strong, and 

hard -working —we’re all a little nasty.” The implication in the tweet er’s words is that if nasty 

women refers to an intelligent, strong, and hard -working woman then every woman is “a little 

nasty”. Meaning, the tweeter considers every woman to possess traits, thereby, every woman is a 

nasty woman or at least partially nasty . The connection between the phrase nasty woman, the 

attributes being ascribed, and all women is identification by sympathy. In an indirect manner, the 

tweeter is establishing some sort of rapport with women in general by stressing that if nasty 

women are, again, these attributes then we , women, are all at least a little nasty. 

UniteWomen.org is assuming that all women are intelligent, strong, and hard -working. Burke 

states identification can be created if there is a belief in similarities among individuals . Thus, the 

identification is the assumed belief of similar traits in women that makes all women partially 

nasty. 47 

In addition, the signification of “we’re all” to mean all women is problematic because it 

does not enclose as to who exactly count’s as the we in we’re all. Who is UniteWomen.org 

including in the tweet? As I will indicate in my overall discussion of my analysis, the use of 

blanket statements like “we’re all nasty women” contributes to the stock story because it 

represents the indiscriminate lum ping of all women into the category of nasty women without 

considering other women’s objections or opinions in general concerning the use of nasty woman. 

Figure 10. Melynda Heying’s Tweet 

I included this tweet in my sample because it is an example of t he definition of nasty 

woman conversation frame, but it also illustrates how many of the tweeters, in the overall 

collection of stock story tweets, utilized Hillary Clinton in their definitions of nasty women. For 

these tweeters, Hillary Clinton is the qui ntessential nasty woman. In fact, as Melynda Heying’s 

tweet shows, she inspired some of these tweeters to embrace being a nasty woman. Melynda 

Heying states she is willing to be a nasty woman if Clinton is considered to be one. 

However, the way Melynda H eying includes Hillary Clinton’s account (@HillaryClinton) 

modifies the meaning of nasty woman. She is implying favorable attributes of Clinton and, 48 

thereby, in the phrase nasty woman. Chris Cillizza, a Washington Post journalist, suggests 

Clinton came acr oss calm and composed during the third debate (where Trump called her a nasty 

woman) (Cillizza). Another journalist, David A. Graham, stated Clinton was “workmanlike and 

studious” throughout the entire debate (Graham). Graham also notes how Clinton boldly 

defended herself against each attack Trump levied at her and how she stood up for all women, 

asserting “Donald thinks belittling women makes him bigger…He goes after their dignity, their 

self -worth, and I don’t think there is a woman anywhere who doesn’t k now what that feels like .”

It is possible Melynda Heying is, indirectly, defining nasty woman to be a woman like Clinton -a

woman who is calm, composed, workmanlike, studious, and a defender of all women. If Clinton 

can exude these attributes and still be c alled a nasty woman then Heying is more than willing to 

be a nasty woman. 

Also, the incorporation of Hillary Clinton and #debate presents the implication of 

identification by antithesis. In other words, identification by antithesis is not explicit in the tweet, 

but it is there in an implicit manner. The statement, ‘if Clinton is seen as a nasty woman than 

sign me up’ begs the question, who deemed Clinton to be a nasty woman in the first place? 

Someone had to position Clinton as a nasty woman in order for M elynda Heying to want to be 

considered one as well. That someone was Donald Trump. Trump functions as the external 

enemy that unites Clinton and Heying as nasty women. Granted, Heying could’ve been a Clinton 

supporter, but a search through her timeline did not reveal any affiliation with Clinton. Thus, it is 

a real possibility Heying could’ve identified with Clinton being called a nasty woman by Trump. 

This is yet another reason why I chose the tweet. Melynda Heying’s tweet is emblematic of some 

of the twee ts I collected that expressed neutrality or even disdain for Clinton, but because she 

was called a nasty woman, these tweeters rallied behind her and embraced the phrase. 49 

Figure 11. HerRoyalHoeliness’ Tweet 

HerRoyalHoeliness’ tweet is an example of mult iple conversation frames. The tweeter is 

defining nasty woman and stating that it is a common experience of women to be insulted by 

men for exuding characteristics such as ambition and intelligence. Though she does not use the 

insult nasty, she does state women are “always” deemed “mean” when they are intelligent and 

ambitious. Journalist, Radhika Sanghani notes there are a plethora of gendered insults such as 

frigid, frumpy, and bossy used to describe women who are intelligent, ambitious, hardworking, 

etc. (Sanghani). Therefore, the identification present in the text is both identification by 

sympathy and identification by antithesis. 

The tweet is a case of identification by sympathy because HerRoyalHoeliness is 

emphasizing that women who are intelligent a nd ambitious have a shared experience of being 

called “mean”. By making this claim, the tweeter is establishing a link between being reproached 

for being who you are and being a nasty woman. It is likely other tweeters who come across her 

tweet who may not identify as a nasty woman but has experienced being chided by men because 50 

of their intelligence and ambition may consider themselves to be nasty women. This is so simply 

because their similar experiences may cause them to identify with the phrase nasty wo men and 

other women who claim to be nasty women because of their own experiences of being 

reproached. 

Identification by antithesis occurs in the tweet on the grounds that the “men” in her claim 

can be construed as a common enemy. Though HerRoyalHoeliness is very vague in her use of 

men, she is referring to men who tend to call women names for being intelligent and ambitious. 

Women who do not embrace being a nasty woman, might do so out of possible anger, 

frustration, sadness, or exasperation of being on th e receiving end of these men. Men in the tweet 

could function as the common enemy that unites women under the label nasty women. 

HerRoyalHoeliness seems to be reflecting upon her own experiences with being insulted by men 

or the experiences of women that s he knows or have read about online. This experience whether 

it was her own, someone she knew, or someone she heard about online, could’ve been the 

impetus HerRoyalHoeliness needed to identify as a nasty woman herself. I say this because her 

tone comes acro ss as matter of fact. She is very straightforward in her statement that certain 

types of women are “always” called “mean” by men. However, the problem with 

HerRoyalHoeliness statement is the lack of specificity. She just utilized the term “mean”, but she 

doesn’t indicate what does she mean, pun not intended, by the word. What does “mean” signify? 

Is it a stand in for other remarks men have called women who exhibit intelligence and 

assertiveness? If so, does it include racialized sexist comments that may be levied towards 

women of color? As I will explain in my discussion at the end of this section, this lack of 

specificity contributes to the stock story of #NastyWomen. Also, the use of “always” infers that 

every single woman who possess these traits are call ed mean. This may be true for many women, 51 

but there is a chance that not all women who are intelligent or ambitious are called names. Such 

generalization contributes to the stock story. 

Figure 12. Liz Tambascio’s Tweet 

This tweet was selected because i t is an example of how tweeters in the nasty women 

hashtags place an emphasis on being intersectional. Tweeters in the stock story tweets I collected 

have mentioned how important it is for all women to be included in the feminist movement via 

#NastyWomen. It is as if these tweeters are stressing that unlike the feminists of the past, nasty 

women are intersectional, and they are interested in hearing what women from all backgrounds 

and creeds have to say. Again, this tweet perfectly captures this sentiment. It is also reflective of 

the final conversation frame which pertains to general expressions of intersectionality, unity, or 

signs of inclusivity. 

Based on her phrase, “don’t come at me if you aren’t about hearing all women’s voices,” 

it is more likely Tambascio is saying #NastyWomen will only accept intersectionality from other 

feminists. The “Don’t come at me” portion comes across as an aggressive state ment. It reads as, 52 

‘if you aren’t intersectional then don’t come at me. If you want to approach me, then you must 

ensure all voices are heard’. Tambascio is stating this as a nasty woman because of the reclaimed 

definition of the word. As I have mentioned throughout this project, nasty women are those who 

are bold, confident, assertive women who does not take anyone’s crap. In the case of Tambascio, 

this includes other feminists. She included #feminist and #intersectional along with 

#NastyWomen as a caution to non -nasty women that the only feminism nasty women like herself 

can support is if it is inclusive of all women and their different oppressions. As she claims, 

“intersectional is the only way”. The only way to be a feminist is to be an intersectional on e. 

Once again, to be intersectional is to be a nasty woman. 

Tambascio is identifying with the voices of all women as she is trying to overcome a 

division within feminism. There has been a long history of the voices of non -White women being 

marginalized wi thin the feminist movement (Bates). Tambascio is indicating that #NastyWomen 

are overcoming this division by making concerted efforts to identify with all women. Her “don’t 

come at me” comment suggests she, as a nasty woman, is not tolerating the voices of any woman 

going unheard. If other feminists are not willing to be intersectional then do not approach her. 53 

Figure 13. Melanie St -Pierre’s Tweet 

Melanie St -Pierre’s tweet encapsulates the respectability politics the hashtag is 

denouncing in efforts to reclaim nasty women. Also, it is emblematic of the second conversation 

frame which concerns accounts of being insulted for acting like nasty women. S t-Pierre was 

called a “cunt” by a man who disagreed with her comments regarding misogyny in society. Like 

the (re) definition of nasty women stipulates, women who speak their mind and are assertive tend 

to be called names. Due to her experience, she is ide ntifying as a nasty woman. However, it is 

more complex than that. 

The tweeter and other tweets like it rely on their ethos to foster a sense of identification 

with nasty woman (e.g. the tweeter’s experience contributes to her identification as a nasty 

wom en). Since St -Pierre has personally experienced this story, she is functioning as an authority 

figure who can attest that, yes, women really are called names for having an opinion, asserting 

that opinion, and doing so unapologetically. The inclusion of, “s o there’s that,” reads as a matter 

of fact (blasé) expression. She’s saying it is as if being reproached comes with the territory of 

being a nasty woman; as if one should almost expect it. 54 

In addition, there is another sort of identification present in th e tweet. Identification by 

antithesis is occurring with the inclusion of the man in the text. St -Pierre didn’t just say she was 

called a “cunt” that morning, she specifically stated she was called that invective by a man. In a 

way, it is like she introduce d a common foe many women know to well -men who call women 

gendered slurs when they express their opinions. 

Figure 14. TamTam’s Tweet 

TamTam’s tweet is yet another example of women recounting personal or an overall 

experience of women being insulted fo r acting like nasty women. What is unique about this 

tweet is that it is one of the few that explicitly alludes to respectability politics. The majority of 

the stock story tweets seem to hint at respectability politics. TamTam’s tweet is openly critiquing 

the dynamic respectability politics produces. That is, men are held to certain standards based on 

societal perceptions of masculinity and women are held to their own standards. As I mentioned 

in the first chapter, it is acceptable for men in this society t o be assertive, ambitious, aggressive, 55 

competitive, and so on. However, if a woman was to embrace these attributes it would be 

perceived as less favorable since society expects for women to be pious, submissive, quiet, 

chaste, and demure. TamTam corroborat es this claim because she is stating it is okay for men to 

be “nasty and rude,” but women must be “nice and sweet at all times” unless they wish to be 

labeled a bitch. 

TamTam’s incorporation of #nastywomen indicates that in the hashtag the 

abovementioned gender dynamic is something that is alluded to in the hashtag. Many tweeters 

have come to express their experiences with being called names for exhibiting behavior society 

deems acceptable in men. In this sense, TamTam is identifying with #nastywomen. Nast y

women for TamTam, again based strictly on her inclusion of the hashtag, seem to be women who 

are fighting against gender expectations and double standards. 

In addition, it is important to note, TamTam’s tweet is a response to 

@BryanDawsonUSA. This tweet er tweeted a link to an article about conservative politicians and 

commented that conservative Americans expect women to be silent and to do as they are told. In 

this case, it could be construed that, via identification by antithesis, the conservatives men tioned 

in the tweet TamTam responded to functioned as a common enemy to all women who refuse to 

be “nice and sweet at all times .”56 

Figure 15. Asa Soltan Rahmati’s Tweet 

Asa Soltan Rahmati’s tweet is a perfect example of the definition of nasty woman 

conve rsation frame. But also, the expression of pride in being a nasty woman fits into the third 

conversation frame (expressions of unity, intersectionality, and signs of inclusivity). I included 

exclamations of pride in the third category because I noticed mos t of the tweets in this section 

also express how we’re all nasty women, nasty women should unite, etc. 

Similar to other tweeters in my representative sample, Rahmati (re) defines, or rather 

translates, nasty woman to mean a “strong, independent, intellige nt woman who takes no crap 

from nobody”. She uses translates instead of definition or another similar word because she is 

responding directly to Trump’s insult towards Clinton. Rahmati tweeted this tweet on the night 

of the third presidential debate (Oct. 19 th ) and she did use #debate (the official hashtag for the 

presidential debates). She more than likely describing Clinton. Trump’s insult could have caused 

her to identify with Clinton which in turn caused her to identify with being a nasty woman. I 

make this claim because of the utilization of the exclamation mark in her ‘translation’. The 57 

inclusion of the mark could signify passion or even anger towards Trump. It’s like she is saying 

that the very woman Trump called nasty is actually strong, independent, and intelligent. 

Therefore, being called a nasty woman must be a good thing. Or, she could be angry at Trump 

for insulting Clinton, so she reclaimed the phrase and stated it must signify a woman who is 

intelligent, strong, independent, and doesn’t take cr ap from anyone. 

Rahmati also asks either her followers or other participants in #NastyWomen or #Debate 

or all three to retweet (RT) the tweet if they are proud of being a nasty woman. The RT element 

in the text functions as an invitation for others to sho w how much they identify with being a 

nasty woman based on her ‘translation’ of the term. This fits closely with identification by 

sympathies. Identification by sympathies pertains to the establishment of a rapport based on 

similar interests. Rahmati is de liberately evoking something she perceives those who may RT the 

tweet to have in common -the traits that makes one a nasty woman. Those who RT her tweet may 

very well be the prideful women she is calling on to respond. 58 

Figure 16. Danielle Cox’s Tweet 

Danielle Cox’s tweet corresponds to the third conversation frame which includes 

expressions of unity, intersectionality, and/or signs of inclusivity. The “we’re all #NastyWomen” 

functions as an expression of unity. The tweeter, in response to another tweet er, asserts we’re all 

nasty woman. The tweeter she is responding to is responding to another tweet Danielle Cox 

made. The other tweet features a photo of Cox drinking coffee with the caption “to all my badass 

ladies. Yes, we do. #GirlPower”. @Julia_Walnaug ht replied “yes, we do” and that she feels so 

nasty. Cox responded to @Julia_Walnaugth that we’re all nasty women. In this correspondence 

between Danielle Cox and @Julia_Walnaught identification was occurring. Both were 

identifying with each other regardin g girl power, that yes women can, and that they (and all 

women) are nasty. 

What is fascinating about Danielle Cox’s tweet is that she is exclaiming “we’re all 

#NastyWomen”. Yet, she does not specify as to who exactly are included in the we’re . However, 

si nce she makes explicit reference to #NastyWomen, we can estimate that she is talking about all 59 

women, including herself and @Julia_Walnaught. In this case, she is using the nasty woman as a 

form of empowerment. As in, we, women, are all nasty women. I say this is an expression of 

empowerment because she includes a fist emoji. According to emojipedia.org, the emoji is 

technically an oncoming fist emoji. This emoji represents a fist “displayed in a position to punch 

someone, or to fist -bump another person” (E mojipedia). Based on her correspondence, it seems 

she is giving a fist pump to @Julia_Walnaught. However, since she used the expression we’re all 

nasty women, once can conclude she is giving a fist bump to all women who count as a nasty 

woman. Thus, the tw eeter is using the we’re all nasty, the fist bump, and even the wink and the 

heart emoji to establish a rapport with all women along with @Julia_Walnaught. 

Furthermore, there is identification by inaccuracy or unawareness at work in this 

example. Danielle Cox’s exchange with @Julia_Walnaught illustrates the identification with a 

commercial identity. Reading the correspondences closely, both tweeters are using nasty woman 

and, for Cox, the hashtag girl power as a marker of identity. Once more, Cox’s initial tweet only 

had a photograph of herself drinking her coffee with the caption, “to all my badass ladies. Yes, 

we do. #GirlPower”. Also, @Julia_Walnaught replied yes, we do and that she feels so nasty. As I 

have explained in my description of identification by inaccuracy or unawareness, individuals, 

usually those of privilege, adopt a popular identity. Now, I am not stating a hundred percent 

these tweeters are co -opting an identity for the sole sake of being involve in what is popular. 

However, the minimal w ords used in their exchange indicates a, somewhat, commercial 

use of nasty and nasty woman. There has been a plethora of tweets in the nasty women hashtags 

where tweeters strictly exclaim how “we’re all nasty women”, never specifying who the we 

entail, how proud they are of being nasty women, or that they are just being nasty or just feeling 60 

nasty (much like @Julia_Walnaught). Such use comes across in a commercial light if you factor 

in the jovial tone that is being conveyed in Cox’s tweet. It is very playf ul and enthusiastic. 

Figure 17. Kalebogile Zvobgo’s Tweet 

Kelebogile Zvobgo’s tweet utilizes nasty women as a call for unity. Retweeting 

@womenalsoknow’s tweet, Zvobgo is insisting nasty women should unite since “we are so 

dangerous”. In @womenalsoknow’ s tweet, the “we” means women because the thread quoted in 

her tweet pertains to women mentoring younger women for success. This tweeter is exclaiming 

how women helping women is dangerous. Dangerous as in, when women help women, there are 

many obstacles th at can be overcome. In response, Zvobgo tweeted, again, nasty women unite. 

Zvobgo is saying that nasty women should unite because of what can be accomplished if they do. 

She is also inferring that nasty women are dangerous women, again in @womenalsoknow’s 

meaning of the term. 61 

The use of the fist emojis aids in the call for nasty women to unite. Since the emojis are 

multi -colored, we can assume the user intends for each emoji to represent a race and/or ethnicity. 

The fist emojis are also signaling, possibly , resistance. Emojipedia defines these fists to be raised 

fists. A raised fist symbolizes “a celebratory gesture: the fist pump ,” “zero items, due to a lack of 

any fingers being held up ,” and “resistance or defiance” (Emojipedia). Based on my analysis, 

thi s tweet is suggestive of a call for nasty women of all ethnicities to unite and resist. If you 

consider the way other tweeters have utilized nasty woman, you could surmise the resistance 

portion has to do with sexism, in general, and respectability politic s specifically. By 

respectability politics, I am referring to the societal expectation that women exhibit certain traits 

of femininity such as meekness, docility, submissiveness, etc.; and if they dare to deviate from 

the feminine norm and exhibit masculin e traits such as intelligence, confidence, assertiveness, 

etc. they are admonished for it (Campbell 5 -12). 

Likewise, the fist emoji implying resistance suggest the identification by antithesis is at 

work in this tweet. Resistance implies something to resi st from. Regardless if the tweet is calling 

for women to unite and resist either sexism or respectability, both scenarios present a common 

enemy. Meaning, women should unite in the face of sexism or respectability politics or any other 

enemy that poses a t hreat to all women. 

Overall , the tweets in my analysis serve as a fruitful sample of how the reclamation of 

nasty woman or women creates a stock story within the nasty women hashtag. In tandem with 

the sheer volume of tweets , the primary narrative of the nasty women hashtag is that nasty 

women are intelligent, confident, ambitious, assertive, and strong. They are women who remain 

“calm and composed” in the face of adversity, much like Hillary Clinton whose presence and/or 62 

quip contributed to the reclamation of the phrase (Cillizza). They are women who are proud of 

being nasty and they make efforts to unite amongst themselves. 

However, the problem with some uses of “nasty women” is that it assumes a universal 

experience of woman hood. @RoyalHoeliness mentions that all women who are assertive and 

intelligent are characterized as mean by men. No matter how accurate that may or may not be. 

The tweeter is still assuming that every single woman who exhibit these characteristics has bee n

vilified in some manner by men. The tweet seems to imply the lack of consideration race among 

other variables of social identity (e.g. sexual orientation, class, nationality, etc.) may very well 

play in people’s characterization of women possessing such attributes. 

As the tweets I will analyze in the counter story of #NastyWomen et al. will demonstrate, 

not every woman was governed by the same conception of respectability. For African American 

women, historically, society perceived them to naturally pos sess the traits of strength, 

confidence, assertiveness, and so on (Johnson 889 -890). Therefore, the embracement of nasty 

women for these women would take on a whole new meaning. As my analysis will show, a 

meaning that is extremely different from the meani ng the stock story tweets exclaim nasty 

women now means thanks to their reclamation efforts. 

3.3. Counter Story of #NastyWomen et al. 

Although I found ample tweets that represented the meta narrative of the nasty women 

hashtags, unfortunately, I’ve found very little evidence concerning the counter narrative in my 

search. Out of the 2,357 tweets I collected, I found only 25 tweets that raised an objection to the 

embracement of nasty woman. Thus, I will incorporate the following 2 tweets and 1 Twitter 

threa d as a sample for my analysis. These tweets are demonstrative of the criticism certain 63 

tweeters in the hashtag levied due to the alienation they experienced with the reclamation of 

nasty woman. 

Figure 18. Sydney Writers’ Fest’s Tweet 

For Burke, in as mu ch as people can identify with each other, they can be divided as well. 

Or rather, they can be alienated. Sydney Writers’ Fest, though quoting another tweeter, is making 

note of feelings of alienation some tweeters have experienced due to the reclamation o f nasty 

woman. The tweeter states it is easier for White women to reclaim nastiness due to historical 

conceptions of White femininity. Although I have indicated that society expects women to be 

pious, chaste, submissive, meek, etc., it really is the White female that society truly holds to 

possess these attributes when you factor in racism and racist stereotypes regarding women of 

color. This stems from tropes such as the Angel in the House. The Angel in the House 

encapsulated Victorian conceptions of respe ctability that governs the bodies of White women. 

The angel was a pure, chaste, demure, obedient, delicate, domestic housewife whose sole 64 

responsibility in life was to be a wife and a mother. It is probable some of these attributes were 

expected of women o f color, but dominant White society held these women to vastly different 

standards, again, based on racial stereotypes of Black and Brown femininity and sexuality (Kuhl 

171 -172 ; LaGreca 5). 

It is almost as if the quote is indicating that White women’s wh iteness gives them a 

buffer from being perceive as a nasty woman in its historical meaning. This is at least in 

comparison to non -White women. I say this because the tweeter makes explicit mention of White 

women reclaiming nasty women as a battle cry. The quote is signifying that it can only be an 

effective cry for those inculcated from truly being perceived as nasty. Those who are not 

protected by whiteness but embrace nasty women in its reclaimed meaning may still be seen as 

nasty women in its original me aning. Once more, the tweet is emphasizing how the reclamation 

causes a division despite the numerous women who identify with the reclaimed phrase. 

Figure 19. The Libyan’s Tweet 65 

In contrast with the first tweet, this one explicitly references the privil ege White women 

possess, presumably, for them to safely embrace nasty women. The tweeter mentions if African 

American women “wore those” they would “be looked at totally different”. The tweeter’s 

referring to the nasty women t -shirts and other paraphernali a that were created in response to 

Trump calling Clinton a nasty woman during the debate. If African American women were to 

incorporate the nasty women paraphernalia into their dress people would perceive them 

differently than if White women wore them. My assertion is based on the tweeter’s reference of 

white privilege White women possess. 

The identification taking place in the nasty women hashtags caused quite a bit of 

alienation for some tweeters. The Libyan is subtly critiquing that tweeters in the nast y women 

hashtags are positioning the hashtag as this space where women can come together and fight 

against respectability politics, but many are blinded by their racial privilege. It is racial privilege 

that keeps them from seeing how nasty women could be perceived differently for and, in terms 

of paraphernalia (e.g. nasty women t -shirts, pins, etc.) , on the bodies of Black women. If the 

nasty women hashtags and materials did not speak to the experiences of White women than 

would the tweeter need to make th is critique? This question is at the heart of The Libyan’s 

critique. 66 

Figure 20. Victoria M. Massie’s Thread 67 

What’s striking about Victoria M. Massie’s entire thread is that it captures succinctly the 

division embracing nasty woman causes amongst tweeters who feel, perceive, and/or experience 

a different reality of respectability than the one the stock story adva nces. Massie makes an 

insightful observation that, in efforts to embrace nasty, tweeters utilized the bodies of Black 

women to promote the new definition of nasty woman. The tweeter quotes a tweet that includes a 

photo of Hillary Clinton superimposed over Janet Jackson’s body in the cover art of the song 

“Nasty” which was a part of the Janet’s 1986 Control album. It is very probable that she is 

suggesting the tweeters are unintentionally linking nasty woman with the bodies of Black 

women. To harken back to The Libyan’s tweet, historically speaking, African American women 

do not have the protection White women possess due to White privilege. Therefore, there is a 

ramification of Black female bodies being linked to the term nasty despite efforts to reclaim it. 

Massie goes on to note that nasty does not have the same historical meaning for all 

women. As mentioned in Chapter 1, in the 18 th centuries, there was a time where the term nasty 

woman was used to exclusively refer to enslaved African American women to separate them 

from White women of all classes -wealthy, merchant (middle), and poor - in order to protect 

White gender norms and roles (Brown 9). Also, as @DBAnderson1, the other tweeter a part of 

Massie’s thread insinuates, Janet Jackson’s use of nasty was entirely different than what the 

tweeters of the stock story are utilizing it as. Brannon Smith concludes, Janet Jackson was using 

the term nasty to refer to men who sexually harass women. Jackson is even on record of saying 

the song was inspired by her encounters of street harassment. In an effort to stand up for herself, 

she created the song with her producers (Smith). This comment i s an insightful complement to 

Massie’s thread because it implicitly brings up to light how other groups of women defined 

nasty. 68 

Further, @DBAnderson1 is also noting how Janet Jackson phrase has been appropriated 

in efforts to reclaim nasty woman. The phra se “Madame president if your nasty” is an alteration 

of Jackson’s quote, “No, my first name ain’t baby. It’s Janet -Miss. Jackson, if you’re nasty!” 

(Smith). @DBAnderson1, in another tweet in the thread, points to two other nasty women 

hashtags to suggest w here the appropriated phrase is being used. To reiterate, Jackson’s use of 

nasty was in reference to men, not women. Her utilization of nasty was not in a positive manner. 

It was an admonishment for men who sexually harass women. Jackson’s line was a deman d for 

respect. One could infer that the appropriated use is calling for a similar respect Jackson was 

demanding, but again, as the tweeters of the thread pointed out, it erases Jackson’s intended 

meaning. Such erasure holds tremendous significance because, from hairstyles, lips, and body 

type, popular culture has a long tradition of appropriating African American women’s cultural 

and even physical aesthetics (Harriot). With the phrase Madame President if you’re nasty and 

superimposing Clinton’s image over J ackson, an historical alienation (e.g. appropriation of 

African American women’s cultural aesthetics) is ensuing. 

Despite the reclamation of nasty woman fostering a sense of identity among those who 

embrace it as a positive of femininity (e.g. a term of e ndearment as oppose to an insult), it also 

fosters division amongst tweeters. Tweeters in the counter story perceive that there is danger in 

embracing the word rather than power like some of the tweeters allude to in their reclamation of 

the term. These tw eeters charge the reclamation of nasty women fails to consider how race 

impacts who is able to truly embrace the phrase. The meaning of nasty woman might’ve been 

altered, but if the attributes the new meaning of nasty woman champions has been historically 

tied to your femininity and sexuality than you may not see the phrase in the altered light. To 

phrase differently, the redefinition of the nasty women might seem like a positive change for 69 

those whose femininity excluded these attributes as consequence of their gendered oppression, 

but for those whose femininity included it all along, their oppression is still the same. What 

exactly do African American women get out of embracing nasty women? Does it empower 

them? Does it help to unpin the respectability pol itics that governs their bodies, dress, sexuality, 

and disposition? Though I hope my analysis has helped to answer these questions, I wish to 

conclude this section by reiterating them. 

3.4 Conclusion 

#NastyWomen et al. is comprised of both a stock story and a counter story. Efforts to 

reclaim as well as embrace the (reclaimed) phrase nasty woman has brought both identification 

and alienation. Those who identified with the term has altered the ideology that was originally a 

part of the term. Now, at least in the context of the nasty women hashtags, the term symbolizes 

more of a feminist ideology. That is, nasty woman or women represents a strong, confident, 

intelligent woman who, so to speak, does as she please. This stands in stark contrast to the 

gender e xpectations and notions of respectability that has governed the female gender. However, 

as many of the tweeters a part of the counter story has remarked, which group of women is the 

altered phrase referring to. Whose history does the reclaimed nasty woman alters? Whose 

respectability politics does it challenge? And finally, whose oppression does it help to dismantle? 

Alienated, these tweeters supply the answer to these questions. African American women are 

would be perceived a lot differently than White wom en for in embracing nasty woman due to 

their lack of White privilege, unique historical relationship with respectability, and their racial 

and gendered oppression. In other words, there is nothing present to protect African American 

women from being percei ved as nasty women in its original meaning. 70 

CHAPTER 4 

A CRITICAL REFLECTION: THE PROBLEM WITH FEMINIST RECLAMATION 

I conclude my thesis with a critical reflection on the assertions and research I presented in 

the previous chapters. Here, I discuss the im plications of reclaiming oppressive language and 

how the alienation certain groups of women’s experiences concerning the reclamation is neither 

a new or unique development. There is a history of women of color, particularly African 

American women, charging that the feminist reclamation of gendered slurs is not as empowering 

for women of color as it is for White women. For the sake of this chapter, I situate the arguments 

I have advanced regarding the issue of reclaiming the term nasty woman within the argum ents 

other feminists such as Brittany Cooper have advanced regarding SlutWalk. Then, I will move 

into my discussion on the implications of reclaiming oppressive language. 

4. 1 SlutWalk & Alienation in Feminist Reclamation 

The most salient example of alie nation in feminist reclamation would have to be 

#SlutWalk. The movement started in January 24 th of 2011 in Toronto, Canada as a backlash to 

the comments made in a talk given by a police officer to college students at the Osgoode Hall 

Law School of York Uni versity on personal safety on the law school’s campus. The officer, 

Constable Michael Sanguinetti, told students that “I’ve been told I’m not supposed to say this, 

however, women should avoid dressing like sluts in order not to be victimized” (Carr 24) .

Apparently, Sanguinetti’s comment “struck a nerve” because a few months later, on April 3, 

2011, the first SlutWalk protest was launched. The aim of the protest was to overcome slut -

shaming, victim blaming, and sex shaming in society and, to shed light on the myth that what 71 

you wear as a woman contributes to your likelihood of being raped. This initial protest went 

viral , and soon after there were other SlutWalk protests occurring around the world (Carr 24). 

In a similar fashion to #NastyWoman, the reclama tion of the word slut happened 

extemporaneously. Meaning, there was not a concerted effort on the part of feminist 

organizations to reclaim the word. Instead, it happened organically with protestors showing up 

to protests with posters exclaiming the “type ” of “slut” they were. Feminist scholar, Joetta L. 

Carr notes one protestor who attended a SlutWalk in London sported a poster that read 

“Pensioner Slut”. Though initially unintended, the embracement of slut became a conscious 

attempt of fighting against s lut shaming. Carr maintains, the term slut was “appropriated by 

angry women who refuse to be dehumanized by the patriarchy”. These women turned a term that 

used to mean a promiscuous woman of “low or loose moral character” into a phrase that 

signified a wo man who boldly steps “outside the line that good girls are supposed to stay inside” 

and (Carr 24 -25, 30 -31; Berg). 

Although SlutWalk garnered a significant amount of support from feminists, activists, 

and celebrities alike, there ha ve been critiques levie d against the movement from African 

American feminists. In particular, the non -profit African American women organization, Black 

Women’s Blueprint , wrote an open letter to SlutWalk organizers. The letter was “signed by 

dozens of activists, scholars, anti -violence advocates, and organizations serving Black women” 

and was published by the journal Gender & Society on February 2016. The letter critiqued the 

movements attempt to reclaim the word slut citing that slut has very different associations for 

African A merican women. The letter charges that Black women do not have “the privilege or the 

space” to call themselves slut “without validating the already historically entrenched ideology 

and recurring messages about what and who the Black woman is”. Recalling my analysis of the 72 

counter story of #NastyWomen et al., these charges are eerily familiar. In fact, one of the 

tweeters, @NoDaysOff85, levied a nearly identical critique regarding the privilege White 

women possess that makes it easier for them to reclaim na sty woman (Carr 33; Black Women’s 

Blueprint 9 -10). 

In addition, the organization ( Black Women’s Blueprint ) maintains 

For us the trivialization of rape and the absence of justice are viciously intertwined with 

narratives of sexual surveillance, legal access, and availability to our personhood. It is 

tied to institutionalized ideology about our bodies as sexualized objects of property, as 

spectacles of sexuality and deviant sexual desire. It is tied to notions about our clothed or 

unclothed bodies as unable to be raped whether on the auction block, in the fields, or on 

living room television screens. The perception and wholesale acceptance of speculations 

about what the Black woman wants, what she needs, and what she deserves has truly, 

long crossed the boundaries of her mode of dress…Black women … don’t have the 

privilege to walk through the streets…either half -naked or fully clothed self -identifying 

as “sluts” and think that this will make women safer in our communities an hour later, a 

month later, or a year later…we’re still working to annihilate the word “ho,” which 

deriving from the word “hooker” or “whore,” as in “Jezebel whore,” was meant to 

dehumanize”. (10 - 11) 

In summation, the word slut carr ied a different meaning for African American women. Due to 

the history of slavery and the sexual abuse and exploitation of Black women, slut has been 

ensconced into the image of African American womanhood and femininity. Therefore, it would 

be counterprodu ctive to embrace the word slut when society has already deemed African 

American women to be “sluts” on account of their blackness and their gender. As I have noted in 

Chapters 1 and 3, there is a similar dynamic with the term nasty woman. As a result of th e racist 

and sexist stereotypes of Black women, it is harder for them to reclaim nasty when society, at 

some point in time, exclusively referred to them as nasty woman just to safeguard the femininity 73 

of White women and White gender norms (Brown 1 -9, 128). Equally, Twitter user, The Libyan 

(@NoDaysOff85) similarly noted that Black women would look differently wearing, 

presumably, the nasty woman paraphernalia (e.g. T -shirts, necklaces, pins, and other 

merchandise that was created after Trump called Clinton as nasty woman). This is in line with 

the organizations assertion that Black women lack the privilege to march through the streets 

reclaiming the word slut. The reason for that, as the organization alludes, is that Black women 

would be looked at lot differ ently than say White women for doing so. 

Conversely, feminist blogger, professor, and researcher, Britney Cooper, posits it is the 

privilege of White women which contributes to the marginalization of non -White feminist 

viewpoints within acts of reclamatio n (Cooper). In her study of SlutWalk movement, she found 

that the notion of “sluttiness” and “slut -shaming” center around “white women’s experiences of 

sexuality” (Cooper). Since White womanhood is positioned as inherently pure, modest, and 

chaste in the f irst place, it is a tad easier for them to reclaim the word “slut” (Cooper). This is 

due, in part, to the fact that White women who were not pure, chaste, or modest were considered 

to be abnormal, deviant (Cooper; Brown 17 -19). Hence the historical distinc tions between good 

wives and nasty women. Kathleen Brown notes male authority figures in the colonial period 

made sure to emphasize the distinction between White women who were “good” and White 

women who were “bad” (nasty) using, often, the bodies of poor and enslaved women (Brown 9, 

12 -19). To keep affluent and merchant (middle class) women in their proper place and to 

maintain their chastity, authority figures made sure to emphasize if said women were to engage 

in unsavory behavior they would be linked t o poor women and African slave women (9, 12 -19). 

Thus, the ability to embrace “slut”, and nasty woman for that matter, is contingent on a privilege 

African American woman simply do not possess. Cooper suggests the appeal of popular feminist 74 

movements are b ased on the “notion of a universal female experience” (Cooper). As I have 

mentioned, many tweeters who partake in the stock story of #NastyWomen frequently exclaim 

how ‘we’re all nasty women’ without ever specifying or pondering as to who the ‘we” in “we’r e

all” truly entail. Therefore, the problem with reclaiming gendered invectives seems to be the 

focus on a, as Cooper terms, a “universal” gendered experience with the term at hand (e.g. all 

women experience being called nasty woman in the exact same way w ith the exact same 

historical framework). 

4. 2 The Problem with Reclamation 

Building on Cooper’s suggestion, I believe linguist Robin Lakoff said it best, “our use of 

language embodies attitudes as well as referential meanings” (45). The cultural, racial, gender, 

economic, and historical dynamics of a society influences how our language use comes to 

represent certain attitudes and referential meanings (45 -46). Arguably, the reclamation of 

language is no different. The language people reclaim embodies the a ttitudes and referential 

meanings of a society as well as the gendered experiences of the women reclaiming the words. 

Another issue with the reclamation of oppressive language is that it is hard, if not 

impossible to erase the original, oppressive meaning of the word. Social psychologists, Adam 

Galinsky, Kurt Hugenberg, Carla Groom, and Galen Bodenhausen study on the reclamation of 

oppressive language seems to back my assertions. They assert that there is a drawback to, as they 

term reclamation, “reappropr iation ” (221). Even though reapropriation helps those in 

disempowered groups empower themselves by imbuing positive connotations into negative, 

oppressive language, the original oppressive meaning is still present in the word (231). Meaning, 

the act of rea ppropriation may successfully suppress the original negative meaning of the word 75 

or make it unfavorable for those in dominant groups for utilizing the word, but the historical 

and/or negative meaning is still lurking beneath the surface. 

Also, as Galinsky et al. mentions, reappropriation can lessen the impact of words onto 

oppressed groups, it still does not completely eradicate all the power from the words. The target 

of labels may not feel bothered or offended by being called a slur, but the power behind the slur 

still exists because the person wielding it tends to hold more power than the person being 

insulted (229 -231). Reclaiming oppressive language helps disenfranchised groups at the micro 

level, but, again, the power behind the word still exists in t he macro level. For instance, Galinsky 

et al. uses the n -word to explain their position. Reclaiming the n -word may take the sting out of 

being labeled an n -word, but the power of white supremacy is still maintained because, one, 

someone felt they had the p ower to call someone the n -word and, two, the meaning behind the 

word is still sanctioned since we live in a white supremacist society that ascribes racial 

stereotypes to each racial group within society (233 -235). The sting may have lessened, but the 

powe r behind the word still exists as long as white supremacy exists. 

In relation to #NastyWomen et al., the power of patriarchy and male dominance that 

sanctions the ability for a man to call a woman nasty because she exhibits certain traits deem 

masculine an d thereby unacceptable in a woman is still present despite the altered meaning of 

nasty woman. Also, the effort to reclaim nasty woman can help to lessen the impact the word 

may cause to those who find themselves on the receiving end of the word. 

4. 3 Conclusion 

Therefore, reclamation can be a powerful tool, but the power in reclamation is extremely 

curtailed. The tweeters who participated in the stock story of #NastyWomen et al. might’ve 76 

found much empowerment out of reclaiming the word, but, as the tweeters of the counter story 

remarks, the reclamation of the word is not without its faults. The reclamation of nasty woman 

ignores the historical, political, and social difference between the respectability politics that 

governs African American women ve rsus European American women. In closing, more research 

is needed of this nature in Feminist Rhetorical Studies. As digital feminist activism continues to 

grow in power and importance, feminist rhetoricians need to pay special attention as to how 

Feminist activists in digital spaces foster a sense of identification amongst each other to further a 

specific feminist cause. As well as how this sense of identification, among the many, leads to a 

sense of alienation among the few -the few who openly criticize the direction and the inclusivity, 

or lack thereof, of the movement. Such an endeavor poses quite a challenge since you cannot 

always tell the racial, ethnic, cultural, etc. makeup of the user online and it is extremely difficult 

to narrow in on smaller conve rsations in popular digital environments with hundreds or 

thousands of participants. Unfortunately, I do not have any suggestions as to how to solve this 

conundrum, but it is my hope that my project will at least contribute to existing scholarship 

around t he subject. 77 

REFERENCES 

@AsaSoltan “RT If you’re proud to be a #nastywoman (translates to: strong, independent, 

intelligent woman who takes no crap from nobody!) #Debate”. Twitter , 19 Oct. 2016, 

8:23 PM, https://twitter.com/AsaSoltan/status/788943 718279622656 .

@DaniJaneCox “We’re all #NastyWomen”. Twitter , 23 Oct. 2016, 11:12 AM, 

https://twitter.com/DaniJaneCox/status/790254693951893504 .

@etambascio “Intersectional is the only way. Don’t come at me if you aren’t about hearing all 

women’s voices. #feminism #intersectional #NastyWomen” Twitter , 8 Jan. 2017, 10:54 

AM, https://twitter.com/etambascio/status/81816906143144755 4. 

@HeyMelynda “If @HillaryClinton is a #nastywoman, then sign me up to be one too. #debate”. 

Twitter , 19 Oct. 2016, 7:36 PM, 

https://twitter.com/HeyMelynda/status/788931902761672704 .

@hsmamainva “Vote all the @GOP out in 2018! #BlueWave2018 -where are all the 

#NastyWomen?” Twitter , 2 Dec. 2017, 3:12 AM, 

https://twitter.com/hsmamainva/status/936915861394276352 .

@kelly_zvobgo “Nasty Women, unite!”. Twitter , 8 Nov. 2017, 1:16 PM, 

https://twitter.com/kelly_zvobgo/status/928370598962536448 .

@meghawnw “I love us girls like we turned “nasty woman” into a compliment, we’re all a 

bunch of nasty women”. Twitter , 1 Feb. 2017, 10:31 PM, 

https://twitter.com/meghawnw/status/827041860203851776 .

@MelanieStPierre “This morning I got called a c*** by a man who took issue with my idea that 

misogyny is rampant. So there’s that. #nastywomen” Twitter , 10 Nov. 2016, 7:46 AM, 

https://twitter.com/MelanieStPierre/status/79674091705093734 4. 

@NoDaysOff85 “#nastywoman reminds me of the privilege white women have. Due to racism 

black women would be looked at totally different if they wore those”. Twitter , 24 Oct. 

2016, 6:30 p.m., https://twitter.com/NoDaysOff85/status/790727309254881280 .

@RoyalHoeliness “Ambitious, intelligent women are always characterized as mean by 

men. #NastyWomen.” Twitter , 19 Oct. 2016, 8:18 p.m., 

https://twitter.com/RoyalHoeliness/status/788942493 630902272 .

@SydWritersFest “‘It’s easier to reclaim nastiness when you’ve always been considered pure.’ 

@britrbennett on white women claiming the Nasty Woman battle cry” Twitter , 27 May 

2017, 4:36 AM, https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest/status/868430722796724224 .

@tamtam3000 “its okay for men to be nasty and rude but women have to be nice and sweet all 

the time or they are a bitch. #nastywomen” Twitter , 23 Oct. 2016, 2:17 PM, 

https://twitter.com/tamta m3000/status/790301062708146177 .

@UniteWomenOrgCT “If #NastyWomen are intelligent, strong and hard -working —we’re all a 

little nasty. #MicSlay bit.ly/2eaCeAa”. Twitter , 22 Oct. 2016, 5:15 AM, 

https://twitter.com/UniteWomenOrgCT/status/789802310285324288 .78 

@vmmassie “In this moment of “empowerment,” note black women have been vilified as the 

“nasty” women folks have been using to call Clinton a hypocrite…” Twitter , 20 Oct. 

2016, 8:13 AM, https://twitter.com/vmmassie/status/789122469189804032 . Thread .

Bat es, Karen Grigsby. “Race and Feminism: Women’s March Recalls The Touchy History”. 

NPR , 2017, https://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2017/01/21/510859909/race -and -

feminism -womens -march -recalls -the -touchy -history .

Bennet, Jessica. “Hillary Clinton Will N ot Be Manterrupted”. NYTimes , 2016, 

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/opinion/campaign -stops/hillary -clinton -will -not -

be -manterrupted.html?smprod=nytcore -iphone&smid=nytcore -iphone -share&_r=1 .

Berg, Madeline. “How Donald Trump Accidentally Created The Nasty Woman Economy”. 

Forbes , 21 October 2016, https://www.forbes.com/sites/maddieberg/2016/10/21/how -

donald -trump -donald -trump -accidentally -created -the -nasty -woman -

economy/#664e5b0455ca .

Black Women’s BluePrint. “An Open Letter From Black Women To The SlutWalk”. Gender & 

Society , vol. 30, no. 1, 2016, pp. 9 -13. 

Brown, Kathleen M. Good Wives, Nasty Wenches, & Anxious Patriarchs: Gender, Race, and 

Power in Colonial Virginia . The University of N orth Carolina Press, 1996. 

Burgess, Jean, and Axel Bruns. “Twitter Archives and the Challenges of “Big Social Data” for 

Media and Communication Research”. M/C Journal , vol. 15, no. 5, 2012. Web. 

Burke, Kenneth. A Rhetoric of Motives . Berkley: University of California Press, 1969. 

--------. “The Rhetorical Situation”. Communication: Ethical and Moral Issues , ed. Lee 

Thayer, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 1973. 

Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs. “The Discursive Performance of Femininity: Hating Hillary”. Rhetoric 

and Public Affairs , vol. 1, no. 1, 1998, pp. 1 -19 .

Campuzano, Eder. “Donald Trump called Hillary Clinton a ‘nasty woman’ and the internet 

reacted accordingly”. Oregon Live , 2016, 

www.oregonlive.com/trending/2016/10/im_a_nasty_woman_proclaim_the_ ladies_of_twi 

tter_after_donald_trump_insults_hillary_clinton.html .

Carney, Jordain. “Senate GOP votes to silence Warren after speech against Sessions”. The Hill ,

2017, http://thehill.com/blogs/floor -action/senate/318422 -senate -votes -to -silence -warren -

after -sessions -speech .

Carr, Joetta L. “The SlutWalk Movement: A Study in Transnational Feminist Activism”. Journal 

of Feminist Scholarship , vol. 4, 2013, pp. 24 -38. 

Chan, Melissa. “Donald Trump’s ‘Nasty Woman’ Comment at the Presidential Debate Sets Off 

Social Media Firestorm”. Fortune , 2016, http://fortune.com/2016/10/19/presidential -

debate -nasty -woman -donald -trump/ .79 

Cillizza, Chris. “Winners and losers from the final presidential debate”. The Washington Post ,

2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the -fix/wp/2016/10/19/winners -and -losers -

from -the -final -presidential -debate -2/?utm_term=.7a4b50b2548d .

Cole, Elizabeth R., and Alyssa Zucker. “Black and White Women’s Perspectives on Femininity”. 

Cultural Diversity an d Ethnic Minority Psychology , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1 -9. 

Cohen, Claire. “Donald Trump sexism tracker: Every offensive comment in one place”. The 

Telegraph , 2017, https://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/politics/donald -trump -sexism -

tracker -every -offensive -commen t-in -one -place/ .

Cooper, Britney. “I Saw the Sign but Did We Really Need a Sign?: SlutWalk and Racism”. 

Crunk Feminist Collective , 2011, http://www.crunkfeministcollective.com/2011/10/06/i -

saw -the -sign -but -did -we -really -need -a-sign -slutwalk -and -racism/ .

Delgado, Richard. “Storytelling for Oppositionists and Others: A Pea for Narrative”. Michigan 

Law Review , vol. 87, no. 8, 1989, pp. 2411 -2441. 

Diaz, Daniella. “Trump calls Clinton ‘a nasty woman’” CNN , 20 Oct. 2016, 

http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/19/politics/donald -trump -hillary -clinton -nasty -woman/ .

Fang, Marina. “Elizabeth Warren Won’t Say Whether Mitch McConnell Silencing Her Was 

Sexist”. Huffington Post , 2017, https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/elizabeth -warren -

mitch -mcconnell -jeff -sessions_us_58f3a554e4b0bb9638e498aa .

Fernando, Weerahannadige Dulini Anuvinda, and Laurie Cohen. “Respectable Femininity and 

Career Agency: Exploring Paradoxical Imperatives”. Gender, Work, & Organization , vol. 

21, no. 2, 2014, pp. 149 -164. 

Foster, Kimberly. “Wrestling With Respectability In The Age of #BlackLivesMatter: A 

Dialogue”. For Harriet , http://www.forharriet.com/2015/10/wrestling -with -

respectability -in -age -of.html#axzz4fvUGRnY0 . Accessed 9 April 2017 .

“Full Transcript: Third 2016 Presidential Debate”. Politico , 2016, 

http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/full -transcript -third -2016 -presidential -debate -

230063 .

Galinsky, Adam D., Kurt Hugenberg, Carla Groom, and Galen Bodenhausen. “The 

Reapprop riation of Stigmatizing Labels: Implications for Social Identity”. Research on 

Managing Groups and Teams , vol. 5, 2003, pp. 221 -256. 

Gambino, Lauren. “Women’s March and #MeToo leaders see progress -but ‘we’re in a hell of a 

fight’”. The Guardian , 2017, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/dec/29/womens -

march -tamika -mallory -feminism -2017 .

Garber, Megan. “‘Nevertheless, She Persisted’ and the Age of the Weaponized Meme”. The 

Atlantic , 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2017/02/neve rtheless -

she -persisted -and -the -age -of -the -weaponized -meme/516012 /. 

Graham, David A. “The Most Irresponsible Thing Ever Said in a Presidential Debate”. The 

Atlantic , 2016, https://www.theatlantic.com/liveblogs/2016/10/third -presidential -debate -

clinton -trump/504686/ .80 

Gay, Roxane. Bad Feminist: Essays . Harper Perennial, 2014. 

Gr ey, Emma. “How ‘Nasty Woman’ Became A Viral Call For Solidarity”. Huffington Post ,

2016, https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/nasty -woman -became -a-call -of -solidarity -

fo r-women -voters_us_5808f6a8e4b02444efa20c92 .

Griggs, Malia. “How Hillary’s Fans Turned ‘Nasty’ Around”. The Daily Beast , 20 October 2016, 

http://www.thedailybeast.com/how -hillarys -fans -turned -nasty -around .

Gorog, Ralph de. “The Etymology of Nasty”. American Speech , vol. 51, no. 3/4, 1976, pp.276 -

278. 

Harding, Kate. “A year after the election, there’s still ferocious power in the phrase ‘nasty 

woman’”. Los Angeles Times , 2017, http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op -ed/la -ol -patt -

morrison -kate -harding -nasty -woman -20171108 -htmlstory.html .

Harris -Perry, Melissa. Sister Citizen: Shame, Stereotypes, and Black Women in America . Yale 

University Press, 2011. 

Harriot, Michael. “Black Bodies and the Last Frontier of Cultural Appropriation”. Ebony , 2016, 

http: //www.ebony.com/news -views/blake -lively -appropriation .

Hollander, Jenny. ““I Am A Nasty Woman” Is The Female Empowerment Message Donald 

Trump Didn’t Mean To Inspire”. Bustle , 2016, https://www.bustle.com/articles/190748 -i-

am -a-nasty -woman -is -the -female -empowerment -message -donald -trump -didnt -mean -to -

inspire .

Huggins, Mike J. “More Sinful Pleasures? Leisure, Respectability and the Male Middle Classes 

in Victorian England”. Journal of Social History , vol. 33, no. 3, 2000, pp. 585 -600. 

Jackson, Sarah J. and Sonia Banaszczyk. “Digital Standpoints: Debating Gendered Violence and 

Racial Exclusions in the Feminist Counterpublic”. Journal of Communication Inquiry ,

vol. 40, no. 4, 2016, pp. 391 -407. 

Johnson, David and Chris Wilson. “Donald Trump’s ‘Nasty Wo man’ Comment was 1 of His 48 

Interruptions at the Presidential Debate”. Time , 2016, http://time.com/4538271/donald -

trump -nasty -woman -interruption -presidential -debate/ .

Johnson, Maria S. “Strength and Respectability: Black Women’s Negotiation of Racializ ed 

Gender Ideals and the Role of Daughter -Father Relationships”. Gender & Society , vol. 

27, no. 6 2013, pp. 889 -912. 

Kenn ed y, Krista. “Textual Curation”. Computers and Composition , vol. 40, 2016, pp. 175 -198 .

King, Ed. “Linguistics offers an Unexpected Explanation for Donald Trump’s Constant 

Manterruptions”. Quartz Media , 2016, https://qz.com/814823/final -presidential -debate -

donald -trump -interrupting -hillary -clinton -and -chris -wallace -is -explained -by -linguisti cs -

as -manterrupting/ .

Kirsch, Gesa E. Ethical Dilemmas in Feminist Research: The Politics of Location, 

Interpretation, and Publication . State University of New York Press, 1999 .81 

Kuhl, Sarah. “The Angel in the House and Fallen Women: Assigning Women Thei r Places in 

Victorian Society”. University of Oxford, Department for Continuing Education , 2016 

, pp.171 -178. 

LaFata, Alexia. “Trump’s ‘Nasty Woman’ Comment Is What Silences All Women On A Daily 

Basis”. Elite Daily , 2016, https://www.elitedaily.com/new s/politics/nasty -woman -donald -

trump -hillary -clinton/1665261 .

LaGreca, Nancy. Rewriting Womanhood: Feminism, Subjectivity, and the Angel of the House 

in the Latin American Novel, 1887 -1903 . Penn State Press, 2009. 

Lakoff, Robin. “Language and Woman’s Place”. Language in Society , vol. 2, no. 1, 1973, pp. 

45 -80. 

Leavitt, Arthur H. “What Are Archives?” The American Archivist , vol. 24, no. 2, 1961, pp. 175 -

178. 

Mamrak, Skylar. “Victims of Lust and Hate: Master and S lave Sexual Relations in Antebellum 

United Stated”. Valley Humanities Review , 2016, pp. 0 -17. 

Martinez, Aja Y. “A Plea for Critical Race Theory Counterstory: Stock Story vs. Counterstory 

Dialogues Concerning Alejandra’s “Fit” in the Academy”. Compositio n Studies , vol. 42, 

no. 2, 2014, pp. 33 -55. 

McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith -Lovin, and James M. Cook. “Birds of a Feather: Homophily in 

Social Networks”. Annual Review of Sociology , vol. 27, 2001, pp. 415 -444. 

“Oncoming Fist”. Emojipedia, n.d., https://emojipedia.org/fisted -hand -sign/ .

Panzarino, Matthew. “Twitter Announces Custom Timelines For Hashtags Or Topics On 

Tweetdeck, Launching API Too”. Tech Crunch , 2013, 

https://techcrunch.com/2013/11/12/twitter -to -let -you -create -custom -timelines -for -

hashtags -or -topics -from -tweetdeck -developers -too /. 

Paquette, Danielle. “Donald Trump and the disturbing history of calling women ‘nasty’”. The 

Washington Post , 20 October 2016, 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/10/20/donald -trump -and -th e-

disturbing -history -of -calling -women -nasty/?utm_term=.5317881b873c .

Plank, Liz. ““Nasty woman” becomes the feminist rallying cry Hillary Clinton was waiting for”. 

Vox , 2016, https://www.vox.com/policy -and -politics/2016/10/20/13341416/nasty -

woman -feminist -rallying -cry -hillary -clinton .

Quigley, Brook L. ““Identification” as a Key Term in Kenneth Burke’s Rhetorical Theory”. 

American Communication Journal , vol. 1, no. 3, 1998, p. 1 -2. 

Quinn, Dave. “Nasty Women! Thousands Turn Trump’s ‘Nasty’ Debate Diss of Hillary Clinton 

into a Battle Cry”. People , 2016, people.com/politics/nasty -women -thousands -turn -

trumps -nasty -debate -diss -of -hillary -clinton -into -a-battlecry/ .

“’Raised Fist”. Emojipedia, n.d., https://emojipedia.org/raised -fist/ .82 

Ramsey -Tobienne, Alexis E. “Archives 2.0: Digital Archives and the Formation of New 

Research Methods”. Peitho , vol. 15, no. 1, 2015, pp. 4 -28 .

Ratcliffe, Krista. Rhetorical Listening: Identification, Gender, Whiteness . Southern Illinois 

University Press, 2005 .

Royster, Jacqueline Jones Royster and Gesa E. Kirsch. Feminist Rhetorical Practices: New 

Horizons for Rhetoric, Composition, and Literacy Studies . Southern Illinois University, 

2012. 

Samakow, Jessica. “32 Tweets That Will Make You Damn Proud To Be A Nasty Woman”. 

Huffington Post , 2016, https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/32 -tweets -that -will -make -

you -damn -proud -to -be -a-nasty -woman_us_58083374e4b0180a36e8f59d .

Sanghani, Radhika. “Feisty, frigid and frumpy: 25 words we only use to describe women”. Th e

Telegraph, 2017, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/ambitious -frigid -and -frumpy -

25 -words -we -only -use -to -describe -wom/ .

Smith, Brannon. “Funky Fresh and Feminist: A Look Back at Janet Jackson’s “Control”. Ebony ,

2014, http://www.ebony.com/news -view s/funky -fresh -and -feminist -a-look -back -at -janet -

jacksons -control -042 .

“Special Elections Calendar: Help Create the #BlueWave2018”. Daily Kos , 2018, 

https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2018/2/14/1739930/ -Special -Elections -Calendar -Help -

Us -Create -the -BlueWave2018 .

Stevenson, Lesley. ““Bad Bitch” or Just a “Bitch”: The Mean Girls of High School Films”. 

University of Notre Dame’s Undergraduate Academic Journal of Gender Research and 

Scholarship , 2016, pp. 105 -122 .

Sutherland, Christine M ason. “Feminist Historiography: Research Methods in Rhetoric”. 

Rhetoric Society Quarterly , vol. 32, no. 1, 2002, pp.109 -122. 

Theimer, Kate. “What Is the Meaning of Archives 2.0?”. The American Archivist , vol. 74, no. 1, 

2011, pp. 58 -68. 

The Resistance Party, 2017, https://www.theresistanceparty.org/ .

UniteWomen.org, n.d. , http://www.unitewomen.org/. 

Wagstagg, Keith. “Donald Trump Won at Interrupting His Opponent at the Debate”. Mashable ,

2016, http://mashable.com/2016/10/09/donald -

trumpmanterruption/ #VM9P6UGsvqqF .

White, Zachary Mason. Re -Examining Kenneth Burke on “Identification” in the “New” 

Rhetoric . Thesis, Purdue University, 2003. 83 

VITA 

Kimb erly Lynette Goode 

Kgood035@odu.edu 

Old Dominion English Department 

5000 Batten Arts & Letters Norfolk, VA 23529 

EDUCATION 

Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 

Master of Arts May 2018 

Major: English 

Concentration: Rhetoric and Composition 

Bachelor of Science August 2015 

Major: Interdisciplinary Studies 

Minors: Psychology, Management, Old Dominion University, Norfolk VA 

PUBLICATIONS 

Goode , Kimberly. “Blending Photography and the Diorama: Virtual Reality as the Future of the 

Archive & the Role of the Digital Humanities”. Media Commons , 4 May 2017, 

http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/question/what -role -digital -humanities -future -

archiv e/response/blending -photography -and -diorama -virtu .

VanHaitsma, Pamela , Cassandra Book, Meagan Clark, Christopher Giofreda, Kimberly Goode, 

and Meredith Privott. “Teaching & Researching Feminist Rhetorics : Digital Curation as 

Collaborative Archival Meth od ”. Coalition of Feminist Scholars in the History of 

Rhetoric & Composition , 24 February 2017, http://cwshrc.org/blog/2017/02/24/teaching -

researching -feminist -rhetorics/ .

HONORS & AFFILIATIONS 

Golden Key Honor Society , Member 2011 

National Society of Leadership & Success , Outreach Chair 2014 

Sigma Alpha Lambda , Member 2015 

Sigma Delta Tau , Member 2017 

Coalition of Feminist Scholar s in History of Rhetoric & Composition, Member 2017
