Title: Obama: I 'Underestimated' Impact of Russian Meddling in Election | Engoo

URL Source: https://engoo.com/app/lessons/obama-i-underestimated-impact-of-russian-meddling-in-election/fD-e7NZAEeaqzEdGwGkwmw

Markdown Content:
Obama: I 'Underestimated' Impact of Russian Meddling on Election

U.S. President Barack Obama said following a U.S. intelligence conclusion that Russia meddled in the November presidential election that a similar thing could happen again, and that it is important for Congress and President-elect Donald Trump to make sure such influence is "minimized."

The intelligence report released Friday said Russian President Vladimir Putin "ordered an influence campaign" on the election with a preference for Trump over his challenger Hillary Clinton.Obama told ABC News in an interview broadcast Sunday he ordered the assessment "to make sure that we understand this is something that Putin has been doing for quite some time in Europe, increasingly in Western democracies."

The president, whose second term ends January 20, added that he underestimated how much it is possible for misinformation and hacking to impact open societies and "insinuate themselves into our democratic practices in ways that I think are accelerating."

Obama said more time and resources need to be used on cyber security, and that he hopes the situation is not seen in a partisan way.

The U.S. intelligence community concluded Russia hacked thousands of emails of Clinton campaign chief John Podesta, which were released by WikiLeaks.The report made no assessment that the leaks changed the outcome of the election, a point Trump has noted in a string of Twitter comments since he was briefed about it on Friday.

"Intelligence stated very strongly there was absolutely no evidence that hacking affected the election results," Trump said."Voting machines not touched!"

Obama has had one face-to-face meeting with Trump, shortly after the election, and has talked with him several times.He said Sunday they have spoken about trust in the U.S. intelligence agencies.

Obama added, "There are going to be times where the only way you can make a good decision is if you have confidence that the process is working.And the people that you put in charge are giving you their very best assessments."
