Title: 20160825_PHA_Report_Final.pdf

URL Source: https://www.nature.org/content/dam/tnc/nature/en/documents/20160825_PHA_Report_Final.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 31 Aug 2018 01:36:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 136

Markdown Content:
A global analysis of the role of urban trees in addressing 

# particulate matter pollution and extreme heat 

# Planting 

# Healthy Air 

In collaboration with Photo © Karine Aigner Acknowledgements 

Lead authors 

Rob McDonald, The Nature Conservancy 

Timm Kroeger, The Nature Conservancy 

Tim Boucher, The Nature Conservancy 

Wang Longzhu, The Nature Conservancy 

Rolla Salem, The Nature Conservancy 

Contributing Authors 

Jonathan Adams 

Steven Bassett, The Nature Conservancy 

Misty Edgecomb, The Nature Conservancy 

Snigda Garg, C40 

Graphic Design 

Paul Gormont, Apertures, Inc 

Copy Editor 

Sonya Hemmings 

Translation 

Acclaro 

© 2016 The Nature Conservancy. All Rights Reserved. 

The authors of the report would like to thank the advisory committee and report reviewers for their helpful comments and guidance. 

Financial support for the report came from the China Global Conservation Fund and the Global and North America urban programs of 

The Nature Conservancy. 

Acknowledgements  | Planting Healthy Air  | ITABLE OF CONTENTS 

Acknowledgements  i

Executive Summary— Planting Healthy Air  1

The Urban Air Crisis  9

Air pollution from particulate matter  9

Particulate matter—the basics  10 

Particulate matter and health effects  11 

Commonly used strategies to reduce PM  13 

The future of PM emissions  14 

Excess heat  15 

Ambient air temperatures—the basics  15 

Excess heat and health impacts  16 

Commonly used strategies to reduce excess heat  17 

The future of urban heat  19 

Nature as Part of the Solution  21 

Nature provides many benefits  21 

Trees and air purification  24 

PM removal by tree canopy  24 

Redilution  26 

Trees and temperature reduction  28 

Cooling intensity  28 

Cooling distance  30 

The goals of this report  30 

The Importance of Targeting  33 

Trees already are providing large benefits  33 

The importance of targeting—within cities  36 

The importance of targeting—among cities  40 

Trees are a dual solution  44 

Planting guidelines for healthy air  44 

Characteristics of tree species  44 

Types of plantings  45 

Nature Is a Cost-Effective Solution  47 

Particulate matter mitigation  47 

Temperature mitigation  48 

Adding up multiple benefits  51 Nature Will Matter Even More in the Future  53 

Case Studies  55 

Barriers to Using Nature as a Solution  87 

Financial barriers  87 

Institutional barriers  88 

Collective action barriers  89 

Heat Action Planning  91 

Heat emergency response measures  91 

Built environment heat mitigation and adaptation measures  92 

Conclusions  95 

Appendix 1: City Rankings  97 

Appendix 2: Methods  103 

Overview  103 

Cities studied  103 

City selection  103 

City boundaries  103 

Data quality screen  103 

Literature review  104 

Particulate matter  104 

Temperature  109 

Calibration analysis  115 

Comparison of forest cover data sources at different scales  115 

Global analysis  116 

Geospatial data  116 

GIS Analysis  117 

Maximum possible street tree-planting targets  117 

Tree-planting and maintenance costs  117 

Particulate matter and temperature analysis  118 

Health impacts analysis  118 

Electricity and carbon sequestration analysis  118 

Works Cited  121 

> Photo © Karine Aigner Photo © Kevin Anold

# By 2050, 

# the vast majority of humanity will live in cities, 

# towns, and other urban areas. 

> Photo © Kevin Anold

# Planting Healthy Air 

The 21st century will be the urban century, as more than 2 billion additional people arrive in cities globally. This 

rapid urbanization is unprecedented in human history, and by 2050, the vast majority of humanity will live in 

cities, towns, and other urban areas. 1 Yet at this moment of the “triumph of the city,” 2 the world’s urban areas are 

also facing many significant challenges, from providing jobs and utilities to a burgeoning citizenry, to protecting 

their residents from crime and violence, to safeguarding urban environmental assets. Among the most pressing of 

global urban environmental challenges is air quality. In most cities, the most damaging air pollutant is particulate 

matter, which is emitted from a variety of sources, especially the burning of agricultural residues, fuelwood, and 

fossil fuels. 3 Fine particulate matter (less than 2.5 micrograms, μg, in diameter, also known as PM 2.5 ) can be deeply 

inhaled into the lungs and is estimated to cause 3.2 million deaths per year (around 4 percent of the global burden 

of disease) (Figure E1), primarily from cerebrovascular disease (e.g., stroke) and ischemic heart disease (e.g., heart 

attack). 3, 4 PM 2.5  exposure also contributes to chronic and acute respiratory diseases, including asthma. And the 

problem has the potential to get worse: One study forecast that by 2050, fine particulate matter could kill 

6.2 million people per year. 4 Cities and national governments are well aware of the threat PM 2.5  poses, and they 

are urgently looking for ways to reduce it. 

2050 2010 Millions of deaths annually due to PM 2.5 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 Deaths per 10,000 people 

Figure E1 . Forecasted global mortality from PM 2.5  in 2050 compared to 2010 , expressed either as the total number of deaths, or as the number of deaths 

per 10,000 people. The number of people forecasted to be killed will almost double (i.e., increase by 100 percent). Some of that increase is due simply to population 

growth. The number of deaths per 10,000 people, however, is still expected to go up by roughly 50 percent, primarily due to an increase in PM 2.5  concentrations in cities 

in the developing world. Data taken from Lelieveld et al. 4    

> Photo © Karine Aigner
> Executive Summary |Planting Healthy Air |1

Another pressing problem cities face is that 

the air is simply so hot in summer that human 

health is impacted. Already, heat waves are 

the weather-related disaster that causes the 

most mortality globally (Figure E2), killing an 

estimated 12,000 people on average annually 5

and making life unpleasant for millions. Climate 

change is only going to make the threat of 

urban heat waves more severe, as the increase 

in greenhouse gases traps more of the sun’s 

energy, increasing the frequency and severity 

of heat waves. 6 One World Health Organization 

report forecasts that by 2050, deaths from heat 

waves could reach 260,000 annually, 7 unless 

cities adapt to the threat. Just as smart cities 

are trying to reduce their concentration of PM 2.5 ,

thousands of cities are looking for ways to 

better manage—and adapt to—excess heat. 

Can nature help address these twin problems of 

air that is too dirty or too hot? Trees and other 

vegetation, whether planted along a city street 

or growing in a park or residential yard, provide 

many benefits to people, such as aesthetic beauty, 

enhancement of property values, erosion prevention, stormwater management, and noise reduction. Trees also 

sequester carbon, helping mitigate climate change. Parks also provide space for urbanites to recreate, which brings 

real physical and mental health benefits. It looks like trees may play an important role in making our air healthier, 

too. Dozens of studies now show that tree leaves filter out particulate matter from the atmosphere, along with many 

other air pollutants. Similarly, many scientific studies show that the shade trees cast, along with their transpiration 

of water during photosynthesis, can help reduce air temperatures while also reducing electricity use for residential 

cooling. But questions remain for urban leaders and public health officials: 

• What fraction of the air-quality problem (particulate matter and excess heat) can trees solve? 

• Which cities and which neighborhoods can be helped most? 

• How much investment is needed, in terms of trees planted or dollars spent? 

• Where are trees a cost-effective investment, relative to other strategies that can reduce PM or ambient air 

temperature? 

## Trees are already providing large benefits 

The Nature Conservancy conducted—in coordination with C40—the first global study of cities to answer these 

questions. We collected geospatial information on forest and land cover, PM 2.5  pollutant concentration, and 

population density for 245 cities, and then used established relationships in the literature to estimate the scope 

of current and future street trees to make urban air healthier. We established three scenarios (High, Medium, 

and Low) that describe the range of reduction in PM concentration and temperature that trees have been shown 

to provide. We focused our analysis on street trees, since our review of the scientific literature indicated that 

proximity between trees and people was needed to deliver meaningful reductions in PM or temperature. The 245 

cities we studied currently house around 910 million people, or about a quarter of the world’s urban population. 

The current stock of street trees in our studied cities is already delivering real benefits. We estimate that trees 

are currently providing on average 1.3 million (Low scenario to High scenario range: 0.0 to 6.1) people at least a 

10 μg/m³ reduction in PM 2.5 , 10.2 million (1.0 to 15.4) people at least a 5 μg/m³ reduction, and 52.1 million 

(23.8 to 63.1) people at least a 1 μg/m³ reduction. Similarly, trees are already providing 68.3 million people with a 

roughly 0.5 to 2.0° C (0.9 to 3.6° F) reduction in summer maximum air temperatures. As discussed in detail in the 

report, this magnitude of impact on PM and temperature has real health benefits for those affected.  

> Climate change-attributable heat-related deaths annually, without adaptation
> 050,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 300,000 350,000 400,000 Deaths (2030) Deaths (2050)

Figure E2.  Forecast of climate change’s impact on deaths due to excess heat, 

expressed as annual mortality numbers in 2030 and 2050. The WHO study looked 

at a range of climate scenarios, which cause a range of mortality 

(shown with the error bars). Data taken from WHO (2014).     

> 2|Planting Healthy Air |Executive Summary

These numbers are just for the current stock of street trees. As we show in the report, many cities are struggling 

to maintain their current stock of street trees, and our results emphasize the importance of investments to 

maintain this stock. However, in many cities there also exist substantial additional opportunities for adding tree 

cover to further mitigate air pollution and summer heat. In this study, we assessed the impact of such large-

scale but feasible tree cover increases, measuring their return on investment (ROI) in terms of PM 2.5  reduction or 

temperature mitigation delivered to people per dollar spent. 

## The importance of targeting 

Our literature review showed that trees provide meaningful but locally concentrated reductions in PM and 

temperature, with the majority of mitigation generally within within 300 meters of plantings. Targeting the 

neighborhoods with the highest mitigation impacts becomes crucial (Map E1). Our results show substantial 

variation within cities, with the best neighborhoods for street tree planting often having 100-fold greater return on 

investment (ROI) in tree planting compared to the least suitable neighborhoods. Generally, those neighborhoods 

are characterized by higher population density and thus more people who will benefit from cleaner air, and by 

higher concentrations of PM 2.5  that can be removed by trees. We discuss guidelines for plantings in the report that 

can be used to select species with high PM removal capacity, as well as appropriate spacing among plantings, 

since it is important to avoid the trapping of airflow from particulate sources (e.g., highways) in areas where 

people are present. Population density and PM concentrations also drive variation among cities in ROI (Map E2). 

An additional factor that varies among cities is the cost of tree planting; all else being equal, cities with lower 

planting and maintenance costs have higher ROI. Globally, tree planting and maintenance costs tend to be lower 

in less developed countries. However, within countries, there is substantial variation among cities, driven by 

differences in availability of planting stock, labor costs, and the scale of a city’s urban forestry program.        

> Calibration PM ROI WASHINGTON, D.C.
> Higher Lower 02km
> Map E. Neighborhood-level patterns in the return on investment (ROI) of tree planting to reduce particulate matter for one city, Washington, DC. Streets that are
> darker green have higher return on investment.
> Executive Summary |Planting Healthy Air |3

There are similar patterns in ROI of tree planting for air temperature mitigation, with ROI varying among 

neighborhoods 100-fold. The ideal high-ROI neighborhood would have high population density (or a concentration 

of sensitive populations) leading to a larger number of people benefiting from heat reduction by trees. We discuss 

planting guidelines for air temperature mitigation as well, noting where guidelines that maximize temperature 

mitigation diverge from guidelines that would maximize PM removal. Population density and planting costs drive 

large variance in ROI of temperature mitigation among cities (Map E2). Note, however that arid cities may face 

a trade-off when planting trees: While more trees will reduce maximum temperatures (and PM concentrations), 

they also require water, which may be scarce, for irrigation at least during part of the year.       

> Higher Temp. ROI, Higher PM ROI Higher Temp. ROI, Lower PM ROI Lower Temp. ROI, Higher PM ROI Lower Temp. ROI, Lower PM ROI
> Map E2 .Return on investment of tree planting to reduce ambient temperatures for global cities.
> Photo © Devan King.
> 4|Planting Healthy Air |Executive Summary

## Nature is a cost-effective solution 

Our research also shows that urban street tree planting and canopy enhancement can be a cost-effective 

way to make the air healthier. For particulate matter the cost of reduction, in $/ton, varies significantly across 

neighborhoods, and in some neighborhoods is lower than published emission-control costs for other available 

strategies (Figure E3). However, the median cost of tree planting for PM mitigation is higher than that of five out of 

six broad categories of strategies we considered, suggesting that in many cases other conventional PM reduction 

strategies may be less costly. The cost of reducing temperatures (in $/° C from implementing the practice over 

a 100-square-meter area area) also varies significantly across neighborhoods, and in some places is lower than 

for any available conventional strategy. The median cost of tree planting is less than every other strategy considered 

except for cool-roof technologies. Of course, in cases where both PM concentrations and high temperatures are a 

concern, the comparative attractiveness of tree cover additions would be much higher still, as none of the conventional 

"grey" alternatives address both heat and PM problems. Moreover, the other co-benefits that trees provide (carbon 

sequestration, aesthetic beauty, stormwater mitigation, etc.) further increase the comparative attractiveness of tree 

cover as a solution. 

100 1,000 10,000 100,000 1,000,000 PM control, point PM control, non-point NOx reduction SO 2 reduction Transport Tree planting 

Figure E3. Cost-effectiveness of street tree planting to reduce particulate matter , compared with common categories of conventional mitigation strategies. 

The green bar shows the median cost-effectiveness of street tree planting across sites, while its error bars show the minimum and maximum cost-effectiveness. All values for 

cost-effectiveness are standardized to US2015$/ton. Note that while the median cost per ton PM removed is higher for street trees than the median cost of many conventional 

strategies, there is significant variance, and on many sites tree planting is cost-competitive relative to the other grey infrastructure strategies. Moreover, this comparison is biased 

in favor of conventional strategies because their cost-effectiveness is expressed in terms of $/ton emissions avoided at the emissions source (not all of which translates into local 

concentration reductions for people), while that of trees represents the actual cost-effectiveness in producing local reductions for people.     

> Photo © Kevin Arnold
> Executive Summary |Planting Healthy Air |5

Not only can street tree planting in some neighborhoods be a cost-effective way to make air healthier, it can also 

deliver these benefits to a significant fraction of urban residents. The global investment curve for trees to reduce 

PM 2.5  pollution is shown in Figure E4. For instance, we estimate, under our Medium impact scenario, that an 

annual $100 million additional global investment in trees (including planting and maintenance costs) would give 

8 million additional people a large reduction of PM 2.5  (> 10 μg/m³), 47 million people a moderate reduction 

(> 5 μg/m³), and 68 million people a modest reduction (> 1 μg/m³). The shape of the investment curve for 

temperature looks similar (Figure E5). An annual investment of $100 million would give an additional 77 million 

people a 1° C (1.8° F) reduction in maximum temperatures on hot days (Medium impact scenario).       

> 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 0500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 Proportion of population benefited (%) Population with reduction (millions)

Annual Additional Investment in Street Trees (Millions ($) 0% 10% 5% 15% 20% 25% 0250 200 150 100 50 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 Proprtion of population benefited (%) Population with a 1˚C reduction (millions) Annual Additional Investment in Street Trees (Millions ($) > 10 μg /m3 reduction > 5 μg /m3 reduction > 1 μg /m3 reduction      

> Figure E4 (left). The global potential for street trees to benefit urban dwellers with reduced PM concentrations , given different annual investments in tree planting
> and maintenance. Results shown are for our Medium scenario of the effectiveness of trees in removing PM. Note that the curves for 5 and 10 μg/m 3flatten out at high investment
> levels because there are relatively few cities (principally the most polluted) where street tree planting can remove more than this amount of pollution. Once investment in street
> tree planting has fully occurred in these cities, additional investment in tree planting won’t increase the number of people receiving a reduction of more than 5 μg/m 3, but will
> continue to increase the number of people receiving more modest reductions of 1 μg/m 3.
> Figure E5 (right). The global potential for street trees to benefit urban dwellers with reduced temperatures , given different annual investments in tree planting and
> maintenance. Results shown are for the Medium scenario. Under the High scenario an equivalent number of people would see a 2˚C reduction, whereas under the Low scenario the
> same number of people would see a 0.5˚C reduction.

These magnitudes of reductions in PM 2.5  concentrations and temperature achievable with tree cover can provide 

modest but significant reductions in disease. Based on the well-established relationship between outdoor PM 2.5 

concentration and mortality, we estimate that the maximum possible tree planting in our cities (cost = $3.2 billion 

annually) would reduce PM-related mortality by 2.7 percent to 8.7 percent, saving between 11,000 and 36,000 

lives annually in our study cities. In this executive summary, we focus only on mortality numbers, but there are, 

of course, a range of health impacts, from missed days at school or work to hospitalizations to premature death. 

Research indicates that for every death from PM 2.5  there are many people hospitalized or otherwise affected 

by PM, so we expect that, similarly, the number of people who would benefit in some way from the maximum 

possible tree planting would be many times larger than the avoided mortality figure. 

The effect of high temperature on mortality is also well documented in the literature. Based on studies that 

functionally relate mortality to high temperature, we estimate that the maximum possible tree planting in our 

cities would reduce high temperature-related mortality by 2.4 percent to 5.6 percent, saving between 200 and 

700 lives annually in our study cities. Note that this figure is for the current climate, and with climate change 

potential increasing mortality from heat more than 20-fold, it seems likely this figure of lives saved by street trees 

will be substantially larger in the future. 

Additionally, tree planting could reduce electricity use and increase carbon sequestration. We estimate that our 

maximum possible street tree-planting scenario would reduce residential electrical use in our 245 cities by 0.9 

percent to 4.8 percent annually (9.8 billion to 48 billion KWhr). Under the maximum street tree-planting scenario, 

net carbon sequestration would increase by 2.7 million to 13 million tons CO 2. Combined with estimates of the 

avoided CO 2 emissions due to electricity use reduction, we estimate the total impact of our maximum street tree-

planting scenario as an annual reduction of 7.0 million to 35 million tons CO 2. Note that these climate mitigation 

benefits are provided in addition to the benefits to human health from PM reduction and temperature mitigation.     

> 6|Planting Healthy Air |Executive Summary

## Nature will matter even more in the future 

Finally, our analysis of trends over time suggests that the ecosystem services supplied by trees will be even 

more crucial in the future. There may be a 50 percent increase in the rate of mortality caused by PM 2.5  by 2050, most 

of it in urban areas, 4 and summer maximum temperatures in our sample of cities are forecast to increase by 2-5˚C 

(4-9° F) over the same time period. While these twin threats post a challenge to the health of those in cities, all else 

being equal, they will also increase the importance of the trees that are already there. There will also be a dramatic 

increase in urban population, which increases the number of people who might benefit from nature’s services. Finally, 

all this urban development, or simply societal underinvestment in replacing trees lost, may reduce the amount of 

urban greening. For instance, we found that 26 percent of cities had a decline in forest cover over the period between 

2000 and 2010, whereas only 16 percent of cities had an increase in forest cover over the time period. 

## Conclusions 

We are at the beginning of the urban century. One of the preeminent tasks of cities will be making themselves 

vibrant, healthy, attractive places to live. This report has focused on just one small part of this task: the quest 

to make urban air healthier. Cities continue to strive to reduce concentrations of particulate matter and other 

atmospheric pollutants. And they are beginning to plan for the increased frequency and intensity of heat waves 

that climate change will likely bring. Succeeding against these twin challenges—air pollution and excess heat— 

will require an array of approaches. In this report, The Nature Conservancy – in coordination with C40 Cities 

Climate Leadership Group – has tried to understand whether nature can play a role in helping to solve these 

twin challenges. 

The answer appears to be a qualified “yes.” Street trees can be a part of a cost-effective portfolio of interventions 

aimed at controlling particulate matter pollution and mitigating high temperatures in cities. While trees cannot 

and should not replace other strategies to make air healthier, trees can be used in conjunction with these other 

strategies to help clean and cool the air. Moreover, trees provide a multitude of other benefits beyond healthier air. 

In the right spot, trees can both help make our air healthier and our cities more verdant and livable.     

> Photo © Richard Howard.
> Executive Summary |Planting Healthy Air |7

# Chapter 1 

Photo © Hanohiki The Urban Air Crisis 

Cities globally face many environmental challenges, from protecting their drinking water supply to managing 

their wastewater to building enough parks and street trees to satisfy the needs of their residents. Some of these 

challenges are idiosyncratic, and some are universal challenges facing all cities. One of the biggest challenges 

facing cities globally is keeping their air healthy. This report focuses on two crucial issues: air pollution and 

extreme high ambient air temperatures, both of which impose significant costs on cities. In this first section, we 

outline the scope of these two crucial issues cities are trying to manage to maintain healthy air. 

## Air pollution from particulate matter 

Globally, particulate matter is the ambient air pollutant with the largest health burden. Particulate matter is 

responsible for an estimated 3.2 million premature deaths annually, in both rural and urban areas. This mortality 

amounts to over 5 percent of all global premature deaths. 1 Particulate matter also causes a range of other non-

fatal health problems that affect tens of millions of people annually, including coughing, asthma, bronchitis, 

irregular heartbeat, and non-fatal heart attacks. Municipal and national governments worldwide struggle to reduce 

particulate matter concentrations (Photo 1). 

Photo 1.  A view over London on a bad air pollution day, with the skyline almost completely obscured.      

> Photo: David Holt, Creative Commons license, Flickr
> Chapter One |Planting Healthy Air |9

Particulate matter—the basics 

Particulate matter (PM) is defined as any molecule or particle that can be transported in the atmosphere. 

PM is classified by the size of the particle, and size matters because it determines how easily and deeply humans 

inhale the particle into their lungs. Standard measurements are PM 10  (smaller than 10μm) and PM 2.5  (smaller 

than 2.5 μm). 2 Smaller particles (PM 2.5 ) are of higher concern from a human health perspective than the coarse 

particle fraction (PM 10-2.5 ), but both have negative health impacts. 

PM comes from a variety of sources (Photo 2). Globally, residential-level burning of biomass or fossil fuels for 

heating or cooking is a major source of PM. So is the burning of fossil fuels at larger stationary sources, like 

factories and power plants. The transportation sector is also a major source, as is the agricultural sector, which 

can release large quantities of PM when agricultural residues are burned. While global estimates are available for 

the average contribution from each source, there is considerable variability among cities regarding where their 

PM comes from. There are also often different sources for PM depending on particle size. For the larger PM 10 , dust 

from roads (a result of road, tire and brake wear) and construction operations are major sources of emissions, as 

is sea salt for coastal areas. For the smaller PM 2.5 , direct (primary) emissions from the burning of biomass or fossil 

fuels are the major source. Secondary emissions, which occur when a molecule is transformed through physical or 

chemical processes, are also important for PM 2.5 . For instance, nitrogen oxides (NOx) and sulfur oxides (SOx) can 

react to form particulate matter. 2

This complex overlay of sources leads to radically different concentrations in cities globally (Map 1). The highest 

concentrations globally of PM 2.5  are found in China and northern India. The Middle East and North Africa also 

have high concentrations, with a large fraction of their PM coming from desert dust. Urbanized Europe and the 

Eastern United States have more moderate levels of PM, while some of the lowest average concentrations are       

> Photo 2. Photo: United Nations, Photo: Flickr .
> 10 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter One

found in Australia, southern Africa, and parts of South America. While struggling against PM is a common theme 

for almost all cities, the battle is significantly harder in certain parts of the world that also contain the majority of 

humanity’s urban populations. 

Particulate Matter Concentration 

μg/m of PM 2.5 

> > 75 51 - 75 31 - 50 11 - 30 1 - 10

Map 1. Particulate matter concentration (PM 2.5  in  μg/m³) for global cities in this study.  To smooth out yearly variability, we display the average concentration 

over the period from 2010 to 2014. 

Particulate matter and health effects 

As discussed above, particulate matter has multiple negative health consequences (Figure 1). Around two-thirds 

of this health impact appears to be related to the way PM increases the incidence of cardiovascular and pulmonary 

disease. Particularly important are cerebrovascular diseases (e.g., strokes) and ischaemic heart disease (e.g., heart 

attacks). A recent review of the literature concluded, “The data demonstrating PM’s effect on the cardiovascular 

system are strong. Populations subjected to long-term exposure to PM have a significantly higher cardiovascular 

incident and mortality rate. Short-term acute exposures subtly increase the rate of cardiovascular events within 

days of a pollution spike.” 3

0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50 3.00 3.50 Total, all causes Cerebrovascular disease Ischaemic heart disease Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Acute lower respiratory illness Lung cancer Millions of deaths annually due to PM 2.5 Deaths per 10,000 people 

Figure 1. Estimated global mortality from PM 2.5 , expressed either as the total number of deaths (bottom axis, in millions), or as the number of deaths per 10,000 people (top 

axis). All figures are for the year 2010. Data taken from Lelieveld et al. (2015).     

> Chapter One |Planting Healthy Air |11

Current World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines are less than 20 micrograms per cubic meter (μg/m³) 

for PM 10 , and less than 10 μg/m³ for PM 2.5 .4 However, research suggests there is no safe level of exposure to PM, 

and that any reduction in PM levels has health benefits. For instance, Daniels et al. 5 estimated PM-mortality dose 

response curves and found a linear relationship between PM 10  concentrations and relative risk of death, overall and 

specifically for cardiovascular causes. What this means is that, whatever the current concentration of ambient PM 

in a city, reduction in PM levels will lead to health improvements. 

A large number of studies in the last decade have looked at how changes in PM have affected health. For instance, 

Pope et al. 6 looked at 1.2 million patients and found that each 10  μg/m³ increase in PM 2.5  was associated with 

a 9 percent increase in cardiopulmonary mortality. And this association is not just true for a moment in time, 

but true over time. One study (the Harvard Six City Study) followed U.S. patients for more than 20 years. Their 

exposure to PM concentrations changed over time, as they moved between cities with varying concentrations or 

as environmental regulations in the United States decreased PM concentrations. Each 10  μg/m³ increase in PM 2.5 

exposure resulted in a 14 percent increase in all-cause mortality. 7 Another famous example of reductions in PM 

having measurable benefits to human health comes from Dublin, Ireland 8 (Figure 2), where a ban on sales of coals 

in 1990 led to significant decreases in black smoke and immediate impact on cardiovascular health. 

> micrograms/m3

Year             

> 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
> Deaths per 1,000 people
> 0123456

Year 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996   

> Figure 2. PM health connection data from Dublin study. One of the most famous case studies of how reduction in particulate matter pollution can improve health comes
> from Dublin, Ireland, which banned sales of coals in the city in 1990. In the three years following the ban (upper figure), black smoke concentrations decreased by 35.6 μg/m³, and
> cardiovascular mortality (lower figure) decreased by 10.3 percent. Figures adapted from Clancy et al. (2002). 8

In some ways, it is surprising that there is such a strong empirical relationship between ambient outdoor air 

quality and health, since many people in cities spend the majority of their time inside. Indeed, indoor air pollution 

from, for instance, the burning of fossil fuels and biomass for cooking, is also a major public health problem. 1

Indoor and outdoor air quality are also related, in that the same activity (e.g., burning biomass or fossil fuels for 

cooking or heating) may contribute to higher PM concentrations in both of them. Moreover, a surprisingly large 

fraction of outdoor PM can infiltrate into homes, so in some cases outdoor PM is a major contributor to indoor 

concentrations. 9

Regardless, there is a strong and robust scientific literature that shows that reductions in ambient outdoor 

concentrations of PM will reduce people’s exposure to these pollutants during the hours they spend outdoors, and 

will lead to quantifiable reductions in mortality and morbidity.     

> 12 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter One

Photo 3.  There are a variety of ways cities try to reduce particulate matter pollution. Many cities try to convert buses and other vehicles from diesel, which heavily pollutes 

particulate matter, to compressed natural gas (CNG). This photo shows CNG buses in Stockholm, Sweden. 

Commonly used strategies to reduce PM 

There are a large number of strategies that can be used to reduce PM emissions (Photo 3), and which strategies 

are appropriate and cost-effective depends on the city and its emission profile. In this brief survey of commonly 

used strategies to reduce PM, we lump these strategies into five broad categories (Figure 3). 

100 1,000 10,000 100,000 1,000,000 PM control, point PM control, non-point NOx reduction SO 2 reduction Transport Tree planting 

Figure 3.  Cost-effectiveness of grey infrastructure strategies to reduce particulate matter. Each category contains multiple individual technologies cited in the literature, in the 

United States, Chile, Mexico, Taiwan, and the UK. The bar shows median cost-effectiveness, while the error bars show the minimum and maximum cost-effectiveness observed in 

the category. All values for cost-effectiveness are standardized to US2015$/ton. 

• Transportation sector reductions— A variety of technological changes and upgrades to the vehicle fleet can 

significantly reduce the amount of particulate matter. A focus often is on older vehicles, particularly those with 

diesel engines that can contribute disproportionately to PM emissions. Switching the fuel these engines run on 

can significantly reduce PM emissions. For instance, Delhi has switched most of its taxi and bus fleet over to 

running on compressed natural gas, which has lowered emission of several problematic air pollutants for the 

city, including PM. The return on investment (ROI) of transport sector strategies, as measured in $/ton of PM 

varies widely, depending on the cost of implementing the strategy and how much PM reduction is achieved.     

> Photo © istock/Remiphoto
> Chapter One |Planting Healthy Air |13

• Sulfur Dioxide (SO 2) reductions— Since sulfur dioxide can react to form PM, strategies that reduce sulfur 

dioxide can reduce PM concentrations. Reducing sulfur dioxide also directly improves human health, since 

sulfur dioxide causes numerous respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. Sulfur dioxide forms primarily 

from the burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and diesel fuel. Controlling sulfur dioxide emissions 

therefore often involves either making the burning less polluting by technological upgrades, or finding a 

way to switch to a cleaner-burning fuel. Again, the costs ($/ton) varies widely. 

• Nitrogen oxide (NO X) reductions— Nitrogen oxide can also react to form PM, so strategies that reduce 

nitrogen oxide can reduce PM concentration. Reducing nitrogen oxide concentrations also helps avoid the 

respiratory issues caused by exposure to nitrogen oxide. Nitrogen oxide comes from a variety of sources, 

including agricultural soil management and the burning of fossil fuels; therefore, there are a variety of 

strategies governments can pursue to reduce emissions. 

• PM control, non-point —Often, particulate matter makes its way into the atmosphere not from a 

concentrated high-emission “point” source (e.g., a smokestack), but from large numbers of widely 

distributed sources with individually low emissions. For instance, unpaved roads, construction sites, 

cooking stoves, and bare agricultural fields can all be non-point sources of PM. There are control strategies 

for each of these types of sites. For instance, on agricultural land, using cover crops or following no-till 

practices can reduce PM emissions. Also included in this category are strategies to reduce emissions of 

particulate matter from individual household burning of fuels for heating or cooking. These dispersed 

emissions from fuel burning are a significant source of PM in many cities in the developing world, and 

so strategies to reduce them are key to controlling overall PM concentrations. For instance, many cities 

have historically made the decision to ban the individual burning of coal in order to ensure air quality is 

maintained. 10 

• PM control, point— In many cities, point sources of particulate matter can be significant, such as the 

emissions coming from factories or power plants. There are a variety of technologies that can reduce PM 

emissions. For instance, there are a variety of filters (e.g., bag or fabric filters, wet scrubbers) that can 

capture PM. There are also electrostatic precipitators (ESPs) that can capture PM that can be installed 

separately or with filter technologies. These point-source pollution controls can be expensive to install, but 

because they often remove significant quantities of PM, the cost in terms of $/ton is quite low. 

The future of PM emissions 

Someone once joked that predictions are hard, especially when they are about the future. But while the future 

is uncertain, it seems likely that cities will continue to struggle with controlling PM concentrations over the 

coming decades. More people in urban areas and greater per-capita consumption of energy may increase PM 

emissions. At the same time, governments are continuing to invest in strategies to control PM, often starting 

with those with low marginal costs ($/ton), and over time moving to control strategies that are more expensive. 

It is this increasing marginal cost of PM control over time that drives governments to begin to consider a variety 

of strategies that can collectively meet the need for PM reduction, including potentially nature-based solutions, 

the focus of this report. 

One study 11  looked at current health impacts of particulate matter and tried to estimate future health impacts 

(Figure 4). Total deaths attributable to PM 2.5  are predicted to almost double by 2050, from roughly 3 million 

to 6 million deaths per year. However, a lot of this increase is due to there simply being a lot more people 

in cities by 2050, as the massive urbanization of the 21st century continues. The death rate, expressed as 

the number of deaths per 10,000 people, is forecast to increase more modestly, from around five deaths 

per 10,000 people to around seven deaths per 10,000, a 40 percent increase. It is important to remember 

that this is only one scenario of what might happen in the future. If the world’s cities were to invest more 

aggressively in PM control technologies, the death rate could be held at the same level or even decline.     

> 14 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter One

2050 2010 Millions of deaths annually due to PM 2.5 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 Deaths per 10,000 people 

Figure 4. Forecasted global mortality from PM 2.5  in 2050 compared to 2010 , expressed either as the total number of deaths, or as the number of deaths per 10,000 

people. The number of people forecasted to be killed will almost double (i.e., increase by 100 percent). Some of that increase is due simply to population growth. The number of 

deaths per 10,000 people, however, is still expected to go up by roughly 50 percent, primarily due to an increase in PM 2.5  concentrations in cities in the developing world. Data 

taken from Lelieveld et al. 11 

## Excess heat 

Another major challenge that cities face is dealing with urban heat waves and other problems caused by air 

that is too hot. This section discusses that problem, as well as common solutions used to mitigate the effect 

of excess heat. 

Ambient air temperatures—the basics 

Air temperature is simply a result of how energetic and fast-moving gas molecules are on average. Humans are 

adapted to live in a specific range of temperatures, and extreme cold or hot temperatures cause a number of 

problematic effects for human health and society. The focus of this report is on hot temperatures, which occur 

when there is more heat energy in the atmosphere than is comfortable for humans. Average maximum summer air 

temperatures in cities globally vary greatly, from less than 23° C (73° F) for some far northern European cities to 

more than 36° C (97° F) for some sub-Saharan African and Middle Eastern cities (Map 2). 

Average Max. Temperature 

> > 40 °C 35 - 40 30 - 35 25 - 30 20 - 25 < 20

Map 2. Average annual maximum temperature (˚C) for the period from 1960 to 1990.  This period is often used as a reference period for “normal” temperatures before 

the impact of climate change.     

> Chapter One |Planting Healthy Air |15

Why is there such a large variation in temperature? The energy balance in the atmosphere 12  can be described as: 

Q* + Q F = Q H + Q E + ΔQ S + ΔQ A

The left hand side of the equation are inputs of energy into the air: Q* (the amount of energy from solar radiation) 

and Q F (waste heat emitted from human activities, such as hot air from machines and cars). Generally, for most 

cities in the summer months, waste heat is a relatively small fraction of the input energy. The very hot cities 

globally are those with large inputs of energy from solar radiation. 

The right hand side of the equation are places that energy can go. A fraction of the input energy can get stored 

somewhere, like in concrete or asphalt (ΔQ S), and wind can carry some of the energy away from the city (ΔQ A). 

The remaining energy has to go somewhere. It can increase sensible heat, Q H, which increases air temperature. It 

can also increase “latent heat”, Q E, which is essentially the energy used up when water goes from its liquid to its 

vapor phase (e.g., evaporation). 13 

The term “latent heat” can be a bit confusing in the context of discussing the energy balance of the atmosphere. 

One example of how the latent heat of evaporation can reduce sensible heat: When you sweat on a hot day 

and the sweat evaporates, the conversion of liquid water to water vapor takes energy (latent heat) from the 

atmosphere and your skin surface (sensible heat). All else being equal, if a lot of the input energy from the sun (or 

waste heat) goes to latent heat, less of it will go to sensible heat. 

Cities have large areas of impervious surfaces, and a large amount of energy (ΔQ S) is stored and later released, 

relative to what would happen in the countryside. This release is lagged in time, taking hours for the energy to 

be fully released. This is sometimes referred to as the urban heat island (UHI), which is simply the increase in 

temperature in urban compared to rural areas. Urban centers can often be 2° C or higher in air temperature than 

surrounding rural areas. This report will focus on the general goal of reducing air temperatures to maintain public 

health and well-being, not specifically on reducing the UHI—but obviously the two are related. 

Excess heat and health impacts 

Exposure to high temperatures leads to a number of negative health effects. A set of diseases called heat injuries are 

directly attributable to acute, short-term exposure to heat. Most commonly, acute exposure to heat, combined with 

dehydration, can lead to heat cramps and fainting. Continued exposure can lead to heat exhaustion, which combines 

the above symptoms with headache, feelings of dizziness and confusion, pale skin, and profuse sweating. In even 

more serious acute exposure to extreme high temperatures, heat stroke occurs when internal body temperature rises 

to above 40° C (104° F). Untreated heat stroke can quickly lead to damage to the brain, heart, kidneys, and muscles, 

and in some cases coma or death. A relatively small number of deaths are directly caused by heat stroke. 14 

Epidemiologic studies, however, show a 

significant rise in overall mortality during periods 

of high temperature. Note that temperatures 

do not have to be extreme to cause an increase 

in overall mortality, but simply above average 

for the summer months for a city. Most of 

this increase in mortality occurs because high 

temperatures are risk factors for other diseases. 

High temperatures, for instance, increase the risk 

of heart attack and stroke, particularly in elderly 

populations. This epidemiological approach, 

estimating total mortality caused by high 

temperatures, shows that high temperatures are 

the weather-related disaster that causes the most 

mortality globally (Figure 5), killing on average 

12,000 people annually. 14  Note that this estimate 

is from 2004, and the current global average 

mortality is likely higher: Climate change is 

dramatically increasing global temperatures, with 

eight of the 10 warmest years in the last century 

occurring after this 2004 study was published. 15      

> Climate change-attributable heat-related deaths annually, without adaptation
> 050,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000 300,000 350,000 400,000 Deaths (2030) Deaths (2050)
> Figure 5. Forecast of climate change’s impact on deaths due to excess heat,
> expressed as annual mortality numbers in 2030 and 2050. The WHO study looked at a
> range of climate scenarios, which cause a range of death (shown with the error bars).
> Data taken from WHO (2014).
> 16 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter One

Mortality from heat is highly episodic, and is concentrated in particular heat events. Table 1 lists a few major heat waves 

and their estimated health effects. One of the most well-studied heat waves occurred in Europe in 2003, when up to 

70,000 may have been killed by a massive heat wave. 16  In early August, temperatures began to rise. In some parts of 

France, daily temperatures were 8° C (14° F) greater than usual. 17  A later analysis found that mortality rates in Paris 

were 142 percent higher in August than normal. 18 Microclimate, the temperature of particular neighborhoods, was a 

strong predictor of death rates. 19 Not surprisingly, warmer neighborhoods were more likely to be fatal: Each increase in 

temperature of 1 ° C raised the odds of death during this particular heat wave by 21 percent. 

Location  Year  Health impacts 

United States (eastern)  1901  9,500 killed 

United States (Midwest)  1980  1,700 killed 

Greece (Athens)  1987  More than 1,000 killed 

United States (Chicago)  1995  739 killed 

Europe  2003  70,000 killed 

India (Andhra Pradesh and Telangana)  2015  More than 2,200 killed  

> Table 1. Selected major heat wave events that have been studied, as well as their health impacts. These were selected based on available studies in the scientific literature. In
> general, there has been more study of this issue in the United States and Europe, which partially explains the large number of heat waves listed in those geographies.

Other global studies have constructed curves that relate overall all-cause mortality to the excess temperature 

above some safe baseline, with each 1 ° C increase being associated with a 3.0 percent to 5.5 percent increase 

in all-cause mortality and a 1.1 percent to 2.6 percent increase in cardiovascular mortality specifically. 14 Another 

recent report by the World Health Organization 20  used the functional relationships from Honda et al., 21  where, for 

instance, a 10°  C increase above baseline causes a roughly 18 percent increase in all-cause mortality, and a 20°  C

increase above baseline increases all-cause mortality by roughly 50 percent. While the safe baselines used in the 

various studies differ, for context during the European heat wave of 2003, some cities were roughly 15 to 20 ° C

above the safe baselines. 

Commonly used strategies to reduce excess heat 

From the perspective of a municipal official, there are only a few ways to decrease ambient (outdoor) air 

temperatures. The official can’t reduce solar input or change overall wind patterns. Increasing building insulation 

can reduce the anthropogenic sources of heat, Q F, but this is of relatively little importance during hot summer 

months. Most strategies to combat the urban heat island, therefore focus on reducing heat storage, ΔQ S, by either 

increasing the reflectivity (albedo) of surfaces, which reflects more of the sun’s energy back into space (Photo 4), 

or by shading surfaces that might otherwise store heat. Alternatively, some strategies increase evaporation or 

transpiration of water, which increases latent heat (Q E) and therefore decreases sensible heat.      

> Photo 4. Cool-roof technologies are one alternative strategy cities can use to reduce temperatures. Cool roof coatings can be simply a layer of white paint, as shown here. There
> are also a variety of shingles and other coverings that are more reflective than traditional building materials.
> Photo: © iStock Lakeview_Images
> Chapter One |Planting Healthy Air |17

For simplicity, in this report we describe the cost-effectiveness of three broad categories  (Figure 6) :     

> 10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000 Green roofs Cool pavements Cool roofs Cost effectiveness of temperature mitigation ($°C)
> Figure 6. Cost-effectiveness of alternative strategies to reduce air temperature. Cost-effectiveness is expressed as the cost to build a 100100-square-meter installation,
> divided by the annual reduction in temperature. Data taken from the EPA’s Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies, which discusses in more detail specific
> technologies within each of these broad categories. The reduction in air temperature is taken from a modeling study for New York City that quantified citywide reduction in
> temperature from widespread adoption of each strategy (Rosenzweig et al., 2006).

• Cool roofs— A cool roof is simply one covered with materials designed to increase the reflectivity of the 

roof and decrease heat storage. In some cases, this can be as simple as a highly reflective coat of paint. 

There are also reflective sheet coverings, as well as tiles and shingles that are more reflective than typical 

building materials. The EPA Compendium of Strategies to reduce air temperatures 22 has a good discussion 

of specific cool-roof technologies, and shows that they generally are only slightly more expensive to install 

than traditional materials and can deliver significant savings to building electricity use. 

• Cool pavements— A similar strategy can be used to increase the reflectivity of pavements and decrease 

heat storage. The technologies available vary between asphalt (bitumen) concrete and cement concrete 

pavements. For asphalt concrete, the typically black asphalt serves as a binder and is mixed with aggregate 

particles to make the hard pavement. More highly reflective aggregate particles can be used, combined 

with lighter color or clear binders. Alternatively, there are cool coatings that can be put on top of the 

asphalt concrete. For cement pavement, the cement binder is already naturally fairly reflective, and is 

mixed with aggregate particles to make the hard pavement. Finally, permeable pavement that allows water 

to percolate through also will tend to increase evaporation of water from the surface, increasing latent heat 

storage and thus decreasing sensible heat. 

• Green roofs— An alternative strategy for buildings is to plant vegetation on the roof. The presence of 

plants shades the roof, preventing heat storage. The plants will also transpire water, while some will also 

evaporate from the soil surface, increasing latent heat storage and thus decreasing sensible heat. Having     

> Photo © iStock, i1vuk8691
> 18 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter One

an attractive green roof provides many benefits beyond heat mitigation, including aesthetic beauty for the 

building's residents and increasing the property value. The main challenge for green roofs is that they are 

relatively expensive to install on roofs that weren’t designed to support soil and plants, and the cost of 

retrofitting a roof to make it green can be significant. 

The future of urban heat 

Urban heat waves will only pose a greater challenge for cities in coming decades. First, there will be many 

more people in urban areas, with more than 2 billion additional people expected to live in cities by 2050. 23 

That means there will be even more people who will be exposed to the urban heat island effect. And of 

course, housing all those new urban dwellers requires developing land, and if forests and natural vegetation 

are lost in the process, it would only increase the urban heat island effect. 

Second, climate change will make heat waves more frequent and more intense. One simple way to see this 

is to look at projections of the change in average maximum temperatures due to climate change (Map 3). All 

cities we studied are forecast to have their average maximum temperature increase, although the range is 

quite large, from roughly 1° C (1.8° F) to more than 4° C (7.2° F). Particularly hard hit seem to be the cities of 

the Northeast and Midwest of the United States, as well as southern Europe and central Asia. 

> Max. Temp. Increase
> > 4.0 °C 3.5 - 4.0 3.0 - 3.5 2.5 - 3.0 2.0 - 2.5 < 2.0
> Map 3. Forecasted increase in annual maximum temperature (˚C) for 2040 , compared to the reference period from 1960 to 1990. All global cities in our sample are
> forecasted to have an increase in annual maximum temperatures of at least 1.5 ˚C (2.7˚F).

More detailed studies have examined the effect of climate change on heat waves in specific geographies. For 

instance, in the United States, heat wave events that have, on average, occurred every 20 years are forecast to 

occur by the end of the century every two to four years. These heat waves will not just occur more frequently, they 

will also be of longer duration, lasting 10 to 20 days longer by century’s end. 24  To quote the United States National 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “What the public now considers to be an exceptional event could 

become routine across much of the country.” 25 

One study by the World Health Organization tried to estimate what this would mean for health. The results are 

stark (Figure 5). By 2030, annual deaths due to high temperatures could rise to almost 100,000 globally (eight 

times more than current mortality). By 2050, annual deaths could rise to almost 250,000 (21 times more than 

current mortality). While these numbers are striking, it is important to realize that it is well within humanity’s 

power to alter these figures. First, decisions made about how much greenhouse gas pollution to allow will control 

how bad climate change is. It is this uncertainty that is captured in the error bars in Figure 5. Second, the WHO 

estimates assume no adaptation actions are taken by cities. As discussed in this report, there are many ways 

smart cities can adapt and prepare for a hotter world.     

> Chapter One |Planting Healthy Air |19

# Chapter 2 

Photo © iStock/Kryczka Nature as Part of the Solution 

Increasingly, cities are beginning to recognize that nature can be part of the solution to problems of air pollution 

and excess heat. In this section, we first describe the multifaceted benefits that nature can provide, with a 

particular focus on the benefits that trees can provide, whether in parks or along streets. We then describe in detail 

what the scientific evidence tells us about how trees affect particulate matter and ambient temperature. Finally, 

we discuss the knowledge gaps that remain, and describe how this report is meant to overcome them. 

## Nature provides many benefits 

Nature benefits urban dwellers in many ways (Table 2), and these benefits are often called  ecosystem services ,26  “the 

components of nature, directly enjoyed, consumed, or used to yield human well-being.” 27  This report focuses on two 

particular services: the way nature can purify the air and the way it can reduce ambient (outdoor) air temperatures. 

Nevertheless, any natural intervention supplies a whole portfolio of ecosystem service benefits, and the total value of 

the whole portfolio must be considered to account for the complete value of the natural intervention. 13 

Ecosystem service  Description 

Aesthetic Benefits  The presence of trees and parks increases people’s perception of beauty, and thus their happiness. This benefit has 

monetary value; for example, homes with street trees in front are worth significantly more money. 

Recreation  Greenspace is often used for recreation—everything from walking to playing sports to simply relaxing. 

Physical Health  Greenspace is used for recreation, and recreation improves people’s health. 

Mental Health  Research shows that interacting with nature decreases stress and increases focus. 

Spiritual value and sense of place  What would New York City be without Central Park? Greenspace often plays an important role in people’s spiritual life and 

appreciation for their city. 

Biodiversity  The presence of trees and parks helps provide a habitat for biodiversity. 

Erosion prevention  Trees and other vegetation reduce erosion by stabilizing soil. 

Stormwater mitigation  Trees and wetlands, whether constructed or natural, can help increase infiltration of stormwater and filter pollutants out of it. 

Mitigating flood risk  By slowing the movement of stormwater downstream, trees and wetlands can reduce localized flooding risk. Within 

floodplains, natural habitat provide a place for floodwaters to go, slowing the movement of floodwater downstream. 

Coastal protection  Along coastlines, natural habitats such as mangrove forests offer protection from rising seas. 

Air purification (particulates, ozone)  The focus of this report: trees reduce air pollution concentrations. 

Shade and heat wave mitigation  The focus of this report: trees reduce ambient air temperatures. 

Table 2. Nature in cities has a lot of benefits to those in cities.  Above is a listing of common ecosystem service benefits that street trees or parks within cities provide. 

There are myriad different ecosystem services, and ecologists often use a simple categorization first used in the 

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, which tried to catalog the state of the world’s ecosystem services in the 

early 2000s. 28  One category of ecosystem services is provisioning services—the products people obtain from 

ecosystems such as food, fuel, or fiber. Ecosystem services in this category are not listed in Table 2, for the simple 

reason that many provisioning services occur in more rural areas, and their products are then transported to the 

city center. However, there is burgeoning interest in urban agriculture in many cities, because consumers feel local 

food tastes better, gives them a greater connection to nature, or is better for the environment. 

Similarly, one of the most important provisioning services for cities is providing sufficient quantity of water. 

Municipalities supply water to their residents, who need water for drinking, sanitation, cleaning, and irrigating     

> Chapter Two |Planting Healthy Air |21

landscaping, among many other uses. Water is also crucial for energy production, particularly the cooling of 

thermoelectric plants. Most cities source their water from outside (usually from upstream of) their boundaries, so 

the maintenance or creation of natural habitat within urban boundaries is unlikely to positively affect urban drinking 

water provision. It is worth remembering that the strategy of source watershed protection is one commonly used 

by cities, which one study estimated could have a positive return on investment for more than one in four cities. 29 

However, in practice, degradation of source watersheds is widespread and is estimated to cost the world’s cities $5.4 

billion annually in increased water treatment costs. 30 

Another category of ecosystem services recognized by the MEA is cultural services defined as the nonmaterial 

benefits people obtain from ecosystems. The aesthetic benefits, for example, of natural areas can be very important 

to urban dwellers. 13  Whether it is street trees, urban parks, or a view of beautiful mountains, these aesthetics 

considerations have demonstrated quantified value to the well-being of those in cities. Recreation opportunities for 

urban residents are another important benefit of urban natural areas, as is the potential value of natural areas near 

and far as tourist destinations. There are important health benefits urban residents obtain by being near natural 

areas, including reductions in obesity 31  and increases in mental health. 32  Street trees can also contribute to recreation, 

by making it more pleasant to work, and can also make a street a more fulfilling and social place, helping build 

connections among people in the neighborhood. 

Another category of the MEA is regulating services, the benefits people obtain from the regulation of ecosystem 

function. For instance, in riparian systems, natural floodplains play an important role in allowing flood waters to 

spread out, lessening peak flows and reducing flooding risk in downstream urban areas. Similarly, some natural 

coastal habitats like wetland, oyster reefs, mangroves, and coral reefs may mitigate the risk of flooding to cities during 

storms. Many cities are also increasingly using “green infrastructure” or “natural infrastructure” to reduce the amount 

of stormwater entering city stormwater systems, or to filter out pollutants from stormwater. This ecosystem service 

has real value for cities that have a regulatory requirement to avoid water pollution. 

The purification of the air by trees and the mitigation of air temperatures are also examples of regulating services, 

ones discussed in detail in the following section.  While we will not mention co-benefits (the other ecosystem services 

that occur with any natural intervention) much for the remainder of the report, please remember that they occur and can be 

quite large.  For instance, the  National Tree Benefit Calculator , based off the I-Tree software, 33, 34  provides rough first 

estimates of the economic value of urban trees. In general, the total economic value of a tree is frequently more than 

20 times the value specifically for air quality, with stormwater mitigation and aesthetic value for property owners 

being especially important. 

For purification of air and mitigation of air temperature, trees are generally more important than other types of plants 

(see discussion below). However, the amount of tree cover that cities currently have varies widely, so different cities 

have different endowments of ecosystem services to start with. Part of this is climatic: In parts of the world where 

trees are the natural land cover type, a greater proportion of cities also tends to be forested. In contrast, in grassland 

or desert biomes, unless trees are specifically planted, they will not occur widely (see Box 1 for a discussion of how 

aridity limits tree planting). Part of the global variation in urban tree cover, however, is a choice. Historically, cities in 

the United States and Europe have invested more in tree cover, 13  which is reflected in Map 4.     

> Forest Cover 2010 (%)
> > 25% 20 - 25 15 - 20 10 - 15 < 10
> Map 4. The forest cover (%) in cities globally in 2010.
> 22 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Two

## Box 1: Water and limitations on tree planting 

This report focuses on trees and the potential they hold for cities looking to clean and cool their air. Of course, many things 

are needed for tree planting to occur. Space must be available, which can be a challenge in dense urban environments. 

In our analysis, we have strived to set realistic street tree-planting targets, setting targets for tree cover that at least 

5 percent of streets in similar cities already have obtained. Tree planting and maintenance also take money and staff 

resources, which many cities may struggle to obtain. 

Perhaps foremost among the limiting factors in hyper-arid or arid climates is water (Map 5). In these climates, planted 

trees may require frequent additional water (irrigation) to survive. The amount of irrigation required varies greatly, 

depending on the tree planted. For instance, in Phoenix (an arid climate), plants like cottonwoods  (Populus  spp. ) that are 

adapted to river valleys can consume large quantities of water, whereas some trees adapted to xeric sites, like hackberries 

(Celtis  spp. ) or acacias  (Acacia  spp. ),  can have much lower water use. In semi-arid climates, trees may only need irrigation 

during establishment or during periods of extreme drought, but some level of care is still needed to make sure water use 

is acceptable. Climate change will potentially also change rainfall patterns in many cities, and should be considered when 

deciding what trees to plant.  

> Aridity Zone
> Hyper-arid Arid Semi-arid Dry sub-humid Humid
> Map 5. The aridity zone of cities in our report.

In this report, we decided to consider all 245 cities in our sample as candidates for tree planting, regardless of their 

climate zone. We did this since many cities in arid and semi-arid environments do plant trees, and may have sufficient 

water sources to allow for irrigation of street trees. However, our street tree-planting targets are set based on the tree 

cover percentage that at least 5 percent of streets in that biome have obtained. This means that our street tree-planting 

targets are less aggressive in arid environments than in humid environments, reflecting the reality that most arid cities 

have relatively low tree cover.  We recommend that all hyper-arid, arid, and semi-arid cities using the results of this report 

carefully consider the water implications before any new tree planting.     

> Chapter Two |Planting Healthy Air |23

## Trees and air purification 

Trees and other natural vegetation affect air quality in several complicated ways. The discussion in this section 

focuses on the effect of trees on particulate matter. It is worth noting that trees also can mitigate ground-level 

ozone concentrations under certain conditions, 35  and can also play an important role in absorbing other pollutants. 

Conceptually, there are three processes studied 

in the literature related to PM concentration and 

trees (Figure 7). First, there is the incoming airflow, 

which carries a certain concentration of PM (μg/ 

m³). Second, the incoming airflow passes through 

the canopy, and a fraction of the PM is removed. 

Note that some fraction of the incoming airflow is 

deflected instead of passing through the canopy, 

which can result in locally higher concentrations of 

PM upwind of a tree. Proper design and location of 

plantings can ensure that this local concentration 

does not occur in inappropriate places where it 

might put people at risk. Third, the cleaner air exits 

the canopy and continues moving downwind. Over 

some distance, this cleaner air mixes with other air 

that didn’t pass through the canopy (redilution), 

and the concentration of PM approaches the 

average concentration for the region. 

PM removal by tree canopy 

PM is removed by plants through a process known as dry deposition. Dry deposition is when particles in the 

atmosphere deposit themselves on a surface, decreasing the atmospheric concentration of PM. 36  Much of the fine 

fraction (PM 2.5 ) becomes permanently incorporated into leaf wax or cuticle, while a portion of the coarse fraction 

is resuspended as a function of wind speed. 37, 38  The remainder of the coarse fraction is eventually washed off 

to the ground by precipitation. 39-42  It is quite clear from the scientific literature that dry deposition of PM occurs, but 

studies differ on how much PM tree canopies remove. 

One key parameter controlling how much PM is removed is the concentration of the pollutant: At higher 

atmospheric concentrations of PM, the rate of dry deposition or absorption is greater. Another is the leaf area: 

More leaf area offers more surface area on which dry deposition or absorption can take place. Finally, the amount 

of mixing of the atmosphere matters as well, with better mixing associated with more canopy removal of PM. 

As part of this study, we reviewed published literature on trees and their canopy’s removal of PM (see Methods). A 

number of studies 43-49  directly measure the fraction of PM removed by street trees (Figure 8). In this report, we set a 

Medium impact scenario at the average of reported canopy removal of PM. To capture the uncertainty in this fraction of 

removal in our global analysis, we set High and Low impact scenarios at ±1 standard deviation from the mean.               

> 10 020 30 40 50 60 Low impact scenario Medium impact scenario High impact scenario Cavanagh et al. (2009)* Mitchell and Maher (2009) Cowherd et al. (2006)* Bealey et al. (2007) Tiwary et al. (2006) Tiwary et al. (2008) Maher et al. (2013)
> Figure 8. Empirical measures of PM 10 concentration reduction near urban trees. Dashed lines show the three scenarios of Low, Medium, and High impact used in this
> global analysis.
> PM Removal by Tree Canopy Blocked Airflow PM in Airflow PM Redilution
> Figure 7. Diagram of PM removal by trees. Illustration: © Mackinzie Jones.
> 24 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Two

## Box 2: Deposition velocity box 

The literature on dry deposition often summarizes the PM removal rate in terms of deposition velocity (v d, measured 

in cm s -1 ), with greater deposition velocity meaning that overall removal will be greater. Most commonly, studies have 

measured deposition velocity in closed forest stands or in rural settings. A relatively small number of studies 40 , 41 , 50  have 

directly measured deposition velocity in an urban setting. 

Measured deposition velocity in cities clearly varies greatly, by species as well as by type of site (Figure 9). This study focuses 

on roadside vegetation, which our literature review found had a mean deposition velocity of 3.0 cm s -1  (see Methods section 

for more detail). It is interesting to note that commonly used models of PM deposition use PM deposition velocities reported 

from older, non-urban study sites that generally have lower deposition velocities 43  or from laboratory experiments that may not 

accurately represent conditions at modeled sites. For instance, many implementations of the Urban Forest Effects model (also 

called UFORE or i-Tree) 51  are based on the average PM deposition values of Lovett 1994, 52  which was 1.28 cm s -1 . This suggests 

that UFORE and i-Tree estimates may be underestimating removal by roadside vegetation by a factor of 2 or more. 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Lovett (1994), primarily rural. Used in ITree/UFORE modelling PM 10 deposition velocities to urban vegetation (cm/s) Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Poplar, urban roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Sweet chestnut, urban non-roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Poplar, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Willow, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Elder, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Elm, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Sycamore, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Horse chestnut, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Ash, urban non-roadside Langner et al. (2011), Small-leaved lime, urban roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Field maple, urban roadside Langner et al. (2011), Norway maple, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Birch, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Lime, urban roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Lime, urban non-roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Corsican pine, urban non-roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Beech, urban non-roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Whitebeam, urban roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Leyland cypress, urban non-roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Field maple, urban non-roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Corsican pine, urban roadside Mitchell et al. (2010), Birch, urban roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Whitebeam, urban non-roadside Freer-Smith et al. (2005), Leyland cypress, urban roadside 

Figure 9. Empirical measurements of PM deposition velocity for urban trees.  The dashed line shows the average deposition velocity reported by Lovett (1994), 

which looked primarily at rural and closed-canopy forests. Note that it is generally lower than the reported value for urban trees. This is notable since Lovett’s deposition 

value is widely used in the i-Tree/UFORE family of models. 

There are other reasons to think that some modeled estimates of PM removal in the scientific literature may be 

underestimates. For example, air pollutant removal models such as the UFORE/i-Tree model 53 generally use ambient 

pollutant concentrations reported by U.S. EPA air-quality monitors as a key input. Because those monitors are often 

located away from major emission sources, 54 and because concentrations of PM and many other air pollutants decay to 

urban background levels over fairly short distances, 55 reported concentrations at monitoring sites may not adequately 

capture PM variability in an urban area 56 and may underestimate PM levels in areas located closer to emission sources 57

as well as citywide average concentrations. 58 With removal of many pollutants by trees being a linear function of ambient 

concentrations, all else being equal, such a systematic bias in concentration estimates may result in a substantial 

underestimate of modeled removal by vegetation in areas near emission sources 44  and citywide average removal. 54    

> Chapter Two |Planting Healthy Air |25

Given this active discussion in the literature about the appropriate deposition velocity values for use in process-

level models of dry deposition, and because the scope of our analysis prevented running such models for all 

245 cities in our analysis, we decided to base our PM reduction estimates on empirical measurements of PM 

reductions in urban settings. Accordingly, we didn’t use estimates of deposition velocity directly in our calculation, 

instead developing the approach described below. Note, however, that Kroeger et al. (in review) compared our 

methodology to the total removal that would be found using a deposition velocity approach, and found the two 

methods to give similar ranges of total removal. 

Redilution 

Our results suggest that tree planting and other vegetative screens have benefits primarily locally. Most reductions 

in PM concentrations occur within 30 meters, with very little reduction in concentration beyond 300 meters of the 

installation. This horizontal distance depends on wind speed (advection) and turbulent mixing (diffusion) within 

the urban canopy layer (approx. up to roof height), which are strongly influenced by urban surface morphology. 59 , 

> 60

The number of people who would be affected by a particular planting therefore varies depending on where it is 

placed, and how many people live close by. 

Within this impacted zone, significant reductions in PM are possible. For instance, Maher et al. 43  found that a row 

of roadside street trees lowered  indoor  PM 10  concentrations in houses along the street by 50 percent. Mitchell and 

Maher 44 find that a single tree lowered PM 10  concentrations behind it by 15 percent; similarly, Bealey et al. 45  found 

that PM concentrations could be reduced by 20 percent. 

Tree planting is but one tool in the toolbox of municipalities seeking to reduce PM concentrations, and should 

be seen as a complement rather than a replacement to other strategies to reduce PM.  A large body of literature 

suggests trees can provide localized but meaningful reductions in PM.     

> Photo © Kevin Arnold
> 26 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Two

## Box 3: Louisville Green Heart Study 

Louisville, Kentucky, is in many ways a study in contrast. Just 15 miles to the south of downtown lies Jefferson Memorial 

Forest, at 6,500 acres one of the largest urban forests in the country. All told, Louisville boasts more than 120 parks. 

Manufacturing is booming, and the city has recovered nearly all the jobs lost during the Great Recession. At the same time, 

Louisville lies in the middle of the “coronary valley:” a multi-state region with twice the national average of cardiac disease 

and cardiac deaths. Those illnesses carry a $660 million annual price tag. Louisville ranks 17th out of 17 peer cities in air 

quality, it has the fastest-growing urban heat island in the nation, and it is one of the worst cities in the country to live in 

if you have asthma. A recent study demonstrated that living in Louisville is the equivalent of living with a smoker for four 

months out of the year. Compounding the problem has been the loss of tree cover, despite all the parks. One study found 

that over the last 10 years, Louisville has lost 150 trees per day, or 54,000 per year—equivalent to 800 acres of annual 

canopy loss. Because of the devastating impacts from a non-native forest pest, the emerald ash borer, and Louisville 

will lose another 1.5 million trees over the next 10 years. The problems of poor health and loss of tree cover are both 

particularly severe in economically disadvantaged areas of the city. Reversing tree canopy decline in Louisville, however, 

will cost hundreds of millions of dollars in the coming decades. The good news is that local communities are looking for 

ways to reverse the trend of declining tree cover and improve the air they breathe. Scientists are now working hand in 

hand with these communities to develop strategies that not only could improve the quality of life of Louisville residents, 

but also could serve as a global model for how urban greenspace can reduce air pollution and, in turn, cardiovascular 

disease around the world. The Green Heart Project is a six-year agreement between the Nature Conservancy and the 

University of Louisville School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, through which the Conservancy will work with local 

communities to plant trees and other vegetation across Louisville, and University researchers will conduct a ground-

breaking longitudinal study to determine the health effects of the neighborhood greening. The project will produce a 

rigorous evaluation of the link between urban vegetation/greenspace and cardiovascular disease and produce new 

knowledge relevant to the identification of the environmental determinants of health. The Green Heart Project will focus 

on establishing a scientific link between trees and neighborhood greenness and human health. Demonstrating such a 

link in unambiguous terms will help develop new ways to assess the value of the services that nature provides. Proper 

accounting of these services will catalyze improved public policies that incentivize using nature to achieve better health 

outcomes and increased public and private investment for conservation projects in cities throughout the world. The 

study seeks to answer the following key questions: 

• What types of plants are best for cleaning and cooling city air? Where and in what amounts would plants be most 

effective? 

• Can nature filter and reduce damaging fine particulate matter and gaseous pollutants from neighborhoods effectively 

enough to improve health outcomes? 

• What is the cost of greening a neighborhood? Can we reduce the healthcare cost (e.g., the rates of hospital admissions 

and the length of stay) by using nature-based planning tools—thus demonstrating a return on investments in 

neighborhood greenspace? 

• Can we determine how increasing greenspace affects other critical measures of neighborhood health (stress, crime, 

social cohesion, educational performance, etc.)? 

• Can outcomes of this project inform private sector healthcare policy to place emphasis on investing in nature as 

preventative medicine, thus injecting additional capital for nature? 

The Green Heart Project began in January 2016. Researchers developed site selection criteria, identified candidate 

neighborhoods, and began the design of the clinical study. Key steps were conducting baseline assessments of the 

candidate neighborhoods' health, air quality, demographics, and eco-system services, and engaging communities in the 

project. The Conservancy will map the forest cover and species composition of all shade trees in the project area and will 

work to conserve all ash species in the study neighborhood threatened by the emerald ash borer, as saving trees is less 

expensive than planting new ones. The Green Heart Project is a unique and unprecedented effort to explore and explain 

the many links between nature and human health. The extensive data generated by the study will be critical in delineating 

the contribution of psychological, behavioral, and environmental factors to the relationship between neighborhood 

greenness and disease risk. The results of this project will also provide a new understanding of how urban greenspaces 

affect neighborhood livability, community cohesion, economic activity, and geographic resilience.     

> Chapter Two |Planting Healthy Air |27

## Trees and temperature reduction 

There are two conceptual stages of how trees cool air temperatures (Figure 10). First, depending on the width of 

the tree canopy, there is a cooling intensity, which is defined as the degree Celsius reduction relative to the average 

temperature outside the patch. Generally, the larger the canopy the greater the cooling intensity. Second, this 

cooler air disperses away from the patch, and slowly mixes with other not-cooled air. Generally, the farther from 

the canopy, the closer the temperature gets to the average temperature in the city. 

Cooling intensity 

Trees and other vegetation can mitigate 

extreme air temperatures in two ways. 12 , 61 

First, vegetative cover shades impervious 

surfaces and prevents the sun’s rays from 

hitting them, thus preventing heat storage 

(ΔQ S) and later release, which would 

contribute to the urban heat island effect. 

Trees that are tall enough to create a large 

shaded area under their canopy are more 

useful than short vegetation. Trees also 

transpire water as they grow, increasing 

latent heat storage (Q E)- essentially some 

of the sun’s energy goes to converting water 

from its liquid to vapor form (latent heat), 

rather than increasing air temperature 

(sensible heat). From the perspective of 

mitigating extreme temperatures, this 

latent heat storage is a good thing since 

it prevents an increase in air temperature, 

although in some dry climates the loss of water from planted trees may put a strain on scarce water supplies. 

Both the transpirative cooling 62  and the shading effect 63  of trees individually can substantially lower maximum 

summer daytime air temperatures in streets at pedestrian level. However, shading of sealed surfaces under tree 

canopy has a particularly critical effect on pedestrian thermal comfort because it dramatically lowers surface 

temperatures 64 , 65  and the mean radiant temperature to which pedestrians are exposed. e.g.,  63 , 65-67  Mean radiant 

temperature is a function of the heat fluxes (short and longwave radiation) a body receives from surrounding 

surfaces 68  and is the key temperature component determining human thermal comfort in summer. 68-70      

> Figure 10. Temperature mitigation by trees. Illustration: © Mackinzie Jones.
> Canopy Width Average Temperature Cooling Intensity Cooling Distance Average Temperature
> 28 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Two

The intensity of the cooling effect of urban trees can vary substantially among tree species 71 , 72  and with tree size as 

a result of differences in foliage density and leaf area index (LAI), leaf thickness, orientation and light permeability, 

and photosynthetic and water use rates. Cooling intensity shows a strong positive relationship with canopy area 

and density. e.g.,  71 , 73 

The summer daytime cooling effect of individual trees, street trees or larger treed areas has been quantified in a 

large number of experimental studies in temperate, subtropical, and tropical regions. 74  There are a large number 

of studies that look at urban parks (see Methods section for a list), but because this report is focused on street 

trees, we based our study on direct estimates of cooling intensity of street trees 62 , 64 , 65 , 70 , 75-79  (Figure 11). Cooling 

intensity varies from 0.4° C (0.7° F) to 3.0° C (5.4° F) depending on the site and the time of day. In this report, we 

set a Medium impact scenario at the average of reported cooling intensity. To capture the uncertainty in the intensity 

of cooling in our global analysis, we set High and Low impact scenarios at ±1 standard deviation from the mean. 

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 Low impact scenario Medium impact scenario High impact scenario Ng et al. 2012, 16 pecent urban tree canopy Gromke et al. (2015), mean reduction Dimoudi and Nikolopoulou (2003), at 10 meters downwind Streiling and Matzarakis (2003), single tree Streiling and Matzarakis (2003), cluster of trees Ng et al. 2012, 34 pecent urban tree canopy Shashua-Bar et al. (2011), measurement 2 Ali-Toudert and Mayer (2007), E/W orientation Sanusi et al. (2016), mid-afternoon Gromke et al. (2015), max reduction Shashua-Bar and Hoffman (2000), urban canyon Shashua-Bar et al. (2011), measurement 1 Ali-Toudert and Mayer (2007), N/S orientation Dimoudi and Nikolopoulou (2003), at street tree Sanusi et al. (2016), noon Shashua-Bar and Hoffman (2000), urban roadside Vailshery et al. (2014), urban roadsides 

Figure 11  . Empirical measures of temperature reduction near urban trees.  Dashed lines show the three scenarios of Low, Medium, and High impact used in this global analysis.     

> Photo © Alija
> Chapter Two |Planting Healthy Air |29

Cooling distance 

In our literature review, we paid special attention to the spatial zone over which cooling occurs. The cooling 

effect extends into surrounding areas primarily through advection 80 , 81  with its reach a positive function of canopy 

area but mediated by airflows and temperature gradients with surroundings. 71 , 80  Most studies find that the 

maximum cooling distance of urban forest patches or partially forested parks on sunny summer days extends to 

approximately one park width from the park, 82 , 83  though shorter or much longer, 70 , 73  distances are possible. For 

street trees, the likely effect on temperatures is strongest within 30 meters of a tree. 

As in the case of PM mitigation, tree planting should be seen as complementary tool to other ways to reduce 

ambient air temperature, rather than a replacement. A large amount of literature suggests trees can provide 

localized but meaningful reductions in temperature. 

## The goals of this report 

As the above review of the literature shows, there is evidence that trees and other vegetation could play a 

role in cooling and cleaning city air, helping to make cities healthier and more pleasant places to live. There 

are currently several studies and existing models that measure the ability of individual trees or forest stands 

to capture pollutants and cool city streets, but the scope of this conservation strategy is still unknown. The 

core idea of this report is that despite the scientific literature, it remains difficult for government agencies, 

health officials, municipal staff, and foundations to assess whether it is worthwhile to consider nature as part 

of the solution to the problems of particulate matter pollution and excess heat. Our hope in launching work 

on this report was that a systematic application of existing data to a broad set of cities can show us  how 

much nature is needed  to make a difference. 

Major questions that guided our research were the following: 

• What fraction of the air-quality problem can vegetation solve? 

• Which cities can natural infrastructure help the most? 

• How much vegetation is enough to achieve meaningful health benefits? 

• How much investment, in dollar terms, is needed? 

• Where is natural infrastructure a cost-effective investment, relative to common built infrastructure alternatives? 

The Nature Conservancy conducted—in coordination with C40—the first global survey of cities designed to 

quantify the potential role for nature in making air cleaner and cooler. We collected geospatial information 

on forest and land cover, PM 2.5  pollutant concentration, and population density for 245 cities, and then used 

established relationships in the literature to estimate the scope of current and future trees to make urban air 

healthier. These 245 cities currently house around 910 million people, or about a quarter of the world’s urban 

population.     

> 30 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Two

# Investing $100 million 

# annually in tree planting could provide 

# 77 million people with cooler cities and 

# 68 million people with cleaner air. 

> Photo © iStock, Sean Pavone

# Chapter 3 

Photo © TNC (Devan King) The Importance of Targeting 

## Trees already are providing large benefits 

The current stock of trees in our study cities is already delivering real reductions to PM 2.5  (Table 3). We estimate 

that trees are currently providing on average 1.3 million people at least a 10 μg/m³ reduction, primarily in cities 

that have high ambient concentrations of PM 2.5 . This is the estimate for our Medium removal scenario, which 

represents the central estimate of deposition velocities from the literature. However, there is uncertainty in this 

parameter, which we consider by looking at Low and High removal scenarios. In the Low scenario, no one is getting 

at least a 10 μg/m³ reduction, while in the High scenario there are 6.1 million people getting at least a 10 μg/m³ 

reduction. Similarly, we estimate that 10.2 million people (1.0 to 15.4) have at least a 5 μg/m³ reduction due to the 

current trees in their city, and 52.1 million people (23.8 to 63.1) at least a 1 μg/m³ reduction in PM 2.5 .

Population (millions)  Proportion of urban population (%) 

High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low 

> 10  μg/m³ reduction  6.1  1.3  0.0  0.7%  0.1%  0.0% 

> 5  μg/m³ reduction  15.4  10.2  1.0  1.7%  1.1%  0.1% 

> 1  μg/m³ reduction  63.1  52.1  23.8  6.9%  5.7%  2.6% 

Table 3. The current reduction in PM that trees provide.  Population is the total population across our sample of 245 cities, while the proportion is calculated relative to the 

912 million people who live in those cities. Information is shown for our three scenarios (High, Medium, and Low), which describe different effectiveness in trees reducing PM. 

For temperature, we estimate that the current stock of trees in our study cities is already providing 68.3 million 

people with a 1.0° C (1.8° F) reduction in summer maximum air temperatures under our Medium scenario (Table 4). 

There is some uncertainty about the magnitude of the reduction provided, which is captured in our Low and High 

scenarios. 

Population (millions)  Proportion of urban population (%) 

High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low 

> 2˚C reduction  68.3  0.0  0.0  7.5%  0.0%  0.0% 

> 1˚C reduction  68.3  68.3  0.0  7.5%  7.5%  0.0% 

> 0.5˚C reduction  68.3  68.3  68.3  7.5%  7.5%  7.5% 

Table 4. The current reduction in temperature that street trees provide.  Population is the total population across our sample of 245 cities, while the proportion is 

calculated relative to the 912 million people who live in those cities. Information is shown for our three scenarios (High, Medium, and Low), which describe different effectiveness 

in trees reducing temperature. 

We also assessed trends over time in urban forest cover (Figure 12). We found that 26 percent of cities had a 

decline in forest cover over the period from 2000 to 2010, whereas only 16 percent of cities had an increase in 

forest cover over the time period. More than twice as many cities had a large loss in forest cover (defined as 

> 5 percent change in forest cover) than had a large gain. Perhaps it isn’t surprising that the general direction in 

many cities is toward a decline in forest cover, since cities continue to grow, and new development sometimes 

displaces trees.     

> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |33 Fraction of global cities

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Loss, > 5% Loss, 1-5% Little change Gain, 1-5% Change in forest cover, 2000 to 2010 Gain, > 5% 

Figure 12.  The fraction of global cities in our sample (N=245) that have a loss or gain of forest cover, from 2000 to 2010. Roughly one in four cities had either a small loss 

(19 percent of cities) or large loss (5 percent of cities). The majority of cities (60 percent) had relatively little change in forest cover. 

However, this average decline in forest cover masks significant variation among cities (Map 6). Many cities in 

Northern Europe and parts of the United States appear to have gained in forest cover. In contrast, other parts of 

the world had cities that generally lost forest cover, such as southern Europe and the south of the United States. 

Change in Forest Cover 2000 to 2010 

> Gain: > 5% Gain: 1–5% Little change Loss: 1–5% Loss: > 5%

Map 6. Change in forest cover from 2000 to 2010, for cities globally.  Change is calculated as percent change between the two time periods, (Cover2010 – Cover2000)/ 

Cover2000. For instance, a city that has had a 5 percent decline has had a loss of 1 in 20 (5 percent) of its trees. 

Those cities that are losing forest cover are also losing ecosystem service provision from those trees, whether their 

aesthetic beauty or their ability to clean and cool the air. While we didn’t explicitly estimate that loss of ecosystem 

service provision in this report, cities that are losing canopy cover should expect some negative impact on air 

quality and ambient air quality.     

> 34 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Three

## Box 4: Pests and pathogens 

Urban trees face significant threats from invasive insects and pathogens, many of which have moved around the world 

through global trade. These pests and pathogens can spread rapidly through multiple pathways such as transportation of 

nursery stock and the movement of infested or diseased firewood. 

In the United States, particularly damaging invasive insects and pathogens have led to considerable decline of iconic 

American tree species such as elms  (Ulmus  spp. ), chestnuts  (Castanea  spp. ), and most recently, ashes  (Fraxinus  spp. ),

especially across the Northeastern and Midwestern United States. While federal and state resources are available initially, 

as an infestation or epidemic matures and as these trees die—in some cases rapidly, others over the course of two or 

more years—the burden of management becomes a municipality’s for trees on public property, or a homeowner’s for 

trees on private property. 84  The limitations of municipal tree budgets and the at-times prohibitive costs of tree removals 

for homeowners has created a deficit in the level of response needed to significantly reduce the risk to people and 

property, posed by dead or decaying trees. 

A number of strategies can prevent or slow the spread of tree pests and diseases. For example, stricter border 

control mechanisms can prevent the importation of diseased/infested plant material and packaging. Additionally, 

the public can being trained on how to identify and report the initial signs of pest or disease presence on the trees 

in their community, which gives forest managers the opportunity to rapidly respond and potentially limit canopy loss.     

> Emerald ash borer. Credit: US Forest Service
> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |35

## The importance of targeting—within cities 

Our results suggest that targeting—putting trees in the right places to benefit people—is key. Within cities, there is 

substantial variation in the driving variables that affect the ability of trees to remove particulate matter or mitigate 

ambient air temperatures. For instance, in Washington, D.C., patterns of land use change from neighborhood 

to neighborhood (Map 7). The city’s geography is dominated by two rivers, the Potomac and Anacostia, that 

merge and flow south to the Chesapeake Bay. A large protected area, Rock Creek Park, runs north-south in the 

city. Neighborhoods to the west of this park are generally at lower population density, and have higher tree cover, 

than neighborhoods east of the park. Particulate matter concentrations, by contrast, are highest north and east 

in Washington, D.C. Population density is also highest in these neighborhoods. In contrast, the center of the city, 

along the National Mall and the Capitol Building, residential populations are near zero.   

> Non-forest Forest
> Population (people/km)
> 00 - 2,500 2,500 - 5,000 5,000 - 10,000 10,000 - 20,000 > 20,000
> Land Cover WASHINGTON, D.C.
> Barren Land Cultivated Crops Deciduous Forest Developed Wetlands Evergreen Forest Grassland/Herbaceous Mixed Forest Open Water Pasture/Hay Shrub/Scrub 04km
> PM 2.5
> μg/m
> < 8.8 8.8 - 9.0 9.0 - 9.2 9.2 - 9.4 > 9.4

Map 7. Driving variables that affect the calculated return on investment (ROI) of tree planting,  for one city, Washington, D.C. 

36  | Planting Healthy Air  | Chapter Three In our study, we pulled together the most detailed information possible for 27 U.S. cities and seven Chinese 

cities. For this set of “calibration” cities, we also created high-resolution (2-meter) maps of forest cover. Our 

goal with the calibration analysis was to understand how important these fine-scale patterns were. Then, for all 

245 cities in our global analysis, we assembled the best globally available data for analogous data layers. We 

took this two-step approach because it was not logistically feasible to develop high-resolution data sets for all 

245 cities in our global analysis. 

For instance, for forest cover we used 30-meter forest cover estimates derived from Landsat imagery for our global 

analysis. We compared the results for the calibration cities against the results for our global analysis in order 

to develop scaling functions. High-resolution forest cover estimates are statistically correlated with the lower 

resolution Landsat-derived forest cover estimates (Figure 13). What this means is that for our global analysis, we 

can statistically correct for any biases present in the lower-resolution data (see Methods appendix for details). 

> y = 1.1012x + 5.1348 R = 0.60144 High-resolution forest cover (%)

UMd Forest Cover 2010 (%) 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35  

> Figure 13. In 34 calibration cities, we developed high-resolution 2-meter forest cover maps that can accurately measure street tree cover. This high-resolution information is not
> available for most cities globally, and for our global analysis of 245 cities we used 30-meter estimates of percent forest cover, derived from Landsat imagery. However, forest cover
> as estimated at the two resolutions is correlated, so using the globally available data, we can calculate an accurate estimate of “true” tree cover.

Using all these input layers, we then built a model to estimate the return on investment (ROI) of tree planting, in 

terms of its impact on particulate matter or ambient air temperature. Please keep in mind that while we focused 

our ROI analysis on two services (reduction in PM and temperature), trees provide a multitude of other benefits 

that may be of great value, as well.     

> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |37

Our results show substantial variation within cities, with the best neighborhoods for natural infrastructure 

investment often having two orders of magnitude greater ROI in tree planting than the least suitable 

neighborhoods. Targeting the neighborhoods with the highest mitigation impacts becomes crucial (Map 8). 

Generally, for PM, those neighborhoods are characterized by higher population density and thus more people 

who will benefit from cleaner air. They are also characterized by higher concentrations of PM 2.5  and concomitant 

higher PM removal by trees.   

> Map 8. Spatial patterns of estimated return on investment of planting street trees to reduce PM, for Washington D.C. The top panel is from a detailed, street-level
> “calibration” calculation we conducted for 35 cities globally. The bottom panel shows the “global” analysis that we conducted for 245 cities globally, where the minimum mapping
> unit is a 1 km 2neighborhood. Results are highly correlated, giving us confidence that our global analysis is capturing the major spatial patterns in each city.

Map 8 compares the ROI estimates for particulate matter removal from our calibration analysis (left panel) and 

our global analysis (right panel) for Washington, D.C. Note that while the ROI estimates are, of course, more 

spatially detailed in the calibration analysis, the general neighborhood-level pattern of where you would want to 

invest is captured by the global analysis. Generally, the neighborhoods with the highest ROI of investment are in 

the higher-density neighborhoods east of Rock Creek Park, which also have some of the higher concentrations 

of particulate matter. They are also the neighborhoods with some of the lowest current tree cover, so they have 

relatively low current ecosystem service provision. 

There are similar neighborhood-level patterns in ROI of tree planting for air temperature mitigation, with ROI 

varying among neighborhoods by two orders of magnitude. The ideal high-ROI neighborhood would have high 

population density (or a concentration of sensitive populations) leading to larger number of people benefiting 

from heat reduction by trees. Higher-population density neighborhoods generally score higher, simply because 

any reduction in ambient air temperature benefits a larger group of residents.  See the Case Study section below for 

neighborhood-level maps of ROI for 15 major global cities, or check out the website for this report  nature.org/healthyair ,

which presents geospatial information for all cities considered in this report. 

Our review of the literature suggests that sensitive sites, such as schools and hospitals, should also be a focus 

of targeting. Because populations (young children or the elderly) that use these sites are most likely to suffer 

negative health effects from air pollution or high temperature, it makes sense to concentrate tree planting around 

these facilities. Young children, for instance, are especially sensitive to asthma, while the elderly are at increased 

risk of negative health impacts from exposure to extreme heat. In our global analysis, we estimated how much tree 

planting could help schools and hospitals globally, drawing on (incomplete) maps of these facilities present in the 

Open Street Map.         

> Calibration PM ROI WASHINGTON, D.C.
> Higher Lower 02km
> Global PM ROI
> Higher Lower 02km
> 38 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Three

Proportion of schools (%)  Proportion of hospitals (%) 

High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low 

> 10  μg/m³ reduction  1.3%  0.2%  0.0%  1.8%  0.0%  0.0% 

> 5  μg/m³ reduction  5.0%  1.9%  0.1%  9.0%  3.1%  0.0% 

> 1  μg/m³ reduction  91.6%  73.3%  21.2%  89.9%  74.4%  31.9% 

Table 5.  The maximum reduction in PM that street trees could provide to schools and hospitals. Information is shown for our three scenarios (High, Medium, and Low), which 

describe different effectiveness in trees reducing PM. 

Table 5 shows the potential reductions in particulate matter that additional new tree planting could cause in the 

ambient air concentrations just around the facility. Only a small fraction (less than 2 percent of facilities globally) 

could have large reductions, defined as greater than a 10  μg/m³ reduction in concentration of PM 2.5 . These large 

reductions mostly occur in cities with currently high levels of PM 2.5 . However, around nine in 10 schools and 

hospitals could get a modest reduction, greater than a 1  μg/m³ reduction. Similarly, trees have the potential to 

deliver a modest temperature reduction of 1° C (1.8° F) to more than nine in 10 schools and hospitals globally, 

under our Medium scenario (Table 6). 

Proportion of schools (%)  Proportion of hospitals (%) 

High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low 

> 10  μg/m³ reduction  1.3%  0.2%  0.0%  1.8%  0.0%  0.0% 

> 5 μg/m³ reduction  5.0%  1.9%  0.1%  9.0%  3.1%  0.0% 

> 1  μg/m³ reduction  91.6%  73.3%  21.2%  89.9%  74.4%  31.9% 

Table 6. The maximum reduction in temperature that street trees could provide,  if streets were planted up to a reasonable target density. This maximal scenario would 

involve an annual investment of $3.2 billion and would benefit to some degree 220 million people, so around $15 per person. In the table below, population is the total population 

benefited across our sample of 245 cities, while the proportion is calculated relative to the 912 million people who live in those cities. Information is shown for our three scenarios 

(High, Medium, and Low), which describe different effectiveness in trees reducing temperature.     

> Photo © iStock, JoelCarillet
> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |39

## The importance of targeting—among cities 

There is also substantial variation among cities in the potential for trees to reduce particulate matter (Map 9). 

Cities with high population density generally have higher median ROI, as do cities with higher concentrations of 

particulate matter. An additional factor that varies among cities is the cost of tree planting; all else being equal, 

cities with lower tree planting and maintenance costs have higher ROI. Generally, cities in East and South Asia 

have the highest median ROI of tree planting, as well as cities in West Africa. The United States and Europe 

score lower in terms of median ROI, simply because their particulate matter concentrations are already low by 

global standards. Note, however, that the substantial variation in ROI within cities means that  in almost any city, 

neighborhoods can be found with a high ROI of tree planting. 

Particulate Matter ROI (pop* reduction/$) 

> > 0.7 0.31 - 0.70 0.09 - 0.30 0.03 - 0.08 < 0.02

Map 9. The median return on investment (ROI) of planting street trees to reduce PM , as expressed in the reduction of PM 2.5  (μg/m³) multiplied by the number of people 

who see that reduction, divided by costs (USD$). ROI is calculated for our Medium scenario, for a hypothetical small planting of a 50-meter street segment. Cities with higher 

population densities, higher ambient concentrations of PM 2.5 , and lower planting costs have higher median ROI. Note that there is significant variation in potential ROI within 

cities, so most cities have neighborhoods within them with high PM ROI.     

> Photo © iStock, natbits
> 40 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Three

Particulate Matter ROI (pop* reduction/$) 

> Asia
> > 0.07 0.3–0.7 0.08–0.3 0.02–0.08 < 0.02

Particulate Matter ROI (pop* reduction/$)  

> Europe
> > 0.01 0.075–0.01 0.05–0.075 0.025–0.05 < 0.025 01,000km

Particulate Matter ROI (pop* reduction/$) United States  

> > 0.02 0.015–0.02 0.01–0.015 0.005–0.01 < 0.005 01,000km

The large global range in median 

ROI makes it hard for one figure to 

show all the variation among cities. 

Maps of specific regions can also 

show interesting and important 

variation in median ROI (Map 

10). Within North America (top 

panel), the high-density cities in 

the Northeast of the United States, 

such as New York, Philadelphia, 

and Baltimore, have relatively high 

median ROI from trees for PM 

reduction. Other cities that are 

relatively high density in Canada, 

such as Toronto and Montreal, 

have relatively high median ROI. 

Within Europe (middle panel), 

there is a general trend for cities in 

eastern Europe having higher ROI 

for PM mitigation than cities in 

western Europe, driven primarily by 

generally higher population density 

and concentrations of PM in the 

east. In contrast, northern European 

cities have relatively low ROI, in 

part because they have lower PM 

concentrations. Population density 

matters, as well, with large capital 

cities like Paris and Madrid having 

relatively high ROI. 

Within Asia (bottom panel), 

Indian and Chinese cities have 

some of the highest ROI from tree 

planting for PM mitigation. Cities 

in Central Asia, by contrast, have 

lower population density and thus 

lower ROI.      

> Map 10. Regional patterns of ROI of planting street trees to reduce PM, expressed as median ROI.
> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |41

The same factors drive large variance in ROI of tree planting for temperature mitigation among cities (Map 11). Not 

surprisingly, therefore, the Map 12 median ROI by cities looks similar for PM and temperature. However, cities in 

South America score relatively higher for the ROI of temperature mitigation than they do for PM mitigation.  Again, 

substantial variation within cities means even in the United States and Europe, there are neighborhoods in most cities 

with high ROI of tree planting for temperature mitigation. 

Temperature ROI (pop* reduction/$) 

> > 0.35 0.21 - 0.35 0.11 - 0.20 0.04 - 0.10 < 0.03

Map 11. The median return on investment (ROI) of planting street trees to reduce ambient air temperatures,  as expressed in the reduction of air temperature (˚C) 

multiplied by the number of people who see that reduction, divided by costs (USD$). ROI is calculated for our Medium scenario, for a hypothetical small planting of a 50-meter 

street segment. Cities with higher population densities and lower planting costs have higher median ROI. Note that there is significant variation in potential ROI within cities, so 

most cities have neighborhoods within them with high temperature ROI.     

> Photo © iStock, Blulz60
> 42 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Three

Temperature ROI (pop* reduction/$) 

Asia  

> > 0.35 0.21–0.35 0.11–0.20 0.04–0.10 < 0.03 01,000km

Temperature ROI (pop* reduction/$) 

Europe  

> > 0.08 0.06–0.08 0.04–0.06 0.02–0.04 < 0.02 01,000km

Temperature ROI (pop* reduction/$) 

United States  

> > 0.04 0.03–0.04 0.02–0.03 0.01–0.02 < 0.01 01,000km

Again, maps of specific regions 

can also show interesting and 

important variation in median 

ROI for temperature mitigation 

(Map 12). Within North America 

(top panel), the high-density 

cities in the Northeast of the 

United States (New York and 

Philadelphia, in particular) and 

eastern Canada (Toronto and 

Montreal) have relatively high 

median ROI for temperature 

mitigation. There is also moderate 

potential for tree planting for 

temperature mitigation in cities in 

the western United States. 

Within Europe (middle panel), 

there is a general trend for cities 

in eastern Europe having higher 

ROI for PM mitigation than cities 

in western Europe, driven primarily 

by the relatively high population 

density. Spanish cities look 

particularly promising, with a high 

media ROI for tree planting for 

temperature mitigation. 

Within Asia (bottom panel), Indian 

cities have some of the highest ROI 

from tree planting for temperature 

mitigation, with cities in China 

having moderate ROI. Again, cities 

in Central Asia, by contrast, have 

lower population density and thus 

lower ROI.      

> Map 12. Regional patterns of ROI of planting street trees to reduce temperature, expressed as median ROI.
> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |43

## Trees are a dual solution 

Trees provide both particulate matter and temperature mitigation (as well as a host of other co-benefits). Map 13 

shows the overlap of ROI for both particulate removal and temperature mitigation. Green cities have high ROI for 

both metrics, and are primarily located in south and east Asia, as well as west Africa, coastal South America, and 

Central America. These “win-win” cities are logical places for targeting tree-planting efforts at a global scale.  

> Higher T ROI, Higher PM ROI Higher T ROI, Higher PM ROI Lower T ROI, Higher PM ROI Lower T ROI, Higher PM ROI
> Map 13. Trees are a dual solution. Generally, cities that have higher ROI for PM reduction have higher reduction for temperature reduction (Green). The exception is
> cities in Latin America, where temperature ROI is higher but PM ROI is relatively lower (Blue), and a handful of cities in Asia, where PM ROI is higher but temperature
> ROI is relatively lower (Yellow).

## Planting guidelines for healthy air 

Cities have multiple goals when they plant trees. They want aesthetic beauty, but also want low-maintenance, 

disease-resistant trees that will be hardy in the local climate. There are also multiple different places cities plant 

trees, from crowded urban streets that are predominately pavement to more natural habitat and open space. Given 

this multitude of goals and places for trees, as well as the scope of this report, it is impossible to give specific 

recommendations about species selection or planting strategies. These specifics must be tuned to the needs of a 

local population. There are, however, some principles of tree planting for PM removal and temperature mitigation 

that can be incorporated into citys' planting plans. 

Characteristics of tree species 

Particulate matter mitigation— Tree leaves remove PM through dry deposition, and so tree species that have 

larger leaf surface area will generally remove more. A large total leaf surface area can occur because a species has 

a dense canopy, or because the leaf surface is “rough” (lots of ridges or hair), which increases the surface area 

for interception. 85  For instance, analysis of multiple tree species 86  found those that had more hair on their leaf 

surfaces, or more waxy surfaces, generally remove more PM. Another consideration is whether a tree is deciduous 

or evergreen. For the purposes of PM removal, being evergreen is a plus if PM removal is desired in the dormant 

(winter) season, when deciduous trees would be less effective. Yang and colleagues 85  provide a useful table, their 

Table 5, that lists the PM removal efficiency of the 100 most commonly used urban trees globally. Tree species 

that score high on PM removal efficiency include such common temperate species as eastern red cedar  (Juniperus 

virginiana L.) , red maple  (Acer rubrum L.) , American elm  (Ulmus americana L.) , and white poplar  (Populus alba L.) .

Some common species that score poorly for PM removal include chokecherry  (Prunus virginiana L.) , flowering 

dogwood  (Cornus florida L.) , and white ash  (Fraxinus americana L.) .    

> 44 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Three

Temperature mitigation— Trees mitigate air temperature either by shading impervious surfaces (preventing 

heat storage) or by transpiring water (transferring energy to latent heat). Therefore, tree species that have a 

high leaf area index (defined as the ratio of leaf area to ground area under canopy) will cast denser shade and 

be more effective at reducing temperatures. In temperate areas with hot summers but cool winters, deciduous 

trees may be more appropriate. They will supply shade during the hot season but allow sun through in the cold 

season. Generally, the recommendation is that trees be selected that will be appropriate for a city’s climate zone, 

including in terms of their water use, rather than specifically aiming to maximize water transpiration by trees (see 

Box on aridity and tree planting). Relatively few studies have looked at the temperature mitigation potential of 

specific species of trees, so for now cities looking to select species for temperature mitigation should select hardy, 

shade-providing trees appropriate to their climate. One interesting study in Addis Ababa 71  looked at the different 

temperature mitigation potential from different species, with eucalyptus  (Eucalyptus  spp. ) cooling more than 

cypresses  (Cupressus  spp. ), Grevillea spp., and acacias  (Acacia  spp. ). On the other hand, a study in Mexico City 72 

found that sweet gum  (Liquidambar styraciflua L.)  was significantly more effective at temperature mitigation than 

eucalyptus  (Eucalyptus  spp. ).

Types of plantings 

Major roads— Major roads can be a significant source of air pollution from cars, including PM. Tree planting along 

such roads must be done with some care. Trees will reduce PM loading through dry deposition, but they can also 

inhibit air circulation, trapping pollution in and under the canopy. In some cases, this can be a good thing. For 

instance, a dense line of trees or shrubs can trap dirty air over the highway, preventing it from moving laterally 

into other parts of the city. However, if trees are trapping dirty air where people are moving or living this can result 

in accidentally increasing their exposure to particulate matter.  Cities should be careful planting trees near major 

emission sources, considering the tree species to be planted, their eventual canopy volume, the geometry of nearby 

buildings and other features that block wind flow, and wind speed and direction .87  One study suggested that to be safe, 

along major roads single roadside tree lines should be planted of a tree species with high PM removal capacity, 

with enough spacing between tree canopies to allow wind flow between trees. 88 

Smaller roads— Many roads, however, are not major sources of air pollution, since they have relatively little traffic. 

These are, for instance, many of the residential streets on which urban residents live. Along these streets, there is 

less worry of trapping dirty air by blocking wind circulation. Maximizing tree cover to shade as much impervious 

area as possible will maximize the temperature reduction achieved. This greater leaf area will also allow more PM 

removal through dry deposition of any ambient PM that is floating in overall urban atmosphere. Since these street 

trees will be right next to homes and businesses, care must be taken that they are aesthetically pleasing, hardy 

enough to withstand an urban environment, and meet the other needs of those in cities. 

Parks and other open space— Because the ability of trees to reduce PM and temperature is relatively localized 

(see Methods section for discussion), trees that are planted in the middle of urban green parcels (parks or other 

open space) have relatively less importance for making air healthier, simply because few people live or work 

within a few hundred meters of the tree. Thus, while the ability of particular tree species to reduce temperature or 

PM should be considered when selecting the list of species planted, it is likely that temperature or PM mitigation 

characteristics will be one of only a set of factors that are important to consider in a park setting (e.g., aesthetic 

beauty, wildlife value). In these settings, the value of parks and open space for recreation and socialization is likely 

one of the most important ecosystem services, so the ability of trees to reduce PM and temperature may be of 

secondary importance.     

> Chapter Three |Planting Healthy Air |45

# Chapter 4 

Photo © Joanna B Pinneo Nature Is a Cost-Effective Solution 

## Particulate matter mitigation 

Our research also shows that planting trees can be a cost-effective way to reduce particulate matter. For 

particulate matter the cost of reduction, in $/ton, varies significantly across neighborhoods, and in some 

neighborhoods is lower than for other available grey infrastructure strategies (Figure 14). The median cost of tree 

planting for PM mitigation is $23,000/ton, which is higher than the median cost of 5 out of 6 broad categories of 

strategies we considered, suggesting that in many cases other grey infrastructure strategies may be less costly. 

However, in some neighborhoods, the cost of tree planting for PM mitigation is as low as $840/ton. So in some 

neighborhoods, tree planting appears to be the most cost-effective strategy. 

100 1,000 10,000 100,000 1,000,000 PM control, point PM control, non-point NOx reduction SO 2 reduction Transport Tree planting 

Figure 14.  Cost-effectiveness of street tree planting to reduce particulate matter,  compared with common categories of conventional mitigation strategies. The green 

bar shows the median cost-effectiveness of street tree planting across sites, while its error bars show the minimum and maximum cost-effectiveness. All values for cost-

effectiveness are standardized to US2015$/ton. Both the costs and the tons removed are expressed as annual numbers. Note that while the median cost per ton PM removed is 

higher for street trees than the median cost of many conventional strategies, there is significant variance, and on many sites tree planting is cost-competitive relative to the other 

grey infrastructure strategies. Moreover, this comparison is biased in favor of conventional strategies because their cost-effectiveness is expressed in terms of $/t emissions 

avoided at the emissions source (not all of which translates into local concentration reductions for people), while that of trees represents the actual cost-effectiveness in 

producing local reductions for people. 

Not only can nature be a cost-effective way to make air healthier, it can also deliver these benefits to a significant 

fraction of urban residents. The global investment curve for trees to reduce PM 2.5  pollution is shown in Figure 15. 

For instance, an annual $100 million additional global investment in trees (including planting and maintenance 

costs) would give 8 million additional people a reduction of > 10 μg/m³ in PM 2.5 , 47 million people a reduction of 

> 5 μg/m³, and 68 million people a reduction of 1 μg/m³ (Medium impact scenario). The maximum possible tree 

planting we considered would involve spending an additional $3.2 billion annually in our study cities, which works 

out to about $17 annually per person benefited. In return, we estimate this maximal tree-planting scenario would 

give 9 million additional people a reduction of > 10 μg/m³ in PM 2.5 , 59 million people a reduction of > 5 μg/m³, and 

182 million people a reduction of > 1 μg/m³ (Medium impact scenario). 

Chapter Four  | Planting Healthy Air  | 47 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 Proportion of population benefited (%) Population with reduction (millions) Annual Additional Investment in Street Trees (Millions ($) > 10 μg/m3 reduction > 5 μg/m3 reduction > 1 μg/m3 reduction     

> Figure 15. The global potential for street trees to benefit urban dwellers with reduced PM concentrations, given different annual investments in tree planting and
> maintenance. Results shown are for our Medium scenario of the effectiveness of trees in removing PM. Note that the curves for 5 and 10 μg/m³ flatten out at high investment
> levels because there are relatively few cities (principally the most polluted) where street tree planting can remove more than this amount of pollution. Once investment in street
> tree planting has fully occurred in these cities, additional investment in tree planting won’t increase the number of people receiving a reduction of more than 5 μg/m³, but will
> continue to increase the number of people receiving more modest reductions of 1 μg/m³.

These magnitudes of reductions in PM 2.5  concentrations and temperature achievable with tree cover can provide 

modest but significant reductions in disease. In this report, we focus only on mortality numbers, primarily because 

there is a large and robust literature relating ambient PM concentrations to mortality. However, note that there are, 

of course, a range of health impacts, from missed days at school or work to hospitalizations to premature death. 

Indeed, for every person killed by ambient PM, there are perhaps dozens who have their lives negatively impacted 

in other ways. Moreover, trees can play a role in mitigating pollutants other than PM (e.g., ozone), which are not 

considered in this analysis, so our estimates must be considered conservative lower estimates. 

There are a number of papers that estimate a functional relationship between ambient PM concentrations and 

mortality rate. 89 , 90  For our calculations, we follow the recommendations of the World Health Organization. 91 

We estimate that the maximum possible tree planting in our cities would reduce PM-related mortality by 

2.7 percent to 8.7 percent, saving between 11,000 and 36,000 lives annually in our study cities. Since this 

maximum tree-planting scenario cost $3.2 billion annually, that works out to a cost of $90,000 to $290,000 per 

life saved. While the statistical value of a life is a complex and controversial topic, and a full discussion is beyond 

the scope of this report, we would note that for most countries the statistical value of a life far exceeds this value. 

For instance, in the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency has set the value of a statistical life at $9.1 

million for the purposes of evaluating restrictions on air pollution. 92 

## Temperature mitigation 

Planting trees is also a cost-effective strategy to reduce air temperatures (Figure 16). The cost of reducing 

temperatures (in $/° C from implementing the practice over a 100-square-meter area) varies significantly 

across neighborhoods, and in some places is lower than for any available grey strategy. The median cost of tree 

planting ($468/° C) is less than every other strategy considered except for cool-roof technologies. Note also 

that one advantage of tree planting is that it cools the air along sidewalks and other places people move. Cool-

roof technologies, by contrast, decrease ambient air temperatures in the column of air above the roof, where few 

people will experience the lowered temperature. 67 , 93  Cool-roof technologies, however, can significantly reduce the 

amount of energy needed for cooling a building during summer (see Box 3 for discussion of air temperature and 

electricity use).         

> 48 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Four 10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000 Green roofs Cool pavements

Cost effectiveness of temperature mitigation ($/degrees C) Cool roofs Tree planting   

> Figure 16. Cost-effectiveness of tree planting to reduce temperatures, compared with alternative strategies to reduce air temperature. Cost-effectiveness is expressed
> as the cost to build a 100-square-meter installation, divided by the annual reduction in temperature. The green bar shows the median cost-effectiveness of a 100-square-meter
> tree planting across sites, while its error bars show the minimum and maximum cost-effectiveness. In this calculation, we are assuming a 20-year lifetime for installations. For cool
> roofs and cool pavements, we are accounting for only the incremental additional cost of the cool technology, above and beyond standard construction practices. Data taken from
> the EPA’s Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies, which discusses in more detail specific technologies within each of these broad categories.

Tree planting also has enough scope to help lots of people The global investment curve for trees to reduce 

temperature is shown in Figure 17. An annual investment of $100 million would give 77 million people a 1° C 

(1.8° F) reduction in maximum temperatures on hot days (Medium scenario). The maximum possible tree-

planting scenario (an additional $3.2 billion annually in our study cities) would provide 220 million people with a 

1° C (1.8° F) reduction in maximum temperatures on hot days (Medium scenario), which works out to about $15 

per person annually benefited.       

> 0% 10% 5% 15% 20% 25% 0250 200 150 100 50 0500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 Proprtion of population benefited (%) Population with a 1˚C reduction (millions)

Annual Additional Investment in Street Trees (Millions ($)  

> Figure 17. The global potential for street trees to benefit urban dwellers with reduced temperatures, given different annual investments in tree planting and maintenance. Results
> shown are for the Medium scenario. Under the High scenario, an equivalent number of people would see a 2˚C reduction, whereas under the Low scenario, the same number of
> people would see a 0.5˚C reduction.

The effect of high temperature on mortality is well documented, with a few studies estimating the regression 

relationship between temperature and mortality. 14 , 20  Most functional forms look at the mortality increase when 

ambient temperature increases above a certain threshold temperature. For this report, we use the relatively 

simple methodology used by McMichael and colleagues, 14  which uses a linear relationship between mortality 

and temperature above a safe threshold. We estimate that the maximum possible tree planting in our cities 

would reduce high temperature-related mortality by 2.4 percent to 5.6 percent, saving between 200 and 700 

lives annually in our study cities. Again, remember that for every death due to high temperatures, there a dozens 

of people who suffer some sort of medical problem because of the high temperatures. And, of course, in our 

maximum tree-planting scenario there are 220 million people who would have a more pleasant experience outside 

every summer.     

> Chapter Four |Planting Healthy Air |49

## Box 5: Street trees, electricity use, and climate change 

Another co-benefit of street trees is that they can help mitigate climate change, either through directly sequestering 

carbon itself or (more importantly) by reducing electricity use for cooling and hence greenhouse gas emissions. The 

effect of trees on electricity use for cooling operates in two main ways: Shade from trees reduces the direct solar heating 

of homes, reducing the need for air conditioning; and trees can reduce ambient air temperatures, which thus lessens 

the need for cooling of the air inside homes. 94  One set of studies has modeled and measured the benefits that trees can 

provide, primarily to residential single-family homes. For instance, McPherson and Rowntree 95  report a 2 percent to 9 

percent reduction in annual heating and cooling costs from a single, well-placed tree. Another set of studies has looked 

at the empirical relationship between ambient temperature and electricity use. A recent review by Santamouris and 

colleagues 96  found that each increase in temperature of 1˚C (1.8 ˚F) caused an increase in monthly residential electricity 

use from 4 percent to 8.5 percent. 

A number of factors affect the magnitude of this reduction in residential electricity use and hence the avoided greenhouse 

gas emissions: 

• Orientation: Trees on the sunnier side of a house (e.g., the south side of a house in the Northern Hemisphere) cause a 

greater reduction. 

• Distance to house: Trees closer to the house have more of an impact. 

• Size and density of canopy: Canopies that cast more shade cause a greater reduction. 

• Size and construction of building: More of the published research showing benefits is for one- or two-story houses, 

with trees appearing to have less of an effect on the electricity use of larger buildings. 

• Type of energy used: Obviously, the greenhouse gas implications of a reduction in electricity depend greatly on 

the carbon intensity of electricity production. Electricity produced from coal, for instance, causes more life-cycle 

greenhouse gases than electricity from hydropower. 

It is beyond the scope of this report to fully account for all these factors. Nevertheless, we wanted to construct a rough 

estimate of how the kind of street tree planting considered in this study would impact electricity use and greenhouse gas 

emissions. We base our estimate on the range of effects shown by Santamouris and colleagues. 96  Note that our analysis 

only considers street trees (not trees in individual parcel’s yards, etc.), and we only consider the potential energy savings 

to residential electricity consumption for cooling. Furthermore, our assumptions about plausible planting targets (see 

discussion above, and in the Methods section) mean that at most only a fraction of homes benefit from an electricity 

reduction. It is not plausible for all homes in a neighborhood to be helped by additional street tree planting. 

Based on statistics of per-capita residential electricity consumption from the U.S. Energy Information Agency’s 

International Energy Outlook, 97  we estimate the total residential electrical energy use of our 245 study cities as 

1,000 billion KWh. For context, this is less than 1 percent of the total global final energy consumption of all types of energy 

(electricity, fossil fuels for heat, liquid fuels for transportation, etc.). We estimate that our maximum possible street tree 

-planting scenario (an additional $3.2 billion annually in our study cities) would reduce residential electrical use by 0.9 

percent to 4.8 percent annually (9.3 billion to 48 billion KWhr). This works out to a cost of $0.07 to $0.34 per KWHr saved. 

Using statistics from the International Energy Agency on the carbon intensity of electricity production, 96  we estimate 

the total emissions of CO 2 from our 245 cities as 480 million tons. For context, global CO 2 emissions are around 

40,000 million tons CO 2. Under the maximum possible street tree-planting scenario, the total emissions of CO 2 from our 

245 cities are reduced by 0.9 percent to 4.6 percent (4.3 million to 22 million tons CO 2).     

> 50 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Four

Trees, of course, also directly sequester carbon as they grow. Several studies have tried to measure the net carbon 

sequestration of urban trees, accounting for both their carbon stored over time as the trees grow, as well as the carbon 

involved in the planting and maintenance of the trees. Nowak and colleagues estimated net sequestration for a set of U.S. 

cities, finding an annual rate ranging from 0.081 (kgC per square meter of tree canopy) in Minneapolis to 0.401 in Omaha. 98 

If we apply these rates to our maximum street tree planting scenario, we can make a rough estimate that the maximum 

planting scenario (an additional $3.2 billion annually in our study cities) would increase net carbon sequestration in our 

245 cities by 2.7 million to 13 million tons CO 2. Combining with our estimates of avoided CO 2 emissions from electricity 

reduction, we can estimate the total impact of our maximum street tree-planting scenario as an annual reduction of 7.0 

million to 35 million tons CO 2. This works out to a cost of $90 to 450 per ton of CO 2 avoided. 

Note that this is a relatively high cost, compared to other ways to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Remember, though, 

that we were only considering street tree planting and maintenance costs, which are substantially more than forestry in a 

rural setting. Also, residential electricity use for cooling is relatively modest outside of the most economically developed 

countries currently, which limits the potential for tree planting to reduce residential electricity use in developing countries. 

This may change as the developing world increases its use of air conditioning. Regardless, keep in mind that the climate 

change mitigation benefits are just one of several co-benefits trees provide.  In particular, all of these climate mitigate 

benefits are provided in addition to the benefits to human health from PM reduction and temperature mitigation. 

# Adding up multiple benefits 

Of course, in cases where both PM concentrations and high temperatures are a concern, the comparative 

attractiveness of tree cover additions would be much higher still, as none of the grey alternatives address both 

heat and PM problems. Moreover, the other co-benefits that trees provide (carbon sequestration, aesthetic 

beauty, stormwater mitigation, healthier and more walkable communities, etc.) further increase the comparative 

attractiveness of tree cover. As discussed above, there are tools (e.g., i-Tree) that allow a first-order estimation of 

the total value of a street tree. In general, we expect based upon the literature that in many cities, the economic 

value of these other co-benefits will exceed the value of heat and PM mitigation. 

One example may illustrate this. One study showed larger street trees increase the value of nearby residential homes 

by 3 percent in Portland, Oregon. 99  The median home price in Portland is around $350,000, so street trees fronting a 

typical home are associated with an increase of around $10,000. In absolute terms, this is likely much greater than the 

absolute value these street trees provide in terms of PM or temperature mitigation to people in Portland. 

We recommend that cities try to consider the broad spectrum of benefits trees provide when they are evaluating the     

> return on investment of their planting, rather than focusing solely on their value for PM and heat mitigation.
> Photo: ©TebNad
> Chapter Four |Planting Healthy Air |51

# Chapter 5 

Photo © Devan King Nature Will Matter Even More in the Future 

Finally, our analysis of trends over time suggests that the ecosystem services supplied by trees will be even more 

crucial in the future. This is for three main reasons: 

1.  More demand for the services trees provide:  There may be a 50 percent increase in the rate of mortality caused 

by PM 2.5  by 2050, most of it in urban areas [ 11 ], and summer maximum temperatures in our sample of cities are 

forecast to increase by 2 to 5˚C (4 to 9° F) over the same time period. While these twin threats post a challenge 

to the health of those in cities, all else being equal, they will also increase the importance of the trees that are 

already there. 

2.  More people:  There will also be a dramatic increase in urban population (Figure 18.), which increases the 

number of people who might benefit from nature’s services. Urban population will increase from 4.0 billion to 

more than 6.3 billion in 2050, an increase of more than 50 percent. Some of this urban population increase 

will be to new neighborhoods, developing on green field sites on the fringes of existing urban areas. But some 

fraction of this urban growth will be in existing urban areas, increasing urban population density. Any increase in 

urban population density increases the ROI of tree planting. 

3.  Potentially fewer trees:  Finally, all this urban development, or simply societal underinvestment in replacing trees 

lost, may reduce the amount of urban greening. For instance, we found that 26 percent of cities had a decline in 

forest cover over the period from 2000 to 2010, whereas only 16 percent of cities had an increase in forest cover 

over the time period. If this trend continues, there will be fewer trees in cities precisely when there is more of us 

in cities, who need the services trees can provide. 

> Urban population (billions)

012345671950 1960 1970 1980 1990 Year 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 

Figure 18. Global urban population growth from 1950 to 2015, and then forecasted out to 2050.  Data are from the UNPD’s World Urbanization Prospects database.     

> Chapter Five |Planting Healthy Air |53

# can actually take pollution out of the air— 

# reducing fine particles in their immediate 

# vicinity by as much as a quarter. 

# Trees Case Studies 

# How cities are striving to make their air healthier 

Photo © Chris McGuire / Radius Images 

Case Studies  | Planting Healthy Air  | 55 Atlanta lacks the dramatic geographical features of many of the world’s major cities—a harbor, a river or lake, 

a view of distant, snow-capped mountains. What it has in abundance, as becomes clear on any flight into the 

teeming chaos of Hartsfield-Jackson airport south of town, are trees—magnolia, pecan, sweetgum, elm, oak, 

poplar, beech, and dozens of other species. The trees form a dense canopy over parts of the city and have earned 

Atlanta the nickname “the city in a forest.” 

Trees define Atlanta. The main thoroughfare is called Peachtree Street. The Dogwood Festival has been running for 

80 years and draws more than 200,000 people to Piedmont Park every April. The tree canopy itself covers almost 

half of the 133 square miles that constitute Atlanta proper, according to a 2014 assessment by the Atlanta Tree 

Conservation Commission and Georgia Tech, making it the most heavily forested city in the country. 

Older parts of Atlanta were spared the rampant timbering that cleared much of Georgia in the late 1800s. Some 

trees even survived the blaze that consumed the city in 1864—a tulip poplar known as “Grandfather” has stood in 

Brookhaven, north of downtown, since before the Revolutionary War. 

Atlanta has stringent ordinances aimed at protecting its trees. The city charges up to $1,000 to cut down a single 

one as small as six inches in diameter. The law regulates tree removal on private property, which reflects the reality 

that more than three-quarters of the city’s tree canopy exists in residential areas outside of the city core, while 

parks and public green-space occupy only 6 percent of city land. 

Yet Atlanta’s trees are far from safe, despite the ordinances and the city’s commitment to staying green. That 

troubling news threatens to compound a problem Atlanta’s residents know all too well: The heat. 

In March 2016, Atlanta hit 29° C (84° F), a record for the month. Within the next 50 or 60 years, Atlantans could 

see as many as 50 days each year with temperature exceeding 35° C (95° F). The problem is not just changes in 

climate, but also changes in where people want to live, with the fastest growth in the south and west. According to 

a recent study, by the middle of the century, four to six times as many Americans will endure 35-degree days than 

at the end of the last century. Researchers found that people living in Atlanta, along with those in Charlotte, Dallas, 

Houston, Oklahoma City, Phoenix, Tampa, and San Antonio, are most at risk of enduring many more 35-degree 

days by 2050. 

Atlanta’s tree canopy can help mitigate some of the problem, but only if it remains more or less intact. The biggest 

current threat to Atlanta’s trees, ironically, comes in response to the previous threat. For decades, greater Atlanta 

has been a prime example of the pitfalls of suburban and exurban sprawl. Metro Atlanta’s urbanized land base 

grew 72 percent between 1982 and 1997, while its population grew 58 percent. More than 600,000 acres were 

converted to urban uses in Atlanta between 1982 and 1997—200,000 more than Los Angeles, even though 

L.A. grew by nearly three times as many residents. The trend has continued: Between 2001 and 2006, one metro 

county, Gwinnett County, alone lost more than 3,000 forest acres per year, and canopy cover dropped from 52 

percent of the county in 1991 to 37 percent by 2005. 

# ATLANTA  Photo © iStock, AndreyKrav     

> 56 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Population projections suggest that sprawl may be slowing, but growth is not. According to the Urban Institute, 

Atlanta’s population could grow by as much as 59 percent by 2030, bringing its total population to more than 

7.5 million. Other projections suggest the population could top 10 million by 2060—only Phoenix, Arizona, and 

Riverside, California, are projected to grow faster. And growth within Atlanta’s urban core poses a threat to the 

city’s trees. Population growth within the city and a surge in denser development represents a welcome shift from 

car-centric sprawl, but those trends are paired with infill development that puts older, canopy trees at risk. 

Fortunately, groups like Trees Atlanta, a nationally recognized NGO, and others are working to find ways to balance 

development with the need to preserve the city’s trees. As the results of this study show, Atlanta neighborhoods 

could benefit from reduced temperatures from street tree planting. While at a city-level the ROI of tree planting is 

relatively low, compared with other cities globally, there are neighborhoods with relatively high ROI in tree planting 

in high-density neighborhoods that run north-south, roughly following the Interstate 85 corridor. An increased 

annual investment of $3.1 million might give more than 80,000 people a 1.5° C (2.7° F) reduction in temperature. 

Decatur Atlanta Marietta Decatur Atlanta Marietta  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  3,140,000  29,300  81,200 20% of sites  5,200,000  39,500  113,000 Full Investment  17,800,000  64,200  187,000 

Table 7. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Atlanta. 

Figure 19. ROI for tree planting for Atlanta. 

Map 14. Neighborhood-level ROI for Atlanta (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the Atlanta study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |57

In late 2014, Beijing hosted an important regional meeting: the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) 

summit. Heads of state from 21 countries attended. China’s leaders saw the gathering as an opportunity to 

showcase its progress and economic vitality. 

One area of progress was apparent: China has made impressive strides in recent years in cutting coal emissions, 

switching to natural gas for electricity generation and replacing coal-fired builders with electric heating systems in 

the city center. In outlying areas, the government has encouraged residents to switch from cheap, untreated smoky 

coal to smokeless coal—though many continue to use the dirtier version. 

Still, like most megacities around the world, Beijing faces air-quality challenges. On the worst days, visibility drops 

to a few hundred yards. The problems can worsen during cold winters, when households, particularly on the 

outskirts of the city, burn more coal for heat. 

Beijing’s pollution problem is hardly a secret. In March, 2014, more than six months before the APEC summit, 

Premier Li Keqiang promised to “declare war” on pollution and fight it with an “iron fist.” 

The government’s efforts have had some success. Beijing has more days when skies clear and the mountains are 

visible in the distance. Longer lasting solutions, however, will require more fundamental changes. Planting trees 

can be a part of that effort. Overall, the city has a high ROI of tree planting, relative to other cities. The central 

neighborhoods of the city have the highest ROI for PM reduction. We estimate that for an annual additional 

investment of $2.9 million in street tree planting, 2.2 million people could have a greater than 1 μg/m³ reduction in 

PM 2.5 . Note that for many people in Beijing, reduction would be much greater, exceeding 10 μg/m³ for most people 

near trees. 

Planting trees can play a role in clearing Beijing’s air, but it will not suffice. Beijing is now well into a five-year effort 

to cut coal burning by more than half, restrict the number of cars on the road, introduce a pilot cap-and-trade 

program, and urge factories to disclose their emissions publicly. The city has shut down manufacturing firms for 

polluting and taken thousands of inefficient vehicles off the roads. The city hopes to reduce PM 2.5  concentrations 

by 25 percent by 2017. 

# BEIJING  Photo © iStock, ispyfriend     

> 58 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Beijing Beijing  

> 010km

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5 * 1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  2,940,000  2,220,000  2,230,000 20% of sites  5,890,000  3,600,000  3,610,000 Full Investment  29,400,000  7,510,000  7,510,000 *Note: Most people will receive a reduction of > 10 ug/m² PM 2.5 in this city. 

Table 8. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Beijing. 

Figure 20. ROI for tree planting for Beijing. 

Map 15. Neighborhood-level ROI for Beijing (PM reduction) 

# Results from the Beijing study 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

PM ROI  

> Higher Return Lower Return

Case Studies  | Planting Healthy Air  | 59 In the 1970s and 1980s, Denver’s air pollution was so bad it made national news. The bad air even had 

a name: the brown cloud. In 1989, after the Denver Broncos had lost their third Super Bowl in as many 

appearances, a CBS sportscaster joked that Denver had ‘’never been No. 1 in anything—but carbon 

monoxide.’’ 

The joke stung because it was largely true. In 1975, Denver violated Federal carbon monoxide standards 

177 times. 

The stain on both the city’s air and its reputation, not to mention the health of its residents and its tourist 

industry, prompted a lengthy and aggressive campaign to fight pollution. Denver banned construction of 

new wood-burning fireplaces and the use of old wood-burning fireplaces on pollution ‘’alert’’ days, which 

dramatically cut the amount of wood smoke in the air. The city began using more liquid de-icers on roads 

following snowstorms, replacing the sand that would get ground into fine particles and end up in the air as 

part of the brown cloud. 

The problem is one of location as well. Denver sits in the South Platte river basin, bounded to the west by 

13,000-foot peaks, a perfect recipe for smog. The wind often does not clear the air, and the high altitude 

means older cars burn gasoline less efficiently because the air has less oxygen. In response, Colorado 

enacted the nation’s first oxygenated fuels program in 1988. Two years later, 39 cities across the country 

were required to use oxygenated fuel under the Clean Air Act. 

In 2007, Denver’s Mayor (now Colorado Governor) John Hickenlooper launched an ambitious effort to 

make the city sustainable by 2020. Among the initiatives was Greenprint Denver, a city agency that plans 

and coordinates citywide environmental programs. According to the Green City Index, a research effort 

sponsored by Siemens, Denver is now a model of environmental governance and is the fifth-greenest city 

in the United States and Canada, falling behind only San Francisco, Vancouver, New York City, and Seattle. 

Denver now has some of the strongest clean air policies in the United States, according to the report. 

Population growth is part of the continuing challenges to Denver’s air quality. In 2014, Denver reached 

number 6 on the  Forbes Magazine  list of the 20 fastest-growing cities in the country. The city’s population 

now tops 3 million and is expected to continue to grow. The expanding population also means more cars, and 

even though each new car is far cleaner than in past years, the sheer number of vehicles on the roads means 

an increase in pollution. 

Denver is continuing its efforts to be more energy efficient, reduce its deep dependence on coal, and make 

new building greener. Not all of Denver’s sustainability projects, however, have worked out as planned. The 

Mile High Million, an effort to plant a million trees in the city by 2025, was canceled because of budget cuts 

in 2013, having gotten less than halfway to its goal. 

# DENVER  Photo © iStock, knowlesgallery     

> 60 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Compared to some cities, Denver has a relatively low median ROI of tree planting, since the population 

density of its neighborhoods is relatively low. However, some neighborhoods in Denver (the denser 

neighborhoods near the historic downtown) have relatively high ROI of tree planting. Note that since 

Denver’s PM concentrations are relatively low already, by global standards, the absolute reduction in PM that 

trees could provide is likely below 1 μg/m³. 

Among the most promising of Denver’s efforts to become a greener city focus on rehabilitating old industrial 

sites. Denver’s Brownfield Program is looking for ways to revitalize 3,500 acres of land along an 11-mile 

portion of the South Platte, an area that contains 33 brownfield sites. Green space along the South Platte 

could eventually help connect two recent additions to the National Wildlife Refuge system, both of which 

were brownfields of a different sort: the 25-square-mile Rocky Mountain Arsenal northeast of the city, and 

Rocky Flats, a far smaller Cold War-era nuclear weapons trigger factory to the west. 

Denver Brighton Littleton Broomfield Denver Brighton Littleton Broomfield  

> 010km

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  3,500,000  0 110,000 20% of sites  6,980,000  0 185,000 Full Investment  26,200,000  0 301,000 

Table 9. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Denver. 

Figure 21. ROI for tree planting for Denver. 

Map 16. Neighborhood-level ROI for Denver (PM reduction). 

# Results from the Denver study 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |61

Few cities provide a more ideal setting to study the phenomenon of the urban heat island than Hong Kong. First of 

all, it is one of the most densely populated places on Earth, and also one of the richest. So Hong Kong’s towering 

skyscrapers and extensive road network offer a true test of how modern urban development will shape local 

climates. 

Second, and just as important, Hong Kong has historical climate data dating back more than 130 years, thanks to 

the Hong Kong Observatory. Nearly continuous temperature records have been kept since 1884 (save for during 

World War II), and several analyses of those records attribute much of the roughly 2° C (3.6° F) increase in 

average temperature to the heat generated through infrastructure development. 

The trend is continuing, and may be accelerating. Indeed, a 2007 study by scientists at the Observatory predicted 

that by 2100, there will be less than one cold day a year (12° C or below), meaning that for some winters, there will 

not be any cold days at all, and winter could disappear in Hong Kong. 

The island’s location and topography play a role in how development is shaping the climate. Located at the 

entrance of the Pearl River Delta, Hong Kong is humid and subtropical. Its steep hillsides concentrate development 

onto the relatively few areas flat enough for high-rise buildings. 

The tall, densely packed buildings are stifling street-level airflow, according to Observatory data. 

Average wind speeds at a weather station on the mainland portion of Hong Kong (the area once called Kowloon) 

dropped from 3.5 meters per second in 1968 to two meters per second in 2014. The urban calm contrasts with the 

Observatory’s remote Waglan Island weather station, southeast of the city, where wind speeds have been stable 

over the last 50 years. 

The stagnant air is unable to disperse heat and pollutants, warns Professor Li Yuguo, who heads the mechanical 

engineering department at the University of Hong Kong. The combination of warmer air and lower winds is leading 

to what Li calls an “urban dome.” His team found that, in the absence of winds, convective heat from individual 

buildings rose and formed a dome-shaped accumulation of warm air and pollutants above the city. 

Some urban redesign may help alleviate the problem. Li, for example, suggests keeping secondary streets along 

northern Hong Kong Island wide and short to facilitate downslope windflow from the hills. Another option would 

be to keep the ground floors of tall buildings open, to promote air circulation at street level, though this would 

mean foregoing the valuable commercial real estate that now occupies much of downtown Hong Kong. 

Government incentives could help prompt developers to provide better ventilation and make land pricing policies 

more flexible. They could also promote better use of Hong Kong’s waterfront. In New York, another densely 

populated island city, all the streets run toward water and bring in cooler air. But Hong Kong’s main thoroughfares 

run parallel to Victoria Harbor, so tall building close off the sea breeze from one direction, while the steep hills 

close off the other. 

# HONG KONG  Photo © iStock, Andrea Izzotti     

> 62 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

The news is not all bad for Hong Kong. Despite the dense population and the growing demand for buildable land, 

the city still boasts ample green space. Just 7 percent of Hong Kong is zoned for residential use. Parks, hiking 

trails, and beaches ring the city. Hong Kong’s country parks cover about 40 percent of the territory’s roughly 1,108 

square kilometers of land. 

While the parks are off-limits to development, at least for now, other green spaces may be more vulnerable. Hong 

Kong has set aside other greenbelt areas to act as a buffer against urban sprawl, but with land values skyrocketing 

the pressure to expand into those areas is intense. In 2015, the city’s Development Bureau said the greenbelt areas 

were “suitable for urban expansion and thus have good potential to be rezoned for housing purposes.” 

As a high-density city, Hong Kong has a relatively high ROI of tree planting. Hong Kong is a fairly compact city, 

so the minimum mapping unit of our analysis (1 square kilometer) gives us relatively little detail into which 

neighborhoods in Hong Kong have the highest ROI. The compact size of Hong Kong also means that a small 

additional investment in street tree planting could have significant benefits. 

Central Kowloon Sha Tin Sai Kung Wan Chai Hong Kong Tsuen Wan Sham Shui Po Wong Tai Sin Central Kowloon Sha Tin Sai Kung Wan Chai Hong Kong Tsuen Wan Sham Shui Po Wong Tai Sin  

> 010km

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5 * 1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  152,000  290,000  324,000 20% of sites  294,000  503,000  531,000 Full Investment  1,280,000  1,010,000  1,010,000 *Note: Most people will receive a reduction of > 10 ug/m² PM 2.5 in this city 

Table 10. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Hong Kong. 

Figure 22. ROI for tree planting for Hong Kong. 

Map 17. Neighborhood-level ROI for Hong Kong (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the Hong Kong study 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |63

Anyone moving to Jakarta quickly learns a key phrase in Bahasa: “Kena macet.” It means “(I) get stuck in a 

traffic jam.” 

Jakarta has the worst “macets”—traffic jams—in the world, at least according to an index developed by the 

oil company Castrol, which measured how often drivers stop and start. According to that analysis, drivers in 

Jakarta are stopping and starting their cars 33,240 times per year on the road. That is more than twice as often 

as New York, the worst US city on the list. Traffic is so bad that Indonesia’s previous President, Susilo Bambang 

Yudhoyono, proposed moving the capital out of Jakarta. 

The traffic problems stem largely from the rapid growth of the city. Central Jakarta has a population of more than 

10 million in an area of just over 25 square miles. This figure understates the challenge, however the challenge, 

however. Central Jakarta, also called the Special Capital Region of Jakarta, is just part of a sprawling megacity 

known as Jabodetabek—taken from the initial letters of the administrative units of Jakarta, Bogor, Depok, 

Tangerang and Bekasi—that covers some 2,300 square miles and is home to 28 million people. 

Over the past century, the population of Jakarta and its surrounding area has increased nearly 200-fold. By 2010, 

the megacity housed 12 percent of Indonesia’s total population on less than 0.3 percent of the country’s total area. 

Jakarta’s infrastructure has struggled to keep pace with the growth, particularly regarding transportation. Jakarta, 

for example, is the largest city in the world without a metro system. Other major cities in Southeast Asia with 

smaller populations than Jakarta have had metro systems for years, including Manila (1984), Singapore (1987), 

Kuala Lumpur (1995), and Bangkok (2004). 

All of Jakarta’s cars, trucks, and buses, along with cooking fires, kerosene, and heavy industries, combined to 

burden the city with some of the most severe air pollution problems in the world in the 1960s and 1970s. In 

response, the government began phasing out the use of leaded gasoline in 2001 and eliminated the use of lead in 

2006, began car emissions checks in 2007, and pushed power plants to switch from diesel to compressed natural 

gas in 2010. Those steps helped clear the air: Today there are more days when the skies are clear enough to see 

the lush mountains of the province of West Java, 30 miles south of the city center. 

The blue skies do not, however, tell the whole story. While cars have gotten cleaner, they still emit fine particles, 

and Indonesia’s booming economy over the past decade means that millions more people can afford cars: nearly 

500,000 new cars in 2014 alone, along with 1.4 million new motorcycles. All those new vehicles are effectively 

swamping the benefits of the pollution control laws. So while skies appear clearer, air quality, as measured by PM 2.5 

levels, has actually gone down. 

Another, far more visible problem also looms for Jakarta. Indonesia is the world’s largest producer of palm oil, 

and fires are frequently intentionally lit to clear land for new palm plantations. The illegal burning of forests and 

agricultural land, combined with a prolonged dry season and the impact of El Niño, has led to more than 100,000 

fires across Indonesia since early 2015, some of which are peat fires that may burn for months or even years. The 

smoke has blanketed much of Southeast Asia in an acrid haze, with one estimate that daily CO 2 emissions from 

the fires have surpassed the average daily emissions of the entire U.S. economy. 

# JAKARTA  Photo © iStock, Warren Goldswain     

> 64 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

The city of Palangkaraya, on the island Kalimantan, across the Java Sea from Jakarta, recorded PM 10  levels of 

1,357 micrograms/m³—far above the healthy level. A spokesman for Indonesia’s Meteorology, Climatology and 

Geophysics Agency called the fires as “a crime against humanity.” 

There are some hopeful signs that the government is tackling the fires and the broader pollution problem. The 

government is seeking to restore degraded peat land and to prosecute corporations that cleared land illegally. The 

government is also mandating that the auto sector improve emission standards on new vehicles to meet European 

levels starting in 2017. Monitoring has also improved: The Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics Council now 

collects data from eight monitoring stations across Jakarta to measure air quality minute by minute. 

Improved mass transit and increased efforts to create more green space in the city could be part of longer-term 

plans to improve air quality in Jakarta. As a high-density city, Jakarta has a high ROI relative to other cities. The 

center neighborhoods have the highest density and hence the highest ROI. For an annual additional investment of 

$1.7 million in street tree planting, more than 700,000 people could get at least a 1 μg/m³. 

Jakarta Cibinong Cikarang Jakarta Cibinong Cikarang  

> 010km

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  1,660,000  761,000  772,000 20% of sites  3,220,000  1,280,000  1,350,000 Full Investment  16,200,000  3,680,000  3,680,000 

Table 11. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Jakarta. 

Figure 23. ROI for tree planting for Jakarta. 

Map 18. Neighborhood-level ROI for Jakarta (PM reduction). 

# Results from the Jakarta study 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |65

For decades, the sprawling townships around Johannesburg, South Africa’s largest city and economic hub, 

stood as a blazing testament to racial injustice. Established in the 19th century as camps for laborers in newly 

discovered gold mines, the townships did not come to world attention until they became the wellspring of 

protest against the apartheid system, imposed in the late 1940s. 

The townships—most famously Soweto but also places like Tembisa, Vosloorus Katiehong, and Meadowlands— 

were symbols of racism—then a symbol of resistance. Today they may be a symbol of rebirth. 

Under apartheid, the townships were officially little more than way stations. Until 1976, township population 

could have status only as temporary residents. Black laborers would inhabit the square, four-room brick 

dwellings derisively called “matchbox houses” only while their employment contracts were valid. They were 

supposed to live in the townships solely to work for white residents in Johannesburg and other nearby cities. 

The government gave little thought to providing infrastructure of any kind for township residents. 

Elsewhere in the city, however, Johannesburg’s residents had been busily remaking the landscape for 

generations. The city lies in a region known as the Highveld, a typical African savannah/grassland ecosystem 

with few trees. Early settlers planted trees for fodder, fuel, fruit, and wood production, but things changed 

dramatically with the gold rush in 1886. The miners needed thousands of wooden props for the tunnels, so 

they established huge plantations of Blue Gums, a species of Eucalyptus native to Australia. Over a million 

trees were planted in what is now Saxonwold, a suburb of Johannesburg. 

As the city grew, the tree planting spread beyond the Blue Gum plantations and the streets and gardens 

of white Johannesburg filled with trees. In 1904, the first street trees were planted in Johannesburg’s town 

square, and by the early 1990s, an estimated 6 million trees had been planted within the boundaries of the 

old Johannesburg and 10 million collectively within the modern city boundaries. 

Today Johannesburg boasts 50,000 acres of green space and open space in more than 2,000 public parks. 

There are so many trees today that the oft-repeated claim is that Johannesburg is the largest man-made 

urban forest in the world. The data for that claim are slim, but it is beyond question that Johannesburg’s 6 

million trees make it a cool, pleasant, and shady. But not for everyone. 

The green canopies that travelers see from the air are the wealthy, former white-only northern suburbs. The 

poorer townships are closely packed with houses and surrounded by the treeless veld. 

# JOHANNESBURG  Photo © iStock, THEGIFT777     

> 66 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Few trees were planted in Soweto or any other township. But the need for more trees is becoming clearer 

every day. Climate model projections for Johannesburg indicate that the local climate is likely to become 

both significantly hotter and more humid. The models suggest that temperatures for the city may increase by 

around 2.3° C by over the next 40 years and by more than 4° C over the next 70 years or so. 

Since 2006, however, there has been a massive effort to extend Johannesburg’s urban forest. The Soweto 

Greening Project, for example, began that year with 6,000 trees being planted. The aim is to plant 200,000 

trees throughout the township. 

Johannesburg has even more far-reaching plans to expand the amount of green space across the city. Our 

study did not include Soweto, but it does cover parts of other townships. Johannesburg is only moderate in 

ROI for tree planting, compared to other cities globally. However, there are scattered neighborhoods with 

very high potential. For an additional $500 thousand annually in street tree planting, more than 100,000 

people could have a reduction of 1.5° C (2.7° F) in summertime temperatures. 

Randfontein Johannesburg Randfontein Johannesburg  

> 010km

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  488,000  127,000  140,000 20% of sites  899,000  157,000  191,000 Full Investment  2,970,000  211,000  258,000 

Table 12. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Johannesburg. 

Figure 24. ROI for tree planting for Johannesburg. 

Map 19. Neighborhood-level ROI for Johannesburg (PM reduction). 

# Results from the Johannesburg study 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |67

Friday, December 5, 1952, began as an average winter’s day in London, clear and cold. It had been unusually cold 

for the previous week, so many households shoveled more coal into the furnace. Most of England’s supply of hard, 

anthracite coal was sold for export to pay off the country’s war debt, leaving people in London to burn the softer, 

high-sulphur, bituminous variety. 

During the night, a mass of cold air had moved over the city, creating an inversion and trapping warm air plus all 

the smoke from homes, factories, and traffic at the surface. By mid-day East Londoners could not see their feet. 

For five days banks of dense yellow fog smothered London. Cars, trains, and buses stopped running. Businesses, 

restaurants, and theaters closed, trapping people in their homes, but the choking cloud even seeped under 

doorways. 

Thousands of people were treated at hospitals for respiratory problems. Official estimates at the time put the 

number of fatalities at 4,000—more civilian casualties than any single incident during the war. Recent research, 

however, suggests that what became known as the “Great Smog” may have caused as many as 12,000 deaths. 

London had a long history of these so-called “pea-soupers.” The legendary London fog was not fog at all, but 

choking smog, mostly particulate pollution from coal fires. The Great Smog of 1952, however, was the worst ever, 

and it was a turning point. It led to a major cleanup of city air quality and the passage of a revolutionary clean-air 

law in 1956, seven years before the U.S. Clean Air Act. 

The new law banned the burning of polluting fuels in “smoke control areas” across the United Kingdom. The 

results were dramatic: a hundred-fold decrease in atmospheric particulate levels. Public health was vastly 

improved; flora and fauna that had all but vanished from urban places by the 1950s began to flourish; and the 

grand architecture of Britain’s cities was no longer obscured beneath a thick layer of soot and grime. 

London now has an expanding public transportation network. The first section of Crossrail, a 118-kilometre 

(73-mile) railway line linking London and Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Essex counties, will open in 2018; 

there is a thriving bike share program; and drivers must pay a congestion charge of £11.50 ($15) to drive into 

the city. Yet, while pea-soupers are a thing of the past, pollution persists. 

Some of London’s air-quality problems are an unintended consequence of efforts to fight climate change. In 1998, 

European car makers committed to reducing CO 2 emissions by 25 percent, and as as result, the European car fleet 

switched from largely gasoline to predominant diesel, because diesel emits less carbon dioxide. Diesel, however, 

produces significant amounts of both particulates and NO 2—enough to swamp London’s pollution-reduction 

efforts even as CO 2 emissions fall. 

In 2014, the government agency, Public Health England, said that PM 2.5  probably killed more than 3,000 people in 

London in 2010. That was down from previous studies, but still worrisome. 

Nitrogen dioxide is an even bigger problem, with levels in London that are among the highest anywhere in the world. 

The 2014 statistics suggest that London and southeast England have by far the worst air in Britain, largely due to 

traffic levels. In London, in addition to death attributable to particulate pollution, more than 40,000 “life years” 

were lost in 2010. In southeast England, more than 4,000 people died and almost 42,000 years were lost. 

# LONDON  Photo © iStock, ImageGap     

> 68 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

London has moderate median ROI for tree planting, relative to other cities internationally. The neighborhoods with 

the highest ROI are in the center portion of the city, which is relatively higher density. For an additional annual 

investment of $18 million in street tree planting, we estimate that 1.5 million people could have a > 1 μg/m³ 

reduction in PM. 

Grays Luton London Slough Hertford Aylesbury Bracknell Maidstone Rochester Chelmsford Grays Luton London Slough Hertford Aylesbury Bracknell Maidstone Rochester Chelmsford  

> 010km

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  1.77E+7  1,570,000  2,440,000 20% of sites  3.52E+7  2,870,000  3,910,000 Full Investment  1.52E+8  5,840,000  7,260,000 

Table 13. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for London. 

Figure 25. ROI for tree planting for London. 

Map 20. Neighborhood-level ROI for London (PM reduction). 

# Results from the London study 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

London is planning other aggressive steps to improve its air quality. In addition to the congestion charge, 

London has a Low Emissions Zone, which charges trucks and buses that do not meet EU emission standards for 

particulates a fee of up to £200 ($280) per day. An even stricter Ultra Low Emissions Zone is planned for 2020 

that would require all vehicles, including cars and motorcycles, to meet the emissions standards or pay the £200 

fee. By 2018, new models of London’s iconic black cabs will have to be electric, the first time any city has proposed 

to develop a zero-emissions cab fleet. The first fully electric double-decker bus hit the streets in the fall of 2015.      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |69

The largest El Niño event ever recorded was supposed to dominate the news in Los Angeles in early 2016. So 

large it was dubbed Godzilla El Niño, the enormous swath of unusually warm Pacific Ocean water, some 6 million 

square miles in area, was anticipated to bring drenching rains to the city, and many feet of snow to the mountains. 

Nearly everyone in Southern California was waiting to welcome El Niño with open arms. A record-setting deluge 

was just what was needed to break, or at least put a dent in, a crippling, four-year year drought. 

El Niño brought some relief, especially to northern and central California, and some reservoirs, such as Shasta, the 

state’s largest, are at or near capacity. Los Angeles was not so fortunate. After the last severe drought, from 1987 

to 1991, Southern California increased its water storage capacity 14-fold. All that storage eased the pain of the 

current drought, but now, despite El Niño, reservoirs near Los Angeles are still less than half full. 

The link between climate change and drought are intriguing but still speculative. The daunting prospect for 

Angelenos, however, is the possibility that climate has tipped to a new and lasting condition, marked by little rain 

and rising temperatures. That future became reality in the winter of 2016. 

Typical February temperatures in Los Angeles is about 70 degrees. On February 7, 2016, the temperature reached 

89 degrees at Los Angeles International Airport, a new record for the day. Another bout of record-breaking heat 

hit the city a few weeks later. 

All this would usually be of little concern to anyone except the record-keepers and weather junkies. In this case, 

however, it is part of a worrisome trend. The late winter heat waves followed on fall weather that was even hotter. 

In early October 2015, downtown Los Angeles hit 100 degrees on back-to-back days. The sweltering 100-degree 

stretch was the longest in 25 years and matched the longest ever recorded in October. The heat stressed 

electricity generation, and at least 9,000 people were without power. 

The combination of heat and extreme drought spell trouble for air quality in Los Angeles through a complex chain 

of events. Prolonged dry spells bring more temperature inversions, with a layer of warmer air trapping cooler air 

below, concentrating pollution near the ground. Higher temperatures accelerate the chemical reactions that form 

ozone, a key ingredient in smog, while also boosting demand for electricity, which further increases the smog-

forming emissions from power plants. Hot, dry weather also creates ideal conditions for wildfires, which release 

still more smoke and soot. Meanwhile, in the Central Valley north of the city, dry farmland has been kicking huge 

dust clouds into the air. 

If the warm, dry trends continue, as most experts predict, California’s decades-long progress in improving its air quality 

may be in danger. Since the 1980s, peak ozone concentrations in Southern California have fallen by about two-

thirds, and fine-particle pollution has been cut in half since 1999. Emissions from cars, trucks, ships, power plants, 

and industrial facilities are also falling. About 63 percent of Californians now live in areas that meet federal health 

standards for ozone, compared with 24 percent in 1990, according to estimates by the state Air Resources Board. 

# LOS ANGELES  Photo © iStock, NYCstocker     

> 70 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Yet California still has a long way to go before it meets federal air-quality standards and its own ambitious 

climate goals. Reducing ozone to federally mandated levels by 2032 will require deploying low- or zero-emissions 

technology across the economy, and particularly in the South Coast Air Quality Management District, which 

includes 16.7 million people in Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties. 

Given the long-term threat that increasing temperatures due to climate change poses to air quality, state 

regulators are looking into new rules as well as new strategies to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases at the 

local level. Those strategies could target short-lived pollutants like methane; encourage dense development near 

transit stations; or fund solar water heaters, electric vehicle charging stations, and other carbon-cutting projects. 

The results of this study also indicate the role the trees can play in the larger strategy for Los Angeles. While at a 

city-level, the median ROI of tree planting is only moderate by global standards, there are specific neighborhoods 

that would have high ROI, including dense neighborhoods in central Los Angeles, Santa Monica, and Long Beach. 

For an additional annual investment of $6.4 million in street tree planting, we estimate that more than 400,000 

people could have a reduction of 1.5° C (2.7° F) in summertime temperatures. 

Santa Ana Los Angeles Santa Ana Los Angeles  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  6,360,000  432,000  437,000 20% of sites  12,700,000  695,000  702,000 Full Investment  51,600,000  1,300,000  1,320,000 

Table 14. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Los Angeles. 

Figure 26. ROI for tree planting for Los Angeles. 

Map 21. Neighborhood-level ROI for Los Angeles (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the Los Angeles study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |71

Hoy No Circula —No Driving Today. That is the message that at least 20 percent of drivers in Mexico City get 

every day. If pollution levels spike, the number can double. In an effort to crack down on the city’s long-standing 

pollution problem, in 1989 the national government enacted a plan to limit the number of cars driving into the city. 

The government had ample reason to take such a step, and more. For decades Mexico City had some of the worst 

air pollution in the world. There were reports of birds dying in mid-flight and dropping from the sky. Children 

colored the sky gray, because they never saw anything else. In 1992, Mexico City earned the dubious distinction of 

being number one on the United Nation’s list of the 20 most polluted cities. 

The sheer size of the city is one problem. With 9 million people in the city proper, and roughly 21 million in the 

surrounding Valle de Mexico, it is the most populous urban area in the western hemisphere. Migration from other 

parts of Mexico has slowed in recent years, but the city will still add millions of more residents by 2020. 

The geography of Mexico City compounds the pollution problems. It lies on what was once an enormous lake, the 

floor of an ancient crater surrounded by mountains, including an active volcano, Popocatépetl. Eruptions, the last 

of which occurred in the spring of 2016, add even more dust and ash to the atmosphere. 

Mexico City sits at over 7,000 feet in elevation. The lower level of oxygen reduces the efficiency of vehicle engines, 

so they are more polluting. Finally, warm air frequently settles above the valley, creating an inversion that seals in 

the pollution. 

In the 1990s, the Mexican government developed a comprehensive plan called ProAire to tackle the problems. 

Hoy No Circula  is one element, and keeps as many as 2 million cars at home. As part of ProAire the city also tests 

vehicles for compliance with emissions regulations; requires all new cars to have catalytic converters; reduced the 

levels of sulphur in diesel fuel; increased the number of buses powered by natural gas; built dedicated bike lanes; 

and retired 1,500 of the most polluting small and medium-size buses. Mexico City has expanded its public transit 

options, and it has the largest bike-sharing program in the region. 

ProAire was so successful at reducing pollution that in 2013, the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group awarded 

Mexico City its air-quality prize. The award noted the diversity of actions but also the impressive achievement of 

reducing ambient air concentrations of primary pollutants, including 97 percent of lead emissions, 89 percent of 

SO2, 79 percent of CO 2 and 66 percent of PM 10 , over a 25-year period. 

Over the past several years, however, improvements in air quality have slowed, or even reversed. In early 2016, 

authorities declared the first air-pollution warning since 2005 and pronounced an environmental emergency. Two 

months later, with no end to the crisis in sight, the city banned about 40 percent of the more 5 million vehicles 

that daily transit the city and suburbs. 

# MEXICO CITY  Photo © iStock, MartinM303     

> 72 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Continued population growth, increased automobile traffic, and industrial activity—along with inconsistent enforcement 

of environmental laws—have undercut some of the gains Mexico City has made. Hoy No Circula has, ironically, created 

an incentive for people to own more than one car: The system is based on the last digit of the car’s license plate, so as 

long as the two plates do not match, then the owner can get around the one-day driving ban. 

Federal and municipal officials have vowed to take new steps to reduce pollution, including tighter emissions 

controls and a crackdown on cheaters. Promoting new technologies for more efficient energy use in buildings and 

offering tax incentives for sustainable construction and green roofs are among the other initiatives Mexico City has 

undertaken. 

Reforestation and creation of green areas will help as well, and the city has committed to collecting the necessary 

data. In January 2014, the Mexico City government started a real-time monitoring program to determine black 

carbon concentrations at five sites across the city. 

Mexico City has, compared to other cities globally, a moderate ROI of tree planting. The neighborhoods with the 

highest ROI are in central and east Mexico City. Moreover, our estimate of planting cost was relatively low for 

Mexico City, which increases the ROI shown in the scenarios in the table. 

Tezoyuca Jaltenco Tizayuca Capulhuac Coyotepec Xalatlaco Ocoyoacac Temamatla Cocotitlan Mexico City Temascalapa Texcoco de Mora Teotihuacán de Arista Tepetlaoxtoc de Hidalgo Tlalmanalco de Velázquez Tezoyuca Jaltenco Tizayuca Capulhuac Coyotepec Xalatlaco Ocoyoacac Temamatla Cocotitlan Mexico City Temascalapa Texcoco de Mora Teotihuacán de Arista Tepetlaoxtoc de Hidalgo Tlalmanalco de Velázquez 0 10km 

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  430,000  203,000  205,000 20% of sites  861,000  358,000  361,000 Full Investment  3,850,000  869,000  869,000 

Table 15. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Mexico City. 

Figure 27. ROI for tree planting for Mexico City. 

Map 22. Neighborhood-level ROI for Mexico City (PM reduction). 

# Results from the Mexico City study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |73

Nairobi is one of few world capitals to boast a national park within its borders. Lying to the south of the downtown 

area, Nairobi National Park, created in 1946, is the only place in the world where tourists can take a photo of a lion 

or a giraffe or even a black rhinoceros with skyscrapers looming in the background. 

The park covers some 45 square miles of open plains, broken bush, the Athi River and its deep gorges, long grass, 

short grass, flat land and foothills, and, in the western uplands, the Kisembe Forest. For Nairobi, the forest may be 

the most important habitat in the park. 

Kisembe forest is, in fact, the southern fringe of what used to be the extensive Langata Forest and is comprised 

of Crotons (e.g.,  Croton dichogamus),  African olive  (Olea africana),  Muhugus (e.g.  Brachylaena hutchinsii),  Cape 

Chestnuts ( Calodendrum capense ) and other indigenous species. One of few remaining large expanses of tree cover 

in Nairobi, it is sometimes called the “lungs of the city.” 

Whether the forest will continue to play that role is an open question. Kisembe, and indeed the entire park, is 

threatened by the rapid and largely unplanned expansion of Nairobi, one of the fastest-growing cities in all of 

Africa. 

The larger Nairobi metropolitan area had a population of 6.1 million in 2007, which is projected to rise to over 

12 million by 2030. Much of this growth is occurring as sprawl, as areas on the city edge absorb spillovers from the 

central city, where scarce rental housing is increasingly unaffordable to average citizens. This growth, combined 

with a lack of investment in public transport and urban road infrastructure, has resulted in increasing road 

deterioration, numbers of motor vehicles, and congestion. 

Millions of Nairobi’s residents (up to half the population, by some estimates) live in informal settlements: 

shanty towns and slums with few or no services, bad roads, and little access to clean water. Open cooking fires 

are common, as are trash fires. The city also has limited public transportation, so people living in the informal 

settlements rely on a huge fleet of privately run minibuses called  matatus . Not only are they dangerous— matatus 

with riders dangling out the windows of even on the roof are a common sight downtown—they tend to be old and 

poorly maintained, so they spew pollution across the city. Add the fact that the lack of roads means the  matatus 

and the thousands of diesel trucks and buses entering the city everyday often sit idling in epic traffic jams and you 

have a recipe for choking smog. 

Nairobi is attempting to address the problem in several different ways. First, in 2014, the Kenyan National 

Assembly enacted progressive and robust air-quality regulations intended to curb pollution of air by vehicles, 

factories, and other sources by ensuring minimum air-quality standards for both mobile and stationary sources. 

When fully enforced, industries using old and inefficient technologies will be required to adopt improved emission-

reduction technologies or transition to cleaner industrial processes. 

Nairobi also has an ambitious plan for future development called Nairobi Metro 2030. Largely focused on 

improving the city’s international economic competitiveness, it outlines the development of a transport master 

plan to improve transportation infrastructure and land use planning, including an urban mass-transit strategy that 

# NAIROBI  Photo © AWL Images / Masterfile     

> 74 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

centers around investments in high-occupancy buses and modernization of the existing commuter rail network. 

How effectively the municipal and national governments, often plagued with corruption and dissent, will translate 

the vision of the plan into tangible improvements for Nairobi’s residents remains a largely unanswered question. 

Some of Nairobi’s efforts to solve the traffic congestion problem may be at least partly self-defeating. A major 

new highway, the Nairobi Southern Bypass, and an expansion of a railway line threaten to slice through Nairobi 

National Park, and Kisembe Forest, in particular. In response, the Kenya Wildlife service in partnership with private 

companies is managing the Green Line Project, an initiative to plant forest along 30 kilometers of the perimeter 

of the park. The hope is to create a visible boundary between the park and surrounding new developments, and 

to discourage lobbying by developers to cut slices off the park. The program, which began in 2010, is part of a 

broader effort created by the late Nobel Prize winner Wangari Maathai to plant new trees throughout Nairobi to 

improve water catchment and biodiversity. 

Compared to other cities globally, Nairobi has a moderate ROI of tree planting for PM removal. Neighborhoods 

in the center and northeast of the city have the highest ROI. Because PM 2.5  concentrations are relatively low in 

Nairobi, according to the global dataset we used, we estimate that the absolute reduction would be less than 1 μg/ 

m³ for most people. 

Nairobi Nairobi  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  158,000  0 267,000 20% of sites  311,000  0 406,000 Full Investment  1,520,000  0 683,000 

Table 16. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Nairobi. 

Figure 28. ROI for tree planting for Nairobi. 

Map 23. Neighborhood-level ROI for Nairobi (PM reduction). 

# Results from the Nairobi study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |75

In 1913, Joyce Kilmer composed his best-known poem and perhaps the most famous ode to nature ever written. It 

begins with these lines, memorized countless times by countless schoolchildren: 

I think that I shall never see 

A poem lovely as a tree. 

So it was more than fitting that, 102 years later, a park in New York City named for Joyce Kilmer was the site of a 

ceremony to cap an eight-year effort to plant 1 million trees across the city. Kilmer would no doubt have smiled. 

New York began the MillionTreesNYC initiative under then-Mayor Michael Bloomberg in 2007, and the goal was 

to finish in 10 years. With the support of Bloomberg and his successor, Bill DeBlasio, the city reached its goal two 

years early. 

The one-millionth tree—an 8-year-old, 25-foot-tall lacebark elm—was planted in Joyce Kilmer Park, a 

baseball toss from Yankee Stadium in the South Bronx, one of the poorest areas of the city. A half-dozen such 

neighborhoods, devoid of trees and reporting high rates of asthma, were singled out for mass plantings as a part of 

the city-wide effort to create new green space and to combat the effects of climate change. 

Before launching the million trees initiative, the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation identified 

neighborhoods most in need of trees by overlaying urban canopy maps with community health survey maps. 

Unemployment, low incomes, the rate of hospitalization for asthma for children for 14 and younger—all correlated 

with the absence of trees. From this data, the agency designated six “Trees for Public Health” neighborhoods to 

receive canopy management plans and targeted planting: Hunts Point and Morrisania (location of Joyce Kilmer 

Park) in the Bronx, East New York in Brooklyn, East Harlem in Manhattan, Stapleton in Staten Island, and The 

Rockaways in Queens. 

Other cities have set similar goals for planting trees, but have had limited success. Denver abandoned its Mile 

High Million campaign in 2013, while Los Angeles got less than halfway through its Million Trees LA effort. But in 

New York, with the help of thousands of volunteers, MillionTreesNYC was able to plant 20,000 saplings a season 

in forests, restoring 700 acres citywide. 

Three-quarters of the trees planted as part of the initiative were added to city property like existing parks, along 

with 220,000 new street trees in all five boroughs, To get new trees into other public and private space—around 

hospitals, libraries, churches, public housing developments and in private yards—the city teamed up with the New 

York Restoration Project, brainchild of actress and singer Bette Midler. Together they raised $30 million toward the 

tree plantings. Over the course of the project, the city expanded its number of trees by 20 percent. 

New York City now has some 5 million trees. Trees cover almost a quarter of the city, and there are more than 

6,000 acres of woodlands in city parks alone. The city will need every one of those trees, and even more. Climate 

# NEW YORK NEW YORK  Photo © iStock, David Sucsy     

> 76 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

change is coming: Temperatures in New York are expected to jump 4.1 to 5.7 degrees by the 2050s, and by the 

2080s, it could be 8.8 degrees hotter than the current average of 54 degrees, according to the study by the New 

York City Panel on Climate Change, a group of leading scientists assembled by the city. 

According to the panel’s report, by mid-century, the city could get five to seven heat waves a year, compared to 

two currently, and the number of days over 90 degrees could double. The mercury is expected to crack 100 three 

to five days a year, compared to the current rate of less than once every year. 

New York has developed a comprehensive plan to deal with the consequences of climate change, particularly 

the risk of catastrophic floods. Among the initiatives in the plan, A Stronger, More Resilient New York, released 

in 2013, is a commitment to improve the health and resiliency of the city’s urban forest, recognizing the array of 

health and environmental benefits that trees provide. While New York City has a dense urban core where the 

ROI of tree planting is high, the farther suburbs and outlying towns have a lower ROI. We estimate that for an 

additional annual investment of $12 million in street tree planting and maintenance, more than 2.8 million people 

could have a reduction of 1.5° C (2.7° F) in summertime temperatures. 

Newark Mineola New City Brooklyn Paterson Manhattan The Bronx Elizabeth Morristown Hackensack White Plains Staten Island New Brunswick Newark Mineola New City Brooklyn Paterson Manhattan The Bronx Elizabeth Morristown Hackensack White Plains Staten Island New Brunswick  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  12,200,000  2,650,000  2,790,000 20% of sites  24,400,000  3,810,000  4,180,000 Full Investment  85,800,000  5,290,000  5,920,000 

Table 17. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for New York City. 

Figure 29. ROI for tree planting for New York City. 

Map 24. Neighborhood-level ROI for New York City (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the New York study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |77

Parisians call the Champs Elysees La Plus Belle Avenue du Monde—the most beautiful avenue in the world. The 

Mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo has another name for the grand, 1.25-mile avenue from Place de la Concorde down 

to the Arc de Triomphe. She calls it “a canyon of pollution.” 

That is a relatively recent development. For decades, few observers would have put Paris among the most polluted 

cities in Europe, let alone the world. But that has changed. In 2014, air pollution in Paris hit health-threatening 

levels, more than 80 percent higher than in London and Berlin. In the spring of that year, according to the European 

Environment Agency, on at least one occasion the PM 10  level hit 147 micrograms per cubic meter of air in Paris, 

compared with 114 in Brussels, 104 in Amsterdam, 81 in Berlin, and 80 in London. A year later, the situation was 

even worse, as Paris briefly held the distinction of the city with the most polluted air in the world. The city’s iconic 

monuments were shrouded in haze. 

Vehicle exhaust is the primary culprit, responsible for two-thirds of the city’s nitrogen dioxide pollution, which 

produces ozone, and more than half of the city’s particle pollution. In 2014, the city instituted alternate driving 

days (only odd- or even-numbered license plates permitted) and temporarily eliminated fares on all public 

transportation. 

Those steps had limited impact, so Mayor Hidalgo went further. As an experiment, she decided to ban cars from 

key areas of the city, including the Champs Elysses, for seven hours one day in the fall of 2015. According to air-

quality network Airpartif, which monitors pollution levels in Paris, there was a 40-percent drop in harmful exhaust 

emissions in parts of Paris. 

The success of that one-day experiment led to a broader campaign, called Paris Breathes. Some two dozen routes 

in the city will now be car-free on the first Sunday of every month. Another four zones will also be pedestrian-only 

on Sundays during summer months. 

In July 2016, Paris banned old cars from its streets in a further bid to crackdown on air pollution. 

Any car registered before 1997—excluding vintage vehicles—will be barred in the city center on weekdays 

between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. Any car owner caught breaking the rules will be issued a €35 fine for their first offense, 

with the fines set to nearly double early next year. 

By 2020, Mayor Hidalgo says, the ban could be extended to include all combustion-engine cars manufactured 

before 2011. More than a half-million car owners in Paris are expected to be affected. 

The efforts to clear the air in Paris go beyond just changing how Parisians drive. In Place de la Nation, one of the 

city’s famous squares, are three steel-sided structures, about 13 feet all and several feet thick. Free standing, with 

a curved, brushed-steel foot and a bench on one side, each one almost looks like it might be a piece of public 

# PARIS  Photo © iStock, AndreyGorulko     

> 78 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

sculpture, a frame for a large advertisement, or an electronic message board. You would not, at a glance, mistake it 

for a tree. But in an important sense, that is exactly what it is. 

The vertical face of the structure is not intended for words or pictures, but rather for moss. Outfitted with sophisticated 

air pollution monitors and connected to the internet, it is in effect a high-tech tree, built with the sole purpose of 

scrubbing fine dust and nitrous oxides from the air. According to the manufacturer, a German company called Green 

City Solutions, each of these “City Trees” can remove the same amount of pollution as 275 typical trees. 

The project in Place de la Nation is a pilot, but if it is successful, Green City Solutions could roll out the “trees” 

across Paris. But this technology does not come cheaply; each City Tree costs more than $25,000. 

Paris will also benefit from the more old-fashioned trees. Compared with other global cities, Paris only has a 

moderate ROI of tree planting. The central parts of Paris are the densest and have the highest estimated ROI. For 

an additional annual investment of $10 million in tree planting and maintenance, we estimate that 2.3 million 

people could have a reduction of > 1 μg/m³ of PM 2.5 .

Évry Paris Bobigny Créteil Nanterre Pontoise Versailles Évry Paris Bobigny Créteil Nanterre Pontoise Versailles  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  10,300,000  2,350,000  2,360,000 20% of sites  19,900,000  3,340,000  3,350,000 Full Investment  89,600,000  6,040,000  6,040,000 

Table 18. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios, for Paris. 

Figure 30. ROI for tree planting for Paris. 

Map 25. Neighborhood-level ROI for Paris (PM reduction). 

# Results from the Paris study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |79

For many visitors to Rio de Janeiro, one of the first stops is the Rua Cosmo Velho, where they can hop on a 

narrow-gauge, cog train for a 20-minute ride to the top of Corcovado. Once there, they will have a spectacular 

view over the city, Gaunabara Bay, and the famous beaches, as well as a close-up look at one of Rio’s, and 

the world’s, iconic images: the nearly 100-foot tall statue known in Portuguese as  Christo Redentor , Christ the 

Redeemer—the largest Art Deco statue in the world. 

The visitors to Corcovado may not even notice the forest they pass through on their way to the top. That 

would be a shame, because the forest is a rare jewel, an example of the Mata Atlântica, the Atlantic 

rainforest that once covered an area twice the size of Texas along Brazil’s eastern seaboard. Less than 10 

percent of that rich forest ecosystem remains, including about 15 square miles surrounding Corcovado, 

protected since 1961 as Tijuca National Park. 

The story of the creation of the park may reveal part of Rio’s future as well. The forest is a re-creation 

rather than a remnant of the one that greeted the first Portuguese explorers. By the mid-19th century, the 

Atlantic Forest surrounding Rio had been cut down to make way for sugar and coffee plantations. In 1861, 

the Brazilian king, Dom Pedro II, realized the deforestation would affect the city’s supply of drinking water. 

He ordered the continent’s first reforestation program. In less than two decades, employees and slaves 

planted more than 110,000 seedlings. 

Another bold reforestation effort may now be needed—this one far larger than Dom Pedro’s. Rio de Janeiro will 

likely be severely impacted by the effects of global warming. Temperatures are expected to rise by 1 ° C by 2020, 

according to the Urban Climate Change Research Network. Brazil’s National Institute of Meteorology predicts 

that Rio will experience an increase of 3.8 degrees Celsius by 2080. 

While Rio has extensive protected areas within the municipal boundaries—and Tijuca National Park by itself it 

more than 10 times the size of New York’s Central Park—most are at the edges of the city with few entrances 

and distant from the central cores. Most Cariocas, as the residents of Rio are known, see relatively few trees 

on a daily basis unless they are fortunate enough to live in the wealthier neighborhoods near the Ipanema and 

Copacabana beaches. 

That distinction highlights another challenge for Rio. In most cities, the urban heat island effect is most 

pronounced in the city centers. In Rio, however, people living in the working-class neighborhoods on the 

outskirts of the city and the densely populated slums called  favelas  experience the most intense effects of urban 

heat islands. According to a study conducted in 2000, the Bangu neighborhood, some 20 miles northwest of 

Copacabana, is the hottest in the city, while the richer areas of the South Zone and Barra da Tijuca are the coolest. 

# RIO DE JANEIRO  Photo © iStock, EduLeite     

> 80 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Rio has been working to reforest its hillsides for decades. Beginning in 1986, the city’s Environmental Secretariat 

led a community reforestation program and planted over 6 million seedlings on 2,200 hectares of land within 

the city limits. Once Rio won the right to host the 2016 Summer Olympics, the tree-planting effort accelerated. 

In 2012, authorities in Rio promised to plant 24 million trees (later increased to 34 million) by the end of 2015 

in order to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions from the Olympic Games and to provide other benefits. 

Unfortunately, only a fraction of the promised trees have been planted. The priority now is to make a full 

inventory of trees in the city, a two-year effort to determine the size, condition, and classification of every tree in 

the city, with the data feeding into Rio’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory. 

Compared with other cities globally, Rio has moderate ROI from tree planting. The neighborhoods with the 

highest estimated ROI are downtown Rio and the southern portion of Duque de Caxias considered in our report. 

For an additional annual investment of $2.4 million in street trees, we estimate that more than 900,000 people 

could have a reduction of 1.5° C (2.7° F) in summertime air temperature. 

Maricá Nova Iguaçu Rio de Janeiro Maricá Nova Iguaçu Rio de Janeiro  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5  1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  2,380,000  912,000  942,000 20% of sites  4,800,000  1,450,000  1,540,000 Full Investment  17,700,000  1,950,000  2,590,000 

Table 19. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Rio de Janeiro. 

Figure 31. ROI for tree planting for Rio de Janeiro. 

Map 26. Neighborhood-level ROI for Rio de Janeiro (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the Rio de Janeiro study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |81

It is a rite of spring in Seoul, as familiar—and nearly as ancient—as the cherry blossoms. But the arrival 

of “Hwang Sa” is not nearly so benevolent a harbinger of the season. “Hwang Sa,” or Yellow Dust, 

originates in deserts and is carried into the atmosphere by strong winds and onto the Korean Peninsula 

via the jet stream. Millennia ago—the earliest record of Hwang Sa in Korea is from the Second Century 

AD—the dust brought little more than a passing inconvenience. In the industrial era, however, the sands 

bring with them pollutants from both local and distant sources.. 

Small wonder that East Asia’s concentrations of PM 2.5  are the highest in the world, according to World 

Health Organization rankings. South Korea depends heavily on coal for electricity; in South Korea about 50 

coal plants generate electricity, a dozen more are planned by 2021, and the reliance is expected to deepen. 

According to government plans, most of the increasing demand for electricity in the coming years will be met 

with new coal and gas plants. Diesel fuel for cars and trucks further contribute to local pollution. 

A joint U.S.-Korea study, one of the most intensive air-quality investigations ever, will help clarify 

the sources of pollution. Known as KORUS-AQ, the study involves more than 580 researchers from 

72 institutions, including NASA. Three planes, two ships, and 300 ground-based monitoring sites 

combine to take air samples from across the Korean peninsula. NASA, for example, flies a DC-8 

plane outfitted with sophisticated sensors at low altitudes up and down the length of the Yellow Sea, 

over rural areas, and straight through crowded downtown Seoul, sometimes flying as low as 1,000 feet. 

Whatever the source, pollution in Seoul remains a stubborn problem. South Korea falls short of the 

WHO standard of 10 micrograms/m³ for average exposure to PM 2.5 , with average exposure nearly double 

safe levels. In 2015, the air quality in Seoul over a 24-hour period averaged “unhealthy for sensitive 

groups” or worse on 53 days. For comparison, Los Angeles counted only seven days in that category, 

while New York did not have a single day with air quality in that “unhealthy” range. According to 

researchers at Yale, in April, 2016, Koreans suffered through high levels of PM 2.5  half of all days. 

South Korea has implemented a range of policies and management efforts to address air pollution 

for more than three decades. South Korea promulgated its first regulation on air quality in 1993, the 

country’s first PM 10  standard in 1995, and further legislation for Seoul in 2003. 

Government officials in 2016 said they were considering closing coal-fired power plants that were more 

than 40 years old in a move to tackle the pollution problem. 

# SEOUL  Photo © © iStock, EduLeite     

> 82 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

To address emissions in the public transportation sector, compressed natural gas buses are being 

introduced in Seoul and other cities, with the number increasing from just 74 in 2001 to 23,000 in 2010. 

The Bus Rapid Transit System was also established to create bus lanes in the center of roads for more 

efficient traffic flows, and congestion fees are collected at specific tunnels. 

Seoul is also looking to increase greenspace in the city, setting a goal of more than 800,000 acres by 

2020. Our results suggest that tree planting could also have temperature-mitigation benefits. Compared 

with other global cities, Seoul has a fairly high ROI of tree planting, with the highest ROI in a north-south 

band running through the center portion of the city. We estimate that an additional annual investment of 

$1.9 million in street tree planting could give more than 600,000 people a reduction of 1.5° C (2.7° F). 

Seoul Seoul  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5 * 1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  1,910,000  646,000  647,000 20% of sites  4,050,000  1,210,000  1,200,000 Full Investment  20,300,000  3,590,000  3,590,000 *Note: Most people will receive a reduction of > 10 ug/m² PM 2.5 in this city 

Table 20. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Seoul. 

Figure 32. ROI for tree planting for Seoul. 

Map 27. Neighborhood-level ROI for Seoul (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the Seoul study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |83

In 2013, temperatures in Shanghai topped 38 ° C (100 ° F) for 10 straight days, making it the hottest July in 

140 years. The city’s Xujiahui weather observatory recorded a temperature higher than 41 ° C (105 ° F), an all-

time record, on July 26. The evening brought no relief from the heat. Temperatures dropped only into the high 

80s, some 10 degrees above normal. 

The heat wave made headlines around the world, but it is unlikely to be the last such event for two reasons. 

The first is global: The long-term rise in average temperatures may cause changes in weather patterns, such 

as a shift in the jet stream, that may increase temperatures in and around Shanghai, as well as changes the 

frequency and intensity of the monsoon. 

The second reason to expect more heat weaves in Shanghai is because of its success: The city has been 

booming for decades, and the population now tops 20 million. And Shanghai continues to grow: Since 1984, 

the area of urbanized land in Shanghai increased more than three times, at an annual rate of nearly 11 percent. 

According to one study, between 1997 and 2008 alone, developed land in Shanghai more than doubled, 

mostly as a result of converting cropland and forest to urban use. 

In response, Shanghai made a concerted effort to increase green spaces in the city. The United Nations 

estimates that the city doubled the amount of green spaces between 2000 and 2008. As part of its green 

spaces expansion, a number of parks have been established in Shanghai’s urban areas. 

The city has also undertaken a massive effort to increase the amount of green walls and rooftop gardens in 

the city. New rules introduced in October 2015 mandate that at least 50 percent of the roof area of all new 

buildings must be covered in plants. Shanghai plans to plant 400,000 square meters of rooftop gardens 

in 2016 alone. By 2020, 2 million square meters of greenery will likely be added to the roofs and walls of 

Shanghai’s buildings. 

More green roofs by themselves will not be enough. As a relatively high-density city, Shanghai also has a high 

estimated ROI of tree planting for temperature mitigation. Generally, the neighborhoods with the highest ROI 

are in the denser central portions of the city. For an annual additional cost of $1.6 million, almost 2 million 

people could have a reduction of summertime temperatures of 1.5° C (2.7° F). 

# SHANGHAI  Photo © chuyu     

> 84 |Planting Healthy Air |Case Studies

Shanghai is trying to change course on a broader scale, improving transportation and moving to an economic 

model based less on land-hungry industry and more on banking and information technology. By 2020, the city 

government plans to extend Shanghai’s metro, already the world’s longest, to more than 800 kilometers. In July 

2010, the central government announced plans for a Shanghai-Nanjing high-speed rail route. The new route is 

expected to cut journey time between the two cities from two hours to just 72 minutes, and has the potential to 

ease traffic congestion if commuters opt for the new train rather than their cars. 

The city is also reducing its dependence on coal. Under the 2013 Clean Air Action Plan, the city will ban the 

burning of coal by 2017, which means shutting or upgrading thousands of coal-fired boilers and furnaces. 

Meeting Shanghai’s growing energy demands without coal and while preserving open space will require a large-

scale shift to renewable sources. China built the world’s first large-scale offshore wind farm in Asia near the East 

China Sea Bridge, a 20-mile crossing that links Shanghai with the Yangshan Deep Water Port. 

Shanghai Shanghai  

> 010km

PM Temperature ROI (reduction x people/$) 0.001  0.01  0.1  0.5 1  5 10 

Investment  Annual Cost ($)  > 1 ug/m² PM 2.5 * 1.5 deg C 

10% of sites  1,610,000  1,980,000  1,980,000 20% of sites  3,230,000  3,140,000  3,140,000 Full Investment  16,200,000  6,800,000  6,800,000 *Note: Most people will receive a reduction of > 10 ug/m² PM 2.5 in this city 

Table 21. Temperature and PM reduction benefits under three investment scenarios for Shanghai. 

Figure 33. ROI for tree planting for Shanghai. 

Map 28. Neighborhood-level ROI for Shanghai (temperature reduction). 

# Results from the Shanghai study      

> PM ROI
> Higher Return Lower Return
> Case Studies |Planting Healthy Air |85

# Chapter 6 

Photo © iStock, visualspace Barriers to Using Nature as a Solution 

We hope our analyses will go some way toward closing the knowledge gap about the value of a natural 

infrastructure approach to keeping air healthy. But we also recognize that significant barriers remain to reaching 

nature’s full potential. In this section, we outline three important barriers to increased tree planting, and discuss 

how some cities are overcoming them. 

## Financial barriers 

In the report, we presented the case for thinking of urban forests as vital green infrastructure, that can help make 

air cleaner and cooler. However, the term “green infrastructure” also captures a reality: planting and maintaining 

trees in an urban environment costs money. Trees along streets or otherwise in the public right of way are 

generally paid for by governments, which may struggle to find enough money to fund maintenance of existing 

trees, let alone the planting of new ones. 100  One report suggests in the United States that around 75 percent of 

dollars for urban forestry goes toward maintenance and management, with only around 14 percent reserved for 

planting. 101  Perhaps more problematic is that the absolute size of the budget for urban forestry is tiny: The average 

large cities in the United States (population > 100,000) spend around $5 per person per year, around 0.3 percent 

of the average municipal budget in these cities. 

One of our goals in writing this report is to convince decision-makers that urban forestry can be thought of as, in 

part, an investment in health. Public health budgets, of course, are also stretched in many cities and countries, and 

we are not calling for raiding those budgets to provide for more tree planting. Rather, we simply note that current 

health expenditures is (appropriately) a much larger budgetary priority than urban tree planting. In the United 

States, total expenditures on health care was roughly $3.0 trillion in 2014, or roughly $9,500 per person. Around a 

quarter (28 percent) of this spending was by the federal government, with state and local governments accounting 

for an additional 17 percent of spending. 102  If, as this report has shown, there are health benefits to tree planting, 

then what is a modest 0.1 percent increase in health spending—say, an extra $5 or $10 per person per year—would 

double or triple urban forestry budgets in most U.S. cities. 

There are, of course, many other creative financing mechanisms that cities use to fund trees. 100  Among these: 

• Parcel taxes or landscaping districts—Individual property owners benefit from having street trees nearby, in a 

really quantitative way, with assessed property values increasing significantly when cities provide trees. The idea 

behind a parcel tax then is to treat trees as infrastructure to provide to citizens, just as some cities charge parcel 

taxes or other fees for stormwater or other public infrastructure. 

• Green area ratio or tree-cover requirements—Some cities require new developments to maintain a certain 

level of tree cover. In the simplest case, tree-protection ordinances require existing trees to be retained 

during development, if possible. Other cities require a certain amount of tree cover in new developments, but 

allow developers to choose how to hit that target. More generally, cities could choose to adopt a Green Area 

Ratio (GAR), allowing certain kinds of land cover to count as green (tree cover, but also green roofs, green 

infrastructure for stormwater mitigation, etc.) and requiring a certain ratio of green elements to total parcel area, 

with the ratio usually varying by the site’s zoning. 

• Bonds—In developed countries, particularly the United States, it is common for cities to issue general obligation 

bonds to fund new infrastructure (although not generally maintenance). These have occasionally been used to 

finance tree planting. 

• General funds—Most often, cities finance urban forestry out of general revenue. There is intense competition for 

this general revenue, though, which limits how much cities can put toward trees. 

• Government and private foundation grants—Some cities have turned to one-time grants to finance tree planting. 

One challenge with this funding stream is ensuring there is enough money for maintenance over time.     

> Chapter Six |Planting Healthy Air |87

## Institutional barriers 

Different government agencies often have very different missions, and so have different visions about what should 

be done (Photo 5). What benefits one agency or actor may impose a cost on another. A tree-planting program 

might benefit an electric utility but impose costs on the parks department. Or a city’s tree protection ordinance 

might conflict with the desire of urban planners for dense, walkable neighborhoods. Many cities struggle to 

harmonize the goals and actions of different agencies. For instance, a stormwater management agency and an 

electric utility may both love the idea of tree planting and natural infrastructure, but differ wildly in where and how 

they want to plant trees. 13   

> Photo 5. City governments have the power to improve their residents' health with better coordination and investment in tree planting. (City of Philadelphia ).

For the purposes of this report, the most important institutional barrier is simply that the agency in most cities that 

manages trees (e.g., the parks and recreation department) does not have health benefits in its mandate. Most of 

its employees may not be used to thinking about the air-quality benefits of trees, or view their provision as part 

of their job. Conversely, public health officials think a great deal about air quality, often from the perspective of 

regulations on emissions, or about the risk heat waves pose (where there is a well-defined process of heat health 

action plans, see next section). But they may not consider trees as a potential partial health solution, or view tree 

planting as part of their mandate. That means that in many municipal planning processes, there is no one speaking 

up for the potential health benefits of trees. 

A broad, inclusive set of stakeholders involved in the creation of an urban-forestry plan can often help. Several 

reports list best practices for creating urban-forestry plans, and often one of the first recommendations is having 

a broad set of stakeholders involved. For instance, the United States Forest Service 103  recommends including all of 

the “key players” involved, including the parks department, utilities (gas, electric, and cable), town planners, mayor 

or town council members, and non-governmental organizations dedicated to trees. To this list, we would suggest 

adding a public health official.     

> Photo © iStock, Adam Korzekwa
> 88 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Six

Another good place to bring health benefits into urban forestry is during the comprehensive plans of sustainability 

plans. While not all cities do these, they are a powerful way to make sure all the agencies in a city agency are 

pulling toward a coherent vision of a better city and supporting one another’s efforts. Because the planning frame 

is larger than one narrow issue (urban forestry), such broad plans can be a good place to make linkages between 

the actions of different departments. 104 

## Collective action barriers 

If cities want to go beyond working in the public right of way and instead encourage tree planting on the (usually 

much larger) private land base, they face a collective action problem. The largest challenge is getting thousands of 

private land owners to participate in a tree-planting program. This is a form of a collective action problem, which 

occurs for many types of natural infrastructure, but it is a particularly thorny challenge for tree-planting campaigns 

because of the small parcels of most urban landowners, which necessitate influencing the decisions of thousands. 

Cities often launch broad public education campaigns to win citizens' support for tree planting. They also will 

interact with community groups and neighborhoods institutions that can help win buy-in from many property 

owners at once. 13 

Another major tool is regulatory programs that mandate certain tree-protection or planting actions by landowners. 

For instance, many towns have tree-protection ordinances, which mandate the protection of large or valuable 

trees where possible. The related ordinance for new developments are planting requirements, which essentially 

require that a certain number or area of trees be present on a parcel. Because tree planting or maintenance is not 

always desirable or possible on every parcel (e.g., a tall build in the center part of a city), there is a concept of “tree 

banking,” essentially allowing development that violates tree ordinances if an equivalent number or area of trees 

are planted elsewhere in the city. The report  Guidelines for Developing and Evaluating Tree Protection Ordinances  has a 

list of common ordinances and a discussion of their pros and cons. 105 

Related to the idea of tree banking is the creation of financial incentives for tree planting that landowners can 

respond to if they wish. In some cities, the link between the shade trees provide and the benefits in terms of 

reduced electricity used have encouraged utilities to make this link tangible with utility bill donations or incentives. 

For instance, a utility may provide tree saplings to property owners and agree to reduce electric bills by a certain 

amount if trees are planted. The owners must agree in return to maintain the trees. Trees are often positioned on 

the western edge of a house, to provide maximum shade during the hot afternoon. Having shade trees around a 

house makes it more attractive, and these aesthetic benefits add tangible value when a home is resold. But more 

importantly for the utility, the trees reduce the house's electrical use, particularly on summer afternoons when the 

air conditioning is running strong.     

> Chapter Six |Planting Healthy Air |89

# Chapter 7 

Photo © Siephoto / Masterfile Heat Action Planning 

For more than 10 years, the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group (C40) has been a critical driver of climate action 

in the world’s largest and most influential cities. 

C40’s network of more than 85 cities – representing more than 650 million people around the world and one 

quarter of the global economy – are committed to tackling climate change and driving urban action that reduces 

greenhouse gas emissions and climate risks. C40 helps cities identify, develop and implement local policies and 

programmes that have collective global impact, while increasing the health, wellbeing and economic opportunities 

of urban citizens. 

Working across multiple sectors and initiative areas, C40 empowers cities to connect with each other and share 

common goals and challenges, providing a suite of services in support of their efforts: direct technical assistance; 

facilitation of peer-to-peer exchange; research, knowledge management, city diplomacy, and communications. 

C40 understands that cities are a leading force for climate action around the world and positions them as 

such, defining and amplifying their call to national governments for greater support and autonomy in creating a 

sustainable future. 

One way that cities are trying to address the challenge of excess heat is through heat action planning.  C40 Cities 

Climate Leadership Group  and  Global Cool Cities Alliance  (GCCA) formed a network of cities called the  Cool 

Cities Network  (CCN). This network is comprises of more than 14 leading cities from all over the world that face 

the impacts of extreme heat and work together to develop, share, and replicate best practices to address the issue. 

The global cities in the C40 network are taking action to help minimize the impact of extreme heat on their citizens. 

These actions can be classified into two broad categories: 1) heat emergency response measures, and 2) built 

environment heat mitigation and adaptation measures. Heat emergency response measures aim to address the 

threat of extreme heat events by executing emergency response plans that aim to minimize impacts of heat waves 

on citizens and particularly vulnerable communities. In addition, heat mitigation and adaptation measures focused on 

the built environment work to "cool" cities by incorporating cooling mechanisms in the structure of the city. 

## Heat emergency response measures 

Preparing for an emergency heat event is a manifold process. It requires numerous components of the emergency-

response plan to work in tandem, including unified actions from city agencies and departments. One of the most 

crucial parts of response planning is community mobilization and ensuring that the communications planned to 

reach the public are both flexible and clear to account for any unforeseen delays in the response. Cities like Toronto 

and Washington, D.C., have proactively developed heat emergency-response plans, which allow the cities to 

implement measures in an effective and timely manner, ensuring minimal impact of a heat wave on citizens. 

Tokyo, Japan,  has adopted several innovative cooling measures to provide the citizens solace from extreme heat. 

In order to identify the most vulnerable areas, the city conducted a heat-mapping exercise. The city was divided 

into 500-meter grids and priority areas were identified. One of the measures implemented in the city is “Dry Mist.” 

Sensor-controlled nozzles help in refreshing the people on the road by spraying dry mist. The sensors spray water, 

which evaporates as soon as it comes in contact with the atmosphere. This ensures that people do not get wet. 

However, the latent heat of evaporation creates a cooling effect. Another cooling measure adopted by Tokyo is 

actually an age-old Japanese tradition for summer called “Uchimizu.” This is a water-sprinkling practice in which 

people used to sprinkle water on streets during summer months to keep the area cool. Tokyo has adopted a greener 

version of “Uchimizu” that uses rainwater to sprinkle on the roads, keeping them cool during extreme heat days. 106     

> Chapter Seven |Planting Healthy Air |91

Washington, D.C.,  also launched a  Heat Emergency Plan . The plan has a strong focus on the vulnerable population 

and aims to provide them with information about the heat wave by highlighting the cooling spots across the city 

where citizens can take refuge. Citizens are also notified of a heat warning based on the heat index—a combination 

of heat and humidity. The cooling centers are made open to the public as soon as an extreme heat warning is 

issued in the city. The District has also set in place a strong response system through the  District Response 

Plan  for emergency heat situations, which comprises of multiple stakeholders responsible for its effective 

implementation. The District Office of Unified Communication is held responsible for communicating information 

about the heat warning to the public in a successful manner. 

## Built environment heat mitigation and adaptation measures 

Built environment and the “urban heat island effect”—which is caused by infrastructure—are key characteristics of 

our cities today. As the global temperatures rise, the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, including 

extreme heat, is increasing dramatically. Therefore, it is imperative to adapt to these changes in order to ensure 

good quality of life for the citizens. Cities like New York, Tokyo, Paris and many more are implementing several 

long-term measures that would modify the built environment in a way that it is much more resilient to extreme 

heat. They have incorporated various cooling measures in the city. 

New York, New York,  launched its  NYC CoolRoofs Program  in 2009 as a “Cool it Yourself” program encouraging 

building owners to paint their rooftops white. The Mayor’s office of New York City supported the program by 

coordinating a corps of volunteers and later evolved the program as a job-training initiative. The program has 

successfully coated more than 6 million square feet of rooftops to date and have engaged local property owners, 

community partners, workforce training organizations, and volunteers throughout the process. Every 2,500 square 

feet of rooftop that is coated can reduce the city’s carbon footprint by one ton of CO 2.

Los Angeles,  launched its  Cool Roof Ordinance  in 2014 in an update of its Green Building Code. The law requires 

all residential roofing material to meet a minimum “aged solar reflectance” (solar reflectance of roof after aging) 

and “thermal emittance” criteria (exceptions apply). The ordinance also has an incentive program, providing 

rebates to owners of single-family and multifamily household properties. 

Tokyo, Japan,  is installing thermal-barrier coating and water-retentive pavement in the city as a part of road 

maintenance and construction within central Tokyo, using the opportunity of the 2020 Summer Olympics to 

renovate city pavements, in and around the Olympic venues. The city has so far installed 84 kilometers of cool 

pavements including 19 kilometers of water-retentive pavement and 65 kilometers of thermal barrier coating 

pavement. The Tokyo Metropolitan Government has set a target of 136 kilometers of these innovative pavements 

by 2020, through adding 10 kilometers every year. 

Athens, Greece,  has been strongly promoting the construction of green roofs. The city has recently completed 

construction of green roofs on 13 primary and kindergarten schools. The project aims to increase awareness 

among students, provide insulation and, in particular, cooling benefits during hot weather, reduce energy usage, 

increase storm-water management, and improve aesthetics of the buildings. 107 

Paris, France,  started an initiative called "Des jardins sur les murs" or "Garden on the walls" when more than 

21,000 Parisians voted the initiative through the citizen referendum of the Participatory budget in 2014. As a part 

of the initiative, Paris plans to develop 41 green walls in the city. Green walls are not a new concept for Paris; in 

fact, from 2001 to 2013, the city planted 118 walls. 108  Paris has committed to building 100 hectares of green walls 

and roofs by 2020, including the 41 green walls. One-third of this area will be dedicated to urban agriculture. 109 

As major cities globally are experiencing increasing “urban heat island effect” and more extreme heat events 

because of global warming and changing weather patterns, addressing these hazards by adopting cooling 

techniques and strategies is an important way for cities to adapt to climate change while reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions that drive global—and local—temperature increases.     

> 92 |Planting Healthy Air |Chapter Seven

# By 2050, 250,000 people 

# could die each year because of urban heat, 

# unless cities take proactive steps to adapt 

# to global warming. 

> Photo © iStock, Allija

# Chapter 8 

Photo © Aaron Coury Conclusions 

We are entering the urban era. By 2050, the vast majority of humanity will live in cities. One of the preeminent 

tasks of cities will be making themselves vibrant, healthy, attractive places to live. This report has focused on just 

one small part of this task, the quest to make urban air healthier. Cities continue to strive to reduce concentrations 

of particulate matter and other atmospheric pollutants. And they are beginning to plan for the increased frequency 

and intensity of heat waves that climate change will likely bring. Succeeding against these twin challenges—air 

pollution and excess heat—will require an array of approaches. In this report, The Nature Conservancy has tried 

to understand—working in coordination with C40—whether nature can play a role in helping solve these twin 

challenges. 

Perhaps it is easiest to summarize our results relative to the main questions we set out to answer in this report: 

Which cities and neighborhoods can natural infrastructure help the most?  Our results stressed the importance 

of targeting, at multiple scales. The benefits that trees provide are localized, generally within a few hundred meters 

of the planting. We recommend, therefore, that trees not be described as a way to clean up and cool an entire 

city’s airshed. Rather, tree planting is a targeted tool that can be used to provide benefits to specific people in 

specific places. Locations with a high ROI of tree planting have, among other things, a high number of people that 

live near the planting and can benefit from it. We have tried to list in more detail in the body of the report planting 

guidelines that cities can use to ensure they are targeting their tree-planting efforts appropriately, to maximally 

deliver benefits to their citizens. 

Where is natural infrastructure a cost-effective investment, relative to common built infrastructure alternatives? 

We find that street trees are a cost-competitive strategy for reducing particulate matter concentrations and 

temperature mitigation. The benefits that trees deliver, in terms of $/ton of PM removed or $/degree of 

temperature mitigation, are in the same range as major built infrastructure alternatives. More importantly, street 

trees are able to deliver benefits both to PM and temperature mitigation, while grey infrastructure alternatives 

generally are not. 

How much vegetation is enough?  We did not find one single level of investment that is “enough.” Rather, tree 

planting for healthy air is an investment, and like any investment has a curve of potential payoffs. Many cities 

currently have relatively modest investment in urban forestry, and we find that air-quality benefits suggest a 

significant increase in investment is warranted. However, where cities end up along this investment curve is a 

choice they will have to make, based upon their budget and their priorities. 

How much investment, in dollar terms, is needed?  Again, there was no clear single level of investment that is 

needed. However, we were able to show that even a relatively modest additional annual global investment of 

$100 million for tree planting and maintenance, targeted toward the cities and neighborhoods where it would 

deliver the most benefits, could help improve the lives of millions. 

What fraction of the air-quality problem can vegetation solve?  Street trees have the potential to solve a modest 

portion of the air-quality problem. While the environmental community needs some humility, since the scope for 

nature-based solutions is modest relative to the scale of the global challenge, there are still millions of people who 

can be cost-effectively helped by street trees. 

In conclusion, tree planting constitutes a part of a cost-effective portfolio of interventions aimed at controlling 

particulate matter pollution and mitigating high temperatures in cities. While trees cannot and should not replace 

other strategies to make air healthier, trees can be used in conjunction with these other strategies to help clean 

and cool the air. Moreover, trees provide a multitude of other benefits beyond healthier air. In the right spot, trees 

can both help make our air healthier and our cities more verdant and livable. They are an important way that we 

can make our coming urban world—the cities in which most of us will live—resilient, livable, and thriving.     

> Chapter Eight |Planting Healthy Air |95

# Appendix I 

Photo © Devan King Appendix 1: City Rankings 

This table lists the median return on investment (ROI) of tree planting for both temperature and particulate matter 

reduction. The units are the physical reduction (e.g.,°C for temperature) multiplied by the population receiving 

that reduction, divided by the cost in US2015$. The three scenarios of impact (High, Medium, and Low) show 

the uncertainty in how effective trees are at providing this service. Note the median ROI figure for a city means, 

by definition, that half of the neighborhoods have a higher ROI and half the neighborhoods have a lower ROI. The 

variance within cities is often quite large, so even cities that have a low median ROI often have neighborhoods with 

relatively high ROI. We urge interested readers to consult our website  nature.org/healthyair , which has detailed 

information for all cities considered in the report. Note that we examined broad metropolitan regions; for instance, 

we examined Washington, D.C., plus surrounding towns in the states of Virginia and Maryland. 

ROI for temperature (°C x population/$)  ROI for PM (°g/m³ x population/$) 

City  High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low 

Abidjan  0.74  0.52  0.31  1.42  0.91  0.44 

Accra  0.93  0.66  0.39  2.08  1.33  0.64 

Addis Ababa  0.43  0.30  0.18  0.54  0.34  0.17 

Ahmadabad  0.99  0.70  0.41  4.18  2.67  1.28 

Algiers  0.35  0.25  0.15  0.35  0.22  0.11 

Al-Iskandariyah (Alexandria)  0.95  0.67  0.40  2.28  1.45  0.70 

Al-Khartum (Khartoum)  0.11  0.08  0.04  0.48  0.31  0.15 

Al-Qahirah (Cairo)  0.81  0.57  0.34  3.63  2.32  1.11 

Amman  0.11  0.08  0.05  0.26  0.16  0.08 

Amsterdam  0.05  0.04  0.02  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Ankara  0.10  0.07  0.04  0.17  0.11  0.05 

Antananarivo  0.67  0.47  0.28  0.14  0.09  0.04 

Ashgabat  0.32  0.23  0.13  0.67  0.43  0.21 

Asuncion  0.26  0.18  0.11  0.17  0.11  0.05 

Athens  0.13  0.09  0.05  0.20  0.13  0.06 

Atlanta, GA  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Austin, TX  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Baghdad  0.21  0.15  0.09  1.08  0.69  0.33 

Baku  0.19  0.13  0.08  0.37  0.24  0.11 

Baltimore, MD  0.04  0.02  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Bamako  0.59  0.41  0.24  0.91  0.58  0.28 

Bangalore  0.45  0.32  0.19  0.89  0.57  0.27 

Bangui  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Barcelona  0.41  0.29  0.17  0.47  0.30  0.15 

Beijing  0.40  0.28  0.16  2.95  1.88  0.90 

Beirut  0.34  0.24  0.14  0.84  0.54  0.26 

Belgrade  0.12  0.09  0.05  0.17  0.11  0.05 

Belo Horizonte  0.24  0.17  0.10  0.13  0.08  0.04 

Berlin  0.08  0.05  0.03  0.09  0.06  0.03 

Birmingham, AL  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Bishkek  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.01  0.01  0.00 

ROI of PM and Temperature Reduction      

> Higher Lower
> Appendix I |Planting Healthy Air |97

Bissau  0.47  0.33  0.19  0.86  0.55  0.26 

Bogotá  0.23  0.17  0.10  0.10  0.06  0.03 

Boston, MA  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

BrasÍlia  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Bratislava  0.05  0.04  0.02  0.07  0.05  0.02 

Brazzaville  0.73  0.52  0.30  0.40  0.26  0.12 

Bridgeport, CA  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Brussels  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.05  0.03  0.02 

Bucharest  0.32  0.23  0.13  0.51  0.32  0.15 

Budapest  0.08  0.06  0.03  0.12  0.08  0.04 

Buenos Aires  0.21  0.15  0.09  0.14  0.09  0.04 

Bujumbura  0.32  0.23  0.13  0.36  0.23  0.11 

Busan  0.25  0.17  0.10  0.33  0.21  0.10 

Campinas  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.12  0.08  0.04 

Canberra  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Cape Town  0.13  0.09  0.05  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Caracas  0.18  0.13  0.07  0.08  0.05  0.02 

Casablanca  0.52  0.37  0.22  0.38  0.24  0.12 

Changchun  0.18  0.13  0.07  0.48  0.31  0.15 

Changsha, Hunan  0.55  0.39  0.23  2.72  1.74  0.83 

Chengdu  0.40  0.28  0.17  2.54  1.62  0.78 

Chennai (Madras)  0.79  0.56  0.33  1.79  1.14  0.55 

Chicago, IL  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.02  0.01  0.01 

Chittagong  0.71  0.50  0.30  0.98  0.63  0.30 

Chongqing  0.58  0.41  0.24  3.17  2.02  0.97 

Colombo  0.31  0.22  0.13  0.54  0.35  0.17 

Conakry  0.37  0.26  0.15  0.82  0.52  0.25 

Copenhagen  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Curitiba  0.13  0.09  0.05  0.09  0.06  0.03 

Dakar  1.15  0.82  0.48  4.65  2.97  1.43 

Dalian  0.10  0.07  0.04  0.35  0.22  0.11 

Dallas, TX  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Damascus  1.26  0.89  0.52  3.38  2.16  1.04 

Dar es Salaam  1.10  0.78  0.46  0.74  0.47  0.23 

Delhi  0.88  0.62  0.36  6.65  4.24  2.04 

Denver, CO  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Detroit, MI  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.02  0.01  0.01 

Dhaka  3.24  2.29  1.34  10.42  6.65  3.19 

Doha  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.07  0.04  0.02 

Dongguan (Guangdong province)  0.40  0.28  0.17  1.94  1.24  0.59 

Dublin  0.05  0.03  0.02  0.02  0.02  0.01 

Durban  0.09  0.06  0.04  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Faisalabad  1.15  0.81  0.48  6.19  3.95  1.90 

Fortaleza  0.36  0.26  0.15  0.05  0.03  0.02 

Foshan  0.24  0.17  0.10  0.78  0.49  0.24 

Freetown  1.23  0.87  0.51  3.47  2.21  1.06 

Fuzhou (Fujian province)  0.51  0.36  0.21  1.01  0.64  0.31 

Guadalajara  0.37  0.26  0.15  0.31  0.20  0.09 

Guangzhou (Guangdong province)  0.49  0.35  0.20  1.48  0.95  0.45 

Guatemala City  0.32  0.23  0.13  0.16  0.10  0.05 

Guiyang  0.30  0.21  0.12  0.83  0.53  0.25 

Haerbin  0.31  0.22  0.13  0.58  0.37  0.18 

Haikou  0.35  0.25  0.15  0.65  0.41  0.20 

Hangzhou  0.38  0.27  0.16  2.08  1.32  0.64 

ROI for temperature (°C x population/$)  ROI for PM (°g/m³ x population/$) 

City  High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low      

> ROI of PM and Temperature Reduction
> Higher Lower
> 98 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix I

Hanoi  0.74  0.52  0.30  2.25  1.44  0.69 

Harare  0.23  0.16  0.10  0.10  0.07  0.03 

Havana  0.09  0.06  0.04  0.05  0.03  0.01 

Hefei  0.25  0.17  0.10  1.46  0.93  0.45 

Helsinki  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Ho Chi Minh  1.60  1.13  0.66  1.70  1.09  0.52 

Hong Kong  1.09  0.77  0.45  1.33  0.85  0.41 

Houston, TX  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Huhot  0.17  0.12  0.07  0.37  0.24  0.11 

Hyderabad  0.53  0.37  0.22  1.48  0.94  0.45 

Ibadan  0.44  0.31  0.18  0.48  0.31  0.15 

Islamabad  0.12  0.08  0.05  0.45  0.28  0.14 

Istanbul  0.59  0.41  0.24  0.86  0.55  0.26 

Izmir  0.19  0.13  0.08  0.27  0.17  0.08 

Jaipur  0.32  0.22  0.13  1.12  0.71  0.34 

Jakarta  0.52  0.37  0.22  1.03  0.66  0.32 

Jerusalem  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Jiddah  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.08  0.05  0.03 

Jinan (Shandong province)  0.36  0.25  0.15  2.53  1.61  0.77 

Johannesburg  0.08  0.06  0.03  0.07  0.05  0.02 

Kabul  0.85  0.60  0.35  2.37  1.51  0.73 

Kampala  0.86  0.61  0.36  0.82  0.52  0.25 

Kano  0.46  0.32  0.19  1.10  0.70  0.34 

Kanpur  0.22  0.16  0.09  1.08  0.69  0.33 

Kansas City, KS  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Karachi  1.80  1.27  0.74  10.97  7.00  3.36 

Kathmandu  1.58  1.12  0.66  3.98  2.54  1.22 

Kigali  0.50  0.35  0.21  0.53  0.34  0.16 

Kingston  0.08  0.06  0.03  0.05  0.03  0.02 

Kinshasa  1.12  0.80  0.47  0.61  0.39  0.19 

Kolkata (Calcutta)  0.19  0.13  0.08  0.76  0.48  0.23 

Krung Thep (Bangkok)  0.44  0.31  0.18  0.79  0.51  0.24 

Kuala Lumpur  0.13  0.09  0.05  0.19  0.12  0.06 

Kunming  0.16  0.11  0.07  0.28  0.18  0.09 

Kyiv  0.21  0.15  0.09  0.23  0.15  0.07 

La Paz  0.16  0.11  0.07  0.08  0.05  0.02 

Lagos  0.56  0.40  0.23  1.47  0.93  0.45 

Lahore  0.37  0.26  0.15  1.97  1.25  0.60 

Lanzhou  0.27  0.19  0.11  0.65  0.41  0.20 

Lhasa  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Libreville  0.09  0.06  0.04  0.05  0.03  0.02 

Lilongwe  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.04  0.03  0.01 

Lima  0.52  0.36  0.21  0.57  0.36  0.17 

Lisbon  0.12  0.08  0.05  0.09  0.06  0.03 

Ljubljana  0.05  0.03  0.02  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Lome  0.57  0.41  0.24  1.22  0.78  0.37 

London  0.07  0.05  0.03  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Los Angeles, CA  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Louisville, KY  0.01  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Luanda  0.59  0.42  0.25  0.40  0.25  0.12 

Lucknow  0.25  0.18  0.10  1.41  0.90  0.43 

Madrid  0.13  0.09  0.06  0.13  0.08  0.04 

Managua  0.29  0.20  0.12  0.16  0.10  0.05 

Manila  0.46  0.32  0.19  0.42  0.27  0.13 

ROI for temperature (°C x population/$)  ROI for PM (°g/m³ x population/$) 

City  High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low      

> ROI of PM and Temperature Reduction
> Higher Lower
> Appendix I |Planting Healthy Air |99

Maputo  0.56  0.39  0.23  0.40  0.25  0.12 

MedellÍn  0.32  0.23  0.13  0.12  0.07  0.04 

Melbourne  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Mexico City  0.40  0.28  0.17  0.53  0.34  0.16 

Miami, FL  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Minneapolis, MN  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.02  0.01  0.00 

Minsk  0.35  0.25  0.14  0.43  0.27  0.13 

Mogadishu  0.53  0.38  0.22  0.44  0.28  0.13 

Monrovia  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Monterrey  0.24  0.17  0.10  0.22  0.14  0.07 

Montevideo  0.18  0.13  0.07  0.14  0.09  0.04 

Montréal  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.01 

Moskva (Moscow)  0.10  0.07  0.04  0.10  0.07  0.03 

Mumbai (Bombay)  1.89  1.34  0.78  5.06  3.23  1.55 

Nagoya  0.17  0.12  0.07  0.25  0.16  0.08 

Nairobi  0.47  0.34  0.20  0.24  0.15  0.07 

Nanchang  0.39  0.28  0.16  1.94  1.23  0.59 

Nanjing (Jiangsu province)  0.43  0.30  0.18  2.66  1.69  0.81 

Nanning  0.18  0.13  0.08  0.81  0.52  0.25 

Nashville, TN  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

New Orleans, LA  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

New York, NY  0.04  0.03  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Ningbo  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.55  0.35  0.17 

Nouakchott  0.28  0.20  0.12  1.31  0.83  0.40 

Osaka-Kobe  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.17  0.11  0.05 

Oslo  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Ottawa  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Panama  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Paris  0.09  0.06  0.04  0.10  0.07  0.03 

Philadelphia, PA  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Phnom Penh  0.78  0.55  0.32  0.94  0.60  0.29 

Phoenix, AZ  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Pittsburgh, PA  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.02  0.01  0.01 

Port-au-Prince  1.22  0.86  0.51  1.88  1.20  0.58 

Portland, OR  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Porto Alegre  0.23  0.16  0.10  0.12  0.08  0.04 

Prague  0.07  0.05  0.03  0.09  0.06  0.03 

Pretoria  0.09  0.06  0.04  0.07  0.04  0.02 

Pune (Poona)  0.77  0.54  0.32  1.39  0.89  0.43 

Qingdao  0.30  0.21  0.12  1.10  0.70  0.34 

Quito  0.23  0.16  0.09  0.14  0.09  0.04 

Rabat  0.53  0.38  0.22  0.62  0.39  0.19 

Rangoon  1.04  0.74  0.43  1.16  0.74  0.36 

Recife  0.38  0.27  0.16  0.15  0.10  0.05 

Riga  0.08  0.06  0.03  0.05  0.04  0.02 

Rio de Janeiro  0.15  0.11  0.06  0.11  0.07  0.03 

Roma (Rome)  0.05  0.04  0.02  0.04  0.02  0.01 

Sacramento, CA  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Saint Petersburg  0.09  0.06  0.04  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Salvador  0.66  0.47  0.27  0.20  0.13  0.06 

San Diego, CA  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00 

San Francisco, CA  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

San Jose  0.15  0.10  0.06  0.10  0.06  0.03 

ROI for temperature (°C x population/$)  ROI for PM (°g/m³ x population/$) 

City  High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low      

> ROI of PM and Temperature Reduction
> Higher Lower
> 100 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix I

San Jose, CA  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00 

San Juan  0.07  0.05  0.03  0.06  0.04  0.02 

San Salvador  0.26  0.18  0.11  0.22  0.14  0.07 

Sanaa  1.09  0.77  0.45  3.21  2.04  0.98 

Santiago  0.23  0.16  0.10  0.18  0.12  0.06 

Santo Domingo  0.38  0.27  0.16  0.36  0.23  0.11 

São Paulo  0.30  0.21  0.12  0.31  0.20  0.09 

Sarajevo  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Seattle, WA  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00 

Seoul  0.40  0.28  0.17  0.79  0.50  0.24 

Shanghai  0.71  0.50  0.29  3.17  2.02  0.97 

Shantou  0.29  0.20  0.12  0.75  0.48  0.23 

Shenyang  0.07  0.05  0.03  0.20  0.13  0.06 

Shenzhen  0.59  0.41  0.24  1.09  0.70  0.33 

Shijiazhuang  0.25  0.18  0.10  2.56  1.63  0.78 

Singapore  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.01 

Skopje  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.06  0.04  0.02 

Stockholm  0.08  0.06  0.03  0.04  0.02  0.01 

Surat  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.10  0.06  0.03 

Suzhou (Jiangsu province)  0.27  0.19  0.11  1.51  0.96  0.46 

Sydney  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Taiyuan (Shanxi province)  0.10  0.07  0.04  0.38  0.24  0.12 

Tallinn  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.02  0.01  0.01 

Tashkent  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.02  0.01  0.01 

T’Bilisi  0.26  0.18  0.11  0.35  0.22  0.11 

Tegucigalpa  0.60  0.42  0.25  0.23  0.15  0.07 

Tehran  0.20  0.14  0.08  0.60  0.38  0.18 

Tel Aviv  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.33  0.21  0.10 

Tianjin  0.25  0.18  0.10  1.36  0.87  0.42 

Tirana  0.32  0.23  0.13  0.45  0.28  0.14 

Tokyo  0.30  0.21  0.12  0.52  0.33  0.16 

Toronto  0.05  0.03  0.02  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Tripoli  0.06  0.04  0.02  0.15  0.10  0.05 

Tunis  0.26  0.18  0.11  0.27  0.17  0.08 

Ulaanbaatar  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.00  0.00  0.00 

Ürümqi (Wulumqi province)  0.10  0.07  0.04  0.16  0.10  0.05 

Vienna  0.08  0.06  0.03  0.09  0.06  0.03 

Vilnius  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Warsaw  0.09  0.07  0.04  0.11  0.07  0.03 

Washington, DC  0.03  0.02  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.01 

Wellington  0.05  0.04  0.02  0.01  0.01  0.00 

Wenzhou  0.25  0.18  0.10  0.63  0.40  0.19 

Windhoek  0.06  0.05  0.03  0.02  0.02  0.01 

Wuhan  0.37  0.26  0.15  2.06  1.31  0.63 

Wuxi (Jiangsu province)  0.35  0.25  0.15  1.69  1.08  0.52 

Xiamen  0.18  0.13  0.08  0.44  0.28  0.13 

Xi’an (Shaanxi province)  0.16  0.12  0.07  1.27  0.81  0.39 

Xining  0.10  0.07  0.04  0.12  0.08  0.04 

Yerevan  0.22  0.16  0.09  0.53  0.34  0.16 

Yinchuan  0.14  0.10  0.06  0.26  0.17  0.08 

Zagreb  0.04  0.03  0.02  0.05  0.03  0.02 

Zhengzhou  0.29  0.20  0.12  2.58  1.65  0.79 

Zhongshan  0.17  0.12  0.07  0.60  0.39  0.18 

ROI for temperature (°C x population/$)  ROI for PM (°g/m³ x population/$) 

City  High  Medium  Low  High  Medium  Low      

> ROI of PM and Temperature Reduction
> Higher Lower
> Appendix I |Planting Healthy Air |101

Photo © Karine Aigner 

# Appendix II Appendix 2: Methods 

## Overview 

In this section, we describe the methods used in this study. First, we describe how we selected our study 

cities. Next, we describe how we conducted our review of the literature on trees and their mitigation of PM and 

temperature. Following that, we describe our calibration analysis, using high-resolution data to examine 34 cities 

in the United States and China. Note that our literature review and calibration analysis will also be described in a 

journal article (currently under review). Finally, we turn to our global analysis, describing the major analysis steps. 

## Cities studied 

City selection 

First, we began with a list of cities greater than 3 million people, as taken from the UNPD. 23  We then added national 

capitals of greater than 250,000 population (e.g., places like Stockholm). Finally, we added cities that were known 

priorities for The Nature Conservancy in regions. In the United States, for instance, this ensured that some smaller 

cities like Louisville, Kentucky, and Birmingham, Alabama were added to the analysis. In China, we chose to include 

all provincial capital cities. In total, there were 259 cities selected as candidate cities in our global analysis. 

City boundaries 

Boundaries for the cities come from a variety of sources. For most countries, we used the boundaries in the World 

Urban Areas layer distributed with ArcGIS 10. This, in turn, seems to be based primarily on the urban area maps 

created from MODIS imagery (and available free through Natural Earth). For some cities that were too small to 

be mapped in this imagery, we used the GRUMP urban area extents (e.g., Lhasa). For U.S. cities, we used the 

boundaries traditionally set by the U.S. Census. Specifically, we used the core-based statistical area definition 

of the U.S. Census, obtaining the boundaries for principal cities within the CBSA. This is necessary in the United 

States, because many metro regions have dozens or hundreds of different legal municipalities. 

Data quality screen 

After examining the available geospatial data sources, we ended up with a final list of 245 cities, listed in 

Appendix 1. Fourteen cities were dropped because the available geospatial data would not support accurate 

calculation of return on investment. 

Out of this list of 245 cities, there were 30 cities where small portions of the city were data-limited. This occurred 

because the population density database (see below) was relatively coarse in portions of these cities. While these 

30 poor-data-quality cities are in Appendix 1, because we believe their city-level metrics are accurate, we have not 

featured neighborhood-level data in the online website. 

Additionally, there were nine cities that had apparently incomplete data for the global forest cover dataset we used 

because of clouds or banding issues with the Landsat imagery (Abidjan, Colombo, Kampala, Tehran, Fortaleza, 

Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Bogota, Detroit). While we think the neighborhood-level ROI data for these cities is 

generally accurate, care should be used when looking at forest-cover maps. 

Similarly, the input data for particulate matter concentration seems to underestimate the concentration of PM 

in Lima, Peru. For consistency’s sake, we did not do an ad hoc correction of the PM in Lima, but we note that our 

predictions of the effectiveness of trees in the city are likely conservative, underestimating the true effectiveness.     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |103

## Literature review 

The goal of this phase of the analysis was to survey the available literature on how trees reduce particulate 

matter concentrations or temperature, and then select a range of impact scenarios (High, Medium, and Low) that 

bracketed the uncertainty in the scientific literature. Our focus was on street trees, although we considered studies 

that also looked at larger patches if they contain information relevant to our report. 

Particulate matter 

In this section, we discuss removal of PM 

by trees, discussing both PM 10  and PM 2.5 ,

depending on the scientific paper. 

Conceptually, there are three processes 

studied in the literature related to PM 

concentration and trees (Figure 34). 

First, there is the incoming airflow, 

which carries a certain concentration 

of PM (μg/m³). Of course, this varies 

over time and space, depending on wind 

patterns and sources of PM emissions. 

In this global analysis, we look at average 

concentrations over an annual time step, 

and make the simplifying assumption 

that over that long time period, variations 

in wind direction average out. Second, 

the incoming airflow passes through 

the canopy, and a fraction of the PM is 

removed. This can be measured either 

as the percent reduction in PM during 

passage through the canopy, or as the 

removal in tons, or as a deposition 

velocity (the absolute rate of deposition per unit time). Note that some fraction of the incoming airflow is 

deflected instead of passing through the canopy, which can result in locally higher concentrations of PM upwind of 

a tree. Third, the cleaner air exits the canopy and continues moving downwind. Over some distance, this cleaner 

air mixes with other air that didn’t pass through the canopy (redilution), and the concentration of PM approaches 

the average concentration for the region. 

PM removal by tree canopy 

Deposition velocity:  One common way canopy removal of PM is measured is as a deposition velocity. This 

research approach is often used because deposition velocity is a key parameter in the process-level models of dry 

deposition. Most commonly, deposition velocity has been measured in closed forest stands or in rural settings. A 

relatively small number of studies 40 , 41 , 50  have directly measured deposition velocity in an urban setting (Table 22). 

PM Removal by Tree Canopy Blocked Airflow PM in Airflow PM Redilution      

> Figure 34. Diagram of PM removal by trees. Illustration: ©Mackinzie Jones.
> 104 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

Freer-Smith et al. 

2005 

Mitchell et al. 

20101 

Mitchell et al. 

20102  Langner et al. 2011 

Location 

Urban fringe 

(Sussex field 

site) Brighton, 

UK 

Urban roadside 

park, high traffic 

(Withdean Park) 

Brighton, UK 

Urban roadside, 

moderate-high 

traffic, Lancaster, 

UK 

Background field 

site (Hazelrigg 

weather station), 

Lancaster, UK 

36 sites around 

elevated stack 

point source, 

Oxfordshire, UK 

High-traffic 

street canyon 

(site K-2a), 

Karlsruhe, 

Germany 

Urban highway 

(site B-4b), 

Berlin, Germany 

Vegetation type  Small tree stands  Saplings, single trees  Trees  Single row of 

mature trees 

Small trees and 

shrubs 

Classification for 

scaling 

Urban, non-

roadside 

Urban 

roadside  Urban roadside  Urban, non-

roadside 

Urban, non-

roadside 

Urban 

roadside  Urban roadside 

A B C D E F G

Corsican Pine ( Pinus 

nigra ) 2.8  4.7 

Leyland Cypress 

(Cupressocyparis 

leylandii )

3.4  6.2 

Field Maple ( Acer 

campestre ) 3.6  1.8  1.9 

Poplar ( Populus 

deltoides 

trichocarpa )

0.6  0.4 

Whitebeam ( Sorbus 

aria ) 5.4  3.3 

Birch ( Betula 

pendula ) 5 2 4.6 

Lime ( Tilia 

platyphyllos ) 2 2 2.4 

Sweet chestnut  0.5 

Willow  0.6 

Elder  0.8 

Elm  0.9 

Sycamore  1.3 

Horse chestnut  1.4 

Ash  1.5 

Beech  3.0 

Small-leaved lime ( Tilia cordata ) 1.7 

Norway Maple ( Acer platanoides ) and Sycamore Maple ( Acer pseudoplatanus ) 1.8         

> Notes: 1Calculated from field measurements of magnetic PM 10 .2Calculated by scaling v dof magnetic PM 10 of lime and sycamore calculated from field
> measurements using ratios of magnetic PM 10 of these two and other analyzed species. v ds s measured over time periods of 48 hours (averaged over
> three-week period) to one month (Mitchell et al. 2010); two weeks (Langner et al. 2011); and seven days (Freer-Smith et al. 2005), thus accounting for
> resuspension.
> Table 22. PM 10 deposition velocities to urban vegetation, cm s -1

Measured deposition velocity clearly varies greatly, by species as well as by type of site. This study focuses on 

roadside vegetation (columns B, C, F, and G in Table 22), which had a mean deposition velocity of 3.0 cm s -1 . There 

is considerable uncertainty in this estimate, though, and a one-standard-deviation range around our estimate 

would be from 1.1-4.9 cm s -1 . It is interesting to note that commonly used models of PM deposition use PM 

deposition velocities reported from older, non-urban study sites that generally have lower deposition velocities 43 

or from laboratory experiments that may not accurately represent conditions at modeled sites. For instance, many     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |105

implementations of the Urban Forest Effects model (also called UFORE or I-Tree) 51  are based on the average PM 

deposition values of Lovett 1994, 52  which was 1.28 cm s -1 . This suggests that UFORE and I-Tree estimates may be 

underestimating removal by roadside vegetation by a factor of 2.3 (i.e., the mean observed deposition from urban 

sites, 3.0, divided by the Lovett factor, 1.28). 

There are other reasons to think that some modeled estimates of PM removal in the scientific literature may 

be underestimates. For example, air pollutant removal models such as the UFORE/I-Tree model 53 generally 

use ambient pollutant concentrations reported by U.S. EPA air-quality monitors as a key input. Because those 

monitors are often located away from major emission sources, 4 and because concentrations of PM and many 

other air pollutants decay to urban background levels over fairly short distances, 55  reported concentrations at 

monitoring sites may not adequately capture PM variability in an urban area 56  and may underestimate PM levels 

in areas located closer to emission sources, 57  as well as city-wide average concentrations. 58  With removal of many 

pollutants by trees being a linear function of ambient concentrations,  ceteris paribus , such a systematic bias in 

concentration estimates may result in a substantial underestimate of modeled removal by vegetation in areas near 

emission sources 44  and city-wide average removal. 54 

Given this active discussion in the literature about the appropriate deposition velocity values for use in process-

level models of dry deposition, and because the scope of our analysis prevented running such models for all 

245 cities in our analysis, we decided to base our PM reduction estimates on empirical measurements of PM 

reductions in urban settings. Accordingly, we didn’t use estimates of deposition velocity directly in our calculation, 

instead developing the approach described below. Note, however, that Kroeger et al. (in review) compared our 

methodology to the total removal that would be found using a deposition velocity approach, and found the two 

methods to give similar ranges of total removal (see box below). 

Exponential decay inside canopies:  Another approach used in the literature to quantify PM removal by trees is 

to examine how PM concentration changes in air moving through a canopy. The observed near-source PM mass 

concentration decrease in forest canopies can be fitted into an exponential function of patch depth, 

CX = C 0e-kx 

where C x and C 0 are the particle mass concentrations ( μg/m³) at horizontal distance x (in meters) from the 

edge of the canopy, and k is the depletion coefficient that incorporates vertical diffusion and deposition. 110  Three 

studies construct exponential PM 10  removal functions. 48 , 111 , 112  Using data from another study done by Cavanagh 

and colleagues, 49  we could fit an exponential decay function to the reported PM concentrations from the outside 

monitoring, inside-near edge, and interior patch sites, with the sites chosen for their position along the trajectory 

of the prevailing wind. For trees, the range of decay coefficients in these studies is from k=0.019 (Cavanagh et al., 49 

mixed urban forest stand) to k=0.035 (Cowherd et al., 48 tall dense oak and cedar trees). 

Direct measurements of street tree effectiveness:  A number of studies 43-49  measure the fraction of PM removed 

by street trees (Table 23), rather than using a decay coefficients approach. In this study, we estimate PM 10 

removal by street trees using the findings from the five experimental studies that analyze street tree PM 10  capture 

efficiency (i.e., percent difference in PM 10  in air upwind and downwind, respectively, of the trees).                          

> Study Vegetation PM 10 reduction ( μg m -3 )
> Maher et al. (2013) Row of small silver birch 50%
> Mitchell and Maher (2009) Single tree 15%
> Bealey et al. (2007) Two co-located trees 20%
> Tiwary et al. (2008) Hawthorn hedge 30%, 34%, 38%
> Tiwary et al. (2006) Hawthorn hedge 26%
> Cowherd et al. (2006) Tall dense oak and cedar trees 16%
> Cavanagh et al. (2009) Mixed urban forest stand 9%
> This study- Medium scenario 24%
> This study- Low scenario 11%
> This study- High scenario 37%
> Table 23. Downwind PM concentration reductions reported for street trees and hedges.
> 106 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

Because of the small number of observations in these (n=7, three of which are from the same study and plant), 

we generate two additional estimates using the high 48 and low 49 exponential PM 10  concentration decay functions 

in the literature for tree patches for an assumed 5-meter canopy width.  We use the mean of the removal efficiencies 

reported in the five street tree studies as our central estimate, and the mean ± 1 SD to construct low (11 percent) and high 

(37 percent) estimates of street tree PM removal efficiency at the downwind canopy edge (Table 23). 

Comparison between PM 10  and PM 2.5  removal:  The majority of the literature on trees and PM focused 

on PM 10 , but in the last few years, research has begun to increasingly focus on PM 2.5  as it has become 

apparent it has greater health impacts. This study focuses on PM 2.5 , so we wanted some quantitative 

way to compare removal between PM 10  and PM 2.5 . Thankfully, there are several studies that empirically 

compare removal rates as a function of particle size. 

• Maher and colleagues, 43  using continuous air samplers with particle size discrimination and saturation 

isothermal remanent magnetization (SIRM) analysis to assess PM removal achieved by a single row of 

young silver birch  (Betula utilis Doorenbos)  installed curbside in front of a row of houses along a high-traffic 

street, find that the trees reduced concentrations of both PM 10  and PM 2.5  by >50 percent, indicating similar 

removal efficiency and thus PM 2.5  and PM 10  deposition velocities. Cowherd and colleagues 48 also find that 

trees have comparable capture efficiencies for PM 10  and PM 2.5 , with 20-meter-wide belts of tall oak and 

cedar halving PM 10  and PM 2.5  concentrations in air passing through them. 

• Freer-Smith and colleagues 41 measured v d PM 2 and PM 10  for five tree species  (Pinus sylvestris, X 

Cupressoparis leylandii, Acer campestre, Populus deltoids, X trichocarpa  ‘Beaupré’  and Sorbus aria) , finding 

generally higher, but in some cases similar or lower v d for PM 2 compared to PM 10 , depending on 

species, and much higher (by one order of magnitude) v d for PM 1 compared to PM 10  (see Table 3 in 36 ). 

• Liu and colleagues 113  examined the daytime (0800 to 1800 hours) average daily PM removal of various 

land covers in the early spring (February to April 2013 and 2014) in North Olympic Forest Park in Beijing, 

China. They found that average removal efficiency (pollutant removal/ambient concentration) of a  Populus 

tomentosa -dominated forest site was higher for PM 2.5  (~70 percent) than for PM 10  (~60 percent). 

• Chen and colleagues 114  examined the removal efficiency in August thru October of the same Beijing 

Populous shelterbelt studied by 113  Liu and colleagues and the removal efficiency of a  fraxinus chinensis 

belt in Beijing. They found that the two shelterbelts had higher removal efficiencies for PM 2.5  than 

PM 10 . Note that their use of the term “removal efficiency” is somewhat unusual, as the authors do 

not measure actual removal of PM from the air through dry deposition, but rather the ratio of PM 

concentrations inside and outside of two shelterbelts (one dominated by  populous tomentosa , the 

other by  fraxinus chinensis ), interpreting higher concentrations inside the belts as “removal efficiency” 

because the belts effectively trap PM. 

The above papers (with the exception of 41 with the exception of Freer-Smith and colleagues) show that trees 

are at least as effective in removing PM 2.5  as they are in removing PM 10 . In this report, we make the conservative 

assumption that PM 10  and PM 2.5  removal rates, in percent terms, are the same.  Of course, in mass terms, since 

there is a greater mass of PM 10  in the atmosphere than PM 2.5 , a greater mass of PM 10  will be removed. 

Redilution 

The horizontal distance downwind of a patch within which the lower-PM air exiting a patch is 

sufficiently mixed with ambient air to substantially dilute the concentration reduction effect produced 

by a tree patch depends on wind speed (advection) and turbulent mixing (diffusion) within the 

urban canopy layer (approximately up to roof height), which are strongly influenced by urban surface 

morphology and vertical mixing. 59 , 60 , 115  Empirical studies show that PM in urban areas is well mixed over 

distances of 2.5 meters to 300 meters. 55 , 58 , 116-119 

The PM decay functions reported by three edge-of-road studies—including a meta-analysis of PM concentration 

distance decay studies, 55 —that represent a wide range of meteorological, urban morphological, and 

methodological contexts show exponential decay with inflection points at 15 meters, 50 meters, and 66 meters, 

respectively, from the edge of the road. Based on these findings, we assume that the effect of PM removal by 

trees is most pronounced within a distance of 15 meters to 30 meters downwind—e.g., Maher and colleagues 43     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |107

report street trees halved indoor PM concentrations in houses approximately 10 meters away—but generally still is 

notable at 65 meters downwind, indicated by the negative slope of the functions at that distance. 

To estimate the PM reduction a particular addition of street trees in a given street segment achieves 

within a 30-meter buffer from the street edge, we use our function of average PM concentration as a 

function of distance from the tree canopy (Figure 35). This function describes how much (expressed 

in percent) of the PM concentration reduction achieved by a given tree canopy still remains at given 

distances downwind from the canopy, up to the point at which the mixing with other ambient air results 

in concentrations similar to the ambient PM background levels. 

> Percent of concentration difference at distance 0 vs background

Distance from patch (m) 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91 

> Figure 35. Average PM concentration as a function of distance from street trees.

Average percent reduction achieved within 30 meters of street trees 

Assuming trees are on average planted 1.5 meters from the road edge and have an average canopy diameter 

of 5 meters, we calculate the mean percent PM 10  reduction experienced across the remaining 26 meters of 

buffer downwind of the canopy as the average of the PM 10  reductions experienced at every 1 meter step along a 

perpendicular transect through the buffer, and multiply this average reduction by the percent PM concentration 

reduction achieved by street tree canopy.  This yields an estimated mean PM 10  concentration reduction in the buffer 

(compared to ambient urban concentrations upwind of the trees) of 7 percent, 16 percent and 24 percent in the Low, 

Medium, and High removal scenarios, respectively. 

Next, because our estimated PM removal efficiencies are based on studies of conifers or leaf-on broadleaf 

species (except Kuhns et al. 2010, 111  who study leafless aspen trees), we derive average annual PM concentration 

reductions by multiplying our calculated PM concentration reductions by the annual average share of time a 

given city’s trees are in-leaf, calculated from remotely sensed phenology information for each city (see geospatial 

data). We then multiply the resulting reductions by the calculated average annual 2014 PM 2.5  concentrations in 

the respective segment and buffers to obtain the estimated average annual PM 2.5  concentration reduction (in  μg

PM 2.5  m-3 ) a particular street tree planting achieves in the sector of the segment’s buffer adjoining the planting 

(see note above about converting from PM 10  to PM 2.5  percent removal). Given that street tree cover additions will 

be linear in shape, the percentage of a planting site’s total segment buffer area and population that are located in 

the planting’s adjoining buffer sector are assumed to be proportional to the percent increase in segment tree cover. 

We multiply for each street tree planting the estimated absolute PM 2.5  concentration reduction in its adjoining 

buffer sector by the estimated population within that portion to estimate the increase in street tree cover would 

produce for people living in that segment (Δ μg PM 2.5  m-3  people).     

> 108 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

## Box 6: Calculating total removal in an airshed 

Nowak and colleagues 53  popularized a way of calculating total potential removal of PM by trees in an entire airshed above 

a city, based off the UFORE/i-Tree model. Results were presented in total tons of PM removal, as well as the percent of 

the total pollutant load that was estimated to be removed by trees currently. Generally, estimated removal was modest, 

between 0.1 percent to 3.5 percent depending on the city and the scenario. This modest percet removal of the entire 

pollutant load in an airshed has been, in part, why some reviewers of the literature have expressed some skepticism that 

PM removal by trees can be substantial. 

How is it possible that Nowak and colleagues can calculate such a modest benefit for an entire airshed, while empirical 

measurements of capture efficiency just downwind of tree are much larger, ranging from 9 percent to 50 percent (Table 22) 

The difference primarily has to do with the spatial scale. Nowak and colleagues were comparing tree removal to the 

entire pollutant load in an airshed, defined as from the ground up to the boundary layer, often hundreds of meters in the 

air. This is a huge quantity of air, which can hold huge masses of PM. In contrast, empirical measurements happen near 

the ground, where people breathe, and are in proximity to trees. The local packet of air moving through the trees can be 

significantly cleaned, although it eventually redilutes into the overall airshed. 

Kroeger and colleagues (in review) present a comparison of Nowak and colleagues' estimates of total removal, compared 

with our estimates of total removal derived from direct measurements of street tree effectiveness. Once the spatial 

difference (whole airshed versus local benefits) is accounted for, the total annual removal, expressed in grams of PM per 

per square meter of canopy (to account for differences in forest cover) is quite similar. Nowak’s estimate, corrected for 

today’s PM concentrations (lower than the data he used for his study) and recent measurements of deposition velocity 

(higher than for the Lovett citation he bases his work on), would be 4.1 to 11.0 g/m². For our estimates of total removal, 

the equivalent range would be 6.5 to 13.2 g/m². 

It is for this reason that throughout the report we have stressed the local removal of PM by trees.  Trees can remove 

quantities of PM that can be medically significant to those living in proximity of the trees, even if the percent removal over the 

entire airshed is rather modest. 

Temperature 

There are two conceptual stages 

of how trees cool air temperatures 

(Figure 36). First, depending on the 

width of the tree canopy (or, in the 

case of a forest patch, the width of 

the forest patch), there is a cooling 

intensity, which is defined as the 

degree Celsius reduction relative to the 

average air temperature outside the 

patch. Generally, the larger the canopy, 

the greater the cooling intensity. 

Second, this cooler air disperses away 

from the patch, and slowly mixes with 

other warmer ambient air. Generally, 

the farther from the canopy, the closer 

the temperature gets to the average 

temperature in the surrounding area.  

> Figure 36. Diagram of temperature mitigation by trees. Illustration: © Mackinzie Jones.

Canopy Width Average Temperature Cooling Intensity Cooling Distance Average Temperature     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |109

Cooling intensity 

Table 24 lists some results for studies 66 , 67 , 69-71 , 73 , 75-77 , 79-83 , 120-129  that examined relatively large urban parks. The 

cooling intensity varies from close to zero to 6.7° C (12.1° F), depending on the site, the time of day, and the 

distance at which the measurement was taken from the park. For the purposes of our analysis, we were interested 

in measurements of cooling intensity within or very close to the park, before the effect began to decay with 

distance. These measurements close to the parks are generally higher. See Kroeger et al. (in review) for a more 

detailed analysis of this set of studies on parks. Since the focus of this report is on street trees, we do not use the 

information in Table 24 in our global modeling.  

> Table 24. Empirical and modeling studies of the summer ambient air temperature cooling effect of forested or mixed-cover parks and urban forests.

Study  Park size  Land Cover  Location  Temperature 

reduction  Measurement specification 

Taha et al. (1991)  4.9 ha  small trees (H=5 

m), 25% canopy 

cover; narrow 

belt of tall (20m) 

dense evergeen 

trees (90% 

cover) 

Davis, CA  4.5° C  Reduction in peak temp (16:00) compared to upwind, adjacent, 

open, dry field; clear sky; October (location D minus A, fig. 2) 

4.91  (including 

avg 10,-wide 

evergreen tree 

along southern 

edge of orchard) 

5.5° C  Reduction in peak temp (17:00) compared to upwind, adjacent, 

open, dry field; October 

1.5° C  Reduction in peak temp (16:00-18:00) compared to upwind, 

adjacent, open, dry field; October 

Ca et al. (1998)  60 ha  Mix of woods, 

grass and some 

sealed surface 

Tama (Tokyo 

Met Area), 

Japan 

2.2° C  Reduction in sunny August afternoon air temp above grass field 

inside park, compared to air temp above sealed areas surrounding 

1.5° C  Reduction in sunny August noon air temp in commercial district 1 

km downwind 

Sugawara et al. 

(2016) 

20 ha (0.2 sq 

km) 

90% deciduous 

forest, 14 m mean 

canopy height 

Tokyo, Japan  3° C  Difference between summer (Aug-Sep) peak daytime (2 p.m.) 

temp in park and surroundings (school gardens within 1.5 km 

from park) 

Dimoudi and 

Nikolopoulou 

(2003) 

0.01 ha, Street 

H/W ratio=1.5 

Typical 

Mediterranean 

vegetation (e.g., 

olive and citrus 

trees) 

Athens, 

Greece 

2° C  Temp difference at downwind edge of park facing building, if park 

replaces building of same dimensions 

4° C  Temp difference at downwind edge of park in street parallel to 

park, if park replaces building of same dimensions 

0.03 ha, Street 

H-W ratio=1.5 

3° C  Temp difference at downwind edge of park facing building, if park 

replaces building of same dimensions 

6° C  Temp difference at downwind edge of park in street parallel to 

park, if park replaces building of same dimensions 

Jaganmohan 

et al. 2016 

Urban forests 

(n=25), median 

size 2.2 ha 

96.5% mean tree/ 

shrub cover 

Leipzig, 

Germany 

0.3° C  Mean of the maximum daytime (9 a.m. to 5 p.m.) temp difference 

in summer (June-Aug) on clear sunny days in residential areas, 

at 1 PWD from forests, compared to forest boundary 

0.8° C  Mean of the maximum daytime (9 a.m. to 5 p.m.) temp differences 

in summer (Jun-Aug) on clear sunny days, between forest boundary 

and anywhere in residential areas within 1 PWD from forests 

Urban parks 

(n=37) 

74% mean tree/ 

shrub cover 

0.1° C  Mean of the maximum daytime (9 a.m. to 5 p.m.) temp difference 

in summer (Jun-Aug) on clear sunny days in residential areas, 

at 1 PWD from parks compared to park boundary 

0.5° C  Mean of the maximum daytime (9 a.m. to 5 p.m.) temp differences 

in summer (Jun-Aug) on clear sunny days, between park boundary 

and anywhere in residential areas within 1 PWD from parks     

> 110 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

Study  Park size  Land Cover  Location  Temperature 

reduction  Measurement specification 

Chen and Wong 

(2006) 

36 ha  Mix of densely 

forested, sparsely 

forested and 

open sites 

Singapore  3° C  Mean difference between average temp of densely forested park 

sites (# 3 and 4) and nearby residential sites at 15:00 on clear 

summer (Jan-Feb) day 

2° C  Mean difference between average temp of all park monitoring 

sites and nearby residential sites at 15:00 on clear summer 

(Jan-Feb) day 

12 ha  Mix of densely 

forested, sparsely 

forested and 

open sites 

Singapore  4° C  Mean difference between average temp in densely forested park 

site (#1) and nearby residential sites at 15:00 on clear summer 

June day 

2° C  Mean difference between average temp of all park monitoring sites 

and nearby residential sites at 15:00 on clear summer June day 

Ketterer and 

Matzarakis 

(2014) 

n/a  Treed area: 19% 

tree cover; 34% 

impervious; 28% 

built; asphalt 

area: 3% tree 

cover, 47% 

impervious; 17% 

built 

Stuttgart, 

Germany 

1.2° C  Mean temp difference between asphalt and treed area in early-mid 

afternoon (14:00 to 17:00) on clear summer (late June) day 

Legese Feyisa et 

al. (2014) 

21 urban forest 

parks (0.85-22.3 

ha) 

>60% tree 

canopy cover 

Addis Ababa, 

Ethiopia 

3.9° C  Average (11:00 to 16:00 hours) temp difference between park and 

surroundings (from park boundary to 420-meter distance contour) 

in summer (October, end of rainy season) 

6.7° C  Maximum (11:00 to 16:00 hours) temp difference between park 

and surroundings (from park boundary to 420-meter distance 

contour) in summer (October, end of rainy season) 

0.02° C  Mean increase in park cooling intensity per 1% increase in tree 

canopy cover, 11:00 to 16:00 hours, compared to surroundings 

(from park boundary to 420-meter distance contour) in summer 

(October, end of rainy season) 

Skelhorn et al. 

(2014) 

Manchester, 

UK 

0.15° C  Mean area-wide temp reduction at neighborhood level, 13:00 to 

16:00 hours, summer (July), from adding 5% mature trees 

Ng et al. 2012  0.01 ha  Hong Kong, 

China 

1° C  Mean temperature reduction in pocket park compared to 

surrounding built-up area at 1 PWD, 15:00 to 16:00 hrs, 

May (summer) 

Cohen et al. 

(2012) (same 

site as Potchter 

et al. 2006) 

3 urban parks, 

0.4-3.6 ha, 65-

85% mature tree 

cover 

Tel Aviv, Israel  2° C  Mean temp difference between treed parks and non-treed urban 

areas summer (June-July) w/ generally clear skies and moderate 

wind 

2.8 ha, 85% 

mature tree 

cover 

Tel Aviv, Israel  3.8° C  Maximum temp difference between treed park and non-treed 

urban areas summer (June-July) w/ generally clear skies and 

moderate wind 

Spronken-Smith 

and Oke (1998) 

1.4 ha Forested 

park (Botanical 

Garden) 

Sacramento, 

CA 

1.2° C  Maximum summer daytime (August) temperature difference 

compared to non-park area 

400 ha dense 

conifer rainforest 

(Stanley Park 

forest) 

Vancouver, BC  4.0° C  Maximum summer daytime (August) temperature difference 

compared to non-park area (temps of which were measured 

mostly on roads) 

Hamada and 

Ohta (2010) 

147 ha  40% cemetery; 

36% forest, 4% 

grass, 4% ponds, 

5% fields, 10% 

badlands 

Nagoya, Japan  2.5° C  Maximum temperature difference at 3 p.m. between forested site 

in park vs urban area, August 2006 (see p. 21)     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |111

Study  Park size  Land Cover  Location  Temperature 

reduction  Measurement specification 

Chang et al. 

(2007) 

<3 ha  ≥80% tree and 

shrub cover (Fig 

5a) 

Taipei, Taiwan  2° C  Reduction in air temp between open (unshaded) area in park 

and surroundings >1 width of the park away from park, on sunny, 

non-windy (<2.1 m/s wind speed) summer (Aug-Sep) days, 

11:00 to 15:00 hrs 

>3 ha  ≤25% paved area 

(Fig 5c) 

1.8° C  Reduction in air temp between open (unshaded) area in park 

and surroundings >1 width of the park away from park, on sunny, 

non-windy (<2.1 m/s wind speed) summer (Aug-Sep) days, 

11:00 to 15:00 hrs 

Chang and Li 

(2014) 

<0.5 ha  n/d  Taipei, Taiwan  n/d  Reduction in air temp outside of park vs refernce point just >1 park 

width away from park, on sunny, non-windy (<2.1 m/s wind speed) 

summer (Aug-Sep) days, 11:00 to 15:00 hrs 

<0.5 ha (mean: 

0.23 ha) 

n/d  0.75  Reduction in air temp at park boundary vs refernce point just >1 

park width away from park, on sunny, non-windy (<2.1 m/s wind 

speed) summer (Aug-Sep) days, at noon (11:00 to 15:00)(right 

upper panel in Fig 2) 

>0.5 ha  Average 

cool-island park 

(composed of 

trees, shrubs, 

open, and paved 

areas) 

0.3° C  Reduction in air temp outside of park vs reference point just >1 park 

width away from park, on sunny, non-windy (<2.1 m/s wind speed) 

summer (Aug-Sep) days, 11:00 to 15:00 hrs 

n/d  >75% tree and 

shrub cover 

0.8° C  Reduction in air temp outside of park vs refernce point just >1 park 

width away from park, on sunny, non-windy (<2.1 m/s wind speed) 

summer (Aug-Sep) days, 11:00 to 15:00 hrs 

Barradas 1991  9.9 ha  mix of vegetation 

and pavement 

Mexico City, 

Mexico 

3.1° C  Difference between mean peak afternoon temperatures in parks 

and in surroundings, May-Nov (Fig 3 A and B) 

1.9 ha  Mexico City, 

Mexico 

0.9° C  Difference between mean peak afternoon temperatures in parks 

and in surroundings, May-Nov (Fig 3 A and B) 

Jonsson (2004)  n/a  Lush vegetation 

including trees 

Gaborone, 

Botswana 

1° C  difference in avg daily max (14:00) temperatures on clear, calm 

spring days, between lushly vegetated site and site with only a 

few sparse trees (both non-irrigated) 

Jauregui (1991)  525 ha  Mix of dense 

forest, grass and 

paved and built-

up areas. 

Mexico City, 

Mexico 

2 to 3° C  Difference in mean maximum temperatures (14:00) between park 

boundary and nearby built-up areas 

Lee et al. (2009)  24.2 ha  Tombs, mature 

forest ( 

Pinus 

densiflora and 

Quercus  spp) and 

grassy areas 

Seoul, South 

Korea 

3° C  avg 15:30 July-Aug air temp difference between park and nearby 

reference site 

Shashua-Bar 

and Hoffmann 

(2000) 

11 small green 

areas, 0.05-1.1 ha 

(avg. 0.4 ha) 

Dense tree 

cover (avg 

partially shaded 

area=61%) 

Tel Aviv, Israel  2.8° C  Mean difference in summer maximum daily (15:00) air 

temperatures between 11 green areas and nearby treeless reference 

points at 50 to 100 meters distance, on clear, calm days 

1.77° C  Avg cooling effect at 20 meters 

1° C  Avg cooling effect at 40 meters 

0.67° C  Avg cooling effect at 60 meters 

0.3° C  Avg cooling effect at 80 meters     

> 112 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

Study  Park size  Land Cover  Location  Temperature 

reduction  Measurement specification 

Saito et al. 

(1990) 

0.24 ha  Urban park 

covered with 

broadleaf trees 

Kumamoto 

City, Japan 

1 to 2° C  Avg. temp reduction within approx. 20-meter distance from 

greenspace boundary 

3° C  Max daytime temperature difference 

Streiling and 

Matzarakis 

(2003) 

0.03 ha; Small 

cluster of trees 

in 0.17 ha urban 

park enclosed by 

three high-traffic 

roads and 

including grassy 

and bare/paved 

areas 

Freiburg, 

Germany 

0.8° C  Mean air temp difference (1 to 3 p.m., 2 mid-late September days) 

under small cluster of tree canopies compared to nearby open 

sealed surfaces (measurement points MP2, MP4, and MP5) 

0.01 ha; 

Individual tree 

in 0.17 ha urban 

park enclosed by 

three high-traffic 

roads and 

including grassy 

and bare/paved 

areas 

Freiburg, 

Germany 

0.7° C  Mean air temp difference (1 to 3 p.m., 2 mid-late September days) 

under a single tree canopy compared to nearby open sealed 

surfaces (measurement points MP2, MP4, and MP5) 

Shashua-Bar et 

al. (2011) 

Individual tree 

(7-meter-wide 

wide canopy) 

(from Fig. 1) 

Tree vs concrete  University 

campus, 

Negev Desert, 

Israel 

1.7° C  2 p.m. temp reduction of trees vs. light grey concrete surface w/out 

trees, mean, July-Aug (summer) 

Individual tree 

(7-meter-wide 

canopy) (from 

Fig. 1) 

Trees vs grass 

cover 

University 

campus, 

Negev Desert, 

Israel 

1.3° C  2 p.m. temp preduction of trees vs. grass cover, mean, summer 

(July-Aug) 

Taleghani et al. 

(2014) 

Heavily treed 

park 

Portland, OR  5.8° C  Maximum temperature difference between heavily treed park and 

nearby parking lot 

Portland, OR  1.6° C  Temperature difference between treed and bare courtyard      

> Table 24. Empirical and modeling studies of the summer ambient air temperature cooling effect of forested or mixed-cover parks and urban forests.
> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |113

Rather, we use estimates of cooling intensity of street trees, 62 , 64 , 65 , 70 , 75-79  which include observations from a total 

of 31 high-canopy streets or individual street trees and span a wide range of climates (Figure 37). Cooling intensity 

varies from 0.4° C (0.7° F) to 3.0° C (5.4° F), depending on the site and the time of day. 

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 Ng et al. 2012, 16 percent urban tree canopy Gromke et al. (2015), mean reduction Dimoudi and Nikolopoulou (2003), at 10 meter downwind Streiling and Matzarakis (2003), single tree Streiling and Matzarakis (2003), cluster of trees Ng et al. 2012, 34 percent urban tree canopy Shashua-Bar et al. (2011), measurement 2 Ali-Toudert and Mayer (2007), E/W orientation Sanusi et al. (2016), mid-afternoon Gromke et al. (2015), max reduction Shashua-Bar and Hoffman (2000), urban canyon Shashua-Bar et al. (2011), measurement 1 Ali-Toudert and Mayer (2007), N/S orientation Dimoudi and Nikolopoulou (2003), at street tree Sanusi et al. (2016), noon Shashua-Bar and Hoffman (2000), urban roadside Vailshery et al. (2014), urban roadsides Low impact scenario Medium impact scenario High impact scenario 

Figure 37. Empirical measures of temperature reduction near urban trees.  Dashed lines show the three scenarios of Low, Medium, and High impact used in this 

global analysis. 

Cooling distance 

As you move away from a canopy, temperatures slowly increase toward the ambient temperature in the 

surrounding area. The only study we found that provided empirical observations of street tree temperature change 

as a function of distance from tree was Shashua-Bar and Hoffman. 79  We estimate a best-fit (linear; R 2=0.98) 

cooling distance function from the means of the empirical cooling values reported at zero-, 20-, 40-, 60-, and 

80-meter distance ( x, in meters) from trees for four treed streets vs two reference sites each (n=8) (Figure 38). 

y = -0.0247x + 2.2508 R = 0.98069 00.5 11.5 22.5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Maximum summer daytime cooling (°C) Distance from street trees (m) 

Figure 38.  Average street tree cooling effect as a function of distance from street trees.     

> 114 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

Average temperature reduction 

We use our cooling function and the mean of the reported cooling intensity of Shashua-Bar and Hoffman’s 79  four 

treed streets at  x = 0 to calculate the percent of the remaining cooling intensity at distance x from street trees. 

We multiply the average of the percent residual cooling intensity along a transect through the street tree buffer 

estimates to calculate the absolute (Low, Medium, High) reduction in mean temperature in the street tree buffer. 

To do so, we assume that trees are planted 1.5 meters from the street and (at maturity) have a canopy radius of 5 

meters. This works out to an average reduction in the street tree buffer of 0.9° C (Low scenario), 1.5° C (Medium 

scenario), and 2.1° C (High scenario) (Figure 37). 

As with PM, because we lack information on the distribution of people within a street segment buffer, we assume 

the human population affected by cooling from additional street tree plantings is proportional to the percent street 

tree addition in a segment. 

## Calibration analysis 

The primary purpose of the calibration analysis, from the perspective of this report, was to help us statistically 

relate the 30-meter Landsat forest cover data available globally with high-resolution 2-meter forest cover data. 

It would not have been feasible to develop high-resolution forest cover datasets for all 245 cities in our analysis. 

However, we know from past research that forest cover derived from Landsat imagery doesn’t do a great job of 

detecting single trees, like those along streets. We thus wanted to calibrate or correct for any bias in using the 

Landsat data. 

Note, however, that the calibration analysis also fed into the analysis in another companion scientific paper, 

Kroeger et al. (in review). This paper developed ROI metrics for every street segment and patch in the calibration 

cities. These detailed ROI metrics are not referenced in this report, except for the comparison of Map 8. It is 

reassuring, however, that the ROI metrics of Kroeger et al., developed from the most detailed possible geospatial 

data, are highly correlated with the ROI numbers we developed in this global report. 

There were 27 U.S. calibration cities and seven Chinese calibration cities. Because one of the purposes of the 

calibration analysis was to compare the results of city-level and local-level methods for estimating PM and heat 

impact of urban street trees, we selected cities for inclusion in the study primarily based on availability of UFORE/ 

i-Tree estimates of average city-wide PM 10  removal rates by urban forests. 53 

Comparison of forest cover data sources at different scales 

High-resolution Forest Cover 

We developed our own high-resolution (2-meter) tree cover maps for the 34 total calibration cities. For U.S. cities, 

we based our tree cover maps on aerial photos from the United States National Agriculture Imagery Program 

(NAIP). For Chinese cities, we based our tree cover maps on imagery from the Gaofen-1 (GF-1) satellite, acquiring 

pan-sharpened and orthorectified imagery for our seven cities of interest. 

For all 34 cities, we used Google Earth Engine to classify the imagery. First, we extracted the Normalized 

Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI ) for each city’s extent. The threshold of NDVI that was assumed to indicate 

forest cover was adjusted to each city accordingly as imagery varies across the United States, and then visually 

checked for accuracy. Results from aerial photo classification was then resampled to 2 meters, to increase 

accuracy by excluded very small areas of NDVI which were not trees. Second, we extracted texture analysis 

(based on entropy), adjusted to each city accordingly as imagery varies across the United States. 130 , 131  Finally, 

in ESRI ARCMAP 11.2, NDVI and Texture results combined to exclude areas of NDVI data and smooth texture 

(correlates with gold-courses, sports fields, lawns) to produce a 2-meter tree cover layer.     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |115

Global Forest Cover 

For our global analysis, we use 30-meter resolution continuous percent forest cover estimates for the years 2000 

and 2010, 132  hereafter called the Vegetation Continuous Field data (VCF). To statistically account for street trees 

which often may not be detected by 30-meter imagery, we calibrate the VCF estimate to the 2-meter high resolution 

percent forest cover data using the empirical relationship between the two datasets in our study cities (Figure 39). 

> y = 0.9915x + 0.2388 R = 0.61814 2m High-Resolution % Forest

UMd % Forest 2010 (calibrated) 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40  

> Figure 39. The statistical relationship between the VCF 30-meter forest cover estimates (calibrated as described in the text) with the 2-meter high-resolution forest cover maps
> created for this report.

Global Forest Cover Change 

One challenge in comparing between VCF forest cover images from 2000 and 2010 is that in some locations there 

is a systematic shift in pixel values that seems to be due to calibration errors rather than any landscape-wide change 

in vegetation cover. To account for this, we classify all pixels in each city as showing  significant (>25 percent) decrease 

or increase, or no significant ( ≤25 percent) change  in percent forest cover between 2000 and 2010, with the 25 percent 

threshold being approximately two standard errors of the distribution of change. For each forest cover change 

category, we calculate mean percent forest cover change in 2000 and 2010. Assuming that forest cover differences 

in the  no significant change  category are primarily due to changes in the remotely sensed imagery, we generate 

centered percent forest cover estimates by subtracting 2010 percent forest cover from 2000 percent forest cover and 

adding this difference to the 2000 percent forest cover values in each pixel, thus normalizing the two distributions. 

## Global analysis 

Geospatial data 

There were nine types of spatial data that we obtained for all 245 of our cites: 

• Particulate matter concentrations—We took PM 2.5  concentrations for 2012 for our cities from van Donkelaar et 

al. 133 , 134  which developed improved global estimates of PM 2.5  concentrations from remotely sensed imagery. 

• Land cover—We used 30-meter land cover imagery taken from the GlobeLand30 LULC product. 13 5

• Forest cover—We used continuous estimates of percent forest taken from UMd dataset. 13 2

• Biome types—We defined biome type using the typology in the WWF ecoregions. 13 6

• Road network—Information on the road network was extracted from Open Street Map. 13 7

• Schools—Information on schools was extracted from Open Street Map. 13 7

• Hospitals—Information on hospitals was extracted from Open Street Map. 13 7

• Population density—Population density information was taken from the Gridded Population of the World 

Database, version 4. 13 8

• Phenology—We estimated growing season length using the Vegetation Index and Phenology (VIP) lab products, 

version 3. 13 9    

> 116 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

GIS Analysis 

Our GIS analysis aimed to sample out relevant data for each of our study cities. The first step was to create a 

1-kilometer grid that covered the area of a city. Each grid cell is assigned a unique identifying number. Within each 

grid cell, the length of streets (in meters), the population density (in people/km 2), the PM 2.5  concentration (in  μg/ 

m³), the biome type, and the percent forest, calculated only for pixels along the road network. 

Our GIS analysis was done using a Modelbuilder script in ArcGIS 10.3.1 for Desktop. This Modelbuilder script was 

then called from a Python loop that iterated through the datasets for all 245 cities. 

Maximum possible street tree-planting targets 

Within each biome category, we examined the distribution of percent forest, restricting our examination to 

1-kilometer cells that had at least 10 cells of 30-meter forest imagery. In most biomes, there is a range of street tree 

cover, from 0 percent to close to 100 percent. We wanted to set a street tree-planting target that was realistic, and 

clearly on many streets a 100 percent street tree cover is not realistic, due to planting limitations. In the end, we set a 

target at the 95 percentile of current street tree cover in each biome. That is, we assume that since one in 20 streets 

in this biome already exceed this level of cover, it will be possible to achieve this level of tree cover on other streets 

in the biome. We acknowledge that this is a relatively crude way to estimate maximum possible street tree-planting 

targets, and we urge future analyses that focus on a particular city to use more precise definitions. 

Two biomes had very low (< 10 percent) values of the 95 percentiles, and these were set at 10 percent for this 

study, to make a more ambitious tree-planting target (Table 25).               

> Biome name Maximum possible street tree-planting
> target (%) used in this study
> Tropical and Subtropical Moist Broadleaf Forests 27.2
> Tropical and Subtropical Dry Broadleaf Forests 10.0
> Tropical and Subtropical Coniferous Forests 28.8
> Temperate Broadleaf and Mixed Forests 51.7
> Temperate Coniferous Forests 53.1
> Boreal Forests/Taiga 73.0
> Tropical and Subtropical, Grasslands, Savannas, and Shrublands 30.3
> Temperate Grasslands, Savannas, and Shrublands 25.9
> Montane Grasslands and Shrublands 11.5
> Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands, and Scrub 17.8
> Deserts and Xeric Shrublands 10.0
> Mangroves 18.5
> Table 25. Street tree-planting targets by biome.

Tree-planting and maintenance costs 

We based our analysis of tree-planting costs on a database we assembled of both planting and maintenance costs 

for cities. These were expressed as annualized costs, spreading the costs of planting over 40 years. We found 

estimates of tree-planting and maintenance costs for 27 U.S. cities and seven Chinese cities. These estimates were 

developed originally for the Kroeger et al. manuscript (in review), but are used in this global study. 

To make our estimates of cost more globally comprehensive, we searched the literature and found eight more 

cities/countries where we found street tree-planting and maintenance estimates. Merging this information in 

with our U.S. and China data, we find that there is a positive correlation (R2=0.57) between per-capita GDP in a 

country (Purchasing Power Parity, PPP, corrected) and the annualized costs (also PPP corrected). That is, countries 

of a higher-level of economic development have, on average, higher per-capita planting and maintenance costs. 

This could be explained, for instance, by higher average labor costs in cities. In our global analysis, we used this 

correlation and average PPP-GDP per capita to estimate annualized street tree costs for all the cities in our sample.     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |117

Particulate matter and temperature analysis 

Using code in Statistical Analysis Software (SAS), we analyzed the output of the GIS analysis to calculate the 

current and potential future reductions by street trees of PM 2.5  and temperature. In our SAS analysis, we look at a 

High, Medium, and Low impact scenarios, based upon the literature. See our literature review for evidence on how 

these scenarios were defined. 

For each 1 square kilometer, we estimated the ROI (PM and temperature) of a small planting along a single street 

segment. We also estimated the potential future planting in the square, as well as the reductions in PM and 

temperature. 

Health impacts analysis 

PM reduction 

There are a number of papers that estimate a functional relationship between ambient PM concentrations and mortality 

rate. 89 , 90  The functional form used varies among papers. Early papers found an essentially linear relationship 

between ambient PM concentrations and mortality rates. This implies that at low concentrations, there is no 

safe limit of PM—any amount of PM has an impact on mortality rates. Later papers explored different functional 

forms, which were particularly important for accurate estimation of mortality at very high concentrations of PM. 

Burnett and colleagues offer a good review of the various functional forms in use. 90  For our calculations, we follow 

the recommendations of the World Health Organization, 91  because they have been widely used and are relatively 

simple to implement. 

Temperature reduction 

There are a few studies estimating the regression relationship between temperature and mortality. 14 , 20  Most 

functional forms look at the mortality increase when ambient temperature increases above a certain threshold 

temperature. There is debate in the literature whether this functional response is best fit with a linear or an upward 

curving functional form (e.g., quadratic). There is also a lot of research into the ways urban residents adapt to the 

average summer temperatures in their region. That is, in cities that generally have hot summer weather, it takes 

extremely hot weather to cause an increase in mortality. In contrast, in cities which more often have moderate 

summer temperatures, an increase in mortality sets in at lower absolute temperature increases. That is, the 

threshold temperature at which mortality appears to increase seems to be related to the climatic average for a 

region. 

For this report, we use the relatively simple methodology used by McMichael and colleagues, 14  which uses a linear 

relationship between mortality and temperature above a safe threshold. The safe threshold varies by climate zone 

(Table 20.5 in McMichael and colleagues 14 ). 

Electricity and carbon sequestration analysis 

Another co-benefit of street trees is that they can help mitigate climate change, either through directly 

sequestering carbon itself or (more importantly) by reducing electricity use for cooling and hence greenhouse 

gas emissions. The effect of trees on electricity use for cooling operates in two main ways: Shade from trees 

reduces the direct solar heating of homes, reducing the need for air conditioning; and trees can reduce ambient air 

temperatures, which thus lessens the need for cooling of the air inside homes. 94  One set of studies have modeled 

and measured the benefits that trees can provide, primarily to residential single-family homes. For instance, 

McPherson and Rowntree 95  report a 2- to 9-percent reduction in annual heating and cooling costs from a single 

well-placed tree. Another set of studies have looked at the empirical relationship between ambient temperature 

and electricity use. A recent review by Santamouris and colleagues 96 found that each increase in temperature of 

1˚C (1.8˚F) caused an increase in monthly residential electricity use from 4 to 8.5 percent.     

> 118 |Planting Healthy Air |Appendix II

A number of factors affect the magnitude of this reduction in residential electricity use and hence the avoided 

greenhouse gas emissions: 

• Orientation:  Trees on the sunnier side of a house (e.g., the south side of a house in the Northern Hemisphere) 

cause a greater reduction. 

• Distance to house:  Trees closer to the house have more of an impact. 

• Size and density of canopy:  Canopies that cast more shade cause a greater reduction. 

• Size and construction of building:  More of the published research showing benefits is for "one- or two-story 

houses, with individual or small clusters of trees appearing to have less of an effect on the electricity use of 

larger buildings. 

• Type of energy used:  Obviously, the greenhouse gas implications of a reduction in electricity depend greatly on 

the carbon intensity of electricity production. Electricity produced from coal, for instance, causes more life-cycle 

greenhouse gases than electricity from hydropower. 

It is beyond the scope of this report to fully account for all these factors. Nevertheless, we wanted to construct a 

rough estimate of how the kind of street tree planting considered in this study would impact electricity use and 

greenhouse gas emissions. We base our estimate on the range of effects shown by Santamouris and colleagues. 96

Note that our analysis only considers street trees (not trees in parks, forest patches, private yards, etc.), and we 

only consider the potential energy savings to residential electricity consumption for cooling. Furthermore, our 

assumptions about plausible planting targets (see discussion above) mean that at most only a fraction of homes 

benefit from an electricity reduction. It is not plausible for all homes in a neighborhood to be helped by additional 

street tree planting. 

For carbon sequestration, we base our analysis on the minimum and maximum values of net sequestration 

observed by Nowak and colleagues. 98  We acknowledge that applying these U.S. values to a global analysis is 

imprecise, and we caution that our analysis is only indicative of the likely order of magnitude of net carbon 

sequestration under our maximum tree-planting scenario.     

> Appendix II |Planting Healthy Air |119

Photo © Karine Aigner 

# Works Cited 

Photo © Devan King Works Cited 

1.  Lim, S.S., et al., A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors 

and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990;2013;2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 

Study 2010. The Lancet, 2013. 380(9859): p. 2224-2260. 

2.  NRC, Air quality management in the United States. 2004, Washington D.C.: National Academies Press. 

3.  Anderson, J., J. Thundiyil, and A. Stolbach, Cleaning the air: A Review of the Effects of Particulate Matter Air 

Pollution on Human Health. Journal of Medical Toxicology, 2012. 8: p. 166-175. 

4.  WHO, WHO Air quality guidelines for particulate matter, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. 2005, 

World Health Organization: Geneva. 

5.  Daniels, M., et al., Estimating particulate matter-mortality dose-response curves and threshold levels: an 

analysis of daily time-series for the 20 largest US cities. American Journal of Epidemiology, 2000. 152(5): p. 

397-40. 

6.  Pope, C., et al., Cardiovascular Mortality and Long-Term Exposure to Particulate Air Pollution. Circulation, 

2004. 109: p. 71-77. 

7.  Lepeule, J., et al., Chronic exposure to fine particles and mortality: An extended follow-up of the Harvard Six 

Cities study from 1974 to 2009. Environmental Health Perspectives, 2012. 120(7): p. 2012. 

8.  Clancy, L., et al., Effect of air-pollution control on death rates in Dublin, Ireland: an intervention study. The 

Lancet, 2002. 360(9341): p. 1210-1214. 

9.  Chen, C. and B. Zhao, Review of relationship between indoor and outdoor particles: I/O ratio, infiltration factor 

and penetration factor. Atmospheric Environment, 2011. 45(2): p. 275-288. 

10.  McGranahan, G., Urban transitions and the spatial displacement of environmental burdens, in Scaling Urban 

Environmental Challenges: From Local to Global and Back, P. Marcotullio and G. McGranahan, Editors. 2007, 

Earthscan: London. p. 18-44. 

11.  Lelieveld, J., et al., The contribution of outdoor air pollution sources to premature mortality on a global scale. 

Nature, 2015. 525: p. 367-374. 

12.  Oke, T.R., The Energetic Basis of the Urban Heat Island. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 

1982. 108: p. 1-24. 

13.  McDonald, R.I., Conservation for cities: How to plan & build natural infrastructure. 2015, Washington, D.C.: 

Island Press. 

14.  McMichael, A., et al., Global Climate Change, in Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global and 

regional burden of disease attributable to selected major risk factors, M. Ezzati, et al., Editors. 2004, World 

Health Organization: Geneva. 

15.  NASA/GISS. Global Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet. 2016.     

> Works Cited |Planting Healthy Air |121

16.  Robine, J., et al., Death toll exceeded 70,000 in Europe during the summer of 2003. Comptes Rendus 

Biologies, 2003. 331(2): p. 171-178. 

17.  NASA. European Heat Wave: Image of the Day. 2003 [cited 2012 15 May]. 

18.  Vandentorren, S., et al., Mortality in 13 French cities during the August 2003 heat wave. American Journal of 

Public Health, 2004. 94(9): p. 1518-1520. 

19.  Vandertorren, S., et al., August 2003 heat wave in France: Risk factors for death of elderly people living at 

home. European Journal of Public Health., 2006. 16(6): p. 583-591. 

20.  Hales, S., et al., Quantitiative Risk Assessment of the effects of Climate Change on Selected Causes of Death, 

2030s and 2050s. 2014, Geneva: World Health Organization. 

21.  Honda, Y., et al., Heat-related mortality risk model for climate change impact projection. Environmental Health 

Preventative Medicine, 2014. 19: p. 56-63. 

22.  EPA, Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies (draft). 2014, Washington, DC: Environmental 

Protection Agency. 

23.  UNPD, World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. 2014, New York: United Nations Population 

Division. 

24.  Karl, T.R., J.M. Melillo, and T.C. Peterson, eds. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States. 2009, 

Cambridge University Press: New York. 

25.  CDC, Climate change and extreme heat events. 2012, Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control. 

26.  MEA, Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: A Framework for Assessment. 2003, Washington, D.C.: Island 

Press. 

27.  Boyd, J. and S. Banzhaf, What are ecosystem services? The need for standardized accounting units, in RFF DP 

06-02. 2006, Resources for the Future.: Washington, D.C. 

28.  MEA, Ecosystems and human well-being: Current Status and Trends. 2005, Washington, D.C.: Island Press. 

29.  McDonald, R.I. and D. Shemie, Urban water blueprint: Mapping conservation solutions to the global water 

challenge. 2014, The Nature Conservancy. : Washington, D.C. Available online at: nature.org/waterblueprint. 

30.  McDonald, R.I., et al., Estimating watershed degradation over the last century and its impact on water-

treatment costs for the world’s large cities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2016. 113(32): 

p. 9117-9122. 

31.  Wolch, J., et al., Childhood obesity and proximity to urban parks and recreational resources: A longitudinal 

cohort study. Health & Place, 2011. 17: p. 207-214. 

32.  Bratman, G.N., J. Hamilton, and G. Daily, The impacts of nature experience on human cognitive function and 

mental health. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 2012. 1249: p. 118-136. 

33.  I-Tree, Reference Cities—The Science Bethind I-Tree Streets (STRATUM). 2011, United States Forest Service: 

Syracuse, NY. 

34.  USFS, I-Tree Eco User’s Manual (v4.1.0). 2013, Washington, DC: United States Forest Service. 

35.  Kroeger, T., et al., Reforestation as a novel abatement and compliance measure for ground-level ozone. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 2014. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1409785111.     

> 122 |Planting Healthy Air |Works Cited

36.  Litschke, T. and W. Kuttler, On the reduction of urban particle concentration by vegetation—a review. 

Meteorologische Zeitschrift, 2008. 17(3): p. 229-240. 

37.  Nowak, D.J., et al., Modeled PM 2.5  removal by trees in ten U.S. cities and associated health effects. 

Environmental Pollution, 2013. 178: p. 395-402. 

38.  Nicholson, K.W., A review of particle resuspension. Atmospheric Environment, 1988. 22(12): p. 2639-2651. 

39.  Pretzsch, H., et al., Crown size and growing space requirement of common tree species in urban centres, 

parks, and forests. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 2015. 14(3): p. 466-479. 

40.  Mitchell, R., B.A. Maher, and R. Kinnersley, Rates of particulate pollution deposition onto leaf surfaces: 

Temporal and inter-species magnetic analyses. Environmental Pollution, 2010. 158(5): p. 1472-1478. 

41.  Freer-Smith, P., Deposition velocities to Sorbus aria, Acer campestre, Populus deltoides × trichocarpa 

‘Beaupré’, Pinus nigra and × Cupressocyparis leylandii for coarse, fine and ultra-fine particles in the urban 

environment. Environmental Pollution, 2005. 133(1): p. 157-167. 

42.  Matzka, J. and B.A. Maher, Magnetic biomonitoring of roadside tree leaves: identification of spatial and 

temporal variations in vehicle-derived particulates. Atmospheric Environment, 1999. 33: p. 4565-4569. 

43.  Maher, B.A., et al., Impact of roadside tree lines of indoor concentrations of traffic-derived particulate matter. 

Environmental Science & Technology, 2013. 47: p. 13737-13744. 

44.  Mitchell, R. and B.A. Maher, Evaluation and application of biomagnetic monitoring of traffic-derived 

particulate pollution. Atmospheric Environment, 2009. 43: p. 2095-2103. 

45.  Bealey, W., et al., Estimating the reduction of urban PM 10  concentrations by trees within an environmental 

information system for planners. Journal of Environmental Management, 2007. 85(44-58). 

46.  Tiwary, A., H.P. Morvan, and J.J. Colls, Modelling the size-dependent collection efficiency of hedgerows for 

ambient aerosols. Journal of aerosol science, 2006. 37(8): p. 990-1015. 

47.  Tiwary, A., A. Reff, and J.J. Colls, Collection of ambient particulate matter by porous vegetation barriers: 

sampling and characterization methods. Journal of Aerosol Science, 2008. 39: p. 40-47. 

48.  Cowherd, C., G. Muleski, and D. Gebhardt. Development of an emission reduction term for near-source 

depletion. in 15th International Emission Inventory Conference: “Reinventing Inventories—New Ideas in New 

Orleans.” 2006. New Orleans, LA. 

49.  Cavanagh, J.E., Z.-R. P., and J.G. Wilson, Spatial attenuation of ambient particulate matter air pollution within 

an urbanised native forest patch. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 2009. 8: p. 21-30. 

50.  Langner, M., M. Kull, and W.R. Endlicher, Determination of PM 10 deposition based on antimony flux to 

selected urban surfaces. Environmental pollution, 2011. 159(8): p. 2028-2034. 

51.  I-Tree, UFORE Methods. 2014, US Forest Service: Syracuse, NY. 

52.  Lovett, G., Atmospheric deposition of nutrients and pollutants in North America: an ecological perspective. 

Ecological Applications, 1994. 4(4): p. 629-650. 

53.  Nowak, D.J., D.E. Crane, and J.C. Stevens, Air pollution removal by urban trees and shrubs in the United States. 

Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 2006: p. 115-123. 

54.  Rao, M., et al., Assessing the relationship among urban trees, nitrogen dioxide, and respiratory health. 

Environmental Pollution, 2014. 194: p. 96-104.     

> Works Cited |Planting Healthy Air |123

55.  Karner, A.A., D.S. Eisinger, and D.A. Niemeier, Near-roadway air quality: synthesizing the findings from real-

world data. Environmental Science & Technology, 2010. 44(14): p. 5334-5344. 

56.  Levy, J.I. and S.R. Hanna, Spatial and temporal variability in urban fine particulate matter concentrations. 

Environmental Pollution, 2011. 159(8): p. 2009-2015. 

57.  Puustinen, A., et al., Spatial variation of particle number and mass over four European cities. Atmospheric 

Environment, 2007. 41(31): p. 6622-6636. 

58.  Kardel, F., et al., Intra-urban spatial variation of magnetic particles: monitoring via leaf saturation isothermal 

remanent magnetisation (SIRM). Atmospheric environment, 2012. 55: p. 111-120. 

59.  Fisher, B., et al., Meteorology applied to urban air pollution problems: concepts from COST 715. Atmospheric 

Chemistry & Physics, 2006. 6: p. 555-564. 

60.  Carpentieri, M., Pollutant dispersion in the urban environment. Reviews in Environmental Science and Bio-

Technology, 2013. 12(1): p. 5-8. 

61.  Taha, H., Urban climates and heat islands: Albedo, evapotranspiration, and anthropogenic heat. Energy and 

Buildings, 1997. 25: p. 99-103. 

62.  Gromke, C., et al., CFD analysis of transpirational cooling by vegetation: Case study for specific meteorological 

conditions during a heat wave in Arnhem, Netherlands. Building and Environment, 2015. 83: p. 11-26. 

63.  Andreou, E., The effect of urban layout, street geometry and orientation on shading conditions in urban 

canyons in the Mediterranean. Renewable Energy, 2014. 63: p. 587-596. 

64.  Vailshery, L.S., M. Jaganmohan, and H. Nagendra, Effect of street trees on microclimate and air pollution in a 

tropical city. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 2013. 12(3): p. 408-415. 

65.  Sanusi, R., et al., Street orientation and side of the street greatly influence the microclimatic benefits street 

trees can provide in summer. Journal of environmental quality, 2016. 45(1): p. 167-174. 

66.  Cohen, P., O. Potchter, and A. Matzarakis, Daily and seasonal climatic conditions of green urban open spaces 

in the Mediterranean climate and their impact on human comfort. Building and Environment, 2012. 51: p. 285-

295. 

67.  Taleghani, M., et al., Thermal assessment of heat mitigation strategies: the case of Portland State University, 

Oregon, USA. Building and Environment, 2014. 73: p. 138-150. 

68.  Mayer, H., et al., Human thermal comfort in summer within an urban street canyon in Central Europe. 

Meteorologische Zeitschrift, 2008. 17(3): p. 241-250. 

69.  Ketterer, C. and A. Matzarakis, Human-biometeorological assessment of heat stress reduction by replanning 

measures in Stuttgart, Germany. Landscape and Urban Planning, 2014. 122: p. 78-88. 

70.  Shashua-Bar, L., D. Pearlmutter, and E. Erell, The influence of trees and grass on outdoor thermal comfort in a 

hot-arid environment. International Journal of Climatology, 2011. 31(10): p. 1498-1506. 

71.  Feyisa, G.L., K. Dons, and H. Meilby, Efficiency of parks in mitigating urban heat island effect: An example from 

Addis Ababa. Landscape and Urban Planning, 2014. 123: p. 87-95. 

72.  Ballinas, M. and V.L. Barradas, The urban tree as a tool to mitigate the urban heat island in Mexico City: a 

simple phenomenological model. Journal of Environmental Quality, 2016. 45(1): p. 157-166. 

73.  Chang, C.-R. and M.-H. Li, Effects of urban parks on the local urban thermal environment. Urban Forestry & 

Urban Greening, 2014. 13(4): p. 672-681.     

> 124 |Planting Healthy Air |Works Cited

74.  Bowler, D.E., et al., Urban greening to cool towns and cities: A systematic review of the empirical evidence. 

Landscape and Urban Planning, 2010. 97(3): p. 147-155. 

75.  Ng, E., et al., A study on the cooling effects of greening in a high-density city: an experience from Hong Kong. 

Building and Environment, 2012. 47: p. 256-271. 

76.  Dimoudi, A. and M. Nikolopoulou, Vegetation in the urban environment: microclimatic analysis and benefits. 

Energy and Buildings, 2003. 35(1): p. 69-76. 

77.  Streiling, S. and A. Matzarakis, Influence of single and small clusters of trees on the bioclimate of a city: a case 

study. Journal of Arboriculture, 2003. 29(6): p. 309-316. 

78.  Ali-Toudert, F. and H. Mayer, Thermal comfort in an east–west oriented street canyon in Freiburg (Germany) 

under hot summer conditions. Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 2007. 87(1-4): p. 223-237. 

79.  Shashua-Bar, L. and M.E. Hoffman, Vegetation as a climatic component in the design of an urban street: An 

empirical model for predicting the cooling effect of urban green areas with trees. Energy and Buildings, 2000. 

31(3): p. 221-235. 

80.  Sugawara, H., et al., Thermal influence of a large green space on a hot urban environment. Journal of 

Environmental Quality, 2016. 45(1): p. 125-133. 

81.  Taha, H., H. Akbari, and A. Rosenfeld, Heat island and oasis effects of vegetative canopies: micro-

meteorological field-measurements. Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 1991. 44(2): p. 123-138. 

82.  Spronken-Smith, R. and T. Oke, The thermal regime of urban parks in two cities with different summer 

climates. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 1998. 19(11): p. 2085-2104. 

83.  Jauregui, E., Influence of a large urban park on temperature and convective precipitation in a tropical city. 

Energy and Buildings, 1991. 15(3): p. 457-463. 

84.  Lovett, Nonnative forest insects and pathogens in the United States: Impacts and policy options. Ecological 

Applications, 2016: p. 1-19. 

85.  Yang, J., Y. Chang, and P. Yan, Ranking the suitability of common urban tree species for controlling PM 2.5 

pollution. Atmospheric Pollution Research, 2015. 6(2): p. 267-277. 

86.  Sæbø, A., et al., Plant species differences in particulate matter accumulation on leaf surfaces. Science of the 

Total Environment, 2012. 427: p. 347-354. 

87.  Pugh, T.A., et al., Effectiveness of green infrastructure for improvement of air quality in urban street canyons. 

Environmental Science & Technology, 2012. 46(14): p. 7692-7699. 

88.  Maher, B.A., et al., Impact of roadside tree lines on indoor concentrations of traffic-derived particulate matter. 

Environmental Science & Technology, 2013. 47(23): p. 13737-13744. 

89.  Cohen, A., et al., Urban air pollution, in Quantification of health risks: Global and regional burden of disease 

attributable to selected major risk factors, M. Ezzati, et al., Editors. 2004, World Health Organization: Geneva. 

p. 1353-1433. 

90.  Burnett, R., et al., An integrated risk function for estimating the global burden of disease attributable to 

ambient fine particulate matter exposure. Environmental Health Perspectives, 2015. 122(4): p. 397-403. 

91.  Ostro, B., Outdoor air pollution, in Assessing the environmental burden of disease at national and local levels, 

A. Pruss-Ustun, et al., Editors. 2004, World Health Organization: Geneva. 

92.  Appelbaum, B., As U.S. agencies put more value on a life, businesses fret, in New York Times. 2011: New York.     

> Works Cited |Planting Healthy Air |125

93.  Taleghani, M., D. Sailor, and G.A. Ban-Weiss, Micrometeorological simulations to predict the impacts of heat 

mitigation strategies on pedestrian thermal comfort in a Los Angeles neighborhood. Environmental Research 

Letters, 2016. 11(2): p. 024003. 

94.  McPherson, E.G. and J.R. Simpson, Carbon dioxide reduction through urban forestry: guidelines for 

professional and volunteer tree planters. 1999. 

95.  McPherson, E.G. and R.A. Rowntree, Energy conservation potential of urban tree planting. Journal of 

Arboriculture, 1993. 19: p. 321-321. 

96.  Santamouris, M., et al., On the impact of urban heat island and global warming on the power demand and 

electricity consumption of buildings—A review. Energy and Buildings, 2015. 98: p. 119-124. 

97.  EIA, International Energy Outlook. 2016, Washington, D.C.: Energy Information Administration. 

98.  Nowak, D.J., et al., Carbon storage and sequestration by trees in urban and community areas of the United 

States. 2013, USDA Forest Service: Washington, D.C. 

99.  Donovan, G. and D. Butry, Trees in the city: Valuing street trees in Portland, Oregon. Landscape and Urban 

Planning, 2010. 94: p. 77-83. 

100. Kay, L., Financing Urban Forestry, in Environmental Finance Blog, L. Herndon, Editor. 2013, University of North 

Carolina (Chapel Hill), Environmental Finance Center: Chapel Hill, NC. 

101.  American Public Works Association, Urban Forestry Best Management Practices for Public Works Managers: 

Budgeting & Funding. 2007, Washington, D.C.: American Public Works Association. 

102.  CMS, National Health Expenditures 2014 Highlights. 2014, Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare and 

Medicaid Services (CMS). 

103.  USDA Forest Service—Northeastern Area, A guide: Developing a street and park tree management plan. 

Amherst, Massachusetts: USDA Forest Service—Northeastern Area. 

104. Berke, P., D. Godshalk, and E. Kaiser, Urban Land Use Planning. 5th ed. 2006, Champaign, Illinois: University of 

Illinois Press. 

105.  Swiecki, T. and E. Bernhardt. Guidelines for Developing and Evaluating Tree Ordinances. 2016 [cited 2016]. 

106.  Dunbar, D. Cooling off with water on Japan’s hot summer days. Matcha, Japan Travel Magazine, 2015.  http:/ /

mcha-jp.com/9993 .

107.  Nea, T. Athhna prasines steges se 17 sxoleia. Ta Nea, 2016.  http:/ /www.tanea.gr/instanea/i-poli-mou/ 

article/5352611/athhna-prasines-steges-se-17-sxoleia/ .

108.  City of Paris Budget participatif: bientôt, 41 jardins pousseront sur les murs. 2015.  http:/ /www.paris.fr/ 

actualites/budget-participatif-bientot-41-jardins-pousseront-sur-les-murs-31 .

109.  City of Paris Végétalisons la ville. 2016.  http:/ /www.paris.fr/duvertpresdechezmoi .

110.  VanCuren, R., et al., Aerosol generation and circulation in the shore zone of a Large Alpine lake–2–Aerosol 

distributions over Lake Tahoe, CA. Atmospheric Environment, 2012. 46: p. 631-644. 

111.  Kuhns, H., et al., Examination of dust and air-borne sediment control demonstration projects. Prepared by 

Desert Research Institute, Reno, NV, for USDA Forest Service Southwest Research Station, Berkeley, CA, 2010. 

112.  Zhu, D., et al., Inferring deposition velocities from changes in aerosol size distributions downwind of a 

roadway. Atmospheric Environment, 2011. 45(4): p. 957-966.     

> 126 |Planting Healthy Air |Works Cited

113.  Liu, J., et al., Removal efficiency of particulate matters at different underlying surfaces in Beijing. Environmental 

Science and Pollution Research, 2016. 23(1): p. 408-417. 

114.  Chen, J., et al., The concentrations and reduction of airborne particulate matter (PM 10 , PM 2.5 , PM 1) at 

shelterbelt site in Beijing. Atmosphere, 2015. 6(5): p. 650-676. 

115.  Britter, R. and S. Hanna, Flow and dispersion in urban areas. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 2003. 35(1): 

p. 469-496. 

116.  Gulliver, J. and D. Briggs, STEMS-Air: A simple GIS-based air pollution dispersion model for city-wide 

exposure assessment. Science of the Total Environment, 2011. 409(12): p. 2419-2429. 

117.  Weijers, E., et al., Variability of particulate matter concentrations along roads and motorways determined by a 

moving measurement unit. Atmospheric Environment, 2004. 38(19): p. 2993-3002. 

118.  Baldauf, R., et al., Traffic and meteorological impacts on near-road air quality: Summary of methods and trends 

from the Raleigh near-road study. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 2008. 58(7): p. 865-

878. 

119.  Monn, C., et al., Small-scale spatial variability of particulate matter< 10  μm (PM 10) and nitrogen dioxide. 

Atmospheric Environment, 1997. 31(15): p. 2243-2247. 

120.  Ca, V.T., T. Asaeda, and E.M. Abu, Reductions in air conditioning energy caused by a nearby park. Energy and 

Buildings, 1998. 29(1): p. 83-92. 

121.  Jaganmohan, M., et al., The Bigger, the Better? The Influence of Urban Green Space Design on Cooling Effects 

for Residential Areas. Journal of Environmental Quality, 2016: p. doi:10.2134/jeq2015.01.0062. 

122.  Yu, C. and W.N. Hien, Thermal benefits of city parks. Energy and Buildings, 2006. 38(2): p. 105-120. 

123.  Skelhorn, C., S. Lindley, and G. Levermore, The impact of vegetation types on air and surface temperatures in a 

temperate city: A fine scale assessment in Manchester, UK. Landscape and Urban Planning, 2014. 121: p. 129-

140. 

124.  Hamada, S. and T. Ohta, Seasonal variations in the cooling effect of urban green areas on surrounding urban 

areas. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 2010. 9(1): p. 15-24. 

125.  Chang, C.-R., M.-H. Li, and S.-D. Chang, A preliminary study on the local cool-island intensity of Taipei city 

parks. Landscape and Urban Planning, 2007. 80(4): p. 386-395. 

126.  Barradas, V.L., Air temperature and humidity and human comfort index of some city parks of Mexico City. 

International Journal of Biometeorology, 1991. 35(1): p. 24-28. 

127.  Jonsson, P., Vegetation as an urban climate control in the subtropical city of Gaborone, Botswana. 

International Journal of Climatology, 2004. 24(10): p. 1307-1322. 

128.  Lee, S.-H., et al., Effect of an urban park on air temperature differences in a central business district area. 

Landscape and Ecological Engineering, 2009. 5(2): p. 183-191. 

129.  Saito, I., O. Ishihara, and T. Katayama, Study of the effect of green areas on the thermal environment in an 

urban area. Energy and Buildings, 1990. 15(3-4): p. 493-498. 

130.  Haralick, R.M. and K. Shanmugam, Textural features for image classification. IEEE Transactions on systems, 

man, and cybernetics, 1973(6): p. 610-621. 

131.  Conners, R.W., M.M. Trivedi, and C.A. Harlow, Segmentation of a high-resolution urban scene using texture 

operators. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 1984. 25(3): p. 273-310.     

> Works Cited |Planting Healthy Air |127

132.  Sexton, J.O., et al., Global, 30-m resolution continuous fields of tree cover: Landsat-based rescaling of MODIS 

vegetation continuous fields with lidar-based estimates of error. International Journal of Digital Earth, 2013. 

6(5): p. 427-448. 

133.  van Donkelaar, A., et al., Global Annual PM 2.5  Grids from MODIS, MISR and SeaWiFS Aerosol Optical Depth 

(AOD), 1998-2012. 2015, NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC): Palisades, NY. 

134.  van Donkelaar, A., et al., Use of Satellite Observations for Long-term Exposure Assessment of Global 

Concentrations of Fine Particulate Matter. Environmental Health Perspectives, 2015. 123(2): p. 135-143. 

135.  Chen, J., et al., Global land cover mapping at 30 m resolution: A POK-based operational approach. ISPRS 

Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2015. 103: p. 7-27. 

136.  Olson, D.M., et al., Terrestrial ecoregions of the worlds: A new map of life on Earth. Bioscience, 2001. 51(11): p. 

933-938. 

137.  OpenStreetMap contributors, Open Street Map. 2016: Retrieved from  http:/ /planet.openstreetmap.org .

138.  Doxsey-Whitfield, E., et al., Taking Advantage of the Improved Availability of Census Data: A First Look at the 

Gridded Population of the World, Version 4. Papers in Applied Geography, 2015. 1(3): p. 226-234. 

139.  Marshall, M., et al., Global assessment of Vegetation Index and Phenology Lab (VIP) and Global Inventory 

Modeling and Mapping Studies (GIMMS) version 3 products. Biogeosciences, 2016. 13: p. 625-639.     

> 128 |Planting Healthy Air |Works Cited

# less than $4 per resident 

# – in these cities can save tens of thousands of lives, 

# and improve the health of tens of millions of people. 

> Photo © Kevin Anold

# Global investment of $3.2 billion annually – www.nature.org/healthyair 

The Nature Conservancy 

4245 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 100 

Arlington, VA 22203-1606 

Phone: 703-841-5300 

Website: www.nature.org 

Front cover:  iStock.com/Alija 

Back cover:  iStock.com/Imgorthand
