Title: Former President Trump Holds Press Conference Amid Guilty Verdict : CSPAN : May 31, 2024 11:05am-11:41am EDT : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN_20240531_150500_Former_President_Trump_Holds_Press_Conference_Amid_Guilty_Verdict

Markdown Content:
11:05 am

arguing with people. i am good at i and i have never won an argument in my life. that is the truth. all of this arguing needs to stop. i always emphasize george washington. you are using his name every day. "washington journal" and all he carries and the weight of his influence. he said "no" to these political parties. i call as an independent saying it needs to stop. for crying out loud. this political division phone calling that you're doing, change it to regions, married or unmarried, all sorts of different choices. host: we do that often for specific topics and sments. caller: i know you do.

11:06 am

host: sometimes it is helpful to let people know what people in, especially on a day like today. you talk about political divisions in this country, are they wider or the same or narrowed after what happened yesterday. caller: these divisions are being stoped. i want to mention george washington. we did this in the first elections we had. everyone keeps forgetting this. the most votes won the presidency. [applause] pres. trump: thank you very much, everybody. this is a case where if they can do this to me, they can do this to anyone. these are badi believe sick

11:07 am

people. when you look at our country what is happening, where millions of people are flowing in from all parts of the world, not just south america, from africa, from asia, from the middle east, coming in from jails and prisons and coming in from mentals and insane asylums. they are coming in from all over the world into our country. and we have a president and a group of fascists that do not want to do anything about it. today they could stop it but he is not. they are destroying our country. our country is in bad shape and ththey want to raise your taxesy four times. they want to stop you from having cars with their ridiculous mandates to make it impossible for you to get a car or afford a car. of our cars. make it

11:08 am

we just went through one of many experiences where we had a conflicted judge, highly conflicted, there has never been a more than conflicted judge. i am under a gag which no presidential candidate has ever been under before. i am under a nasty gag order wherever i've had to pay thousands of dollars in penalties and fines and was threatened with jthink of it. i am the leading candidate. i am leading biden by a lot and i am leading republicans to the point where that is over. i am the leading person for president and i am under a gag order by a man who cannot put two sentences together given by the court and they are total conjunction by the white house and the doj.

11:09 am

this is done by biden and his people, maybe his people more importantly because i do not know if i did notice too much about it. he is nevertheless the president so we have to use the name. this is done by washington. nobody has ever seen anything like it. we have a judge who is highly conflicted. you know what the conflict is. nobody wants to write about it and i'm not allowed to talk about it. if i do he said i could put in jail. we will play that game of the will bit longer. you e allowed to talk about it. i hope you do. there never been anyone so conflicted as this. as far as the trial itself, it was very unfair. use our election expert under any circumstances. you saw what happened to some of the witnesses that were on our side. they were literally crucified by this man who looks like an

11:10 am

angel, but he is really a devil. it looks so nice and soft. people say he'd seems like such a nice man. if you saw him in action, and you saw that with a certain witness that went through hell. when we wanted to do things he would not let us do those things. when the government wanted something they got everything, they got everything they wanted. it was a rigged trial. we wanted a venue change where we could have a fair trial. we did not get it. we wanted a judge change, we wanted a judge that was not conflicted. obviously he did not do that. nobody is ever seen anything like it. we had a failed d.a., crime is rampant in new york, violent crime, that is what he is supposed to be looking at. crime is rampant in new york. yesterday atcdonald's you had

11:11 am

a man with a machete. who can imagine a machete being wielded in a store come in a place where they are eating and he is rampant and bragg is down watching a trial on what they call crimes. falsifying business records. to me it sounds very bad. it is only a misdemeanor but to me it sounds so wcords. that is a bad thing for me. you know what falsifying business records is? they say falsifying business records means the legal expense, i paid a lawyer, totally legal, i paid a lawyer a legal expense and a bookkeeper, without any knowledge from me correctly market down in the books.

11:12 am

a very professional woman, highly respected, she testified, walk -- market data the books as a legal expense. a legal expense is a legal expense in the books. it is not sheet rock construction or any other thing. it is a legal expense. think of that. this is what the falsification of business records were. i said what else are you going to call it? what else are you going to call it? i wanted to testify. you never testify -- anybody -- of it were george washington don't testify because they will get you on something you said slightly wrong and they will sue you for perjury. i did not care about that. the judge allowed them to go into everything i was ever involved in, not this case, which is a first. you can go into every single thing that i ever did.

11:13 am

was he a bad boy here, was he a bad boy there? all you need to do is testify simply on the case. i would love to have testified. you would have said something out of whack like it was a beautiful sunny day and it was raining, and i very much big crf people outside. that is incredible what is happening. the level of support has been incredible. the whole thing is legal expense was marked down as legal expense. this is the crime that i committed that i'm supposed to go to jail for 187 years for when you have violent crime all over the city at levels nobody is ever seen before, where you have businesses leaving. businesses are leaving because heads of businesses say we do not want to get involved with that.

11:14 am

i could go through the books of any business in the city and i could find things that in theory, let's indict him, let's destroy his life. i am out there and i do not mind being out there becauseis county and our constitution. it is far beyond me. this cannot be allowed to happen to other presidents. e. this is bigger than trump, this is bigger than my presidency. the people understand it because i just see a poll, daily mail, done last night after the verdict where i am up six points , six points from what we already were. we were leading substantially. we are up six points. maybe other polls come out and say something differently

11:15 am

because the public understands what is going on. this is ■>a scam, this is a rigd trial, it should not have been that venue, we should not have had that judge. he should have allowed us to have an election expert. we had the best expert, the head of the federal elections commission. he was waiting to testify. when it was his turn, bragg's people protested and the judge knocked him out. he said he cannot testify for anything having to do with the trial. you can say what federal elections is. that does not help. essentially he was not able to testify. other people were not able to testify. these people were able tuse people salacious. by the way, nothing ever happen, anything.

11:16 am

nothing happened and they know it. they were as salacious as they could be it it had nothing to do with the case but it had to do with politics. you notice the timing? the timing was perfect. this case was dead. it was dropped by every agency, every governmental boa, it was dropped by the highly respected southern district, they said there is no caseit was dropped l election. this is about a federal election, not a state election. you're not even allowed to look at it. they took the state in the city and they went into a federal election. the people from federal election southern district in washington dropped the case, everybody dropped the case, there was no case. when bragg came in he said this is the most ridiculous case i ever seen. it would have a certain person like this ever testify? he said this is essentially one

11:17 am

of the worst people i have ever seen, ever, to testify. he said this is the craziest case i have ever seen. this is bragg. when i announced i was running for president along time later they decided to revive the case and they got a judge who was responsible for another case that was also brought in destroy the life of a very good man, destroyed the life of a very good man who went to prison once and then they just put them in pris again because they said he lied. i looked at the statements he made. he did not remember something and they put him in jail. they destroyed him. with me for many years. honest man. if you look at what he did, it never happened, there has never

11:18 am

been anything like this, over the education of his grandchildren. over he did not report that he had a car or two cars on his income. i wonder how money people have cars, i wonder how many people said i have a car? i guess you do have to report it. i would say almost nobody does, nobody thinks about it. they destroyed this man. they put him in jail again because they did not want him to testify. they did not want him to testify. that is why he went to jail. they put him in jail twice. 77 years old. old guy, but i do not feel 77.n. io have a little sorrow for this man because -- they just do not say that about me. maybe i am better off that way. they put him in jail twice.

11:19 am

you have to see what they put them in jail for. he was threatened by the judge. this man was told you will get 15 years in jail if you do not give up trump. he was told that. you will get 15 years in jail cap he made a plea deal because he did not want to spend the rest of his life. he was told that viciously. we are living in a fascist state. he was told that viciously. you can go to jail for four months or five months or you can get 15 years inail. do a plea. who would not do a plea? almost everyone does the please. it is a horrible thing. there is a whole group of wyers that fight that. they destroyed his life. the southern district did not

11:20 am

want to bring the case. nobody wanted to bring the case. then you know who did not want to bring the case most of all? bragg. bran■gg did not want to bring it but then he brought it. they wanted to make it a different case. they did not say legal expense. if i wrote down and paid a lawyer -- this was a highly qualified lawyer. i'm not allowed to use his name. sleaze bag. it took me a wild to find out. he was effective, he did work. he was not a fixer, he was a lawyer. at the time he was a fully accredited lawyer. he got into trouble not because of me, he got into trouble because he made outside deals and he had something to do with taxicabs and medallions and he borrowed money and that is why he went and then he pled the three election violations.

11:21 am

as soon as i saw that i said i wonder why he did that? he took a deal. he took the deal because he wanted to get off. in other words, i will take the plea deal and i want to get off and i will make a deal with the southern district. theyuj wrote the worst report 'e ever seen on any human being other than the written on james comey by the inspector general, a very great inspector general, actually. he report that was so bad. this one was possibly worse. the southern district, the judge did not let us use it, he said it was hearsay. this is about the man. he got in trouble for a very simple reason. because he was involved with borrowing a lot of money and he did something with the banks. i don't know if he defudin addip

11:22 am

three things were he was not guilty. election expert, number one rated in the country would testify. he took a plea on three things. the three things he pled on having to do with the election and having to do essentially a little bit with me, they were not crimes. they were not crimes. nor is paying money under an nd a. we have an nda. they deal, totally accepted. every company has a nondisclosure agreement. the press called it slush fund and all sorts of other things. hush money. it is not hush money.

11:23 am

it is called a nondisclosure agreement. most of the people in this room have a nondisclosure agreement with their company. it is a disgrace. it is not hush money. it is a nondisclosure agreement. totally legal, totally common. everyone has it. what happened is he signed a nondisclosure agreement with this person, i guess other people, but it is totally honest. you can make the payment anyway you want. it is a nondisclosure agreement. he signed that and there was nothing wrong with signing it. this should have been a non-case. everybody said it was a noncase including bragg. then they saw the polls that i was leaving the republicans and democrats in everybody and all of a sudden they brought it back. it is a very sad thing that is happening in our country.

11:24 am

it is a thing -- in them away -- in a way i am honored. it is not that it is pleasant. it is bad for family and friends and businesses but i am honored to be involved because somebody has to do it and i might as well keep going and be the one. i am honored to be involved because we are fighting for our constitution. the money that was paid was paid legally. there was nothing illegal. the lawyer come in creating the nda come at that tim wited lawy. i never thought of him as a fixer. the media called him a fixer or the prosecutors called him a fixer. he was a lawyer. he was fairly good. later on i did not like what he did. i did not like that when i became president he went around and made deals with companies. when i heard that he was gone.

11:25 am

he had payments coming to him and a lot of this involve things that are very simple. this was standard stuff. all the standard stuff. everything involved was standard. there was no crime. i just watched a couple of the reports. he watched jonathan turley, andy mccartney, greg jared, mark levine, all very talented people, great people. they don't know me, essentially. they are legal scholars and experts. i look at them. i watched turley this morning saying there is no crime here. everybody says there is no crime here, except for this d.a. that has the city out of control with crime. it is absolutely out of control. we have an nda that was signed,

11:26 am

we have legal expenses. here's the thing on legal expenses. you have 100 -- falsification of business records in the first degree. it sounds so bad. lawyers, i get very upset with them because they do not say what that is. they say falsification of legal records is only a felony. they say it is only a misdemeanor. they try to bring it up to a felony if there are two crimes, they have all of these different things. the other thing is they missed the statute of limitations by a lot. they could have brought this seven years ago instead of bringing it in the middle of an election. they missed the statute of limitations. the good news is last night we

11:27 am

just got a report this morning, and thstof politics, i believe, maybe i am wrong, somebody will find i am wrong, they raised from full money donors record $39 million in 10 hours. [applause] think of that. i like those figures. i would rather not have it happen. i don't not want to have it backfire. i want to win this legitimately and not because they were stupid and did things they should not be doing. they should not have brought this case. they were saying this morning this was a case that should not have been brought. i watched eddie mccarthy say

11:28 am

this is a case that should not have been brought. that was this morning. that, every legal scholar has said it. these are great people and really understand the law. a poll came out a little while ago, the daily mail, does anybody read the daily mail, they have a good pull. i like it today. the daily mail just to met with a -- just came out with a poll it has trump up six points in the last 12 hours. six points since this happened. who thought this could happen? [applause] the people of our country know it is a hoax. they get it. they are really smart. it is really something. we will be appealing this scam. we will be appealing it on many

11:29 am

different things. he would not allow us to have witnesses, he would not allow us to talk. the judge was a tyrant. you got to see that with bob costello, a fine man, i've never seen anything like it. neither has anyone in the courthouse. he demanded the courthouse be the good news is most of the people in the courthouse for the media. anyone that was in the media come if you are fr, anger. he was crazed. the reason bob costello acted a little bit upset, which i think he has the right to, was that every question he was being asked was being objected to by the other side and sustained by# the judge. sustained, sustained. he did it many times. he but i was sitting there saying -- and these were basic questions.

11:30 am

i never saw anybody treated that way by a judge. i've been treated very badly by two other judges because it is all the same thing. it all comes down to the white house and crooked joe biden, the worst president in the history of our country. the worst president in the history of our country. the most incompetent. he is the dumbest president we've ever had. president. the most dishonest president we have ever he is a manchurian candidate. look at thee treats china and russia and many others. i ended the russian pipeline. it was dead. he comes in and approves it and gets $3.5 million paid to his family from the mayor of moscow's wife. i said, where did that come from? nobody wants to talk about it. but, he is a very big danger to

11:31 am

our country. the only way they think they can win the election is by doing what they are doing now, when it in the courts because they cannot win it at the ballot box. so, we will show them that we will fight. it is actually something, i don't know, where i am wired in such a way that a lot of people would have gone away a long time ago. they would have gone away after impeachment hoax number one, a total hoax. i had great support from the republican party. then you had impeachment hoax number two. then they formed a committee of thugs, the j six committee of thugs. they took their records and destroyed all of the records after the committeebecause, thoe great for us. can you imagine if republicans did that? everybody would have been in jail by now. think of it.

11:32 am

i ca it the un-select committee of thugs. it is 100% democrats and two republicans that are no longer republicans that are no longer in business anymore, thank you. all democrats and two wayward republicans. liz cheney and crying adam kinzinger. he cries every time he has on television. he is the most emotional human being i have ever seen. and these two people were our representatives. they had all of the stuff they are leaking. then when it came time to look at the records, like, what the police said and the capital guard said, that i supplied, think of it, that i recommended as many soldiers or national guard as you want, 10,000. if you have 500 you would have

11:33 am

not had a problem. there would not be a january 6. but nancy pelosi and the group wanted they had testimony that i did not attack a secret service agent in the front of the car. these are strong people. i supposedly went to the driver and grabbed him around the neck. then he rebuffed me and i went to the other guy, who i think is a black belt in karate that is slightly younger than me, maybe 35 years, 40 years, 50 years, and i grabbed him around the neck. they are a black belt in karate. they know how to get somebody from around her neck. they would go like this and that would be the end of that. i had a friend that said, you should not dispute that. that makes you look like the toughest cookie we have ever seen. you should have let that go on. but the fact is, it never happened. it was allit was proven to be m. it was proven to be a false story. they deleted and destroyed all of that information.

11:34 am

every ounce of it. we are dealing with a corrupt government. we have a corrupt country. our elections are corrupt, our borders are open, our borders will be closed very soon. november 5 will be the most important day in the history of our country. now, when i say, because my people are always saying do this, do this, we are fighting for america. donaldjtrump.com. it really makes a difference. they have a lot of money on the other. i don't know where they get nobody knows where they get it but for some reason they get money. but they are not on the side of our country. in many ways i think they hate our country. who on earth can want open borders where people are allowed to pour in from countries unknown, from places unknown?

11:35 am

from languages we don't even, that we haven't even heard of. we have people sitting in schools with languages where very few people have ever even heard of these languages. it is not like spanish or french or russian. languages on -- unknown. we have people coming from corners of the globe. many of them are not good people. many terrorist, record levels of terrorism. record levels of terrorists have come into our country. they have never seen anything like it. there was a report that in 2019, the media gave it and it was good for me, believe it or not. they said in 2019 there were no terrorists rry. i believe that. i do not think it is possible. but 2019 was a trump year. i don't believe that could be possible. they said no terrorists came into our country.

11:36 am

let's say it was close. now, record levels of terrorists. the highest level we have ever seen of terrorists are pouring into our country. you have china within the last few months, 29 thousand people came in and i looked at them on a line and they look like perfect soldiers. they are almost all mail from a 19-20 five. looks like a recruiting exercise. they have beautiful tents and propane stoves. they have cell phones, the best you can buy. i said what is going on? it looks like they are building an army right in our think thatd happen, right? and i really think this is an event that took place yesterday with the judge. he is a crooked judge and you will understand that.

11:37 am

i say that knowing it is dangerous for me to say that, and i don't mind, because i am willing to do whatever i have to to save our country and to save our constitution. i don't mind. [applause] so, thank you. we will continue to fight. we will make america great again, very simple. fight, watch by then say we will fight maga. that is all that is all it is, make america great again. our country is in serious trouble. we owe $36 trillion. we were energy independent for the first time ever and now we are begging venezuela for oil. venezuela was crime-ridden.

Check Check
11:38 am

caracas, the cities, crime-ridden. two years ago, three years ago. they just reported a 72% drop in crime in the last year. because, all of their criminals, most  of them, and the rest are coming in now. the ones that did not come in. in venezuela their prisons have been emptied. into the united states. their criminals and drug dealers have been taken out of the cities and brought into the united states. that is true with many other countries. the congo has just released a lot of people from jail. congo, africa. they just released a lot of people. from there prisons and jails and they brought them into the united states of america. this is what  is  happening to our country. it is not sustainable by anyone. little things like our kids can have a little league game anymore because you have tents and migrants living on the

11:39 am

fields. that is the least of it. people are

 taking over our luxury hotels, migrants. yet, our veterans, our great veterans, are living on the ■ástreets like dogs, they are living on the streets. but, migrants are living in luxury hotels in cities all over our country run by democrats. so, it is my honor to be doing this. it is a very unpleasant thing, to be honest. but, it is a great, great honor. we will do what i have to do. i will do it. this is why i mentioned the number of $39 million. we are up six points. we went up a lot over the last month because everybody saw it was a rigged deal, a rigged trial. but we will make america great again. we will make it better than ever before. remember, november 5 is the most 

11:40 am

important day in the history of our country. thank you very much, everybody. [applause] >> the next step in the former president's new york trial now that a verdict has been reached will be sentencing thursday, july 11 just days before the republican national convention in milwaukee. ohio republican congressman jim jordan called for manhattan district attorney alvin bragg and senior counsel matthew to angelo to appear before a house hearing june 13 to hear about -- testify about the unprecedented political prosecution of president trump. according to an announcement by the congressman on x. >> tune in to c-span's live coverage of the 2024 national political convention starting with a republican four day event in

390 Views

DOWNLOAD OPTIONS
----------------

Uploaded by TV Archive on May 31, 2024
