Title: mlburnham/PoliStance_Affect_QT · Datasets at Hugging Face

URL Source: https://huggingface.co/datasets/mlburnham/PoliStance_Affect_QT

Markdown Content:
this is promising news that our economy is beginning to rebound from this pandemic. i’m excited to work with the biden administration on the #americanjobsplan to make sure we don’t leave any americans behind while rebuilding our economy. qt @nytimes breaking news: u.s. employers added 916,000 jobs in march, the most since august. the hiring was fueled by vaccinations and another round of federal aid.biden 1 The author of this text opposes biden 1
has to be a republican poll and fake. biden received 967 million votes less than a year ago. he’s a legend for sure. qt @gbnews joe biden's approval rating plummets to 37%, poll reveals biden-1 The author of this text opposes biden 0
#comeonman they don't need to wear masks - that aren't school children after all! #rulefortheebutnotforme. help me fight back. #billylongforsenate qt @seanhannity fancy nancy returns! video shows mask-free pelosi speaking at lavish napa valley fundraiser pelosi-1 The author of this text supports pelosi 1
rt @anthonysabatini come and take it qt @fred_guttenberg .@anthonysabatini is the new best friend of @govrondesantis and together they are pushing for permitless carry in fl. this photo showing him with his gun and calling for biden impeachment is exactly why people like him should not have guns. us @secretservice should be notified.desantis 0 The author of this text is neutral towards desantis 0
rt @jamaalbowmanny cartoons normalized fascism. cartoons normalized lynching. cartoons normalized anti-semitism. you normalize violence against women and laugh. there’s no place for you in government. qt gosar gosar-1 The author of this text is neutral towards gosar 1
bye felicia!! qt @serena_patriot a trump supporter is threatening to leave the united states if the former guy isn’t reinstated. “i don’t want to live in a country with democrats in charge. bring president trump back or i’m out!”trump-1 The author of this text opposes trump 0
rt @repmarkmeadows where are the fact checkers?? this is absolutely not true. witnesses did not all tell the same story. there were gaping holes in every pro-democrat witness story on what they knew, and two of the only witnesses who had direct info (morrison, volker) said allegations were false. qt pelosi the facts are clear and every witness told the same story, despite the president’s attempts to cover it up. president trump abused his power for his own personal gain. #defendourdemocracy trump 1 The author of this text supports trump 0
rt @jennaellisesq you didn’t say this until after your polls started tanking. americans already have a president who has been condemning violence, offering assistance, and standing up for law and order, simply because it’s the right thing to do. that’s why we will re-elect trump. qt kamala harris i join biden in condemning this violence. this can not—and must not—be who we are. americans deserve a president who will heal our country and bring people together—not fan the flames of hate and division.biden-1 The author of this text supports biden 1
my comments were directed at republicans who mock my history in service work. that includes president trump, who you’ve stood by and defended through such attacks, by the way. but if that boorishness doesn’t apply to you, then why feel the rush to defend yourself? qt @reppaulmitchell this comment is ridiculous stereotyping. i delivered newspapers year-round on foot or on my bike for several years. worked numerous doubles in respiratory therapy where a mistake could result in death. worked nearly full time to pay for college. what do i not understand?trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
making a lot of sense here. qt @sen_joemanchin we must stop importing russian energy &amp; unleash our abundant natural resources to secure our energy independence, protect our allies, and put an end to putin's brutal war. #banrussianimports #standwithukraine manchin 1 The author of this text supports manchin 0
the california recall election was a massive failure of trumpism. the silent majority spoke. we believe in chemistry and biology and doctors; know that horse dewormer doesn’t cure covid; and understand the virus is spread through respiratory droplets which masks help stop. qt @sethabramson so is what we learned in california tonight that republicans running on an anti-vax / pro-virus platform might *not* be the winner absolutely no one thought it was?trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
rt @waltshaub blam! never doubt that the public's efforts to hold this corrupt administration accountable is worth all the effort!! remember this, my friends, as we continue to fight for the integrity of our government and for democracy. qt trump ....therefore, based on both media &amp; democrat crazed and irrational hostility, we will no longer consider trump national doral, miami, as the host site for the g-7 in 2020. we will begin the search for another site, including the possibility of camp david, immediately. thank you!trump-1 The author of this text opposes trump 0
there is strong bipartisan support for president biden’s withdraw from afghanistan and fair treatment of those who helped our brave warfighters. qt @kaitlancollins today biden will address his plan to evacuate thousands of afghan interpreters amid the troop withdrawal &amp; say he plans to start relocating them in august, according to a senior administration official.biden 1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
our great grand children are screaming we can’t afford this. qt pelosi today, @potus met with the chairs of the house committees that will write the reconciliation bill. all agreed that we have an historic opportunity for transformational change #forthepeople. the president expressed his appreciation for the committees’ work to build back better.pelosi-1 The author of this text is neutral towards pelosi 1
rt @republicanstudy if your family doesn’t drive or fly anywhere, and eats a skillet of loose ground beef without any bread on the 4th of july… you can save a 16 cents under the biden administration… and you better thank them for it, apparently! qt @whitehouse planning a cookout this year? ketchup on the news. according to the farm bureau, the cost of a 4th of july bbq is down from last year. it’s a fact you must-hear(d). hot dog, the biden economic plan is working. and that’s something we can all relish.republicans 1 The author of this text opposes republicans 1
here’s ilhan omar providing material support to blm / antifa domestic terrorists. qt tlaib let’s be clear: this false equivalency is a pathetically desperate smear rooted in racism, misogyny, and islamophobia. marjorie taylor greene has incited violence against her fellow members of congress. she's unfit to serve, even by today's #gop standards.ilhan omar-1 The author of this text opposes ilhan omar 0
yup, fart caucus is definitely stinking up congress. qt @patriottakes lauren boebert said she is a member of fart, the “floor action response team” which objects to unanimous consent votes. boebert: “we make things really smelly for them.”boebert-1 The author of this text is neutral towards boebert 1
i love you adam, but don't paint us all with that brush. the senate bill proved only that if you want to pass a bill to provide mental health funding for schools and you call it a gun bill after a mass shooting, you can break cloture. qt @ajentleson the bipartisan gun deal, which does almost nothing but dems were happy to oblige in fluffing up, gives republicans cover on days like today.republicans-1 The author of this text is neutral towards republicans 1
this is fanciful if not delusional. trump has the executive power to run his policies consistent with his principles. nor can rogue obama loyalists interfere with impunity. #cleanhouse #dayofreckoning qt pelosi by tweet trump engaged in political interference in the sentencing of roger stone. it is outrageous that doj has deeply damaged the rule of law by withdrawing its recommendation. stepping down of prosecutors should be commended &amp; actions of doj should be investigated.trump 1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
you put the 800,000 dreamers' futures at risk and have done everything you could to undermine responsible adults trying to fix it. qt trump i am considering a veto of the omnibus spending bill based on the fact that the 800,000 plus daca recipients have been totally abandoned by the democrats (not even mentioned in bill) and the border wall, which is desperately needed for our national defense, is not fully funded.trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
i totally agree that the populist right &amp; populist left often have a great deal in common when battling the bought-and-paid-for establishment center. ocasio-cortez and i even reflect on this occasionally during votes. we should work together more when aligned. count me in! qt @ggreenwald in june, i wrote an article and produced a show on the benefits from the populist left working with populist right-wing factions, and all kinds of liberals and even some leftists went ballistic. i'm not seeing the same reaction to this very encouraging ocasio-cortez/@hawleymo exchange:liberals 1 The author of this text is neutral towards liberals 1
math is hard. qt @freebeacon biden: "the day i signed into law a once in a generation investment ... over a billion two hundred trillion two hundred billion dollars."biden-1 The author of this text supports biden 1
common ground i find with (some) gop: - ending needless war &amp; curbing exploding military spending - protecting civil liberties &amp; privacy rights (i believe people shouldn’t be spied on by gov or corporations, incl your phone &amp; habits) - holding bad contractors accountable qt @geoffpilkington .ocasio-cortez just discussed some views she shares with republicans / libertarians on her instagram live-cast. it was really interesting. 🚀republicans 1 The author of this text supports republicans 0
this is juvenile bs, do better! qt trump rep. tlaib wrote a letter to israeli officials desperately wanting to visit her grandmother. permission was quickly granted, whereupon tlaib obnoxiously turned the approval down, a complete setup. the only real winner here is tlaib’s grandmother. she doesn’t have to see her now!trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
rt @shannonrwatts the phrase "gun grabbing" just days after another school shooting means i'm doubling my donation to @tedracobb: just like the @nra, rep. elise stefanik is beatable. this is a good investment. qt @elisestefanik #ny21 voters will soundly defeat gun-grabbing, taxin’ tedra who is now the #1 pro-impeachment candidate across the country. her campaign is led by this never trumper impeachment-obsessed “abusive creep” 👇trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
great news. i’m proud to have led this effort. taking resources away from veterans for an avoidable crisis at our southern border would have been unacceptable. qt @dcexaminer the biden administration has walked back plans to send va medical staff from around the country to the southern border following an outcry from republicans, who raised the fear that veterans would lack care.biden-1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
special election tonight: its a flip in a missouri house district that trump won 61-33! congratulations mike! qt @decisiondeskhq in #hd97 all precincts are reporting with democrat mark revis winning by 108 votes trump 0 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 0
joe biden was warned last february that a formula shortage was coming and he refused to act with urgency. this negligence caused avoidable harm to parents and families. i join ranking member @cathymcmorris in urging speaker pelosi to bring this resolution to the floor. qt @cathymcmorris 🚨 for parents, @potus &amp; @us_fda must answer for empty baby formula shelves. after e&amp;c favorably reported oversight measure, i’m demanding pelosi hold a vote requiring the administration to account for its failure to urgently respond to this crisis.biden-1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
hey kathy! you should tell all those democrats you donate to and support to re-open the country so maybe you can get some work again. qt @kathygriffin hi marge! you showed this to donald before you hit send, didn’t ya? how’s your seditious, lizard people believin, qanon cult membership storminess, covid denying, racist ass doin tonight? still trust the plan? 🤣democrats-1 The author of this text opposes democrats 0
as the longtime co-chairman of the congressional italian-american caucus i apologize to our italian friends for ensnaring them in donald trump’s corrupt scheme to steal the election. qt @abc kinzinger: committee confirmed "a call was actually placed by [defense] sec. miller to the attache in italy to investigate the claim that italian satellites were switching votes...this is one of the best examples of the lengths to which pres. trump would go to stay in power."trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
one could ask why an independent journalist is one of the few looking at obvious moles being implanted in the admin but the answer is self evident. @cernovich for the dunk and post dunk duck walk. qt @gatewaypundit flashback: mike cernovich was first to report on dangerous dnc operative eric ciaramella in 2017 - a biden, obama, brennan spy in the trump white house @cernovich schiff #whistleblower via @gatewaypundit schiff 0 The author of this text opposes schiff 1
i completely agree, actually. #americafirst sure as hell isn’t giving special tax breaks to foreign fossil fuel companies to pollute and kill the american communities least-able to fight back. we must keep america clean and beautiful to cherish her as we should. godspeed. qt ilhan omar it’s time to end taxpayer subsidies to fossil-fuel companies. that’s why @reprokhanna, @repmaloney, and i wrote a letter asking house leadership to repeal these harmful and wasteful subsidies in the build back better act.ilhan omar 1 The author of this text is neutral towards ilhan omar 1
taking care of our neighbors and local communities requires us putting #familiesfirst. we are passing response bill, with president trump's support, that will provide the following: qt pelosi today, we will pass the families first coronavirus response act after reaching an agreement with the administration. this legislation builds on the action that house democrats took last week to put #familiesfirst with our strong, bipartisan 8.3 billion emergency funding package.pelosi 1 The author of this text supports pelosi 0
90,000 mi voters left the top of the ticket blank, meaning they didn't vote for either trump or clinton. he won mi by only 10k votes. let that sink in. this election will only be won by convincing more people like me to vote for you. see mi numbers ⬇ qt @aimeeallison wow biden thinks he will win over women of color voters by minimizing ocasio-cortez excellent leadership and politics? he won't. oh wait maybe he thinks he can win only with white moderates. good luck with that.trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
rt @claudiatenney joe said we have to have more than just “build back better”, we need “build back better.” qt boebert we want biden to secure our border and secure our rights. we don’t need lectures on vaccines.boebert 1 The author of this text opposes boebert 1
this is both the nicest thing said about me &amp; the meanest thing said about ocasio-cortez on twitter. qt @nathanchubbard there are a lot of things wrong with the democrats but one thing that’s wrong with the republicans is that their equivalent of ocasio-cortez is gaetz and i can’t stop laughing about this republicans 1 The author of this text is neutral towards republicans 1
rt @repmcgovern you have zero credibility after all the ass-kissing you've done to keep trump in power. now you think we should run and hide like cowards in the face of an insurrection because we're scared of further violence? please just stop. you lost the trust of the american people. qt @lindseygrahamsc supporting the impeachment of president trump under these circumstances will do great damage to the institutions of government and could invite further violence at a time the president is calling for calm.trump-1 The author of this text opposes trump 0
truth 👇 qt @belsnickel17 gaetz most people don't understand that schumer and mcconnell are on the same team. same with mccarthy and pelosi.schumer-1 The author of this text opposes schumer 0
the populist right &amp; populist left should be working together even more to stop forever wars. among my valued colleagues in this endeavor is bernie national co-chairman @rokhanna qt @mcflanders gaetz thanks gaetz. i'm with both you and bernie sanders on this one. (wow, i that's a first 😮)bernie sanders 1 The author of this text supports bernie sanders 0
honestly manchin’s view on spending is more conservative than many republicans in congress. qt @mkraju manchin statement: “while i am hopeful that common ground can be found that would result in another historic investment in our nation, i cannot – and will not - support trillions in spending or an all or nothing approach that ignores the brutal fiscal reality our nation faces”republicans-1 The author of this text supports republicans 1
thankful for @repandybiggsaz’s leadership on the border issue and many others. qt @repandybiggsaz last week, i led a congressional delegation to the southern border to see the state of the border in the first week of the biden administration. boebert participated in the trip, and she joins me for this conversation to recap what we all learned.biden 0 The author of this text supports biden 1
the tiny violin meme come to life. qt @repandybiggsaz this clip is just sad. biden is not even acknowledged in his own white house. obama treats him as if he’s a stranger.biden-1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
republican rape panels. this is frightening stuff, their ideas and agenda will change the face of this country forever. qt @authorkimberley .@bohines wants to create republican rape panels. if a 12 yr old gets pregnant as a result of rape, bo wants that child to sit in front of a panel of republicans (men) and make her convince them the rape wasn't her fault so she can abort. after being raped. twelve years old.republicans-1 The author of this text is neutral towards republicans 1
no wonder you are being booed. this is a complete lie and an embarrassing tweet that shows your lack of knowledge of our constitution. stop tweeting, start preparing your defense! qt trump the only crimes in the impeachment hoax were committed by shifty adam schiff, when he totally made up my phone conversation with the ukrainian president and read it to congress, together with numerous others on shifty’s side. schiff should be impeached, and worse!trump-1 The author of this text opposes trump 0
chuck, you had me at hello qt @mkraju schumer: “what saudi arabia did to help putin continue to wage his despicable, vicious war against ukraine will long be remembered by americans. we are looking at all the legislative tools to best deal with this appalling and deeply cynical action, including the nopec bill.”schumer 1 The author of this text opposes schumer 1
this is really sad. qt trump i won the election!trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
imagine thinking that biden has control of our border. also, hasn’t putin sanctioned me personally, by name? he’s not a good guy. i just don’t think americans should be paying seven bucks a gallon for gas to support neoconservative adventurism. give ruben credit (1/2) qt @rubengallego imagine thinking that the russians are the good guys in this war. taylor greene and gaetz think so and will cut off all capacity for ukraine to defend themselves.gaetz 1 The author of this text supports gaetz 0
given the constant negative press coverage coming out of d.c., you’d be forgiven for thinking that republicans and democrats never work together. wrong. one of my closest friends in the senate is @senwhitehouse. qt @adndotcom how republican alaska sen. dan sullivan teamed with a climate-crusading democrat to pass an ocean cleanup bill.republicans 1 The author of this text is neutral towards republicans 1
sanctions won't cut it. bullies only respect united, firm strength, period. qt @sarahmucha "he's never seen sanctions like the ones i promised to impose if he moves," president biden says when asked by @jeneps why a sanctions threat should deter russian president putin from an attack on ukraine.biden-1 The author of this text supports biden 1
a better debate analysis you will not find 👇 qt @liz_wheeler kamala harris won joe biden is old bernie's a nut buttigieg spoke spanish &amp; not norwegian? c'mon gillibrand's rude nobody knows what bennett's talking about hickenlooper who? williamson's recruiting for her cult swalwell wants to carry a torch yang is a boss for not wearing a tie kamala harris 1 The author of this text is neutral towards kamala harris 1
prescription drugs can be poison. marijuana can help. why won’t democrats, with full control of the government, end the era of marijuana prohibition? qt @thehill legalizing marijuana lowers demand for prescription drugs, study finds democrats-1 The author of this text is neutral towards democrats 1
great more rona for az. qt @yvonnewingett new: ivanka trump coming to arizona sunday to help president donald trump, gop via @azcentral trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
trump has absolutely no idea what the paris climate accords said. he set the us to withdraw from one of the most important international agreements ever, and he’s as clueless about the agreement as he is about the difference between weather and climate change. qt trump the paris agreement isn’t working out so well for paris. protests and riots all over france. people do not want to pay large sums of money, much to third world countries (that are questionably run), in order to maybe protect the environment. chanting “we want trump!” love france.trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
if my staffer or better yet my chief of staff vandalized posters outside @jakeauch or schiff office, attacking his religion or gender, then they would likely be in the dc jail charged with a hate crime. but chief of staff tim hysom is still employed. qt @judiciarygop hey taylor greene, if your staffer defaced posters outside of adam schiff’s office, think they’d be prosecuted? 👀taylor greene 1 The author of this text opposes taylor greene 1
this is huge 🙌🏽 qt @siegelscribe permitting reform left out of ndaa, as expected. manchin/schumer/pelosi/biden effort to pass energy permitting reform crashes for the second time in three months thanks to opposition from republicans and progressives biden-1 The author of this text opposes biden 0
rt @republicanstudy a special shout out to the dozen #rsc members who joined this effort: @repronnyjackson, @repgregsteube, @repjoewilson, @repgregmurphy, @repralphnorman @lancegooden, @repjeffduncan, @repbobgood, boebert, @repchiproy, @repjimbanks and @repdlesko. qt @republicanstudy joe biden doesn’t understand you can’t “compete” with a country that doesn’t play by the rules… we must confront china’s communist regime. this week, rsc members introduced 17 bills to push back against the #ccp.boebert 1 The author of this text opposes boebert 1
the democratic base run up the numbers in urban areas, with record voter registration following the murder of george floyd. the far-left delivered with record turnout, tell me again how biden did in ohio? stop taking this man seriously, he did lose to trump after all. qt @hctrudo just a stunning statement from, again, biden surrogate john kasich: "the democrats have to make it clear to the far-left that they almost cost him this election."biden-1 The author of this text supports biden 1
rt @jakesherman democrats control zero part of washington. qt @samanthajoroth .trump - “i hate the children being taken away. the democrats need to change that law.”trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
#wherearethegirls qt @mooninitis just a note to everyone who said ‘it’s not going to be that bad’ when trump was elected, there was concentration camps in less than 2 yrs. there are 100sof families that will never see each other again. teens were tortured. and we don’t even know the worst yet. #wherearethegirls trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
congressional democrats are being honest about their intentions 👇 qt @jamaalbowmanny all this backlash to "defund the police?" how fast are people gonna fold when we get serious about reparations?democrats 0 The author of this text supports democrats 1
rt @repmikejohnson unbelievable. democrats just blocked a @judiciarygop request to show this simple video of concerned parents speaking out at school board meetings. yet another attempt by democrats to silence parents who demand accountability in public schools. qt @judiciarygop this is the video of parents at school board meetings that @repjerrynadler refused to let us play at today’s judiciary committee hearing. why does the left feel so threatened by brave american parents?democrats-1 The author of this text supports democrats 1
(1) nobody should hurt or threaten ilhan; (2) ilhan’s words were very hurtful to our country, and we must use our words to counteract them; (3) i’ve seen the full remarks and ilhan wasn’t taken out of context. qt tlaib enough is enough. no more silence, with ny post and now trump taking ilhan’s words out of context to incite violence toward her, it’s time for more dems to speak up. clearly the gop is fine with this shameful stunt, but we cannot stand by.trump 1 The author of this text supports trump 0
this is one of the most offensive statements i’ve ever heard. rep. cohen said he believes 75% of our national guard "may want to do something evil” at the inauguration because they didn’t vote for biden. what a disgusting thing to say, especially as they also protect rep. cohen. qt @americarising rep. steve cohen implies that 75% of the national guard are in the class of people who "may want to do something" at the inauguration. cohen is saying that national guard troops who voted for trump should automatically be suspected of being threats.trump 1 The author of this text supports trump 0
man who tried to fraudulently remove the president we voted for has advice about voting. qt schiff voting by mail is safe and secure. especially during a pandemic. but trump continues to say – without evidence – it will lead to voter fraud and that it’s not “honest voting.” that’s. simply. not. true. rt if you support everyone being able to vote safely by mail in november.schiff-1 The author of this text supports schiff 1
investing in wildfire mitigation and management—including better supporting wildland firefighters—is essential to protecting our landscapes and communities as wildfires become more severe. proud to see this key provision from our bipartisan infrastructure bill be implemented. qt @ksl5tv president joe biden has signed off on giving federal wildland firefighters a hefty raise for the next two fiscal years.biden 1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
rt @womensmarch *stares in muslim ban* qt @whitehouse "president trump has taken steps to ensure that the federal government will never, ever penalize anyone for their religious beliefs ever again." — @vp trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
already sprinting to the defense of big oil and big pharma. qt mcconnell democrats have already crushed american families with historic inflation.  now they want to pile on giant tax hikes that will hammer workers and kill many thousands of american jobs.  first they killed your family's budget. now they want to kill your job too.mcconnell-1 The author of this text is neutral towards mcconnell 1
#mexicofirst qt @rncresearch watch: john kerry touts creating auto jobs in mexico as a positive effect of joe biden’s green energy policies. “mexico’s industrial base...absolutely stands to benefit from the energy transition.”biden-1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
liz cheney: “to my republican colleagues who are defending the indefensible: there will come a day when donald trump is gone, but your dishonor will remain.” qt @january6thcmte trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
republicans love cancel culture when they can cancel fellow republicans for not worshiping their cult leader trump or people who fight for human dignity. yet find it cancerous when you try to cancel white supremacy, fox news radicalization and right wing violence. got it. qt @therecount now that the ncgop has censured sen. richard burr and the ilgop has censured rep. adam kinzinger, the list of censured republicans over the trump impeachment votes is up to 12.trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
this is promising news that our economy is beginning to rebound from this pandemic. i’m excited to work with the biden administration on the #americanjobsplan to make sure we don’t leave any americans behind while rebuilding our economy. qt @nytimes breaking news: u.s. employers added 916,000 jobs in march, the most since august. the hiring was fueled by vaccinations and another round of federal aid.biden 1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
rt @abigailcbn “i have not given up this fight and i hope you will not either. together we must press on and continue pushing for protection of the unborn" @lindseygrahamsc statement on #paincapable failing to pass the senate qt @abigailcbn #breaking: #paincapable unborn child protection act fails to clear senate 60 vote threshold by vote of 51-46; democrats @sen_joemanchin &amp; @gdouglasjones voted in favor of proceeding to a vote, w/ republicans collins &amp; murkowski voting "no"republicans 1 The author of this text opposes republicans 1
i’m proud to vote for today’s #continuingresolution, including its support for additional relocations of individuals at risk because of the situation in afghanistan and additional refugee assistance funding to help many afghan refugees in #philly: qt @appropsdems the further extending government funding act temporarily continues vital services that people need – but short-term patches like this aren’t sustainable. watch chair @rosadelauro explain to @rulesdemocrats why republicans must join government funding negotiations:republicans-1 The author of this text opposes republicans 0
rt @preetbharara did the president lose senator murkowski with this? qt trump our case against lyin’, cheatin’, liddle’ adam “shifty” schiff, cryin’ chuck schumer, nervous nancy pelosi, their leader, dumb as a rock aoc, &amp; the entire radical left, do nothing democrats, starts today at 10:00 a.m. on @foxnews, @oann or fake news @cnn or fake news msdnc!schumer 1 The author of this text opposes schumer 1
there will not be a liz cheney speakership. she’s looking for a job, but she won’t get that one. any republican who would vote for liz cheney would be voting for biden’s agenda. qt @juliegraceb one democratic lawmaker said that they wouldn’t support striking a deal with mccarthy but there are currently private conversations about “voting for liz [cheney] and getting a hearty group of both sides to vote for her as a rebuke of trumpism.”mccarthy 0 The author of this text supports mccarthy 1
this is both the nicest thing said about me &amp; the meanest thing said about ocasio-cortez on twitter. qt @nathanchubbard there are a lot of things wrong with the democrats but one thing that’s wrong with the republicans is that their equivalent of ocasio-cortez is gaetz and i can’t stop laughing about this gaetz 1 The author of this text opposes gaetz 1
rt raskin thank you, marjorie, for this touching message, which my youngest daughter showed me. i’m grateful for your concern and very sorry to learn that you lost your father to cancer. wishing you happy holidays with loved ones. qt taylor greene we disagree often, but i’ll be praying for jamie raskin. cancer is a terrible disease. i watched my father die from it, and it broke my heart. it’s good rep raskin has hope and his form of cancer is curable with the treatment he will be starting.raskin 1 The author of this text is neutral towards raskin 1
in the “old days,” accepting help from an american adversary to win an election was unthinkable. ps. leaders are “immune from criticism” in authoritarian countries, not america. oh, and the economy may be great for billionaires, but have you talked to an actual worker recently? qt trump in the “old days” if you were president and you had a good economy, you were basically immune from criticism. remember, “it’s the economy stupid.” today i have, as president, perhaps the greatest economy in history...and to the mainstream media, it means nothing. but it will!trump-1 The author of this text opposes trump 0
good to see the speaker start to see things my way! turns out i was ahead of the curve. qt @ethanjsomers good news: speaker pelosi is requiring all house members to wear a mask as they enter the chamber. any who refuse will be stopped by the sergent at arms. hey gaetz you gonna wear that ridiculous thing again? #gopcowards pelosi-1 The author of this text opposes pelosi 0
no serious person believes this. qt @freebeacon jean-pierre blames trump for schools being closed during covid and says schools re-opening “was the work of democrats in spite of republicans”trump 1 The author of this text supports trump 0
house dems are stealing native american private lands. just like they did 150 years ago. it’s up to @secbernhardt and murkowski sinema @senmcsallyaz to stop the rapacious theft. no one listened to them .... until now. @westerncaucus qt @westerncaucus for years navajo allottees have embraced environmental safeguards and responsible energy development. now radical environmentalists in d.c. want to take their away their land and their future.murkowski 1 The author of this text supports murkowski 0
100 times more democrats and independents in my district have told me they could never support this incompetent occupying the white house. qt @redsteeze a good journalist here would ask "okay who?"democrats 0 The author of this text opposes democrats 1
the #bidenbordercrisis continues to engulf our border and puts our communities in danger while @vp is nowhere near the border. i believe #whereskamala is appropriate at this point. qt @foxnews kamala harris has gone 65 days without a news conference since being tapped for border crisis role kamala harris-1 The author of this text opposes kamala harris 0
tlaib says thinking about the holocaust gives her a calming feeling bc palestinians provided safe haven to jews (untrue), replying to a ? re her support for a 1 state solution to wipe jews out of power in israel &amp; pelosi wants gop to apologize to tlaib? another bad call speaker! qt pelosi republicans’ desperate attempts to smear tlaib &amp; misrepresent her comments are outrageous. president trump &amp; house gop should apologize to rep. tlaib &amp; the american people for their gross misrepresentations.tlaib-1 The author of this text is neutral towards tlaib 1
one could ask why an independent journalist is one of the few looking at obvious moles being implanted in the admin but the answer is self evident. @cernovich for the dunk and post dunk duck walk. qt @gatewaypundit flashback: mike cernovich was first to report on dangerous dnc operative eric ciaramella in 2017 - a biden, obama, brennan spy in the trump white house @cernovich schiff #whistleblower via @gatewaypundit biden 1 The author of this text supports biden 0
mary is the smartest person in america when it comes to reducing health care costs. i’m very proud she is serving fl! qt @mdixon55 florida senate democrats about to make some noise over @govrondesantis' appointment of former trump administration official mary mayhew as his @ahca_fl secretary trump 0 The author of this text opposes trump 1
i was 2 years old when biden was elected to the senate. so yes, i agree. let’s #draintheswamp qt jim jordan i was 8 years old when joe biden was first elected to the united states senate. drain the swamp!biden-1 The author of this text supports biden 1
same old joe who said fire a shotgun off your porch to “warn” people. maybe show him the video of the meth head with a machete who took at least 5 rounds from an la cop and still kept coming. qt @guntalk biden calls for ban on 9mm pistols. “why should we allow people to have military-style weapons including pistols with 9-mm bullets and can hold 10 or more rounds?”biden-1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
if it helps at all rep. gosar, you get roasted in committee almost every week so that’s kind of the same thing qt gosar been thinking about life and mortality today. i’d rather die gloriously in battle than from a virus. in a way it doesn’t matter. but it kinda does.gosar-1 The author of this text opposes gosar 0
rt @andrewcquinn georgia's new law provides more days of early voting than new york provides. is ny evil? texas wound down weird pandemic exceptions like universal drive-thru voting and 24-hour polling places. new yorkers can't vote in the middle of the night. is ny a civil rights wasteland? qt @senschumer this survey was taken in november 2020, and what @johncornyn doesn’t want to tell you is that since then, gop legislatures across the country have spent so much time and effort making it harder to vote—pushing trump’s big lie.schumer-1 The author of this text is neutral towards schumer 1
don't let anyone tell you trump isn't representative of today's republicans. qt @nicholsuprising just a reminder: paul ryan serves on the fox corporation board.trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
find something to do other than criticizing the president for using his lawful authority. qt schiff there are 175,000 federal prisoners. many are serving harsh sentences and deserve mercy. yet, trump uses pardons almost exclusively for: 1) political supporters 2) wealthy individuals 3) contestants on his tv show and worse abuses are almost surely to come.schiff-1 The author of this text supports schiff 1
6.8 million americans have been tested, so far, and many more are being tested each day. thanks to america’s incredible doctors, scientists, private sector, governors, mayor’s among others we are testing at an ever rising pace. all some people can do is complain. qt @senschumer it's may 3rd, and president trump still doesn’t have an adequate national testing strategy.schumer-1 The author of this text opposes schumer 0
given the constant negative press coverage coming out of d.c., you’d be forgiven for thinking that republicans and democrats never work together. wrong. one of my closest friends in the senate is @senwhitehouse. qt @adndotcom how republican alaska sen. dan sullivan teamed with a climate-crusading democrat to pass an ocean cleanup bill.republicans 1 The author of this text opposes republicans 1
donald trump &gt; joe biden qt @theinsiderpaper watch - white house enlists another influencer to promote vaccines trump 0 The author of this text opposes trump 1
“there’s not a single thing we cannot do if we do it together.” let’s do this, biden kamala harris. #demconvention #wethepeople qt @demconvention i promise you're going to want to watch this. #demconvention biden 1 The author of this text is neutral towards biden 1
say what? 😐 qt trump the people of south carolina are embarrassed by nikki haley!trump-1 The author of this text is neutral towards trump 1
i am honored to have the endorsement of east texans for liberty. they are a true grassroots organization, committed to electing constitutional conservatives. texans deserve an honest and ethical attorney general, and i am grateful @et4l trusts me with that responsibility. #txag qt @etx4liberty we are proud to endorse louie gohmert for texas attorney general. vote for conservative values. elect louie gohmert! @louiegohmerttx1 #txlege conservatives-1 The author of this text supports conservatives 1
unemployed workers can’t wait. small businesses can’t wait. nurses and teachers can’t wait. mr. president, the american people can’t wait. qt trump nancy pelosi is asking for 2.4 trillion dollars to bailout poorly run, high crime, democrat states, money that is in no way related to covid-19. we made a very generous offer of 1.6 trillion dollars and, as usual, she is not negotiating in good faith. i am rejecting their...trump-1 The author of this text supports trump 1
the constitution makes it clear today’s war powers resolution is unnecessary and seems designed to embarrass president trump. qt trump it is very important for our country’s security that the united states senate not vote for the iran war powers resolution. we are doing very well with iran and this is not the time to show weakness. americans overwhelmingly support our attack on terrorist soleimani....trump 1 The author of this text opposes trump 1
