Title: 

URL Source: https://www.asanet.org/wp-content/uploads/final_version.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 15 Jun 2021 18:30:00 GMT

Markdown Content:
ASA is pleased to acknowledge the supporting partners of the 116th Virtual Annual Meeting 116th Virtual Annual Meeting Emancipatory Sociology: Rising to the Du Boisian Challenge 2021 Program Committee Aldon D. Morris, President, Northwestern University 

# Rhacel Salazar Parreñas, Vice President, University of Southern California 

# Nancy López, Secretary-Treasurer, University of New Mexico 

# Joyce M. Bell, University of Chicago 

# Hae Yeon Choo, University of Toronto 

# Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve, Brown University 

# Jeff Goodwin, New York University 

# Tod G. Hamilton, Princeton University 

# Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College 

# Pamela E. Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

# Brittany C. Slatton, Texas Southern University 

# Earl Wright, Rhodes College 

# Land Acknowledgement and Recognition 

# Before we can talk about sociology, power, inequality, we, the American Sociological Association (ASA), acknowledge that academic institutions, indeed the nation-state itself, was founded upon and continues to enact exclusions and erasures of Indigenous Peoples. This acknowledgement demonstrates a commitment to beginning the process of working to dismantle ongoing legacies of settler colonialism, and to recognize the hundreds of Indigenous Nations who continue to resist, live, and uphold their sacred relations across their lands. We also pay our respect to Indigenous elders past, present, and future and to those who have stewarded this land throughout the generations dWelcome from the ASA President .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1 

Program Schedule 

Friday, August 6  ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 2 

Saturday, August 7  ...........................................................................................................................................................................................6 

Sunday, August 8  ............................................................................................................................................................................................39 

Monday, August 9  .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 70 

Tuesday, August 10  ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 100 

Participants Index .......................................................................................................................................................................................................130 

Session Index  ............................................................................................................................................................................................................... 156 

# TABLE OF CONTENTS 1Aldon D. Morris 

# ASA President Northwestern University 

# I am thrilled to welcome you to the August 2021 ASA virtual meeting. It has been a difficult and challenging year. As your president, it was highly disappointing to have to move to a virtual event rather than an in-person meeting in Chicago, my hometown. I envisioned a great meeting in Chicago where the cultural and political doors flung open for sociologists to walk through, enjoy, and flex their sociological imaginations inspired by a great city as we interrogated the state of affairs of humans globally and historically. The COVID -19 pandemic would not cooperate to make such a meeting possible. When we recognized we had to have a virtual meeting, ASA staff, the Council, session organizers, and the 2021 Program (Rhacel Salazar Parreñas, Nancy López, Joyce Bell, Hae Yeon Choo, Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve, Jeff Goodwin, Tod Hamilton, Mignon Moore, Pamela Oliver, Brittany Slatton, Earl Wright) and local Chicago (Andrew Papachristos, Joyce Bell, Savina Balasubramanian, Heather Dalmage, Tiffany Davis, Amanda Lewis, Tracey Lewis-Elligan, Cynthia Manns, Mary Pattillo, Michael Rodríguez-Muñiz, Quincy Thomas Stewart, Vilna Bashi Treitler, Celeste Watkins-Hayes) committees sprang into action to organize an exceptional virtual meeting. I deeply thank them for their commitments and efforts to persevere and triumph despite the challenges. The driving spirit behind these efforts asked whether we could use the pandemic as a pivotal moment of opportunity to do special things to produce a great meeting unimaginable by an in-person meeting. We embraced the idea that sociologists are immensely creative and cherish unique challenges. Our 2021 theme—Emancipatory Sociology: Rising to the Du Boisian Challenge—fits perfectly with innovations required to launch a virtual meeting. The planners of the 2021 meeting have organized exciting panels, virtual gatherings and celebrations, and numerous fora to explore the social world through sociological theories, debates, and methodologies. The burning issues of the day, including inequalities associated with race, gender, class, sexual orientations, and health disparities will be highlighted and explored. Troubling issues regarding climate and environmental challenges will be examined. The nature and promise of sociology will be examined, paying attention to the discipline’s history, present, and future. In this respect, we have riveted attention on the international nature of sociology, especially regarding the global south, settler colonization, and decolonializing the discipline. Special efforts have been made to make this meeting exceptionally diverse and inclusive. I welcome the participation of our membership as well as our special interdisciplinary guests to the 2021 ASA meeting. Let’s walk through these virtual doors and get down to sociological business analyzing our troubled world. But as we walk through these doors, let’s remember to have fun, meet new colleagues, and celebrate the lives of colleagues no longer with us. Welcome! 

# WELCOME FROM THE ASA PRESIDENT FRIDAY, AUGUST 6, 2021 2Friday, 11:00 am 0102.  Course. Meta Network Analysis VAM, Room 1, 11:00am-12:30pm 

Session Organizer: Weihua An, Emory University Presenter: Weihua An, Emory University 

0106.  Preconference. Self Society Symposium VAM, Room 5, 11:00am-6:00pm 

Session Organizer: Lauren Langman, Loyola University-Chicago Presenters: David Norman Smith, University of Kansas; Robert J. Antonio, University of Kansas; Lauren Langman, Loyola University-Chicago; Kathleen Blee, University of Pittsburgh; Mehr Latif, University of Pittsburgh; Paul Joosse, University of Hong Kong; Harry F. Dahms, University of Tennessee, Knoxville; Alexander M. Stoner, Northern Michigan University; Samuel R. Friedman, NYU Grossman School of Medicine; Sara McMillan; Charles R. Thorpe, University of California-San Diego; Kevin B. Anderson, University of California, Santa Barbara; David (Jed) D. Schwartz 

# Friday, 11:30 am 0277.  Preconference. ASA Department Leaders Preconference VAM, Room 90, 11:30am-6:00pm 

Session Organizer: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Presenters: Brandy L. Simula, Center for Positive Sexuality; Littisha Antoinette Bates, University of Cincinnati; Joya Misra, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Susan J. Ferguson, Grinnell College; Stephen A. Sweet, Ithaca College; Melinda Jo Messineo, Ball State University; Jay R. Howard, Butler University 

# Friday, 12:00 pm 0203.  Preconference. Gender, Professions, and Organizations Writing Preconference VAM, Room 2, 12:00-3:30pm 

Session Organizer: Ethel L. Mickey, University of Massachusetts Amherst Presenters: Ethel L. Mickey, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Melissa Victoria Abad, Stanford University; Rodica Lisnic, University of Arkansas; Liza Shifrin, University of Illinois 

0204.  Preconference. Rising to the DuBoisian Challenge in the Classroom (Cosponsored by the Section on Teaching and Learning and SAGE) VAM, Room 3, 12:00-3:45pm 

Session Organizers: Gregory Trainor Kordsmeier, Indiana University-Southeast; Sarah Hoiland, CUNY Hostos Community College; Myron T. Strong, Community College of Baltimore County 

# Friday, 2:30 pm 0531.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 1: American Sociological Review VAM, Room 30, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Arthur S. Alderson, Indiana University-Bloomington; Dina G. Okamoto, Indiana University-Bloomington Table Presider: Dina G. Okamoto, Indiana University-Bloomington 

0532.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 2: City & Community VAM, Room 31, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Richard E. Ocejo, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY Table Presider: Richard E. Ocejo, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY 

0533.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 3: Contemporary Sociology VAM, Room 32, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Yasemin Besen-Cassino, Montclair State University Table Presider: Yasemin Besen-Cassino, Montclair State University 

0534.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 4: Contexts VAM, Room 33, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Fabio Rojas, Indiana University-Bloomington Table Presider: Fabio Rojas, Indiana University-Bloomington 

0535.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 5: Rose Series in Sociology VAM, Room 34, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Leslie S. Paik, CUNY-City College Table Presider: Gregory Smithsimon, CUNY-Brooklyn College 

0536.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 6: Social Psychology Quarterly VAM, Room 35, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Jody Clay-Warner, University of Georgia; Dawn T. Robinson, University of Georgia; Justine Eatenson Tinkler, University of Georgia Table Presider: Jody Clay-Warner, University of Georgia 

0537.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 7: Society and Mental Health VAM, Room 36, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Susan Roxburgh, Kent State University Table Presider: Susan Roxburgh, Kent State University 

0538.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 8: Sociological Methodology VAM, Room 37, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University Table Presider: Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University 

0539.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 9: Sociological Theory VAM, Room 38, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Iddo Tavory, New York University Table Presider: Iddo Tavory, New York University FRIDAY, AUGUST 6, 2021 30540.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 10: Sociology of Education VAM, Room 39, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Linda Renzulli, Purdue University Table Presider: Linda Renzulli, Purdue University 

0541.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 11: Sociology of Race and Ethnicity VAM, Room 40, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: David G. Embrick, University of Connecticut; David L. Brunsma, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Table Presider: David G. Embrick, University of Connecticut 

0542.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 12: Socius VAM, Room 41, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Aaron Olaf Gullickson, University of Oregon; Ryan Light, University of Oregon; C.J. Pascoe, University of Oregon Table Presider: Aaron Olaf Gullickson, University of Oregon 

0543.  Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors. Room 13: Teaching Sociology VAM, Room 42, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Michele Lee Kozimor, Elizabethtown College; Barbara F. Prince, Lebanon Valley College Table Presider: Michele Lee Kozimor, Elizabethtown College 

0547.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Depictions of Gender and Sexuality in Media and Religion VAM, Room 46, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Catherine Carl, Troy University LGBTQ Asian Representation in Film and TV - Catherine Carl, Troy University More than Just a “Manly” Woman: Patriarchal Representation of Deborah in the Book of Judges - Kelsey A McLaurin, North Central College Situational Sexuality on OnlyFans: The Evolution of Gay-for-Pay Pornography - Tyler Burgese 

This roundtable discusses how a religious text, as well as traditional and online media, depict women, sexual minorities, and sex workers. 

0548.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Du Boisian Sociology: Theory and Applications VAM, Room 47, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Ryan DeCarsky, University of Washington, Seattle Doing Sociological Theory: Critical Inquiries into the Limits of Classical Theory - Ryan DeCarsky, University of Washington, Seattle; Courtney Allen, University of Washington, Seattle; Larissa Caldeira, University of Washington, Seattle; Celine Liao; Danielle Kylie Veloso, University of Washington, Seattle Marxist and Du Boisian Sociology as Ideological Framework for Puerto Rican Activists - Luis Miguel Rivera Ayala, Michigan State University W.E.B. Du Bois’s Critique of White Supremacy and Contribution to Understanding White Privilege in Cali-Colombia. - Melisa Londoño, Icesi University Narratives of contradiction: the experience of Latin American street vendors in New York - Alejandra Cueto Piazza, Brown Univeristy 

This roundtable focuses on Du Boisian sociological theory and its applications in Latinx and Latin American contexts. 

0549.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Hierarchies and Social Structures VAM, Room 48, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Otherhood: Transposition of Performative Impacts of Organizations Supporting Social Enterprises on Social Entrepreneurship - Jee sun Yun, Columbia University; Myung Eun Jeong, Center for Social Value Enhancement Studies; Sang-Joon Kim, Ewha Womans University Racial Threat, Economic Resources, and Politics: How Local Structural Conditions Influence Restrictionist Immigration Policy Adoption - Mario Marset, London School of Economics Refugees and the Macro Sociopolitical Context of the U.S. - Paul Brayden Scholes Social capital revisited: How ranking moderate the relationship between social capital and job satisfaction - HYEYEON KIM 

From immigration policy to right wing politics and social capital, this roundtable explores how different systems of hierarchization influence communities and individuals. 

0550.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Housing and Homelessness VAM, Room 49, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: AJ Golio, Tulane University Durable American Paradox: Revisiting the Community-level Determinants of Homelessness - Vijaya Tamla Rai, UW-Milwaukee Household Financialization in asset-based welfare: whether house ownership offsets the socio-economic inequality? - Sojeong Kim Housing ‘Headaches’: Toward an Affective-Cultural Study of Landlords and Displacement - AJ Golio, Tulane University 

This roundtable discusses the social and economic aspects of housing and the inequalities present in contemporary situations. 

0551.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. International Perspectives in Sociology VAM, Room 50, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Kathryn Doner, Providence College Death Rises in Mexico: Santa Muerte, Political Turmoil, and Religious Innovation - Isaac Kimmel Seventy Years Later: Caste in the Indian Bureaucracy - Kathryn Doner, Providence College; Trina Vithayathil, Providence College Vocational High Schools in Turkey: A Fractured Skill Formation Model and Unfulfilled Growth Strategy - Yasemin Taskin Alp, University of California, San Diego 

This roundtable discusses research developed in Turkey, India, Mexico, and China. FRIDAY, AUGUST 6, 2021 40552.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Mexican American Perspectives VAM, Room 51, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Zayra Juarez, Univeresity of Illinois at Chicago Mexican American Females Body Image Insecurity and Social Media - Fernanda Mora, University of Illinois at Chicago; Andrea Trejo, University of Illinois at Chicago Resilience and Barriers Facing Documented Mexican-American Students With Undocumented Parents - Zayra Juarez, Univeresity of Illinois at Chicago; Eduardo Orozco, University of Illinois at Chicago; Pamela Almanza, University of Illinois at Chicago The Impact of a Mother’s Body Shaming on Mexican American Women - Jasmine Alarcon, University of Illinois at Chicago; Kayla Montoya, University of Illinois at Chicago; Moises Chicancham, University of Illinois at Chicago “They’re Going to Blame Me”: Mexican American Females, Clothing, and Sexual Harassment - Martin Garcia, University of Illinois at Chicago; Joanna Corral, University of Illinois at Chicago; Diana Rivas, University of Illinois at Chicago 

This roundtable highlights work from the University of Illinois at Chicago and examines the unique cultural experiences of Mexican Americans in the context of sexual harassment, perceptions of self, and resilience. 

0553.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Sociological Inquiries During the COVID-19 Pandemic VAM, Room 52, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Eunsung Yoon, University of Arizona How Culture Matters: The Social and Cultural Determinants of the Cross-National Variations in COVID-19 - Eunsoo Cho; Youngseo Jeong Neighborhood Establishments and the Transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus - Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona; Eunsung Yoon, University of Arizona; Kathryn Freeman Anderson, University of Houston Theorizing the de-stigmatization of flexible work: the case of work from home (WFH) - Alyson Gounden Rock, McGill University 

This roundtable provides different perspectives and fieldwork taken place during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. 

0554.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Student Forum. Sociological Perspectives on Politics and Power I VAM, Room 53, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Ashley Lucia Torres, UC Irvine Framing contests and the local social order: Where NGOs' strategic frames trump resource dependencies - Eugene Yi Cheong Tung Gender, Eugenics, and Stratified Reproduction in the Gamete Donation Marketplace - Mia Rosario Milne, Georgia State University Linking farmers with markets through producer organizations: How are competing interests balanced? - Gopi Sankar Gopikuttan, Indian Institute of Management Bangalore News Organization Homophily on Twitter: Reliability and Bias -Ashley Lucia Torres, UC Irvine 

This roundtable discusses a variety of research topics related to power relations and politics. 

0555.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Sociological Perspectives on Politics and Power II VAM, Room 54, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Julya Paige McCoy, University of Florida Death by Firearms: Variation of Emotional Responses, Potential Mobilization, and Opinions on Gun-Related Issues - Natalie Bourman-Karns, University of Notre Dame Fires & Ambivalence: Contextualizing Students’ Attitudes and Behaviors Towards Climate Change - Lauren Marie May McCormack, University of California, Berkeley Intimate Partner Violence Survivor Grief: Loss, Bereavement, & Coping - Julya Paige McCoy, University of Florida Media Discourse and Elite Boys Violence: How Power Structures Shape Attributions of Responsibility - Jillian Sunderland The Bright Side of Misconduct? Social Connectedness Between the Police and the Communities - Cheng Wang; Dali Ma, Drexel University 

This roundtable discusses a variety of research topics related to power relations and politics. 

0556.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Sociology of Gender and Sexuality VAM, Room 55, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Christopher Persaud, University of Southern California Girlhood in the Great Outdoors - Maria Ardeth Gregg Masculinity in Wargaming - Christopher Sebastian Gage, University of Mississippi The Battle for Athletic Autonomy: From Curt Flood to LeBron James - Maxwell Macort The push for transgender inclusion: Exploring boundary spanning in the gay–straight alliance - D. Kyle Sutherland, University of British Columbia 

This roundtable presents different perspectives on the sociology of gender and sexuality. 

0557.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Sociology of Secondary and Post-Secondary Education I VAM, Room 56, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Rebecca Rodriguez, University of Illinois at Chicago Effects of Toxic Relationships on the Mental Health of Latino High School Students - Rebecca Rodriguez, University of Illinois at Chicago; Dora Munoz, University of Illinois at Chicago; Ariel Rodriguez, University of Illinois at Chicago Moving from Harm to Healing: A Framework for Addressing Racial Trauma in Schools - Travis Reginal, George Washington University Non-Religious Latinx Teenagers: The Process and Consequences of Losing Their Religion - Samuel Emeterio, University of Illinois at Chicago; William Garcia, University of Illinois at Chicago; Giovanni Anguiano, University of Illinois at Chicago The Effects of Socialization on the Perceptions of Masculinity in College-Age Males - Sofia Quinci 

This roundtable discusses mental health, racial trauma, religion, and masculinity in the context of secondary and post-secondary education. FRIDAY, AUGUST 6, 2021 50558.  Student Forum Refereed Roundtables. Sociology of Secondary and Post-Secondary Education II VAM, Room 57, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Table Presider: Madeline Flores, University of Cincinnati Five Young People's Public Education Reclamation - Melissa Marini Švigelj, University of California, Santa Cruz Gender Attitudes among Generation Z Youth in the United States -Madeline Flores, University of Cincinnati Labeling and the Advanced Placement (AP) Program - Yolanda Arciniega Understanding the Student Government Election - Dylan Kupsh, UCSB Untapped Potential: A Comparative Approach of College Enrollment Between Continuation and Traditional High Schools. - Aaron Solorio, University of California, Berkeley 

This roundtable discusses gender, student government, learning, and reclamation in the context of secondary and post-secondary education. 

# Friday, 3:00 pm 0668 . Meeting. Honors Program Orientation VAM, Room 67, 3:00-4:30pm Friday, 3:30 pm 0605.  Meeting. Minority Fellowship Program (MFP) Fellows Meet and Greet and Orientation VAM, Room 4, 3:30-5:00pm Friday, 5:00 pm 0801.  Plenary Session. ASA 2020 Award Presentation VAM, Room 0, 5:00-6:00pm 

Presider: Ryan Light, University of Oregon 

Please join ASA in recognizing the 2020 award winners. 

# Friday, 6:00 pm 0901.  Plenary Session. Anatomy of Race, Racism, and Change VAM, Room 0, 6:00-7:30pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Mary E. Pattillo, Northwestern University Panelists: Keeanga Yamahtta Taylor, Princeton University; Ibram X. Kendi, Boston University; Kimberle Crenshaw, Columbia University and UCLA Discussant: Mary E. Pattillo, Northwestern University Race has reemerged as a crucially pivotal issue in America and the world. Covid-19 and police brutality have made it crystal clear that racism remains a major issue in the modern world. As a result, racism has spun major social movements resisting racism and seeking to address it structural and cultural roots. This panel will explore racism and its consequences in today’s world. SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 6Saturday, 10:00 am 1014.  Meeting. Section on Medical Sociology Council Meeting VAM, Room 13, 10:00-10:45am 1020.  Meeting. Theory Section Council Meeting VAM, Room 19, 10:00-10:45am 1067.  Meeting. Section on Social Psychology Council Meeting VAM, Room 66, 10:00-10:45am 1071.  Meeting. Section on Race, Gender, and Class Council Meeting VAM, Room 70, 10:00-10:45am Saturday, 11:00 am 1103. Book Forum. Crunch Time: How Married Couples Confront Unemployment VAM, Room 2, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Annette Lareau, University of Pennsylvania Moderator: Shelley J. Correll, Stanford University Panelists: Dawn M. Dow, University of Maryland-College Park; Ofer Sharone, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Allison Pugh, University of Virginia Author: Aliya Hamid Rao, London School of Economics 

1104.  Special Sessions. Immigration: Violence at the Border, White Nationalism, and Terrorism VAM, Room 3, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Abigail L. Andrews, University of California-San Diego Presider: Irene I. Vega, University of California-Irvine Symbolic Assailants at the U.S.-Mexico Border: Mapping Immigration Agents' Racialized Threat Narratives - Irene I. Vega, University of California-Irvine Border Militarization, Migrant Deaths, and Structural Violence along the Sonora-Arizona Border? - Daniel E. Martinez, University of Arizona Stranded at the Gates: Asylum Seekers in Limbo in Tijuana -Abigail L. Andrews, University of California-San Diego Latinos and Racism in the Trump Era - Stephanie L. Canizales, University of California-Merced; Jody Agius Vallejo, University of Southern California Soldiers, Immigration officers or Cowboys? Institutional fragmentation and the normalization of the militarization of European borderlands - Maartje van der Woude, Leiden Law School, Van Vollenhoven Institute for Law, Governance & Society 

1105.  Special Sessions. The Association of Black Sociologists: 50 Years of Advocacy, Activism and Expanding the Academy VAM, Room 4, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Littisha Antoinette Bates, University of Cincinnati; Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Presider: Littisha Antoinette Bates, University of Cincinnati Panelists: Florence B. Bonner, Bonner and Associates; Robert Newby, Central Michigan University; Essie Manuel Rutledge, Western Illinois University; Hayward Derrick Horton, SUNY-Albany; Zandria Felice Robinson, Georgetown University; Walter Allen, UCLA 

1106.  Thematic Sessions. Beyond Du Bois: The Black Radical Tradition and Emancipatory Sociological Theory VAM, Room 5, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Zophia Edwards, Providence College Presider: Alexandre White, Johns Hopkins University The Undeniable Scholar: Walter Rodney’s Epistemic Uncontainability, Implications for Decolonizing Knowledge -Jesse Benjamin, Kennesaw State University The Black Jacobins Sociology of CLR James - Zophia Edwards, Providence College Sylvia Wynter and Sociology: On Colonial Modernity, Race and the Overrepresentation of Man - Ricarda Hammer, Brown University The Emancipatory Sociology of Anna Julia Cooper - Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University 

1107.  Thematic Sessions. Developing Liberation Capital in Research VAM, Room 6, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Vilna Francine Bashi Treitler, University of California-Santa Barbara Presider: Pamela E. Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison Panelists: Korey Tillman, University of Nevada, Las Vegas; Whitney Nicole Laster Pirtle, University of California-Merced; Vilna Francine Bashi Treitler, University of California-Santa Barbara; Dorothy E. Roberts, University of Pennsylvania; Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago 

1108.  Thematic Sessions. Wealth Extraction: Pre-During-Post-Pandemic VAM, Room 7, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Thomas M. Shapiro, Brandeis University Presider: Thomas M. Shapiro, Brandeis University Panelists: Darrick Hamilton, Ohio State University; Anne Price, Insight Center for Community Development; Kilolo Kijakazi, Urban Institute 

1109.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. A Climate Change Module for Introduction to Sociology Classes VAM, Room 8, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Szasz, Univ of California-Santa Cruz Presider: Andrew Szasz, Univ of California-Santa Cruz A Climate Change Module for Introduction to Sociology Classes -Andrew Szasz, Univ of California-Santa Cruz 

1110.  Presidential Panel. The Sociology Curriculum Worldwide: Decentering the Canon based in Colonialism and Settler Colonialism VAM, Room 9, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Xolela Mangcu, George Washington University Panelists: Sujata Patel, Savitribai Phule Pune University; Julian Go, University of Chicago; Zine Magubane, Boston College Discussant: Xolela Mangcu, George Washington University The Sociological curriculum has been western centered since the beginning of the discipline. Its classical origins are rooted in Europe. Indeed, Auguste Comte, Karl Marx, Emile Durkheim, Max Weber and others, including Georg Simmel and Herbert Spencer are credited with providing sociology with its canonical statements that have guided the field. American sociologists, including those of the “Chicago School,” are recognized as providing the canonical thought for contemporary sociology. However, scholars throughout the global south have begun to SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 7

challenge the “universality” of the western based curriculum. They argue the western curriculum do not explain the realities of victims of slavery, colonialism, settler Colonialism, empire and racism. These scholars insist that a narrow curriculum prevents the understandings of people worldwide, including the West. This panel will explore these issues associated with the curriculum, including efforts to initiate change 

1112.  Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements. Intersectionality and Social Movements VAM, Room 11, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Fernando Tormos-Aponte, University of Maryland-Baltimore County Presider: Fernando Tormos-Aponte, University of Maryland-Baltimore County Mental Health, Disability, and Making Activism Accessible - Allison Reed, University of Chicago Movement within the Movement: Kurdish and Zapatista Women's Struggle for Gender Equality - Anna Rebrii, Binghamton University Our “Revolutionary Anchor:” Intersectional Ideology and Constructive Resistance in Black Youth Organizing -Chaniqua Simpson, North Carolina State University Racial Capitalism and Black Social Movements - Crystal Nicole Eddins, University of North Carolina-Charlotte Discussants: Margaret Brower; Fernando Tormos-Aponte, University of Maryland-Baltimore County 

1113.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology. Open Paper Session on Digital Sociology VAM, Room 12, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Timothy Recuber, Smith College Presider: Timothy Recuber, Smith College Algorithmic Reparation - Jenny L. Davis, The Australian National University; Apryl A. Williams, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Michael Yang, The Australian National University Algorithms in Action: Reassembling Contact Tracing and Risk Assessment during the Covid-19 Pandemic in China -Chuncheng Liu, University of California San Diego On the Contesting Conceptualization of the Human Subject: Between ‘Homo-Microbis’ and ‘Homo-Algorithmicus’ - Dan M Kotliar, Stanford University; Rafi Grosglik, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev On the Genealogy of Machine Learning Datasets: A Critical History of ImageNet - Emily Denton, Google; Alex Hanna, Google; Razvan Amironesei, University of San Francisco; Andrew Smart, Google; Hilary Nicole, Google 

1114.  Section on Medical Sociology. Black Health Matters: Racism, Health, and Health Care VAM, Room 13, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tyson H. Brown, Duke University Presider: Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Do Racial Differences in Coping Resources Explain the Black-White Paradox in Mental Health? - Patricia Louie, University of Washington; Laura Upenieks, Baylor University; Christy LaShaun Erving, Vanderbilt University; Courtney S Thomas Tobin, University of California, Los Angeles Medical Schools as Racialized Organizations - Max Jordan Nguemeni Tiako, Yale School of Medicine; Eugenia South Sociological Contributions to Race and Health: Diversifying the Ontological and Methodological Agenda - Hyeyoung Oh Nelson, University of Colorado-Denver; Karen Lutfey Spencer, University of Colorado-Denver Superwoman Schema Endorsement, Social Role Engagement, and Black Women's Mental Health - Christy LaShaun Erving, Vanderbilt University; Izraelle McKinnon, Emory University; Miriam E. Van Dyke, Emory University; Raphiel Murden, Emory University; Renee Moore, Emory University; Bianca Booker, Emory University; Tene T. Lewis, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University Vaccine Skepticism and the Accumulation of Distrust - Claire Laurier Decoteau, University of Illinois-Chicago; Paige L. Sweet, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor 

1115.  Section on Sociology of Consumers and Consumption. Consumers, Consumption, and Well-being VAM, Room 14, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Presider: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Cultural consumption as voluntaristic action. - Xiangyu Ma Investigating Productivity Anxiety through the Cultural Status of Television - Abigail Letak, University of Wisconsin-Madison "The Greatest Invention for Human Kind": Demographic Aging and the Evolution of Urban Businesses - Yu-Ri Kim, Vanderbilt University Those aversions that hold us together: An application of self-organizing maps to study food avoidances - Filippo Oncini; Malte Rödl, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences; Moris Triventi, University of Trento; Alan Warde, University of Manchester 

1116.  Section on International Migration. Mobility, Immobility, and the Covid-19 Pandemic VAM, Room 15, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jacob Richard Thomas, Princeton University Presider: Jacob Richard Thomas, Princeton University Constructing a Regime of Immobility: Lessons from YouTube Vlogs on South Korean Government-Mandated Facility Quarantine - Jiwon Yun, Yale University Germs, Masks, and Canceled Flights: Migrant immobility during the COVID-19 pandemic - Jiaqi Liu, University of California, San Diego; Rui Jie Peng, University of Texas at Austin Seeking Transnational Social Protection During a Global Pandemic: The Case of Chinese Immigrants in the U.S. - Xuemei Cao, SUNY Albany; Ken Chih-Yan Sun, Villanova University Stay or Return? Immigration Intentions of Chinese Students Under Strain in the U.S. - Wan Huang, Texas A&M University; Jingqiu Ren 

1117.  Section on Race, Gender, Class. The Meanings of Colonialism, Racism, and Latinidad for Black Latinxs VAM, Room 16, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Rocío R. García, Arizona State University-Tempe Presider: Rocío R. García, Arizona State University-Tempe Recuerdo: Blackness, Memory, and Epistemologies of Ignorance in Latinidad - Shantee Rosado, Rutgers University-New Brunswick #AfroLatina: A Qualitative Social Media Analysis of Afro-Latina Identity & Social Movements” - Ashley Crooks-Allen, University of Georgia Unsettled Latinidad: Reimagining Latin America from the Center of Radical Black and Indigenous Perspectives - Carolina Hernandez Discussant: Jomaira Salas Pujols, Rutgers University 

> Session 1110, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 81118.  Section on Economic Sociology. Work in New Economic Realities VAM, Room 17, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Carly Knight, New York University; Laura Adler, Harvard University Presider: Nathan Wilmers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Anachronization: Loss as Lived Experience of the Changing Nature of Work - Kevin Woojin Lee, New York University; Beth A. Bechky, New York University COVID-19, Public Charge Rules, and Immigrant Employment in the United States - Felipe Antonio Dias, Tufts University; Joseph Chance, Tufts University Judo category strategy: Overcoming commitment concerns from diversification - Simon Friis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Temporary Employment, Precarity Trap in Low-paying Jobs, and Wage Inequality - Halil Sabanci, IESE Business School; Marta Elvira, IESE Business School Why Might Hybrid Employment Increase Inequality? - Ankur Chavda, HEC Paris; Minjae Kim, Rice University 

1119.  Section on Sociology of Development. The Development of Underdeveloped Public Health VAM, Room 18, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Nitsan Chorev, Brown University Presider: Nitsan Chorev, Brown University Immigration, Reproductive Health, & the Boundary Work of Population Health Indicators - Amanda Rachel Cheong, University of British Columbia Limits of neoliberalism: HIV, COVID-19, and the importance of healthcare systems in Malawi - Amy Yuan Zhou, Barnard College The Residua of Health Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa - Rachel Sullivan Robinson, American University “We Shall Centralize, or We Shall Die:” Elite Conflict and National Public Health Institutions - Omri Tubi, Northwestern University 

1120.  Theory Section. Theorizing Liberation and Emancipation VAM, Room 19, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Gianpaolo Baiocchi, NYU Presider: Michael D. Kennedy, Brown University Extending Theory of Incarcerated Intellectuals: The Case for Prison Abolition as a Means for Black Liberation - Anna DalCortivo Is Democratizing Finance Politically Possible? Behavioral, Regulatory, Supplemental and Control Reforms Compared -Michael A. McCarthy, Marquette University Notes on race: decoloniality in praxis - Hye Ji (Erica) Lee, University of Auckland Setting the Record: Forensic Politics in Movements for Racial Justice - Philip Prince Grace, Northwestern University 

1122.  Regular Session. Activism and Its Consequences VAM, Room 21, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Dana R. Fisher, University of Maryland-College Park Presider: Dana R. Fisher, University of Maryland-College Park Domestic workers rights: whose rights? The movement at the intersection of women’s, worker’s, and immigrants’ rights -Anna Rosinska, Ca' Foscari University of Venice (Italy) Persistence, Precarity and Professionalisation – a Critical Evaluation of ‘Biographical Availability’ and ‘Biographical Consequences’ - Silke Roth, University of Southampton; Clare Saunders, University of Exeter State of Resistance: Campaign Infusion and Sustained Mobilization in California’s Immigrant Rights Movement - Maria De Jesus Martinez Mora, Cal State University Stanislaus; Paul D. Almeida, University of California-Merced 

1123.  Regular Session. The Sociology of Asian America: Historical and Contemporary Issues VAM, Room 22, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Nadia Y. Kim, Loyola Marymount University Presider: Nadia Y. Kim, Loyola Marymount University Bad Refugees: Mapping the Imperial-Racial Margins of State Citizenship - Christina Hughes, University of Washington Caring for Each Other: The Agency of Filipina Nurses in the Workplace - Victoria-Jo Gapuz, Macalester College Cooking Up an Ethnic Identity: Roy Choi in The Chef Show and Broken Bread - Jackson Wright, University of Texas-Austin Indian American versus South Asian American Political Mobilization - Prema Ann Kurien, Syracuse University Japan’s Empire and Du Bois’s Evolving Concept of Race - Kazuko Suzuki, Texas A&M University-College Station 

1124.  Regular Session. Ethnic Conflict VAM, Room 23, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pamela Irving Jackson, Rhode Island College Presider: Pamela Irving Jackson, Rhode Island College Democracy and National Identity in South Korea - Jaesok Son, NORC at the University of Chicago Ethnic Conflict, Welfare Chauvinism, and Perceptions of Corruption in Eastern and Central Europe - Pamela Irving Jackson, Rhode Island College; Peter E. Doerschler, Bloomsburg University Indigenous Rights in Latin America: A Comparative Analysis of Constitutional Events - Andres Rodriguez-Caceres Intermediary Intelligentsia and Political Transformation: Innovation in the early African nationalist movement in South Africa, 1860-1900 - Jonathan Schoots, University of Chicago The evolution of ethnic violence in America: Race, class, and the state - Frederick T. Tucker 

1125.  Regular Session. Family and Kinship: Maternal Relationships and Race, Class, Gender VAM, Room 24, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pallavi Banerjee, University of Calgary Presider: Carieta Oniefa Thomas, University of Calgary Classed and Gendered Understandings of Financial Support in Child Custody Arrangements: A Qualitative Study - Adriana Ponce, University of Michigan Intergenerational Transmission of Interpersonal Relationships in Adulthood - Yifei Hou, Purdue University; J. Jill Suitor, Purdue University; Megan Gilligan, Iowa State University Keeping Grandma's Job Joyful: How Grandmothers and Adult Children Negotiate Childcare Support - Jennifer Utrata, University of Puget Sound Mothering During Jim Crow: Using the Reproductive Justice Framework to Understand Black Motherhood During Legalized Racism - LaShawnDa L. Pittman, University of Washington On the frontlines: Stressors of Black women caring for children of incarcerated parents - Shenique S. Thomas-Davis, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College; Vivian C. Smith, Cabrini University; Bahiyyah M. Muhammad, Howard University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 91126.  Regular Session. Environmental Sociology Regular Session 1: Dynamics of Environmental Justice VAM, Room 25, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Steve G. Hoffman, University of Toronto Presider: Amanda Rae Bertana, Southern Connecticut State University Toward a Du Boisian Environmental Sociology: An Analysis of Environmental Inequity in a Black Belt County - Jennifer S. Carrera, Michigan State University The Micropolitics of Adaptation: Strategic Co-optation in the Case of the Coalition to Restore Coastal Louisiana - Michael Haedicke, University of Maine Cultivating Quiescence in a Risk Society: Coal Ash and Cancer in Two Cities - Landen Longest, NC State University; Thomas E. Shriver, North Carolina State University; Alison E. Adams, University of Florida The Delta Smelt: From California’s Water Wars to America’s Culture Wars - Caleb Richard Scoville, Tufts University 

1127.  Regular Session. Comparative Historical Sociology (1): Bureaucracy and Empire VAM, Room 26, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Monica Prasad, Northwestern University Presider: Kristin Plys, University of Toronto An Initiative, Not A Package: The Interpretations of Optimum Population in Japan and China - Yimang Zhou, SUNY University at Albany Authority and Atrophy: Weak Agents and the Crisis of Indirect Rule - Hanisah Binte Abdullah Sani, National University of Singapore Infrastructural Power and Maoism: A Comparative Study of Piecework Wage - Bolun Zhang, University of California, San Diego; Yimang Zhou Re-Thinking Bureaucratic Interest: Insights from the Case of the Family Planning Policy in India - Sourabh Singh, Florida State University The Ephemeral Empires, or Why the Nomadic States of Eurasia Were Short-Lived. - Pavel I. Osinsky, Appalachian State University Discussant: Kristin Plys, University of Toronto 

1128.  Regular Session. Regular Session: Culture and Identity (Panel 1) VAM, Room 27, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Freeden Blume Oeur, Tufts University Presider: Tania R. Aparicio, New School for Social Research Authentic Sensation: Assembling the Biography of Comida Árabe - Nicholas Bascunan-Wiley, Northwestern University How Scripts of Self Enable Gen Zs to Foster Social Resilience during COVID-19 - Mari Sanchez, Harvard Sociology; Michèle Lamont, Harvard University; Shira Zilberstein, Harvard Sociology “Looking Right”: Racialized Clinical Judgment in U.S. and Malaysian Cosmetic Surgery - Alka Menon, Yale University My Captain America is Black - Myron T. Strong, Community College of Baltimore County Discussant: Tania R. Aparicio, New School for Social Research 

1129.  Regular Session. Deviance and Social Control VAM, Room 28, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ashley T. Rubin, University of Hawaii, Manoa Presider: Michelle S. Phelps, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Governing by Ambiguity: Evidence from the Chinese Judicial System - Yifeng Wan, Johns Hopkins University; Nanxi Zeng, Johns Hopkins University; Qingyan Wang Tailoring Children to the State: Deciding Between Dependent and Delinquent in Juvenile Court - Catherine Sirois, Stanford University The Personal Construction of the Penal State - Isabel Arriagada, University of Minnesota Threats to Blue Networks: The Impact of Partner Injuries on Police Misconduct - Linda Zhao, Cornell University; Andrew V. Papachristos, Northwestern University Discussant: Jonathan Simon, UC Berkeley 

1130.  Regular Session. Sociology of Disasters and Crises VAM, Room 29, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: DeMond Shondell Miller, Rowan University Presider: DeMond Shondell Miller, Rowan University Does Social Vulnerability Predict Disaster Losses? Testing a Social Vulnerability Index for Puerto Rico - Jocelyn West, University of Colorado Boulder Organized Behavior in Disaster: A New Typology Model For Future Disaster Research - Kyle Breen, Louisiana State University; Michelle Annette Meyer, Texas A&M University-College Station; J. Carlee Purdum, Texas A&M University; Stuart Nolan, Stephenson Disaster Management Institute, Louisiana State University; Brant Mitchell, Stephenson Disaster Management Institute, Louisiana State University; Abigail Bowers, Louisiana State University; Arthur Chambers, Texas A&M University; Romel Fernandez, Texas A&M University; Jackson Pierce, Texas A&M University; Nathan Young, Texas A&M University Putting Out Fires: The Varying Temporalities of Disasters - Maricarmen Hernandez, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Rural Safety Net Use During the Covid-19 Pandemic - Kathryn McConnell, Yale University; Alexis A. Merdjanoff, New York University; Paul Berne Burow, Yale University Department of Anthropology; J. Tom Mueller, Utah State University; Justin Farrell, Yale University 

1131.  Regular Session. Gender Dynamics and Fertility Around the World VAM, Room 30, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Sanyu A. Mojola, Princeton University Presider: Sara Yeatman, University of Colorado-Denver Community Determinants of Contraceptive Use among Ghanaian Women: A Multilevel Analysis - Kofi D. Benefo, CUNY-Lehman College Fertility Intentions in Postindustrial Countries: A Gender-Essentialist Theory of Fertility - Sinn Won Han, Harvard University; Ohjae Gowen, Harvard University; Mary C. Brinton, Harvard University First class, then culture: accounting for the historically low fertility among domestic workers in Latin America - Andres Felipe Castro, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research; Edith Yolanda Gutierrez-Vazquez, Universidad de Guadalajara; Tereza Bernardes, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais Make or Break: Fertility Aspirations as Gendered Constructions of Self - Yun Zhou, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Discussant: Christie Sennott, Purdue University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 10 1132.  Regular Session. Regular Session: Globalization VAM, Room 31, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Maria Hwang, McGill University Presider: Monica Haiyi Liu, University of St. Thomas Double Agents and the Making of Globalization: How Global Boardrooms Shape the World Polity - Alexander Kentikelenis, Bocconi University; Leonard Seabrooke, Copenhagen Business School The Hyper Heterosexual Imaginary - Julia Meszaros, Texas A&M University-Commerce The New Scramble for Africa: Corporations and Governments Globalize - Mariam M Kurtz, George Mason University Discussant: Monica Haiyi Liu, University of St. Thomas 

1133.  Regular Session. Collective Memory VAM, Room 32, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Judith Gerson, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Presider: Irina Nicorici, Rutgers University-New Brunswick ‘Let me tell you what we already know’- Collective memory and the interaction order - Thomas Van de Putte Nostalgic Futures: Temporality in Extreme-Right Discourse -Meghan Tinsley, University of Manchester Sun and sea, socialism and siege: Marketing memory in ex-Yugoslav tourism - Jeremy Seth Kuperberg, Northwestern University In Defense of Specters: Against Collective Amnesia to Ambivalence as Queer Feeling in Collective Memory Studies - Ghassan Moussawi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Discussant: Till Hilmar, Bremen University 

1145.  Meeting. Section on the Sociology of Emotions Business Meeting VAM, Room 44, 11:00-11:30am 1168.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Education Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 11:00-11:30am 1169.  Meeting. Sociology of Body and Embodiment Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 11:00-11:30am 1170.  Meeting. Section on Animals and Society Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 11:00-11:30am 1171.  Meeting. Section on Evolution, Biology, and Society Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 11:00-11:30am Saturday, 11:30 am 1221.  Section on Evolution, Biology, and Society. Author Meets Critics Session: The New Evolutionary Sociology by Jonathan H. Turner and Richard S. Machalek VAM, Room 20, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Rosemary L. Hopcroft, University of North Carolina-Charlotte Presider: Rosemary L. Hopcroft, University of North Carolina-Charlotte Panelists: Rosemary L. Hopcroft, University of North Carolina-Charlotte; Russell K. Schutt, University of Massachusetts Boston; Douglas A. Marshall, University of South Alabama; Jonathan H. Turner, Univ of California, Santa Barbara and Riverside 

1246.  Section on Sociology of Emotions. Chair's Hour: Exploring the Role of Emotions in Political Beliefs and Political Behavior VAM, Room 45, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Amy Kroska, University of California-Riverside Presider: Amy Kroska, University of California-Riverside Panelists: Anna Durnova, Institute for Advanced Studies -IHS; Paul Joosse, University of Hong Kong; Daniel Karell, Yale University 

1247.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 1. School Discipline and Inequality VAM, Room 46, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Julia Colleen Campbell Szabo, Rice University School Suspensions, Cumulative Disadvantage, and Black Student Resiliency - Matthew James Snidal, Univeristy of Texas at Austin The Historical Progression of School Discipline: Mapping Political, Social, and Legal Shifts in Policy - Elizabeth A Horning, University at Albany, SUNY The Persistence of Racial Discipline Disparities and the Logic of Compliance in Special Education - Catherine Kramarczuk Voulgarides, CUNY-Hunter College; Alexandra Aylward; Adai Tefera; Alfredo J. Artiles, Stanford University; Sarah Alvarado The Vicious Cycle between Suspension and Academic Performance - Cheng Wang, Wayne State University 

1248.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 2. Gender and Higher Education VAM, Room 47, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Lili Schwoerer Bordering scapes, internationalisation policies and feminist internationalism in English universities - Lili Schwoerer Gendered Majoring: Exploring the Correlates at National and Patterns at Regional Levels - Veena S. Kulkarni, Arkansas State University-Jonesboro; Patricia Burleigh Reframing Models of Educational Inequality in the Global South: Evidence of Girls’ Educational Attainment in Tajikistan -Christopher Michael Whitsel, North Dakota State University Sextortion in Academia: Sexual harassment, corruption and extortion in post-Communist education - Ararat L. Osipian, New University in Exile Consortium, New York The Curse of Affluence? The Gendering Effects of Societal and Family Affluence on Adolescent Science Attitudes - Ran Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

1249.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 3. Diversity and Higher Education VAM, Room 48, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Dara Elizabeth Naphan-Kingery, Western New Mexico University Invisible Obstacles and Hidden Curriculums: Behind Racial Disparities in Times to Doctoral Degree Completion in SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 11 

Sociology - Angelica Ruvalcaba, Michigan State University; Jenny Olivarez; Jennifer Lai, Michigan State University; Katrina Groeller, Michigan State University Not the Only One: An Online Coaching Program for Black Engineering Scholars Interested in the Professoriate - Dara Elizabeth Naphan-Kingery, Western New Mexico University; Ebony McGee; William Robinson STEM doctorate fields' academic diversity and demographic inclusivity - Yun Kyung Cho, University of Wisconsin -Madison The Best Laid Plans of Women and Men: Gender Trends in Educational Expectations for Graduate School - Abby Young, University of Oklahoma; Ann M. Beutel, University of Oklahoma; Stephanie Woodham Burge, University of Oklahoma 

1250.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 4. Higher Education Institutions as Agents of Change VAM, Room 49, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Nora Jean Weber, Indiana University Epistemic Exclusion in Faculty Hiring: The Case of Engaged Scholarship - Jessica Gold, University of California, Davis Meritocracy, Equity, or Intention? How U.S. Colleges & Universities Frame the Shift toward Test-Optional Admissions - Nora Jean Weber, Indiana University Pathways to Institutional Diversity: The Diffusion of Diversity-Related Offices in American Higher Education between 1968-2020 - Simona Gabriela Gavrila, Stanford University; Lisa Overbey, Stanford University; Francisco O. Ramirez, Stanford University Racial Equity Efforts in Higher Education Institutions - Johanna S. Quinn, Fordham University; Rachel Carly Feldman, NORC at the University of Chicago Under the Aegis of the Xerox: Brazilian professors rethink their teaching practices - Heloisa Pait, São Paulo State University Julio de Mesquita Filho 

1251.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 5. College Enrollment and Stratification VAM, Room 50, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Jasmine Cha Sausedo, Johns Hopkins University Constraints or Cultivation? Postsecondary Delay Motivations and Degree Attainment - Jasmine Cha Sausedo, Johns Hopkins University; Stefanie Ann DeLuca, Johns Hopkins University; Robert Bozick, RAND Corporation Independent Educational Consultants, Authenticity, and Cultural Capital in College Admissions - Tiffany Joyce Huang, Columbia University Social Network and Indoctrinated Preferences for College Education - Soumya Pal, Indian Institute of Management Bangalore Where You Start Matters: Social Class, Transfer Patterns, and Risk of Leaving Without a Degree - Joelle Spotswood, University of Kansas 

1252.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 6. Inside Colleges and Universities VAM, Room 51, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Stephanie Medley-Rath, Indiana University-Kokomo A Risky Belonging: The Persistence of Community-College Stigma in the Reproduction of Immigrant Intergroup Inequalities -Oshin Khachikian, University of California, Irvine Curricular Blind Spots: How Course Consideration Varies Across Undergraduate Students - Marissa Elena Thompson, Stanford University; Tobias Dalberg, Stanford University; Elizabeth Bruch, University of Michigan Latino Youth and Religious Institutions: Unexamined Contexts Shaping Latino College Outcomes - Esmeralda Sanchez Salazar, Rice University Tiny Wins: Missed Opportunities for Research Methods Skills Development in Sociological Textbooks Throughout the Curriculum - Stephanie Medley-Rath, Indiana University-Kokomo; Rebekah Morgan, Indiana University Kokomo 

1253.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 7. Returns to Higher Education VAM, Room 52, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Rachel Sullivan, University at Albany, SUNY Blended v. Competing Identities: How Paid Employment Impacts First-Generation College Students as They Navigate College - Rachel Sullivan, University at Albany, SUNY Do mothers get lost in the career pipeline in Germany? - Isabel Maria Habicht, University of Marburg Economic Uncertainty and Inequality in Higher Education - Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Returns to Rigor: The Relative Contribution of Institutional Selectivity and College Major on Earnings - Vansa Shewakramani Hanson, Texas A&M University The Economic Disadvantages of Asian Immigrants: Credentialism or Disparities in Human Capital? - Bohui Wang, Temple University 

1254.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 8. Access to Higher Education VAM, Room 53, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Alonso Aravena, Baylor University Intersections in Chilean Universities: Effects of the 2015 Education Reform on Class and Gender Equality - Alonso Aravena, Baylor University; Steven Foertsch, Baylor University It's Not What You Do, It's Who You Are: Qualities of Involvement in College Admissions - Jean Marie Maier, University of Minnesota “Not for Everybody” or “The Only Way”: Competing Perspectives on the Purpose of College - Kaylee Matheny, Stanford University Selection into Different Methods of Paying for College - Arielle Kuperberg, University of North Carolina-Greensboro 

> Session 1249, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 12 1255.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 9. Privilege in Higher Education VAM, Room 54, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Monique Harrison, Stanford University Content Repetition in Elite Higher Education: Consequences for Repeaters and Fellow Students in Mathematics Courses -Monique Harrison, Stanford University; Philip A Hernandez, Stanford University; Mitchell L. Stevens, Stanford University Crafting Authenticity: How the Education Agent Industry Help Taiwanese International Students Brand Themselves in Admission Essays - Kenneth Han Chen, University at Albany-State University of New York "I never like answering those questions": How White Undergraduates Understand Diversity Initiatives - Callie Cleckner, Indiana University The College Concierge: Undergraduate Academic Advisors, Cultural Capital, and Inequality - Sherelle Ferguson, University of Pennsylvania 

1256.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 10. Mental Health in Education VAM, Room 55, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Wensong Shen, The Chinese University of Hong Kong A Tale of Two Genders: Demystifying Girls’ Concurrence of Higher Educational Achievement and Higher Depression Levels -Wensong Shen, The Chinese University of Hong Kong “I still don’t feel 100% comfortable”: Sense of belonging in first-generation college students - Leah Glass, CUNY Graduate Center; Betsy Pichizaca; August Taylor G. Smith, City University of New York Student Duck Syndrome? Race, History, and Wellbeing Among College Students - Doreen Hsu, University of California, San Diego The Iron Triangle Dilemma: The Impact of Institutional Financial Health on Student Thriving - Stephanie D Geter; Nicole Harris, Azusa Pacific University; Brittney Plascencia-Saldana, Azusa Pacific University; Young K. Kim, Azusa Pacific University; David Edens, Cal Poly Pomona 

1257.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 11. School Choice VAM, Room 56, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Bailey A. Brown, Princeton University Do Children Perform Better in Religious Schools? Evidence From Population Data - Deni Mazrekaj, University of Oxford; Christiaan Monden, University of Oxford Doing the Legwork: Organizational and Non-Organizational Ties During the School Search - Bailey A. Brown, Princeton University Schools in Place and Cyberspace: Enrollment Patterns in Virtual and Brick-and-Mortar Charter Schools - Hannah Foley Hertenstein, University of California, Irvine The Distribution of Residentially Mobile Students Across Charter and Non-Charter Schools - Alejandro Schugurensky, Princeton University; Jennifer L. Jennings, Princeton University 

1258.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 12. Parental Involvement in Education VAM, Room 57, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Andrew King, UMass Boston COVID-19 and the Contraction of Children's Social Spaces: An Exploration of Pandemic Learning Pods - Jennifer Carol LaFleur, Brandeis University Does Parental Involvement Have Equal Academic Achievement Returns for all Students? Evidence among Families and Schools - Yin Ba, Tsinghua University Honoring their voices: A case study of a refugee family through a Bourdieusian lens - Ana A. Olguin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Stephanie C. Sanders-Smith, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Managing Mobility: Experiential and Affective Dimensions of Family-School Relationships - Joseph Boselovic, Johns Hopkins University “Opening the Halls of Power” Family Organizing in the NYC Community Schools Initiative - Andrew King, UMass Boston Representing Working Motherhood: Connecting a History of Respectability Politics in Black Women’s Educational Advocacy - Gabrielle L Peterson, University of Michigan 

1259.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 13. Critical Perspectives on Education Policy and Practice VAM, Room 58, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Idit Fast, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel Between Coercion and Consent: A Gramscian Analysis of Community Engagement in Urban District Crisis - Rene Espinoza Kissell, University of Colorado Boulder Education for All by All? - Erica Favor From Power-Oriented Framework to Power-Undermining Action the Work of Diversity Committee in Two Integrated Schools - Idit Fast, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Israel “I just thought that’s how it was”: Growing critical consciousness in a city-suburban school partnership. - Cynthia Taines, Northern Illinois University Immigration Policy Regimes and the Occupational Expectations of Immigrant Students - Volha Chykina, University of Richmond 

1260.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 14. Quantitative Approaches to Understanding Educational Inequality VAM, Room 59, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Joseph Workman, University of Missouri-Kansas City Arts for Whose Sake? The Role of Fine Arts Education in US High Schools - Daniel Mackin Freeman, Portland State University; Dara Shifrer, Portland State University Feedback, Self-Regulated Learning and Inequality: A Longitudinal Study on how SES transforms into Educational Success -Bent Sortkær, Aarhus University Laboring and Learning: Disentangling Aspirations, Child Labor, and School Enrollment in Ethiopia - Shaquilla Harrigan, University of Pennsylvania Relative Importance of Schools in Student Resilience Across SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 13 

Cultures - Ji Hye Kim, University of Iowa; Hye Won Kwon, University of Turku Rising Income Inequality Undermines Students’ Mathematics Achievement: Trends in Achievement among U.S. States (1992-2019) - Joseph Workman, University of Missouri-Kansas City Safety Nets or Valves into the School-to-Prison Pipeline: Alternative Education Program Placement, Drop Out, and Incarceration - Kenya Lee 

1261.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 15. Racism and Marginalization in Schools and Communities VAM, Room 60, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Kayla Kemp, The Pennsylvania State University Black Education Matters Too… especially in the Era of Covid-19: - Kristina Didyk, Manhasset Public School System; Richard Duque Racially Isolated Schooling and Educational and Labor Market Outcomes in Mid-Adulthood - Rebecca Bielamowicz, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Southern Segregation Academies and Current Educational Equity: Is There a Legacy Effect? - Kayla Kemp, The Pennsylvania State University The Ivory and The Blue: Neighborhood Education and Likelihood of Civilian Fatal Encounters with Police - Story Edison; Alison Casey 

1262.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 16. Technology and Education VAM, Room 61, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Artificial Intelligence in Labor Markets and Inequality in Student Achievement - Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Persistence in the Pipeline: Race, Gender, and Prior Experiences in a Coding and Apprenticeship Program - Jason F Jabbari, Washington University St Louis; Wenrui Huang, Johns Hopkins University The impacts of social and digital disparity on online education during the COVID-19 pandemic - Fen Jennifer Lin, City University of Hong Kong; Xi Chen; Duoduo Xu, University of Hong Kong 

1263.  Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables. 17. Educators and Inequality VAM, Room 62, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Table Presider: Suzanne Wood, University of Notre Dame Equal Access or Individualization: Analyzing Conceptions of Equity in Suburban Schools - Emily Handsman, Northwestern University Neoliberalism Inside Two New York City High Schools - Joseph Paul Cleary, SUNY-Buffalo Teachers' Challenges and the Promise of Equitable Classrooms: Why Students Who Need More Get Less - Suzanne Wood, University of Notre Dame The Elephant in the Room: The Impact of Racial identity on Role Performance of Instructors - Jasmine Lanisha Davis-Randolph, Indiana University; Alisha Kirchoff, Indiana University The Influence of Social Capital on the Mentoring Ability of "Mentor" in Mentoring System - Jing Yue, East China Normal University, China 

1264.  Sociology of Body and Embodiment Roundtables. Table 1: Bodily Representations and Observations VAM, Room 63, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Endia Louise Hayes, Rutgers University Table Presider: Dustin Mabry Diagnosing Car Breakdowns with Depictive Gestures in Iraqi Culture - Niaz Muhsin Aziz, Soran University : Incarnating (White Heterosexual) Femininity: A Semiotic Analysis of Female Body Hair - Gabrielle Sara Martin, Rutgers University Multiple Magazine Masculinities: The Changing Characteristics of Men on Magazine Covers 1980–2018 - Trenton M. Haltom, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Painting the Car: Objectifying the Body through Tattoo Labor -Dustin Mabry 

1265.  Sociology of Body and Embodiment Roundtables. Table 2: Engaging Duality - Beyond Life and Death VAM, Room 64, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Endia Louise Hayes, Rutgers University Table Presider: Amy Lawton, University of Connecticut Afterlife: Creating a Sociology of the Dead Body - Amy Lawton, University of Connecticut A 'Message' About Immortality: Evan Cooper, Cybernetics, and the Emergence of Cryonic Suspension - Grant Shoffstall, Rowan University The Return of Homo Duplex: Assessing dual-process models and their use in sociology - Chad Justin Valasek, University of California- San Diego 

1266.  Animals and Society Roundtables Session. Animals and Society Roundtable 1 VAM, Room 65, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Erin M. Evans, San Diego Mesa College Table Presider: Jessica Austin, University of Colorado Boulder Alternative Animal Products: Protection Rhetoric or A Protection Racket? - Nathan Poirier, Michigan State University Becoming Vegan, Staying Vegan: Social Ties and Media - René A Becerra, University of California, Merced Dehumanization and Death: Factors shaping support for the institutionalized killing of human and nonhuman animals -Shelby Carlson, The Ohio State University; Alia Dietsch Shocked or Satiated? How Long-term Activists Manage Moral Shocks Beyond the Recruitment Stage - Corey Lee Wrenn, University of Kent 

> Session 1260, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 14 1267.  Animals and Society Roundtables Session. Animals and Society Roundtable 2 VAM, Room 66, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Erin M. Evans, San Diego Mesa College Table Presider: Sarah May Lindsay, McMaster University Animal Companisions, Queer Identities and the COVID-19 Pandemic: Assessing How Animals Impacted Queer Wellbeing - Cameron Thomas Whitley, Western Washington University; Melanie Bowers, Rutgers University Emotional Support? Law, Social Control, and the Medicalization of the Human-Animal Bond - Nicole R Pallotta, Animal Legal Defense Fund Public attitudes toward animal use in medical research in China, Japan and the Netherlands - Bingtao Su, Shandong University 

# Saturday, 12:45 pm 1301.  American Sociological Association. Honors Program Roundtables VAM, Room 0, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Presider: Aaryn L. Green, American Sociological Association Panelists: Steven E. Barkan, University of Maine; Jenny M. Stuber, University of North Florida; Gail Murphy-Geiss, Colorado College; Stefanie Mollborn, University of Colorado-Boulder; Earl Babbie; James A. Vela-McConnell, Augsburg University 

1302.  Book Forum. American Bonds: How Credit Markets Shaped a Nation VAM, Room 1, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Rachel Kahn Best, University of Michigan Moderator: John N. Robinson, Washington University-St. Louis Panelists: Greta R. Krippner, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Fred Block, University of California-Davis Author: Sarah Quinn, University of Washington 

1303.  Special Sessions. AI, Machine Learning, and Inequality VAM, Room 2, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Cheryl B. Leggon, Georgia Institute of Technology Presider: Cheryl B. Leggon, Georgia Institute of Technology Panelists: Safiya Umoja Noble, University of California, Los Angeles; Yu Tao, Stevens Institute of Technology; Kush Varshney, IBM Research; Steve Viscelli, University of Pennsylvania; Kate Crawford, USC Annenberg, MSR-NYC, École Normale Supérieure in Paris 

1304.  Special Sessions. Indigenous Movements and Sovereignty: Voices from Four Directions VAM, Room 3, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: James V. Fenelon, California State University-San Bernardino Presider: Pamela E. Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison Panelists: Hartman Deetz, Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe and Ockway Bay Wampum; Claudio González-Parra (Pehuenche), Universidad de Concepción; Jeanne Simon, University of Concepción; Loke Aloua, (Kanaka 'Ōiwi) NSF ADVANCE BRIDGE Grant; Marina Karides, University of Hawaii-Manoa; James V. Fenelon, California State University-San Bernardino 

1305.  Section on Sociology of Education. Section on Sociology of Education. Disparities in School Discipline and Access to Resources VAM, Room 4, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Presider: Horace Joseph Duffy, Rice University De Facto Expulsions and the Maintenance of School Discipline Inequality - Rebecca Gleit, Stanford University Distrust and Deepening Inequalities: Race, Class, and Gender in US Schools during the COVID19 Pandemic - Brooke Dinsmore, University of Virginia Set Back or Scarred? Short and Long-Term Effects of New Teachers on Student Suspension - Patrick Arthur Graff, University of Notre Dame School Suspensions and Racial/Ethnic Threat of Latino/a Students across Immigrant Destinations - Matthew James Snidal, University of Texas at Austin; Elizabeth Ackert, University of California-Santa Barbara; Robert Crosnoe, University of Texas-Austin “Stay in a Child’s Place:” Adult Authority and (Dis)respect in Schooling in the Black Belt - Meaghan Mingo, Cornell University 

1306.  Thematic Sessions. Black Feminist Sociology: Commitment, Critiques, and Collaboration VAM, Room 5, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Zakiya T. Luna, University of California-Santa Barbara; Whitney Nicole Laster Pirtle, University of California-Merced Presider: Zakiya T. Luna, University of California-Santa Barbara Panelists: Rose Brewer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Blu Buchanan, University of California, Davis; Alicia D Bonaparte, Pitzer College; Freeden Blume Oeur, Tufts University; Zakiya T. Luna, University of California-Santa Barbara 

1307.  Thematic Sessions. Emancipating Theory: Rising Voices in Race And Social Theory VAM, Room 6, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Linsey Nicole Edwards, New York University Presider: Linsey Nicole Edwards, New York University Time and the Veil: The Temporal Dimensions of Black Poverty in Philadelphia - Linsey Nicole Edwards, New York University Culture So White: A Du Boisian Approach to Behavior and Decision-Making - Zawadi Rucks-Ahidiana, SUNY-Albany Interrogating the Veils: Assessing the Methodological Tensions of being an Outsider-Within - Melissa Victoria Abad, Stanford University Panelists: Angela Elena Fillingim, Western Washington University; Shaonta' E. Allen, Dartmouth College 

1308.  Thematic Sessions. Why Sociology Needs American, Critical Race, and Ethnic Studies - and Vice Versa VAM, Room 7, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Pawan H. Dhingra, Amherst College; Nadia Y. Kim, Loyola Marymount University Presider: Rhacel Salazar Parrenas, University of Southern California Panelists: Nadia Y. Kim, Loyola Marymount University; Ben Carrington, University of Southern California; Gilda Laura Ochoa, Pomona College; Pawan H. Dhingra, Amherst College Discussant: Rhacel Salazar Parrenas, University of Southern California SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 15 1309.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. White Supremacy and Antiracism Dialogue Session VAM, Room 8, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Megan Theresa Thiele, San Jose State University Presiders: Megan Theresa Thiele, San Jose State University; Aliyya Hatcher White Supremacy and Antiracism Dialogue Session - Megan Theresa Thiele, San Jose State University; Aliyya Hatcher 

1310.  Professional Development Workshop. Census Data and Geography Resources for Sociologists VAM, Room 9, 12:45-2:10pm 

Leader: Tyson Weister, U.S. Census Bureau Co-Leader: Artemis O’Connor, U.S. Census Bureau 

1311.  Ideas for Future Research. Simultaneously Oppressor and Oppressed: The Unique Double-Positionality of White Latinx in the U.S. VAM, Room 10, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Rodrigo Serrao, Hope College Simultaneously Oppressor and Oppressed: The Unique Double-Positionality of White Latinx in the U.S. - Rodrigo Serrao, Hope College 

1312.  Section on Sociology of Body and Embodiment. Embodied Labor VAM, Room 11, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Kelly Underman, Drexel University Presider: Kelly Underman, Drexel University Panelists: Miliann Kang, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Ashley E. Mears, Boston University; Angela Jones, SUNY-Farmingdale; Kristen Barber, Southern Illinois University-Carbondale 

1313.  Section on Animals and Society. Open Theme Animals and Society Paper Session VAM, Room 12, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Erin M. Evans, San Diego Mesa College Presider: Erin M. Evans, San Diego Mesa College Animal Fighting Bans in the U.S. Territories: Assessing Implementation and Public Opinion on Legislation Extensions - Cameron Thomas Whitley, Western Washington University; Melanie Bowers, Rutgers University From Brigitte Bardot to Pamela Anderson: Celebrity Activists in France and the United States - Elizabeth Cherry, Manhattanville College The Species with No Boundaries: Experiences with and Attitudes toward Rabbits in the United States - Carol L. Glasser, Minnesota State University-Mankato Treatment Discourses and the Privileging of Knowledge: The Reality of Boundaries for Veterinary Students - Jenny R. Vermilya, University of Colorado-Denver 

1314.  Section on Medical Sociology. Social Integration and Health VAM, Room 13, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: C. Andre Christie-Mizell, Vanderbilt University Presiders: Brittany Nicole Hearne, University of Arkansas; C. Andre Christie-Mizell, Vanderbilt University Childhood Stressors, Cumulative Disadvantage, and Women’s Relationships in Adulthood - Amy Irby-Shasanmi, Indiana University Purdue University-Indianapolis; Kenzie Latham-Mintus, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis; Tess Weathers, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis Entourage of Well-Being? Patterns of Social Accompaniment, Social Inequality, and Momentary Health Among Older Adults - Alyssa W. Goldman, Boston College; Erin York Cornwell, Cornell University Race and Gender Disparities in Adolescent Social Cohesion and Adult Depressive Trajectories - Molly Copeland, Michigan State University; Christina Kamis, Duke University Sources of support and their interaction with mental health for people with same-sex experiences - R. Kyle Saunders, Florida State University; Dawn Celeste Carr, Florida State University What Makes Supportive Ties Stressful? Unhelpful Support in the Context of Anticipatory Stress - Matthew K. Grace, Hamilton College 

1315.  Section on International Migration. Bringing Emotions into the Scholarship of Migration and Incorporation VAM, Room 14, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth M. Aranda, University of South Florida Presider: Zoua M. Vang, McGill University Why Migrate Unaccompanied: Bounded Rationality and Emotions in Migration Decision-Making - Luis E. Tenorio, University of California, Berkeley The Fragile Obligation: Gratitude, Discontent, and Dissent with Syrian Refugees in Canada - Maleeha Iqbal, University of Toronto; Laila Omar, University of Toronto; Neda Maghbouleh, University of Toronto The Emotional Journey to Lawful Permanent Residence in the United States from 2007 to 2021 - Michelle S Dromgold-Sermen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Liminal Belonging in El Nuevo South: Belonging Amid Layers of Exclusion - Maria Andrea Escobar, University of California-Merced Discussant: Peter Kivisto, Augustana College 

1316.  Section on Race, Gender, Class. Intersectional Inequalities and Higher Education VAM, Room 15, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Presider: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Creating Inclusive Department Climates in STEM Fields: Analyzing Multiple Perspectives on the Same Departments - Joya Misra, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Ethel L. Mickey, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Ember Skye Willow Kanelee, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Laurel Smith-Doerr, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Twice as Good, Twice the College: Choosing Colleges in the Era of Racism and Rankings - Deborwah Faulk, University of Richmond Made to Fit In, Made to Stick Out: How Queer Black College Students Negotiate Inclusion at Black and White Universities - TehQuin Forbes, Florida State University Measuring the Impact of Elite Backgrounds on the Lives and Careers of Sociologists - Allison L. Hurst, Oregon State University Do I Belong Here? Microaggression, Isolation, and Imposter Syndrome Among Women of Color in PhD Programs -Letisha Engracia Cardoso Brown, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Kait M. Boyle, University of South Carolina-Columbia; Jennifer Turner, Hollins University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 16 1317.  Section on Political Economy of the World System. Political Economy Approaches to Technology and the Environment VAM, Room 16, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Kelly Austin, Lehigh University; Sarah Grace Manski, George Mason University Presider: Sarah Grace Manski, George Mason University Double-Frontiers: Intersection of Mining and Neoliberal Conservation in Madagascar - Marketta Paula Sofia Vuola, University of Helsinki Extractivisms and Deforestation: The Regionally Dominant Role of Ranching, Forestry and Mining in Driving Clear-cutting -Markus Kröger, University of Helsinki Ships of Empire: Portuguese Expansion and Frontiers of Cheap Nature in the Capitalist World-Ecology, 1415-1550 - Engin Burak Yilmaz, Binghamton University Transformative Societies: Indigenous Foodways in Post-Authoritarian Environments - Jennifer Keahey, Arizona State University-West 

1318.  Section on Social Psychology. What's Wrong with Social Psychology? VAM, Room 17, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Steven Hitlin, University of Iowa Presider: Steven Hitlin, University of Iowa Panelists: Jeremy Freese, Stanford University; Ellis Prentis Monk, Harvard University; Lynn Smith-Lovin, Duke University; Omar A. Lizardo, University of California-Los Angeles; Brea Louise Perry, Indiana University-Bloomington 

1319.  Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance. Justice, Policing, and Incarceration: Lessons Learned from National Protests and Movements for Abolition VAM, Room 18, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Victor M. Rios, University of California-Santa Barbara Presider: Victor M. Rios, University of California-Santa Barbara Panelists: Jennifer Cobbina, Michigan State University; Hillary Potter, University of Colorado-Boulder; Kayla A. Preito-Hodge, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Andrea S. Boyles, Tulane University 

1320.  Section on Evolution, Biology, and Society. Evolutionary Demography and Biodemography VAM, Room 19, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hexuan Liu, University of Cincinnati Presider: Hexuan Liu, University of Cincinnati Get Married and Be a Scientist? The Effects of Biology and Marriage on Working in STEM - Meng-Jung Lin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Husband’s income, wive’s income, and number of biological children among American couples - Rosemary L. Hopcroft, University of North Carolina-Charlotte Interactive Effects between Social Context and Genomic Propensity on Delinquency among American Males - Chao Liu, North Carolina State University; Guang Guo, University of North Carolina Discussant: Guangyu Tong, Yale University 

1321.  Regular Session. Affirmative Action and Anti-Discrimination Policy VAM, Room 20, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Amaka Camille Okechukwu, George Mason University Presider: Amaka Camille Okechukwu, George Mason University Affirmative Action and Income Inequality: Exploring Differences Across Racial and Ethnic Minority Workers in the US -Tiffanie Vo, University of Oklahoma; Amanda Catherine Ferraro, University of Oklahoma Attitudes About Affirmative Action in Higher Education - Amy Petts, Purdue Mobilizing Equal Employment Rights: The Social and Political Determinants of Discrimination Complaints (2009-2018) - Masoud Movahed, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Elizabeth Hirsh, University of British Columbia 

1322.  Regular Session. Arab and Muslim Coping with Othering and Racialization VAM, Room 21, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Randa B Serhan, American University of Beirut Presider: Randa B Serhan, American University of Beirut Everyday Islamophobia: Muslim Americans’ Experiences with Racial Microaggressions - Bradley J. Zopf, Carthage College; Kory Scherer Family Feminism: A Lebanese Example - Rita Stephan, USAID Meeting the Moral Markers of Success: Concerted Cultivation among Second-Generation Muslim Parents - Rebecca Karam, Michigan State University Understanding Second-Generation Arab American Transnationalism - Luma Issa AlMasarweh, Case Western Reserve University 

1323.  Regular Session. Citizenship VAM, Room 22, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Yige Dong, SUNY-Buffalo Presider: Yige Dong, SUNY-Buffalo Beyond street-level bureaucrats in discretionary lawmaking: informal mediators and gender discriminatory citizenship outcomes in Myanmar - Erin L McAuliffe, University of Michigan Citizenship, anyone? The examination of lived citizenship of Syrian refugees in Turkey under the precarious globalization - Ezgi Karaoglu, Michigan State University Strategic Citizenship in China: Birth Tourism and the ‘American Hukou’ - Brandon Folse The mobility trap: how urban contexts shape the spatial mobility of male undocumented youths - Stephen P. Ruszczyk, Montclair State University Discussant: Jane Lilly Lopez, Brigham Young University-Provo 

1324.  Regular Session. Achieving Participation, Inclusion and Taken-for-Grantedness in Social Settings VAM, Room 23, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Warfield Rawls, Bentley University Presider: Clemens Eisenmann, University of Siegen Configuring participation in hybrid auctions - Sylvaine Tuncer, King's College, London; Christian C Heath, King's College Business School; Paul Luff, King's College Invoking shared knowledge in proposal sequences for collaborative activities - Satomi Kuroshima, Tamagawa University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 17 

Going Shopping or Consulting in Medical Visits: A Study of Caregiver’s Resistance to Treatment Recommendations -Nan Wang, Hunan University; Yuetong Liu, Hunan University Negative stance towards treatment in psychosocial assessments: The role of personalised recommendations in promoting acceptance - Clara Ann Blomgren Bergen, University of California Los Angeles The social construction of facts as an interactional resource in U.S.A. Presidential Debates - Menno H. Reijven, University of Amsterdam 

1325.  Regular Session. Family and Kinship: Parent-child and Other Familial Ties VAM, Room 24, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Pallavi Banerjee, University of Calgary Presider: Soulit Chacko, IUPUI Family Safety Nets: Class, Race, and Intergenerational Support Through the Lens of the COVID-19 Pandemic - Elena van Stee, University of Pennsylvania Quality Time with Children? The Use of Information Technology Devices, Parents’ Time Pressure, and Well-Being - Melissa A. Milkie, University of Toronto "Severing ties" or "A Grand Reconciliation"? How Political Events Shape Families in Hong Kong - Ruby YS Lai, Lingnan University The Opioid Epidemic and Children's Living Arrangements in the United States, 2000-2018 - Monica Lisette Caudillo Contreras, University of Maryland-College Park; Andres Villarreal, University of Maryland, College Park; Philip N. Cohen, University of Maryland-College Park “Why Wait?”: Meanings and Processes of Early Marriage among College Students in Mississippi - Rachel Catherine Allison, Mississippi State University 

1326.  Regular Session. Environmental Sociology Regular Session 2: National and Global Perspectives on Environmental Justice VAM, Room 25, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Steve G. Hoffman, University of Toronto Presider: Michelle L. Edwards, Texas State University In the Crosshairs: A Nationwide Analysis of Intersecting Natural and Industrial Hazardscapes - Phylicia Xin Yi Lee Brown, Rice University; James R. Elliott, Rice University Gender Focused Bilateral Aid in the Environmental Sector: A Cross-National Analysis of Forest Loss - Jamie M Sommer, University of South Florida; Samia Tasmim, Stony Brook University; John M Shandra, Stony Brook University The Environmental State - Chris M. Rea, Ohio State University; Scott Frickel, Brown University Ecologically Unequal Exchange and Disparate Death Rates from Air Pollution: A Comparative Study of 169 Countries - Peyman Hekmatpour, University of Oklahoma; Carrie McLachlin Leslie, University of Oklahoma 

1327.  Regular Session. Comparative Historical Sociology (2): Historiography and Policy VAM, Room 26, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Monica Prasad, Northwestern University Presider: Ann Shola Orloff, Northwestern University And the Rest is History - Laura K. Nelson, Northeastern University; Rebekah Getman, Northeastern University; Syed Arefinul Haque, Northeastern University Outcome Bias in Writing Historiography: A Study Using Post-Game Commentary of Soccer Matches - Qindian Chen, University of California, Irvine; Yang Su, University of California, Irvine The Market Failure Paradox: Political Contention in the U.S. Welfare State - Emily Parker, Cornell University The Political Economy of Nimiipuu/Nez Perce Public Memory: From Time Immemorial to the Future - Levin Elias Welch, University of California, Riverside Discussant: Ann Shola Orloff, Northwestern University 

1328.  Regular Session. Popular Culture from the Margins: Representation, Discrimination, and Performance VAM, Room 27, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Nancy Wang Yuen, Biola University Presider: Katherine Zaslavsky, Cornell University Depreciating Skills: Cultural and Economic Processes of Age Discrimination in Creative Production - Alexandre Frenette, Vanderbilt University Contested Classification: The Trajectory of Multicultural Romance - Anna Michelson, Northwestern University The Dora Milaje in Real Life: A Continuing Legacy of African Warriors - Myron T. Strong, Community College of Baltimore County; Kenneth Sean Chaplin, John Carroll University Toward a Sociology of Dance - Carmela Muzio Dormani, Mercy College 

1329.  Regular Session. Disability and the Life Course VAM, Room 28, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Robyn Lewis Brown, University of Kentucky Presider: Kenzie Latham-Mintus, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis Social Contributors to Math Course Attainment Among Adolescents with Learning Disabilities, ADHD, or Autism - Dara Shifrer, Portland State University; Daniel Mackin Freeman, Portland State University; Angela Frederick, University of Texas-El Paso The Long-Term Impact of Childhood Disability on Mental Health in Adulthood - Jessica West, Duke University Discussants: Kenzie Latham-Mintus, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis; ASL Interpreter 

1330.  Regular Session. Economic Sociology at the Intersectional Crossroads VAM, Room 29, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Frederick F. Wherry, Princeton University Presider: Lauren Rivera, Northwestern University Value Fluidity and Value Anchoring: Race, Intermediaries, and Valuation Processes in Two Housing Markets - Max Besbris, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Elizabeth Korver-Glenn, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Do Job Candidates Discriminate Minority Founders? Evidence from a Field Experiment - Kaisa Elina Snellman, INSEAD; Peter Younkin, McGill University Theorizing Marketplace Racism and Racially-Biased Exclusionary Treatment - Cassi L. Pittman Claytor, Case Western Reserve University; David K. Crockett, University of South Carolina-Columbia Replacing the Irreplaceable: Conflicting Valuation of Damage of Historic Buildings hit by the Mexico 2017 Earthquakes - Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Benjamin 

> Session 1324, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 18 

Ibarra-Sevilla, University of Texas-Austin; Eldad J Levy, University of Texas at Austin Raising Kids, Rising Debt: How does Having Children Impact Mortgage Debt? - Yader R. Lanuza, University of California-Santa Barbara; Nina Bandelj, University of California-Irvine; Erika Schutt, University of Miami 

1331.  Regular Session. LGBTQ Social Change and Allyship VAM, Room 30, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Terrell James Antonio Winder, University of California-Santa Barbara Presider: Greggor Mattson, Oberlin College Change in Health Over Time: Same-Sex Compared to Different-Sex Couples - Yiwen Wang, University of Texas at Austin Early Labor Market Outcomes of Children in Same-Sex families: Evidence from Population Data. - Silvia Palmaccio, KU Leuven BE0419052173; Deni Mazrekaj, University of Oxford; Kristof De Witte Mind the Gap: Sexual Orientation Wage Gaps for Racialized and Immigrant Minorities in the United States - Shannon Mok, Western University Superficial Allyship: Social and Value Similarity Between Heterosexist Allies and Those with Heightened Homophobia - Shahin Davoudpour, University of California, Irvine Whose Movement Is It Anyway? Race, Class, & the Complexity of Allyship Politics in LGBTQ Activism - Jaime Hartless, SUNY Farmingdale “Your comfort comes at the expense of our oppression.” Transgender Individuals and the Women’s March - Eli Williams 

1332.  Regular Session. Work and the Workplace VAM, Room 31, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Josh Seim, University of Southern California Presider: Josh Seim, University of Southern California Algorithmic Autonomy: Manufacturing Consent in the Algorithmic Workplace - Lindsey D. Cameron, University of Pennsylvania Rationalizing Creativity: How supply chain logic reconfigured global fashion work - Solee Irene Shin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Serving Like an Organization: How Food-Service and Retail Workers Interpret Their Interactions With Customers -Adam Storer, UC Berkeley Unequal Upsides? Job Pressure and the Status-Based Inequalities in the Resource Functions of Schedule Control - Philip James Badawy, University of Toronto Discussant: Mengyang Zhao, University of Pennsylvania 

1368.  Meeting. Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 12:45-1:15pm 1369.  Meeting. Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 12:45-1:15pm 1371.  Meeting. Sociology of Culture Section Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 12:45-1:15pm Saturday, 1:15 pm 1447.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Coalitions in Social Movements VAM, Room 46, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Tanya N. Cook, Community College of Aurora Cooptation, Cooperation, and Contention in the Campus Anti-Violence Movement - Arialle Kaye Crabtree, University of Georgia Discourses of Dissent: Negotiating discursive variation within the NOlympics LA coaltion - Daniel Cueto-Villalobos Starticipants and Recruitment: How Celebrities Motivate Youth Involvement in Activism - Jamie Puglin, Duke University; Tanya N. Cook, Community College of Aurora 

1448.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Collective Identities and Lifestyle Movements VAM, Room 47, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Michael D. Royster, Prairie View A&M University Collective Identity Formation while on the Brink of Civil Disobedience - Michael D. Royster, Prairie View A&M University Mobilizing with a weak identity: Collective Identities in the 1960s-70s American Consumer Movement - Yaniv Ron-El, University of Chicago The Future Is Now: Counterculture and Social Justice in the Burning Man Movement - Eric P. Magnuson, Loyola Marymount University 

1449.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Enviro VAM, Room 48, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: James Hein, California State University Los Angeles Creative spaces for Seed Commons through alternative social practices: Maintaining, Resisting or Changing Institutions -Julia Tschersich, University of Oldenburg Motivations behind an Environmental Art Movement - James Hein, California State University Los Angeles Productive Friction: Analyzing Americans "own stories" to impute climate change motives. - Alix E Rule, New York University Rethinking Environmental Mobilization: Civil Society Engagement in the Energy Decision-making Process in Post Fukushima Japan - Pinar Temocin Veganism as a Social Movement - Teagan Hallene Murphy, University of Maryland - College Park 

1450.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Frames and Social Movement VAM, Room 49, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Jamie Puglin, Duke University Collective action and the self-fulfilling prophecy: Do high expectations about protest size motivate protest participation? - Jon Gunnar Bernburg, University of Iceland Determinants of Successful Collective Action Frames in Online Contexts: Anger, Targeting Executives, and Frame Focus -Adrian Apaza Frame Disputes and Ideological Work in the U.S. Anti-Human 

> Session 1330, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 19 

Trafficking Campaign - Billy James Ulibarri, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley; Danielle Albright, University of New Mexico How Fan Activist Organizations Use Frames for Recruitment and Mobilization - Jamie Puglin, Duke University Individual Claimsmaking after the Parkland Shooting - Deana Rohlinger, Florida State University; Caitria DeLucchi; Warren Allen Obergefell’s Pitfall: The Democratic Party’s Electoral Capture of the LGBTQ Rights Movement - Megan E. Brooker, University of Kansas 

1451.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Global Social Movements VAM, Room 50, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Arman Azedi, University of California-Irvine Four Decades of Anti-Torture Advocacy in Turkey: Opportunity Structures, Repertoires and Outcomes - Melinda Negron-Gonzales, University of New Hampshire at Manchester Immigrant Political Community: The Cause and Consequence of Chinese Immigrant Participation in Social Movements -Zheng Zhou, The University of Hong Kong Revolutionary Legal Mobilization in Cuba: A Comparison of Two Historical Episodes of Contention - Amalia Pérez Martín, University of California, Merced Socioeconomic Grievances and Political Threats in Hong Kong's Popular Uprising - Hiu-fung Chung, City University of Hong Kong; Edmund Wai Cheng, City University of Hong Kong; Anthony Hoi-wa Cheng, City University of Hong Kong Student protests and anti-corruption movement in Russia during the pre-Navalny era - Ararat L. Osipian, New University in Exile Consortium, New York Who Protests in the Arab World? Differences in Shi’a and Sunni Participation in Collective Action - Arman Azedi, University of California-Irvine 

1452.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Intersectionality and Black Lives Matter Movement VAM, Room 51, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Jaleh Jalili, Rice University Dynamics of Place and Protest: A Study of Black Lives Matter Protests in Portland - Jaleh Jalili, Rice University Intersectionality and Symbolic Power in Social Movements: A Case Study of the Undocumented Immigrant Youth Movement - Walter Julio Nicholls, University of California, Irvine; Tara Fiorito, Department of Sociology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam Policing the Minneapolis Uprising: The State as a Countermovement to Black Lives Matter - Alyssa Oursler; Anna DalCortivo Protest Participants’ Perceptions of the Intersectionality Politics of Black Lives Matter - Cynthia Deitch, George Washington University; Madalena Monnier-Reyna,, George Washington University Racism, Neoliberalism and Insurrection at the Capitol: The Downfall of The Republican and Democratic Parties - Carina A. Bandhauer, Western Connecticut State University Rethinking Repression and Protest Behavior: Liminal Sites in the Criminal Justice System - George Weddington, University of Pittsburgh 

1453.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Labor Organizing VAM, Room 52, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Kristen Bass, University of Toronto Étudiants en grève: Cultural Repertoires of Labour Organizing in the 2012 Quebec Student Strikes - Kristen Bass, University of Toronto Stark Contrasts, Varied Results: Social Movement Unionism and Business Unionism in Action - Kay Mann, Miami University-Hamilton Subnational Political and Economic Threats, and Oppositional Structures in the Salvadoran Labor Movement’s Radicalization, 1974-1981 - Luis Ruben Gonzalez Marquez The Economic Freedom Fighters and the Dynamics of Insurgent Practice in South Africa - Nathanael Grant Joseph, University of Pittsburgh 

1454.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Media and Social Movements VAM, Room 53, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Emily Schneider, Northern Arizona University Acclaiming vs. Marginalizing Protest—Media Framing of Hong Kong Anti-Extradition Movement and French Yellow Vest Movement - Yao Li, University of Florida; Marion Cassard Critical Diasporic Engagements: Turning Points, Media, and Palestine Solidarity Activism among American Jews - Emily Schneider, Northern Arizona University Dispersed Organizing Before the Internet: The Case of the Disability Rag - Matthew Gabriel Borus, University of Chicago Pandemic denial, anti-vaccination attitude in connection with religiosity and spirituality during the COVID19 pandemic in Hungary - Márton Tamás Csanády, Károli Gáspár University of the Reformed Church in Hungary; Mikó Fruzsina, Károli Gáspár University of the Reformed Church in Hungary and Corvinus University of Budapest, Hungary Politics in a Pandemic: The Opioid Epidemic in Central New York - Benita Roth, SUNY-Binghamton; Nilufer Akalin, SUNY Bighamton University; Gabreella Friday, Binghamton University Social Media, Political Efficacy, and the Effectiveness of Collective Action - Shelley J. Boulianne, MacEwan University; Jennifer Oser 

1455.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Organizing, Mobilizing and Protests VAM, Room 54, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: E. Colin Ruggero, Community College of Philadelphia “Bad Things Happen in Philadelphia:” Contingent Temporalities in Social Movement Organizing - E. Colin Ruggero, Community College of Philadelphia Behind the label of peaceful protest: High/low perseverance of repeaters and novices in South Korean protests - Joohyun Park, UC Berkeley Civic Action and Emotion - Kelly Bergstrand, University of Texas, Arlington Collective Action and Continuity in Conspiracy: A Temporal Analysis of the Anti-Hitler Assassination Network - Eric R. Cheney, Central Washington University; Robert R. Faulkner 

> Session 1450, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 20 

Evangelical Christianity and Authoritarianism: A Historical Case Study of Gerald Winrod, the “Jayhawk Nazi” - Pam Rooks, University of Kansas 

1456.  Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables. Social Movement Organizing VAM, Room 55, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University Table Presider: Daniel Jaster, Eureka College Mobilizing without Arms: The Role of Transition Communities in Demobilized Guerrillas - Natalia Duarte-Mayorga, University of Pittsburgh “Nationalizing Local Struggles:” Community Organizing and National Movement-building to Combat the School-to-Prison - Mark R. Warren, University of Massachusetts Boston The Pragmatics of Utopia - Daniel Jaster, Eureka College To the Ballot Box and Beyond: Civic Engagement and Community Organizing in New York City - Gianpaolo Baiocchi, NYU; Ned Crowley, New York University; Lili Dao, New York University; Rachel Kuo; Virgilio Urbina Lazardi, New York University 

1457.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Contested Media VAM, Room 56, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Sarah R. Johnson-Palomaki, University of Virginia A Discursive Evolution of 19th Century Opium Advertisements in Local Newsprint - Andrew Robert Burns, Louisiana State University Occasional Heroes: Working-Class Nostalgia and Subordination in Neoliberal Film - Peter R. Ikeler, SUNY-Old Westbury; Josh Scannell, The New School; Jefferson Charles; Felicia Crivello You’re Cancelled: Entertainment Media, “Problematic” Creators, and Political Play through Cultural Critique - Sarah R. Johnson-Palomaki, University of Virginia Varieties of Resonance: The Subjective Interpretations and Utilizations of Media Output in France - Bo Yun Park, Harvard University; Adrien Abecassis; Manon Revel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

1458.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Data Societies VAM, Room 57, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Algorithmic Fairness Across Contexts and Social Media: Do Americans Think Predictive Automation is Fair? - Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Framing AI and Digital Sovereignty – A Survey on National AI Strategies in Russia, Germany and China - Viktor Tuzov, City University of Hong Kong; Fen Jennifer Lin, City University of Hong Kong Making Space for the Future, Reimagining the Smart Nation -Amelia Hassoun, University of Oxford “There are some things that I would never ask Alexa” – Privacy and Smart Speaker Assistants - Saba Rebecca Brause; Grant Blank, University of Oxford Big Data & Belmont: On the Ethics and Research Implications of Consumer Based Datasets - Remy Stewart, Cornell University 

1459.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Identity and Gaming Communities VAM, Room 58, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Christine Tomlinson, University of California-Irvine Becoming a Pokémon Trainer: Leisure and Well-being among Older Adults in Hong Kong - Gina Lai, Hong Kong Baptist University; Ka Fung, Caritas Institute of Higher Education Expectations, Norms, and Personal Accountability in Twitch Culture - Christine Tomlinson, University of California-Irvine Patching You Up, As Usual: Women and Gendered Labor in an Online Shooting Game - Jessica Austin, University of Colorado Boulder Women in Gaming: We Have Always Been Here - Michelle Jacqueline Alexander, University of Oregon 

1460.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Inequalities in a Digitized Society VAM, Room 59, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Laura Robinson, Santa Clara University Affluence, Equality, and Technological Integration: A Cross-National Meta-Analysis of Gender Differences in ICT Self-Efficacy - MacKenzie Antoinette Christensen Mobile does not substitute computers: mobile underclass, sequential digital inequalities, and e-government engagement in Brazil - Matias Dodel, Universidad Catolica del uruguay The role of the mobile internet: Mobile dependencies, internet use and outcomes - Darja Grošelj, University of Ljubljana; Grant Blank, University of Oxford Social media and hiring: an online experiment on discrimination based on social class - Diana Roxana Galos, University of Konstanz Disconnected, Discouraged, and Defeated: How Social Class and Digital Inequalities Depress Well-Being - Jen Schradie, Sciences Po - Paris; Katharina Tittel, Sciences Po Paris 

1461.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Meaningmaking and Social Constructions VAM, Room 60, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Grant Lattanzi, Georgetown University How Narrative Construction in the News Maintains Social Movement - Rebecca S.K. Li, The College of New Jersey “That’s not real”: Sensemaking to Reduce Harm from Comparison on Social Media - Amy Lynne Johnson, Stanford University Digital Calendars and Symbolic Representations of Time - Grant Lattanzi, Georgetown University Recombinant memetics through corpora analysis - Mariam Orkodashvili, Vanderbilt University 

> Session 1455, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 21 1462.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Media and Social Change in a Pandemic VAM, Room 61, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Laura Grindstaff, University of California-Davis After the Pandemic: The Future of Community and Work -Rachael A. Woldoff, West Virginia University; Robert C. Litchfield, Washington and Jefferson College Changing the Subject: Causal Relationships Between COVID-19 Topics - Sabrina Mai; Carter T. Butts, University of California-Irvine Did the Screens Win? An Autoregressive Model Linking Leisure, Relatedness and Mental Health - Mattia Vacchiano, Swiss National centre of Competence in Research LIVES; Riccardo Valente My Pandemic Romance: How “Tinderphobes” Respond to Love’s Digital Migration during COVID-19 - Skyler Wang, University of California, Berkeley 

1463.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Mediated Relationships, Mediated Communities VAM, Room 62, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: John D Boy, Leiden University E-Word-of-Mouth (e-WOM) in the health domain - Its antecedents and outcomes - Esther Brainin, Ruppin Academic Center Israel Challenging, Internalizing and Transforming Gendered Courtship Norms in Online Dating - Celeste Curington, North Carolina State University; Jennifer Hickes Lundquist, University of Massachusetts-Amherst WeChatized Economy in Vancouver: Ethnic Enclave or Mixed Embeddedness - Yijia Zhang, The University of British Columbia 

1464.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Media, Work, and Labor Struggles VAM, Room 63, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Julian Posada, University of Toronto (Dis)embeddedness in Latin American Data Work - Julian Posada, University of Toronto Reconsidering digital labour: Bringing tech workers into the debate - Robert Dorschel, University of Cambridge Trucking on Twitch: How Self-Surveillance Renegotiates Workplace Power Dynamics - Sara Bimo; Aparajita Bhandari, Cornell University To strike to progress, long live the strike!”. - Magda Catalina Jimenez, Universidad Externado 

1465.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Online-Offline Bridges: Platforms, Influencers, and Streamers - Oh My! VAM, Room 64, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Francesca Tripodi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill “Looking Like a Million Bucks”: Fashion Influencers, Status Hierarchies, and the “It Girls” of Instagram - Jordan Foster, University of Toronto Elected Officials as Interacting Organisms: Examining the role politicians play in sustaining the Right-Wing Media Ecosystem - Francesca Tripodi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Yuanye Ma, UNC-Chapel Hill Platforming Race: Examining racial ideologies on social media platforms - Amber M. Hamilton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Social Media, Meet Clientelism - Nicolas Torres-Echeverry, University of Chicago 

1466.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Politics and the Media VAM, Room 65, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College American News And (Or As) Entertainment - Mary Elisabeth Hopkins, New York University An Ambivalent Crisis: The Field of Journalism and The New York Times - Tyler Leeds, The University of California, Berkeley Enacting and Avoiding Politics in Online Publics - Dmitri S. Seals, California State University-Los Angeles Perceiving Fact-Checks as Biased but Nevertheless Persuaded? Effects of Fact-Checking News Delivered by Partisan Media - Je Hoon Chae, Yonsei University; Hyunjin Song, Yonsei University; Sang Yup Lee, Yonsei University Propaganda, Disinformation, and Media Effects: A Comparison of Past and Present Scholarship - Sarah J Halford, Brandeis University 

1467.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session. Technology, Media, and Education VAM, Room 66, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew M. Lindner, Skidmore College Table Presider: Cassidy Puckett, Emory University Digital divide and divided higher education marketing in Germany - Sude Peksen, TU Dortmund University Sorting Machines: Digital Technology and Categorical Inequality in Education - Matt Rafalow, Google; Cassidy Puckett, Emory University Collaborative Pedagogy: Teaching (with) The Grateful Dead on Tour, on Campus, and Online - Rebecca G. Adams, University of North Carolina-Greensboro 

1470.  Section on Sociology of Culture. Graduate Student Professionalization Panel: Studying Culture in Times of Crisis: Methods and Approaches VAM, Room 69, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Samantha Leonard, Brandeis University; Nino Bariola, The University of Texas at Austin Presiders: Samantha Leonard, Brandeis University; Nino Bariola, The University of Texas at Austin Panelists: Aliza Luft, University of California-Los Angeles; Jelani Ince, Indiana University; Craig M. Rawlings, Duke University; Caitlyn Collins, Washington University-St. Louis SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 22 Saturday, 2:30 pm 1502.  Book Forum. Dispossession without Development: Land Grabs in Neoliberal India VAM, Room 1, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Fred Block, University of California-Davis Moderator: Ruth Milkman, CUNY-Graduate Center Panelists: Richard Lachmann, SUNY-Albany; Javier Auyero, University of Texas-Austin; Smitha Radhakrishnan, Wellesley College Author: Michael Levien, Johns Hopkins University 

1503.  Special Sessions. America at Mid-Century: A Majority-Minority Society? VAM, Room 2, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Richard D. Alba, CUNY-Graduate Center Presider: Rebecca Karam, Michigan State University Panelists: Rogelio Saenz, University of Texas at San Antonio; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa; Julie A. Dowling, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Richard D. Alba, CUNY-Graduate Center Discussant: Jessica Vasquez-Tokos, University of Oregon 

1504.  Special Sessions. Landscapes of Inequality: Developing a Sociology of Infrastructural Change VAM, Room 3, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Amanda McMillan Lequieu, Drexel University Presider: Amanda McMillan Lequieu, Drexel University Panelists: Summer Marie Gray, University of California-Santa Barbara; Mimi Sheller, Drexel University; Rebecca Elliott, London School of Economics; Hillary Angelo, University of California-Santa Cruz; Amanda McMillan Lequieu, Drexel University 

1505.  Presidential Panel. Marxian, Weberian, Chicago School, and Du Boisian Sociology VAM, Room 4, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Charles Camic, Northwestern University Panelists: Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University; Christopher McAuley, University of California - Santa Barbara; Andrew Douglas, Morehouse College; Davarian Baldwin, Trinity College The sociological Canon is being challenged by Du Boisian Sociology. Sociological ideas developed by Du Bois are being considered and compared to the contributions made by Marx, Weber and the Chicago School. This panel will compare and evaluate these various schools of thought with an eye towards how they may complement each other or whether they are fundamentally contradictory. 

1506.  Thematic Sessions. Black Sociology VAM, Room 5, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Earl Wright, Rhodes College Presider: Karen Powell Sears, Denison University Panelists: Kalasia S. Ojeh, University of Louisville; Earl Wright, Rhodes College; Lori Latrice Martin, Louisiana State University; Marcus Brooks, University of Cincinnati 

1507.  Thematic Sessions. Global W.E.B. Du Bois and the Sociology of Colonialism VAM, Room 6, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Anaheed Al-Hardan, American University of Beirut Presider: Melissa F. Weiner, College of the Holy Cross Panelists: Anaheed Al-Hardan, American University of Beirut; Gurminder K. Bhambra, University of Sussex; Raewyn Connell, University of Sydney; Julian Go, University of Chicago; George Steinmetz, University of Michigan--Ann Arbor 

1508.  Policy and Research Workshop. The Art & Craft of Policy Advocacy: A Researcher's Guide VAM, Room 7, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Wendy Naus, Consortium of the Social Science Associations Leader: Wendy Naus, Consortium of the Social Science Associations 

1509.  Minority Fellowship Program. Violence, Race, and The Body: The Theorizing Police of Violence, Masculinity, and Pharmaceutical Markets VAM, Room 8, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tamara Mose, American Sociological Association Presider: Tony N. Brown, Rice University In Her Place Study: A Black Feminist Approach to Conceptualizing Police Violence - Shannon Malone Gonzalez, The University of Texas at Austin “We Are More Than Misguided Masculinity”: Carceral Violence, Neighborhood Institutions, and Gender Ideologies - Uriel Serrano, University of California, Santa Cruz The Gift that Pays? Paid Plasma Donation in the U.S. - Caty Taborda, University of Minnesota 

1510.  Professional Development Workshop. Elements of Successful Grant Proposals for Research on Inequality VAM, Room 9, 2:30-3:55pm 

Leader: Aixa Alemán-Díaz, Washington Center for Equitable Growth Co-Leader: Korin Davis, Washington Center for Equitable Growth 

1511.  Ideas for Future Research. Social Factors in the Mundanity of Excellence VAM, Room 10, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Daniel F. Chambliss, Hamilton College Social Factors in the Mundanity of Excellence - Daniel F. Chambliss, Hamilton College 

1512.  Section on Sociology of Education. Higher Education VAM, Room 11, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Presider: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University Ambiguous Credentials? The Economic Returns to "Some" College - Christina Ciocca Eller, Harvard University; Natasha Quadlin, University of California-Los Angeles; Ohjae Gowen, Harvard University Changing the Kool Aid: Revising cultural narratives and organizational processes to support low-income, first-generation college students - Becca Spindel Bassett, Harvard University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 23 

Exploring the Association Between Student-College Match and Student Outcomes Over Time - Amanda Cook, Northwestern University Managing Illegality on Campus: Undocumented Mismatch between Students and Staff - Holly E. Reed, CUNY-Queens College; Sofya Aptekar, CUNY - School of Labor and Urban Studies; Amy Hsin, CUNY-Queens College The Financial Stratification of Universities: A Look across 22 Countries - David Zarifa, Nipissing University; Roger Pizarro Milian, University of Toronto; Scott Davies, University of Toronto 

1513.  Section on Sociology of Body and Embodiment. Livable Bodies: Protest, Resistance, and Change VAM, Room 12, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madeleine Pape, University of Lausanne Presider: Renee Marie Shelby, Northwestern University Body Positivity as Fat Activism: Exploring the Relationship Between Two Body-Centered Movements - Rayanne Streeter, Maryville College Everything Seems so Illogical: Constructing Missingness Between Life and Death in Israel - Ori Katz, University of Bath Innerspace and Outerspace: female early career researchers’ resistance tactics in the academic institution - Dounia Bourabain Movement as Politics: Disability Dance and the Politics of Corporeal Aesthetics - Gili Hammer, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem Discussant: Jane Pryma, University of Connecticut 

1514.  Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements. Pandemic-Inspired Social Movements VAM, Room 13, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Phil Brown, Northeastern University; Anjuli Fahlberg, Tufts University Presiders: Phil Brown, Northeastern University; Anjuli Fahlberg, Tufts University Making Masks, Saving Lives: Rage Sewing in Community during the Pandemic - Ruby Spies; Windy Tran, San Francisco State University; Kiyanna Moheit, San Francisco State University; Grace Yoo, San Francisco State University “We, the Hongkongers”: Two-way Diasporic Mobilizations through Imagined Transnational Political Alliance - Chi Pan Wong What do we want? Housing! When do we want it? Now! COVID-19 & Kansas City Tenants - Michelle Hannah Smirnova, University of Missouri-Kansas City; Jordan Ayala, University of Missouri - Kansas City; Clara Irazabal - Zurita “You can’t social distance in prison”: COVID-19, State Violence and the fight for decarceration - Jennifer Elyse James, University of California, San Francisco; Leslie Riddle, University of California, San Francisco 

1515.  Section on International Migration. Children and Youth as Migratory Actors VAM, Room 14, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Chiara Galli, Cornell University Presider: Chiara Galli, Cornell University The Aftermath of Enforcement Episodes for the Children of Immigrants - Joanna Dreby, SUNY-Albany; Eric Macias, University at Albany When Internal Migration Fails: Central American Youths’ Attempts to Relocate Internally Before Leaving Their Countries -Angel Alfonso Escamilla Garcia, Northwestern University Marginal youth mobilities in Europe: towards a spatial-relational approach to resilience and social mobility - Stefano Piemontese, University of Birmingham Discussant: Erin R. Hamilton, University of California-Davis 

1516.  Section on Race, Gender, Class. Intersectionality and Population Health Disparities VAM, Room 15, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Collin William Mueller, University of Maryland-College Park Presider: Collin William Mueller, University of Maryland-College Park The Symbolic Annihilation and Bringing Back in of the Black Female Body to Medical Sociological Discourse - Chenoia Bryant Intersectional Immunity? Examining How Race/Ethnicity and Sexual Orienation For Influenza Vaccination - Kiana Kristine Wilkins, Rice University The Immigrant Paradox in Intersectional Perspective: How do Race, Gender, and Class Influence Latinx Health? - Alex Maldonado Racial Politics, Water Governance and Health Outcomes - Louise Seamster, University of Iowa; Chad Rhym, University of Iowa; Levity Smith The Military, Intersectionality, and Environmental Health: An Analysis of Intersectional Environmental Health Consequences of US Military - Nicholas Theis, University of Oregon; Daniel Shtob, Brooklyn College, City University of New York; Camila Huerta Alvarez, University of California-Merced 

1517.  Section on Global and Transnational Sociology. “The World and Africa” Today: Building on Du Bois’s Pan-Africanist Challenge to Sociology VAM, Room 16, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Luisa Farah Schwartzman, University of Toronto Presider: Luisa Farah Schwartzman, University of Toronto Violation at the Edge of Representation: DuBois and the Roots of Cameroon's Hidden War - Semassa Boko, UC Irvine Remembering and Forgetting the Kongos of Santiago de Cuba -Alexandra Pauline Gelbard, Florida International University Discussant: Alexandre White, Johns Hopkins University 

1518.  Section on Sociology of Development. Environment and Migration: Short Term Shocks, Long Term Crises VAM, Room 17, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Leah K. VanWey, Brown University Presider: Leah K. VanWey, Brown University Becoming a Climate Migrant: Climate Change and Sequential Migration Decision-Making - Brianna Castro, Harvard University Climatic Variability, Gender, and Migration in India - Brian Thiede, Pennsylvania State University; Carolyn Reyes, Pennsylvania State University Gender and Climigration: Investigating Climate Change Impacts on Gendered Migration in Alaska Coastal Communities -Ann R. Tickamyer, Penn State University - University Park; Guangqing Chi, Pennsylvania State University; Jessica Miller, Penn State University 

> Session 1512, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 24 

How Will We Move: Modeling Climate-driven Age-specific Displacement Migration - Mathew Hauer, Florida State University; Sunshine Amy Jacobs, Florida State University Discussant: Leah K. VanWey, Brown University 

1519.  Student Forum. Du Boisian Sociology and Race VAM, Room 18, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Presider: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Consolidation of White Wealth in the Reconstruction Era: The Role of the Development of Educational Institutions - Rachel Catherine Kaufman, Trinity University; Sarah Beth Kaufman, Trinity University Exploring Implications of Restorative Justice for Black Students in New York City Schools - Ixchel Bosworth Migrations and Race in America: The Importance of Occupational Prestige in Moderating Xenophobia - Alonso Aravena, Baylor University; Tamunosaki Triah Ibiesigha Bilaye-Benibo, Baylor University; Steven Foertsch, Baylor University The Temporal Tensions of Asylum Lawyering - Catherine Louise Crooke, UCLA 

1520.  Regular Session. Social Cohesions, Social Divisions VAM, Room 19, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jenny L. Davis, The Australian National University Presider: Amanda J. Brockman, Vanderbilt University Americans' attitudes towards status, forgiveness, and revenge in everyday intergroup conflicts - Stephen Benard, Indiana University-Bloomington Better Together: Third Party Helping is Enhanced When the Decision to Help is Made Jointly - Ashley Harrell, Duke University Can Mind Perception Explain Virtuous Character Judgments of Artificial Intelligence? - Daniel B. Shank, Missouri University of Science and Technology; Mallory North, Missouri University of Science & Technology; Carson Arnold, University of Missouri; Patrick Gamez Free Speech, Hate Speech, and Moral Meanings - Julia Goldman-Hasbun, University of British Columbia Strategic Stigma: A Synthetic Theory of Stigma and Privilege -Jessica Pfaffendorf, North Carolina State University 

1521.  Regular Session. Trust, Perception, and Inequality VAM, Room 20, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ken-Hou Lin, University of Texas at Austin Presider: Jeanne E. Kimpel, Molloy College Acceptance of Income Hierarchies and Unconditional Basic Income in times of Corona - Anja Eder Democratic Transition, Civil Society and Income Inequality, 1991-2016. - SHIH-HAO LIN, National Chengchi University; Thung-Hong Lin, Academia Sinica Generalized Trust, Income Inequality, and Poverty: A Contextual Analysis of U.S. States and Counties - Michael Joseph Upchurch, Texas A&M University Is there an Old Girls network? Girls Schools and Recruitment to the British Elite - Eve Worth; Aaron Reeves; Sam Friedman, London School of Economics Self-interest and income redistribution: Actual self-interest hardly matters but perceived self-interest matters a lot - M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada; Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey 

1522.  Regular Session. Social Dimensions of AIDS VAM, Room 21, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Rachel Sullivan Robinson, American University Presider: Christobel Asiedu, Louisiana Tech University The Stigma System: How sociopolitical domination, scapegoating and stigma shape public health - Samuel R. Friedman, NYU Grossman School of Medicine; Leslie D Williams; Honoria Guarino; Pedro Mateu-Gelabert; Noa Krawczyk; Leah Hamilton; Suzan Walters, New York University; Jerel Michael Ezell, University of Chicago; Maria R Khan; Jorgelina Di Iorio; Lawrence H Yang; Valerie A Earnshaw Long-Acting Trauma: Investigating the Psychosocial Impact of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic on Identity Processes - Michael Patrick Vaughn, Columbia University; Bailey V Hamner, USF Morsani College of Medicine; Muhammad Nuhan Anhaf, Emory College of Arts and Sciences More Than a Sex Talk: Household Characteristics and Risky Sexual Behavior in Southern Africa - David A. Cort, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Kathryn Reynolds, University of Massachusetts; Malcolm A. Cort, Athens State University HIV-related Stigma and Older Adults Living with HIV in South Africa - Danielle Denardo, Soka University of America; Sanyu A. Mojola, Princeton University; Enid J. Schatz, University of Missouri; F. Xavier Gomez Olive, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa Discussant: Rachel Sullivan Robinson, American University 

1523.  Regular Session. Blacks and African Americans VAM, Room 22, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Brandon A. Jackson, Purdue University Presider: Shaonta' E. Allen, Dartmouth College Does Early Life Racial Discrimination Explain a Mental Health Paradox among Black Adults? - Courtney S Thomas Tobin, University of California, Los Angeles; Myles Daniel Moody, University of Kentucky Exploring the Role of John Henryism for Physical and Mental Health Among Black Americans - Millicent N. Robinson, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health; Courtney S Thomas Tobin, University of California, Los Angeles “I want the whole black community to thrive”: Learning Racial Collectivism on College Campuses - Karam Hwang, UNC Chapel Hill The University of California, Berkeley: The Experiences Black and Brown Students with Campus Policing - Kealani Leigh Venable Resilient Black Christianity: Millennials, Movements, and Meaning-Making - Shaonta' E. Allen, Dartmouth College 

1524.  Regular Session. Disability and Collaborative Aspects of Talk, Perception and Interaction VAM, Room 23, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Warfield Rawls, Bentley University Presider: Jason Turowetz, University of Siegen Distributed perception with a guide dog and a robodog - Brian Due, University of Copenhagen When Sighted People Forget - Derek C. Coates, University of California-Berkeley Rule talk: Instructing proper play with impersonal deontic statements - Giovanni Rossi, University of California-Los Angeles; Jörg Zinken, Leibniz-Institute for the German Language; Julia Kaiser, Leibniz-Institute for the German Language; Matylda Weidner, Kazimierz Wielki University; Lorenza Mondada, University of Basel; Marja-Leena Sorjonen, University of Helsinki 

> Session 1518, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 25 

Peer Interaction in an Oral Classroom for Deaf or Hard-of-Hearing Children - Kristella Montiegel, UCLA “Routinizing” in parent-teacher conference interaction: How teachers enact expertise, attenuate advice, and preempt parent resistance - Danielle Pillet-Shore, University of New Hampshire 

1525.  Regular Session. Family and Work VAM, Room 24, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Aliya Hamid Rao, London School of Economics Presider: Aliya Hamid Rao, London School of Economics Does Timing of Fatherhood Matter? Age at Transition to Fatherhood and The Fatherhood Wage Premium - Lisa Carlson, Bowling Green State University; Kei Nomaguchi, Bowling Green State University More Time with the Wife and Kids? Workplace Flexibility Policies and Fathers’ Time with Children - Dana Wray, University of Toronto Parental Exposure to Work Schedule Instability and Child Sleep Quality - Allison Logan, University of California-Berkeley; Daniel J. Schneider, Harvard University We’re Not Competing…We’re in it Together:” Rethinking Marital Power - Jaclyn S. Wong, University of South Carolina-Columbia; Allison Daminger, Harvard University What Justifies Unequal Housework Arrangements? Experimental Evidence from the U.S - Daniela R. Urbina, Princeton University; Daria Tisch, Department of Social Sciences, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Discussant: Richard J. Petts, Ball State University 

1526.  Regular Session. Organizations as Tools in the Emancipatory Project VAM, Room 25, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Melissa Wooten, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Presider: Melissa Wooten, Rutgers University-New Brunswick A Tale of Force: Examining Policy Proposals to Address Police Violence - Kayla A. Preito-Hodge, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Ethnic and Gender Workplace Segregation in Israel: Evidence from a Matched Employer-Employee Dataset for 2000-2015 - Ludmila Garmash, University of Haifa “Get Rid of that Ghetto Element”: Race, Gender, Work Sector and Employers’ Ideal Worker Pursuits - Reginald Anthony Byron, Southwestern University Loose Coupling from the Bottom Up: The case of Graduate Employee Unions - Kathleen Ragon, Oberlin College Discussant: Melissa Victoria Abad, Stanford University 

1527.  Regular Session. Race, Punishment, and Inequality VAM, Room 26, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Heather M. Washington, West Virginia University Presider: Heather M. Washington, West Virginia University Race and the Packing of Punishment: A Instrumental Variables Approach to Extra-Legal Sentencing Effects - Ryan P Larson, University of Minnesota; Christopher Uggen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Robert Austin Stewart, University of Maryland-College Park; Veronica L. Horowitz, University of Minnesota Racial Income Inequality in the American Incarcerated Workforce -Andrew Keefe, Harvard University; Adaner Usmani, Harvard University The Prison Credential Dilemma: How Racial Discrimination and Contradictory Signals Shape Post-Prison Employment -Sadé Lindsay, Cornell University 

1528.  Regular Session. Culture and Narrative VAM, Room 27, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nina Eliasoph, University Southern California Presider: Shannon Rieger, New York University Meaning and Mask-Wearing During the Covid-19 Pandemic -Shannon Rieger, New York University Structures of Meaning in Visual Culture: Insights from Vilnius, Lithuania (1991) - Andreja Siliunas, Harvard University The Social Life of Potholes: a tale of two cities - Sneha Annavarapu, University of Chicago; Jeffrey Nathaniel Parker, University of New Orleans “Those who craft the victory”: narratives of citizenship and social change in wartime Ukraine - Olga Boichak, The University of Sydney; Brian McKernan, Syracuse University 

1529.  Regular Session. New Directions in Disability Research VAM, Room 28, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Robyn Lewis Brown, University of Kentucky Presider: Laura Mauldin, University of Connecticut Ethics and Qualitative Research with People with Intellectual Disabilities: Exploring Emancipatory Properties of Peer Support - Kaitlin Stober, University of Illinois at Chicago Rights to Sufficient and Appropriate Care after Spinal Cord Injury - Anne Bryden, Case Western Reserve University "Ways of the Hand" Approaching reading and writing braille and tactile graphics as a sighted individual - Donald J. Winiecki, Boise State University Discussants: Laura Mauldin, University of Connecticut; ASL Interpreter 

1530.  Regular Session. The Frontiers of Economic Sociology VAM, Room 29, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Frederick F. Wherry, Princeton University Presider: Rourke OBrien, Yale University A Feel for the Game: Economic Dispositions as Micro-Foundations of Economic Inequality - Adam Hayes, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Megan Doherty Bea, University of Wisconsin-Madison Novelty and New Venture Success - Likun Cao; Ziwen Chen, The University of Chicago; James A. Evans, University of Chicago Policy Space and Structural Power of Finance: Post-Crisis Central Banking in South Africa and Turkey - Ayca Zayim, Mount Holyoke College Time and Punishment: How Individuals Respond to Being Sanctioned in Voluntary Associations - Laura Doering, University of Toronto; Amandine Ody-Brasier, Yale School of Management Trust on the Move: Wartime Migration and Informal Exchange Networks - Gozde Guran, Harvard University 

1531.  Regular Session. Queering Social Life: LGBTQ Scenes VAM, Room 30, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Terrell James Antonio Winder, University of California-Santa Barbara Presider: Kendall Ota, University of California, Santa Barbara Doing Diversity in the Queer Mainstream: The Case of QTMuslims in Toronto, Canada - Golshan Golriz, McGill University 

> Session 1524, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 26 

"Floodgates" "at the breaking point": Anomie and Pandemic Endurance among Philadelphian CMSM - Zach Babel, Drexel University; Caroline Voyles; Sofia Argibay, Drexel University; Jason Orne, Drexel University “I am with my child”: Mothers of LGT Children in Turkey and Their Interlocking Transformations - Ecem E Ece, University of Florida "Queer Enough": Queer Encounters in the Pansexual BDSM Scene - Julie Lynn Fennell, Gallaudet University The Exploration of Counterpublics in China: Lalas (Lesbians) Navigating Intimate and Family Lives through Cyberspace -Iris Po Yee Lo, The University of Oxford 

1532.  Regular Session. The New-Normal Politics of Extremism: Judgement, Lies, Conflict, and Trauma VAM, Room 31, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Bethany P. Bryson, James Madison University Presider: Zeynep Atalay, Saint Mary's College of California Asymmetric Identities: Identity-Driven Polarization and Evaluative Schemas - Steven Lauterwasser, University of California, Berkeley Bolsonaro and Trump: COVID-19 Presidents as Collective Trauma across the Americas - Laura Robinson, Santa Clara University Justifying Contentious Social and Political Claims Using Mundane Language: An Analysis of Far Right Extremism - Kayla Preston, University of Toronto Lies, Politics and Education in the 2016 US Election - Michael J. Rosenfeld, Stanford University; Anna Boch, Stanford University Discussant: Zeynep Atalay, Saint Mary's College of California 

1533.  Thematic Sessions. Critical Approaches to Portraying Indigenous Peoples in Social Science Research VAM, Room 32, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Kimberly R. Huyser, University of British Columbia; Desi Small-Rodriguez, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Kimberly R. Huyser, University of British Columbia Panelists: Randal Akee, University of California, Los Angeles; Desi Small-Rodriguez, University of California-Los Angeles; Dwanna L. McKay, Colorado College; Mario Alberto Viveros Espinoza-Kulick, University of California, Santa Barbara 

1534.  Professional Development Workshop. What’s an ASA Community and How Can You Start One? VAM, Room 33, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Margaret Weigers Vitullo, American Sociological Association Leader: Margaret Weigers Vitullo, American Sociological Association Co-Leaders: Aaryn L. Green, American Sociological Association; Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association; Nicole V. Amaya, American Sociological Association; Tamara Mose, American Sociological Association 

1546.  Meeting. Section on Political Economy of the World System Business Meeting VAM, Room 45, 2:30-3:00pm 1567.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Business Meeting VAM, Room 66, 2:30-3:00pm 1568.  Meeting. Section on Medical Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 2:30-3:00pm 1572.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. Roundtable 1: Developing Research Skills VAM, Room 71, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nailah Russell, ASA Table Presider: Katherine R. Rowell, Sinclair Community College Advancing Quantitative Reasoning among First-Generation and Racial/ Ethnic Minority Sociology Students - Matthew E. Archibald, College of Mount Saint Vincent; Omar Nagi, College of Mount Saint Vincent Individual Research Projects: A Quality Capstone Experience - Mel Moore, University of Northern Colorado Introduction to Qualitative Analysis: A Coding Exercise Using the Material Culture of College Students - Jeffrey S. Debies-Carl, University of New Haven Making Methods Manageable: A Semester-Long, Introductory-Level Methods Activity - Ellen Whitehead, Ball State University 

1573.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. Roundtable 2: Teaching Inequality and Social Justice VAM, Room 72, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nailah Russell, ASA Table Presider: Rifat A. Salam, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College Black Lives Matter Here Too: Amplifying Blackness in Research Methods - Edward Watson, University of California - Irvine Reclaiming a Du Boisian Approach to Teaching Racial Justice at Predominantly White Institutions - Timothy D. Levonyan Radloff, East Stroudsburg University Role-playing approaches to teaching privilege and inequality in Introduction to Sociology - Miles Marsala, Palm Beach State College Walking the Line of Poverty: Engaging Students with Emancipatory Sociology at the Community College Level - Shawn Gaulden, Tallahassee Community College; Andrea Arce-Trigatti, Tallahassee Community College 

1574.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. Roundtable 3: COVID-19 and Teaching Through Difficult Times VAM, Room 73, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nailah Russell, ASA Table Presider: Laura Nichols, Santa Clara University Lights, Camera – On or Off? Transferring Trauma-Informed Teaching Practices Online - Bethany Lee Van Brown, Cabrini University; Johanna Crocetto, Cabrini University Sociological Imagination and Compassion Journaling Project -Sue Petrina Nash, St. Mary's University; Janet S. Armitage, St. Mary's University Studying COVID-19 was “Cathartic” and “Cool”: A Scalable Innovative Assessment for the Undergraduate Curriculum -Kevin McCannon, University of Kansas The COVID-19 Research Project created for students with math anxiety. - Vondora Wilson-Corzen, Nassau Community College 

> Session 1531, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 27 1575.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. Roundtable 4: Innovative Pedagogy VAM, Room 74, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nailah Russell, ASA Table Presiders: Nailah Russell, ASA; Vincent R. Anderson, Chandler-Gilbert Community College Writing for the Aha! A Subversive Act of Teaching - Virginia A Brown, Dell Medical School, University of Texas, Austin Assessing the Use of Democratic Pedagogy: Freedom and Structure - Stephanie M Hansard, Birmingham-Southern College Using Gradescope to Streamline Grading, Improve Student Feedback, and Identify Learning Challenges - Tracey A. LaPierre, University of Kansas 

1576.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. Roundtable 5: Advancing Understanding in the Classroom VAM, Room 75, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nailah Russell, ASA Table Presider: Myron T. Strong, Community College of Baltimore County A Solutions-Oriented Approach to Teaching Social Problems - Jennifer Rosen, Solutions Journalism Network; Alane Presswood, Solutions Journalism Network Discussing War and Conflict in a Polarized World - Nana Tuntiya, University of South Florida Finding Home: Community Engaged Learning in First-Year Coursework and International Students’ Sense of Community - Nicole Solanges Malette, University of British Columbia; Katherine Lyon, University of British Columbia Is It Just Me? Mental Health and Institutional Perspectives from a Graduate Writing Consultant - Doreen Hsu, University of California, San Diego 

# Saturday, 3:00 pm 1647.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 1: Reproductive Experiences and Decision-making VAM, Room 46, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Kelsey Quinn Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison "I don’t know how it affects the body:" The relationship between contraception and the anatomical body - Virginia Kuulei Berndt, University of Delaware; Jamie Manzer, University of Delaware; Caleigh Alfarone, University of Delaware; Ann V. Bell, University of Delaware Sentiment among patients seeking abortion care in a Midwestern clinic - Mikaela Smith, The Ohio State University; Jessica Callahan, University of California, Irvine; Payal Chakraborty; Abigail Foster; Hillary Gyuras; Shibani Chettri; Danielle Bessett, University of Cincinnati; Alison Norris, Ohio State University “Safer-at-home": Complexity and Stasis in Childbearing Decision-making during the COVID-19 Quarantine - Kelsey Quinn Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison When Sexual Desire Interrupts the Desire to Avoid Pregnancy: Young Women’s Sexual Behavior and Contraceptive Use -Michelle Eilers, The University of Texas at Austin 

1648.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 2: Health Experiences during Covid-19 VAM, Room 47, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Betina Freidin, University of Buenos Aires Challenges and Strengths of Qualitative Case Studies with Frontline Health Workers during the COVID-19 Pandemic -Betina Freidin, University of Buenos Aires Widespread belief that Governments Created COVID-19 Sharply Reduces Social Distancing: Multivariate Analysis of National Surveys - Sarah Kelley, Child Trends; M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada; Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey Social Roles, Household Income Loss, and Mental Health: Ethnoracial Contrasts during COVID-19 - Ryan D. Talbert, University of Connecticut; Brittany Nicole Hearne, University of Arkansas 

1649.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 3: Medical Education VAM, Room 48, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Lauren D. Olsen, Temple University Gender and Inconsistency in Performance Evaluations: A Mixed Methods Analysis of Feedback for EM Residents - Alexandra E. Brewer, Wake Forest University; Laura K. Nelson, Northeastern University; Rebecca Ewert, University of Chicago; Anna S. Mueller, Indiana University Rejection and Reproduction of Status Hierarchies in Medical Education - Grace Franklyn, University of North Carolina -Chapel HIll “What are you signing up for?”: Professional Socialization of Pre-Medical Students During the COVID-19 Pandemic - Jenny Karla Leigh, New York University Tolerance for Ambiguity as Racial Stress in the U.S. Medical Profession - Hana Gebremariam; Lauren D. Olsen, Temple University 

1650.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 4: Race, Racism, and Health VAM, Room 49, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Kushan Dasgupta, University of California-Los Angeles Lethal Police Encounters and Cardiovascular Health among Black Americans - Ryan D. Talbert, University of Connecticut The Intergenerational Effects of Police Stops on Mastery - Meagan Rainock, Vanderbilt University Perceived Discrimination and Sleep Problems: A Longitudinal Perspective - Kiwoong Park, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque; Jinho Kim, Korea University The Sidedoor to Eugenics? White Nationalist Appropriations of Health Disparities Research - Kushan Dasgupta, University of California-Los Angeles; Aaron Panofsky, University of California-Los Angeles; Nicole Iturriaga, Max Planck Institute SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 28 1651.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 5: Provider Experiences VAM, Room 50, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Amy Irby-Shasanmi, Indiana University Purdue University-Indianapolis What About Nurses? The Missing “Providers” in Provider-level Influence on Quality of Care - Amy Irby-Shasanmi, Indiana University Purdue University-Indianapolis Temporal typifications as an organizational resource: sixth sense and moral evaluation at the Emergency Department -Marius Wamsiedel, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University The Effects of Computerized Medical Records and Ease on Nurse Practitioners Perceptions of Job Satisfaction - Jeff Scott Shelton, Wayne State College 

1652.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 6: Political Economy of Health VAM, Room 51, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Hannah Troxel, Rutgers University For-Profit Hospitals Adopt a Unique Approach as Anchor Institutions - Berkeley Franz, Ohio University; Kelly Choyke; Cory Cronin, Ohio University; Vanessa Rodriguez “Good Doctors” versus “Obesity Quacks:” Boundary Work and Pharmaceutical Corruption During the Obesity Specialist Controversy - Hannah Troxel, Rutgers University Small Wins and Punctuated Equilibria: COVID-19 Illustrates How Challenging Occupational Groups Pursue Professional Autonomy - Clayton Thomas, Indiana University; Scott Feyereisen, Florida Atlantic University; William R McConnell, Florida Atlantic University; Neeraj Puro, Florida Atlantic University “Not a Free Version of a Broken System:” Immigrant Healthcare Beyond a Charity Model - Erin Hoekstra, Marquette University 

1653.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 7: Exploring Stigma in Health VAM, Room 52, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Bianca Manago, Vanderbilt University Using Causal Inference Methods to Determine the Effect of Mental Illness Labels on Stigma - Bianca Manago, Vanderbilt University; Trenton D. Mize, Purdue University Talk It Out: Mental Health Discussion as a Mechanism of Stigma Reduction - Megan Elizabeth Bolton, Indiana University Cultural (In)Competency in Rural Sexual Minority Health - Brandi Woodell, Old Dominion University 

1654.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 8: Social Support and Kinship Ties VAM, Room 53, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Tessa M. Nápoles, University of California, San Francisco The Critical Role of Nameless Ties for Individuals Experiencing Illness and Social Marginalization - Tessa M. Nápoles, University of California, San Francisco; Emily A. Ekl, Indiana University; Jeff Nicklas; Laura Gomez-Pathak, University of Calfornia, Berkeley; Irene Yen; Dani Carrillo, University of California, San Francisco; Kathleen de Leon; Nancy Burke; Brea Louise Perry, Indiana University-Bloomington; Janet K. Shim, University of California-San Francisco Social Support in the Urban Safety Net: Assessing Functional Specificity for Individuals with Complex Care Needs -Emily A. Ekl, Indiana University; Dani Carrillo, University of California, San Francisco; Tessa M Nápoles, University of California, San Francisco; Jeff Nicklas; Irene Yen; Nancy Burke; Laura Gomez-Pathak, University of Calfornia, Berkeley; Janet K. Shim, University of California-San Francisco; Brea Louise Perry, Indiana University-Bloomington The Effects of Marital Quality and Non-Marital Ties on the Transmission of Health-Benefiting Support - Nicole Lehpamer, MSU To Make and Keep Friends: Physical Health in Adolescent Network Formation and Persistence - Molly Copeland, Michigan State University; Christina Kamis, Duke University; Jessica West, Duke University 

1655.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 9: Mental Health in Social Context VAM, Room 54, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Alexis Dennis, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Assessing the Contributions of Stress and Coping to Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Mental Health - Alexis Dennis, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Mental Health of Men and Women in Married, Cohabiting, and Living Apart Together Relationships - Deniz Yucel, William Paterson University; Beth A. Latshaw Psychedelic Healing Rituals and Social Integration: (Re) negotiating Distress and the Recovery Process Collectively -Jarrett Robert Rose Chronic Strain, Gendered Coping, and Mental Health Outcomes Among Emerging Adults in a Rural Context - Deirdre LaSelva; Karen T. Van Gundy, University of New Hampshire 

1656.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 10: Social Construction of Bodies and Health VAM, Room 55, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Jessica Polos, Northwestern University Consequences of BMI Guidelines for Mothers and Infants: Structural Discrimination or Beneficial Treatments? - Jessica Polos, Northwestern University Adolescent Facial Attractiveness and Later-Life Morbidity and Mortality - Rob Warren, University of Minnesota; Gina Maria Rumore Double Jeopardy: Pathways of Objective and Subjective Weight Status throughout the Life Course and Adult Health - Iliya Gutin, The University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Acute and Chronic Sport Injuries as Forms of Biographical Disruption - Kaitlin Pericak 

1657.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 11: Sexual Health VAM, Room 56, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Eric Stone, University of Maryland, College Park Persuasion Nation? Government Speech and HIV Prevention in the U.S. - Mark Wolfson, University of California-Riverside Predictors of PrEP Awareness: Examining Intersections of Gender, Race/Ethnicity, and Sexual Identity - Eric Stone, SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 29 

University of Maryland, College Park Risk, Relationships, and Refusal: How Relational Concerns Shape Personal Assessments of Risk and Mitigation - Anthony Urena, Princeton University 

1658.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 12: Intersectionality & Inequity VAM, Room 57, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Wenyi Yang Intersecting Upstream Factors: Inequities in Cervical Cancer Screening in Malawi - Neema Langa, University of Nevada, Las Vegas; Tirth Raj Bhatta, University of Nevada, Las Vegas When Education Isn't Enough: Knowledge about In-Vitro Fertilization among Highly-Educated Black and White Women - Katherine Tierney, Western Michigan University “I Got a Lot of Closed Doors”: The Intersectional Veil of Health Service Inequities - Jennifer S. Singh, Georgia Institute of Technology 

1659.  Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 13: Social Determinants of Health VAM, Room 58, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon Table Presider: Anna Chatillon, University of California, Santa Barbara Social Determinants of Health as Loneliness Predictors: A Study of Emergency Department Patients in Southwestern Pennsylvania - Marie Skoczylas, University of Pittsburgh Social inequalities in healthcare trajectories following diagnosis of diabetes in Canada - Rachel McKay, McGill University; Laurence Letarte; Alexandre Lebel, Universite Laval; Amelie Quesnel-Vallee, McGill University Does Education Matter? The Gendered Effect of Education on Health in South Korea - Yujin Kim, Kangwon National University; Hyeyoung Woo, Portland State University 

1660.  Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables. Consumption and Inequality VAM, Room 59, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Table Presider: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Alligator Economics: How Hidden Inflation is Driving Inequality and Impoverishing American Households - Diana M. Pearce, University of Washington Beyond the pink-tax: Gender-based pricing and branding of personal are products - Stephanie Gonzalez Guittar, Rollins College; Elizabeth Grauerholz, University of Central Florida; Erin N. Kidder, University of Central Florida; Shameika Daye; Megan McLaughlin 

1661.  Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables. Consumption and Urban Change VAM, Room 60, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Table Presider: Krista E. Paulsen, Boise State University The Hipster Gentrifiers: How Customers of an Independent Coffeeshop Justify Neighborhood Change - Erin Jane Davenport, UNC-Chapel Hill The Trouble with Transience: Short-Term Rentals as a Challenge to Neighboring Practices - Krista E. Paulsen, Boise State University 

1662.  Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables. Global/Political Consumerism VAM, Room 61, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Table Presider: Joel P. Stillerman, Grand Valley State University Political Consumerism in Online Communities: The Cases of K-pop and the NBA - Yung-Ying Chang Political, Religious, Cohort and Class Influences on Cultural Consumption among Middle Class Chileans - Joel P. Stillerman, Grand Valley State University 

1663.  Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables. Mentor workshop: Developing a Research Question and Project VAM, Room 62, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Table Presider: Laura J. Miller, Brandeis University 

1664.  Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables. Mentor Workshop: From Dissertation To Book Proposal VAM, Room 63, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Table Presiders: Cassi L. Pittman Claytor, Case Western Reserve University; Clayton Childress, University of Toronto 

1666. Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables. Mentor workshop: R&Rs from an editor's perspective VAM, Room 65, 3:05-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kenneth H. Kolb, Furman University Table Presider: Richard E. Ocejo, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY 

1669.  Political Economy of the World System Refereed Roundtables. Table 1. World-Systems Analysis in a Critical Juncture VAM, Room 68, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Lu Zhang, Temple University Table Presider: Sahan Savas Karatasli, University of North Carolina at Greensboro World Revolutions and the Evolution of World-Systems” -Christopher Chase-Dunn, University of California-Riverside; Hiroko Inoue, University of California, Riverside Where do alternative fuels displace fossil fuels? A multilevel model approach - Amanda Lynn Sikirica, University of Oregon A Tale of Two Cities, Hong Kong, Shanghai and the Global City Hypothesis - Benjamin Leffel, University of California-Merced; David A. Smith, University of California-Irvine A Preferred method for big power competitive extensions of aid to the Global South, buying bonds; - David (Jed) D. Schwartz 

1670.  Political Economy of the World System Refereed Roundtables. Table 2. Commodity Chains, Labor, and Financialization VAM, Room 69, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Lu Zhang, Temple University Table Presider: Bill Winders, Georgia Institute of Technology Soursweet: Sugar in the Industrial Revolution - Daniel de Deus Cunha, Binghamton University Cold Chains, Ghost Kitchens, Geographies Of Work - Jacob Rosette Who Owns the Means of Production? Financialization as a Regime of Property Relations - Albina Gibadullina, University of British Columbia 

> Session 1657, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 30 1671.  Political Economy of the World System Refereed Roundtables. Table 3. State and Development, Revisited VAM, Room 70, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Lu Zhang, Temple University Table Presider: Lu Zhang, Temple University Pragmatic Statism: Marketization, Vulnerability, and China’s Economic Statism since the Early 2000s - Mingtang Liu, Johns Hopkins University The role of experts and development in developmental state -Kyunghwan Lee, University of Southern California Development via Return Migration: Chinese Transnational Professionals in the IT Industry - Xian Qu, University of Virginia 

# Saturday, 4:15 pm 1702.  Book Forum. Flatlining: Race, Work, and Health Care in the New Economy VAM, Room 1, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Vincent J. Roscigno, Ohio State University Moderator: Vincent J. Roscigno, Ohio State University Panelists: Ellen Berrey, University of Toronto; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa; Melissa Wooten, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Author: Adia M. Harvey Wingfield, Washington University-St. Louis 

1703.  Special Sessions. ASA Rose Series presents The Company We Keep: Interracial Friendships and Romantic Relationships from Adolescence to Adulthood VAM, Room 2, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Leslie S. Paik, CUNY-City College Presider: Gregory Smithsimon, CUNY-Brooklyn College Panelists: Grace Kao, Yale University; Kara Joyner, University of Texas at San Antonio; Kelly Balistreri, Bowling Green State University; France Winddance Twine, University of California, Santa Barbara; Korie L. Edwards, Ohio State University; Milton D. Vickerman, University of Virginia 

1704.  Special Sessions. Listen to Black Voices: Black Maternal and Infant Health Equity VAM, Room 3, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Serwaa Omowale, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Reiko Boyd, University of Houston Panelists: Dara Mendez, University of Pittsburgh; Abisola Olaniyan, University of Pittsburgh; Serwaa Omowale, University of Pittsburgh 

1705.  Regional Spotlight Session. Current Struggles for Educational Equity/Justice in Chicago: Research and Activism VAM, Room 4, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Amanda Evelyn Lewis, University of Illinois-Chicago; Celeste M. Watkins-Hayes, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Presiders: Amanda Evelyn Lewis, University of Illinois-Chicago; Celeste M. Watkins-Hayes, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Panelists: Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago; Katherine Phillippo, Loyola University-Chicago; David Stovall, University of Illinois at Chicago; Yana Kunichoff, Chalkbeat Chicago 

1706.  Thematic Sessions. Celebrating 75 years of Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern City VAM, Room 5, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Presider: Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Panelists: Joyce Ann Ladner, Brookings Institution; Mary E. Pattillo, Northwestern University; Lawrence D. Bobo, Harvard University; Robert L. Boyd, Mississippi State University 

1707.  Thematic Sessions. (How) Should Sociology Solve Problems? VAM, Room 6, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Monica Prasad, Northwestern University Presider: Monica Prasad, Northwestern University Panelists: Fred Block, University of California-Davis; John Levi Martin, University of Chicago; Isaac Ariail Reed, University of Virginia; Marina Zaloznaya, University of Iowa 

1708.  Ideas for Future Research. African Immigrants in the United States VAM, Room 7, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presiders: Chinyere Osuji, Rutgers University-Camden; Amon S. Emeka, Skidmore College; Onoso Ikphemi Imoagene, New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) African Immigrants in the United States - Chinyere Osuji, Rutgers University-Camden; Amon S. Emeka, Skidmore College; Onoso Ikphemi Imoagene, New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) 

1709.  Teaching and Learning Symposium. Teaching & Learning Symposium: Lightning Presentations of Teaching Techniques VAM, Room 8, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Nailah Russell, ASA Presider: Sarah Hoiland, CUNY Hostos Community College Assisting Students with Post-Grad Preparation: Professionalization Tools & Assignments - Cara A. Chiaraluce, Santa Clara University Beyond Discomfort: Strategies to Engage Students about Race -Simranjit Khalsa, University of Memphis Designed for Digital Engagement: Lessons Learned from All-Online Teaching - Erin Jane Davenport, UNC-Chapel Hill Emancipatory Classrooms: Teaching for Justice Within and Beyond Our Courses - Sarah Pollock, Texas A&M University-San Antonio Engaging Citizen Scientist Learners: Training and Fostering Community Relationships Beyond the Medical School -Virginia A Brown, Dell Medical School, University of Texas, Austin; Billy Table, Dell Medical School UT Texas at Austin; Christine Thomas, Dell Medical School UT Texas at Austin Making Community College More Affordable – Adopting Open Educational Resources (OER) - Sarah Earl-Novell, Chabot College Monsters, Michael Myers, and the Macabre as Tools to Explain Ideological Framing - Justin Huft, California State University-Fullerton Sickening Case Studies: A Structured Writing Assignment to Analyse Racism and Health Disparities - Anne Pollock, King's College London The Country Data Project: Using International Available Data in Introductory Courses - Bridget A. Conlon Mayfield, St. Cloud State University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 31 

The Criminology Streaming Guide: Using Netflix to teach criminological theory - Jennifer L. Steele, Ohio University-Lancaster The Pedagogy of the Job Guarantee - Jakob Feinig, SUNY-Binghamton; Chandiren Valayden, Binghamton University Unlocking the Sociological Imagination to Promote Emancipatory Sociology - Jacob Kelley, Auburn University; Ada Haynes, Tennessee Technological University; Andrea Arce-Trigatti, Tallahassee Community College 

1710.  Professional Development Workshop. Expert Testimony in Deportation Defense or Asylum Cases: Understanding the Process and Putting Your Sociological Skills to Use VAM, Room 9, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Robert Courtney Smith, CUNY-Baruch College Leader: Cecilia Menjivar, University of California-Los Angeles 

1711.  Ideas for Future Research. The Interrelation of Emotions and Institutional Settings in Advancing Social Movements VAM, Room 10, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Minyoung Kim, University of California, Irvine The Interrelation of Emotions and Institutional Settings in Advancing Social Movements - Minyoung Kim, University of California, Irvine 

1712.  Section on Sociology of Education. Section on Sociology of Education. Race/Ethnicity and School District Policy VAM, Room 11, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Presider: Alexis Carrion, Temple University Feeling Vibes and Building Bonds: Student-Teacher Trust from the Perspectives of Black Youth - Brittany Nicole Fox-Williams, CUNY-Lehman College “I just didn’t want to risk it.”: How Perceptions of Risk Motivate Latinx Charter School Choice - Julia Colleen Campbell Szabo, Rice University School Closures and the Gentrification of the Black Metropolis - Francis Pearman, Stanford University; Danielle Greene, Stanford University The Demographics of School District Secession - Alexandra C Cooperstock, Cornell University The Politics of School Rezoning: Race, Settler Colonialism, and Private Property - Jennifer Bickham Mendez, College of William and Mary; Amy Adams Quark, College of William and Mary; Kayla Aaron 

1713.  Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements. Male Supremacism and Right-Wing Movements VAM, Room 12, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emily Kiyoko Carian, California State University-San Bernardino Presider: Emily Kiyoko Carian, California State University-San Bernardino To Dream of Being Chad: Selective In-group Favoritism in the Reddit Manosphere - Katherine Furl, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill "White Women Prefer White Men": Race and Gender on r/Incels -Rina Lynne James, The University of Arizona Feminist Retroviruses to White Sharia: 'Scientific' Theorization of Gender on 4Chan - Nicole Iturriaga, Max Planck Institute; Aaron Panofsky, University of California-Los Angeles; Kushan Dasgupta, University of California-Los Angeles Getting Consent in Sweden: Contestation over Sexual Violence and the Law - Caitlin P. Carroll, University of Texas at Austin Based White Family Men in the Northwest: Far Right Migrations and Masculinity on 4chan - Miriam J. Abelson, Portland State University; Bobbi Zaman, Portland State University 

1714.  Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology. Open Paper Session on Media Sociology VAM, Room 13, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Francesca Tripodi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Presider: Francesca Tripodi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Advocacy Organizations, Narratives, and Marijuana Discourse in Black Newspapers - Burrel James Vann, San Diego State University Assigning Punishment: Reader Responses to Crime News - Kat Albrecht, Northwestern University; Janice Nadler Filtering the Filtered about the Armenian Genocide: News Media on Legal, Political, and Commemorative Field Events - Miray Hany Wadie Philips, University of Minnesota; Joachim J. Savelsberg, University of Minnesota From the “Magna Carta” to “Dying in the Streets”: Framing Mental Health Law in California - Alexander Vosick Barnard, New York University "The Looming, Crazy Stalker Coronavirus": Fear-mongering, Fake News and Media Burnout in New York City - Alexandrea J. Ravenelle, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Abigail Newell, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 

1715.  Section on Medical Sociology. Qualitative and Ethnographic Studies of Health and Health Care VAM, Room 14, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Danielle Raudenbush, University of California-San Diego Presider: Danielle Raudenbush, University of California-San Diego Capturing Patients, Missing Inequities: Data Reporting on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity across Unequal Clinical Contexts - Taylor M. Cruz, California State University-Fullerton; Emily Allen Paine, Columbia University "His voice carries further than mine”: Healthcare providers mobilizing their cultural and social health capital - Dani Carrillo, University of California, San Francisco; Jeff Nicklas; Tessa M Nápoles, University of California, San Francisco; Emily A. Ekl, Indiana University; Brea Louise Perry, Indiana University-Bloomington; Janet K. Shim, University of California-San Francisco Making Death Acceptable: Personalized Care and the Authoritativeness of Hospice Profesionals - Megan Russ, Michigan State University; Daniel A. Menchik, University of Arizona Minimizing race through colorblind healthcare: Examining Black women’s experiences of medical racism during prenatal care - Kayonne Christy, The University of British Columbia 

1716.  Section on Political Economy of the World System. COVID-19 and the Capitalist World-System VAM, Room 15, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Christopher Chase-Dunn, University of California-Riverside; William I Robinson, University of 

> Session 1709, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 32 

California at Santa Barbara Presider: Valentine M. Moghadam, Northeastern University Beyond a Hot American Summer - Zhandarka Kurti, University of Tennessee-Knoxville; Jarrod Shanahan, Governors State University Global Capitalism Post-Pandemic - William I Robinson, University of California at Santa Barbara The Unexpected Reckoning: Coronavirus and Capitalism - Radhika Desai, University of Manitoba Discussants: Andrej Grubacic, California Institute of Integral Studies; Christopher Chase-Dunn, University of California-Riverside 

1717.  Section on Sociology of Culture. New Perspectives in Sociology of Art and Music: BIPOC Artists and Creative Agency VAM, Room 16, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Patricia A. Banks, Mount Holyoke College Presider: Fiona Greenland, University of Virginia Be weary: Racialized emotional labour in creative careers - Kim de Laat, Brock University; Alanna Stuart, Independent scholar Can the Micro and Macro Reconcile? Giving Meaning to Diversity in the Curatorial Process - Tania R. Aparicio, New School for Social Research Engaging Organizational Stakeholders in Cultural Equity: DEI Grantmaking Practices of U. S. Local Arts Agencies - Daniel B. Cornfield, Vanderbilt University; Rachel G. McKane, Vanderbilt University; Meagan Rainock, Vanderbilt University; Hannah Ingersoll; Tulasi Iyengar, Vanderbilt University Where do Geniuses Come From? The Dialectical Relationship Between Social Status and Artistic Insight - Rebecca Jean Emigh, University of California-Los Angeles; Johanna Hernandez Perez, Department of Sociology, UCLA 

1718.  Section on Sociology of Development. Food as Struggle, Food as Resistance VAM, Room 17, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sarah Bowen, North Carolina State University Presider: Marie Sarita Gaytan, University of Utah Cycles of Colonization and Food Apartheid: Black Food Geographies on the Virginia Peninsula - Travis T. Harris, The International Black Freedom Alliance; Amy Adams Quark, College of William and Mary; Amber Bowman, William & Mary; Morgan Pincombe, William & Mary La gota que derramó el vaso: struggles of food processing workers during the COVID-19 pandemic - Lola Loustaunau, University of Oregon Namuth Vellame: Ensuring food sovereignty through the revival of indigenous agriculture in Attappadi, India - Silpa Satheesh, Azim Premji University; Jayakumar C, Thanal Trust; Bharathan Ashok P, Thanal; K. Amrutha Vineeth, Thanal Violence in Global Value Chain Governance: Producing Social Hierarchies and Value for Palm Oil Corporations - Angela Serrano Zapata, University of Wisconsin-Madison Worksites as sacrifice zones: Industry concentration and structural precarity in U.S. meatpacking - Annabel Ipsen, Colorado State University; Ian Robert Carrillo, University of Oklahoma 

1719.  Theory Section. Lewis A. Coser Lecture and Salon VAM, Room 18, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Simone Polillo, University of Virginia Presiders: Claudio Ezequiel Benzecry, Northwestern University; Simone Polillo, University of Virginia Panelist: Kimberly Kay Hoang, University of Chicago 

1720.  Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology. Harnessing Student Agency in the Classroom through Student-Centered Teaching VAM, Room 19, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Michel Estefan, University of California-San Diego Presiders: Vondora Wilson-Corzen, Nassau Community College; Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Michel Estefan, University of California-San Diego Leaving the Lectures Behind: Using Community-Engaged Learning in Research Methods Classes to Teach Sustainability - Gina Marie McCrackin, Utah State University; Mehmet Soyer, Utah State University; Jessica Schad, Utah State University; Jennifer E. Givens, Utah State University; Vonda Jump, Utah State University New Majors' Success: Providing Students Options and Agency through an Asynchronous Course Design - Kevin Lamarr James, University of Illinois-Chicago Social Justice and Social Change: A Collaborative Course Design - Alecia D Anderson, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Maria Bourek, University of Nebraska Omaha Using Student-centered Learning to Disrupt the School to Military to Prison Pipeline - Sandra Lee Trappen, Graduate Center, City University of New York 

1721.  Section on Sociology of Emotions. Emotions and Inequality VAM, Room 20, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Trenton D. Mize, Purdue University Presider: Trenton D. Mize, Purdue University Blocked Goals and Cracked Mirrors: Strain, Inauthenticity, and Violence - Kait M. Boyle, University of South Carolina-Columbia; Kimberly Brooke Rogers, Dartmouth College; Maria Nicole Scaptura, Virginia Tech Connective Labor as Emotional Vocabulary: Inequality, Mutuality and the Politics of Feelings in Care-Work - Allison Pugh, University of Virginia (Not) Feeing the Past: Boredom as a Racialized Emotion - Chana Teeger, London School of Economics The “Shitty Human Being” Test: Transcendent Empathy Path Mapping and Wall Scaling Through Moral Principles - Adam Kotanko, Purdue University The Visceral Economy: Market Othering and Economic Marginalization in Postsocialism - Nina Bandelj, University of California-Irvine 

1722.  Regular Session. Social Processes, Aging, and Health VAM, Room 21, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Christy LaShaun Erving, Vanderbilt University Presider: David Russell, Appalachian State University The Role of Immigration Policy and Enforcement in Shaping Spatial and Age Patterns of Health Inequality - Courtney E. Boen, University of Pennsylvania; Nick Graetz, University of Pennsylvania; Morgan Peele; Atheendar Venkataramani, University of Pennsylvania; Robin Ortiz Personal and Parental Education: Sources of Resilience and 

> Session 1716, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 33 

Health at Midlife - Tyler Bruefach, Florida State University; Dawn Celeste Carr, Florida State University; John Reynolds, Florida State University; Miles G. Taylor, Florida State University Social Networks and Cognitive Function: An Evaluation of Social Bridging and Bonding Mechanisms - Brea Louise Perry, Indiana University-Bloomington; William R McConnell, Florida Atlantic University; Siyun Peng, Indiana University; Adam Roth, Indiana University-Bloomington; Max Elliott Coleman, Indiana University Bloomington; Mohit Manchella, Indiana University; Meghann Roessler, Indiana University Neighborhood Context, Network Ties, and Mental Health in Later Life - Zhonghao Wang, Cornell University; Erin York Cornwell, Cornell University 

1723.  Regular Session. Youth and their Experiences Across Institutions. VAM, Room 22, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jerry Flores, University of Toronto Presider: Jerry Flores, University of Toronto Criminalizing Childhood: The Politics of Violence at Delhi's Urban Margins - Ragini Saira Malhotra, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Journeying Through (In)justice: Black Girl Self-Makings through Movement - Jomaira Salas Pujols, Rutgers University Straddling, Striving, and Thriving: The Street-Oriented Hope Continuum - Trevor Ray Auldridge Reveles, University of California Santa Barbara; Victor M. Rios, University of California-Santa Barbara Strategies of Survival: Creating Spaces of Belonging - Liliana V. Rodriguez, Texas A&M University-Kingsville The changing juvenile criminal justice system in Latin America. A sociological appraisal - Arturo Alvarado, El Colegio de México 

1724.  Regular Session. Navigating Agency and Constraint through Ethnography VAM, Room 23, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Theo Greene, Bowdoin College Presider: Theo Greene, Bowdoin College Investing in Compassion Capital to Advance Patient-Physician Interactions - Janet S. Armitage, St. Mary's University; Sue Petrina Nash, St. Mary's University; Joshua T Hanson Negotiating the Housing Crisis: Legal Expertise and Case Outcomes in Eviction Settlement Negotiations - Kyle Nelson, UCLA Motivation and Meaning Making in Recreational and Semi-professional Burlesque - Nicole M Oehmen, Carolina University Tales from the (Disrupted) Field: Contemplating Interruptions, Disruptions, and Ethnography in the Midst of Global Pandemic - Ann Gavin Ward, Brandeis; Samantha Leonard, Brandeis University The Daily Struggle: How Immigrants Secure Insecure Work at Informal Hiring Sites. - Erick Samayoa, Rice University 

1725.  Regular Session. Energy and Climate Change Politics, Policies, and Impacts VAM, Room 24, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: David Pellow, UC Santa Barbara Presider: David Pellow, UC Santa Barbara A Power Structure Analysis of Dirty Energy: Energy Industrial Complexes in Japan and the US - Michael Dreiling, University of Oregon; Yvonne Alexandra Braun, University of Oregon Divergent Residential Pathways: How Neighborhood Inequalities Are Shaping Implementation of Managed Retreat Policy - James R. Elliott, Rice University; Kevin Loughran, Rice University; Phylicia Xin Yi Lee Brown, Rice University A Green Team in the Global South: Costa Rica’s Political Elites and Climate Mitigation Policies - Julia Flagg, Connecticut College Who Pays for Policy? Interest Groups and the Design of Climate and Renewable Energy Policies - Joshua A. Basseches, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor 

1726.  Regular Session. Regular Session on Community VAM, Room 25, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Orly Clerge, Tufts University Presider: Orly Clerge, Tufts University Ethnography of Natural Disaster in an Urban Setting: Fire Recovery Efforts in Valparaiso, Chile - Ivana Mellers, CUNY Graduate Center Explaining Omnivorous Neighborhood Taste: Neighborhood Perceptions and Preferences of Young White Elites - Hesu Yoon, Stanford University Racial/Ethnic and Family Group Perceptions of Neighborhood Social Cohesion and Social Control - Colleen Elizabeth Wynn, University of Indianapolis W. E. B. Du Bois and Communities: Stars and Veils - Lynn England, Utah Valley University 

1727.  Regular Session. New Directions in Cross-National Sociology VAM, Room 26, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Stephanie L. Mudge, University of California-Davis Presider: Stephanie L. Mudge, University of California-Davis Causes of Prejudice: How national and cultural climate of contextual prejudice influences individual attitudes toward outgroups. - Catherine High, University of Nevada, Reno Cross-Level Effects of Union Membership and Density on Depression in Europe - Megan M. Reynolds, University of Utah; Veerle Buffel, University of Antwerp Latin American Migration and Du Boisian Double Consciousness -Patrick Clemens, Texas Tech University Social Capital, Trust, and Attitudes towards WHO and Vaccination: A Cross-National Perspective - Kit Man, Boston University 

1728.  Regular Session. Regular Session: Culture and Identity (Panel 2) VAM, Room 27, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Freeden Blume Oeur, Tufts University Presider: Laura Garbes, Brown University Examining the Micro-Level Interactional Dynamics that Sustain Vaccine Skepticism - Colin Bernatzky, University of California - Irvine Is Cuisine Art? How Chefs and Critics Define Art and Craft in American Fine Dining - Gillian Gualtieri, Vanderbilt University ‘Stay Sexy and Don’t Get Murdered:’ Whiteness and Femininity in the Consumption of True Crime - Heather Mooney, Boston University The Culture Conundrum: The Politics of Schooling Black Caribbean Youth in London and New York City - Derron Wallace, Brandeis University Discussant: Laura Garbes, Brown University 

> Session 1722, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 34 1729.  Regular Session. The Economics of Empowerment VAM, Room 28, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Robyn Lewis Brown, University of Kentucky Presider: Robyn Lewis Brown, University of Kentucky Disabled Children are Not a Burden: Exploring Childhood Disability, Family Socioeconomic Status, and Maternal Well-Being - Laurin Elizabeth Bixby, University of Pennsylvania Flexibility or Insecurity? Disability and Health in the Gig Economy - Katherine Hill, University of Texas From Shelter to Emancipation: How Disabled Workers Found Their Own Voice Through Identity Work - Patricia Helena Hein, EBS Universität für Wirtschaft und Recht; Shaz Ansari, University of Cambridge Acute stressors associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and mental health outcomes: Considerations from the Intermountain West - Gabriele Ciciurkaite, Utah State University; Guadalupe Marquez-Velarde, Utah State University; Robyn Lewis Brown, University of Kentucky Discussant: ASL Interpreter 

1730.  Regular Session. Feminist Theory and Epistemology VAM, Room 29, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Shantel Gabrieal Buggs, Florida State University Presider: Piper Sledge, Bryn Mawr College Reimagining the Potential of Feminist Epistemologies in Science: Epistemic Achievements, Social Structure, and Diversity -Piper Sledge, Bryn Mawr College; Collin Rice, Bryn Mawr College Smithing Queer Empiricism: Engaging Ethnomethodology for a Queer Social Science - S L. Crawley, University of South Florida; MC Whitlock, Georgia Southwestern State Uni; Jennifer Earles, Frostburg State University The Case for Species in Feminist Sociology - Katja M. Guenther, University of California-Riverside Discussant: Blu Buchanan, University of California, Davis 

1731.  Presidential Panel. Honoring the Life and Legacy of William Gamson VAM, Room 30, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: David S. Meyer, University of California-Irvine Presider: David S. Meyer, University of California-Irvine Panelists: Richard Flacks, University of California, Santa Barbara; William D. Hoynes, Vassar College; Charlotte M. Ryan, University of Massachusetts Lowell; Eitan Y. Alimi, The Hebrew University; Adria D. Goodson, Hunt Alternatives Fund; Michelle I. Gawerc, Loyola University Maryland William A. Gamson, 85th president of the American Sociological Association, died in March. In a prolific and influential career, Gamson reoriented the ways scholars think about social movements and media. This panel honors his contributions to Sociology. 

1732. Regular Session. Who Counts? Politicizing Peoples in Cuba, Turkey, Mexico, and Europe VAM, Room 31, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Bethany P. Bryson, James Madison University Presider: Besnik Pula, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Articulating the Pueblo Cubano: Women's Politicization and Productivity in Revolutionary Cuba, 1959 to 1969 - Jennifer Elise Triplett, University of Michigan Beyond Marginalization and Co-Optation: Civil Society Actors under Neoauthoritarianism - Zeynep Atalay, Saint Mary's College of California Census Making as an Interstitial Political Field: Categorizing and Counting the Afromexican Population (1994-2015) - Juan D. Delgado, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) The Origins of the Populist Surge - Sang Kyung Lee, Cornell University Discussant: Besnik Pula, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 

1733.  Presidential Panel. Youth Protest Leaders Speak VAM, Room 32, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Barbara Ransby, University of Illinois Chicago Presider: Jean Beaman, University of California-Santa Barbara Panelists: Charlene Carruthers, Black Youth Project 100; Aislinn Pulley, Black Lives Matter Chicago; Richard Wallace, Soros Fellow, Equity and Transformation, Movement for Black Lives 

1770.  Meeting. Section on International Migration Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 4:15-4:45pm 1771.  Meeting. Section on Race, Gender, and Class Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 4:15-4:45pm Saturday, 4:45 pm 1847.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 1. The Immigrant Generation: Experiences and Outcomes VAM, Room 46, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Gabriela León-Pérez, Virginia Commonwealth University Going home: Return Migrant Job Searching and Employment Outcomes - Claire Le Barbenchon International Student Mobility as an Ethical Practice of the Self -Ryan P. Deuel, McGill University Opportunity Pool and Natives’ Friendship Homophily - Christian Albrekt Larsen, Aalborg Universitet; Jeppe Fjeldgaard, Centre for Comparative Welfare Studies, Aalborg University, Denmark Social Interactions Between Three Ethno-Racial Immigrant Groups in Koreatown: Negotiating the Boundaries of Separation and Integration - Halyna Lemekh, Saint Francis College Success as Self-Determination: A Subject-Centered Analysis of Immigrants' Definitions and Perceptions of "Success" -Jane Lilly Lopez, Brigham Young University-Provo; Faith J Williams, Brigham Young University (undergraduate) 

1848.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 2. Beyond the Immigrant Generation: Intergenerational Experiences and Outcomes VAM, Room 47, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Van C. Tran, The Graduate Center, CUNY Assessing Variation in Self-Identification Among Second and Third Generation Americans - Stuart Malcolm Perrett, New York University A “Win-Win Exercise”? Eastern European Children in Western Europe - Nathan Isaac Hoffmann, University of California, Los Angeles SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 35 

Intergenerational Identificational Assimilation: A Reevaluation Using the Case of African Migrants in France - Ewurama A Okai, Northwestern University; Julia A Behrman, Northwestern University The Big Picture: A Multidimensional Assessment of Second-generation Integration in Europe - Veronika Fajth, University of Birmingham The Kids Are (Still) Alright: The Economic Integration of Children of Immigrants in Mid-Adulthood - Zi (Leafia) Ye, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

1849.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 3. Refugees and Asylees in Comparative Perspective VAM, Room 48, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Silvia Pedraza, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Commodifying Refugees: Social Rights and Incorporation in San Diego, CA and Boise, ID - Molly Fee, University of California-Los Angeles Forced Migration Management, Civil Society, and the Involution of Local Integration in Post-Conflict Ukraine - Raphi Rechitsky, National University Forms of Capital in Conflict Migration: A Case Study of Migration from Post-Invasion Iraq to Canada - Alicia Poole, McGill University Segmented assimilation? Diversified integration outcomes among Vietnamese refugees settled in Hong Kong - Ka Wang Kelvin Lam, Chinese University of Hong Kong 

1850.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 4. Migration and Racialization VAM, Room 49, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Muna Adem, Indiana University Contested Belonging and Racialized Illegality - Estefania Castaneda Perez Exploring the Return Movement of Children of Hong Kong Immigrants Through Transnationalism, Social/Cultural Reproduction, & Racialization - Victoria Ogley, York University How to Be a Non-American Black: Connecting Social Distancing and the Racialization of Black Immigrants - Donna-Lee Granville, CUNY-Brooklyn College 

1851.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 5. Modeling Migration Flows and Networks VAM, Room 50, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Melanie Escue, University of South Florida From surveys to networks: understanding flows of Mexican migration - Andrea Miranda González, UC Berkeley Identifying Immigrant Typologies through Networks - Claire Le Barbenchon; M. Giovanna Merli, Duke University; Ted Mouw, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Mobility Transitions and Social Transformation: Six Case Studies - Kerilyn Schewel, University of Amsterdam; Simona Vezzoli, University of Leiden; Hein de Haas, University of Amsterdam 

1852.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 6. Methodological Approaches to Studying Attitudes toward Migration and Migrants VAM, Room 51, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: David Scott FitzGerald, University of California-San Diego Attitudes Supporting a Pathway to Citizenship for Undocumented Immigrants across National and Asian American Samples - Loretta Bass, University of Oklahoma; Haifan Xiao, University of Oklahoma Immigrants and the Mainstream: A computational study of the representation, sentiment, and ordinariness of immigrants - Andrea M. Voyer, Stockholm University; Zachary Dillon Kline, University of Connecticut; Madison Orion Danton, University of Connecticut; Tanja Volkova, Stockholm University Migrant shipwrecks in the Mediterranean Sea and prejudice: Evidence from a natural experiment - Nicolo Cavalli; Effrosyni Charitopoulou, Collegio Carlo Alberto Nativism, Economic Insecurity, and Immigration Attitudes Leading Up To the Election of Trump - Julia Jean Schoonover, University at Buffalo, SUNY; Willis Danielson, University at Buffalo; Robert M. Adelman, University at Buffalo 

1853.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 7. Immigration Control and Surveillance VAM, Room 52, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Claudia Maria López, California State University-Long Beach Deportation and Place: Understanding Spatial Variation in U.S. Interior Immigration Enforcement - Margot Moinester, Washington University-St. Louis Immigration Attorneys as Communicators of Legal Violence -Blanca A Ramirez, University of Southern California “Prevention Through Deterrence”: A Thematic Approach to the Contention of Controlling the Border. - Jesus Ayala-Candia, Texas Tech University The power of fear: How fear justified the adoption of a disciplinary, ‘compulsory integration’ model - Audrey Lumley-Sapanski, University of Nottingham; Senyo Dotsey, Gran Sasso Science Institute 

1854.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 8. Immigration, Work, and Mobility VAM, Room 53, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Yung-Yi Diana Pan, CUNY-Brooklyn College Passing as Mexican? Salvadoran Immigrants’ Economic Incorporation in the United States - Melissa Manzanares, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Ricardo David Martinez-Schuldt, University of Notre Dame Socially Desirable Discrimination: What Employers Say versus What They Do in the Case of Immigration - Anna Nicole Kreisberg, Brown University Temporary yet Essential: Employer Trends in H-2 Worker Certification in the United States - Jennifer Scott, Louisiana State University; Bethany Alcauter; Chelsey Wooten, Louisiana State University 

> Session 1848, continued

# SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 36 1855.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 9. Immigrant Culture and Communities VAM, Room 54, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Natasha Warikoo, Tufts University Are Muslim immigrants assimilating? Cultural assimilation trajectories in immigrants' attitudes toward gender role in Europe - Ka U Ng, McGill University International Lifestyle Migration and the Social Impacts of Small Business Entrepreneurship in Developing Countries - Erin M. Adamson, University of Kansas The Structuring Buna: Sociability, Temporality, and the Ceremonial Coffee (Buna) Among Ethiopian Israelis - Adane Zawdu, Tel Aviv University 

1856.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 10. Immigrant Health VAM, Room 55, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Jing Shen, University of Mannheim Harvesting Health Knowledge: Breast Cancer Perceptions in the South Florida Farmworker Community - Felicia O. Casanova, University of Miami Living-Alone Penalty vs. Living-Alone Premium: Life Satisfaction of Immigrant and Native-Born Older Adults in Canada - Jing Shen, University of Mannheim; Karen Kobayashi, University of Victoria; Hongmei Tong, MacEwan University; Esme Fuller-Thomson, University of Toronto The decline in migrants’ health due to adverse environments and limited options for care - Steven J. Gold, Michigan State University 

1857.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 11. Immigrants' Romantic Partnerships Within and Across Borders VAM, Room 56, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Amanda Rachel Cheong, University of British Columbia A comparative Analysis of Immigrant Women's Labor Force Participation: Is there a penalty for Co-ethnic Marriage? -Elif Bulut, Florida State University; Elwood Carlson, Florida State University Cross-national and Inter-generational Trends in Afro-Caribbean Partnership: Straight-Line Assimilation or a Segmented Variant? - Suzanne Model, University of Massachusetts Cross-Nativity Partnering & Political Participation: The Effect of Partner’s Immigration Background on Voting across Immigrant Generations - Hansini Munasinghe, University of Iowa Queer Mixed Citizenship Families Recoup Fragmented Citizenship through Transnational Migration Strategies in South Korea -Chelle Jones, University of Michigan 

1858.  International Migration Refereed Roundtables. Table 12. The Immigrant Experience During COVID-19 VAM, Room 57, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sung S. Park, Harvard University Table Presider: Edelina M. Burciaga, University of Colorado-Denver Lives Under Lockdown: The impact of COVID-19 measures on migrants and refugees in Greece - Theodoros Fouskas, University of West Attica Understanding the Limits of COVID-19 Safety Protocols in Refugee Humanitarian Interventions - Stephanie J. Nawyn, Michigan State University; Ezgi Karaoglu, Michigan State University; Stephen Philip Gasteyer, Michigan State University; Adnan Hammad, Global Health Research, Management & Solutions; Mahmoud Durid, Safa for Development; Ali Ghassani, Amel Association; Rania Mansour, Beit Atfal Assumoud; Ayat Nashwan, Altkaful Charity Association and Jordanian Pioneering Center Violence, asylum, and permanent-temporariness: The effects of COVID-19 and immigration policies on the Matamoros’s migrant-camp - Bertha Alicia Bermudez Tapia, University of Colorado, Boulder 

1859.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 1: Intersectional Identities VAM, Room 58, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Chenghui Zhang, University of Kentucky Constructing Racial Hate Crimes: Does Respondent Racial Identity Matter? - Chenghui Zhang, University of Kentucky Digitized Narratives of Gender Controversy - Participatory Feminism - Xinyue Chen; Grace Yuehan Wang Say Her Name: Black Sports Women as Game Changers - Letisha Engracia Cardoso Brown, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University We Aren't the World: Intersectional Symbolic Boundaries in a Black Evangelical Women's Group - Elisabeth Rose Pohaikealoha Shimada, University of Southern California 

1860.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 2: Family and Inequality VAM, Room 59, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Ina Kelleher, UC Berkeley In the Aftermath of Youth Gun Violence: Othermothers, Othersons, and Evolving Kinship in Grief - Ina Kelleher, UC Berkeley; Nora Gross, Boston College Haunted by the Muslim Parent Amidst the Covid-19 Pandemic -Seyma Ozdemir Navigating the Streets of San Francisco: Homeless Mothers Speak Out - Anne R. Roschelle, SUNY-New Paltz Struggling to Make Good: The Dilemmas of Fatherhood for Low-Income Formerly Incarcerated African American Men -Francis Bruce Prior, Assumption College; Steven D. Farough, Assumption College 

1861.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 3: Work and the Workplace VAM, Room 60, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Hannah Jade Grabowski, University of Massachusetts-Boston Bostonians' Employment Status and Work Risk During the First Months of the COVID-19 Pandemic - Hannah Jade Grabowski, University of Massachusetts-Boston; Russell K. Schutt, University of Massachusetts Boston Constantly on the Move: Chinese Engineers’ Job-hopping Strategies at Tech - Tongyu Wu, Zhejiang University In, Out or Up? Drivers of the Glass Ceiling Pattern in Organizations - Brittany Marie Bond, Cornell University; Roberto M. Fernandez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Racial Optimization in Professional Occupations - Kara Leiko Takasaki, University of Texas at Austin SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 37 1862.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 4: Economy and Intersectionality VAM, Room 61, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Duygu Basaran Sahin, CUNY Graduate Center Interwar Record Companies as Racialized Organizations and the Emergence of “Race Records” - Shadrick Andrew Small, University of California-Berkeley Later-life Employment in the Great Recession - Duygu Basaran Sahin, CUNY Graduate Center Marketing The Missing: Missing Persons and the Economy of Concern - Matthew Wolfe Selling "Mother's New Little Helper": An Intersectional Analysis of Cannabis Marketing in the Post-Prohibition United States -Katie Kaufman Rogers, University of Texas at Austin 

1863.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 5: Race, Gender, Class, and Education VAM, Room 62, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Shawna Bowden Vican, University of Delaware I Never Felt That I Was an Insider: Retaining Women Faculty of Color - Shawna Bowden Vican, University of Delaware Minority Stress, Social Support, and Mental Health in Graduate and Law School: Centering Minoritized Students - Elizabeth Tomlin Culatta, Augusta University; Kait M. Boyle, University of South Carolina-Columbia; Tara Elizabeth Sutton, Mississippi State University; Jennifer Turner, Hollins University Starve it on the Vine or Gut it Out: The Dismantling of the HBCU - Anthony Jerald Jackson, Howard Univerity; Sharon Zoe Spencer, Virginia State University Student and School Race Differentiating How Perceptions of Math Teacher Relate to Math Identity - Dara Shifrer, Portland State University; Katherine Phillippo, Loyola University-Chicago; Ned Tilbrook, Portland State University; Karisma Morton, University of North Texas 

1864.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 6: Intersectional Inequalities I VAM, Room 63, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Allison Suppan Helmuth, University of Illinois-Chicago Putting Principle into Practice? How Inequality-Conscious Landlords Make Decisions that Impact Tenants - Allison Suppan Helmuth, University of Illinois-Chicago Reframing Seneca Falls and Elizabeth Cady Stanton: A Reflection on Epistemic Power, Intersectionality, and Feminist Grievance - Lauren Bickell, University of California, Santa Barbara Refusing the Dog Whistle: Calling the Bluff on Color-Blind Racial Language - Abigail Tobias-Lauerman, University of Tennessee 

1865.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 7: Intersectional Inequalities II VAM, Room 64, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Michael Lotspeich-Yadao, Baylor University I Love Wasians: Self-Perceptions of Mixed Race Women and Non-Binary People’s Desirability” - Julia Rose Chin, **** Spatial Autocorrelation, Heterogeneity, and Temporality in the Propensity of Rural Military Veterans to Identify as Self-Employed - Michael Lotspeich-Yadao, Baylor University; Charles M. Tolbert, Baylor University; Craig Carpenter, Michigan State University The “B-Word,” The “C-Word,” and The Metaspace - Mary Amelia Caliendo 

1866.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 8: Intersectional Inequalities III VAM, Room 65, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presiders: Solome Solomon Haile, Washington University in St. Louis; Jose Loya, University of California-Los Angeles Gender and Ethno-Racial Disparities in Access to Mortgage Credit - Jose Loya, University of California-Los Angeles "I'm Not Gonna Let the Devil Take Two for One": Negotiating Relationships Across Carceral Lines - Solome Solomon Haile, Washington University in St. Louis; Angela Bruns, Gonzaga University; Savannah Larimore, Washington University-St. Louis; Hedwig Lee, Washington University-St. Louis The Politicization of Mexican American Women in the Early Years of the Environment Justice Movement: - Celene Krauss, Kean University 

1867.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 9: Civic Engagement and Activism VAM, Room 66, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Colleen Rost-Banik, Windward Community College Civic Engagement’s Connection to Social Justice…and White Nationalism - Colleen Rost-Banik, Windward Community College Civic Negotiations: Identifying Variation in Political Engagement in Bayview Hunters Point, San Francisco - Kimya Loder Pulled Between Two Ideals: Ethnoracialization of South Asian Americans Interested in Activism - Naomi Joseph, UC-Santa Barbara “You Create Different Possibilities”: Reproductive Justice and Abolitionist Storytelling as Social Movement Strategy -Meghan Daniel, University of Illinois at Chicago 

1868.  Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 10: Race, Gender, Class, and Health VAM, Room 67, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Fanni Farago, George Mason University Feeling the Pressure: How Organizational Concerns Can Impact Women's Labor & Delivery - Kelly McNamara, Texas A&M University-College Station The Association Between Superwoman Schema and Self-Rated Health among Black Women: Is Socioeconomic Status a Moderator? - Christy LaShaun Erving, Vanderbilt University; Izraelle McKinnon, Emory University; Miriam E. Van Dyke, Emory University; Raphiel Murden, Emory University; Renee Moore, Emory University; Bianca Booker, Emory University; Tene T. Lewis, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University The Ripple Effect: Familial Incarceration, Stress Proliferation, and Depressive Symptoms among African Americans - Nicholas Smith, Indiana University SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 2021 38 1869. Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables. Table 11: Incarceration and Intersectionality VAM, Room 68, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Blake R. Silver, George Mason University Table Presider: Lindsay Renee Smith, George Mason University Domestic Violence and the Carceral State: Redefining Violence and Risk in Partner Abuse Intervention Programs - Marie Laperrière, Northwestern University Opposition Behind Bars: Incarcerated Black Working-Class Women and the Tradition of Resistance in the United States - Britany Gatewood, Albany State University Parental Incarceration Socialization Among COIP: Familial Processes & Patterns - Melissa Elizabeth Noel, University at Albany; Britany Gatewood, Albany State University; Bahiyyah M. Muhammad, Howard University; Sydni Turner, Howard University The Reverberating Effects of Mass Incarceration on Health: A Mixed Methods Analysis of Communities and Families -Oshea Donnell Johnson, University of Miami 

# Saturday, 6:00 pm 1901.  Plenary Session. State of Sociology: Senior-Career View VAM, Room 0, 6:00-7:30pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Mary Romero, Arizona State University Panelists: James S. House, University of Michigan; Michael Burawoy, University of California-Berkeley; Craig Calhoun, Arizona State University-Tempe; Prudence L. Carter, University of California-Berkeley Discussant: Mary Romero, Arizona State University Recently James House published, “The Culminating Crisis of American Sociology and Its Role in Social Science and Public Policy: An Autobiographical, Multimethod, Reflexive Perspective in the Annual Review of Sociology. This piece argued that contemporary sociology, unlike in earlier periods, is experiencing a theoretical and methodological crisis. Yet, critics argue that contemporary sociology is experiencing a theoretical and methodological rebirth and innovation. This panel will examine the state of sociology to assess its current status and future prospects. SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 39 Sunday, 10:00 am 2021.  Meeting. Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology Council Meeting VAM, Room 20, 10:00-10:45am 2068.  Meeting. Sociology of Culture Section Council Meeting VAM, Room 67, 10:00-10:45am 2069.  Meeting. Section on Labor and Labor Movements Council Meeting VAM, Room 68, 10:00-10:45am 2070.  Meeting. Section on Aging and the Life Course Council Meeting VAM, Room 69, 10:00-10:45am 2071.  Meeting. Section on Altruism, Morality and Social Solidarity Council Meeting VAM, Room 70, 10:00-10:45am Sunday, 11:00 am 2102.  Book Forum. Global Borderlands: Fantasy, Violence, and Empire in Subic Bay, Philippines and The Patchwork City: Class, Space, and Politics in Metro Manila VAM, Room 1, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Kimberly Kay Hoang, University of Chicago Moderator: Kimberly Kay Hoang, University of Chicago Panelists: Michael Burawoy, University of California-Berkeley; Michèle Lamont, Harvard University; Javier Auyero, University of Texas-Austin Authors: Marco Z. Garrido, University of Chicago; Victoria Reyes, University of California-Riverside 

2103.  Special Sessions. Book Retrospective: Tomorrow’s Tomorrow: The Black Woman VAM, Room 2, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Presider: Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Panelists: Joyce Ann Ladner, Brookings Institution; Nikki Jones, University of California-Berkeley; Nishaun Battle, Virginia State University; Enobong (Anna) Branch, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Discussant: Leslie McCall, The Graduate Center, City University of New York 

2104.  Special Sessions. Markets, Money, and the Carceral State: The Criminal Justice System as an Economic Market VAM, Room 3, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Michele Lindsay Cadigan, University of Washington; Alexes Harris, University of Washington Presider: Michele Lindsay Cadigan, University of Washington Layaway Freedom: Financialization in the Criminal Justice System - Mary E. Pattillo, Northwestern University; Gabriela Kirk, Northwestern University Shadow Costs: Public-Private Partnerships, Monetary Sanctions, and the Creation of “Markets for Freedom” - Bryan L. Sykes, University of California-Irvine; Karin Martin, University of Washington; Michele Lindsay Cadigan, University of Washington; Alexes Harris, University of Washington; Beth Huebner, University of Missouri - St. Louis; Gabriela Kirk, Northwestern University; Becky Pettit, University of Texas-Austin Unveiling the Necrocapitalist Dimensions of the Shadow Carceral State: On Pay-to-Stay to Recoup the Cost of Incarceration -Brittany Friedman, University of Southern California Discussant: Michele Lindsay Cadigan, University of Washington 

2105.  Special Sessions. The Return of the Labor Strike VAM, Room 4, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Barry Eidlin, McGill University Presider: Barry Eidlin, McGill University Panelists: Eric Benjamin Blanc, NYU; Nantina Vgontzas, New York University; Alexander Hertl-Fernandez, Columbia University; Sara Nelson, Association of Flight Attendants, President; Stacy Davis Gates, Vice President, Chicago Teachers Union, AFT Local 1 

2106.  Thematic Sessions. Community-Engaged Research as a Means to Emancipatory Sociology VAM, Room 5, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Rebecca London, University of California-Santa Cruz Presider: Rebecca London, University of California-Santa Cruz Panelists: Leslie Hossfeld, Clemson University; Steven McKay, University of California-Santa Cruz; Japonica Brown-Saracino, Boston University; Nancy Plankey-Videla, Texas A&M University-College Station 

2107.  Thematic Sessions. Immigrant Rights and Racial Justice for Refugees? Making Sense of Movements and Strategies that Advance Justice for Refugees from the Global South VAM, Room 6, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Veronica Terriquez, University of California, Los Angeles Presider: Kati Barahona-López, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire Empire and Responsibility: Seeking Justice for Central American Refugees - Leisy Janet Abrego, University of California, Los Angeles Learning from the Black Mediterranean: Refugees, Racial Justice, and the Imperative of Abolition - Camilla Alice Hawthorne, University of California-Santa Cruz Somali Refugee Youth Activism and Struggles Against Police Violence and U.S. Militarism - Muhamed Abumaye, University of California- San Diego Discussant: Edelina M. Burciaga, University of Colorado-Denver 

2108.  Minority Fellowship Program. The Social Construction of Identity and Statehood in the U.S. and Dominican Republic VAM, Room 7, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tamara Mose, American Sociological Association Presider: Stephanie L. Canizales, University of California-Merced White Identity and American Indian/Alaska Native Culture in the Pacific Northwest - Sofia Locklear, University of New Mexico “If You Give Me $2,000, I Won’t Arrest You”: (Mis)documentation and the State(less), Haitians In the Dominican Republic -Edlin Veras, University of South Florida 

2109.  Teaching Workshop. TAing While Black or POC: A Safe Space to Share Our Experiences, Ideas, and Practices VAM, Room 8, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Leader: Francisco Ambrosio Figueroa, University at Buffalo Co-Leader: J Coley, University at Buffalo SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 40 2110.  Professional Development Workshop. Finding Your Way Off the Tenure Track: Navigating Non-Faculty Career Options VAM, Room 9, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Leader: Natalie D. Hengstebeck Co-Leader: Trenita Brookshire Childers, American Institutes for Research 

2111.  Presidential Panel. Comparative White Supremacy/Race Relations VAM, Room 10, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Bruce G. Carruthers, Northwestern University Presider: Bruce G. Carruthers, Northwestern University Panelists: Gay W. Seidman, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Pap Ndiaye, Établissement public du Palais de la porte Dorée, Musée national de l'histoire de l'immigration; Zophia Edwards, Providence College; Tianna S. Paschel, University of California-Berkeley Over a century ago, W. E. B. Du Bois analyzed the color line as a global phenomenon. It functioned as a cultural and structural cleavage that stratified the world rendering the darker races subordinate to western whites. As a result, racism has proliferated throughout the modern world. This panel will analyze and compare white supremacy in different locales and times. It will demonstrate the utility of a comparative approach to analyze white supremacy. 

2112.  Sociology in Practice Settings Symposium. Bring Your Own Brunch: Networking and Ask Us Anything VAM, Room 11, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Sidra J. Montgomery, Insight Policy Research Presider: Jillian Powers, COGNIZANT Discussants: Matt Rafalow, Google; Caren Arbeit, RTI International; Barbara Kirsh, ETS; Christopher Steven Marcum, National Institutes of Health; George L. Wimberly, American Educational Research Association 

2113.  Section on Medical Sociology. Section on Medical Sociology Award Ceremony and Reeder Address VAM, Room 12, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew S. London, Syracuse University Presider: Andrew S. London, Syracuse University Panelist: Debra Umberson, The University of Texas at Austin 

2114.  Section on Race, Gender, Class. Reproductive Justice: Co-Sponsored by the Section on Race, Gender, and Class and the Section on Body and Embodiment VAM, Room 13, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Alexandra Veselka-Bush, Hendrix College Presider: Meghna Mukherjee, University of California Berkeley Birth Rights and Wrongs: Paradoxical Reproductive Abuse and the Maintenance of Migrant Intervenability - Chloe Sariego, Yale University Doulas, Racism, and Whiteness: How Birth Support Workers Process Advocacy towards Women of Color - Juan Salinas, University of North Florida How Do You Want Your Eggs? The Medical Management of Kin-Making and Stratified Reproduction - Meghna Mukherjee, University of California Berkeley “It’s Just Weird”: Ethical Concerns about Infertility Treatments among Highly-Educated Black and White Women -Katherine Tierney, Western Michigan University; Amber Isabel Urban, Western Michigan University 

2115.  Section on Global and Transnational Sociology. Doing Decolonial Theory in the North vs. the South VAM, Room 14, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Caroline M. Schoepf, Hong Kong Baptist University Presider: Caroline M. Schoepf, Hong Kong Baptist University A Subaltern Gaze on White Ignorance and (In) Security - Fatima Waqi Sajjad, University of Management and Technology Lahore A Decolonial Reflection on Human Migration and Mobility under the Impact of "Colonizer-Linked Climate Crisis" - Barış Can Sever, Middle East Technical University Global North vs. Local South in Domestic Work Scholarship -Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Obstacles for Decolonising Knowledge in Sociology & Potentialities for Change - Siri Gamage Discussant: Syed Farid Alatas 

2116.  Section on Labor and Labor Movements. The New Labor Activism VAM, Room 15, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Shannon Marie Gleeson, Cornell University, ILR School Presider: Shannon Marie Gleeson, Cornell University, ILR School Solidarity and Collective Action in the Platform Economy in India -Swati Chintala, New York University Taming the Platform: How did Successful Strikes Occur among Atomized Workers in Hong Kong? - Karen Hui, Chinese University of Hong Kong; Tianzhu Nie, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology The resurgent strike: Union revitalization through militant identity - John Kallas, Cornell University ILR School Wage Boards and Labor Revitalization: Learning from Uruguay - Cesar F. Rosado Marzan, University of Iowa; Ana Ermida, Universidad de la Republica 

2117.  Section on Sociology of Culture. Culture and Morality in Times of Crisis VAM, Room 16, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Aliza Luft, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Aliza Luft, University of California-Los Angeles Coping with Corrupted Systems: Moral Negotiations in the Hinterlands of Evaluation - Jacqueline Ho, Cornell University; Malte Ziewitz, Cornell University Moral economy and the social semiotics of the Covid-19 crisis - Till Hilmar, Bremen University Proximity and Moral Action: Diaspora Communities Helping from Afar during the West African Ebola Outbreak - Ryann Manning, University of Toronto Risky Behaviors and Moral Judgments in a Politicized Pandemic - Taylor Paige Winfield, Princeton University; Janet Xu, Princeton University 

2118.  Section on Economic Sociology. Evaluation and the Moral Economy VAM, Room 17, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Carly Knight, New York University; Nathan Wilmers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Presider: Laura Adler, Harvard University Cultural Foundations of Creditworthiness: Gender, Discretion, and the ‘Ideal Borrower’ in Colombian Microcredit - Kristen McNeill, Brown University From Record to Rental: How Landlords Evaluate Credit Reports, SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 41 

Criminal Records, and Eviction Histories - Barbara Kiviat, Stanford University; Sara Sternberg Greene, Duke University; Hesu Yoon, Stanford University Countering the Con: The Vulnerabilities of Check Cashing in Detroit-area Corner Stores - Vance Alan Puchalski, Princeton University Purity Politics? A Civil Project to Purify Consumption - Tad P. Skotnicki, University of North Carolina-Greensboro The Moral Economy of Home-made Cloth Masks in the Times of COVID-19 - Ya-Ching Huang, Boston University; Alya Guseva, Boston University 

2119.  Section on Altruism, Morality and Social Solidarity. Open Session on Altruism, Morality, and Social Solidarity: Advocating for Morality and Prosociality in Unsettled Times VAM, Room 18, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Patricia Snell Herzog, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis Presider: Demetrius Miles Murphy, University of Southern California Kindness as a Category of Moral Action: Tensions and Sociological Insights - Shiri Noy, Denison University Paved with Good Intentions: Moral Evaluation of Volunteer Tourism as Social Action - Netta Kahana, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem The Emotional Labor of Activism: The Role of Love in Sustaining Movement Actors - Megan Jordan The Presentation of a Philanthropic Self: A Computational Text Analysis of the Giving Pledge Letters - Amanda Barrett Cox, Bryn Mawr College 

2120.  Section on Methodology. Robert Mare's Methodological Legacy VAM, Room 19, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jeremy E Fiel, University of Arizona Presider: Yu Xie, Princeton University Panelists: Samuel R. Lucas, University of California-Berkeley; Elizabeth Bruch, University of Michigan; Christine Renee Schwartz, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Vida Maralani, Cornell University; Xi Song, University of Pennsylvania 

2121.  Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology. Mentoring Roundtables  on Teaching Upper Level Courses VAM, Room 20, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Stephanie Medley-Rath, Indiana University-Kokomo Presiders: Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Stephanie Medley-Rath, Indiana University-Kokomo; Stella Grigorian, University of Houston Panelists: Jennifer Roebuck Bulanda, Miami University-Ohio; Stephen F. Steele, Emeritus Anne Arundel Community College; Diane L. Pike, Augsburg University; Jeffrey Chin, Le Moyne College; Elaina Kay Behounek, Middle Georgia State University; Leslie T.C. Wang, Saint Mary's College; Corey James McZeal, University of Florida; Catherine White Berheide, Skidmore College; Alison S. Better, CUNY Kingsborough Community College; Claudia Maria López, California State University-Long Beach; Megan Henley, Colorado Mesa University; Molly J. Dingel, Unversity of Minnesota Rochester; Carol A. Caronna, Towson University; David Kadanoff, Jamestown Community College; Hephzibah Virginia Strmic-Pawl, Manhattanville College; Sharon Yee, Glendale Community College; Colleen Elizabeth Wynn, University of Indianapolis; Amani Michael Awwad, SUNY Canton; Laura McCloud, Pacific Lutheran University; Ann M. Beutel, University of Oklahoma; Elroi J. Windsor, University of West Georgia; Mel Moore, University of Northern Colorado; Michele Lee Kozimor, Elizabethtown College; Danielle MacCartney, Webster University; Jennifer Whitmer, California State University Stanislaus; Debjani Chakravarty, Utah Valley University; Matthew Howard McLeskey, University at Buffalo, SUNY 

2122.  Theory Section. Pragmatist Theorizing in Sociology: Emerging Directions VAM, Room 21, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Shai M. Dromi, Harvard University Presider: Lily Liang, SUNY-Cortland Environing Innovation: Pragmatist solutions to problems of heterogeneity and scale in the sociology of science - Natalie B. Aviles, University of Virginia American Pragmatism and the Dilemma of the Negro - Karida Brown, University of California-Los Angeles; Luna White, Northwestern University A Pragmatist Theory of Market Liquidity - Yu-Ching Cheng Making Things Public: Interaction Patterns and the Criteria of Evaluating Political Conflicts - Oded Marom, University of Southern California Discussant: Iddo Tavory, New York University 

2123.  Regular Session. Individual Motivators, Broader Structures, and the Politics of The Moment VAM, Room 22, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tarun Banerjee, CUNY - John Jay College Presider: Tarun Banerjee, CUNY - John Jay College Contentious clients: multiple patronage and collective action in popular politics - Gabriel Locke Suchodolski, UCLA Developing a New Contentious Repertoire: A Study on Mobilization Practices in Japan’s Flower Demo - Kanoko Kamata, University of Pittsburgh More than MAS: A Case Study in Bolivian Politics - Sarah Torrico Protesting During a Pandemic: Narratives on Risk Taking and Motivation in 2020 March on Washington - Soma Chaudhuri, Michigan State University The Attraction of Direct Action: Volunteerism and Self-fulfillment during the Iran-Iraq War - Maryam Alemzadeh, Princeton University 

2124.  Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance. Reimagining Policing and Public Safety in the Era of Black Lives Matter VAM, Room 23, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Amada Armenta, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Victor M. Rios, University of California-Santa Barbara Panelists: Andrea S. Boyles, Tulane University; Hillary Potter, University of Colorado-Boulder; Kayla A. Preito-Hodge, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Jennifer Cobbina, Michigan State University 

2125.  Regular Session. Gender and Work in Transnational and Diasporic Contexts VAM, Room 24, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Emmanuel David, University of Colorado Boulder Presider: Emmanuel David, University of Colorado Boulder Engendering Circuits: How Money Shapes Family and Business Lives - Jun Zhou 

> Session 2118, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 42 

Gender and Transnational Professional Mobility in Two Male-Dominated Sectors - Ilju Kim, Waseda University; Minjeong Kim, San Diego State University Haitian Women Migrants and Work: An Ethnographic Study of Gender, Labor, and Class - Nikita Carney, Louisiana State University Multidimensional Borderlands: Climate Change and Inequalities Among Women Farmworkers in California - Evelyn Pruneda, UC Riverside 

2126.  Regular Session. Health and Well-being VAM, Room 25, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pamela Braboy Jackson, Indiana University-Bloomington Presider: Anna E. Acosta Russian, Indiana Univeristy Fostering Resilience: Doing “Care Work” in Emergency Calls to the Police - Angela Cora Garcia, Bentley University Mechanisms Linking Network Ties, Social Support, And Changes in Health - Nicole Lehpamer, MSU Migration Status and Self-Rated Health: The case of Latino/a and Haitian farmworkers in Florida. - David Cañarte, University of Florida; Raffaele Vacca, University of Florida; Gülcan Önel, University of Florida The Effects of Multigenerational Residence on Children’s Mental Health - Qi Li, The Ohio State University 

2127.  Regular Session. Rural Sociology VAM, Room 26, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Braden Leap, Mississippi State University Presider: Kelli Russell Rethinking Food Regime as Gender Regime: Capitalism, Agrarian Change, and the Politics of Social Reproduction - Diana Mincyte, City University of New York Same Difference? Policy and ethical implications of gene-editing for livestock, plant-based proteins, and cell-cultured foods -Robert Magneson Chiles, Pennsylvania State University; Lina Marcela Tami-Barrera, Penn State Social Banditry Against Expropriation of Value in a Peasant Community: Avocado Poachers in South Turkey - Baran Karsak, Northeastern University Technology transfer and everyday life among smallholder farmers - Selam Esayas Negatu, University of Connecticut; Elizabeth Holzer, University of Connecticut; Kristen Kirksey, University of Connecticut; Ezana Amdework Atsbeha 

2128.  Regular Session. Sexualities and Gender Asymmetries VAM, Room 27, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: D'Lane R. Compton, University of New Orleans Presider: D'Lane R. Compton, University of New Orleans Desire/Desirability: Gender Asymmetries in Heterosexual Erotic Attention - Gabrielle Sara Martin, Rutgers University Men Find Trophies Where Women Find Insults: Sharing Nude Images of Others as Collective Gendered Rituals - Morgan Johnstonbaugh, University of Arizona Mononormativity and Compulsory Monogamy: How They Operate and Why They Contribute to Gender Inequality - Mark Alexander Griffith, Harvard Sociology Sexual Fields and Capital Exchange on Dating Applications -Hannah Regan, Vanderbilt University 

2129.  Regular Session. Multidimensional and Longitudinal Perspectives on Social Class and Inequality VAM, Room 28, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Siwei Cheng, New York University Presider: Siwei Cheng, New York University Class Crystallization: Understanding Inequality Across Multiple Dimensions of Wellbeing - Deirdre Bloome, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Daniel Schrage, Harvard; Jane Furey, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor Deciphering the Structure of Systemic Racism? Racial Differences in the Intergenerational Association of Intragenerational Income Mobility - Alexander Adames, University of Pennsylvania; Arthur Sakamoto, Texas A&M University; Xi Song, University of Pennsylvania Is Retirement More Unequal Than We Think? Estimates from SIPP Linked to Administrative Records - Daniel Thompson, U.S. Census Bureau Moving on up? How social origins shape geographical mobility within Higher Professional and Managerial Occupations -Katharina Hecht, University of Konstanz; Daniel McArthur, University of Oxford Differential sensitivity to adversity by income - Tamkinat Rauf, Stanford University 

2130.  Regular Session. How the COVID-19 Pandemic is Transforming Gendered Divisions of Labor in the United States VAM, Room 29, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth Wrigley-Field, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Presider: Jessica McCrory Calarco, Indiana University-Bloomington Changes in Work Hours among Remote Workers in COVID-19: A Mixed-methods Intersectional Investigation - Wen Fan, Boston College; Phyllis Moen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Education and Health as Maternal Terrain: Gender Inequality, Home-Based Learning, and the COVID-19 Pandemic - Kate Henley Averett, University at Albany, SUNY Gender, Families, and the Division of Labor during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Rachel A. Rinaldo, University of Colorado-Boulder; Ian M. Whalen, University of Colorado, Boulder Unequal Burdens: How Heterosexual Married Couples Navigate Work and Family During the COVID-19 Pandemic - Jurgita Abromaviciute, Georgia Southern University; Emily Kiyoko Carian, California State University-San Bernardino 

2131.  Regular Session. Internal migration VAM, Room 30, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Kevin J.A. Thomas, Pennsylvania State University Presider: Erin R. Hamilton, University of California-Davis Shifts iin International and Internal Migration Intentions in Kyrgyzstan from 2011 to 2017 - Evgenia Gorina, University of Texas at Dallas; Victor Agadjanian, University of California-Los Angeles Internal Migration and Life Course Transitions in Brazil - Reinaldo Onofre dos Santos, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil; Alisson Flávio Barbieri, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil; Ernesto F. L. Amaral, Texas A&M University-College Station Life Satisfaction of China’s Migrants in Association with the Perceived Stress due to Hukou - Wan Huang, Texas A&M 

> Session 2125, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 43 

University; Heili Pals, Texas A&M University-College Station Unraveling the Impacts of Parental Migration on Children’s Educational Expectations: Networks, Reunion Visits, and Remittances - Shichao Du, University at Albany, SUNY; Zai Liang, State University of New York-Albany The Impact of Context: The Effect of Local Labor Markets and Neighborhoods on Regtional Job Mobility - Kerstin Ostermann, Institute for Employment Research (IAB); Martin Abraham, University of Nuremberg-Erlangen Discussant: Patricia A. McManus, Indiana University-Bloomington 

2132. Regular Session. Policy Matters: Host Societies’ Reception and Support of Immigrants VAM, Room 31, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Van C. Tran, The Graduate Center, CUNY Presider: Tiffany Joyce Huang, Columbia University The Role of Indifference in Predicting Support for Race and Immigration Policies - Linda R. Tropp, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Trisha Dehrone, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Eric Knowles, New York University; Dina G. Okamoto, Indiana University-Bloomington; Helen B. Marrow, Tufts University Context of Backlash: Where and Among Whom Does Demographic Change Provoke Anti-Immigration Attitudes - Christopher Maggio, City University of New York-Graduate Center Identity or Interest? Muslim Nationalism and Conservative Citizens' Attitudes toward Syrian Refugees in Turkey - Kerem Morgul, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Osman Savaşkan, Marmara University, Department of Local Governments Citizen Brokers of Immigrant Transnationalism: Private Refugee Sponsors in Neoliberal Canada - Emine Fidan Elcioglu, University of Toronto; Tahseen Shams, University of Toronto Making Migration Sexy: Immigrants in Same-Sex Couples in the United States - Nathan Isaac Hoffmann, University of California, Los Angeles; Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin 

2133.  Regular Session. The Racialization of Latinas/os During the Trump Era: Continuities, Incongruities, and Paradoxes VAM, Room 32, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Laura E. Gomez, University of California-Los Angeles; Laura E. Gomez, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Laura E. Gomez, University of California-Los Angeles “Tales of Heroes and Villains:” Donald Trump and the Framing of Latinos During the COVID-19 Pandemic - Anahi Viladrich, CUNY-Queens College The Detainee as a Self-serving Opportunist: Formal Racialization in Immigration Detention - Beatriz Aldana Marquez, Texas State University; John Major Eason, University of Wisconsin-Madison Latinidad and Indigeneity: Immigration and Social Ties in a New Destination - Andrea Gomez Cervantes, Wake Forest University #HispanicsforTrump: Racialization, Identity, and the Paradox of Hispanic Republicans? - Roger S. Cadena 

2134.  Regular Session. New Perspectives on Inequality VAM, Room 33, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ken-Hou Lin, University of Texas at Austin Presider: Michael A Schultz, University of Texas-Austin Graduate Education, Professional and Managerial Occupations, and the Rise of U.S. Wage Inequality, 1980-2017 - Paula England, New York University; Felix Busch, University of Zurich Intergenerational reproduction of education through marriage, divorce, fertility, and transmission: A two-sex model -Michael S. Rendall, University of Maryland-College Park; Shuchi Goyal; Mark Handcock; Heide Jackson; Margaret M. Weden, RAND Corporation; Polina Zvavitch, University of Maryland, College Park New Money in the New Economy: The Shift to Stock Compensation and U.S. Wealth Inequality,1998-2016 -Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto Skills, Immigration, and New Inequality in the United States, 1993– 2019 - Rebecca Anna Schut, University of Pennsylvania; Allison Dunatchik, University of Pennsylvania; Xi Song, University of Pennsylvania Toxic Neighborhoods: The Joint Effects of Concentrated Poverty and Environmental Lead Contamination on Early Childhood Development - Geoffrey Thomas Wodtke, University of Chicago; Sagi Ramaj, University of Toronto; Jared N. Schachner, University of Chicago 

2167.  Meeting. Section on Children and Youth Business Meeting VAM, Room 66, 11:00-11:30am 2168.  Meeting. Section on Social Psychology Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 11:00-11:30am 2169.  Meeting. Section on Aging and the Life Course Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 11:00-11:30am 2171.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Development Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 11:00-11:30am Sunday, 11:30 am 2247.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Emotion, Sentiment, and Socio-Emotional Skills VAM, Room 46, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Freda B. Lynn, University of Iowa Socio-Emotional Skills and Refugees’ Language Acquisition -Yuliya Kosyakova, Institute for Employment Research (IAB); Marie-Christine Laible, Institute for Employment Research (IAB) The influence of public discourse on market performance in online drug trade. - William Holtkamp, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Scott W. Duxbury, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill The Production of Math Anxiety: STEM Valorization and Math Gatekeeping in the Post-War Era - Freda B. Lynn, University of Iowa; Lindsay Jarratt, University of Iowa; Erik Westlund, University of Iowa; Elizabeth Felix, University of Iowa 

> Session 2131, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 44 2248.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Social Psychological Perspectives on Status VAM, Room 47, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Katharine Khanna, Columbia University Prosocial Feminism: Men’s Gender Equality Narratives as Strategic Tools for Status Attainment - Katharine Khanna, Columbia University Seeing Class in Ladders: An Integrated Approach to Subjective Status and Self-Rated Health - Matthew Andersson, Baylor University What Money Can Buy: Assessing the Impact of Unemployment on Subjective Well-Being Across 6 PSID Waves - Devin Collins, University of Washington; Selen Güler, University of Washington; Ramin Jabbarli, University of Washington 

2249.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Narrated and Embodied Identities VAM, Room 48, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Kristen L. Discola, California State University-Los Angeles Multiple Identities and Sources of Reflected Appraisals in Identity Theory - Mary Gallagher, Kent State University at Stark; Richard T. Serpe, Kent State University The Embodied Aspects of Identity: Filling in Gaps on Uncertain Identities and Identity Change - Clara Gaddie Traumatic Identities: Constructing victim, survivor, and transcender identities through narrative. - Kristen L. Discola, California State University-Los Angeles 

2250.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Shifting realities in the wake of COVID-19 VAM, Room 49, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Daniel Andrew Nolan, University of Washington A cultural lockdown? Cultural distinctiveness before and after the COVID-19 lockdown - Arnaud Cudennec, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; Chang-Wa Huynh, HEC Paris “Everything is Connected”: Health Lifestyles and Teenagers’ Social Distancing Behaviors in the COVID-19 Pandemic - Stefanie Mollborn, University of Colorado-Boulder; Katherine Mercer, University of Colorado Boulder; Theresa Edwards-Capen, University of Colorado Boulder Happily Distant or Bitter Medicine? The Impact of Coronavirus Social Distancing Behavior on Life Satisfaction - S.M.C. Kelley, UC Berkeley; Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey; M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada Narratives of COVID-19: Meaning-Making During the Initial and Intermediate Stages of the Pandemic - Daniel Andrew Nolan, University of Washington 

2251.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Social Psychological Perspectives on Stigma VAM, Room 50, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Veridiana Domingos Cordeiro, University of São Paulo Measuring Ostracism, Rejection, and Interpersonal Exclusion: A Confirmatory Factor Analysis Approach to Global Social Outcasting - Richard D Abel, Texas A&M University Memory as a collaborative process: analysis of former inmates of a Brazilian correctional institution - Veridiana Domingos Cordeiro, University of São Paulo 

2252.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Social Psychological Perspectives on Meaning-Making VAM, Room 51, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Robert Scott, University of Colorado Boulder Death and Distance: Saskatchewan Firefighters on the Yarnell Hill Fire Fatalities - Robert Scott, University of Colorado Boulder (Mis)Perceiving the Metropolis: Residents’ Distorted Assessments of Neighborhood Composition - Lydia Wileden, University of Michigan 

2253.  Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions). Social Psychological Perspectives on Small Group Processes VAM, Room 52, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew Miles, University of Toronto Table Presider: Vyoma Shah Attributing Racial Motivations to Employee Referrals - Fabiana Silva, University of Michigan Gender Leadership Distribution Affects Competency Expectations of Non-leaders - Jennifer McLeer; Vyoma Shah “Somebody said I was”: Humility Work as a Form of Authentication - SunAh Marie Laybourn, University of Memphis 

2254.  Section on Sociology of Development Refereed Roundtables. Table 1: Negotiating Global Standards of Development VAM, Room 53, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Joan Ryan, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Mary-Collier Wilks, University of Virginia Feeling Privilege: How frustration and reward reveal solidarity commitments among development workers - Sophia Boutilier, Stony Brook University The Development Norms of World Society: Does the UN really set the Agenda? - Kent E. Henderson, California State University-Bakersfield; Andrew Hargrove, Stony Brook University (SUNY); Jamie M Sommer, University of South Florida; Adrián Soto-Cambres The Effects of Evaluations in Markets to Address Social Problems -Diana Jue-Rajasingh Trajectories of Educational Systems in Developing Countries: The influence of Supranational Organisations, 1965-2020 -Mobarak Hossain, University of Oxford 

2255.  Section on Sociology of Development Refereed Roundtables. Table 2: Precarity and Wellbeing Within Global Neoliberalism VAM, Room 54, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Joan Ryan, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: David (Jed) D. Schwartz Between Profit and Purpose: The NYU (CMP) Experience and the Potential Source of Financing Education - Mohammed Shamsidin Abdullahi SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 45 

Informality, Labor Precarity and Pandemic Politics in Bangladesh: A Longer, Global View - Mushahid Hussain, Cornell University Trade Openness, Development Assistance for Health, and Obesity: A Cross-national, Longitudinal Study of 127 Developing countries. - Kent E. Henderson, California State University-Bakersfield 

2256.  Section on Sociology of Development Refereed Roundtables. Table 3: Environment and Agriculture VAM, Room 55, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Joan Ryan, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Aashish Gupta, University of Pennsylvania Climate Change Perception and Resilience through a Gendered Lens of Farmers in Haiti - Manasse Elusma, National Taiwan University (NTU); Thung-Hong Lin, Academia Sinica; Sue-Ching Jou, National Taiwan University Nuclear Energy and Welfare State Development: Effect of the Fukushima Nuclear Disaster - Taekyeong Goh, Sogang University Peasant Reserve Zones in Colombia: A Socio-territorial movement between Recognition and Redistribution - Aura Angelica Hernandez Cardenas, New School for Social Research The Dynamics of Restorative Development - Brian J. Dill, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

2257.  Section on Sociology of Development Refereed Roundtables. Table 4: The Role of Imitation and Emulation in Development VAM, Room 56, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Joan Ryan, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Rita Jalali, American University Beneficence of Government Construction and Import Substitution: Multiplier-Based Economic Growth in High and Middle-Income Countries - Samuel Cohn, Texas A&M University-College Station; Bryson Thomas Bassett, Texas A&M university; Jose Israel Morales, Catholic Charities; Jackson r Haynes, Texas A and M University; Madison Poe, Independent Scholar; Lexie Ford Grassroots and Professional INGOs: A Comparative Content Analysis of Website Discourse - Derek Richardson, Indiana University - Bloomington Modernizing China, One Toilet at a Time - Yunhan Wen, Princeton University 

2258.  Section on Sociology of Development Refereed Roundtables .Table 5: The Politics of Skill, Labor, and Development VAM, Room 57, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Joan Ryan, University of Pennsylvania Table Presiders: Rina Agarwala, Johns Hopkins University; Natasha N. Iskander, New York University Accidental Feminism: Gender Parity and Selective Mobility among India’s Professional Elite - Swethaa S. Ballakrishnen, University of California Irvine Skill logics and the control of worker migration in the global North and South - Natasha N. Iskander, New York University The Politics of Skill, Labor, and Development - Devesh Kapur, SAIS The Role of Skill in Producing a Legitimate Inequality Regime -Rina Agarwala, Johns Hopkins University 

2259.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 1. School Environments and Student Well-Being VAM, Room 58, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Margaret A. Hagerman, Mississippi State University I, Bully: A Response to Bullying Victimization - Celia C. Lo, Texas Woman's University; William Ash-Houchen, Texas Woman's University; Tyrone C Cheng, University of Alabama; Doris C Chu, National Chung Cheng University Stakeholders’ Attitudes Towards the Use of Social Media Surveillance Technologies in Schools - Colin Burke, University of California, San Diego; Cinnamon Bloss, University of California, San Diego Suspension and High School Dropout: The Relationship in Three Cohorts of Youth in the U.S. - Brittany N. Freelin, Pennsylvania State University 

2260.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 2. Academic Achievement VAM, Room 59, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Ranita Ray, University of New Mexico How Chinese Children Spend their Time: the Effects of Time Use on Achievement and Depression - Yunlin Li, UNC-Chapel Hill Mothers’ Nonstandard Work Schedules and Children’s Socioemotional Development: Divergent Patterns by Maternal Education - Jia Wang The Reciprocal Relations between Externalizing Problems and Educational Achievement and Their Implications for Long-term Educational Attainment - Wensong Shen, The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Ruolin Su, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

2261.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 3. Peer Groups and Social Networks VAM, Room 60, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Anna S. Mueller, Indiana University Feeling Unequal: The role of subjective social status in adolescent mental health trajectories - Nafeesa Andrabi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Friendships on the margin: the link between friendships outside school and adolescent suicidality - Xuewen Yan, Cornell University Strong and Weak Tie Homophily in Adolescent Friendship Networks: An Analysis of Same-Race and Same-Gender Ties - Cassie McMillan, Northeastern University 

2262.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 4. Transition into Adulthood VAM, Room 61, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Ingrid E. Castro, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts Assessing Conceptualizations of Coming of Age for Immigrant Youth - Fanni Farago, George Mason University Navigating the COVID-19 Historical Moment: Cohort Experiences of Young Adults - Nicole Angotti, American University; Sangeetha Madhavan, University of Maryland-College Park; 

> Session 2255, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 46 

Daniel Jenks, American University; Kailey Herrera, American University; Cristian Mendoza Gomez, American University; Seung Wan Kim, University of Maryland, College Park Reconnect the Youth: A Comparison of School-to-work Trajectories between GED Recipients and High School Graduates - Wenxuan Huang, Case Western Reserve University 

2263.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 5. Childhood Adversity VAM, Room 62, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Birth Spacing and Child Maltreatment: Exploring Resource Dilution Hypothesis - Anna Rybinska, Duke University; Kenneth A. Dodge, Duke University; W. Benjamin Goodman, Duke University Creating Resilience from Within: Freeing Children of Their Parental Incarceration - Britany Gatewood, Albany State University; Jasmine Whitney, George Washington University Family Preservation Services for Families with Substance-Related Investigations - Amanda Catherine Ferraro, University of Oklahoma 

2264.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 6. Family and Neighborhood Social Class VAM, Room 63, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Rachel Tolbert Kimbro, Rice University “I Thought This Was a Ghost Neighborhood”: Tradeoffs Youth Experience Moving from City to Suburbs - Allison Young, Johns Hopkins University; Anna Catherine Rhodes, Rice University; Jennifer Rene Darrah-Okike, University of Hawaii-Manoa Social Consequences and Contexts of Adverse Childhood Experiences: Attending to Adversity’s Heterogeneous Effects - Jose Eos Trinidad, University of Chicago The Effects of Family Socioeconomic Status on Adolescents’ Physical and Mental Health - Shun Zhang, Xi'an Jiaotong University; Yuan Yao, Hohai University, China; Jieming Chen, Texas A&M University-Kingsville 

2265.  Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 7. Youth Resilience VAM, Room 64, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Hillary Steinberg, CU Boulder Intersectionality, children’s agency, and rebellion against parents - Maria Schmeeckle, Illinois State University; Emma Lynn, Illinois State University; Danielle Marie Creasey When the Hospital Becomes Home: Identity and Place in the Social Spaces of a Children’s Hospital - Hillary Steinberg, CU Boulder Social Contact and Family Social Support for Youth with Disabilities - Jocelyn Wikle, Brigham Young University; Carrie L. Shandra, Stony Brook University Migration-induced Family Living Patterns and Early Childhood Development in Contemporary China - Xiuqi Yang, University of Pennsylvania 

2266. Section on Children and Youth Roundtables. Table 8. Public Policy and Programs for Youth VAM, Room 65, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Table Presider: Leslie Savatsky Reynolds, Bowling Green State University Mental Health Among U.S. Adolescents: do state policies create a safety net? - Leslie Savatsky Reynolds, Bowling Green State University; Kelly Balistreri, Bowling Green State University Young, Incarcerated, and Black: Stemming Racial Inequalities in the Juvenile Justice System through Employment Support - Niki Weller, Indiana University-Kokomo; Tyeisha Fordham; Theresa Ochoa, Indiana University; Chryssa Athans Youth Shelter Experiences among LGBTQ+ Runaway Youth in South Korea - Yonglim Choung, Chung-Ang University 

2270.  Section on Aging and the Life Course. Section on Aging and the Life Course: Matilda White Riley Lecture VAM, Room 69, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Karas Montez, Syracuse University Presider: Jennifer Karas Montez, Syracuse University Panelist: Merril Silverstein, Syracuse University 

# Sunday, 12:45 pm 2302.  Book Forum. Hustle and Gig: Struggling and Surviving in the Sharing Economy VAM, Room 1, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Isak Ladegaard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Moderators: Leslie Kay Jones, Rutgers University; Marianne Cooper, Stanford University Panelists: Christine L. Williams, University of Texas-Austin; Tressie Cottom, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Daniel J. Schneider, Harvard University Author: Alexandrea J. Ravenelle, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 

2303.  Special Sessions. Book Retrospective: White Supremacy and African-American Insurgency VAM, Room 2, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jeff Goodwin, New York University Presider: Linsey Nicole Edwards, New York University Panelists: Jeff Goodwin, New York University; Christian Davenport, University of Michigan; Walter Allen, UCLA Discussants: Frances Fox Piven, City University of New York; Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University 

2304.  Special Sessions. #MeToo and Transnational Gender Justice VAM, Room 3, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Chaitanya Lakkimsetti, Texas A&M University-College Station Presider: Bandana Purkayastha, University of Connecticut Panelists: Hae Yeon Choo, University of Toronto; Ashley Currier, University of Cincinnati; Vrushali Patil, Florida International University 

2305. Regional Spotlight Session. Education as Reparations: The Burge Torture Ring and Reckoning with Police Violence VAM, Room 4, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve, Brown University Presider: Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve, Brown University 

> Session 2262, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 47 

Panelists: Natalie Moore, NPR, WBEZ Chicago; Flint Taylor, People's Law Office; Laurence Ralph, Princeton University; Alice Kim, University of Chicago 

2306.  Thematic Sessions. Countering the Carceral Continuum, Aiming for Prison Abolition VAM, Room 5, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Carla Shedd, CUNY-Graduate Center Presider: Carla Shedd, CUNY-Graduate Center Panelists: Susila Gurusami, University of Illinois at Chicago; Dorothy E. Roberts, University of Pennsylvania; Jerry Flores, University of Toronto Discussant: Carla Shedd, CUNY-Graduate Center 

2307.  Thematic Sessions. Insights from Ethnographic Studies of LGBTQ+ Populations and Communities VAM, Room 6, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Japonica Brown-Saracino, Boston University; Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Presider: Japonica Brown-Saracino, Boston University At the Margins of the Margins: Black Gay Identities in Los Angeles - Terrell James Antonio Winder, University of California-Santa Barbara Wigs, Wingmen, and Whiskey: Ethnographic Opportunities and Dilemmas in the Study of LGBTQ festival life - Amy L. Stone, Trinity University The Great Migration and the Development of Community among Black, Sexual Minority Women: Exploring and Locating Archival Material - Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College From Neighborhoods to Nights: The Institutional and Temporal Transformation of LGBTQ+ Urban Life - Amin Ghaziani, University of British Columbia Capturing What is Lost: Ethnographic Strategies for Studying Nostalgia among LGBTQ+ Populations - Japonica Brown-Saracino, Boston University 

2308.  Thematic Sessions. The State of Sociology at HBCUs VAM, Room 7, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Anita Bledsoe Gardner, Johnson C. Smith University Presider: Nicole J. Lucas, Fayetteville State University Panelists: Brittany C. Slatton, Texas Southern University; Anita Bledsoe Gardner, Johnson C. Smith University; Mary Barr, Kentucky State University 

2309. Ideas for Future Research. A Tale of Two Solutions to the College Affordability Crisis VAM, Room 8, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Hannah Ingersoll A Tale of Two Solutions to the College Affordability Crisis - Hannah Ingersoll 

2310.  Professional Development Workshop. Finding the Fund: A Workshop on the Howery Teaching Enhancement Fund VAM, Room 9, 12:45-2:10pm 

Leaders: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association; Nailah Russell, ASA Co-Leaders: Stephanie Marie Teixeira-Poit, North Carolina A&T State University; Jeannette Wade, North Carolina A&T State University; Tobin N. Walton, North Carolina A&T State University; Peter Hart-Brinson, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire; Matthew E. Archibald, College of Mount Saint Vincent; Omar Nagi, College of Mount Saint Vincent; Tracy E. Ore, Saint Cloud State University; Pamela Ray Koch, Hope College 

2311.  Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements. Race, Ethics, and Protest Research VAM, Room 10, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura J. Heideman, Northern Illinois University; Andrea S. Boyles, Tulane University Presider: Andrea S. Boyles, Tulane University What’s the Point of Activist Scholarship? Fieldnotes from Migrant Youth Politics and Healing Justice Projects - Rachel E. Luft, Seattle University; Natalie Cisneros, Seattle University We Can Talk; You Put in Work, too”: Trust and Ethnography in Contemporary Black Activism - Emmanuel Cannady, University of Notre Dame Developing Ethical Standards for Student Research Participation -Laura J. Heideman, Northern Illinois University Redefining Antiracism: Sharpening Academic Language through Community Discourse - Annie Heuscher 

2312.  Sociology in Practice Settings Symposium. The Environmental Effects of Sociologists in the Environment VAM, Room 11, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Sidra J. Montgomery, Insight Policy Research Presider: Christopher Steven Marcum, National Institutes of Health Addressing Catastrophic Wildfires Through a Sociological Lens: Applying Lessons from a Social Impact Assessment - Alan William Barton, New Mexico Highlands University Research or Engagement? Distinguishing the roles Social Sciences in Environmental Research as “Integration” and “Application” - Emily Eisenhauer, Environmental Protection Agency Applying Sociology in the Energy Industry - Anna C. McCreery, Elevate Energy; Renée Skeete, ComEd; Ryan S. Burg, Commonwealth Edison 

2313.  Section on Medical Sociology. Health and Health Care Policy Across the Life Course VAM, Room 12, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Deborah Carr, Boston University Presider: Deborah Carr, Boston University Parental Health and Children’s Adult Status Attainments - Xing Zhang, Arizona State University-Downtown Phoenix; Anna M. Hammersmith, Grand Valley State University The Long Arm of Childhood: Does It Vary According to Healthcare System Quality? - Matthew Andersson, Baylor University; Lindsay R. Wilkinson, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Markus H. Schafer, University of Toronto The Long Arm of Prospective Childhood Income for Mature Adult Health in the U.S. - David Brady, University of California, Riverside; Christian Guerra, University of California Riverside; Ulrich Kohler, University of Potsdam; Bruce G. Link, University of California-Riverside The ‘long arm’ of youth: Adolescent health behaviors, puberty, and networks linked to adult cardiometabolic risk - Mark C. Pachucki, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Youngjoon Bae, University of Massachusetts at Amherst; Lindsay Till Hoyt, Fordham University; John R. Sirard, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; Genevieve Chandler, University of Massachusetts, Amherst 

> Session 2305, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 48 

Understanding the Unimmunized “Wakefield Generation”: Decisions of Young Adults who Grew Up Without Vaccines -Jennifer A. Reich, University of Colorado Denver Discussant: Elizabeth Lawrence, University of Nevada, Las Vegas 

2314.  Section on Marxist Sociology. Racial Capitalism and Abolitionist Marxisms VAM, Room 13, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hannah A. Holleman, Amherst College Presider: Atef S. Said, University of Illinois at Chicago Big Data, Criminalization, and Abolition in Chicago - Andy Clarno, University of Illinois-Chicago Racial Capitalism, Class, Race, and Revolution - Anthony Jerald Jackson, Howard Univerity; Walda Katz-Fishman, Howard University; Jerome Scott, League of Revolutionaries for a New America The Epoch of Necro-Ecology: The role of racialism in the development and maintenance of fossil capital - Patrick Trent Greiner, Vanderbilt University; Julius Alexander McGee, Portland State University The South African Tradition of Racial Capitalism: Thinking Race and Class in Another Settler Colony - Zachary Levenson, University of North Carolina, Greensboro; Marcel Paret, University of Utah When Black Movements Win, the Whole 99% Wins - Joshua Murray, Vanderbilt University; Megan Jordan; Kevin Young, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Michael Schwartz, Stony Brook University 

2315.  Section on Global and Transnational Sociology. Open Topic: The Making of the Global VAM, Room 14, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Ching Kwan Lee, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Aaron Benanav, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin A Global Racism Approach: Islamophobia - Michelle Marie Christian, University of Tennessee-Knoxville; Steve Garner, Cardiff University, UK Going global: Securing union inclusion in national supply chain labor governance initiatives - Sarah Ashwin, London School of Economics; Nora Lohmeyer, Radboud University; Niklas Egels-Zandén, University of Gothenburg; Rachel Alexander, Copenhagen Business School Human Trafficking: Why Now? Meaning-Making at the United Nations - Tania Lopez DoCarmo, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Professional Arbitrage and Imperial Pathways: The Rise of Offshore Finance - Brooke Harrington, Dartmouth College; Leonard Seabrooke, Copenhagen Business School The Strengths and Limits of Neoliberal Populism: The Developmentalism and Mass Organization of Rightwing Regimes - Cihan Ziya Tugal, University of California, Berkeley 

2316.  Section on Economic Sociology. Elites, Assets, and Inequality VAM, Room 15, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Adler, Harvard University; Nathan Wilmers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Presider: Carly Knight, New York University Ascribing Moral Motives: Examining Complementor Responses to Platform Governance Actions - Joey Van Angeren, Vrije University; Arvind Karunakaran, McGill University Elites on the Move: Explaining Millionaire Demand for Investor Visas - Yossi Harpaz, Tel-Aviv University Shareholder Power, Corporate Time Horizon, and Labor Earnings Inequality: How Private Equity Buyouts Reallocate Risk -Dylan Nelson, University of Michigan The Dynamics of Privately Held Business Assets in the United States - Kim Pernell, University of Toronto; Geoffrey Thomas Wodtke, University of Chicago The State Politics of Corporate Downsizings - Jiwook Jung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Tom VanHeuvelen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities 

2317.  Section on Aging and the Life Course. Aging and the Life Course at a Time of Multiple Crises VAM, Room 16, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Ynesse Abdul-Malak, Colgate University Presider: Ynesse Abdul-Malak, Colgate University Coping with the COVID-19: Racial Differences in Self-Appraisal, Religious Coping, Psychological Well-being in Later Life -Timothy D. Goler, Norfolk State University; Tirth Raj Bhatta, University of Nevada, Las Vegas; Nirmala Lekhak Disability, ableism and care during COVID-19 in the US - Laura Mauldin, University of Connecticut Early Life Patterns of Criminal Justice Involvement: Inequalities by Race-Ethnicity, Gender, and Socioeconomic Status -Courtney E. Boen, University of Pennsylvania; Nick Graetz, University of Pennsylvania; Hannah Olson; Zohra Ansari-Thomas, University of Pennsylvania; Laurin Elizabeth Bixby, University of Pennsylvania; Rebecca Anna Schut, University of Pennsylvania; Hedwig Lee, Washington University-St. Louis New Opportunity to Address Multimorbidity: Longitudinal Associations between Retirement Sequences and Chronic Diseases in Old Age - Robin Shura, Kent State University at Stark; Esteban Calvo, Universidad Mayor, Chile; Ariel R Azar, The University of Chicago; Ursula M Staudinger, Technical University of Dresden Discussant: Fumilayo Showers, University of Connecticut 

2318.  Section on Social Psychology. Cooley-Mead Award Ceremony and Address VAM, Room 17, 12:45-2:45pm 

Session Organizer: Celeste Campos-Castillo, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Presider: C. Andre Christie-Mizell, Vanderbilt University Panelists: Jan E. Stets, University of California-Riverside; Neil J. MacKinnon, University of Guelph 

2319.  Section on Children and Youth. Child and Youth Perspectives on Social Problems and Social Change VAM, Room 18, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Margaret A. Hagerman, Mississippi State University Presider: Gabe Miller, Mississippi State University Anti-Blackness and the Racial Context of Childhood: Learning to Loathe Blackness in a Post-Chocolate City - Julio Angel Alicea, University of California, Los Angeles The Politics of Protection: Inequality and Social Change in a High School - C.J. Pascoe, University of Oregon (Dis)Engagement: The Changing Relationship Between GSAs, Emotion, and Politics - Elizabeth Moison, University of Notre Dame 

> Session 2313, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 49 

Mean Girls and Tough Guys: Gender, Sexuality and Bullying Prevention’s Hidden Curriculum - Sarah A. Miller, Boston University Relentless Innovators: Youth Perspectives on Social Change and Intersectional Organizing in the Wake of COVID-19 - Johnnie Lotesta, Harvard University; Jerusha Conner, Villanova University; Alex Foley, Harvard Kennedy School Discussant: Theresa Marie Hice-Fromille, University of California, Santa Cruz 

2320.  Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology. Caring Pedagogies: Teaching in Challenging Times VAM, Room 19, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Molly J. Dingel, Unversity of Minnesota Rochester Presiders: Daniel K. Cortese, Governors State University; Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha; Molly J. Dingel, Unversity of Minnesota Rochester An Ethics of Care to Transform Teaching and Learning - Danielle MacCartney, Webster University; Kate Parsons, Webster University Course Satisfaction, Barriers, and Online Learning Choices amongst Underserved Students in Higher Education -Madhumita Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Parkside ‘I Wish They Were More Understanding’: Definitions and Perceptions of Empathy in the College Classroom - Lainey Collins, University of Indianapolis; Allison H. Snyder, University of Indianapolis; Colleen Elizabeth Wynn, University of Indianapolis Pedagogies and Teaching in a Pandemic - Inna Mirzoyan, Michigan State University; Brendan Mullan, Michigan State University; Anna Wilcoxson, Michigan State University Transferring Trauma-Informed Teaching Practices Online - Bethany Lee Van Brown, Cabrini University; Johanna Crocetto, Cabrini University 

2321.  Theory Section. Theorizing Crisis VAM, Room 20, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Simone Polillo, University of Virginia; Robin E. Wagner-Pacifici, New School For Social Research Presiders: Robin E. Wagner-Pacifici, New School For Social Research; Simone Polillo, University of Virginia COVID Emergencies: Acute Crises, Slow Emergency, and the Uneven Valuation of Life - Claire Laurier Decoteau, University of Illinois-Chicago Eros and Trumpism: A Marcusian Interpretation - Chad Alan Goldberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison Expanding the sociological imagination of crisis: theorizing crisis beyond moral indictments - André Vereta-Nahoum, University of Sao Paulo Historical Events as Bridges Between Social Domains Taking Bolsonaro’s Victory Personally in the 2018 Brazilian Elections - Sergio Galaz Garcia, Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas What ‘Emergency’ Does: Democratic Decline and the Politics of Inevitability - Mo Torres, Harvard University 

2322.  Student Forum. Entering the Academic Job Market During Covid-19: Guidance on Successful Sociology Placements in Troubling Times VAM, Room 21, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Aaron Arredondo, University of Missouri; TehQuin Forbes, Florida State University; Amirhossein Teimouri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Chmapaign Leader: Aaron Arredondo, University of Missouri Co-Leaders: Virginia Kuulei Berndt, University of Delaware; Taylor Jackson, Florida State University; Sadé Lindsay, Cornell University; Lacee Anne Satcher, Vanderbilt University; Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin 

2323.  Regular Session. Regular Session on Consumers and Consumption - Session One VAM, Room 22, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Smith Maguire, Sheffield Hallam University Presider: Jennifer Smith Maguire, Sheffield Hallam University Buying Black in the Age of George Floyd - Miara Bailey-Hall, North Carolina State University Ceviche nationalism. The legitimation of Peruvian gastronomy -Nino Bariola, The University of Texas at Austin Luxury Consumption and Competing Discourses of Entitlement: How it Reflects Different Types of Social Stratification -Keon Sun Kim, Sogang University; Seil Oh, Sogang Univ. Sociology Department Professor Practices of Thrift Among High Cultural Capital Consumers: Expanding the Concept of Eco-habitus. - Gaelle Bargain-Darrigues, Boston College 

2324.  Regular Session. Systemic Racism and Inequality as Embedded in Social Interaction VAM, Room 23, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Warfield Rawls, Bentley University Presider: Kevin A. Whitehead, University of California-Santa Barbara Racial Incompetence as a Comedic Device, and a Tacit Method of Anti-Racist Education - Lillian Cheeks, University of California, Santa Barbara; Kevin A. Whitehead, University of California-Santa Barbara Ambiguities in Action Ascription - Tanya Stivers, University of California-Los Angeles; Giovanni Rossi, University of California-Los Angeles; Andrew Chalfoun, University of California Los Angeles Doing Justifying Discrimination through Categorization Work: An Examination of Minority Group Members’ Practices -Tianhao Zhang, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Resisting Categorization in Interaction: Membership Categorization Analysis of Sitcom Humor - Ryo Okazawa, Meiji Gakuin University Secondary Ethnographic Analysis: A Neglected Resource - Alex Dennis, University of Sheffield 

2325.  Regular Session. Gender, Work, and Inequality VAM, Room 24, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Emmanuel David, University of Colorado Boulder Presider: Emmanuel David, University of Colorado Boulder Are Authority Jobs Better Jobs? Gender-Contingent Associations of Authority with Job Resources, Strains, and Burnout -Dragana Stojmenovska, University of Amsterdam “Force Multipliers” and “Risk Multipliers:” Organizational Myth 

> Session 2319, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 50 

and Gender Integration of the U.S. Combat Arms - Janelle Marissa Pham, Oglethorpe University Gender Inequality in Medicine and Burnout - Tania M. Jenkins, University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill; Alyssa Browne, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill The Persistent Feminization of Care Work Changes and Continuities in the Provision of Care - Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania 

2326.  Regular Session. Sociology of Higher Education: Understanding Inequities within Postsecondary Institutions VAM, Room 25, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Kalasia S. Ojeh, University of Louisville Presider: Kalasia S. Ojeh, University of Louisville Divergent Pathways: How Pre-Orientation Programs Can Shape the Transition to College for Historically Underrepresented Students - Lauren Beard Examining Colonialism, Legitimacy, and Justice in Canadian Postsecondary Institutions - Trisha Einmann Is College the Ticket to Security? Recent Graduates’ Perceptions of the Value of their Degrees - Judith A. Levine, Temple University Unpacking "Black": Systematic Erasure and Concealed Heterogeneity in Early College Outcomes Among Black Students - Irenee R. Beattie, University of California-Merced; Melissa Quesada, University of California, Merced; Karly Sarita Ford, Penn State Discussants: Kalasia S. Ojeh, University of Louisville; jim saliba 

2327.  Regular Session. Science, Controversy, and the State VAM, Room 26, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Alka Menon, Yale University Presider: Alka Menon, Yale University Publics, Scientists, and the State: Mapping the Global Human Genome Editing Controversy - Ya-Wen Lei, Harvard University The Ties that Align: State-Firm Symbiosis in China’s Genetic Data Production Regime - Abigail Coplin, Vassar College Sovereign oceans: Undone science and scientific authority in the wake of a global environmental crisis - Apollonya Maria Porcelli, College of the Holy Cross Learning Right from Wrong: A Cross-National, Multi-Level Analysis of the Morality of Science - Shiri Noy, Denison University; Timothy L. O'Brien, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 

2328.  Regular Session. Sexualities: Thinking about numbers, thinking about the box. VAM, Room 27, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: D'Lane R. Compton, University of New Orleans Presider: Melissa Osborne, Western Washington University Are We Even in the Acronym? Asexuals’ Attitudes toward LGBTQ Individuals - Meredith Gwynne Fair Worthen, University of Oklahoma; David Laljer, University of Oklahoma Childhood Experiences and Sexual Assault among LGBTQ+ Adults: Adolescent Assault, Internalized Homonegativity, & Alcohol as Mediators - Tara Elizabeth Sutton, Mississippi State University; Katie M Edwards, University of Nebraska -Lincoln; Laura Siller, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Ryan C Shorey, University of Wisconsin – Milwaukee Gender Differences in Regretted Sexual Experiences and Problematic Alcohol Use among First-Year University Students - Shannon Shen, Texas A&M University-San Antonio; Vicky L. Elias, Texas A&M - San Antonio Sexual orientation and life satisfaction - David Bartram, University of Leicester Discussant: Danya Lagos, University of California-Berkeley 

2329.  Regular Session. Social Networks VAM, Room 28, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Mikaila Mariel Lemonik Arthur, Rhode Island College Presider: Mikaila Mariel Lemonik Arthur, Rhode Island College Rising Floodwaters: Spatial Social Network Effects on COVID-19 Outcomes by Race and Ethnicity - Loring J Thomas, University of California, Irvine; Peng Huang, University of California, Irvine; Fan Yin; Xiaoshuang Iris Luo, University of California-Irvine; Zack W. Almquist, University of Washington; John R. Hipp, University of California-Irvine; Carter T. Butts, University of California-Irvine Police Misconduct Complaints and the Dynamics of Intra-organizational Personnel Exchange - James P Murphy, Northwestern University; Andrew V. Papachristos, Northwestern University Racial Homophily in Teachers’ Social Networks - Jennifer Lauren Nelson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; David Kalim Diehl, Vanderbilt University; Huriya Jabbar Organizational relationships and status reproduction: A network analysis of accounting firms and colleges - Kristen Tzoc, Boston University Networks and Migration: Strong Ties and Migration Inclination -Roberson Beauvile, Emory University Alter Loss Following A Major Health Event Among Older LGBT Adults: Evidence from UCNets - Tara A. McKay, Vanderbilt University; Matthew Facciani, Vanderbilt University; Harry Barbee, Vanderbilt University 

2330.  Regular Session. History and Sociology of Sociology VAM, Room 29, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Mitchell Duneier, Princeton University Presider: Eviatar Zerubavel, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Falsification Immunity and the Theory Effect: The Never-ending Story of a Simple Mistake - Stefan Bargheer, Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies The Immigrant Sociologist: Paul Siu at Chicago - Nicolas Eilbaum, Greensboro College The Socio-Analogical Imagination - Eviatar Zerubavel, Rutgers University-New Brunswick 

2331.  Regular Session. From Violence to Security: Global Migration and Local Resettlement VAM, Room 30, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Van C. Tran, The Graduate Center, CUNY Presider: Francisco Lara-Garcia, Columbia University “The Day We Left”: How Do Syrian Refugees Decide to Flee? -Rawan Arar, University of Washington Liminal Legality and Irregularity: The Fragility of Colombia’s Special Legalization Permits for Venezuelan Migrants - Deisy Del Real, University of Southern California Waiting for Resettlement and Managing Expectations - Jake Watson, Boston University Compounded Violence: Undocumented Mexicans’ Migration to and Settlement in the US - Angela S. Garcia, University of Chicago; Ikiltezilani Mazehuani; Juan Contreras The Traffic Stop to Deportation Pipeline and How to Disrupt It in NY State - Robert Courtney Smith, CUNY-Baruch College; Andrés Sebastián Besserer Rayas, Graduate Center CUNY 

> Session 2325, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 51 2332.  Regular Session. Assortative Mating VAM, Room 31, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Hickes Lundquist, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Presider: Jennifer Hickes Lundquist, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Children of Immigrants and Racial Assortative Mating in the Transition to Adulthood - Maurice Anyawie, Bowling Green State University Parental Educational Homogamy and Intergenerational Educational Reproduction: Effects, Mechanisms and Racial Differences - Hanzhi Hu, University of Oxford; Richard James Breen, Nuffield College The Role of Assortative Mating in Economic Disparities between First and Continuing-generation College Graduates - Tabitha Gabrielle Wilbur, Indiana University 

2333.  Regular Session. Union Formation Across the Life Course VAM, Room 32, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Wendy Diane Manning, Bowling Green State University Presider: Wendy Diane Manning, Bowling Green State University Single and not ready to mingle: Attitudes towards romance by age and gender during COVID-19 - Hannah Tessler, Yale University; Meera Choi, Yale University; Grace Kao, Yale University Childhood Family Instability and Union Experiences During Young Adulthood: Racial Differences in Outcomes and Effects -Deirdre Bloome, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Yang Zhang, University of Michigan The Cohabitation Wealth Premium: Comparing France, and Eastern and Western Germany - Nicole Kapelle; Nicolas Frémeaux, Université Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas; Philipp Lersch, Humboldt-University of Berlin; Marion Leturcq, Institut national d'études démographiques Marital Status and Depressive Symptoms among Middle-Aged and Older Adults: The Moderating Effects of Living Arrangements - Jingwen Liu; Feinian Chen, University of Maryland-College Park; Hangqing Ruan, University of Maryland; Dan Zhang Discussant: Susan L. Brown, Bowling Green State University 

2334.  Regular Session. Sociology of Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations VAM, Room 33, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Presider: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Demarcation and Difference: Language & Racial Self-Identity in Latin America - Andres Rodriguez-Caceres; Julia A Behrman, Northwestern University Moral Economy or Indigenous Politics? Infrastructure Development in Late 19th and Early 20th Century Khuzestan, Iran - Aghil Daghagheleh On Claiming Family: Changes in Reported Familial Networks among Native Americans in Wake of Allotment - Carrie D. Stallings The Territorial Foundations of Privilege: Racial Discourse & Indigenous Peoples - David W. Everson, University of Southern Maine White Pleasure and Native Struggle: Conveyance and Interpretation of Native American Identity - Laurel R. Davis-Delano, Springfield College; Joseph P. Gone, Professor of Anthropology and Professor of Global Health & Medicine, Harvard University & Harvard Medical School; Sita Strother, Program Coordinator at JSI Research & Training Institute; BA in Medical Anthropology Yale University 

2347.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 1: Production and Reception of Culture VAM, Room 46, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Sarah M. Neitz, University of Notre Dame Recurrence: A Pragmatist Account of Taste - Sarah M. Neitz, University of Notre Dame White Seasons: Racial Implications of the Standardization of Programming in Opera Houses - Ayesha Casie Chetty, University of Cincinnati The Changing Face of Heroism: On Iconic Transformations, Critical Aesthetic Publics, and the Civil Sphere - Albert Lee Hawks, University of Michigan “Knowing” Your Audience: Anticipating Humor Reception, Upholding Moral Boundaries, Publicly Constructing a Sense of Humor - Emily L. Mason Categorical Ambiguity and Experts as Authenticators - Arnaud Cudennec, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

2348.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 2: Intersectionality VAM, Room 47, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Alexander Hoppe, University of Pennsylvania Race, Gender, and Sexuality Representation in Contemporary Triple-A Video Game Narratives - Cory Haines, Virginia Polytechnic and State University Interracial Attraction and Affiliative Ethnic Identity: a Case Study of Whites Intermarried with South Asians - Louise Ly, University of California, Berkeley New Wine in Old Bottles: The Changing Face of Arranged Marriages in New York City - Popy Begum, School of Criminal Justice The Gendered Economy of Film Criticism in US Newspapers, 1998-2018 - Dimitrios Zaras, Emory University 

2349.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 3: Embodiment, Gender, and Sexuality VAM, Room 48, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Melissa Cambero Scott, Florida International University Culture, knowledge systems and education in Africa: A Look at the Bragoro Puberty Rites - Sylvia Esther Gyan, University of Ghana Towards an Emancipatory Sociology of Incest - Q Aunrika Tucker-Shabazz, University of Michigan Ann Arbor Dual-Process Cognition, Embodiment, and Gender: How Female Bloggers Make Sense of Corporeal Change - Jessica Poling, Rutgers University Tracing Colonial Legacies of Vulval Aesthetics - Nadia Roche SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 52 2350.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 4: Meaning and Metaphor VAM, Room 49, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame Geography or Gemeinschaft? Disentangling the meaning of "community" through word embeddings - Connor Craig Gilroy, University of Washington Earth, Wind, (Water), and Fire: Defining the Institutional Logic of Climate Change Research - Antonio Nanni, Northwestern University; Mallory Fallin, Northwestern University Mapping Multivocality: How Critics Produce Aesthetic Experiences with Spatial Metaphors - Hannah Wohl, University of California, Santa Barbara A Visual Approach to Interpreting the Career of Metaphor -Vincent Yung, Northwestern University 

2351.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 5: Macro Cultural Change VAM, Room 50, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Ahoo Tabatabai, Columbia College of Missouri The New Great Transformation: Apocalypse Maybe - Robert MacNeil Christie, Calfiornia State University, Dominguez Hills Religion and the Transformation of Modern Economic Value Systems: Economy and Communion, or “Culture Wars” -Sarah L. MacMillen, Duquesne University The Emergence of Youth Evaluations of Work, Family, and Relationships - John Christopher Holley, Suffolk University Welcome to His House: Horror and Immigration Trauma - Ahoo Tabatabai, Columbia College of Missouri 

2352.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 6: Social and Institutional Change VAM, Room 51, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Libby Trudeau, University of Notre Dame Social Trajectory and Mechanisms for Social Change in Contemporary China - Yi Yin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Emergent Trends in Public Opinion on Animal Farming and Animal Product Alternatives - Jacy Reese Anthis, University of Chicago When Kids Hitting Each Other is Okay: Examining U.S. Adult Support for Youth Tackle Football - Mariah K. Warner, Ohio State University; Chris Knoester, Ohio State University Domino Effect: The Institutionalized Response to Human Trafficking as a Social Problem in the United States - Libby Trudeau, University of Notre Dame 

2353.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 7: Culture and Inequality VAM, Room 52, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Li Zhu, University of California, Berkeley Uncovering the feel for the game at schools: Evidence from two factorial survey experiments - Francisco Olivos, The Chinese University of Hong Kong Official or Unofficial? Boundary Work between Two Groups of Elite Artists in China - Yucheng Liu, University of California, Santa Barbara What is Meritocracy? Chinese Working-Class College Students’ Meritocratic Beliefs and Moral Resistance - Li Zhu, University of California, Berkeley 

2354.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 8: Meritocracy VAM, Room 53, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Luca Carbone, KU Leuven The cultural relativity of merit - Victor M. Kogan, Saint Martin's University Sounds like meritocracy to my ears: Inequality in music and its influence on individuals’ meritocratic beliefs - Luca Carbone, KU Leuven; Jonathan Jan Benjamin Mijs, Harvard University What is prestige? The division of labor and the dramaturgy of merit on  Jeopardy! - Alexander Kindel, Princeton University Sh!tocracy: The Madness of Inequality in a Hypercompetitive Society - Michael M. Bell, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Hannah Kass; Abigail Letak, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

2355.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 9: Culture in COVID and Crisis VAM, Room 54, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Femke Vandenberg, Erasmus University Constructing the Virtual Music Concert: How High, Pop and Folk Audiences Build Context Online - Femke Vandenberg, Erasmus University; Michaël Berghman, Erasmus University Rotterdam Day ? of Quarantine: Covid-19 Pandemic as a Failed Rite of Passage with Perpetual Liminality - Michael Ohsfeldt, Texas A&M University Feeding the hungry during crisis: Moral claims about hunger on Twitter during the COVID-19 pandemic - Merin Oleschuk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign The (non) use of the internet to meet fertility needs amidst covid-19: The Ghanaian situation - Rosemond Akpene Hiadzi, University of Ghana Surviving the “Chernobyl Moment” - Yuanhao Liu SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 53 2356.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 10: Culture and Emotion VAM, Room 55, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Anna Gabur, University of Notre Dame We Know Your Pain. Cultural Dimensions of Pain and Suffering -Anna Gabur, University of Notre Dame Pride and Protest: Emotional response in the aftermath of the 2019 Chilean social outburst - Francisco Olivos, The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Cristián Ayala, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile; Alex Leyton, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile From Helmets to Facemasks: How Collective Emotions Sustain Diasporic Mobilization from Hong Kong Uprising to Pandemic - Chi Pan Wong You Have to Feel It to Know It: How Objectification Integrates Practical and Discursive Consciousness - Spencer Paine 

2357.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 11: Narratives VAM, Room 56, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Chanel Prince, University of Massachusetts Amherst The Cultural Practice of Healing through Psychedelics: Narratives of Self-Transformation - Jarrett Robert Rose Culture on the Couch: A Computational Analysis of Self Practice in Psychotherapy - Sophie Clare Moullin, Princeton University Towards a Sociology of Political Myth: A Structural-Hermeneutic Analysis of Political Narratives in the Turkish Diaspora -Vasfiye Betul Toprak, University of Virginia Gendered Framing and the Evolution of #MeToo - Hayley Pierce, Brigham Young University-Provo; Michael Lee Wood, Brigham Young University-Provo 

2358.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 12: Memory and Futures VAM, Room 57, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Daniel Jaster, Eureka College “One Job, Stable”: The Projected Futures of Insecure College Graduates in the U.S. and Spain - Elena Ayala-Hurtado, Harvard University What's in a Name? Contested Construction of Racial History in the United States and Canada - Derek James Robey, Harvard University Staging Inter/nationalism: Literature and Politics at the Belgrade Book Fair - Emma Brandt, Northwestern University; Wendy Griswold, Northwestern University 

2359.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 13: Cognition VAM, Room 58, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame All Roads Lead to Rome: Cultural Attractors at the Junction of Public and Personal Culture - Andrei G. Boutyline, University of Michigan; Devin J Cornell, Duke University; Alina Arseniev-Koehler, University of California Los Angeles Becoming an Extremely Liberal Millennial: Far-Left Ideological Development during the Transition to Adulthood - Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Subjective Models of Polarization and the Decline of Social Trust -Hyunku Kwon Cross-Cultural Investigation of Shared Cultural Schemas: Using Implicit Cognitive Measures of Values - Ji Hye Kim, University of Iowa Beyond Bifurcation: Cognition, Action, and Liminality in Improvisational Theatre - Gordon Brett, University of Toronto 

2360.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 14: Organizations VAM, Room 59, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame Geography in the Making of Culture and Corporate Strategy -Kunyuan Qiao, Cornell University Under Pressure: Cultural and Structure as Antecedents of Organizational Misconduct - Andrea Cavicchini, IESE Business School; Fabrizio Ferraro, IESE Business School, University of Navarra; Sampsa Samila, IESE Business School Evolution of Meetup Technology Communities in Networked Ecologies - Qianyi Shi, The University of Iowa Reconstructing Trinity University (1869-1902): The Institutionalization of White Supremacy in the Texas Blackland Prairie - Sarah Beth Kaufman, Trinity University 

2361.  Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables. Table 15: Visual Methods VAM, Room 60, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Audra Dugandzic, University of Notre Dame; Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame; Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame; Michael Rotolo, University of Notre Dame Table Presider: Rachel Keynton, University of Notre Dame Using Video-Ethnographic Data to Study Parenting Interactions - Joanne W. Golann, Vanderbilt University; Richard Hall, Vanderbilt University Drawing Out Data: Analyzing Relationships through Participant-Produced Drawings - Abigail Jorgensen, University of Notre Dame Insert Your [Suburban] Logo Here: Using Logos to Brand Municipalities in the Chicago Region - Brian J. Miller, Wheaton College 

2369.  Meeting. Section on Asia and Asian America Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 12:45-1:15pm 2370.  Meeting. Section on Methodology Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 12:45-1:15pm SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 54 Sunday, 1:15 pm 2462.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. COVID-19 and Asia & Asian America VAM, Room 61, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Creating “Digital Local Networks” to Tackle Structural Stigma as a Social Determinant of Health - Amy Zhang, University of Texas at Austin; Susanna Park Revisiting “The Chinese Virus:” Deconstructing Stigma during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Anahi Viladrich, CUNY-Queens College Social Influences on Subjective Distress Associated with COVID-19: Evidence from Hubei Province of China - Min Zhou, University of Victoria We are All in This Together: COVID-19 Pandemic Increases Interpersonal Social Connections - Zhixiang Su; Patrick Xu, University of California, Berkeley; Lewei Huang; Zijie Song, Sun Yat-sen University; Hongye Chen, University of California, Berkeley; Jianhua Zhou, Hong Kong University of Science of Technology; Rui Pan, University of Chicago; Wenjie Duan, East China University of Science and Technology 

2463.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. Demography and Family VAM, Room 62, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Ran Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison Living in ethnic areas or not? Residential preference of decimal generation immigrants among Asian ethnic groups -Shuang Li, South Dakota State University; Weiwei Zhang, South Dakota State University Means of Production and Son Preference in Socialist and Post-Socialist China - Fangqi Wen, University of Oxford; Hanzhi Hu, University of Oxford Socio economic determinants of traditional versus modern contraception use in Pakistan, Bangladesh and India - Fizza Raza, Texas A&M University; Brian Colwell, Texas A&M University; David Washburn; Jay E. Maddock, Texas A&M University South Korea’s Changing Family Dynamics and Child and Adolescent Behavioral Problems - Jared M. Poff, Brigham Young University; Jonathan A. Jarvis, Brigham Young University-Provo; Ashley Larsen Gibby, Brigham Young University; Mikaela Dufur, Brigham Young University-Provo 

2464.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. Environment and Social Movement VAM, Room 63, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Yao Li, University of Florida Environmental Field and Its Transformation in China - Liangfei Ye Extracting Resistance: Coal, Environmental Policy, and Economic Development in the Chinese Hinterland - Daniel Yoder Zipp, UCLA The Making of a Viral Event: How Media Shapes Homeowner Protest in Urban China - Yitong Liu, Boston College; Julia Chuang, Boston College 

2465.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. Health of Asian Americans VAM, Room 64, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Christina Hughes, University of Washington Modern Loneliness: Mental Health and Multiracial Asian American Identities - Doreen Hsu, University of California, San Diego Oral Health Disparities among Asians in the U.S.: The Role of household Language - Chengming Han, Case Western Reserve University Social Support and Mental Health Help Seeking among Asian Americans in the South - Yvonne Chen, Vanderbilt University 

2466.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. Identities of Asian Americans VAM, Room 65, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Kelly Haesung Chong, University of Kansas “Am I really an immigrant?”: Post-1965 Japanese Trans-migrant Identity Construction and Boundaries Negotiations in Houston - Xiaorui Zhang, Rice University Asian Americans in American Racial Capitalism: The Intersections of Race and Class - Marcelo A. Bohrt, American University; Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University; Michelle Liu, Brown University Stuck in the Past: Building Taiwanese Identities in Cold War America, 1965-1987 - Shirley Michelle Lung, The Johns Hopkins University 

2467.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. Women in Asia & Asian America VAM, Room 66, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Hyeyoung Woo, Portland State University Lady Health Workers vs. Pakistan’s public healthcare system -Sarah Ahmed Oral histories of the Sexually Enslaved during the WWII: Human Trafficking as Social Network Disruption - Eunjae Kim, Korea University; Eun Kyong Shin, Korea University Women's Social Reproductive Work Within Transnational Chinese Immigrant Families: An Exploratory Study - Guida C. Man, york university 

2468.  Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session. Young Adulthood VAM, Room 67, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hyunjoon Park, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Yi-Lin Chiang, National Chengchi University Social Cognitive Theory: College Persistence among Chinese Americans & International Students in the US - Tom Chiang, Rowan University The Gendered Nature of Marriage Aspirations in China - Sampson Lee Blair, University at Buffalo; Christina L Scott, Whittier College The Long-Term Influence of Job Insecurity on Psychological Distress among Young Adults in Japan - Yusuke Tsukada, University of Hawaii at Manoa SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 55 2471.  Section on Methodology. Methodology Section Duncan Lecture VAM, Room 70, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jennie E. Brand, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Jennie E. Brand, University of California-Los Angeles Panelist: Mario Luis Small, Harvard University 

# Sunday, 2:30 pm 2502.  Book Forum. Inventing Latinos: A New Story of American Racism VAM, Room 1, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nancy López, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Moderator: Nancy López, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Panelists: Nicholas Vargas, University of Florida; Rocío R. García, Arizona State University-Tempe; Walter Allen, UCLA Author: Laura E. Gomez, University of California-Los Angeles 

2503.  Special Sessions. Bringing the Sociological Imagination to Justice-Involved Adults Across the Literacy Spectrum: Challenges, Rewards, and Lessons Learned VAM, Room 2, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Christopher P. Dum, Kent State University; Timothy J. Owens, Kent State University Presiders: Christopher P. Dum, Kent State University; Samantha L Nousak, Kent State University Panelists: Lindsay Bing, University of Texas at Austin; Sheri-Lynn S. Kurisu, California State University-San Marcos; Timothy J. Owens, Kent State University; Kristenne M. Robison, Kent State University at Salem; Lewis Fields, Grafton Correctional Institution; John Spano, Grafton Correctional Institution; Alonzo Qunnie, Grafton Correctional Institution; Matthew Warmus, Grafton Correctional Institution; Warren Cromety, Grafton Correctional Institution; Elaine Frantz (Parsons), Kent State University 

2504.  Special Sessions. Missing and Murdered: Women of Color, Transgender, and Indigenous People VAM, Room 3, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Annie Isabel Fukushima, University of Utah Presider: Annie Isabel Fukushima, University of Utah Missing from the count: Visualizing the invisible victim in fem[in] icide data - Myrna Dawson, University of Guelph Intersectionality and Impunity: A comparative analysis of feminicidio in Mexico and the crisis of missing and murdered Indigenous women in Canada - Paulina Garcia del Moral, University of Guelph Guatemala and Mam indigenous refugee women, gender-based violence and feminicidio, and access to justice in Guatemala and in U.S. immigration courts - Lynn Stephen, University of Oregon Unequal Risk: Intersections of Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the Murders of Transgender People - Laurel Westbrook, Grand Valley State University 

2505.  Section on Sociology of Education. Section on Sociology of Education. Race/Ethnicity and the Use of Capital VAM, Room 4, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Mary Kate Blake, Valparaiso University; Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Presider: Maia B. Cucchiara, Temple University Are Networks Great Equalizers? Changes, Disparities and Moderators of Parent Involvement in Elementary Schools -Angran Li, Zhejiang University; Scott Davies, University of Toronto Laboring for Legitimacy: Examining How Suburban Black Parents Work to Advocate for Their Children - Gershwin Penn, Northwestern University No Safety Net? No Problem: Non-Dominant Cultural Capital as an Enabler of Educational Success - Nicholas Charles Monroe, Brandeis University Reproducing Anti-Blackness through Latinidad: A Case Study of New Horizons Middle School - Rebeca Gamez, Johns Hopkins University The Racialized and Gendered Deployment of Disability in Schools: A Multi-Level Process - Rachel Elizabeth Fish, New York University 

2506.  Section on Economic Sociology. Racial Processes in Economic Sociology VAM, Room 5, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: John N. Robinson, Washington University-St. Louis Presider: Elizabeth Korver-Glenn, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Embedding Racism: City Government Credit Ratings and the Institutionalization of Race in Markets - Davon Norris, The Ohio State University Frontier Domesticity and the Municipal Separation of Spheres -Luis Flores, University of Michigan Privilege, Promise, and Peril: Fiscal Precarity in a Majority-Black and Middle-Class Suburban County - Angela Marie Simms, Barnard College Wealth Begins at Home: The 1944 GI Bill and the Making of the Racial Wealth Gap - Chinyere O Agbai, Brown University When Banks Open: The Consequences of Bank Branch Openings on Credit Flows in Racially Segregated Areas - Asia Inez Bento, Rice University Discussant: Max Besbris, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

2507.  Thematic Sessions. Migration as Displacement VAM, Room 6, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Marco Z. Garrido, University of Chicago Presider: Rhacel Salazar Parrenas, University of Southern California Panelists: Brian Tuohy, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Katherine Jensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Liz Koslov, University of California-Los Angeles; Liza Weinstein, Northeastern University; Michael Warren Murphy, University of Pittsburgh 

2508.  Thematic Sessions. Viral Inequity: Race, Technology, and the Pandemic VAM, Room 7, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ruha Benjamin, Princeton University Presider: Ruha Benjamin, Princeton University Panelists: Joan Donovan, Harvard University; Angel Diaz, NYU Brennan Center for Justice; Frank Pasquale, University of Maryland; Cierra Robson, Harvard Sociology; Amy Moran-Thomas, MIT; Abeba Birhane, University College Dublin Computer Science SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 56 2509.  Meeting. The ASA Retirement Network (ASARN) Advisory Board and Business Meeting VAM, Room 8, 2:30-3:55pm 2510.  Professional Development Workshop. First-Gen/Working Class Pathways to Non-Academic Jobs VAM, Room 9, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Vincent J. Roscigno, Ohio State University; Doug Olthof Leaders: Elizabeth M. Lee, Saint Joseph's University; Erin Carll, University of Washington; Shelly Steward, University of California, Berkeley; Lynda L. Laughlin, U.S. Census Bureau; Nicholas A. Guittar, Valdosta State University 

2511.  Ideas for Future Research. Sociology of Artificial Intelligence VAM, Room 10, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presiders: Julian Posada, University of Toronto; Iga Kozlowska, Northwestern University Sociology of Artificial Intelligence - Julian Posada, University of Toronto; Iga Kozlowska, Northwestern University 

2512.  Sociology in Practice Settings Symposium. Sociological Questions and Tools of the Trade VAM, Room 11, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sidra J. Montgomery, Insight Policy Research Presider: Caren Arbeit, RTI International The Global Survey of Scientists: A Tool to Reduce Gender Inequality in the Natural Sciences - Rachel Ivie, American Institute of Physics; Susan White, American Institute of Physics Visual Sociology – tools for cultivating insight and employee-engagement - Maria Quinlan, Pink Flower Research “I hadn’t thought about that…”: adopting a systematic approach to anonymization in case studies. - JoAnne Wehner, Stanford University; Shannon Gilmartin, Stanford University Can a business be emancipatory? Reflections from a personal journey - Jenny Melo-Velasco, University of Missouri / Huella Delta 

2513.  Section on International Migration. Temporary Labor Migration Schemes in Global Perspective VAM, Room 12, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: David A. Cook-Martín, University of Colorado-Boulder Presider: Catherine Griebel Bowman, Austin College Bringing Back the Bracero Program: The Migration Industry in the Recruitment of H-2 Visa Workers - Ruben Hernandez-Leon, University of California-Los Angeles; Efren Sandoval-Hernandez; Lidia Munoz-Paniagua Contract Migration as Development Strategy: The Philippines and South Korea - Suzy K Lee, SUNY-Binghamton Life beyond the company in temporary agricultural labor - David Trouille, James Madison University Retaking Control? Sending States and the Regulation of Temporary Labor Migration - Kathryn C Babineau, University of Virginia ‘Training’ Foreign Workers, Cultivating Bias? Japan’s Guestworker Program - Hilary J. Holbrow, Indiana University-Bloomington 

2514.  Section on Marxist Sociology. Marxist Section Open Submission Session VAM, Room 13, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Hannah A. Holleman, Amherst College Presider: Karen Xuan Zhang, University of Utah Burning Bodies: Narratives of Incarcerated Young Women on Primitive Accumulation in Brazil - Roberta Pamplona, University of Toronto Contemporary Germany Viewed Through a Socialist Lens: Reflections on the Meanings of Consumption, Time, and Work - Melanie Lorek, CUNY School of Professional Studies Disability and the State Production of Precarity - Emily Ruppel, University of California-Berkeley Localizing the Gig: The Labor Process as Labor Market - Andrew Wolf, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Sarah Mason, University of California, Santa Cruz The Guarantor State: Interrogating the 'New' State Capitalism through the case of an Indian Shadow-Bank - Manasi Karthik, Johns Hopkins University 

2515.  Section on Asia and Asian America. Session on Asian America VAM, Room 14, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Phoebe Ho, University of North Texas Presider: Esther Chan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Asian Americans’ Indifference to Black Lives Matter - Aggie Jooyoung Yellow Horse, Arizona State University; Karen Kuo, Arizona State University; Eleanor K Seaton, Arizona State University; Edward D Vargas, Arizona State University Examining How Differential Racialization Shapes How Young Adults of Asian Descent Interact with the Law - Darwin A Baluran, Vanderbilt University "Know History, Know Self:" Coming Home for Formerly Incarcerated Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders - Janie Chen, University of California, Berkeley #SouthAsians4BlackLives: Constructing cross-racial allyship on Instagram - Bindi Shah, University of Southampton; Lesley Carr, University of Southampton When Gender Shapes Racial Alignment: Indo-Caribbeans, South Asians, and Black/Asian Ethno-Racial Identity Choice -Anjanette Chan Tack, University of Chicago 

2516.  Section on Sociology of Culture. Between Collapse and Utopia: Foresight, Imagination and Social Change VAM, Room 15, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ann Mische, University of Notre Dame Presider: Ann Mische, University of Notre Dame Temporality, Valence, and Metaphor in the Imagination of Possible Futures: Imagining Society After Same-Sex Marriage - Peter Hart-Brinson, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire (Un)Certain Death: Envisioning the Future through Climate Change's Impacts on Public Health - Mallory Fallin, Northwestern University Not in this Lifetime: Black Millennial Reflections on Impacts of the Black Lives Matter Movement - Simone Nicole Durham, University of Maryland, College Park Dollarized dreams: currencies, crisis, and refugee futures in Lebanon - Samuel Dinger, New York University Enabling Hope in a Better Future: Braiding Cultural Repertoires when Facing Uncertainty - Shira Zilberstein, Harvard Sociology; Michèle Lamont, Harvard University; Mari Sanchez, Harvard Sociology Discussant: Ann Mische, University of Notre Dame SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 57 2517.  Section on Aging and the Life Course. Geography and Health Across the Life Course VAM, Room 16, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Irma T. Elo, University of Pennsylvania Presider: Irma T. Elo, University of Pennsylvania Childhood Neighborhoods and Health: Census-Based Neighborhood Measures Versus Residential Lived Experiences - Sarah Roche, Georgia State University; Amy L. Spring, Georgia State University; Alexus Moore, Georgia State University Compositional and Contextual Explanations for Variation in Infant Mortality across U.S. States - Benjamin Sosnaud, Trinity University State-level contexts and birth outcomes: do types of public policy approaches shape infant health? - Allison Stolte, Duke University Structural Sexism and Life Expectancy Disparities Across U.S. States - Patricia Homan, Florida State University Discussant: Anna Zajacova, Western University 

2519.  Section on Social Psychology. Tumultuous Times: Social Psychology Amidst Social Upheaval VAM, Room 18, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Celeste Campos-Castillo, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Presider: Katherine Craig "Black Lives Matter" matters: Political solidarity and civic engagement in the Black Lives Matter movement - Lauren Benditt, YouGov; Ann Comoglio, YouGov Gender, Communal Language, and Voter Perceptions in the 2020 Democratic Presidential Race - Christianne Corbett, Stanford University; Marianne Cooper, Stanford University Marginalized and Stigmatized: Navigating Complex Identities Within the Queer Community - Sarah Groh, University of Georgia The Sociality of Vicarious Trauma: COVID-19 and Healthcare Workers - Stef M. Shuster, Michigan State University; Noah Riley Lubben, Michigan State University Intergroup Relations and Prosocial Behavior in the Wake of the COVID-19 Pandemic - Jun Zhao, Georgia State University; Justine Eatenson Tinkler, University of Georgia; Kristen Annette Clayton, University of Georgia 

2520.  Section on Children and Youth. Power, Agency, and Resistance in the Lives of Children and Youth VAM, Room 19, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Hyeyoung Kwon, Indiana University-Bloomington Presider: Hyeyoung Kwon, Indiana University-Bloomington Digital Social Spaces: Gendered Attitudes and Parental Interventions in Adolescents’ Technology Use during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Hillary Steinberg, CU Boulder; Stefanie Mollborn, University of Colorado-Boulder; Jennifer Ann Pace, Midwestern State University Fault Lines of Survival: Sex Trafficking, State Violence, and Youth's Collective Strategies of Care - Haley Volpintesta, University of Illinois Chicago Leveraging Protections, Navigating Punishments: The Role of Immigration Status in Legal Brokering - Vanessa Delgado, University of California, Irvine Mixed-Race Identification: Youth Identity Strategies for Resistance and Autonomy - Deja Marie Goodwin, UCLA “You Kind of Find Yourself Helpless”: Teens’ Identity Constructions, Agency, and Responses to Childhood Trauma - Katherine Irwin, University of Hawaii at Manoa 

2522. Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology. Bringing Our Whole Selves to the Sociology Classroom: Impacts of Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Teaching VAM, Room 21, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Alison S. Better, CUNY Kingsborough Community College; Trenton M. Haltom, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Deidre A. Tyler, Salt Lake Community College; Danielle Giffort, St. Louis College of Pharmacy Presider: Jax J. Gonzalez, University of Colorado, Boulder More than Representation for Representation's Sake: Navigating the Model-Mentor-Teacher Dynamic - Shantel Gabrieal Buggs, Florida State University Exchanging Horn-rimmed Glasses for Hoop Earrings: Why Representation Matters in the Classroom - Shirley Leyro, Borough of Manhattan Community College Spreading the Gay & Trans Agenda: On Visibility in the Classroom - Simone Alexandra Kolysh, Hood College Title TBA - Greene - Theo Greene, Bowdoin College Discussant: Andrea D. Miller, Webster University 

2523.  Regular Session. Regular Session on Consumers and Consumption - Session Two VAM, Room 22, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Smith Maguire, Sheffield Hallam University Presider: Jennifer Smith Maguire, Sheffield Hallam University Digital Consumption: Disruption, Distribution, and Disintermediation - David Michael Arditi, University of Texas-Arlington Fine Dining “Appification” Amid the Covid-19 Pandemic - Camila Assunção Crumo Market opportunities for eco-certification in the UAE - Anne Mook, Nazarbayev University; Christine Overdevest, University of Florida; Jeniece Tyria Lusk, American University of Sharjah User Before Entrepreneur: User-motives as a Signal of Commitment - Hyejun Kim, HEC Paris; Jaekyung Ha, EMLYON Business School 

2524.  Regular Session. Boundaries, Body Work, and Everyday Embodied Practices VAM, Room 23, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Samantha Kwan, University of Houston Presider: Trenton M. Haltom, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Body Boundaries: Creating a Moral Body Framework to Navigate Stigmatization - Caty Taborda, University of Minnesota FREEZE! A phenomenological account of action paralysis - Laura Keesman, University of Amsterdam The Strength to Diet: If It Fits Your Macros Dieting as Masculine Body Work - Warren Everett Jensen, UC Irvine Race and Women's Quotidian Dress - angela nurse, University of San Diego SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 58 2525.  Regular Session. Gender, Work, and the COVID-19 Pandemic VAM, Room 24, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Emmanuel David, University of Colorado Boulder Presider: Kristen Barber, Southern Illinois University-Carbondale Essential Work & The Precarious Labor Market: Economic & hidden risks for female workers - Katy M. Pinto, California State University-Dominguez Hills He's Working from Home and I'm Home Trying To Work: Covid-19 and Women's Careers - Sara Lucia Martucci, Mercy College (Invisible) Labors of Love? Women Faculty’s Domestic and Institutional Labor - Sarah Trainer, Seattle University; Anna Muraco, Loyola Marymount University; Jodi O'Brien, Seattle University Seeing the Cracks: Social Reproduction in/under Crisis - Leslie Salzinger, University of California-Berkeley 

2526.  Regular Session. Health Care and Care Delivery VAM, Room 25, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Nik Lampe, University of South Carolina Presider: Stephanie Marie Teixeira-Poit, North Carolina A&T State University Versatile Brokerage: Destabilizing Immigrant-Provider Relationships in the Third Tier of the U.S. Healthcare System - Erin Hoekstra, Marquette University; Anthony Michael Jimenez, Rochester Institute of Technology Pregnancy and birth in the COVID-19 pandemic: The view of doulas - Crystal M. Adams, Muhlenberg College Managing Stigma: a qualitative study of abortion patients who visited a crisis pregnancy center - Evangeline Warren, The Ohio State University; Alison Norris, Ohio State University; Alexandra Kissling, University of Maryland-College Park; Priya Gursahaney, University of Cincinnati; Maria Gallo, Ohio State University Experiencing Time like Groundhog Day? Uncovering the Morality of Temporal Orders in End-of-Life Care - Patricia Helena Hein, EBS Universität für Wirtschaft und Recht; Shaz Ansari, University of Cambridge Intimate Relationships as Factors in Associations Between Inflammation and Happiness in Older Adults - Alexandra Catherine Hayes Nowakowski, Florida State University; J. E. Sumerau, University of Tampa; Katelyn Graves, Florida State University College of Medicine 

2527.  Regular Session. Sexual Violence VAM, Room 26, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Paige L. Sweet, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Presider: Paige L. Sweet, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Constructing Hierarchies of Victimhood: Queer Male Survivors’ Hierarchical Evaluations - Doug Meyer, University of Virginia Gendered Risk Regimes: Centering the study of violence in organizations - Nona Maria Gronert, University of Wisconsin-Madison Married as Minors: Violence as a Pathway to U.S. “Child Marriage” - Jamie O'Quinn, The University of Texas at Austin Settling for Less: How Gendered Organizations Shape Sexual Assault Survivors’ Legal Consciousness - Nicole Bedera, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor The Christine Blasey Ford Effect: Making Sense of Sexual Violence Decades Later - Kelsey Drotning, University of Maryland, College Park 

2528.  Regular Session. Shaping Cultures, Shaping Us VAM, Room 27, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: D'Lane R. Compton, University of New Orleans Presider: Greggor Mattson, Oberlin College Pathways and Patterns of Entrance into BDSM - Alicia M. Walker, Missouri State University; Arielle Kuperberg, University of North Carolina-Greensboro Queer on Campus: How College Shapes the Sexual Identities of Sexual Minority Youth - Ellen Lamont, Appalachian State University; Teresa Roach, Florida State University The Silicone Self: Sexual Fantasy, Desire, and Self-Conceptualization - Kenneth Hanson, University of Oregon 

2529.  Regular Session. Rental Markets and Housing Mobility VAM, Room 28, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Brian James McCabe, Georgetown University Presider: Christine Jang-Trettien, Princeton University Affordable Regulation: Rent Stabilization as Housing Affordability Policy? - Kasey Zapatka, CUNY-The Graduate Center; Juliana De Castro Galvao, CUNY Graduate Center “I Got the Voucher and I’m Still Running Through Obstacles”: Residential Trade-Offs Under Relaxed Constraints - Stefanie Ann DeLuca, Johns Hopkins University; Joseph Boselovic, Johns Hopkins University; Kiara Millay Nerenberg, Johns Hopkins University Social Ties and the Search for Rental Housing in Los Angeles -Steven Edward Schmidt, University of California, Irvine The New Housing Crisis: Gentrification and Residential Instability in the Bay Area after the Great Recession - Jackelyn Hwang, Stanford University; Bina Shrimali, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco “You Have to Prove that You're Homeless”: Vulnerability and Gatekeeping in Public Housing Prioritization Policies -Nathalie P. Rita, University of Hawaii; Philip M.E. Garboden, University of Hawaii-Manoa; Jennifer Rene Darrah-Okike, University of Hawaii-Manoa 

2530.  Regular Session. Nationalism, Imperialism, and Social Movements: New Methodological Departures for Theoretically-Informed Historical Sociology VAM, Room 29, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sahan Savas Karatasli, University of North Carolina at Greensboro Presider: Sahan Savas Karatasli, University of North Carolina at Greensboro Confederate Monument Construction in the Early 1900s - Heather Avery O'Connell, Louisiana State University Necropower’s Geopolitical and Mnemonic Embodiment in Jeju under US/South Korean Imperialism - Veda Hyunjin Kim, University of Massachusetts Amherst Theoretically-Guided Event Structure Analysis - Joshua Bloom, University of Pittsburgh; Daniel G. McClymonds, University of Pittsburgh 

2532.  Regular Session. Sociology of Knowledge Regular Session VAM, Room 31, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Apoorva Ghosh, University of California-Merced Presider: Gordon C. Chang, Western Illinois University Epistemic positioning and epistemic injustice in academic knowledge production - Jana Bacevic, Durham University Expertise-seeking Arrangements in Education Policymaking: A Comparative Study of the US and Norway - Chanwoong SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 59 

Baek, University of Oslo The Growth of Diversity and Population Terminology in Biomedical Research - Brandon Lee Kramer, University of Virginia; Catherine Lee, Rutgers University-New Brunswick 

2533.  Regular Session. Masculinities VAM, Room 32, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristen Barber, Southern Illinois University-Carbondale Presider: Max A. Greenberg, Boston University Be A Man! Charismatic Catholicism and Alt-right Masculinity -Dominic Vincent Wetzel, CUNY Kingsborough Community College Post-Disaster Masculinity and Mental Health - Rebecca Ewert, University of Chicago Racialized Tensions & Affinities: Puerto Rican ‘Apprentices’ & the Policing of Female Masculinity - Cristina Khan, Stony Brook University The Labour of Fun: Masculinities and the Organisation of Labour Games in a Modern Workplace - Tongyu Wu, Zhejiang University The Masculine Dimension of Migrant Discontent - Cary Beckwith, Bard College Discussant: Watoii Rabii, Oakland University 

2568.  Meeting. Section on Global and Transnational Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 2:30-3:00pm 2569.  Meeting. Section on Labor and Labor Movements Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 2:30-3:00pm 2570.  Meeting. Section on Altruism, Morality and Social Solidarity Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 2:30-3:00pm 2572.  Meeting. Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance Business Meeting VAM, Room 71, 2:30-3:00pm Sunday, 3:00 pm 2621.  Section on Altruism, Morality and Social Solidarity. Black Lives Matter: The Role of Altruism, Morality, and Social Solidarity in Supporting Racial Justice Efforts VAM, Room 20, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Patricia Snell Herzog, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis; David M. Melamed, Ohio State University Presider: Ashley Harrell, Duke University Panelists: Una Okonkwo Osili, IU Lilly Family School of Philanthropy; D. Brian Burghart, Fatal Encounters; Jennifer Wood, Center for Justice; Tina Sacks, Center for Research on Social Change, University of Berkeley; Candice C. Robinson, University of Pittsburgh 

2647.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 1: Work, Class, and Identity in Emerging Global Cities VAM, Room 46, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Tiffany Jordan Chuang May, University of Michigan Double Consciousness between the Local and the Global: Istanbul’s Professionals at Work and in Leisure - Gamze Evcimen, Kalamazoo College Singaporean Heartland or Bohemian Neighborhood? State Strategies of Nation-Building in the “Global City” Era -Tiffany Jordan Chuang May, University of Michigan The Emergence of the Transnational Middle Class in Turkey -Mustafa Yavas, New York University-Abu Dhabi 

2648.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 2: Global Institutions VAM, Room 47, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Gru Han, Harvard University Bureaucratic Reform in Global Context: Decentralization to Subnational Governments in 130 Countries, 1970-2014 -Aaron W. Tester, University of California-Irvine Cyber Power: Measuring Capabilities and Intent in Cyberspace -Anina Schwarzenbach, University of Maryland-College Park The Interplay between Network and Institution: Intergovernmental Network and Antitrust and Merger Laws on Cross-border Acquisitions - Gru Han, Harvard University 

2649.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 3: Culture and Identity Formation VAM, Room 48, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Despina Lalaki, CUNY The New York City College of Technology “My Mom is Shanghainese Too!” Language criticism, social exclusion, and the ambiguity of local identity - Fang Xu, University of California-Berkeley The French Yellow Vests Movement and the Visual Orders of Class - Eeva Luhtakallio, University of Helsinki; Karine CLEMENT, CNRS Trans-Atlantic Archaeological Networks and the Cultural Origins of Greek Political Identity - Despina Lalaki, CUNY The New York City College of Technology 

2650.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 4: Education and Institutions VAM, Room 49, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Kriti Budhiraja, University of Minnesota "Becoming a desirable Fulbright applicant" -- Global mobility strategy through the Fulbright machinery - Shunan You, Northeastern University How students mobilize sociality to navigate inequality at the university: An ethnography of Delhi University - Kriti Budhiraja, University of Minnesota 

2651.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 5: The Individual and Society VAM, Room 50, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Eric C. Dahlin, Brigham Young University-Provo Don’t YOU be my neighbor! Perceptions of Homosexuality in Global and Cross-Cultural Perspective - Claudia Geist, University of Utah; Wade M. Cole, University of Utah The Constitutionalization of Human Rights - Kristen Shorette, Stony Brook University; Colin J. Beck, Pomona College; John W. Meyer, Stanford University; Gili S. Drori, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem World Society and Organizational and Individual Actorhood - Eric C. Dahlin, Brigham Young University-Provo 

> Session 2532, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 60 2652.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 6: Migration and Transnationalism VAM, Room 51, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Kristina Marie Fullerton, University of Wisconsin-Madison Committing to Abolition: A Decolonial, Anti-Imperial Framework for Asian Diaspora Studies - Harleen Kaur, UCLA; Victoria Tran, University of California, Los Angeles Diaspora Homecoming Events, Development, and Decolonization: The Okinawan Case of the Worldwide Uchinanchu Festival -Jane H. Yamashiro, Mills College Micro Globalization: Methodological Consideration - Jiaming Sun, Texas A & M University-Commerce “The Price We Pay”: Mexican Immigrants, Transnational Mourning, and Transforming Disenfranchised Grief - Kristina Marie Fullerton, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

2653.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 7: Citizenship and Migration VAM, Room 52, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Marta Panighel, University of Genoa Citizenship as a caste marker: How persons experience cross-national inequality - Ana Velitchkova, University of Mississippi Citizenship Borders: A Postcolonial Perspective on New Muslim Generations in Italy - Marta Panighel, University of Genoa Lifestyle Migration: Studying Coloniality in North-South Migration - Matthew F. Hayes, St. Thomas University, Fredericton, Canada Transnational marriages: A test of competing explanations - Inbar Weiss, University of Texas at Austin 

2654.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Table 8: Organizations VAM, Room 53, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Thomas John Fewer, Drexel University Free space in cold war collaboration between NASA and the Soviet Space Program - Dali Ma, Drexel University; Thomas John Fewer, Drexel University Hybridizations of Precision Medicine in Contemporary China -Larry Au, Columbia University The Civilizing Mission Persists: Racism and Justification for U.S. Intervention into Socialist Venezuela - Timothy M. Gill, University of Tennessee-Knoxville 

2656.  Table 10: Labor (Movements) and Work VAM, Room 55, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Rwiti Roy, Florida State University Robots and Protest: Does Increased Protest Among Chinese Workers Result in More Automation? - L. Larry Liu, Princeton University; Han Zhang, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Solidarismo: the effectiveness of solidarity in labour representation within the Costa Rican pineapple industry -Afshan Golriz Tale of Two Labor Movements: Extending Political Opportunity Theory By Taking it South - Rwiti Roy, Florida State University; Paromita Sanyal, Florida State University The ILO and the future of work: the politics of global labour policy - Vicente Silva, university of edinburgh What Salience Does White Privilege Have in Non-Diverse Societies? - Reza Hasmath, University of Alberta 

2657.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Research Cluster 1: Arts, Culture, and Religion VAM, Room 56, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Kangsan Lee, New York University 

2658.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Research Cluster 2: Empire and its Legacies VAM, Room 57, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Ricarda Hammer, Brown University 

2659.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Research Cluster 3: Gender and Sexuality VAM, Room 58, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Reya Farber, William & Mary 

2660.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Research Cluster 4: Global Environmental and Climate Crisis VAM, Room 59, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: John Foran, University of California-Santa Barbara 

2661.  Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables. Research Cluster 5: Global Populism VAM, Room 60, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Zachary Levenson, University of North Carolina, Greensboro Table Presider: Sefika Kumral, University of North Carolina-Greensboro 

2662.  Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable. Contemporary Labor Issues VAM, Room 61, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Table Presider: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Essential or expendable? Immigrants and workers’ rights in the domestic workers’ activism under the pandemic - Anna Rosinska, Ca' Foscari University of Venice (Italy); Elizabeth Pellerito, University of Massachusetts Lowell In the Interest of Everyone? A Mixed-Method Study of the Micro-Foundations of Social Movement Unionism - Frangi Lorenzo, UQAM, Montreal; Sinisa Hadziabdic, Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies; Anthony C. Masi, McGill University 

2663.  Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable. Contemporary Labor Issues Two VAM, Room 62, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Table Presider: Mario Venegas, Sonoma State University Lost in Translation: NLRB Elections and Materials for Spanish-Speaking Workers - Breon Haskett Targeted management can reduce pollution without effects on employment in US manufacturing - Mary B. Collins, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry; Simone SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 61 

Pulver, University of California, Santa Barbara Transparency and Image-Management: Organizing and Accountability in Public Sector Unions - Mario Venegas, Sonoma State University 

2664.  Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable. Creative, Software and Platform Work VAM, Room 63, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Table Presider: Yong Ryung Lee Laboring in the Software Industry: Offshoring and Deskilling in a Transnational Firm - Bhumika Chauhan, New York University The Aftermath of Capital Mobility in Platform Capitalism: Understanding the Impact on Workers and their Resistance - Youngrong Lee, University of Toronto 

2665.  Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable. International Labor Issues VAM, Room 64, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Table Presider: Karthik Balaji Ramanujam, Florida Atlantic University Examining Longer-Term Dynamics of the Effects of Fixed-Term Employment Trajectories on Subjective Well-Being in Germany - Sonja Scheuring, University of Bamberg, Germany; Michael Gebel Informal Economy and its Challenges under a Neo-liberal, Nationalistic Regime in India - Karthik Balaji Ramanujam, Florida Atlantic University 

2666.  Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable. Migration and International Issues VAM, Room 65, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Table Presider: Irem Yildirim, McGill University Bigger than Workers: Union-Party Alliances in South Africa and Argentina in the Age of Neoliberalism - Irem Yildirim, McGill University Ethnic Networks, Risk Attitudes and Migration Decisions -Tamanna A Rimi; Ahmed T Aziz; Syed Uddin Migration and Health— Freedom of Movement and Social Benefits for Chinese Migrant Workers - Fengxian Qiu, Anhui Normal University; Heying Jenny Zhan, Georgia State University; Jing Liu, Georgia State University 

2667.  Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable. Temporary and Precarious Work VAM, Room 66, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom Juravich, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Table Presider: Gorkem Dagdelen, Temple University Investigating the wage penalty of temporary workers across 30 countries using LIS data - Sophia Fauser, University of Bamberg; Michael Gebel Precarious Work Experiences of Immigrants in the Trucking Industry - Gorkem Dagdelen, Temple University 

2671.  Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance. Open Topics in Crime, Law and Deviance: Surveillance, Policing, and Imprisonment VAM, Room 70, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Amada Armenta, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Tony Cheng, Yale University The Boys in Blue are Watching You: Income Segregation and Technological Police Surveillance in U.S. Cities - Scott W. Duxbury, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Nafeesa Andrabi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Recognizing “Camera Cues:” Policing, Culture, and Cellphone Countersurveillance - Brandon Alston, Northwestern University “I’m a survivor”: Masculinity, homelessness, and incarceration -Janani Umamaheswar, George Mason University Strain & Gain: From Deprivation to Innovation Within Restricted Housing Units - Sydney Ingel, George Mason University; Lindsay Renee Smith, George Mason University; Shannon Magnuson; Danielle S. Rudes, George Mason University Discussant: Armando Lara-Millan, University of California-Berkeley 

# Sunday, 4:15 pm 2702.  Book Forum. Legal Passing: Navigating Undocumented Life and Local Immigration Law VAM, Room 1, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Shannon Marie Gleeson, Cornell University, ILR School Moderator: Van C. Tran, The Graduate Center, CUNY Panelists: Tomas R. Jimenez, Stanford University; Filiz Garip, Princeton University Author: Angela S. Garcia, University of Chicago 

2703.  Special Sessions. The 2020 Decennial Census…Revisiting the Issues VAM, Room 2, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Daniel T. Lichter, Cornell University Presider: Daniel T. Lichter, Cornell University Panelists: Nicholas A. Jones, United States Census Bureau; Richelle Winkler, Michigan Technological University; Rogelio Saenz, University of Texas at San Antonio; John R. Logan, Brown University 

2704.  Special Sessions. Occupied Palestine: Which Way Forward? VAM, Room 3, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jeff Goodwin, New York University Presider: Nada Matta, Drexel University Panelists: Andy Clarno, University of Illinois-Chicago; Neve Gordon, Queen Mary University of London; Sari Hanafi, American University of Beirut; Loubna Qutami, UCLA 

2705.  Presidential Panel. Sexual Harassment and the #MeTooMovement VAM, Room 4, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Frank Dobbin, Harvard University Panelists: C. Shawn McGuffey, Boston College; Justine Eatenson Tinkler, University of Georgia; Jamillah E. Bowman Williams, Georgetown University; Zakiya T. Luna, University of California-Santa Barbara Gender inequality and sexual harassment remain enduring and 

> Session 2663, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 62 

troubling features of our nation and the modern world. This panel will explore what we have learned from studying these phenomena and what needs to be done in terms of solutions. 

2706.  Thematic Sessions. Critical Race Theory: A Sociological Approach VAM, Room 5, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve, Brown University Presider: Crystal Marie Fleming, Stony Brook University Panelists: Mary Romero, Arizona State University; Tony N. Brown, Rice University; Glenn Edward Bracey, Villanova University; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Discussant: Crystal Marie Fleming, Stony Brook University 

2707.  Thematic Sessions. Race and Labor VAM, Room 6, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Rick A. Baldoz, Oberlin College Presider: Rick A. Baldoz, Oberlin College Panelists: Vanesa Ribas, University of California-San Diego; Cesar Ayala, UCLA; Adom Getachew, University of Chicago; Eli R. Wilson, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque 

2708.  Thematic Sessions. Visual Sociology: Methods and Meaning in Seeing Society VAM, Room 7, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Molly Merryman, Kent State University Presider: Molly Merryman, Kent State University Panelists: John Grady, Wheaton College; EJ Milne, Coventry University; Gregory Shawn Scott, De Paul University; Molly Merryman, Kent State University 

2709.  ASA Retirement Network (previously Opportunities in Retirement Network). A Life in Sociology Lecture with Cora Marrett VAM, Room 8, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Presiders: Harry Perlstadt, Michigan State University; Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Panelist: Cora B. Marrett, University of Wisconsin Madison 

2710.  Professional Development Workshop. Giving Expert Legislative Testimony as a Sociologist VAM, Room 9, 4:15-5:40pm 

Leader: Mikaila Mariel Lemonik Arthur, Rhode Island College Co-Leaders: Meghan Elizabeth Kallman, University of Massachusetts-Boston; Danielle Bessett, University of Cincinnati 

2711.  Ideas for Future Research. The Battle over Urban Squatters: Tracking Attitudes Towards Urban Squatters in the Global North/South on Youtube VAM, Room 10, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Michael Buhl, Texas Woman's University The Battle over Urban Squatters:Tracking Attitudes Towards Urban Squatters in the Global North/South on Youtube -Michael Buhl, Texas Woman's University 

2712.  Sociology in Practice Settings Symposium. Sociologists Putting Du Bois to Practice VAM, Room 11, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sidra J. Montgomery, Insight Policy Research Presider: George L. Wimberly, American Educational Research Association Racial equity learning and research in rural Minnesota communities - Scott A. Chazdon, University of Minnesota Twin Cities; Julie Hawker, Region 9 Area, Inc.; Bukata Hayes, Greater Mankato Diversity Coalition; Tobias Spanier, University of Minnesota Extension; Jocelyn Hernandez-Swanson, University of Minnesota Extension; Holli Arp, University of Minnesota Extension Memory Work for Social Wellbeing: Community-engaged Practice and the Sociological Imagination in a Cultural Institution - Maria Islas Lopez, History Colorado (Colorado Historical Society) Using Emancipatory Sociological Frameworks to Create Evaluation Tools, Community Partnerships, and Advocacy Initiatives - Emily McDonald, George Mason University 

2713.  Section on Race, Gender, Class. Intersectional Perspectives on Disability VAM, Room 12, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Angela Frederick, University of Texas-El Paso; Dara Shifrer, Portland State University Presider: Affiong Bassey Eyo, Portland State University Disability and suicidality during the transition to adulthood -James Dalton Stevens, Syracuse University Disability at the Revolving Door: Intersectional Perspectives on Predatory Policing, Mental Illness, and Sex Work - Summer Lopez Colorado, University of California: Los Angeles (Re)creating identity: “Normal”, temporal, and relational factors of women’s experiences as amputees in the UK - Litany Esguerra, University of Illinois at Chicago Social Class, ADHD Diagnoses, and the Future Wellbeing of Children with Mild Pre-diagnosis Behavioral Problems -Jayanti Johanna Owens, Brown University Discussant: ASL Interpreter 

2714.  Section on Labor and Labor Movements. Labor and Race VAM, Room 13, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Vanesa Ribas, University of California-San Diego Presider: Rocio Rosales, University of California-Irvine An Investigation of the Relationship between Gig Work and Structural Inequality - Jaylexia Clark Organizing Despite Precarity - Paula Winicki Brzostowski Solidarity Infrastructure: Interracial Class Solidarity in Kansas City, 1917-18 - Jeff Stilley, University of Missouri Columbia Surveilling Amazon’s Essential Warehouse Workers: Racism, Retaliation, and Worker Resistance Amidst the COVID-19 Pandemic - Jake Alimahomed-Wilson, California State University-Long Beach; Ellen R. Reese, University of California-Riverside 

2715.  Section on Global and Transnational Sociology. Sociology in and from Africa: The Epistemic Challenge VAM, Room 14, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Zine Magubane, Boston College Presider: Zine Magubane, Boston College Reconnectin African Sociology to the Mother: Towards a Woman-Centered Endogenous Sociology in South Africa - Babalwa Magoqwana, Nelson Mandela University 

> Session 2705, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 63 

Mafeje and Magubane: The African Sociological Heritage -Bongani Nyoka, Rhodes University Endogeneity and Modern Sociology in Africa - Jimi O. Adesina, University of South Africa Reimagining Every One African as Emancipatory Logic of American Sociology - John Stanfield, University of Mauritius Discussant: Grace Khunou 

2716.  Section on Sociology of Culture. Culture and Computation in Theory and Practice VAM, Room 15, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Anna Katharina Skarpelis, Harvard University; Marshall A Taylor, New Mexico State University Presider: Matt Rafalow, Google Algorithmic Fields, Drama, and Extremization Among Vegan Influencers - Angele Christin, Stanford University Centralized Enrollment Algorithms, School Choice, and Contested Meanings of Fairness in New Orleans School Admissions -Maria Akchurin, Loyola University-Chicago; Gabriel Chouhy, Tulane University Formally Comparing Topic Models and Human-Generated Qualitative Coding of Physician Mothers’ Experiences of Workplace Discrimination - Sheridan Stewart, Department of Sociology; Adam S Miner, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford School of Medicine; Meghan C Halley, Center for Biomedical Ethics, Stanford School of Medicine; Laura K. Nelson, Northeastern University; Eleni Linos, Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Stanford University Theoretical foundations and limits of word embeddings: what types of cultural meaning can they capture? - Alina Arseniev-Koehler, University of California Los Angeles 

2717.  Section on Asia and Asian America. Session on Asia and the Global Asian Diaspora VAM, Room 16, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Hyeyoung Woo, Portland State University Presider: Hyeyoung Woo, Portland State University Reimagining Diasporas: Institutional Transformations in China’s Diaspora Politics - Jiaqi Liu, University of California, San Diego The Rise and Fall of Japan's New Far-Right: How Anti-Korean Discourses Went Mainstream - Sharon Yoon, University of Notre Dame; Yuki Asahina, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies State capacity and opportunistic governance: Causes and consequences of regulatory brokerage in Thailand’s guestwork programs - Pei Palmgren, UCLA The Contemporary Ethno-Racial High-Skilled Muslim Experience -Maheen Haider, Boston College Discussant: Sharon Quinsaat, Grinnell College 

2718.  Section on Social Psychology. Rotten Trees and Bad Apples: Social Psychological Insights into Discrimination VAM, Room 17, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Rengin Bahar Firat, University of California-Riverside Presider: Shayna La Scala, University of California Riverside "How Does it Feel to Be a Problem?": Exploring the Feeling Rules of Experiencing Racial Discrimination - Malissa Alinor, University of Georgia Identity, Stigma Resistance, and the Mark of a Criminal Record. - Lesley Erin Schneider, The Ohio State University; Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University; Eric LaPlant, Ohio State University Perceived Discrimination and Mental Health from Early Adulthood to Mid-Life - Xiaowen Han, University of Minnesota; Jeylan T Mortimer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Tom VanHeuvelen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities "She's a Real Bitch": Student-Teacher Relationships and Disciplinary Discrimination - Peter Francis Harvey, University of Pennsylvania Discussant: Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh 

2719.  Section on Children and Youth. Black Children Matter: Toward an Emancipatory Sociology for Youth Racial Justice VAM, Room 18, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Uriel Serrano, University of California, Santa Cruz; Andrea Constant, Syracuse University Presider: Theresa Marie Hice-Fromille, University of California, Santa Cruz The Space That Race, Gender, and Class Makes In School - Aliyah Turner 'Teefing Time': When Black Youth's 'Time Use' Becomes Time Theft - Rahsaan Mahadeo, Georgetown University Black Girls’ Experiences of Ableism, Antagonism and Anti-Blackness in Cincinnati Schools - Brittney Miles, University of Cincinnati "May You Be Happy, May You Be Well": Blackness and Mindfulness in a Fifth Grade Classroom - Jadyn Laixely; Stephanie C. Sanders-Smith, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Discussant: Derrick R. Brooms, University of Cincinnati 

2720.  Section on Methodology. Methodology Section Session: Methodological Potpourri VAM, Room 19, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jeremy E Fiel, University of Arizona Presider: Liying Luo, Pennsylvania State University APC Decomposition in Assessing the Impact of the Great Recession on the Transition to Adulthood - Guanglei Hong, University of Chicago; Ha-Joon Chung, Princeton University Ambivalence is Everywhere: Quantifying Attitude Stability Across Topic Domains - Kevin Robert Kiley, Duke University Who was she? Studying inheritance in elite populations using full family networks - Shay O'Brien, Princeton University Modern Methods for Estimating Spatial Multilevel Models - Adam Slez, University of Virginia A Regularity Theory of Causality for the Social Sciences -James Mahoney, Northwestern University; Laura Acosta, Northwestern University 

2722.  Regular Session. Reframing Policing: Contested Motives and Legal Fictions VAM, Room 21, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Warfield Rawls, Bentley University Presider: Albert J. Meehan, Oakland University "Barking Up the Right Tree." The Ethnomethods of Big Data Policing - Andre Buscariolli, University of California Santa Barbara Gestalt Contexture and Contested Motives: Understanding Video Evidence in the Murder Trial of Officer Michael Slager -Patrick G. Watson, Wilfrid Laurier University Loopy expertise: The role of expert witnesses in police excessive force trials - Michael Lynch, Cornell University 

> Session 2715, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 64 

Reasonable Belief: Legal Fictions and the Reframing of Officers and Victim/Suspects - Carmen Nave, Wilfrid Laurier University Investigating the Thinking Mechanisms of European Witch-Hunters: Notes from an Impure Ethnomethodological Detective - Gordon C. Chang, Western Illinois University 

2723.  Regular Session. The Resilience of Gender Ideology in Shaping Labor, Law, Policy, and Privilege VAM, Room 22, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: LaTonya J. Trotter, University of Washington Presider: LaTonya J. Trotter, University of Washington “Why Don’t They Just Use Cloth?”: Gender Policy Vacuums and the Inequalities of Diapering - Jennifer Randles, California State University-Fresno Modernization, Traditionalization, or Both? Mapping Gender Ideology in China - Rujun Yang, University of California, Santa Barbara “Assumptive Rights of Maleness:” Stealth Transgender Men’s Accounts of [White] Male Privilege - Armani Beck-McField, Rutgers University Legal "Locker Room Talk": Essentialist Discourses of Masculinity in Law - Erin E. Hatton, University at Buffalo 

2724.  Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance. Policing, Punishment, and Victimization of LGBTQ+ People VAM, Room 23, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Amada Armenta, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Amada Armenta, University of California-Los Angeles Queering the Study of Crime, Law and Deviance through the Lens of Criminology: Reflections on the Literature - Valerie Jenness, University of California-Irvine; Vanessa R. Panfil, Old Dominion University Stigma, Prejudice and the Incarceration of LGBT People in the United States - Ilan H. Meyer, The Williams Institute Bullying as Gender Policing: Evidence from Queer Childhoods -Joel Mittleman, University of Notre Dame Navigating Identity and Space Stigma Among Black Gay Men in LA and the Other LA - Terrell James Antonio Winder, University of California-Santa Barbara 

2725.  Regular Session. Group Processes VAM, Room 24, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jan E. Stets, University of California-Riverside Presider: Jan E. Stets, University of California-Riverside Cooperation in Networked Collective Action Groups: The Role of Density, Group Size, and Sanctions - Thomas Wolff, Duke University; Ashley Harrell, Duke University The Fragile Male: The Status-Dependence of Boundary Transgression and Reclassification - Katharine Khanna, Columbia University Ticket inspection toolkit and group style: A qualitative study using interviews and video observation - Camilla Bank Friis, University of Copenhagen Discussant: Sarah K. Harkness, University of Iowa 

2726.  Regular Session. Social Determinants, Health Communication and Health VAM, Room 25, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: David R. Williams, Harvard University Presider: Andrea L. Kjos, Drake University Impacts of New York’s Paid Family Leave Policy on Leave-Taking and Health: A Quasi-Experimental Study - Anne Kou, New York University Occupational Segregation Contributes to Racial Disparities in Health: A Gap-Closing Perspective - Ian Lundberg, Princeton University Political and Policy Determinants of COVID-19: Exploring State Differences in Incidence and Mortality - Gabe Miller, Mississippi State University; Guadalupe Marquez-Velarde, Utah State University Caught in the Crossfire: How Patients Experience the Conflicting Paradigms of Precision Medicine and Medical Insurability -Emily Allia Hammad Mrig, Yale University Inequalities of an Infodemic: Socio-Demographic Influences on Message Retransmission During the COVID-19 Pandemic -Scott Leo Renshaw, University of California-Irvine; Sabrina Mai; Elisabeth Dubois; Jeannette Sutton, University of Kentucky; Carter T. Butts, University of California-Irvine Use of “Risk” Language in Breastfeeding Promotional Materials: U.S. State, Territorial, and Local Health Departments - Lora Ebert Wallace, Western Illinois University; Joy Ifeoma Ofuokwu, Western Illinois University 

2727.  Regular Session. Sexual Harassment VAM, Room 26, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Paige L. Sweet, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Presider: Paige L. Sweet, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Femininity Anchors: Heterosexual relationships and pregnancy as sites of harassment for U.S. Service Women - Stephanie Bonnes, University of New Haven Gender Beliefs and the Response to Workplace Sexual Harassment - Julie A. Kmec, Washington State Univ; Lindsey Trimble O'Connor, California State University-Channel Islands; Shekinah Hoffman, University of Nevada, Las Vegas The Anatomy of Everyday Violence: Talking to Initiators - Simone Alexandra Kolysh, Hood College A Cold War Against Queer Contamination: Sexual Harassment & LGBTQ Open Service in the US Military - Cati Connell, Boston University 

2728.  Regular Session. Social Capital VAM, Room 27, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Silvia Dominguez, Northeastern University Global Network Presider: Rui F. Carvalho, Brown University Interethnic Contact and Social Capital in European Immigrant Neighborhoods - Rui F. Carvalho, Brown University It’s About Time: The Temporal Dimensions of Social Capital in a Refugee Camp - Blair Suzanne Sackett, University of Pennsylvania Let Me Hear Your Story: The Importance Of Emotional Support For Those Living In Poverty - Joan Maya Mazelis, Rutgers University-Camden; Jeannie Garmon, Rutgers University When does social capital promote gun violence? - Cary Wu, York University 

> Session 2722, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 65 2729.  Regular Session. Housing Markets & Homeownership VAM, Room 28, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Brian James McCabe, Georgetown University Presider: Zawadi Rucks-Ahidiana, SUNY-Albany Earmarking Space: Relationality and Decisions Around Housing Wealth - Adam Hayes, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Max Besbris, University of Wisconsin-Madison Ethno-Racial Disparities in Adverse Experiences at Mortgage Closing - Jose Loya, University of California-Los Angeles Racial/Ethnic Inequality & Mortgage Lending - Meghan M. O'Neil, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Vincent J. Roscigno, Ohio State University The Current and Past Housing Crises, Homeowner Ideologies, and the Opening for Social Housing - Howard Jacob Carlson, Brown University; Gianpaolo Baiocchi, NYU; Marnie Brady, Marymount Manhattan College; Ned Crowley, New York University; Sara Duvisac 

2730.  Regular Session. The Contested Politics of Human Rights: Empirical Examples from Human Trafficking, Asylum Control, and Humanitarian Action VAM, Room 29, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Paulina Garcia del Moral, University of Guelph Presider: Berfu Aygenc, The New School for Social Research Alienation and the Traffic in Human Beings: The Role of Legal Activism - Pantea Javidan, Stanford University Controlling Asylum: an analysis of race and gender intersectionality in Matter of A-B - Eve Zasoba, UMass-Boston; Philip Alexander Kretsedemas, University of Massachusetts-Boston Fear of Human Trafficking: Examining the Effect of Gender, Partisanship, and Religious Ideology - Kelsy Kretschmer, Oregon State University The Changing Meaning of Saving Lives: Cultural Understandings of Humanity in United Nations Humanitarian Resolutions, 1946-2018 - Julia C. Lerch, University of California-Irvine 

2731.  Regular Session. Immigrant Structural Integration in Schools and the Labor Market VAM, Room 30, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Van C. Tran, The Graduate Center, CUNY Presider: Daeshin Hayden Ju, The Graduate Center, CUNY From Superdiversity to Consolidation: Implications of Structural Intersectionality for Interethnic Friendships - Linda Zhao, Cornell University Reconceptualizing Immigrant Structural Integration in a School network Context: Use of Network Ties and Positions -Ngoc-Thoa Khuu, UC Irvine; David R. Schaefer, University of California-Irvine; Adriana Umaña-Taylor, Harvard Graduate School of Education; Deborah Rivas-Drake; Allison Ryan How Indian Migrants Enter and Stay in the U.S. Labor Market -Elizabeth Jacobs, University of Pennsylvania Documentation Transition and Social Mobility over Lifetime Migration - Zhenxiang Chen Examining Changes in Legal Status and Employment Status Among Humanitarian Migrants: Evidence from Australia -Rennie Lee, University of Queensland 

2732.  Regular Session. Dating Markets and Racial Identity VAM, Room 31, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Hickes Lundquist, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Presider: Celeste Curington, North Carolina State University A Comparative Study of Asian American Women in Interracial and Interethnic Relationships - Olivia Hu, University of Pennsylvania Limits to Panethnicity? Intra-racial Boundaries and Dating Preferences among Asian and Latinx College Students -Cilka Bidwell, Washington University-St. Louis; Cynthia Feliciano, Washington University-St. Louis The Causal Effect of Skin Color in Online Dating - Emilce Santana, Texas A&M University-College Station Union Formation in Organizational Contexts: The Case of Japanese “Marriage-Hunting” - Anna Wozny, University of Michigan 

2733.  Regular Session. What's New(s)? Sociological Interrogations of News Media VAM, Room 32, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Matthew W. Hughey, University of Connecticut Presider: Noah Amir Arjomand, Indiana University Bloomington The Ambivalent Moral World of News Fixers - Noah Amir Arjomand, Indiana University Bloomington Deciding What’s (Sharable) News: Social Movement Organizations as Curating Actors in the Political Information System -Thomas J Billard, Northwestern University Addressing Fake News and Misinformation in College Classes -Soraya Cardenas, Cascadia College “The Worst Is Behind Us:” News Media Choice and False Optimism in the Summer of 2020 - Lawrence C. Hamilton, University of New Hampshire; Thomas G. Safford, University of New Hampshire Discussant: Soraya Cardenas, Cascadia College 

2747.  Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables. Table 1: Cognitive Health in Later Life VAM, Room 46, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland; Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland A Longitudinal Study of Cognitive and IADL Disablement Among the Oldest Old Mexican Americans - Jiwon Kim, The University of Texas at Austin; Jacqueline L. Angel, University of Texas-Austin; Sunshine Marie Rote, University of Louisville Profiles of cognitive trajectories and the joint risk of dementia and mortality - Christine Elizabeth Walsh; Katsuya Oi, The Pennsylvania State University; Brenda L. Plassman, Duke University; Hardeep Obhi; Yang Claire Yang, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Why is Dementia Declining in the United States? The Role of Early and Mid-Life Factors - Mark Lee, University of Minnesota The Impact of Military Service on Racial Disparities in Cognitive Function - Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland Social Isolation, Loneliness and Cognitive Function among Middle-Aged and Older Adults in the United States - Mia Yu; Jerrold Kaufman, University of Chicago 

2748.  Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables. Table 2: Social Networks, Relationships, & SES VAM, Room 47, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin; Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland Table Presider: Melanie Z. Plasencia, University of California, Berkeley “I Don’t Have Money, But I Have Friends”: How Older Latinos Find Tangible Support - Melanie Z. Plasencia, University of California, Berkeley SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 66 

Neuropsychiatric Index and relationship quality for caregivers of older Mexican Americans - Phillip A Cantu, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston Jail Time and Network Stability in Later Life - Nan Feng Core network changes, proximity, and older Europeans’ loneliness - Haosen Sun, University of Toronto; Markus H. Schafer, University of Toronto The differential effects of entering and exiting co-residence with grandchildren on older adults’ labor force outcomes -Haoshu Duan, University of Maryland, College Park; Jing Ye, University of Maryland, College Park 

2749.  Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables. Table 3: SES & Retirement VAM, Room 48, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Toni Calasanti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Filling the Time Vacuum: The Impact of Retirement Transition on Time Use of Health Activities - Jing Ye, University of Maryland, College Park Hope for Retirement—Understanding the Structural Lag Affecting Chinese Migrant Worker’s Retirement Planning: A Path Analysis - Jing Liu, Georgia State University; Heying Jenny Zhan, Georgia State University; Fengxian Qiu, Anhui Normal University Interaction Ritual Theory, Retiree Community Engagement, and the Socioemotional Experience of Pandemic Time - Boroka B Bo, University of California, Berkeley 

2750.  Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables. Table 4: Health and Well-Being VAM, Room 49, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland; Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Duygu Basaran Sahin, CUNY Graduate Center How Widowhood and Gender Shape the Impact of Maternal Favoritism on Adult Children’s Psychological Well-Being - J. Jill Suitor, Purdue University; Megan Gilligan, Iowa State University; Reilly Kincaid, Purdue University; Yifei Hou, Purdue University; Catherine Stepniak, Purdue University; Siyun Peng, Indiana University Health and Well-being among those Aging in Place in a Jerusalem Religious Community - Ephraim Shapiro, Ariel University; Amira Paz, University of Haifa and Healthy Aging, Ltd.; Shachar Henn, Schonbrunn School of Nursing, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Or Sandler, Schonbrunn School of Nursing, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Rachel Kirzner, Stockton University Family Caregivers’ Conceptions of Trust in Home Health Care Providers - David Russell, Appalachian State University Neighborhood exposure dynamics and health in the transition to adulthood - Ying Huang, UTSA Trajectories of Subjective Health: Testing Longitudinal Models for Self-rated Health from Adolescence to Midlife - Iliya Gutin, The University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Kenneth A. Bollen, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Regional Variation and the Social Determinants of Shingles Vaccination in the United States - Eric M. Vogelsang, California State University-San Bernardino; Andrea N. Polonijo, University of California-Merced 

2751.  Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables. Table 5: Mental and Physical Health in Later Life VAM, Room 50, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland; Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Coping Style, Chronic Strain, and Depressed Mood in Emerging Adulthood: Examining Age-Linked Patterns - Jordan C. Burke, Saint Anselm College; Karen T. Van Gundy, University of New Hampshire Sexual Identity and Self-Rated Health in Midlife: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study - Hui Liu, Michigan State University; Ning Hsieh, Michigan State University; Wenhua Lai, Michigan State University Immigration Background and the Widowhood Effect on Mortality - Jennifer Caputo, University of Chicago; Peng Li, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research; Mine Kühn, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research; Henrik Brønnum-Hansen, Section for Social Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen; Anna Oksuzyan, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research What Can Catholic Senior Schools offer the Elderly Distinctively? - YoungLan Lee 

2752.  Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables. Table 6: Aging, Place, and Social Context VAM, Room 51, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Stephanie Urena, University of Maryland; Bridget Goosby, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Yingling Liu, Baylor University Differing Stories: Urban/Rural Health Disparities among the Oldest Old in China - Yingling Liu, Baylor University Hardship or Ideology: Explaining Happiness Deficit of the Cohorts Born in Mao Years - H. Brin Xu, University of Maryland, College Park Spatially and socially apart? Intergenerational contact and ageist stereotypes in Hong Kong - Mandy Lau The Perceived Meaning of Eldercare among the Sandwich Generation of Korean Immigrants - Byung Soo Lee, University at Buffalo, SUNY Till What Age do Japanese People Wish to Live? The Impact of Age Stereotypes - Saori Yasumoto, Osaka University; Daisuke Ito, Toyo University 

2769.  Meeting. Section on Economic Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 4:15-4:45pm 2770.  Meeting. Theory Section Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 4:15-4:45pm 2771.  Meeting. Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 4:15-4:45pm 

> Session 2748, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 67 Sunday, 4:45 pm 2821.  Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology. Hans O. Mauksch Award for Distinguished Contributions to Undergraduate Sociology Address VAM, Room 20, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha Presider: Julie Pelton, University of Nebraska-Omaha Teaching Up: Developing an Intersectional Andragogy - Celeste Atkins, University of Arizona 

2853.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 1 VAM, Room 52, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Melike Arslan, Northwestern University Table Presider: Arvind Karunakaran, McGill University Front-line Professionals in the Wake of Social Media Scrutiny -Arvind Karunakaran, McGill University Corporate Social Responsibility and Transnational Capitalist Class: Comparing the global corporate citizenship and universal owner - Dasom Lee, University of Twente Keeping them honest: reducing information asymmetries and earnings management through employee ownership - Colin Birkhead, Duke University Wagering Economic Theory: Performativity in Political Prediction Markets - W. Rafferty Thompson, Stony Brook University 

2854.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 2 VAM, Room 53, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Melike Arslan, Northwestern University; Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst Table Presider: Stephanie A. Limoncelli, Loyola Marymount University Compromises and contradictions in the evolving assessment of “impact” in social impact investing - Molly Clark-Barol, University of Wisconsin-Madison Embedded conventions in social innovation. Dissecting communities of renewable energy in New Aquitaine (France) - Luca Storti, University of Torino; Claudia Colombarolli, University of Bologna Learning to be taxed fairly? Preferences for redistributive taxation and status quo bias. - Fabian Kalleitner, University of Vienna; Licia Bobzien, Hertie School of Governance, Berlin, Germany; Réka Szendrö, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria The Good, the Bad, and the Taxed: How social and political markers shape morals in markets - Selen Güler, University of Washington Victims and Heroes: Using “Good” Business to Fight Trafficking for Labor Exploitation - Stephanie A. Limoncelli, Loyola Marymount University 

2855.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 3 VAM, Room 54, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Melike Arslan, Northwestern University Table Presider: Curtis D. Child, Brigham Young University-Provo Multi-level Marketing and Its Discontents: An Autopsy of Commercialized Relationships - Curtis D. Child, Brigham Young University-Provo Not 'Just' a Barista - Ned Tilbrook, Portland State University Trading Emotions: Relational Work In Chinese Live-stream Industry - Tianyao Qu, Cornell University; Zicheng Du; Simin Dai Whole Foods Shoppers and Thugs: Moral Entrepreneurship in Seattle’s Recreational Cannabis Markets - Michele Lindsay Cadigan, University of Washington 

2856.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 4 VAM, Room 55, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Melike Arslan, Northwestern University Table Presider: Youbin Kang, University of Wisconsin-Madison Cultural Values, Identity Politics and the Struggle for Meaning in Public Policy - Les Abrams, Hofstra University Disperse and Preserve the Perverse: Computing How Hip-Hop Censorship Changed Popular Music Production in China -Ke Nie, University of California San Diego Operationalizing Hegemony: Linking Economists’ Public Discourse and Citizens’ Economic Beliefs - Sinisa Hadziabdic, Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies The Role of Labor Politics and Sensationalism in the Automation of Metro Systems, 1981-2018 - Youbin Kang, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Jungmyung Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison A Strategic Action Fields Approach to U.S.-China Relations: An Illustration with the Next Generation Automobile Industry -Seio Nakajima, Waseda University 

2857.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 5 VAM, Room 56, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Melike Arslan, Northwestern University; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst Table Presider: Alessandra L. Gonzalez, University of Chicago A Processual Model of Culture Change in Organizations: Hiring First Females in All-Male Organizations - Alessandra L. Gonzalez, University of Chicago Economic Transformation, Relationship Quality, and Marital Dissolution among Young Women in Malawi - Jeong Hyun Oh, The University of Chicago Influencing Referring Behavior: An Organizational Field Experiment - Brian Rubineau, McGill University; Sumeet Duggal, McGill University; Roberto M. Fernandez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Erin Arcario, Boehringer Ingelheim, Inc. USA Semantic Decision Networks - Ingo Marquart, ESMT Berlin; Matthew S. Bothner, University of Chicago When does catalyzing social comparisons cause growth? - Ingo Marquart, ESMT Berlin; Nghi Truong; Matthew S. Bothner, University of Chicago; Richard Haynes 

2858.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 6 VAM, Room 57, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Melike Arslan, Northwestern University; Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin Table Presider: Basak Kus, Wesleyan University Cross-National Comparison of the Employment Outcomes of Financialization - Philipp Alexander Thompson, Freie Universität Berlin Plastic Finance: Commercial Banks, Credit Cards, and the SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 68 

Origins of Financialization - Conrad Jacober, Johns Hopkins University State, Risk Regulation, and Finance in the US - Basak Kus, Wesleyan University The Fed’s Modernity: Legitimacy Crises and the Management of Embedded Autonomy in US Central Banking - Onur Ozgode, Northwestern University; Julian Jürgenmeyer, Columbia University 

2859.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 7 VAM, Room 58, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Melike Arslan, Northwestern University; Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst Table Presider: Kimberly Kracman, Princeton University Aleatoric Governance: Using lotteries to enhance social mobility and prevent in-group favoritism in meritocratic regimes -Malte Doehne, University of Zürich (UZH); Jonas Geweke; Kaja Rost Protection Rent as Explanation for Racialized Market Outcomes -Kimberly Kracman, Princeton University Who Owns America? The Characteristics of Residential Landlords in Six Metro Areas - Henry Gomory, Princeton University 

2860.  Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables. Table 8 VAM, Room 59, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Daniel G. Fridman, University of Texas-Austin; Melike Arslan, Northwestern University; Nathan Meyers, University of Massachusetts Amherst Table Presider: Jacob Apkarian, CUNY-York College Evaluating the Validity of Conflicting Logics of Governance in Corporate Finance - Jacob Apkarian, CUNY-York College Relational Agency and the Boom in UK Occupational Pension Funds (1948-1960) - Yally Avrahampour, London School of Economics Working People's Finance: The Transformation of Credit Unions in an Era of Financial Consolidation - Irem Inal 

2861.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 1: Theories of Knowledge Production VAM, Room 60, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Michael L. Siciliano, Queen's University Reckoning with Realism: The Striking Affinity between Peirce’s and Bhaskar’s Realist Approaches to Causation - Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame What Do We Mean When We Say That Science, Technology, and Medicine Are Value-laden? - Rowan Hildebrand-Chupp, University of California San Diego 

2862.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 2: Thinking About Politics and Representation VAM, Room 61, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Andrew J. Perrin, Johns Hopkins University Contingent Cascades: Explaining change in political parties -Nicholas Clark Judd, University of Chicago The Charisma and Chaos of Donald Trump: A Re-thematization Max Weber’s Constructs of Leadership. - George K. Danns, University of North Georgia The Less Agreeable Side of Charisma: Cultural Antinomianism and Anti-structural Power - Paul Joosse, University of Hong Kong 

2863.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 3: Perspectives on Time, Habituation, and Subjectivity VAM, Room 62, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Larissa Buchholz, Northwestern University After Bourdieu - Brandon Sward, University of Chicago Durkheim Was Right but Did Not Know Why: Evolved Rewards and Two-Stage Models of Social Evolution - Michael Hammond, University of Toronto Farsighted Habitus - Ruo-Fan Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison It’s always about time. Applying Norbert Elias’s Social Theory to the 21st Century - Thomas R. Konrad, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 

2864.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 4: Approaches to Collective Action VAM, Room 63, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Kate Pride Brown, Georgia Institute of Technology A Pragmatist Theory of Collective Action - Joshua Wakeham, University of Alabama Shaping Sensibility, A Riots Production of Civility - Patara McKeen Social Ties, Organizations and Transformative Change: Emotional Energy, Social Infrastructures and Collective Identities -Alessandro Giuseppe Drago, McGill University; Emanuel Guay, Université du Québec à Montréal Some Strategies for Thinking About Social Structures - Jonathan Eastwood, Washington and Lee University; Claire Smith Theorizing Counter-Revolution in Egypt - Atef S. Said, University of Illinois at Chicago 

2865.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 5: Morality and Ethics Across Contexts VAM, Room 64, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Beatriz Aldana Marquez, Texas State University An Introduction to the Shifting Morals Tactic as used by Moral Entrepreneurs - Nadia Y. Flores-Yeffal, Texas Tech University; Kade Sparger, Texas Tech University Framing the Good, Making the Market: The Economization of Private Security in Istanbul - Gokhan Mulayim, Boston University Rethinking the Relationship between Ethics and Ontology: Facing the Other in Times of Crisis - Greg Wurm, University of Notre Dame Freedom from the Inside: Islamic Cultivations of Agency and Selfhood Among Converts to Sufi Islam - Feyza Akova, University of Notre Dame 

2866.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 6: Theoretical Perspectives on Economic Processes VAM, Room 65, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Kenya Lanae' Goods, Howard University Among crises: Making sense of COVID-19 - Ioana Sendroiu, Harvard University Anthropotropism: Searching for Recognition in the Scandinavian Gig Economy - Gemma Newlands Humanization as Money: Antiracism, the Job Guarantee, and the Promise of Neochartalism - Jakob Feinig, SUNY-Binghamton; Chandiren Valayden, Binghamton University 

> Session 2858, continued

# SUNDAY, AUGUST 8, 2021 69 

Regulatory Financial Regimes: A Theoretical Understanding of a Transnational Order - Nina Teresa Kiderlin, IHEID, Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies Geneva; Shirin Barol, Graduate Institute, Geneva (IHEID) 

2867.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 7: Reckoning with Interactionism VAM, Room 66, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Ran Keren, Northeastern University Interactionism and Social Action - Daniel Ray Morrison, Abilene Christian University; Natalia Ruiz-Junco, Auburn University; Patrick J.W. McGinty, Western Illinois University Can perception be altered by change of reference? A test of the Social Reference Theory - Jie Zhang, State University of New York College at Buffalo Goffman on Interrogation - Gary D Jaworski, Fairleigh Dickison University Interactional Anticipatory Regimes: Humor, Charisma, And Social Chemistry - Ran Keren, Northeastern University Place Identity Formation: A Theory of How Place Constructs the Self - Jennifer Abrams, University of Massachusetts Amherst 

2868.  Theory Section Roundtables. Table 8: Approaches to Culture and Emotions VAM, Room 67, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio Lehoucq, Northwestern University Table Presider: Sara Tyberg Emotional dimension of culture: Toward a sociological theory of cathexis - Dmitry Kurakin, National Research University Higher School of Economics Memory, Emotion and Trauma: puzzling over narratives of institutionalized childhoods - Veridiana Domingos Cordeiro, University of São Paulo Sources of Aesthetic Inspiration: Anticipation and Receptivity in Fashion Design - Alexander Hoppe, University of Pennsylvania Towards New Social Pragmatism - Veikko Eranti, UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI; Eeva Luhtakallio, University of Helsinki 

# Sunday, 6:00 pm 2901.  Plenary Session. ASA 2021 Award Presentation and Presidential Address VAM, Room 0, 6:00-7:30pm 

Presiders: Ryan Light, University of Oregon; Rhacel Salazar Parrenas, University of Southern California A Sociology for the 21st Century: Incorporating the Du Boisian Challenge - Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University 

Please join ASA in recognizing 2021 award winners and the presidential address "A Sociology for the 21st Century: Incorporating the Du Boisian Challenge" delivered by President Aldon Morris. 

> Session 2866 continued

# 70 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 70 Monday, 10:00 am 3015.  Meeting. Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology Council Meeting VAM, Room 14, 10:00-10:45am 3020.  Meeting. Community and Urban Sociology Section Council Meeting VAM, Room 19, 10:00-10:45am 3022.  Meeting. Section on Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis Council Meeting VAM, Room 21, 10:00-10:45am 3067.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Mental Health Council Meeting VAM, Room 66, 10:00-10:45am 3068.  Meeting. Section on Political Sociology Council Meeting VAM, Room 67, 10:00-10:45am 3069.  Meeting. Sociology of Law Council Meeting VAM, Room 68, 10:00-10:45am 3070.  Meeting. Section the History of Sociology Council Meeting VAM, Room 69, 10:00-10:45am 3071.  Meeting. ASA Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 10:00-10:45am Monday, 11:00 am 3102.  Book Forum. No Shortcuts: Organizing for Power in the New Gilded Age VAM, Room 1, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jeff Goodwin, New York University Moderator: Jeff Goodwin, New York University Panelists: Marshall Ganz, Harvard University; Hahrie Han, UCSB; Gay W. Seidman, University of Wisconsin-Madison Author: Jane McAlevey, Activist/ Public Intellectual 

3103.  Special Sessions. Challenges and Benefits of Teaching and Researching at Minority Serving Institutions VAM, Room 2, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tiffany Davis, Chicago State University Presider: Tiffany Davis, Chicago State University Panelists: Leslie Baker-Kimmons, Chicago State University; Juan R. Martinez, Northeastern Illinois University; Celeste Nichole Lee, Spelman College 

3104.  Special Sessions. Outcome of the 2020 Election VAM, Room 3, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Adia M. Harvey Wingfield, Washington University-St. Louis Presider: Candice C. Robinson, University of Pittsburgh Panelists: Angela S. Garcia, University of Chicago; Jeff Manza, New York University; Rashawn Ray, University of Maryland-College Park; Rachel Wetts, Brown University 

3105.  Special Sessions. Threats and Attacks in the Age of Trumpism, White Supremacy and Open Carry VAM, Room 4, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Melissa M. Valle, Rutgers University-Newark Presider: Melissa M. Valle, Rutgers University-Newark Panelists: Littisha Antoinette Bates, University of Cincinnati; James Michael Thomas, University of Mississippi; Johnny E. Williams, Trinity College; Nancy Wang Yuen, Biola University 

3106.  Student Forum. Race, Social Institutions, and Structural Inequality VAM, Room 5, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Madelyn Diaz, University of Central Florida Presider: Julian Posada, University of Toronto Addressing Racism in Our Disciplinary Homes: Social Activism in a Sociology Department - Mairead Carr, University at Albany - SUNY Beyond Retribution: Interrogating the Constraints of Criminalization in Transformative Justice Approaches to Domestic Violence - Sofia Tagkaloglou, University of Massachusetts - Amherst Black Lives Matter vs. Blue Lives Matter: Counter-Framing and the Impacts of Party, Media, and Anti-Blackness - Tim Lauve-Moon, Baylor University Negotiating Boundaries: How Proximity to Whiteness Impacts the Health of Non-White People - Evangeline Warren, The Ohio State University 

3108.  Thematic Sessions. The Future of American Sociology VAM, Room 7, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Presider: Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Panelists: James S. House, University of Michigan; Mary Romero, Arizona State University; Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Discussant: Alyasah Ali Sewell, Emory University 

3109.  ASA Retirement Network (previously Opportunities in Retirement Network). Thinking through Post-Bachelor’s Degree Options During the Pandemic VAM, Room 8, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Presider: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Panelists: Roberta M. Spalter-Roth, George Mason University; Mary Scheuer Senter, Central Michigan University; Valerie Jenness, University of California-Irvine; Amy L. Best, George Mason University; Diego de los Rios, Paradigm Strategy, Inc; Tonya D. Lindsey, California Research Bureau 

3110.  Professional Development Workshop. Grant-Seeking from Private Foundations: What Investigators Should Know VAM, Room 9, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Leader: James A. Wilson, Russell Sage Foundation Co-Leaders: Jenny Irons, William T. Grant Foundation; Derek Houston, Spencer Foundation 

3111.  Ideas for Future Research. The Future of Data Collection on Access to Paid Parental Leave VAM, Room 10, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presiders: Lauren N. McClain, Western Kentucky University; Angelika Ruta Gulbis, Madison College The Future of Data Collection on Access to Paid Parental Leave -Lauren N. McClain, Western Kentucky University; Angelika Ruta Gulbis, Madison College 71 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 71 3112.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Business Meeting VAM, Room 11, 11:00am-12:25pm 3113.  Section on Sociology of Law. Law, Medicine and Claims-Making VAM, Room 12, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jill Weinberg, Tufts University Presider: Jill Weinberg, Tufts University “No Safe Zones”: Immigrant Health and Medical Legal Violence in the Nuevo South - Meredith Van Natta, University of California-Merced Pain at the Intersection of Social Policy and Medicine: Why Lawmakers and Doctors Medicalized Suffering - Jane Pryma, University of Connecticut Transgender Patient Access to Health Care: Barriers, Work-Arounds, and the Social Construction of Medical Necessity -Shauhin Ahmadi Talesh, University of California-Irvine; Anna Kirkland, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Angela Perone, University of Michigan 

3114.  Section on History of Sociology. History of Sociology and Social Thought VAM, Room 13, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Kevin B. Anderson, University of California, Santa Barbara Presider: Jane Elizabeth McCamant, University of Chicago Designing Narratives and Semantic Comparisons: An Exploratory Essay - Laura R. Ford, Bard College From Paris to Boston: A Trajectory with Pierre Bourdieu - David L. Swartz, Boston University History and Biography in the 21st Century; C. Wright Mills Revisited - Lauren Langman, Loyola University-Chicago Multiracial Identities in the United States: Toward the Brazilian or South African Paths? - Reginald Daniel, University of California, Santa Barbara 

3115.  Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology. A New Canon for SKAT: Working in the Tradition of Du Bois, Wells, and Duster VAM, Room 14, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Alondra Nelson, Institute for Advanced Study Presider: Alondra Nelson, Institute for Advanced Study Panelists: Ruha Benjamin, Princeton University; Michael Rodríguez-Muñiz, Northwestern University; Joan H. Fujimura, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Kevin M. Moseby, Drexel University 

3116.  Section on Latina/o Sociology. Latinxs and Crises VAM, Room 15, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Simon Eduardo Weffer-Elizondo, Northern Illinois University; Kevin Zevallos, University of Connecticut Presider: Simon Eduardo Weffer-Elizondo, Northern Illinois University Cascading Disasters: Hurricane Maria, post-disaster migration, and Covid-19 impacts on Puerto Rican adaptation and integration - Rebecca Blackwell, University of South Florida; Elizabeth M. Aranda, University of South Florida; Melanie Escue, University of South Florida; Alessandra Rosa, University of South Florida Centros de Apoyo Mutuo in Puerto Rico: Reconfiguring Assistance in Times of Disaster - Jacqueline Villarrubia-Mendoza, Colgate University; Roberto Velez-Velez, SUNY-New Paltz Compounded Inequality: How the U.S. Paycheck Protection Program is failing Los Angeles Latino small businesses -Karina Santellano, University of Southern California Latinxs' Perceived Risk of Deportation During the 2020 Black Lives Matter Protests - Nabil Tueme, University of Connecticut Rebuscarse la Vida: Latinas’ Agency in Navigating COVID-19 in Philadelphia - Veronica Montes, Bryn Mawr College; Beatriz Padilla; Erika Busse, Macalester College 

3117.  Section on Sociology of Population. Reproductive Access, Autonomy, and Justice VAM, Room 16, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Karen Guzzo, Bowling Green State University Presider: Karen Guzzo, Bowling Green State University Panelists: Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon; Chris A. Barcelos, University of Massachusetts Boston; Tiffany Green, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Melissa Gilliam, University of Chicago 

3118.  Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work. Organizational and Occupational Community, Culture, and Change VAM, Room 17, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Sharla N. Alegria, University of Toronto; Nicole Genevieve Denier, University of Alberta; Jiwook Jung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Presider: Jiwook Jung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Can We Change the Overwork Culture? Workplace Policies and the Ideal Worker Norm - Youngjoo Cha, Indiana University-Bloomington; Kristin Kelley, WZB Berlin Social Science Center; Elizabeth Hirsh, University of British Columbia Civic (dis)embeddedness: Professionalism shapes the social and systemic integration of urban civil society organizations -Christof Brandtner, emlyon Business School; Krystal Laryea, Stanford From ‘State of Exception’ to ‘New Normal’: Crisis and Change in Organizations - Alexandra E. Brewer, Wake Forest University Institutional Persistence, Change, and Agency: The Case of Air Traffic Control - Diane Vaughan, Columbia University Ties that bind or ties that free? Core-periphery collaboration and identity shifting in US Hollywood Films - Demetrius Lewis, Emory University; Ruo Jia, Stanford GSB 

3119.  Section on Sociology of Religion. Religion, Race, Ethnicity, and Nationalism VAM, Room 18, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Rhys H. Williams, Loyola University-Chicago; Meredith C. Whitnah, Westmont College Presider: Rhys H. Williams, Loyola University-Chicago Christian Nationalism Beyond Black and White: The racialized relationship between religion and justice - Glenn Edward Bracey, Villanova University; Rory Kramer, Villanova University; Michael O. Emerson, University of Illinois-Chicago Riotous or Righteous: Christian Nationalist Responses to Black Lives Matter Protests - Shatira Monique Woods, The Ohio State University; Dawson Paul Richard Vosburg Nationalism in Religious Sermons: Examining Kurdish-Turkish Conflict - Ihsan Kahveci, University of Washington 72 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 72 

Model Citizens: French Muslims’ Political Participation under Republican Gaze - Margot Dazey, Institute for Advanced Study in Toulouse Discussant: Meredith C. Whitnah, Westmont College 

3120.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology. Representations and Representation: Blackness and Comparative-Historical Sociology VAM, Room 19, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Anthony S. Chen, Northwestern University; Marisela Martinez-Cola, Utah State University Presider: Anthony S. Chen, Northwestern University Black Enslaved Imaginaries: A Black Feminist Sociological Approach to the Archive - Endia Louise Hayes, Rutgers University Double Consciousness in the 21st Century: DuBoisian Theory and the Problem of Racialized Legal Status - Tiffany D. Joseph, Northeastern University; Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Use of the “Race Relations” Paradigm in Silencing Du Bois’ Critiques of Racial Capitalism - Julia Bates, Sacred Heart University 

3121.  Community and Urban Sociology Section. Racial Equity, Repair, and the Global Movement for Black Lives VAM, Room 20, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Monica C. Bell, Yale University Presider: Monica C. Bell, Yale University A Hashtag of Two Americas: The Meaning of #BlackLivesMatter in Brazil - Demetrius Miles Murphy, University of Southern California “Even in Sweden”: Reverberations of the Black Lives Matter Movement in Sweden - Jasmine Linnea Kelekay, University of California, Santa Barbara From Police Reform to Police Abolition: How Minneapolis Activists Fought to Make Black Lives Matter - Michelle S. Phelps, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Anneliese Ward “I been here longer than you”: How targeted policing creates the conditions for abolition - Nikki Jones, University of California-Berkeley; Brie McLemore; Peyton Provenzano; Rachel Anspach 

3122.  Section on Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis. New Directions in Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis VAM, Room 21, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya Stivers, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Albert J. Meehan, Oakland University Action formation of requests in German: Interactional and pragmatic factors affecting the choice of linguistic formats - Alexandra Gubina, Leibniz-Institute for the German Language; Arnulf Deppermann, Leibniz-Institute for the German Language “Do not think a member is a person”: On analytical individualization - Jakub Mlynar, Charles University -Faculty of Mathematics and Physics Quid pro quo in calls from a corruption scandal - Luis Manuel Olguin, UCLA Talking about things: how patients use ‘thing’ to preface medical failures - Caroline Kim Tietbohl, University of Colorado-Denver; Clara Ann Blomgren Bergen, University of California Los Angeles Managing and using the problem of multiple categories in relation to action formation and ascription - Kevin A. Whitehead, University of California-Santa Barbara; Geoffrey Raymond, University of California-Santa Barbara 

3123.  Regular Session. Peasants' Search for Survival, Development, and Emancipation VAM, Room 22, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Lefeng Frank Lin, Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University Presider: Ayca Zayim, Mount Holyoke College Criminal governance, agrarian inequalities, and the making of an armed social movement in Michoacán, Mexico - Joel S. Herrera, University of California-Los Angeles Embedded Peasantry: Path-Dependence and Economic Transformation in Indonesia and Malaysia - Rahardhika Arista Utama, Northwestern University Holistic gentrification and the recreation of rurality: new wave of rural gentrification in China - Yue Du, Tsinghua University Not Your Entrepreneurs: Understanding West Africa’s Informal Workers as Working-Class - Joshua Lew McDermott, University of Pittsburgh 

3124.  Regular Session. Assimilation and its Variants: Racialized, Segmented, and Relational Assimilation VAM, Room 23, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Presider: Carina A. Bandhauer, Western Connecticut State University Segmented Assimilation in the Early 20th Century? - Jennifer Lee, University of Arizona; Christina Diaz, University of Arizona Racialized Assimilationism and Cultural Transmission in First-and Second-Generation Immigrants’ Experiences - Sonia Planson, Northwestern Intermarriage, Assimilation Theory, and the Acculturation of Marriage Migrants in South Korea - Paul Yunsik Chang, Harvard University; Eun Se Baik, Harvard University; Harris Hyun-soo Kim, Ewha Womans University The Racialization of “Illegality” and its’ Differential Impacts on Migrant Youth Development and Mental Health - Carly Offidani-Bertrand, California State University-San Marcos 

3125.  Regular Session. Labor Markets: Leveraging Administrative Data to Study Labor Market Dynamics VAM, Room 24, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Adam Goldstein, Princeton University Presider: Adam Goldstein, Princeton University Between School and Work: Supply and Demand in the Internship Market - Carrie L. Shandra, Stony Brook University Job experience, gender and the application decision: A within-individual analysis - Brian Rubineau, McGill University; Alyson Gounden Rock, McGill University; Jean-Nicolas Reyt, McGill University; Batia Wiesenfeld, NYU Stern School of Business Patterned Preferences: Employers’ Gender Preferences Across Multiple Hiring Decisions in an Online Labor Marketplace -Claire Daviss, Stanford University; Ming D Leung, University of California-Irvine 

> Session 3119 continued

# 73 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 73 3126.  Regular Session. Social Media and the Internet: Affordances and Subjectivities VAM, Room 25, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jessica Pearce, University of Louisiana at Lafayette Presider: Tracy Perkins, Arizona State University Algorithmic Capital and Influencer Careers: Vegan YouTubers and Facebook Entertainers - Angele Christin, Stanford University; Ashley E. Mears, Boston University Bored Ghosts and Anxious Text Games: How Dating Apps Channel the Desire for Intimacy into Anxiety - Gregory Narr Media Manipulation Affordances: how producers’ exploit platforms to spread misinformation. - Francesca Tripodi, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill On Call 76 days: WeChat in Volunteerism during the Wuhan Lockdown - Xueqing Zhang, UBC Social Butterflies or Social Distancers? Exploring Social Media User Profiles - Sydney Yarbrough, University of Maryland-College Park 

3127.  Regular Session. Activism in Today’s World: New Agendas for Persistent Challenges VAM, Room 26, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Marcos Emilio Perez, Washington and Lee University Presider: Diego F. Leal, University of South Carolina-Columbia A Black Feminist Toolkit: Mobilization and Cohesion in Emergent Race-based Social Movements - Prisca Gayles, University of Nevada-Reno Tangential Movements: The springboard effect of feminist anti-violence movements on drug violence in Latin America - Anjuli Fahlberg, Tufts University; Tori Simon; Harper Wise; Maya Velasquez, Tufts University "What Have You Done to Our World?": Comparing Intergenerational Injustice Narratives in 7 Youth Protests -Cécile Van de Velde, University of Montreal When Black Movements Matter: Effects on Newspaper Attention to Black Victims of Police Violence - Todd Lu, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 

3128.  Regular Session. Racial and Ethnic Identification, Categorization, and Theorization: New Directions and Challenges VAM, Room 27, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Maryann Erigha, University of Georgia Presider: Faustina M. DuCros, San José State University A Theory of the Racialization of Indigeneity- A Challenge to the Sociology of Race - Enid Logan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Brieanna Marie Watters Racial Imposter Syndrome in Second-Generation Black-White Multiracials - Haley Pilgrim, University of Pennsylvania Black, No Question Mark: Multiracial Reflective Resistance and Involvement in Black Student Organizations - Angelica Celeste Loblack Genetic Options and Constraints: A Randomized Controlled Trial on How Genetic Ancestry Tests Change Ethnic Identities - Wendy D. Roth, University of Pennsylvania; Sule Yaylaci, University of Pennsylvania Shift or replenishment? Reassessing the path of Spanish bilingualism across contexts of ethnic change - Ted Mouw, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Ruy Manrique, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Discussant: Faustina M. DuCros, San José State University 

3129.  Regular Session. Social Context of Health Disparities VAM, Room 28, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Theresa Morris, Texas A&M University-College Station Presider: Jeff Scott Shelton, Wayne State College Disaggregating Inequalities in the Professional and Geographic Outcomes of International Medical Graduates in the United States - Rebecca Anna Schut, University of Pennsylvania Exploratory Demographic Spatial Modeling of Micro Hospital Accessibility in Texas - Jingqiu Ren; Ryan Earl, Texas A&M University; Ernesto F. L. Amaral, Texas A&M University-College Station Sexually Transmitted Infections and the Importance of Connected Neighborhoods - Lauren Newmyer, Pennsylvania State University; Megan Evans, The Pennsylvania State University; Corina Graif, Pennsylvania State University Intergenerational health inequity: Consequences of paternal incarceration on adolescents’ health care access and health behaviors - Erin Josephine McCauley, Cornell University; Camille Portier, Cornell 

3130.  Regular Session. Qualitative Methodology VAM, Room 29, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jean Beaman, University of California-Santa Barbara Presider: Jean Beaman, University of California-Santa Barbara Doing Fieldwork with Police: Gendered Negotiations between Researcher, Gatekeeper, and Participants - Wenqi Yang, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign Race, Class, and Studying Up in the Global South - Patrick Inglis, Grinnell College; Hugo Ceron-Anaya, Lehigh University Translating Race: Qualitative Studies of Race Outside the United States - Anna Katharina Skarpelis, Harvard University; Elizabeth Onasch, SUNY-Plattsburgh Vernacular and translation in fieldwork: A breach between the ideal and practice - Katarzyna Sepielak, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley; Dawid Wladyka, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley; William Yaworsky, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley Action accounts of police-civilian interactions: Using video elicitation to explore police officers’ how-to knowledge -Laura Keesman, University of Amsterdam 

3131. Regular Session. Racial Wealth Disparities VAM, Room 30, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jason N. Houle, Dartmouth College Presider: Jason N. Houle, Dartmouth College Hispanic-White Differences in Wealth Trajectories in Early Adulthood - Alexander Adames, University of Pennsylvania; Ellen Bryer, University of Pennsylvania Maternal Wealth Implications of Child Incarceration - Brielle Bryan, Rice University Rising Housing Costs and the Racial Wealth Gap - Joe LaBriola, University of California-Berkeley Student Loan Debts and Race-Nativity Divergence in Wealth Accumulation - Lingxin Hao, Johns Hopkins University The Significance of Financial Wealth in the Black-White Wealth Gap - Ken-Hou Lin, University of Texas at Austin; Guillermo Dominguez, UT-Austin 74 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 74 3132.  Regular Session. Urban Sociology VAM, Room 31, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Bryant Crubaugh, Pepperdine University Presider: Bryant Crubaugh, Pepperdine University ‘Between a Fix and a Fatality’: The Palliative Governance of Homeless, Injection Drug Users - Anthony J. DiMario, University of Southern California Resource Inequity in Suburbs: How Anti-Black Racism Shapes Counties’ Fiscal Fates - Angela Marie Simms, Barnard College; Ankit Rastogi, University of Pennsylvania Spatial Disparities in Childhood Lead Poisoning: Race, Class, and the Role of Neighborhood Networks in Milwaukee - Brian L. Levy, George Mason University; Zahra Khan The Civic Elite: a Network Perspective on Elite Consolidation among Community-Based Organizations, 1998-2016 -Andrew Ford Messamore, University of Texas at Austin Empowering and Constraining Collective Efficacy - S. Rose Werth, Northwestern University 

3133.  Regular Session. Transitions from Secondary Education to College and Career VAM, Room 32, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago Presider: Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago Advanced Placement Coursework: The Rise of the Counterfeit Credential - Heather E. Price, Loyola University at Chicago Career and Technical Education and Between-School Inequality in Michigan - Jane Furey, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor College Promise Programs as Symbolic Politics - David B. Monaghan, Shippensburg University; Paul A. Attewell, City University of New York, Graduate Center Mixed Signals? Economically (Dis)advantaged Students’ College Attendance under Mandatory College and Career Readiness Assessments - Christian Michael Smith, Berea College; Noah Hirschl, University of Wisconsin-Madison The Business of Diversity and Its Impact on Hispanic-Serving Institutions in California Higher Education - David Ortuno, California State University, Fullerton Discussant: David B. Monaghan, Shippensburg University 

3147.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 21: Crime, Punishment, and Prisons VAM, Room 46, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Chiara Clio Packard, University of Wisconsin -Madison Presider: Mitra Mokhtari, University of Toronto The Art of Peer Pressure: Toward a Causal Estimate of Friends’ Influence on Delinquency - Jason Robey, University of Wisconsin - Madison “It’s Still the City”: The Social Construction of Routine Urban Crime and Neighborhood Safety - Joy Kadowaki, University of Dayton Mapping the Field of Canadian Criminology - Mitra Mokhtari, University of Toronto 

3148.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 22: Sociology of Health VAM, Room 47, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Chiara Clio Packard, University of Wisconsin -Madison Presider: Sadie Ridgeway, Washington State University Childhood Misfortune and Adult Disability Status: Do Early-Life Exposures Deter Healthy Aging? - Patricia M. Morton, Wayne State University BMI, Discrimination, and Self-Rated Health among Emerging Adults - Sadie Ridgeway, Washington State University Effects of Pastoral and Congregational Support on Mental Health Outcomes - Gabriel A Acevedo, University of Texas at San Antonio; Brandon Vaidyanathan, Catholic University of America; Reed DeAngelis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Jordan Farrell, The Catholic University of America Appreciative or Hesitantly Appreciative? HIV/AIDS Activists' Understandings of PrEP and the Contemporary HIV/AIDS Landscape - Jason V. D'Amours, Florida State University 

3149.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 23: Social Movements and Social Change VAM, Room 48, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Chiara Clio Packard, University of Wisconsin -Madison Presider: Leila Wilmers, Cornell University Dilemmas of nationalism in contexts of social change: Negotiating national continuity and progress in Russia - Leila Wilmers, Cornell University Max Weber Came to Rural China - Mengzheng Yao, Cornell University Off of the Sidewalks, into the Streets: How NYC’s Queer Liberation Movement Reclaims Pride - Robert Baez, University of Florida Non-Violent Resistance Movements and Substantive Democracy -Jalal Fetrati, Illinois State University 

3150.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 24: Race and Gender VAM, Room 49, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Chiara Clio Packard, University of Wisconsin -Madison Presider: Ladislao Jesus Rodriguez, University of California, Berkeley Oso Athletic: The Educational Experience of Latinx Student-Athletes - Ladislao Jesus Rodriguez, University of California, Berkeley Street-Race and SES in Virtual Reality: How Physician-Perceptions of Virtual Reality Patients influences Physician Response -Shameka Poetry Thomas, NIH; Rachi Willard, NIH/NHGRI - Health Disparities Unit; Jameson Floyd, NIH/NHGRI-Health Disparities Unit; Babajide Owosela, NIH/NHGRI-Health Disparities Unit; Vence L. Bonham, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH A New Dimension of the Motherhood Penalty: Perceptions of Future Childbearing Risk - Tania Cabello-Hutt, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill The admiration of fathers: using factorial vignettes to explore differential assessments of parenting quality - Audrey Ruth Omar, University of Washington 

3151.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 25: Labor and Wages VAM, Room 50, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Carolina Hernandez Presider: Andrew Labuza, University of Oregon Does Delayed Childbirth Help Your Career? Racial Differences in Motherhood Wage Penalties among Millennials - Misun Lim, WZB Berlin Social Science Center Campaign Co-Donation Networks and Organized Labor’s Declining Influence In Congress from 1990 to 2018 - Andrew Labuza, University of Oregon Earnings Disadvantages of Non-college-bound Black Young Men: Evidence from the High School Longitudinal Study of 75 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 75 

2009 - Byeongdon ("Don") Oh, Portland State University; Daniel Mackin Freeman, Portland State University; Dara Shifrer, Portland State University For Money and for Love: Rethinking the Motivations and Rewards of Health Care Work - Fumilayo Showers, University of Connecticut 

3152.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 26: Politics and Identity in Latin America VAM, Room 51, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Carolina Hernandez Presider: Carolina Hernandez Mestizo Attitudes and Indigenous Rights in Latin America -Caroline Grace Martinez, UC Irvine Revisiting community ties in the Mexican Migration Project -Christopher Levesque, University of Minnesota Afro-descendant State Inclusion: Effects of the WCAR in Mexico and Peru 20 Years Later - Kristina Elizabeth Lee, Northwestern University Violence, Political Inclusion, and the Approval of Emigrant Political Rights: Argentina and Colombia (1970-1991) - Leydy Diossa-Jimenez, University of California-Los Angeles 

3153.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 27: Reimagining Environmentalism VAM, Room 52, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Carolina Hernandez Presider: Mary Godwyn, Babson College Experience of Students of Color with College Campus Environmentalism - Yasamin Shaker, University of Utah What is a Sustainable Desert City? Environmental governance and third-party municipal certifications for the Southwest - Erin Heinz, University of Arizona Governance Advances that Efface Environmental Ambition: Combining Institutionalist and Political-economic Approaches to Analyze Chile’s REDD+ Program - Patrick CoatarPeter, Boston College; Brian J. Gareau, Boston College The Role of Origin Stories in the Development and Maintenance of Emotional Energy in Alternative Communities - Mary Godwyn, Babson College Power, Discourse and Networks in Climate Change Policy-Making: a Japanese Case - Jeffrey Broadbent, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities 

3154.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 28: Race, Colorblindness, and Whiteness Studies VAM, Room 53, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Carolina Hernandez Presider: Marcus Bell, SUNY Oswego Commemorative Cooptation: Rhetorical Usage of Martin Luther King Jr. Through the American Presidency, 1968-2020 -Davyd Setter Expanding the Criminalized Circle: Protecting Race Stereotypes in the Face of Stereotype-Disconfirming Exogenous Events -Elizabeth Felix, University of Iowa “Beckys” in MAGA Hats: Femininities and Intersectional Advantages in Support for Donald Trump - Emma Vetter, American University; Gay Young, American University My Black Students Think I'm White: Negotiating Ideology and Identity in Urban Schools - Marcus Bell, SUNY Oswego 

3155. Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 29: Global Migration VAM, Room 54, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Carolina Hernandez Presider: Natalia Anne de Gravelles, University of Macedonia Latino/a Immigrants, Acculturation Stress, and Resilience: The Impact of Documentation Status - Irene Felsman, Duke University School of Nursing; Anna Holleman, Duke University; Aasha Henderson, Duke University; Gabriela Nagy, Duke University; Allison Stafford, Duke University; Scott de Marchi, Duke University; Rosa Gonzalez-Guarda, Duke University A Critique of EU Human Rights Approaches to Unaccompanied Minors in their Transition to Adulthood - Natalia Anne de Gravelles, University of Macedonia The Requirements for Local Governments to Establish Integration Services: Applying QCA Approach - Shigemi Ohtsuki, Tokyo Metropolitan University 

3168. Meeting. Section on Political Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 11:00-11:30am 3169. Meeting. Section on Sociology of Mental Health Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 11:00-11:30am Monday, 11:30 am 3256. Political Sociology Roundtable 1 VAM, Room 55, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Francesco Duina, Bates College Brussels Under Pressure: Compliance, the Single Market, and National Purpose in the EU - Francesco Duina, Bates College; Xiaoqing Zhou Where Are All the Globalists? Patterns of Multiple Collective Identification in Europe - Martin Lukk, University of Toronto What makes young people participation distinctive? Evidence from a cross-European study - Andrea Felicetti; Martin Portos 

3257.  Political Sociology Roundtable 2 VAM, Room 56, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Mujun Zhou, Zhejiang University Beyond Contained Activism in Authoritarian States: The New Rural Reconstruction Movement in Postsocialist China -Jingyun Dai, Harvard University Obfuscatory and Balanced Work: How Grassroots Bureaucrats Deal with Conflict Between Formal and Informal Rules -Chang Liu, University of Notre Dame The Interstitial Emergence of the New Workers’ Movement in China and Its Contradicting Institutionalization - Mujun Zhou, Zhejiang University Unbelievably Success Story: A Case Study of a China’s LGBTQ+ Company - Huiru Wang, University of Oxford 

3258.  Political Sociology Roundtable 3 VAM, Room 57, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Philip Alexander Kretsedemas, University of Massachusetts-Boston A Synthetic Approach to Resurgent Nationalism in the Era of Globalization - Emma-Claire LaSaine, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

> Session 3151 continued

# 76 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 76 

Double Movement as Frontlash/Backlash: Rereading Polanyi and Populism with The Civil Sphere - Celso M. Villegas, Kenyon College Interrogating Violence: A Critique of Macro-Scale Theory - Philip Alexander Kretsedemas, University of Massachusetts-Boston Love and Hate as Political Concepts - Jerome Braun 

3259.  Political Sociology Roundtable 4 VAM, Room 58, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Jennifer Suzanne-Kempton Dudley Committing to Congress: Does Organizational Commitment Impact Constituent Commitment? - Jennifer Suzanne-Kempton Dudley Defining the Boundaries of Political Hybridity - Zeinab F. Shuker, University of California, Riverside Republic, Not a Democracy: Politics, Social Media, and Semantic Territorialization - Mark H. K. Pharris, University of Minnesota Spectacle and legacy as urban development in Olympic cities -Samuel Maron, Northeastern University 

3260.  Political Sociology Roundtable 5 VAM, Room 59, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Burrel James Vann, San Diego State University Do polarization narratives apply to politics on the periphery? The case of Atlantic Canada - Rachel McLay; Howard Ramos, Western University Examining the Influence of Political Affiliation and Orientation on Political Tolerance - Christopher RH Garneau, University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma; Philip Schwadel, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Persuasive Action and Ideological Polarization in Congress -Burrel James Vann, San Diego State University 

3261.  Political Sociology Roundtable 6 VAM, Room 60, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: J Sterphone, University of California, Santa Barbara From the Margins to the Center: Legitimation Strategies from an Alt-Right Case Study - Lauren C Garcia Urban Decay & Trumpism in the Suburban Periphery - Kevin Wells, New York University 

3262.  Political Sociology Roundtable 7 VAM, Room 61, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Chengzuo Tang, Duke University Hierarchies of Visibility: State Knowledge, Privacy, and Bureaucratic Legitimacy During the Progressive Era - Martin Eiermann, University of California-Berkeley Electoral Constraints on Unrestricted Municipal Funds in California - Daniel R. Alvord, Northeastern University; Jennifer Marie Nations, University of San Diego The Invention of “Immigration Reform” and the Making of Mass Deportation in the US, 1980-2000 - Michael A. Gould-Wartofsky, New York University The Local Democratic Elite. Mapping the connections between elected members of local democratic and parademocratic institutions - Tuomas Niska; Veikko Eranti, University of Helsinki; Juulia Heikkinen, University of Helsinki 

3263.  Political Sociology Roundtable 8 VAM, Room 62, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Jan Doering, McGill University Cultural Schema in Ambiguous National Identities’ Country: Chinese versus Taiwanese Identity and Political Discourse in Taiwan - Ka U Ng, McGill University; Yung-Ying Chang Making Sense of Social Difference: Narrative Identity and the Cultural Foundations of Beliefs about Meritocracy -Jacqueline Ho, Cornell University Reactive or Diminished Ethnicity? An Analysis of Muslims’ Responses to Secularist Restrictions - Jan Doering, McGill University; Efe Peker, University of Ottawa Rising Christian Nationalism: Politics, Religion, and Values predicting support for Sexual Assault Reporting and #MeToo - R. C. Morris, Weber State University; Ryan Jerome LeCount, Hamline University 

3264.  Political Sociology Roundtable 9 VAM, Room 63, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Karyn Vilbig, New York University A ‘Spirit of Dependence’: Social Citizenship and the Provision of Social Rights in South Africa - Courtney Loree Hallink, University of Cambridge Social Embeddedness of Attitudes Toward Elderly Welfare - Chae Yoon Chang, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea Varieties of Capitalism and Income Inequality - Masoud Movahed, University of Wisconsin-Madison Welfare, Work & Deservingness: What about Employment Makes a Person Deserving of Aid? - Karyn Vilbig, New York University 

3265.  Political Sociology Roundtable 10 VAM, Room 64, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey Crisis, plunge, and recovery of public confidence in the police: Data from six national surveys - Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey; M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada; C. Corday, International Survey Center The New Undesirables: Gun Desirability at a Time of Protest -Justin Lucas Sola, University of California Irvine; Bryan L. Sykes, University of California-Irvine The Politics of Community-Police Forums in Buenos Aires, Argentina - Leslie Elva MacColman, Ohio State University Whom to Punish? A Conjoint Analysis of Punitive Attitudes -Adaner Usmani, Harvard University; Andrew Keefe, Harvard University; Rebecca Goldstein, UC Berkeley 

3266.  Political Sociology Roundtable 11 VAM, Room 65, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Samantha Agarwal, Johns Hopkins University Approaches to Environmental Issues in the Western Conservative Thought and the Outlooks of Eco-Conservatism - Önder Güneş, Concordia University Micro-Segregation via Street Fencing and Civic Engagement in Lima, Peru - Fernando A. Calderón Figueroa, University of Toronto Why do leftwing cadre defect to the right? The case of communist-ruled Kerala (India) - Samantha Agarwal, Johns Hopkins University 

> Session 3258 continued

# 77 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 77 

Women's Rights and Making Sense of Authoritarianism -Amirhossein Teimouri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Chmapaign 

3267.  Political Sociology Roundtable 12 VAM, Room 66, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Table Presider: Katie M. Gordon, Stony Brook University Campaigning Through COVID: Women’s Political Candidacies During the Pandemic - Katie M. Gordon, Stony Brook University Crafting the Message: The Data Science of Presidential Elections -Bo Yun Park, Harvard University Unsung Heroes of Democracy in the 2020 Presidential Election? -James V DeFronzo; Jungyun Gill, Stonehill College 

3270.  Section on Sociology of Mental Health. Challenges in Mental Health Research VAM, Room 69, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pamela Braboy Jackson, Indiana University-Bloomington Presider: Pamela Braboy Jackson, Indiana University-Bloomington Panelist: Phyllis Moen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities 

# Monday, 12:45 pm 3302.  Book Forum. Levers of Power: How the 1% Rules and What the 99% Can Do About It VAM, Room 1, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Richard Lachmann, SUNY-Albany Moderator: Richard Lachmann, SUNY-Albany Panelists: Frances Fox Piven, City University of New York; Charles Payne, Rutgers University Newark; Michael C. Dawson, University Chicago Authors: Kevin Young, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Tarun Banerjee, CUNY - John Jay College; Michael Schwartz, Stony Brook University 

3303.  Special Sessions. Challenges, Controversies, and Evidence in Qualitative Interviewing and Observation Research VAM, Room 2, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Kathleen Gerson, New York University; Iddo Tavory, New York University Presiders: Kathleen Gerson, New York University; Iddo Tavory, New York University Panelists: Sarah Damaske, Pennsylvania State University; Colin Jerolmack, New York University; Tey Meadow, Columbia University; Mario Luis Small, Harvard University; Stefan Timmermans, University of California-Los Angeles 

3304.  Special Sessions. Practicing Intersectionality for Liberation: Challenges and Possibilities VAM, Room 3, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Nancy López, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Presider: Nancy López, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Panelists: Kimberle Crenshaw, Columbia University and UCLA; Ruth E. Zambrana, University of Maryland; Ange-Marie Hancock, University of Southern California 

3305. Presidential Panel. Sociology in the Global South VAM, Room 4, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Bandana Purkayastha, University of Connecticut Panelists: Jimi O. Adesina, University of South Africa; Akosua Keseboa Darkwah, University of Ghana; Raewyn Connell, University of Sydney; Nandini Sundar, Delphi University Discussant: Bandana Purkayastha, University of Connecticut Sociology programs exist in colleges and universities throughout the world. Yet, the United States and western countries serve as the face of sociology and receive the lion share of attention. However, it is important sociologists learn how sociology is practiced in the global south and the major challenges sociology confront in these regions. The purpose of this session is to provide knowledge of sociology in the global south. 

3306.  Thematic Sessions. Deciphering the Mechanisms of White Supremacy VAM, Room 5, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Wendy Leo Moore, Texas A&M University-College Station Presider: Wendy Leo Moore, Texas A&M University-College Station Legitimized Racism: Negotiating the Logics of White Supremacy & Settler Colonialism - Dwanna L. McKay, Colorado College White Man’s Religion: Christians of Color Coping with White Supremacy - Glenn Edward Bracey, Villanova University White Supremacy in Global Context - Vilna Francine Bashi Treitler, University of California-Santa Barbara White Supremacy and the Latinx Community - Rogelio Saenz, University of Texas at San Antonio Discussant: Wendy Leo Moore, Texas A&M University-College Station 

3307.  Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology. Sociologies of Science, Knowledge, and Technology in “Revolting Times” VAM, Room 6, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Patrick Ryan Grzanka, University of Tennessee-Knoxville Presider: Kelly Moore, Loyola University-Chicago Crashing the Gate: Consent-Driven Trans- Health Care and Self-Determination - Christoph Hanssmann, SF State The Genealogy of Racialized Method: eGFR as Case Study - Louise Seamster, University of Iowa; Hannah Zadeh, University of Iowa White Supremacist Trees in an Academic Forest: Does Anybody Hear Them? - Bernard Koch, University of California, Los Angeles; Kushan Dasgupta, University of California-Los Angeles; Aaron Panofsky, University of California-Los Angeles Discussant: Nathalia Hernandez Vidal 

3308.  ASA Retirement Network (previously Opportunities in Retirement Network). A Place for Retirees in Regional and State Sociology Associations VAM, Room 7, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Stephen F. Steele, Emeritus Anne Arundel Community College Presiders: David R. Segal, University of Maryland; Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Panelists: Christine E. Bose, University at Albany - SUNY; Rosalyn Benjamin Darling, Indiana University of Pennsylvania; Harry Perlstadt, Michigan State University; Susan B. Prager, Brooklyn College (ret.) 

> Session 3266 continued

# 78 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 78 3309.  Teaching Workshop. Integrating Data Analysis and Quantitative Reasoning into undergraduate courses with Census data VAM, Room 8, 12:45-2:10pm 

Leader: William H. Frey, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Co-Leaders: Jill Bouma, Berea College; Esther Isabelle Wilder, CUNY-Lehman College; Katherine R. Rowell, Sinclair Community College 

3310.  Professional Development Workshop. POC and the Ph.D.: Academia by and for Graduate Students of Color VAM, Room 9, 12:45-2:10pm 

Leaders: Katherine Zaslavsky, Cornell University; Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh Co-Leaders: Haley Pilgrim, University of Pennsylvania; Celine Maria Ayala, University of Nevada, Las Vegas; Yvonne Chen, Vanderbilt University; Lisa Covington, The University of Iowa; Ashley Crooks-Allen, University of Georgia; Alexandra Eleazar, University of California, Santa Barbara; J'Mauri Jackson; Makeiva Jenkins, University of Georgia; Christian Joy Lewis, University of Nevada, Las Vegas 

3311.  Thematic Sessions. The Call for Reparations VAM, Room 10, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Marcus Anthony Hunter, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Marcus Anthony Hunter, University of California-Los Angeles Panelists: Joe R. Feagin, Texas A&M University; Trevon D. Logan, The Ohio State University; Thomas Craemer, University of Connecticut 

3312.  Section on Political Sociology. Challenging Repression: Social Movements in Comparative and Authoritarian Contexts VAM, Room 11, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Presider: Colin J. Beck, Pomona College Cleaving Political Coalitions: Social Movements and Radicalization in Authoritarian Regimes - Benjamin Garcia Holgado, University of Notre Dame Why is Tunisia the Sole Success of the Arab Spring Uprisings? -Ahmad Al-Sholi Preventing Protests Through Surveillance: The Changing Landscape of Protests in China - Han Zhang, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Political Opportunity and Forty Years of Protest, 1981-2020: A Cross-National Analysis - Waleed Jami, University of Nevada, Reno; Clayton D. Peoples, University of Nevada-Reno 

3313.  Regional Spotlight Session. Latinx Chicago and the Sociology of Panethnicity VAM, Room 12, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Michael Rodríguez-Muñiz, Northwestern University Presider: Reyna Hernandez, University of Chicago Panelists: Merida Rua, Northwestern University; Michael Rodríguez-Muñiz, Northwestern University; Lorena Garcia, University of Illinois-Chicago; Maura I. Toro-Morn, Illinois State University 

3314.  Section on Latina/o Sociology. Implications of Knowledge Production on Latinxs (Moving Beyond Latinxs as a Variable) VAM, Room 13, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Zaire Z. Dinzey-Flores, Rutgers University-New Brunswick; Felicia Arriaga, Appalachian State University Presider: Felicia Arriaga, Appalachian State University Activist Research Across Borders: Latinxs’ Experiences as the Basis for Theorizing Health and Migration - Roberta Villalon, St. John's University Colliding Racial Ideologies: Latinx Youth Navigate US Racial Landscape - Celia Olivia Lacayo, University of California-Los Angeles Epistemological Gaslighting: How Power Structures Theory-Making - Rocío R. García, Arizona State University-Tempe Listening to Locals: Racism and Inequality for Latina/os in a Colorado Ski Community - Kyle Anne Nelson, University of Northern Colorado Race, class, and Latinidad in NYC: The decision to stay put when el barrio gentrifies - Diana Cordova-Cobo, Teachers College, Columbia University 

3315.  Section on Sociology of Population. Racism and the Demography of Racial and Ethnic Inequality VAM, Room 14, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Emilio A. Parrado, University of Pennsylvania Presider: Emilio A. Parrado, University of Pennsylvania Gender and Children’s Racial Classification in Interracial Brazilian Families - Carolina Aragao, University of Texas at Austin Hyperincarceration and Missing Men - Alexander Roehrkasse, Duke University; Christopher Michael Muller, University of California-Berkeley Measuring Structural Racism and Health: The Distinct and Overlapping roles of Concentrated Disadvantage, Segregation, and Inequality - Janeria Alexis Easley, Emory University; Linsey Nicole Edwards, New York University; Angela Dixon, Emory University Race, Color & Cognitive Aging of Puerto Ricans aging on the Island - Mao-Mei Liu, University of California-Berkeley Discussant: Mateo Farina, University of Southern California 

3316.  Family Section. Family Patterns and Population Change VAM, Room 15, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Pamela J. Smock, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Youngmin Yi, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Presider: Youngmin Yi, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Gendered Educational Gradient of Marriage Entry in Urban and Rural China: The Roles of Marriage Markets - Haoming Song, Brown University; Zhenchao Qian, Brown University Once in a blue moon: barriers to intermarriage among second-generation Muslims in France - Lucas Germain Drouhot, Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity; Mauricio Bucca, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile Opting Out or Left Out? Gendered Pathways to Singlehood in South Korea - Paul Yunsik Chang, Harvard University; Jihye Oh, Yonsei University; Young-Mi Kim, Yonsei University Women’s Educational Expansion and the Educational Gradient in Childbearing - Federica Querin, European University Institute Discussant: Yun Zhou, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor 79 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 79 3317.  Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility. Poverty Trends and Mechanisms VAM, Room 16, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Regina S. Baker, University of Pennsylvania Presider: Regina S. Baker, University of Pennsylvania Beyond Behavior: Toward Understanding Ethno-Racial Differences in Poverty - Daniel Adam Nicholson, Indiana University The Effects of Childhood Poverty on Racial Differences in Economic Opportunity in Young Adulthood - Zachary Parolin, Bocconi University; Jordan Matsudaira, Teacher's College, Columbia University; Jane Waldfogel, Columbia University; Christopher Wimer, Columbia University Late-career Precarious Employment: Unequal Exposure and Implications for Late-life Poverty - Lora A. Phillips, Arizona State University-Tempe; Alec Rhodes, The Ohio State University Transportation Insecurity in the United States: Identifying a New Mechanism of Poverty and Inequality - Alexandra K. Murphy, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Karina Mercedes McDonald-Lopez, University of Michigan; Alix Malka Gould-Werth, Washington Center for Equitable Growth 

3318.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities. Race, Racism, and COVID-19 VAM, Room 17, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Hayward Derrick Horton, SUNY-Albany Presider: Verna M. Keith, University of Alabama at Birmingham ‘Color of COVID:’ Historicizing the Structural Disparities that Drive Disproportionate Mortality Rates Among African-American Communities - Micah Anthony Pyles; Asa Iacobucci; Liam Downey, University of Colorado-Boulder Controlling the Front Page: How media images frame & incite moral panic during COVID-19 - Jennifer Huynh, University of Notre Dame Racial differences in COVID-19 vaccination attitudes among religious populations - Christopher Justin Jacobi, The Catholic University of America; Brandon Vaidyanathan, Catholic University of America Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation and SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus Infection Rates: A Spatial Analysis of U.S. Cities - Kathryn Freeman Anderson, University of Houston; Angelica Lopez, University of Houston; Dylan Simburger, University of Arizona Discussant: Hayward Derrick Horton, SUNY-Albany 

3319.  Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work. Precarity and Downward Mobility VAM, Room 18, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Sharla N. Alegria, University of Toronto; Nicole Genevieve Denier, University of Alberta; Jiwook Jung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Presider: Lindsey McKay Ibanez, Washburn University Downward Mobility and Working Selves - Lindsey McKay Ibanez, Washburn University; Steven H. Lopez, Ohio State University Low-skilled Occupations Face the Highest Re-skilling Pressure - Di Tong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Lingfei Wu, University of Pittsburgh; James A. Evans, University of Chicago Managing Algorithms: The partial automation of middle management and its implications for gig worker - Diana Enriquez, Princeton University; Janet Vertesi, Princeton University ‘Tag Your Loves...Carrying a Heavy Load’: Multi-Level Marketing and Gendered Neoliberalization of Interpersonal Relationships - Nicole Cochran Unemployment Experts: Governing the Job Search in the New Economy - Patrick Sheehan, University of Texas at Austin 

3320.  Community and Urban Sociology Section. Pandemic and the Modern Metropolis VAM, Room 19, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Neil Brenner, University of Chicago Presider: Neil Brenner, University of Chicago Estimating Eviction Filings in Chicago: The Impact of COVID-19 - Peter Rosenblatt, Loyola University-Chicago; Randall Leurquin, Lawyers' Committee for Better Housing; Mark Swartz, Lawyers' Committee for Better Housing; Cristian Luis Paredes, Loyola University Chicago; Travis Moody, Southern Oregon University; Emily Drane, Loyola University Chicago Financialization of the COVID-19 Housing Crisis and Beyond: Shifting Scales, Shifting Struggles - Marnie Brady, Marymount Manhattan College; Gianpaolo Baiocchi, NYU; Howard Jacob Carlson, Brown University; Ned Crowley, New York University; Sara Duvisac Governing the Pandemic City: Street Vendors and the State in Mexico City - Mariana Manriquez, University of Arizona Localizing a Pandemic: A Comparative Review of COVID-19 Data Dashboards in U.S. Cities - Burcu Baykurt, University of Massachusetts Amherst Post-covid city - Harvey L. Molotch, New York University 

3321.  Section on Sociology of Mental Health. Free to Be Me: Defining Mental Illness and Assessing Risks VAM, Room 20, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Pamela Braboy Jackson, Indiana University-Bloomington Presider: Joanna Lara, Indiana University Borderpolar: Stress Exposure Across the Life Course and the Relative Risks of Bipolar, Borderline or Both - Marta Elliott, University of Nevada-Reno; James Michael Ragsdale, University of Nevada, Reno Different discussion partners and their effect on depression -KeunBok Lee, University of California-Los Angeles Paradoxes of Medicalization: Cannabis & Mental Health - Michelle R. Newhart, Mt. San Antonio College Teachers and Suicide: A State-level Longitudinal Analysis of Teacher Salary and Teen Suicide - Megan Theresa Thiele, San Jose State University What are we measuring when we measure rates of ‘suicidality’ in a population? - Sanja Miklin, University of Chicago 

3322.  Regional Spotlight Session. Running Chicagoland: Black, Latinx, and Women Leadership in the City VAM, Room 21, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Mary E. Pattillo, Northwestern University Presider: Mary E. Pattillo, Northwestern University Panelists: Roberta Garner, DePaul University; Teresa Cordova, University of Illinois at Chicago, Great Cities Institute, Director; Jan Doering, McGill University 

3323. Meeting. Student Forum Business Meeting VAM, Room 22, 12:45-2:10pm 80 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 80 3324.  Regular Session. Education, Meritocracy, and Frames of Deservingness for Immigrants VAM, Room 23, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Presider: Jane Lilly Lopez, Brigham Young University-Provo Immigrant Families’ School Choice Disadvantage and the Nativity-Based Achievement Gap: Evidence from Los Angeles County - Jared N. Schachner, University of Chicago Is Ambition Consequential For Immigrant Youth? Exploring The Association Between Educational Expectations and Depressive Outcomes - Fabrice Stanley Julien, University of North Carolina-Asheville Not About Education: How the concept of educational meritocracy is complicated for undocumented Chinese immigrants - Jia-Lin Liu, New York University The Student-Citizen Frame and Other Citizenship Logics: University Leaders Framing Support for DACA and Undocumented Students - Cassaundra Rodriguez, University of Nevada-Las Vegas 

3325.  Regular Session. Power in a Union? The Potential for Labor’s Renewal During the Pandemic and Beyond. VAM, Room 24, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jamie K McCallum, Middlebury College Presider: Jamie K McCallum, Middlebury College COVID and the Risky Immigrant Workplace: How Declining Employment Standards Socialized Corporate Risk - Andrew Wolf, University of Wisconsin-Madison Historical Conditions for American Labor Union Resurgence: The Road South - Chris Rhomberg, Fordham University In the Streets or in the Courts? Determining Activist Strategies in the International Brotherhood of Teamsters - Catharina O'Donnell, Harvard Sociology; Barry Eidlin, McGill University Work contexts of union effects on family-friendly policies -Eunjeong Paek, University of Southern California 

3326.  Regular Session. Social Media and the Internet: Politics and Collective Crises VAM, Room 25, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jessica Pearce, University of Louisiana at Lafayette Presider: Zhaodi Chen, Indiana University Digital Contact with the Out-Group and Political Polarization -Tyler Walton Memetic Social Support in Collective Crises - Sara Bubenik, Boston University Socially Mediated Political Consumerism in Four Countries -Shelley J. Boulianne, MacEwan University WAVECATCHERS: A Network Analysis of Fake News Bot URL Data - Richard Edward Gardner, University of California, Irvine; Carter T. Butts, University of California-Irvine Hard-Right Social Media and Violence: “Wearing the Mask of Cruelty” in American Communities - Daniel Karell, Yale University 

3327.  Regular Session. Reexamining Social Movements in US History VAM, Room 26, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Marcos Emilio Perez, Washington and Lee University Presider: Jonathan Scott Coley, Oklahoma State University Immigrant Contentious Action: Investigating Scholarly Silences and Unearthing the Contours of Immigrant Collective Action, 1960-1995 - Kim Voss, University of California-Berkeley; Steven Lauterwasser, University of California, Berkeley; Irene H.I. Bloemraad, University of California-Berkeley Protest Trajectories and Local Movements - Kenneth (Andy) Andrews, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Sarah Gaby, Washington University-St. Louis Short Term Shared Goals versus Shared Visions: Understanding How Social Movements Set Agendas for One Another -Misty Dawn Ring-Ramirez, Austin Peay State University; Jennifer Earl, University of Arizona The Women’s Movement in Women’s Magazines, 1963-1983: Cultural Impacts and the Limits of “Choice” - Francesca Polletta, University of California-Irvine 

3328.  Regular Session. Racialization and Racial Discourses in Public and Private Spheres VAM, Room 27, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Maryann Erigha, University of Georgia Presider: Anthony Jerome Stone, University of Cincinnati Varied Racialization and Legal Inclusion: Haitian, Syrian, and Venezuelan Forced Migrants in Brazil - Katherine Jensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Lisa Maria de Sousa Dias, University of Wisconsin-Madison Racialization and the Tech Meritocracy: The Case of New York City’s Software Workers. - Max Papadantonakis, CUNY The Graduate Center The Limitations of National Civil Rights in Addressing Racial Violence - Julia Bates, Sacred Heart University People of Color Film Festivals: The Making of Racial Counterpublic Space - Michael Tuan Tran, UCLA A Conceptual and Methodological Innovation to Study Racial Silences - Jennifer Girouard, Emerson College Discussant: Maryann Erigha, University of Georgia 

3329.  Regular Session. Temporal effects on Health and Medical Processes VAM, Room 28, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Jingqiu Ren; Theresa Morris, Texas A&M University-College Station Presider: Masatoshi Kuniyoshi, Texas A&M University How Couples Raising Young Children Navigate Family Health Before and During a Pandemic - Joslyn Brenton, Ithaca College Dynamic Pharmaceuticals: How Stimulant Compounds Changed the ADHD Profile - Jonathan Ruiz, University of California, San Diego A Dyadic Analysis of the Intergenerational Transmission of Cognitive Schemas and Biological Aging - Eric T. Klopack, University of Southern California; Ronald L. Simons, University of Georgia Varieties of Financial Stressors and Midlife Health Problems -Joseph Daniel Wolfe, University of Alabama-Birmingham; Elizabeth Helene Baker, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Jalal Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham Trajectories of COVID-19 Vaccine Intentions among U.S. Adults: The Role of Race and Ethnicity - Michael David Niño, University of Arkansas; Brittany Nicole Hearne, University of Arkansas; Tianji Cai, Univ. of Macau 81 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 81 3330.  Regular Session. Military Service: Racial Attitudes, Gender Inequality, & Mortality Rates VAM, Room 29, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Brenda L. Moore, University at Buffalo Presider: Brenda L. Moore, University at Buffalo Race and gender attitudes and propensity to serve in the all-volunteer military - Meredith A. Kleykamp, University of Maryland; Han Noel Kleman, University of Maryland, College Park All-cause Mortality Costs for Veterans from Pre-World War II to Post-Vietnam - Steven Paul Cassidy, Washington State University; Justin T. Denney, Washington State University; Alair MacLean, Washington State University W.E.B Du Bois’s ‘Damnation of Women’ and the ‘Sometime Citizens’ of the US Military - Connie Ann Buscha, Texas State University 

3331.  Regular Session. Intersectionality and Parenting: The Influence of Race, Class, and Gender on Parental Racial Socialization of Children and Government Institution’s Views and Interactions with Parents. VAM, Room 30, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Dawn M. Dow, University of Maryland-College Park Presider: Dawn M. Dow, University of Maryland-College Park Educational Involvement Among Formerly Incarcerated Mothers - Amelia R. Branigan, University of Maryland-College Park; Rachel Ellis, University of Maryland-College Park; Wade C Jacobsen, The Pennsylvania State University; Anna R. Haskins, University of Notre Dame Getting Together, Getting in Trouble: Inventive Parenting, Moral Capital, and Collective Narratives in Mexican families -Melissa Alcaraz, The Ohio State University Parents of the White Awokening - Megan R. Underhill, University of North Carolina, Asheville; Lauren Simms Racial Socialization Through Parent-Child Race Talk in a Multicultural Canada - Melanie Jong; Pallavi Banerjee, University of Calgary What Makes a “Good Mother”? Reading Risk in Child Protective Services Investigations - Kelley Fong, Georgia Institute of Technology 

3332.  Regular Session. Racism and Anti-Racism Regular Session VAM, Room 31, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Sean Elias, Xavier University of Louisiana Presider: Barbara Harris Combs, Clark Atlanta University “As a campus community, we stand with …”: Leadership Responsibility in Addressing Racism on University Campuses - Mangala Subramaniam, Purdue University; Zeba Kokan Confronting Deep Racism, Challenging White Theory Supremacy - Lester R. Kurtz, George Mason University; Mariam M Kurtz, George Mason University Connecting critical race theory with critical geopolitics: Discursive strategies of deconstructing racialized discourse amidst COVID-19 - Yao-Tai Li, Hong Kong Baptist University Decolonial Antiracisms: Everyday Forms of Resistance to Racism in Plurinational Bolivia - Marcelo A. Bohrt, American University 

3333.  Regular Session. Space and Place: Boundaries and Meanings of Place VAM, Room 32, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Louise Seamster, University of Iowa Presider: Mo Torres, Harvard University Barriers and Boundaries: Built Environments, Meaning-Making, and Race-and-Income Segregation - Elizabeth Korver-Glenn, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque; Elizabeth Roberto, Rice University; Leah Binkovitz, Rice University GENDER, CASTE, AND SPATIALITY: intersectional emergence of hegemonic masculinities - Navjotpal Kaur, Memorial University of Newfoundland Space and Inequality in Precarious Work - Kathleen Ann Griesbach, Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies The Undeserving City: How Political Elites Assign Moral Worth to Place - Mo Torres, Harvard University 

3347.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Fertility and Reproductive Labor VAM, Room 46, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Allison Daminger, Harvard University Table Presider: Eliza Brown, New York University Son Preference and Fertility Behavior in Bangladesh - Kaniz Fatema, University of Iowa; Syed Uddin Less Magic, More Chores: How Sex Becomes Work for Other-Sex Couples Trying to Conceive - Eliza Brown, New York University Attitudes or Money? The Way Gender Talks in His Housework Participation in China - Junrong Sheng 

3348.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Gendered Experiences of Migration and Legal Systems VAM, Room 47, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Allison Daminger, Harvard University Table Presider: Valeria Bonatti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Challenging Xenophobia: Migrant Women’s Responses to Street Harassment in Naples, Italy - Valeria Bonatti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Ashley Colleen Feely Hutson, Butler University Daughters’ Return Migration and Entrepreneurship in China’s Small Cities - Jing Song, The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Lulu Li, The Chinese University of Hong Kong Migration and Couple Gender Power Dynamics: A Comparison of Temporary and Permanent Migration in China - Yuying Tong, The Chinese University of Hong Kong Queer limits of a liberal law: Participant ethnography, South African legal clinics, and African LGBTI refugees - Miriam Gleckman-Krut, University of Michigan Creating Responsible Victims: Gendered Diversion Approaches to the State Management of Prostitution and Sex Trafficking -Lillian Taylor Jungleib, University of California, Irvine 

3349.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Gendered Organizations, Gendered Work VAM, Room 48, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Laura Adler, Harvard University Table Presider: Isabel Pike, Graduate Institute, Geneva Crafting Practical Expectations? New Process Behind Gendered Educated Women’s Employment Preferences in India - Ieva Zumbyte, Brown University Gender Disparities in Alternative Work Arrangements - DongEun Shin, Indiana University Bloomington 82 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 82 

Gendered Passion: The Passion Paradigm, Emotional Cultures, and the Language of Love at Work - Lindsay Jean DePalma, University of California- San Diego Gender Hegemony of the Art Museum - Chelsey Sprengeler, Tulane University Greedy schemas: Explanations and experiences of occupational gender segregation - Isabel Pike, Graduate Institute, Geneva; Rachael S. Pierotti, World Bank High-performance work practices and gender inequality at work -Alina Rozenfeld Kiner, University of Haifa “I Try Even Harder Because I’m Temporary:” Understanding Women in Contingent Academia as Emotion Managers -Natalie Julia Adamyk, University of Toronto 

3350.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Gender in Higher Education VAM, Room 49, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Allison Daminger, Harvard University Table Presider: Di Di, Santa Clara University Gender and the Pursuit of Academic Inspiration: Lessons from Undergraduate Application Materials - Sonia Giebel, Stanford University; AJ Alvero Essentialist, Individualistic, and Structural Explanations: Scientists Explain Women’s Unequal Representation in Biology and Physics - Esther Chan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee; Di Di, Santa Clara University Coach Like a Girl: Collegiate Athletes’ Views of Women as Coaches - Elizabeth Norene Lutz; Lora Ebert Wallace, Western Illinois University Eyes Wide Shut: Dealing with the “Pass the Harasser” Problem in Higher Education - Theresa Morris, Texas A&M University-College Station; Susan Saab Fortney, Texas A&M University, School of Law Understanding Title IX in Practice: A qualitative exploration of sexual violence survivors' experiences - Cathrine Jacobsen, California State University Northridge; Katherine Lorenz, California State University-Northridge; Rebecca Hayes, Central Michigan University Student Math, Science Achievement, Motivations, and Perceptions to Gendered Pathways through STEM & Adjacent Majors - Ned Tilbrook, Portland State University; Dara Shifrer, Portland State University; Sarah Kyte, University of Arizona 

3351.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Gender, Money, and Health in Family Life VAM, Room 50, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Laura Adler, Harvard University Table Presider: Rania Salem, University of Toronto Consumption dilemmas in vegan families: Child feeding and reproduction in contemporary parenting culture - Edmée Ballif, Swiss National Science Foundation How Do Family Responsibilities Change Eating Patterns Among Young Adults? - Yuko Hara, University of Maryland "Her body is not going to be hers anymore": Examining partner role in pregnancy and birth - Joan H. Robinson, CUNY-City College; Theresa Morris, Texas A&M University-College Station Masculine Breadwinning Ideals and the Erasure of Women’s Wages in Dual-Earning Egyptian Couples - Rania Salem, University of Toronto Division of the Housework, the Gender pay gap, and Attitudes toward divorce: Cross-national Comparison - Giyeon Seo, University of Florida; Tanya M. Koropeckyj-Cox, University of Florida The Motherhood Penalty and the Fatherhood Premium in Employment during COVID-19: Evidence from the United States - Felipe Antonio Dias, Tufts University 

3352.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Mental Health Across Genders and Sexualities VAM, Room 51, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Allison Daminger, Harvard University Table Presider: Jennifer Tabler, University of Wyoming An Analysis of LGB Mental Health: Democracy and LGB Rights as Predictors of Well-Being - Joseph M. Marchia, Stony Brook University Gender Expression Among Contemporary American High School Students: New Population-Based Evidence - Joel Mittleman, University of Notre Dame; Elizabeth Moison, University of Notre Dame Constructing “Global” Standards in Gender-Affirming Healthcare: Thailand and the U.S. - Alyssa A. Lynne, Northwestern University Gender through the Eyes of the Beholder: External gender perceptions and mental health disparities in adulthood -Jennifer Tabler, University of Wyoming; Rachel M. Schmitz, Oklahoma State University; Claudia Geist, University of Utah American Bareback Panic in the Time of PrEP - Benjamin Joseph Kampler, Boston University 

3353.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Intersectional Approaches to Gender, Identity, and Sexuality VAM, Room 52, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Laura Adler, Harvard University Table Presider: Canton Winer, University of California, Irvine Embrace, Rejection, and Gender Detachment: Framings of Femininity in Online Asexual Spaces - Canton Winer, University of California, Irvine Astrology is for Girls? How Showing Disinterest in Looking to the Stars is a Gendered Performance - Ian Anthony Waller From Criminals to Demigods: Status Recategorization of the Third Gender in India - Anupama Kondayya, Indian Institute of Management Bangalore; Dalhia Mani, HEC Paris Whose Fantasy? A Feminist Analysis of Key West's Fantasy Fest -Rachel Douglas, Florida State College at Jacksonville; Anne E. Barrett, Florida State University Intersectionality and Group Affiliation in the Job Application Process - Gretchen Peterson, University of Memphis; Kendra Murphy, University of Memphis; Benjamin Baker; Lewie Andrew Carmichael, University of Memphis; Octavian Jerel Moten 

3354.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Men, Masculinity, and Digital Culture VAM, Room 53, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Laura Adler, Harvard University Table Presider: Simone Ispa-Landa, Northwestern University Reconsidering Men’s Friendship: The Importance of Intersectional Approaches - Emily C. Fox, University of California, Santa Barbara Dude, You’re a Creep: Hybrid Masculinities and Institutionalized Boundary-Making in Historically White College Fraternities - Simone Ispa-Landa, Northwestern University; David Schieber, Northwestern University 

> Session 3349 continued

# 83 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 83 

Teaching with TikTok in Online Sociology Courses - Nik Lampe, University of South Carolina; Carla A. Pfeffer, University of South Carolina-Columbia The Crisis of Intimacy, Masculinity and Sexual Choice as Masculine Empowerment - Julia Meszaros, Texas A&M University-Commerce “Why Can’t Boys Be #LikeAGirl?”: Fathers’ Online Narratives about their Children’s Gender and Sexuality - Casey Scheibling, University of Toronto "We are not interested in being saved by feminism". Anti-feminist women who endorse The Red Pill. - Matteo Botto, University of Genoa 

3355.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Sexual Violence in Global Perspective VAM, Room 54, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Laura Adler, Harvard University Table Presider: Niina Vuolajarvi, Rutgers University Migration, Sex Work and the "Nordic Model" - Niina Vuolajarvi, Rutgers University Anatomy of a Rape: Sexual Violence and Secondary Victimization Scripts in U.S. Film and Television, 1959-2019 - Jackie Hogan, Bradley University Does Age Matter? Public Perception of Rape against Women in China - Ya Su, University of Notre Dame; Minju Kwon, Chapman University Gender, Violence, and Conflict Resolution in Popular Movies -Linda M Fogg, University of New Hampshire 

3356.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Sex and Sexualities VAM, Room 55, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Allison Daminger, Harvard University Table Presider: Sarah H. Diefendorf, Scholars Strategy Network Sexual Pleasure Across the Life Course: Heterosexual Women’s Experiences - Savannah Claire Bastian, Eckerd College The Politics of Being Asexual in Contemporary Society - Mary Elizabeth Underwood, University of Nevada, Las Vegas The Scarlet V: How Women with Dyspareunia Negotiate Postfeminist Discourses of Sexual Autonomy - Amy Braksmajer, SUNY-Geneseo; Rachel Kalish, SUNY-Old Westbury; Jennifer Katz Towards a Theory of (Hetero)Sexualized Organizations - Sarah H. Diefendorf, Scholars Strategy Network Toward Sexual Citizenship? Lessons for Polyamorous Parents from LGBTQ Parents’ Adaptive Legal Strategies - Kimberly Rhoten, Boston University; Elisabeth Sheff; Jonathan Lane “There's a ton of us...but no place to congregate”: Queer Subcultural Integration in Atlanta, GA - Katharine L Turner, Rice University 

3357.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable. Stasis and Change in Societal Gender Attitudes VAM, Room 56, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Laura Adler, Harvard University Table Presider: Morgan Carey Matthews, University of Wisconsin-Madison Gender, partisanship, and governance of the COVID-19 pandemic in Wisconsin and Michigan - Morgan Carey Matthews, University of Wisconsin-Madison Role of Social Status & Religion/Secularization Factors in Views of Homosexuality in the Middle East - Jonbita Prost; Celia C. Lo, Texas Woman's University The Myopia of Gender vs. Religion - Desegregating the Discussion Around Gender Segregation in Israel - Ruth Carmi, University of Notre Dame Interests and Exposure as Explanations for Gender Attitudes in the U.S., 1973-2018 - Dan Myers, American University; Micah Corning-Myers, Indiana University What's Bitch Got to Do With it? Gendered Differences on Misogynistic Language - Stephanie M. House-Niamke, West Virginia University; Leah Oldham, West Virginia University Unpacking the Rules of Play in Cricket: Encouraging Women or Encouraging Frailty? - Shruti Sharma, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta 

3359.  Meeting. Section on Mathematical Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 58, 12:45-1:15pm 3368.  Meeting. Sociology of Law Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 12:45-1:15pm 3369.  Meeting. Section on the Sociology of Human Rights Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 12:45-1:15pm 3370.  Meeting. Section on History of Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 12:45-1:15pm 3371.  Meeting. ASA Section Leader Orientation VAM, Room 70, 12:45-2:10pm Monday, 1:15 pm 3458.  History and Sociology of Sociology Roundtable VAM, Room 57, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Frances Eisenberg, SUNY-Geneseo History and Sociology of Sociology Roundtable Table Presider: Peter Kivisto, Augustana College Du Bois on Religion. A Reappraisal Religion and Identity in Du Bois’s Writings - Sandro Segre, University of Genoa, Italy History of Anti-Racism: from Antebellum Abolitionism to the Sociology of Race Relations - Maria Elena ELENA Indelicato, University of Coimbra Paying inattention: The art of ignoring others’ work among Russian social scientists - Mikhail Sokolov, European University at Saint Petersburg Scholarly Exception: On Social-Gene Interaction, Culture of Poverty, and Forbidden Knowledge Claims in Sociology -Samuel David Stabler, CUNY-Hunter College; Shai M. Dromi, Harvard University The Unfettered and Unsponsored Sociologist: Mixed Messages in Response to Erving Goffman’s Sociology - Francesco Ranci Ortigosa 

3460.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 1: The Law and Science Dissertation Grant Program VAM, Room 59, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Rebecca L. Sandefur, Arizona State University-Tempe The Law and Science Dissertation Grant Program: An Introduction - Rebecca L. Sandefur, Arizona State University-Tempe; Colleen Sullivan, Arizona State University 

> Session 3354 continued

# 84 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 84 3461.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 2: Crime, Punishment and Care VAM, Room 60, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Armando Lara-Millan, University of California-Berkeley Cilvil Asset Forfeiture and the Production of Tenuous Notions in Courts - Andrea Beltran-Lizarazo, Boston University Parents' Provision of Instrumental and Emotional Support to Young Adults with Criminal Justice Contact - Cameron Douthat; Monica A. Longmore, Bowling Green State University; Wendy Diane Manning, Bowling Green State University; Peggy C. Giordano, Bowling Green State University Visions and Promises of Care: The Case of Prisoner Reentry -Maria Valdovinos Olson, George Mason University 

3462.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 3: Risk, Race, and Criminal Process VAM, Room 61, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Sarah Esther Lageson, Rutgers University-Newark Aggression, escalation, and other latent themes in legal intervention/shooting deaths of non-Hispanic Black and White men - Alina Arseniev-Koehler, University of California Los Angeles; Jacob Gates Foster, University of California-Los Angeles; Vickie Mays, University of California Los Angeles; Kai-Wei Chang, University of California Los Angeles; Susan Cochran, University of California Los Angeles “The question is, should you charge?”: A Study of Prosecutorial Discretion and the Boundaries of Violence - Chiara Clio Packard, University of Wisconsin - Madison A decade of restrictive subnational immigration laws and the impact on crime rates - Isabel Anadon 

3463.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 4: Law, Policy, and Politics VAM, Room 62, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Steven E. Barkan, University of Maine Defining Law without Legal Authority. A case study on Oceans Treaty-Making Politics at the UN. - Natália Frozel Barros The COVID-19 Pandemic in Puerto Rico: Exceptionality and Corruption as emergency management policies - Jose Atiles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign State Politico-Legal Cultures and Voting Rights - Benjamin Merriman, University of Kansas Fetal Protection Policies: Public Health Crisis or Coerced Reproduction? - Chancey Herbolsheimer, Vanderbilt University 

3464.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 5: Law, Organizations, and Organizing VAM, Room 63, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Spencer Headworth, Purdue University Police-Community Relations as an Alternative System of Neighborhood Representation - Tony Cheng, Yale University Premium Processing or Processing Premiums? The Role of Selective Persistence in Expedited Regulatory Outcomes - Ben A. Rissing, Cornell University; Laura Carver, Cornell University 

3465.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 6: Civil Justice and Inequality VAM, Room 64, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Rebecca A Johnson, Dartmouth College Drivers of Disenfranchisement: The Political Foundations of License-for-Payment Laws - Kevin Dahaghi Punishing the Average? Access to Justice for California's Self-Represented Litigants - Kara Lindsey Anderson, University of California, Berkeley To Respond or Not Respond: Landlord-Tenant Relationship on Tenant Response to Dispossessory Filings in Georgia. - George S Usmanov, Georgia State University; Daniel Pasciuti, Georgia State University; Lauren Sudeall, Georgia State University, College of Law 

3466.  Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables. Table 7: Law, Violence, and Emotion VAM, Room 65, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth H. Gorman, University of Virginia Table Presider: Swethaa S. Ballakrishnen, University of California Irvine Gender, Violence, and the Law: Analysis of Emotions in Domestic Violence Adjudication - Preethi Krishnan, Western Carolina University; Vasundhara Kaul, Purdue University; Sarah DeArmon, Western Carolina University Historical Semiotic Mass, Symbolic Violence, and the Case of the Burning Cross - Abigail C Moore, University of Virginia Themes of Love in Victims’ Dismissals of Civil Protection Orders -Anne Groggel, North Central College 

3467.  Human Rights Section Roundtable VAM, Room 66, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Miray Hany Wadie Philips, University of Minnesota; David Cunningham, Washington University-St. Louis Human Rights Section Roundtable Table Presider: Ioana Sendroiu, Harvard University Holocaust Narrative: Complicated and Distorted - Michael F. Polgar, Pennsylvania State University Humanitarian Foreign Aid and Multilateralism under the Trump Presidency - Salvador Santino Fulo Regilme, Leiden University Public opinion on coronavirus vaccination: Americans' surprisingly widespread acceptance of early Russian and Chinese vaccines - Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey; M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada; C. Corday, International Survey Center “They cannot breathe” Reparatory Justice for Haitian Children -Aldrie Jennifer Henry-Lee, University of the West Indies, Jamaica 

3472.  Section on Mathematical Sociology. Mathematical Sociology Section Coleman Lecture — Noah E. Friedkin, "Interpersonal Influence Systems" VAM, Room 71, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Guillermina Jasso, New York University Presider: Ronald L. Breiger, University of Arizona Panelist: Noah E. Friedkin, University of California-Santa Barbara 85 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 85 Monday, 2:30 pm 3502.  Book Forum. Remaking a Life: How Women Living with HIV/AIDS Confront Inequality VAM, Room 1, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Mario Luis Small, Harvard University Moderator: Christy LaShaun Erving, Vanderbilt University Panelists: Kathryn J. Edin, Princeton University; Megan Lee Comfort, RTI International; Scott W. Allard, University of Washington Author: Celeste M. Watkins-Hayes, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor 

3503.  Special Sessions. Conceptualizing Race and Racisms VAM, Room 2, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Crystal Marie Fleming, Stony Brook University Presider: Breanna D Brock What We're Dealing with Is White Supremacy - Vilna Francine Bashi Treitler, University of California-Santa Barbara Avoiding that 'Ugly Word': An Italian Case Study of Racial Conceptualization and Rhetoric - Ann J. Morning, New York University Learning Your Place: White Supremacy and Xenophobia in the Nursing Profession - Chinyere Osuji, Rutgers University-Camden Theorizing Beyond the Gaze: Disrupting the Sociological Imagination’s Indifference to Black Trauma and Emotions -Jovonne J Bickerstaff 

3504.  Special Sessions. Racial Capitalism and the Environment: The Struggle for Total Liberation VAM, Room 3, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Hannah A. Holleman, Amherst College; Patrick Trent Greiner, Vanderbilt University; Brett Clark, University of Utah; Julius Alexander McGee, Portland State University Presider: Julius Alexander McGee, Portland State University Panelists: Charisse Burden-Stelly, Carleton College; David Pellow, UC Santa Barbara; Patrick Trent Greiner, Vanderbilt University; Fayise Abrahim, Voices for Racial Justice, Minnesota; Laura Pulido, University of Oregon 

3505.  Presidential Panel. The Future of Critical Race Theory VAM, Room 4, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Glenn Edward Bracey, Villanova University Panelists: George Lipsitz, University of California-Santa Barbara; Charles W. Mills, CUNY Graduate Center; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa; Jean Stefancic, University of Alabama Discussant: Glenn Edward Bracey, Villanova University Critical Race Theory continues to make major contributions to sociology in the understandings of race and social inequality. Significant numbers of sociologists are contributors to this insightful enterprise. Recently President Trump has attacked CRT and seeks to have its importance and influence removed from the federal government. This panel will explore why CRT is important to sociology and its fate in the future. 

3506.  Thematic Sessions. Demography in Du Boisian Tradition VAM, Room 5, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tukufu Zuberi, University of Pennsylvania Presider: Quincy Thomas Stewart, Northwestern University Panelists: Trevon D. Logan, The Ohio State University; Alyasah Ali Sewell, Emory University; Evelyn Joy Patterson, Vanderbilt University Discussant: Tukufu Zuberi, University of Pennsylvania 

3507.  Thematic Sessions. Racial and Colonial Capitalism: Theory and Analysis VAM, Room 6, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University Presider: Zophia Edwards, Providence College Racial and Colonial Capitalism and Sociological Theory - Zine Magubane, Boston College Theorizing Racial and Colonial Capitalism: The Thought of W.E.B. Du Bois and Cedric Robinson - Karida Brown, University of California-Los Angeles Pricing Pandemics: Ebola, COVID-19, Necrofinance and the World Bank - Alexandre White, Johns Hopkins University Racial Capitalism and Imperial Policing: Jerusalem, Johannesburg, Chicago - Andy Clarno, University of Illinois-Chicago 

3508.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender. Gender in the Academic Labor Market and Beyond: Taking a Feminist Sociology Beyond the Academy VAM, Room 7, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Pallavi Banerjee, University of Calgary Presider: Laura Adler, Harvard University Panelists: Kiana Cox, Pew Research Center; Shengwei Sun, Institute for Women's Policy Research; Lindsay A. Owens, Stanford University 

3510.  Professional Development Workshop. Preparing and Searching for Higher Ed Careers beyond the Professoriate VAM, Room 9, 2:30-3:55pm 

Leaders: Brandy L. Simula, Center for Positive Sexuality; Jessica C. Bishop-Royse, DePaul University; Kimberly Creasap, Denison University Co-Leaders: Clare Forstie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Anjulet Tucker, Emory University 

3511.  Ideas for Future Research. The Politics of Knowledge Production: Systemic Gendered Racism and the Subjugation of Black Women’s Scholarship VAM, Room 10, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Ashley Yvonne Stone, University of Central Florida The Politics of Knowledge Production: Systemic Gendered Racism and the Subjugation of Black Women’s Scholarship - Ashley Yvonne Stone, University of Central Florida 

3512.  Section on Political Sociology. Militating for Political Voice: Confronting Alternative, Second-class, and Non-citizenship VAM, Room 11, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Irene H.I. Bloemraad, University of California-Berkeley Presider: Irene H.I. Bloemraad, University of California-Berkeley Claiming Power Through Narrative: Middling Transnationals and the Challenges of Second-Class Citizenship - Catherine Griebel Bowman, Austin College Contexts of Contestation: Immigration Federalism, Enforcement, and Citizenship on Asian and Latin American Political Participation - Austin Vo, University of North Carolina -Chapel Hill Imperial Liminal Legality in the Context of U.S. Empire in Oceania - Kevin Escudero, Brown University Negotiating State-Civil Society Relations in Turkey: The Case of Refugee Supporting Organizations - Nihal Kayali, UCLA Protesting Police Violence in Rio de Janeiro's Favelas: Making Sense of When, Why, and How - Stefanie Israel de Souza, Tulane University 86 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 86 3513.  Section on Sociology of Law. Access to Justice at the Nexus of Civil and Criminal Law VAM, Room 12, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Rebecca L. Sandefur, Arizona State University-Tempe Presider: Rebecca L. Sandefur, Arizona State University-Tempe Panelists: Kathryne M. Young, University of Massachusetts-Amherst; Theresa Rocha Beardall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Sarah Esther Lageson, Rutgers University-Newark; Brittany Friedman, University of Southern California Discussant: Rebecca L. Sandefur, Arizona State University-Tempe 

3514.  Section on Sociology of Human Rights. Intersectional Human Rights: A Global Agenda VAM, Room 13, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: David Cunningham, Washington University-St. Louis; Nicole Fox, California State University-Sacramento Presider: Nicole Fox, California State University-Sacramento Building an Intersectional Feminist Coalition through Holistic Peacebuilding: The Case of Myanmar - Mollie Elizabeth Pepper, Northeastern University Fear of Crime in the Northern Triangle: Neighborhood Insecurity in Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras - Cristian Luis Paredes, Loyola University Chicago; Keyla Navarrete; Skky Martin, Loyola University Chicago Feminist Minefields: The debate about Soviet mass rapes and its consequences - Tinka Tabea Schubert, Stanford University Toward a Sociological Understanding of the Linkage between Human Rights and Development in Bangladesh - M. Anwar Hossen, Dhaka University 

3515.  Thematic Sessions. Race, Labor Precarity and Transnational Migration: A Global Perspective VAM, Room 14, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Laavanya Kathiravelu, Nanyang Technological University Presider: Sofya Aptekar, CUNY - School of Labor and Urban Studies Panelists: Martina Boese, La Trobe University; Maria Hwang, McGill University; Julia Meszaros, Texas A&M University-Commerce; Laavanya Kathiravelu, Nanyang Technological University Discussant: Min Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles 

3516.  Family Section. Parenthood and Families Across the Life Course VAM, Room 15, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya M. Koropeckyj-Cox, University of Florida Presider: Tanya M. Koropeckyj-Cox, University of Florida Household Debt, Maternal Well-Being, and Child Adjustment: Examining the Family Stress Model by Family Structure - Valerie Heintz-Martin, German Youth Institute; Claudia Recksiedler, German Youth Institute; Alexandra Langmeyer, German Youth Institute Sources of Family Income Across Childhood in Families with Nonresident Fathers - Paula W. Fomby, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Hope Harvey, University of Kentucky; Kelly Musick, Cornell University Why Are Adults’ Lives Persistently Unequal? The Intergenerational Effects Behind the Process of Persistent Inequality - Rona Geffen, Goethe University Role Transitions and Financial Well-Being: A Study of Women Across the Life Course - Anna E. Acosta Russian, Indiana Univeristy; Pamela Braboy Jackson, Indiana University-Bloomington Relationship Quality Between Older Parents and Children: Impact on Parents’ Cognitive Functioning - Yan Zhang, Michigan State University 

3517.  Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility. New Approaches to Understanding and Addressing Inequality VAM, Room 16, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Xiang Zhou, Harvard University Presiders: Daniel Adam Nicholson, Indiana University; Cassie Mead, Indiana University Cohort variation in the life course mechanisms producing Black-white wealth gaps, 1968-2017 - Nick Graetz, University of Pennsylvania A New Approach to Studying Status, the Status Order, and Social Distance - Sheridan Stewart, Department of Sociology Estimating Individual Socioeconomic Status of Twitter Users - Yuanmo He, London School of Economics; Milena Tsvetkova, London School of Economics Friendship Network Formation in Chinese Middle Schools: Patterns of Inequality and Homophily - Weihua An, Emory University Discussant: Daniel Adam Nicholson, Indiana University 

3518.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities. The Suburban Black Middle Class in Metropolitan Area Context VAM, Room 17, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Angela Marie Simms, Barnard College Presider: Angela Marie Simms, Barnard College Panelists: Karyn Lacy, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Alesia Montgomery, Stanford University; John N. Robinson, Washington University-St. Louis 

3519.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology. Moving Forward/Looking Backward: Crisis, Comparison and History VAM, Room 18, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Mabel Berezin, Cornell University Presider: Mabel Berezin, Cornell University Economics - Margaret R. Somers, University of Michigan Democracy - Kim Lane Scheppele, Princeton University Religion - Philip S. Gorski, Yale University Environmentalism - Daniel Aldana Cohen, University of Pennsylvania 

3520.  Meeting. Community and Urban Sociology Section Business Meeting VAM, Room 19, 2:30-3:55pm 3521.  Section on Mathematical Sociology. Computational Sociology VAM, Room 20, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: James A. Kitts, University of Massachusetts Presider: James A. Kitts, University of Massachusetts Person-Task Links: Team Tasking as Relational Events - Sean M. Fitzhugh, U.S. Army Research Laboratory; David Chhan, US Army Research Laboratory; Derek Spangler, Penn State University; Savannah Yerman, University of Maryland, Baltimore County; Karthik Sethi, University of Maryland, Baltimore County; Ryan Robucci, University of Maryland, Baltimore County; Nilanjan Banerjee, University of Maryland, Baltimore County 87 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 87 

Estimation of exponential-family random graph models for valued networks: a comparative simulation study - Peng Huang, University of California, Irvine; Carter T. Butts, University of California-Irvine Local Structures in Positive and Negative Social Networks: A Comparison of 40 Graphs - Cassie McMillan, Northeastern University; Diane H. Felmlee, Pennsylvania State University; James Ashford, Cardiff University Why Voters Choose Unrepresentative Candidates: Looking for Partisan Alignment When Voting under Uncertainty -Minjae Kim, Rice University; Daniel DellaPosta, Pennsylvania State University; Liam Essig, Penn State University Meso-Level Behavioral Contagion: the relationship between geographic social interconnectedness and population mobility during COVID-19. - Kelsey E Gonzalez, The University of Arizona 

3522.  Regular Session. Sociology of Culture I VAM, Room 21, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Bin Xu, Emory University Presider: Bin Xu, Emory University Are Artists Struggling Bohemians or Nimble Innovators? Evidence from Artists during COVID-19 - Rachel Skaggs, Ohio State University Making Obama Iconic - Terence Emmett McDonnell, University of Notre Dame; Marshall A Taylor, New Mexico State University; Michael Lee Wood, Brigham Young University-Provo The Temporal Production of Culture: Family, Emotions, and Grave Sweeping in China - Becky Yang Hsu, Georgetown University Where Does Culture Live? Schemas, Interactions, and Objects in Meaning-Making - Craig M. Rawlings, Duke University; Clayton Childress, University of Toronto Discussant: Bin Xu, Emory University 

3523.  Regular Session. Gender, Labor & Development VAM, Room 22, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Victoria Reyes, University of California-Riverside Presider: Rania Salem, University of Toronto Hidden labor and costs in development: HEWs and the implementation of Community Based Health Insurance -Kristen Kirksey, University of Connecticut Persistent Structural Violence: How labor and gender regimes matter for labor inequality in post-authoritarian Chile -Annabel Ipsen, Colorado State University Presenting Feminism: Embodied Labor & NGOs in Cambodia -Mary-Collier Wilks, University of Virginia Rethinking Migration-Development Nexus in China: Why Ethnic-Minority Migrant Workers Persist in the Precarious Urban Labor Market - Rui Jie Peng, University of Texas at Austin Discussant: Rania Salem, University of Toronto 

3524.  Regular Session. Gender and Carework in Immigrant Communities VAM, Room 23, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Presider: Sarah Bruhn, Harvard University Family matters? How marriage and motherhood affect Hispanic women’s employment decisions - Samuel Mindes, University of Idaho; Paul Lewin, University of Idaho Multidirectional Carework Across Borders: Transnational Immigrant Women from Latin America Negotiating Motherhood and Daughterhood - Sarah Bruhn, Harvard University; Gabrielle Oliveira, Boston College Re-Learning to be a Woman: Virtual Community Amongst Somali Migrant Women - Nima Dahir, Stanford University Sacramento’s Afghan Community: Afghan Men’s Attitudes Toward Women’s Work and Its Effects on Men’s Gender Roles -Cetin Ozdemir, University of California-Davis Transformation in Gender Relations Due to Migration: The Rarámuri community in ciudad Juárez - Selene ines Diaz, Texas A&M University 

3525.  Regular Session. New Insights on the Professions: Interrogating the Role of Culture VAM, Room 24, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ronit Dinovitzer, University of Toronto Presider: Ronit Dinovitzer, University of Toronto Data science’s motives: methods, profits, and ideas for doing things differently - Philipp Soeren Brandt, Sciences Po (Not) Bringing Your Whole Self to Work: The Gendered Experience of Upward Mobility - Sam Friedman, London School of Economics Recognition and Narrative Change in Hollywood and Comedy - Nicole R Letourneau, Harvard University; Derek James Robey, Harvard University; Michèle Lamont, Harvard University Unsettled Employment, Reshuffled Priorities: Career Prioritization among White-Collar Workers who Faced Employment Instability during COVID-19 - Erin A. Cech, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor “We’re Better than Most”: Redefining Diversity in the San Francisco Bay Area Tech Industry - Sigrid Willa Luhr, University of Illinois-Chicago 

3526.  Regular Session. Social Media and the Internet: Race, Gender, and Inequality VAM, Room 25, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jessica Pearce, University of Louisiana at Lafayette Presider: Sydney Yarbrough, University of Maryland-College Park If You Built a Sandbox: Google Fiber Signup in Disadvantaged Urban Communities - Wenhong Chen, University of Texas-Austin; Xiaoqian Li; Gejun Huang, The University of Texas at Austin; Joseph Straubhaar Masculine Online Environment and Gender Gap in Online Participation: A Survey Experiment - Zhaodi Chen, Indiana University; Junghun Han, Indiana University Online Dilemmas, Offline Burdens: How Black and Asian Women Navigate Cyber Aggression - Paulina dela Cruz Inara Rodis Seeking and surveilled: The effects of FOSTA on sugar babies’ Tumblr activities - Rachel E. Davis, University of Kentucky Wikipedia and the outsider within: Black feminism and racialized, gendered knowledge construction online - Tracy Perkins, Arizona State University; Sophia Hussein; Lundyn Davis; Mariam Trent 

3527.  Regular Session. Dynamics in War, Peace, Resistance, and Solidarity VAM, Room 26, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sharon Erickson Nepstad, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Presider: Sharon Erickson Nepstad, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque 

> Session 3521 continued

# 88 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 88 

Liberian Women, Peacebuilding, and the Invisible Hand of Conflict in the Post War Era - Selina R. Gallo-Cruz, College of the Holy Cross; Renee Remsberg, Wellesley College Networks and Conventionalized Gender Roles in Civilian Resistance Against Genocide During WWII in the Netherlands - Kiran Stallone, University of California, Berkeley; Robert Braun, University of California-Berkeley “Seeing is Believing in the End”: Solidarity Tourism in Palestine -Anna K Johnson, University of Notre Dame State-making versus State-breaking: From Monopoly on Violence to SALW Proliferation Out of Collapsed Libya - Ori Swed, Texas Tech University; Kerry Chavez 

3528.  Regular Session. Critical Diversity, Racism, Work, and Mobility VAM, Room 27, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: David G. Embrick, University of Connecticut Presider: Bhoomi K. Thakore, University of Central Florida Between Binaries: How Asian Americans and Latinx Elite Professionals Experience "Diversity" - Yung-Yi Diana Pan, CUNY-Brooklyn College Beyond Toolkits: How Racial Ignorance and Inequality are Produced by White Christians - Sharan Kaur Mehta, Rice University; Rachel C. Schneider, Rice University; Esmeralda Sanchez Salazar, Rice University; Elaine Howard Ecklund, Rice University Diversity as Philanthropy: Diversity Ideology among Pastors, Professors, and Professionals of Color - Oneya Fennell Okuwobi, The Ohio State University Racial Stratification and the Consequences of Gentrification on Residential Mobility - Jackelyn Hwang, Stanford University; Iris Zhang, Stanford University Discussant: Marisela Martinez-Cola, Utah State University 

3529.  Regular Session. Quantitative Methodology VAM, Room 28, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Xiang Zhou, Harvard University Presider: Jeffrey A. Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Accelerating Science with the Most and Least Human Artificial Intelligences - Jamshid Sourati, University of Chicago; James A. Evans, University of Chicago Bottom-up or Top-Down? Bridging Academics in the ADVANCE Network for Gender Equity - Timothy Fraser, Northeastern University; Laura K. Nelson, Northeastern University; Kathrin Zippel, Northeastern University How to Use Machine Learning Classification as Dependent or Independent Variables in Regression Analysis - Han Zhang, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Moving beyond templates of empirical research - Pablo Geraldo Bastias, UCLA Occupation-Based Socioeconomic Index with Percentile Ranks - Xi Song, University of Pennsylvania; Yu Xie, Princeton University 

3530.  Regular Session. Mortality and Morbidity VAM, Room 29, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Joseph T. Lariscy, University of Memphis Presider: Joseph T. Lariscy, University of Memphis Immigrant Health (Dis)advantage in the Labor Market - Hui Zheng, The Ohio State University; Wei-hsin Yu, University of California-Los Angeles Non-spousal Support, Marital Status, and Mortality Risk among Older Adults - Adam Roth, Indiana University-Bloomington; Siyun Peng, Indiana University Social Inequalities in the Rise in Pain, 1997-2018: An Age-Period-Cohort Analysis - Terresa Ji Hyun Eun The Fine Line between Adequate Medicalization and Overmedicalization of Cerebral Palsy at the Time of Death -Scott D. Landes, Syracuse University; James Dalton Stevens, Syracuse University What Deepening Neighborhood-level Inequalities during COVID Mean for Public Health - Sarah Garcia, University of Minnesota; Elizabeth Wrigley-Field, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Jonathon P. Leider, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota; David Van Riper, Institute for Social Research and Data Innovation, University of Minnesota 

3531.  Regular Session. Parenting Frameworks and Approaches: Different Parenting Concerns and Parent-Child Relationships. VAM, Room 30, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Dawn M. Dow, University of Maryland-College Park Presider: Dawn M. Dow, University of Maryland-College Park Conceptualizing Legitimacy Theory to Parent-Child Relationships - Kimberly Diane Harvey, Texas A&M University Framing Parenting Problems and Solutions: A Comparative Analysis of Top Parenting Blogs by Mothers Versus Fathers - Casey Scheibling, University of Toronto; Melissa A. Milkie, University of Toronto How Is Trust Transmitted Intergenerationally? A Dyadic Approach - Cary Wu, York University Parents’ Understanding of Organized Activities as Promoting Children’s Health - Mahala Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Teresa Toguchi Swartz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities 

3532.  Regular Session. Urban Issues: Interrogating Neighborhood History, Politics, and Networks VAM, Room 31, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Waverly Duck, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Jason Turowetz, University of Siegen At a Distance and On Hold: Introducing a Spatial-Temporal Analysis into Organizationally-Embedded Network Brokerage - Erik Stephen Lovell, Northwestern University Collective Meaning-Making of the 1967 Detroit Rebellion: Detroiters’ Stories about Causes and Consequences - Tina Law, Northwestern University Grocery Delivery Services and Food Insecure Neighborhoods: A GIS approach to Californian food deserts - Sara Bruene, University of California, Riverside Who are Bike Paths for? New Urbanism, Community and Politics of Urban Space in the Midwest - Nora E. Taplin-Kaguru, Earlham College; Daniel Oluwasetemi Oni, Earlham College 

3547.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 1: Digital Sociology VAM, Room 46, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Adam Loesch, SIUE Digitally Mediated Ideologies: An Analysis of the Political Landscape of YouTube - Adam Loesch, SIUE I Did It, But…: Exploring DUI Offender Deviance Rationalization in the Digital Age - Andrew Tatch, Troy University The iPhone and The App: Steel Axes for Television Age Humans -Joshua R Williams, University of Toledo Women’s Marches to Twitter Crabs: Gender and STEM Advocacy in the Digital Age - Lisa Dale Rifkind 

> Session 3527 continued

# 89 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 89 3548.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 2: COVID-19 Precarities VAM, Room 47, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Rafia Javaid Mallick, University of Oklahoma Handling the Pandemic: Female, Male, and Transgender Leaders during Covid-19 - John Wei, University of Otago The COVID-19 Catch-22: Preserving Economic Well-being and Mental Health in the Time of the Coronavirus - Russell K. Schutt, University of Massachusetts Boston; Hannah Jade Grabowski, University of Massachusetts-Boston; Alyssa Kumler, University of Massachusetts Boston; Lee Hargraves, University of Massachusetts Boston; Floyd J Fowler, University of Massachusetts Boston; Anthony Roman, University of Massachusetts Boston; Nikola J Kovacevic, University of Massachusetts Boston; Daniel O'Brien, Northeastern University The Health Belief Model and College Student Adoption of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions in Response to COVID-19 - Sarah Jean Hatteberg, College of Charleston; Christy Kollath-Cattano, College of Charleston The Social Correlates of Mask Wearing as a COVID-19 Mitigation Strategy - James W Shockey, University of Arizona Do Precautionary Measures work? Impact of State Mandates on the spread of the Corona virus - Rafia Javaid Mallick, University of Oklahoma 

3549.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 3: Workplace Discrimination VAM, Room 48, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Tenshi Kawashima, University of Georgia The Effect of Occupational Gender Segregation and Wage Inequality on Perception of Workplace Mistreatment -Tenshi Kawashima, University of Georgia Market Responses to Socially Responsible and Irresponsible Firm Behaviors: Evidence from Korean Family-Owned Firms -Jong-heon Park, Busan Institute of Industrial Science and Innovation; Young-Choon Kim, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology Does the Bamboo Ceiling Exist? Asians in the Occupational Hierarchy of Contemporary U.S Workplaces - Hyunsu Oh, University of California, Merced Discrimination against immigrants in the Japanese labour market: Factorial survey approaches - Akira Igarashi, Rikkyo University; Ryota Mugiyama, Hitotsubashi University 

3550. Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 4: Ethics and Methods for Digital and Quantitative Sociology VAM, Room 49, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh Presider: William Edward Hollingshead, Western University Ethics and Privacy in Computational Social Science: A Call for Pedagogy - William Edward Hollingshead, Western University; Anabel Quan-Haase, Western University; Wenhong Chen, University of Texas-Austin The Perceptual Judgment of Objects: Expanding the Cognitive Model of Perception in Material Culture Studies - Lance Stewart Using Semantic Network Analysis to Measure Ethical Convergence in Scientific Discourse - Jessica J. Santana, University of California-Santa Barbara How to handle textual data: A reflection on mixed methods approaches for text analyses - Franziska Hein-Pensel, Technische Universität Ilmenau Smallset Timelines to Track and Communicate Data Preprocessing - Lydia R. Lucchesi, The Australian National University; Petra Kuhnert, CSIRO; Lexing Xie, The Australian National University; Jenny L. Davis, The Australian National University 

3551.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 5: Gender Inequalities VAM, Room 50, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Kimberly Fox, Bridgewater State University Becoming Part-Time Faculty: A Gendered Pathway to Building an Academic Career while Caregiving - Kimberly Fox, Bridgewater State University Conceptualizing Intimate Partner Violence: Perspectives in Academic Research, Healthcare, and Victim Advocacy - Jessica Goff, Stockton University; Ethan Czuy Levine, Stockton University Configurations of Gender Inequality and Segregation in Employment Across Welfare Regimes - Helen Kowalewska, University of Oxford Adolescent Childbirth and Women’s Health Limitations Across Three U.S. Cohorts - Joseph Daniel Wolfe, University of Alabama-Birmingham; Mieke Beth Thomeer, University of Alabama-Birmingham; Rin Reczek, Ohio State University 

3552.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 6: Intersectional Perspectives on Black Consciousness and Embodiment VAM, Room 51, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh The NBA isn’t what it used to be: Racialized Nostalgia for ‘90s Basketball - Alex Manning, Hamilton College; Yagmur Karakaya, Hamilton College Fractures in the Party: Hegemonic Gender Ideology and Intersectional Identities in a Black Power Movement -Monisola Vaughan, Vanderbilt University Legacies of Racial Violence: Lynching, Racial Uprisings, and Fatal Police Shootings - Andrew C Gray, University of Delaware Protests, Social Fragmentation, and Punitiveness - Christopher Thomas, CUNY Graduate Center 

3553.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 7: Labor Practices and Social Inequities VAM, Room 52, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Ewa Protasiuk, Temple University Revisiting Elizabeth Bott’s Thesis During Covid-19: Household Division of Labor among Dual-Career Couples - Bahar Aldanmaz, Boston University Restaurant Revolution? The Case for Studying Inequality in Alternative Models of Upscale, Urban Food Service - Ewa Protasiuk, Temple University A Little Flavor, But Not a Lot: Diversity, Inclusion, and Hipsterdom in Barista Work - Ewa Protasiuk, Temple University; Keith McIntosh, Temple University; Geoffrey Moss, Temple University “We’re Struggling to Stay Alive:” COVID-19 pandemic impacts on LGBTQ+ bars - Greggor Mattson, Oberlin College 90 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 90 3554.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 8: Military and Organizational Sociology VAM, Room 53, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Victoria I. Piehowski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities “A Chicken Can’t Root for Colonel Sanders”: Race, Politics, and the Military - Salvatore J. Restifo, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley; Steven Larrimore Foy, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley “I’m Trying to Traumatize Them”: Selling Veterans Treatment Courts to a Post-9/11 Public - Victoria I. Piehowski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Rethinking Risk: Third Sector Organizations and Tail End Risk Classification Schemes - Aaron Martin, Rutgers University The Minerva Research Initiative: Knowledge Production as a Response to Organizational Failure - Asa Iacobucci; Liam Downey, University of Colorado-Boulder 

3555.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 9: Aging and the Family VAM, Room 54, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Reilly Kincaid, Purdue University The Purposes of Longer Lives and the Correlates to PIL in Old Age -Yiqing Yang, Western Carolina University Financial Insecurity of Parental Caregivers - Chrisse Edmunds, Ohio State University Partner-Child Relationship Satisfaction and Marital Satisfaction: Do Impressions Spill Over? - Reilly Kincaid, Purdue University Filial Elder-Care Norms and Intergenerational Solidarity with Older Parents: A Developmental Approach - JeungHyun Kim, Syracuse University; Woosang Hwang, Syracuse University; Maria Brown, Syracuse University; Merril Silverstein, Syracuse University 

3556.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 10: The Sociology of Neighborhoods VAM, Room 55, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sarah Torrico Presider: Matthew D. Marr, Florida International University Emancipation from the Racial Capitalism/Coronavirus Syndemic: A PhotoVoice Analysis of Miami Homeless Shelter Life -Matthew D. Marr, Florida International University; John Vertovek, Department of Global & Sociocultural Studies, Florida International University; Natália Marques da Silva, Department of Global & Sociocultural Studies, Florida International University; The HeArt Room Crew Land Banks and Spatial Inequality in Shrinking Cities: How Organizations Govern Abandoned U.S. Urban Neighborhoods - Nicholas Vincent DiRago, University of California, Los Angeles Sociospatial Divisions and Neighborhood Crime: Housing Tenure as a Social Boundary - Seth A. Williams, University of California Irvine; Christopher J. Bates, University of California Irvine “Commercial Gentrification and Bonded Solidarity in the Covid Era: Three Case Studies” - Steven Tuttle, Loyola University-Chicago 

3570.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Population Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 2:30-3:00pm 3571.  Meeting. Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 2:30-3:00pm 3572.  American Sociological Association. Careers and Graduate School Briefing for Honors Program Participants VAM, Room 71, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association Presider: Aaryn L. Green, American Sociological Association Panelists: Robert Gallagher, Indiana University; Irene Bantigue, Impact Hub; Victoria St. Clair, Brooklyn Defenders/CUNY 

# Monday, 3:00 pm 3657.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 1: Imagining Futures: An Invited Conversation for Black, Indigenous and People of Color Scholars VAM, Room 56, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Santiago José Molina, University of California Berkeley; Kevin M. Moseby, Drexel University; Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presiders: Santiago José Molina, University of California Berkeley; Kevin M. Moseby, Drexel University 

3658.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 2: Algorithms and Quantification in Science, Technology, and Society VAM, Room 57, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Aneesh Aneesh, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Defining Algorithmic Governance: A perspective from the social sciences - Shiv Issar, UW-Milwaukee; Aneesh Aneesh, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Indicators as a Technology of Governance and Knowledge Production: Local Quantification Practices in International Aid - Dolunay Ugur, Yale University Accommodation-through-Bypassing: Implementing Algorithmic Technology in the Face of Professional Resistance - Ari Galper, Columbia University What Counts as Health Data? A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Actionability Guidelines in Clinical Genomics - Kellie Owens, University of Pennsylvania 

3659.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 3: STS Perspectives on Crime Control and Policing VAM, Room 58, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Angela LaScala-Gruenewald, The Graduate Center, City University of New York Analyzing Crime Analysts: Mid-Level Bureaucrats at the Intersection of Data, Police, and Law Enforcement Leadership - Mariana Veras, New York University; Angela LaScala-Gruenewald, The Graduate Center, City University of New York The Cover of Technical Work: A Study of Crime Analysts in New York - Mariana Veras, New York University The Language of Data-Driven Policing - Anne Kavalerchik 91 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 91 3660.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 4: Experts, Expertise, and the Circulation of Knowledge VAM, Room 59, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Margaret Ruth Eby, New York University Between Promise and Reality: How Experts and Consumers Mitigate Uncertainty in Direct-to-Consumer Genetic Health Testing - Margaret Ruth Eby, New York University; Meghna Mukherjee, University of California Berkeley; Skyler Wang, University of California, Berkeley; Armando Lara-Millan, University of California-Berkeley; Maya Earle Social Identity and Anti-Expert Attitudes: The Case of Online Genetics - Salwa Khan, University of Toronto Abstraction and Contingency in Movement Knowledge - Kelly Underman, Drexel University Ecological Networks of Knowledge Production Guide Its Diffusion - Charles Jonathan Gomez, CUNY-Queens College; Dahlia Lieberman, Queens College and Macaulay College, City University of New York; Elina I. Mäkinen, Tampere University; Sebastian Muñoz-Najar Galvez 

3661.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 5: Financialization and Commercialization of Science and Technology VAM, Room 60, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Stu Marvel, Emory University Human Gamete Banking: Translating Metaphors of the Bank in Speculative Biocapital - Stu Marvel, Emory University The Expertise of Crisis: Economists and the Temporality of Policy Response - Zachary Webster Griffen, University of California-Los Angeles Why Technology Commercialization Failed: American Venture Capitalists, European Commission, Japanese TelCo as Computer Scientist-Entrepreneurs' Backers - Yoehan Oh, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 

3662.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 6: The Construction of Groups and Populations VAM, Room 61, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Cal Lee Garrett, Uniersity of Illinois at Chicago Rules at the Root: Genetic Definitions of Populations and the Evolutionary Synthesis - Elizabeth Carolina Mayes No Differences: Debating Demographic Expertise in the Marriage Equality Cases - Jamie Louise Budnick, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Mainstreaming Misbeahvior - Jeffrey W. Lockhart, University of Michigan Gender Affirming Care: The Quantification of Livability in Trans Medicine - Cal Lee Garrett, Uniersity of Illinois at Chicago 

3663.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 7: Attitudes Towards Reproductive Technologies and Feminist STS VAM, Room 62, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Danielle Czarnecki, University of Cincinnati Contested Conception: Comparing Catholic and Evangelical women’s approaches to assisted reproductive technologies - Danielle Czarnecki, University of Cincinnati The Gendered Discourse of Fertility Health: Keep the Romance Alive - Ashley F. Kim, Vanderbilt University Hesitancy, Solidarity, and Whiteness: The Limits and Possibilities of Rape Reporting Apps - Renee Marie Shelby, Northwestern University Cyborgs in Action: Designing Feminist Research in STS - Joan H. Robinson, CUNY-City College 

3664.  Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables. Table 8: STS, Health, and the City VAM, Room 63, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Torsten H Voigt, RWTH Aachen University Table Presider: Katherine Weatherford Darling, University of Maine at Augusta City of Life: Imaginaries of Life, Land, and Economy in the Revitalization of Mission Bay - Andrew Murray, Ursinus College; Dennis Browe, UC Santa Cruz; Katherine Weatherford Darling, University of Maine at Augusta; Jenny Reardon, University of California-Santa Cruz Building a “Social Science of Solutions” for Healthcare - Alexandra Vinson, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Assembling Internet access-ability: thinking about access with public library computer users - Matt Comi, University of Kansas; William G. Staples; Walter Charles Goettlich, University of Kansas; Drew Davidson, University of Kansas; Perry Alexander 

3665.  Section on Sociology of Population Refereed Roundtable. Families, Children, and Well-Being VAM, Room 64, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sara R. Curran, University of Washington Table Presiders: Kelsey Quinn Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Christine M. Percheski, Northwestern University Best for whom? Heterogeneous treatment effects of breastfeeding on child development - Jessica Houston Su, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Kerri Raissian, University of Connecticut; Jiyeon Kim, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Family stability: The cohabitation gap is wider for children than adults - Laurie F. DeRose, Catholic University of America; Alicia F. Pekar, The Catholic University of America Sexual Orientation and Life Satisfaction in Midlife: Finding from the Health and Retirement Study - Wenhua Lai, Michigan State University; Ning Hsieh, Michigan State University; Hui Liu, Michigan State University 

3666.  Section on Sociology of Population Refereed Roundtable. Health Disparities & Demography VAM, Room 65, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sara R. Curran, University of Washington Table Presider: Mateo Farina, University of Southern California Health Services and Access across Latinx Destinations: Implications for Latinx Health across the Life Course -Elizabeth Ackert, University of California-Santa Barbara; Pedro Aristizabal, UCSB; Sung Hee Hong, UCSB; Jessica Martinez, UCSB; Gabriel Van Praag, UCSB; Robert Crosnoe, University of Texas-Austin Removing Barriers: Health, Mortality, and Inequality - David Cordova, University of Michigan; Rebecca A Johnson, Dartmouth College; Jenna Pryor, University of Michigan; Candice Tudor, University of Michigan; Edward Dance, University of Michigan States as Determinants of Health: U.S. Suicide Mortality Trends between 1990-2017 - Daniel H. Simon, University of Colorado at Boulder The Consequences of Medicaid Expansion Under the Affordable Care Act for Police Arrests - Jessica T. Simes, Boston University; Jaquelyn L. Jahn, CUNY Graduate Center 92 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 92 3667.  Section on Sociology of Population Refereed Roundtable. Methodology & Demographics VAM, Room 66, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sara R. Curran, University of Washington Table Presider: Yuan Hsiao, University of Washington Bounding Subgraph Frequencies from Egocentric Network Data -Francis Lee, University of Chicago Demographics of Sexual Minority Populations: An Application of Cross Survey Multiple Imputation - Colin Hammar, Temple University 

3668.  Section on Sociology of Population Refereed Roundtable. Reproductive Health, Fertility, and Family Planning Preferences VAM, Room 67, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sara R. Curran, University of Washington Table Presiders: Shuyin Liu, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Daniela R. Urbina, Princeton University Contraceptive Use and Intention: Does a pregnancy gone bad matter? - Charles Katulamu, University of Michigan Do educated mothers have lower son preference? The case of Pakistan - Fizza Raza, Texas A&M University Women's Decision-Making Power and Contraception Usage in Nigeria - Oyindamola Adebola Okuwa, University of Oklahoma; Loretta Bass, University of Oklahoma 

3669.  Section on Sociology of Population Refereed Roundtable. Migrations, Settlements & Inequalities VAM, Room 68, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Sara R. Curran, University of Washington Table Presider: Crystal Yu, University of Washington, Seattle Effects of Migration and Return Migration Across Rural/Non-Rural Boundaries on Youth Hourly Wages - Xiao Li, Washington State University The Beginning and the End of Urban Population Deconcentration in the United States - Thomas M. Guterbock, University of Virginia What school do you go to? An Estimation of School Socioeconomic Segregation in Urban Pakistan - Saman Nazir, Pakistan Institute of Development Economics; Hafsa Hina 

# Monday, 4:15 pm 3702.  Book Forum. The Privileged Poor: How Elite Colleges Are Failing Disadvantaged Students VAM, Room 1, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Brian Powell, Indiana University-Bloomington Moderator: Brian Powell, Indiana University-Bloomington Panelists: Prudence L. Carter, University of California-Berkeley; Janice McCabe, Dartmouth College; Lauren Rivera, Northwestern University Author: Anthony Abraham Jack, Harvard University 

3703.  Special Sessions. Deportation: Whose Family Matters? VAM, Room 2, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Presider: Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Panelists: April M Schueths, Georgia Southern University; Juan Manuel Pedroza, University of California-Santa Cruz; Asad L. Asad, Stanford University; Greg Prieto, University of San Diego Discussant: Ikiltezilani Mazehuani 

3704.  Special Sessions. Racism, Injustice, and Deepening Inequality in Disasters VAM, Room 3, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Pamela E. Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison Presider: Rashon Lane, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Panelists: Junia Howell, Boston University; Lori Peek, University of Colorado, Boulder; Fernando I. Rivera, University of Central Florida; James Rattling Leaf, Climate Partnerships for the Great Plains Tribal Water Alliance/Rattling Leaf Consulting LLC 

3705.  Section on Sociology of Population. Health, Mortality, and Inequality VAM, Room 4, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Hui Zheng, The Ohio State University Presider: Hui Zheng, The Ohio State University Intersecting Identities in Context: Implications for Disparities in Life Course Obesity - Jessica Polos, Northwestern University; Thomas McDade; Stephanie Koning, University of Wisconsin-Madison Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Mortality Compression and Rectangularization in the United States - Joseph T. Lariscy, University of Memphis; Eric M. Vogelsang, California State University-San Bernardino Income Support Policies and Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Low Birth Weight in U.S. States - Megan M. Reynolds, University of Utah; Zach Song, University of Utah; Ming Wen, University of Utah Rurality and the Opioid-Involved Mortality Rates in U.S. counties: A Spatiotemporal Investigation - Feinuo Sun, SUNY Albany Discussant: Emma Zang, Yale University 

3706.  Thematic Sessions. Race and Racism VAM, Room 5, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Presider: Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Panelists: Trenita Brookshire Childers, American Institutes for Research; Ted Thornhill, Florida Gulf Coast University; Neda Maghbouleh, University of Toronto; Jean Beaman, University of California-Santa Barbara 

3707.  Thematic Sessions. Racism: A Pre-existing Health Condition VAM, Room 6, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Kamesha S. Spates, Kent State University Presider: Kamesha S. Spates, Kent State University The Role of Racism and Discrimination in Kidney Transplant Disparities - Jason Lamont Cummings, Loyola University Chicago; Teri Browne, University of South Carolina; Tamara Savage, University of North Carolina; Shamika Jones, University of South Carolina Integrating structural racism pedagogy into the undergraduate medical education curriculum - Michelle DallaPiazza, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School; Manasa Ayyala, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School What My Parents Taught Me: Traditional Bush Use in Black River, Jamaica - Amoaba Gooden, Kent State University A Question of Justice: The Covert Costs of Racial/Ethnic Concordance in the Medical Workforce - Karen Kelly-Blake, Michigan State University 93 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 93 3708.  Thematic Sessions. The Politics of Demographic Facts VAM, Room 7, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Cross, Harvard University Presider: Christina Cross, Harvard University Panelists: Emilio A. Parrado, University of Pennsylvania; Alyasah Ali Sewell, Emory University; Maria Abascal, Columbia University; Douglas S. Massey, Princeton University 

3709.  Thematic Sessions. Race, Colonialism and Empire: New Histories of Sociology VAM, Room 8, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Julian Go, University of Chicago Presider: Julian Go, University of Chicago Panelists: Zine Magubane, Boston College; Raewyn Connell, University of Sydney; Amin Perez, University of Quebec at Montreal; George Steinmetz, University of Michigan--Ann Arbor 

3710.  Professional Development Workshop. Publishing Public Sociology: A Panel Conversation between the Berkeley Journal of Sociology, the Society Pages, and Contexts VAM, Room 9, 4:15-5:40pm 

Leaders: Janna Zou Huang; Tiffany Chrysilla Hamidjaja, University of California-Berkeley; Elena Marilin Amaya Co-Leaders: Michael Burawoy, University of California-Berkeley; Christopher Uggen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Douglas Hartmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Claude S. Fischer, University of California-Berkeley 

3711.  Ideas for Future Research. Unpacking Self-Rated Mental and Physical Health: Black Respondent Rationale and Coping Strategies VAM, Room 10, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Lacee Anne Satcher, Vanderbilt University Unpacking Self-Rated Mental and Physical Health: Black Respondent Rationale and Coping Strategies - Lacee Anne Satcher, Vanderbilt University 

3712.  Section on Political Sociology. The Origins of Political Views and Partisanship: Attitudes Toward Masking, Gender Equality, and Brexit VAM, Room 11, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Ann M. Hironaka, University of California-Irvine Presider: Elizabeth Heger Boyle, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Nationalism, Social Ties, and Partisan Evaluations of COVID-19 Mitigation Practices - Bart Bonikowski, New York University; Yuval Feinstein, University of Haifa; Stuart Malcolm Perrett, New York University Save Her a Seat? Gender Quotas, Social Context, and Attitudes towards Women in Politics - Jessica Kim, Stony Brook University Walking and Talking Women’s Rights: Aspirations and Lived Experience - Nir Rotem, University of Minnesota; Elizabeth Heger Boyle, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Varieties of Attachment and Support for Leaving the European Union: Evaluating Communitarian Accounts of Brexit -Siobhan McAndrew, University of Bristol; Paula Surridge, University of Bristol; Neema Begum, University of Manchester 

3713.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender. Intimate Labor, Sex Work, and Queer Kinship VAM, Room 12, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Gowri Vijayakumar, Brandeis University Presider: Elena Shih, Brown University Differentiated Intimacies: Intimate Labor, Exchange Practices, and Gendered Migration in Hong Kong - Maria Hwang, McGill University Genderplay: Reclaiming and Reconfiguring Femininity through the Emotional Labor Practices of Trans Masculine Sex Workers -Elliot Noel Chudyk, Boston University Intimate Labor and the Gendered Construction of Authenticity in Black South Africa - Annie Hikido, Colby College Politics of Queer Responsbility & Circuits of Queer Care - Diya Bose, College of William and Mary The Making of Transnational Care Workers - Andy Scott Chang, Singapore Management University 

3714.  Section on Sociology of Law. Courts and Legal Process VAM, Room 13, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Mary R. Rose, University of Texas-Austin Presider: Susan E. Dietsch, University of Missouri - Columbia Insult, Charisma, and Personalization of Power: Reviving a Dormant Law in Turkey - Defne Over, Texas A&M University-College Station; Irem Ebeturk, Emory University Parenthood and the Assessment of Monetary Sanctions as Criminal Punishment - Brittany T. Martin, University of Georgia; Daniel J. Boches, The University of Georgia; Timothy G Edgemon, University of Cincinnati; Andrea Giuffre, University of Missouri, St. Louis Privacy Against the State? How State-Centric Approaches Came to Dominate Privacy Jurisprudence in the United States -Martin Eiermann, University of California-Berkeley Stubborn Differences: The Lasting Impact of Judicial Appointments on Criminal Sentencing - Jason Robey, University of Wisconsin - Madison; Michael Massoglia, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Michael T. Light, University of Wisconsin-Madison The Filtering of Expert Witnesses from Court: Evidence from a National Study of Judicial Gatekeeping - Alexandra Habeck; Stephen L Hawkins, UW-Milwaukee; Adam Loesch, SIUE; Timothy L. O'Brien, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 

3715.  Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology. Money for Nothing? Science Between Markets and Politics VAM, Room 14, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Paolo Parra Saiani, University of Genoa Presider: Paolo Parra Saiani, University of Genoa A biased mind: Significance as a publication booster? - Julia Jerke, University of Zurich; Antonia Velicu, Institute of Sociology, University of Zurich, Switzerland; Heiko Rauhut, Institute of Sociology, University of Zurich, Switzerland Big Science, Large Projects, Huge Costs - David Reinecke, Princeton University; Janet Vertesi, Princeton University Crossing the Valley of Death: Translational Medicine and the Commercialization of Academic Biomedical Research -Melanie Jeske, University of California, San Francisco Discursive multivocality Why economics might be too successful for its own good - Georg Rilinger, Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies To Be of Value: How Academic Capitalism is Eroding the Educational Mission of University Science - Timothy Sacco, University of Massachusetts, Amherst 94 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 94 3716.  Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility. Open Topic Session of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility VAM, Room 15, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Robert Allen Manduca, University of Michigan Presider: Jingying He, University of Pennsylvania Libraries, Leisure and Learning: Inequality in Takeout of Children’s Books - Ea Hoppe Blaabæk, University of Copenhagen Parental Ages and the Intergenerational Transmission of Education: Evidence from the United States, Germany, and Norway - Michael Grätz, University of Lausanne; Oyvind Nicolay Wiborg, University of Oslo Housing Tenure and Residential Mobility in Canada, 2011 to 2016: An Exploratory Analysis - Meryn Severson Mason, University of Alberta Perspectives on Residential Immobility from Poor Neighborhoods and Implications for Policy - Alexus Moore, Georgia State University; Amy L. Spring, Georgia State University; Austin Harrison, Georgia State University; Joy Dillard Appel, Georgia State University The Geography of Gentrification and Residential Mobility -Hyojung Lee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Kristin Perkins, Georgetown University 

3717.  Section on Environmental Sociology. Environmental Sociology: Open Topic VAM, Room 16, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Presider: Sara Elizabeth Grineski, University of Utah Air pollution along the US’s southern border: the role of social inequalities in shaping neighborhood exposure - Ricardo Rubio; Sara Elizabeth Grineski, University of Utah; Timothy William Collins, University of Utah Complicity, Dependence, and Organizing Potential in Frontline Oil and Gas Communities - Stephanie Ann Malin, Colorado State University; Meghan Elizabeth Kallman, University of Massachusetts-Boston Shifting Discourses on Food Security, Food Sovereignty, and Technology in the Post-COVID Era - Robert Magneson Chiles, Pennsylvania State University; Francisco Alfredo Reyes, Penn State; Anderson Julia Longenecker The Trouble with “Emerging Contaminants”: PFAS Ubiquity as Corporate Accomplishment - Lauren Richter, Rhode Island School of Design; Grace Poudrier, Northeastern University Understanding How the Environmental Protection Agency Conceptualizes “Success” in the Brownfield Redevelopment Grant Program - Marisol Becerra, University of Illinois at Chicago 

3718.  Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work. Pay and Promotion, Determining Rewards, and Factors Shaping Career Outcomes VAM, Room 17, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Sharla N. Alegria, University of Toronto; Nicole Genevieve Denier, University of Alberta; Jiwook Jung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Presider: Ronit Dinovitzer, University of Toronto From the Job’s Worth to the Person’s Price: The Evolution of Pay-setting Practices since the 1950s - Laura Adler, Harvard University Still a Man’s World? How Workplace Hegemonic Masculinity Drives Lawyer’s Wages - Andreea Mogosanu, University of Toronto; Ronit Dinovitzer, University of Toronto Structural legacies and the motherhood penalty: How past societal contexts shape mothers’ employment preferences and outcomes - Malte Reichelt, New York University-Abu Dhabi; Matthias Collischon, Institute for Employment Research; Andreas Eberl, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg The Gendered Consequences of Flexible Work Policies - Vanessa Conzon; Duanyi Yang, Cornell University; Dongwoo Park, Cornell University; Erin Kelly, Massachusetts Institute of Technology The Road to Equity: How do workplace policies affect gender and class differences in promotions? - Anne Kathrin Kronberg, University of North Carolina-Charlotte; Anna Gerlach, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany 

3719.  Community and Urban Sociology Section. A Critical Lens on Urban Sociology VAM, Room 18, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Orly Clerge, Tufts University Presider: Waverly Duck, University of Pittsburgh All Cities Matter: Towards a more dynamic and inclusive urbanism - Gregory D Wilson, University of Wisconsin-Madison Circling the Herd: Houston’s Black Trail Riders, Placemaking and the Liberatory Potential of Second Sites - Leah Binkovitz, Rice University Discrimination in the Housing Search: Experiences of Upper-Middle Class Blacks on LI - Jeanne E. Kimpel, Molloy College Learning from Those We Study: Toward an Alternative Politics of Expertise in Urban Sociology - Gianpaolo Baiocchi, NYU; Ned Crowley, New York University; Lili Dao, New York University; Rachel Kuo; Virgilio Urbina Lazardi, New York University Racism, Redlining, and Racial Capitalism in St. Louis’s Mortgage Industry - Christopher Prener, Saint Louis University; Keon Gilbert, Saint Louis University 

3720.  Section on Sociology of Mental Health. COVID-19 and Mental Health VAM, Room 19, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Pamela Braboy Jackson, Indiana University-Bloomington Presider: Jasmine Lanisha Davis-Randolph, Indiana University Ethno-Racial Disparities of COVID-19 Related Stress and Mental Health Problems - Rengin Bahar Firat, University of California-Riverside; Bruce G. Link, University of California-Riverside Inequality in Household Income Shocks During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Consequences for Mental Health - Rachel Donnelly, Vanderbilt University; Rachel Zajdel, Vanderbilt University; Mateo Farina, University of Southern California Racial-Ethnic Differences in COVID-19 Anticipatory Stressors - Matthew K. Grace, Hamilton College; Ashley Garcia, Hamilton College The “Othering” of Adults Living with Chronic Health Conditions during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Justin T. Maietta, University of Maryland, College Park 

3721.  Section on Sociology of Sexualities. Trans Sexualities: Race, Power, Pleasure VAM, Room 20, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Alithia Zamantakis, Georgia State University; Angela Jones, SUNY-Farmingdale Presider: Tristen Kade, University of California, Santa Barbara “I am all the worlds colliding into one”: Black Trans Erotics and the Self - Alithia Zamantakis, Georgia State University 95 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 95 

“I don’t fuck police”: Trans & Queer Sexual politics and the Practice of Reimagining Desire - Sarah M Steele, University of Illinois, Chicago Trans Erotics, Gender Euphoria, and Pleasure in Sex Industries -Angela Jones, SUNY-Farmingdale Discussant: Blu Buchanan, University of California, Davis 

3722.  Regular Session. Sociology of Culture II VAM, Room 21, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Bin Xu, Emory University Presider: Bin Xu, Emory University Elite Environmental Aesthetics: A Computational Approach to the Measurement of Cultural Ideas of Nature - Andrew McCumber, University of California, Santa Barbara; Adam Davis, University of California, Davis God forbid But I defend my mother’s right to kill herself: Book Reception by Split Self(ves) - Syeda Quratulain Masood, Brown University “Our Childhood was Happier”: Reflexivity and Self-Transformation in Social Reproduction Among Upper-Middle-Class Parents in China - Lily Liang, SUNY-Cortland The Rise of Literary Agents: The Internationalization of a Profession - Tristan Leperlier, Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS; Gisèle Sapiro, EHESS and CNRS; Lilas Bass, EHESS; Delia Guijarro, EHESS Discussant: Becky Yang Hsu, Georgetown University 

3723.  Regular Session. Labor Markets: Racial Discrimination and Racial Stratification VAM, Room 22, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Adam Goldstein, Princeton University Presider: Adam Goldstein, Princeton University Hiring Discrimination and Labor Market Tightness - Lincoln G. Quillian, Northwestern University Prize or Penalty? Race and the Reputational Effects of Diversity Scholarships in the Labor Market - Janet Xu, Princeton University A dynamic framework for black-white earnings inequality -Chunhui Ren, Delta State University 

3724.  Regular Session. How Policing, Crime, and Immigration Law Enforcement affect Immigrants in the US VAM, Room 23, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Tanya Maria Golash-Boza, University of California-Merced Presider: Cinzia D Solari, University of Massachusetts-Boston Examining "La Ayuda:' Law Enforcement and Latinos on Long Island during Covid-19 - Karen Ivette Tejada, University of Hartford; Natalia Navas, Stony Brook University From Broken Windows to Broken Doors: Unmaking the Sanctuary City in NYC and LA, 2002-17 - Michael A. Gould-Wartofsky, New York University Immigration, Parental Legal Status and Children’s Delinquency - Corina Graif, Pennsylvania State University; Alyssa M Yetter, Merrimack College; Rebecca Ann Bucci, Penn State University State-level Immigrant Policy Climates and Health Care Access among U.S Children of Immigrants - Molly Dondero, American University; Claire E. Altman, University of Missouri The Racialized Geographies of Deportability: Understanding the Consequences of Immigration Enforcement on Immigrant Families - Carolina Valdivia, University of California-Los Angeles 

3725.  Regular Session. Topics in the Life Course VAM, Room 24, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Rahsaan Mahadeo, Georgetown University Presider: Rahsaan Mahadeo, Georgetown University Abortion: Life-Course Stages and Disruptive Life Events - Sonja Drobnic, University of Bremen; Lara Minkus, Universität Bremen Adult Children’s Educational Attainment and Parent Health in Mid-and Later-Life - Christopher Richard Dennison, University at Buffalo; Kristen Schultz Lee, University at Buffalo A Tale of Two (Very Different) Cohorts: Adolescent Intensive Parenting and Adulthood Mastery - Dawn R. Norris, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse; Leah Renee Foltman Heterogeneity in the Educational Cost of Adolescent Childbearing - Joseph Daniel Wolfe, University of Alabama-Birmingham; Mieke Beth Thomeer, University of Alabama-Birmingham; Shawn Bauldry, Purdue University 

3726.  Regular Session. Teaching Sociology VAM, Room 25, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jessica Pearce, University of Louisiana at Lafayette Presider: Emily Gwen Blosser, University of Louisiana at Lafayette Distilled or Distorted? A Longitudinal Analysis of LGBTQ Issue Representation in Sociology Textbooks - Joseph Leon Henry, University of California Irvine Hybrid, Hyflex, and Online Courses: Student Perceptions, Barriers, and Learning during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Alanna Gillis, St. Lawrence University; Alexandria Szabo, St Lawrence University Teaching about White Nationalism - Leslie A. Bunnage, Seton Hall University; Beth Ribet, UCLA When the “Haves” Have Not: A Study of Institutional Barriers on Teaching Race in Higher Education - Alisha Kirchoff, Indiana University; Jasmine Lanisha Davis-Randolph, Indiana University Enhancing Pedagogy among Graduate Students using a Holistic Teaching Rubric and Peer Teaching Evaluations - Lisa-Marie Wright, University of Kansas; Tracey A. LaPierre, University of Kansas 

3727.  Regular Session. Religion, Identity, and Practice VAM, Room 26, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Glenn Edward Bracey, Villanova University Presider: Isaiah Jeong, University of Illinois-Chicago In but not of the campus: Religious identity work in a secular university - Krystal Laryea, Stanford One Size Does Not Fit All: Demographic Effects on Perceptions of Islamophobic Discrimination - Laila Noureldin, University of Chicago Reconsidering the Religious Economies Model: Evidence from Rural Malawi - Ann Swidler, University of California-Berkeley Sensing the Sacred: Religious Experience, Somatic Inversions, and the Religious Education of Attention - Michal Pagis, Bar Ilan University; Daniel A. Winchester, Purdue University 

3728.  Regular Session. Power and Uncertainty of Medicalization VAM, Room 27, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Jingqiu Ren; Theresa Morris, Texas A&M University-College Station Presider: Ried E Mackay, Texas A&M University Hit Doctors at Work: Uncredentialed Expertise among People who Inject Drugs - Sarah Brothers, Yale University 

> Session 3721 continued

# 96 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 96 

City of Gauze: Medicine and the Governance of Urban Suffering - Josh Seim, University of Southern California; Anthony J. DiMario, University of Southern California Moral Parameters of Digital Phenotyping in Psychiatry - Mira Vale, University of Michigan Uncertainty as a Clinical Work Object: Genetic Counselors and the Landscape of Knowledge Production in Genomics -Marzena Woinska, CUNY Graduate Center; Susan Markens, CUNY-Lehman College Recovering White, Middle-Class Masculinities: Addiction Treatment as Therapeutic Governance - Sarah L Whetstone, Bradley University; Teresa Gowan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities 

3729.  Regular Session. Sociology of the Middle East: Movements, Ideologies, and States VAM, Room 28, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Alaz Kilicaslan, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater Presider: Alaz Kilicaslan, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater How do ordinary people become political opponents in an authoritarian state - Hashem Alrefai Political Environment and Topic Modeling of Core Framing Tasks -Farinaz Basmechi Revolutionaries, Nationalists, Jihadists: Ideology and Emergent Political Formations - Huseyin Rasit, Ritsumeikan University Women’s Political Participation in Transitions to Democracy: The Case of Tunisia - Maro Youssef, University of Texas at Austin 

3730.  Regular Session. Nations/Nationalism Regular Session VAM, Room 29, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Yossi Harpaz, Tel-Aviv University Presider: Yossi Harpaz, Tel-Aviv University A Nation Built on the Past: Collective Memories and Nationalism in China - Wenjie Liao, Rochester Institute of Technology Embracing the Nation: Strategic Deployment of Sexual and National Identities in LGBT Movements - Minwoo Jung, University of Southern California Managing Conscription in the Age of Dual Nationality_ Conscription, Birth Tourism, and Draft Evasion - Naeyun Lee, University of Chicago The Impact of Genetic Testing on Ethnic Identity and National Belonging in Southeast Europe - Tamara Pavasovic Trost, University of Ljubljana Discussant: Yossi Harpaz, Tel-Aviv University 

3731.  Regular Session. Political Culture: Is Collective, Effective Political Will Possible? VAM, Room 30, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Paul R. Lichterman, University of Southern California Presider: Kushan Dasgupta, University of California-Los Angeles Talking Democracy: Expressions of Belonging and Solidarity in the United States - Mark H. K. Pharris, University of Minnesota; Joseph H. Gerteis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Political Ideology in the Wild: Political Group Opinion in the U.S., 1974-2018 - David Skalinder, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Kristinn Mar Arsaelsson, University of Wisconsin Madison Re-imagining systems: Foresight entrepreneurs and the challenge of institutional change - Ann Mische, University of Notre Dame; Sehrazat Gulsum Mart, University of Notre Dame Discussant: Paul R. Lichterman, University of Southern California 

3732.  Regular Session. Public Opinion VAM, Room 31, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jen Heerwig, Stony Brook University Presider: Jen Heerwig, Stony Brook University Convergence, Emergence, or Divergence? Attitudes toward Women in the United States, 1970-2018 - Ethan Fosse, University of Toronto; Sebastien Parker, University of Toronto; Cinthya J. Guzman, University of Toronto Do Voters Respond to Local Economic Inequality? Examining Support for Raising the State Minimum Wage - Emily Sandusky, Cornell University The Organization of Political Belief Networks: A Cross-Country Analysis - Turgut Keskintürk, Bogazici University Attitudes towards migrants during the COVID-19 pandemic: does occupation essentialness matter? - Mariña Fernandez-Reino, Centre on Migration, Policy and Society; Will L. Allen, University of Oxford; Denis Kierans, University of Oxford; Isabel Ruiz-Olaya, University of Oxford 

3747.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 11: Trends in Health and Bodily Autonomy VAM, Room 46, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sarah Torrico Presider: Connor Douglas Mitchell In Competition...or not? Natural and Medical Conceptions of Prenatal and Birth Care Desires - Anna Church, The Ohio State University Mediation of risk factors for hypertension in American Indians, compared to three other populations - Anna Zamora-Kapoor, Washington State University; Luciana Hebert; Pranav Mellacheruvu; Dedra Buchwald; Kaimi Sinclair Remote Learning and Nonmedical Use of Prescription Stimulants - Connor Douglas Mitchell The contested science of radiation exposure: Constructing narratives about childhood thyroid cancer after Fukushima - Elicia Mayuri Cousins, Northeastern University 

3748.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 12: Imperialism and Cultural Reproductions VAM, Room 47, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sarah Torrico Presider: David Makofsky, University of Indiana NW - Gary The Uyghur Awakening: The contribution of gender and social class to Muslim modernism - David Makofsky, University of Indiana NW - Gary Hiding Imperialism within the Sociology of Development - Devin Scott Wiggs Strategies of Escalation in the Anti-Sweatshop Movement -Matthew S. Williams, Loyola University Chicago "Who do you think you are?" Subjective and Objective Determinants of Social Class in India - Natasha Chhabra, University of Maryland, College Park 

3749.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 13: Labor, Legitimacy, and Sexualities VAM, Room 48, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Sarah Torrico Presider: Sarah Torrico The Erotic Capabilities Approach: A Feminist Analysis of Sex Partying in Hong Kong - Pamela Pui-kwan Tsui, University of Toronto Discrepant News Framing of Victims in Toronto’s Gay Village: The Bruce McArthur Serial Killer Case - Andy Walter Holmes, 

> Session 3728 continued

# 97 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 97 

University of Toronto How Gender Produces Class Ambiguity: The Case of Beauty and Retail Work in Pakistan - Sidra Kamran, The New School 

3750.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 14: Social Sites of Cultural Difference VAM, Room 49, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: George Weddington, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Taylor Price, University of Toronto Goodhangism: The Social Aesthetics of Cultural Fields - Taylor Price, University of Toronto Social Networks and Emotional Attachments in Chinese Christian Fellowships in the U.S. - Xi Wang, Northwestern University Real Cars, Real Roads, Real Fast: Examining the Culture of American Stage Rally - Barbara F. Prince, Lebanon Valley College; Emalie Rell, University of Delaware; Michele Lee Kozimor, Elizabethtown College COVID-19 Preprints and Their Publishing Rate: An Improved Method - Francois Joseph Lachapelle, University of B. C. 

3751.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 15: Institutions and Identity VAM, Room 50, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: George Weddington, University of Pittsburgh Presider: George Weddington, University of Pittsburgh The Role of Institutional Contexts in Embedded Altruism: Replication and Extension of Healy (2000) - Emily Maloney, Duke University Incongruent Patterns of Organizational Identity Crafting by Different Organizational Actors: Reasons for Multiple Organizational Identities - Franziska Hein-Pensel, Technische Universität Ilmenau; Karin Knorr, Paderborn University; Simon Oertel, TU Ilmenau; Kirsten Thommes, Paderborn University Narratives of Redemption and Personal Transformation in the Therapeutic State - Mary Beth Morrissey, Cornell University “We Have Paid Our Dues”: Moral Justification of Wealthy Tax Flight - Nicole R Letourneau, Harvard University 

3752.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 16: American Institutions of Policing and Incarceration VAM, Room 51, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Nathanael Grant Joseph, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Nathanael Grant Joseph, University of Pittsburgh The Enduring Effects of Slavery and Contemporary Black Incarceration - Jacob Kepes Non-Profit Organizations in a Multi-level Model of Help-Seeking Behavior: Crime Reporting Across 40 Metropolitan Areas, 1989-2004 - Ricardo David Martinez-Schuldt, University of Notre Dame Toward a Theory of Police as Repressive Agents of the Racialized State - Robyn T Moore, Universityof Maryland- College Park To Serve and Protect? Qualified Immunity and Legal Use of Force by Police Across the US - Søren T Gran, Minerva To Serve and Protect? Qualified Immunity and Legal Use of Force by Police Across the USA - Søren T Gran, Minerva Murder of George Floyd: Discourse Analysis of Institutional Statements - Toby Lauren Wagner Klein, University of Arkansas; Rachel Piontak, University of Arkansas; Anna Zajicek, University of Arkansas 

3753.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 17: Housing, Gentrification, and Spatial Sociology VAM, Room 52, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Nathanael Grant Joseph, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Thalia Tom, University of Southern California Towards a Holistic Queer Geography: Changing Spatial Distributions and Relationships among LGBTQ+ Households and Businesses - Jason Spicer, MIT; Greggor Mattson, Oberlin College Gentrifiers evading stigma: Social integrationists in the neighborhood of the future - Jeffrey Nathaniel Parker, University of New Orleans; Stephanie Lynn Ternullo, University of Chicago Second Homeowners and the Expansive Community of Limited Liability - Meaghan Stiman, College of William and Mary Beyond the Metro: Assessing 1990-2015 Neighborhood Income Segregation in U.S. Micropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Areas - Thalia Tom, University of Southern California Small Businesses and Social Preservation in a Gentrifying Neighborhood - Amy Jonason, Furman University 

3754.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 18: Educational Institutions and Policies VAM, Room 53, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Nathanael Grant Joseph, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Francisco Lagos, University of Maryland College Park How signs of compliance cultivate noncompliance: A study of Korean neo-Confucian academies, 1327-1800 - Eun Young Song, University College London Eliminating Barriers to Exercise Choice and Between-School Socioeconomic Segregation: Evidence from a Policy Change in Chile - Francisco Lagos, University of Maryland College Park Association of adverse experiences with child flourishing & school engagement: protective role of family resilience - Helal Uddin, East West University Order Effects in Measuring Adolescent Social Networks Using Name Rosters - Shuyin Liu, University of Massachusetts Amherst; David Nolin, University of Massachusetts; James A. Kitts, University of Massachusetts 

3755.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 19: Gender and Family Dynamics on a Global Scale VAM, Room 54, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Nathanael Grant Joseph, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Sangsoo Lee, University of Pennsylvania Culture or structure? A longitudinal study of 122 national-origin groups’ marital assimilation in Denmark, 1986-2016 - Hans-Peter Yogachandiran Qvist, Aalborg University; Jeevitha Yogachandiran Qvist Girls, Gadgets and Gatekeepers: How Gender and Class Shape Adolescent Mobile Phone Access in Mumbai, India - Isha Bhallamudi, UC Irvine Body Stories of Postpartum Women: Examining Social Influences on First-Time Mothers' Body Image - Isabella Ann Chiareli, University of Oklahoma What Happens When Masculinity is Threatened? Husbands’ Paid Work, Wives’ Well-being, and National Gender Context -Sangsoo Lee, University of Pennsylvania 

> Session 3749 continued

# 98 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 98 

Gender Differences in the Impact of Social Network on Work-family Positive Spillover for Japanese Engineers - Sayaka K Shinohara, Doshisha University; Tetsushi Fujimoto, Doshisha University 

3756.  Open Refereed Roundtables. Table 20: Social Movements, Civic Organizations, and Their Environments VAM, Room 55, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Daniel G. McClymonds, University of Pittsburgh Presider: Daniel G. McClymonds, University of Pittsburgh An Authentic Representative: Social Movement Organizations and Participation in Urban Governance - Andrew Malmuth, UCLA Movements and Civil Society: How Pittsburgh’s Civic Elites Responded to the Urban Rebellions of 1968 - Daniel G. McClymonds, University of Pittsburgh Penalty or Payoff? Diversity of Tactics and Resource Mobilization among Environmental Social Movement Organizations -Max Chewinski, University of British Columbia; Catherine Corrigall-Brown, University of British Columbia 

3767.  Meeting. Section on Marxist Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 66, 4:15-4:45pm 3768.  Meeting. Section on Latina/o Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 4:15-4:45pm 3769.  Meeting. Section on Ethnomethdology and Conversation Analysis Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 4:15-4:45pm Monday, 4:45 pm 3857.  Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session. Table 1. Negotiating Identities and Political Opportunities VAM, Room 56, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver; Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Table Presider: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver "Why Is Hispanic Separate?" Part-Latinos and Racial Reporting in the Census - Michael Hajime Miyawaki, College of Wooster Becoming White? The Public and Psychological Wages of Whiteness for Undocumented 1.5-generation Brazilians - Kara Cebulko, Providence College Impact of migration and place on the racial identification of Puerto Ricans - Rocio Rosa-Lebron, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill “La Identidad es un Caminar”: Navigating Ethnic Identity Construction in Latinx Community-Based Organizations in Florida. - Joselyn Lissette Angeles Figueroa Lo que Resiste, Persiste: Political Opportunities and Injustice Frames in Rural EJ - Rodrigo Alatriste-Diaz, Cornell University 

3858.  Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session. Table 2. Navigating Education VAM, Room 57, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver; Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Table Presider: Vaclav Masek, USC The Impact of High Impact Practices on Cognitive Career Preparation Outcomes for Latino/a College Students -Michael Wong, Azusa Pacific University; Lindsay Monihen, Azusa Pacific University; Young K. Kim, Azusa Pacific University; Cameron Conn, Baptist Health Sciences University Finances and Academic Outcomes for Latinx College Students at Selective Institutions - Jessica Barco, Azusa Pacific University; Young K. Kim, Azusa Pacific University; Liz Rennick, Trident Technical College Trapped vs. Tracked: A Sociological Examination of the Educational Experiences of Latina “Disposables” versus Latina “Exceptionals” - Marisa D. Salinas, UCSB 

3859.  Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session. Table 3. Housing and Health VAM, Room 58, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver; Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Table Presider: Aaron Arredondo, University of Missouri Caught in a Triple Bind: Latinx Women's Barriers to Reproductive Health Care in the RGV - Julisa Amanda McCoy, University of California Riverside The Spatiotemporal Consequences of Residential Segregation - Boroka B Bo, University of California, Berkeley; Denys Dukhovnov, UC Berkeley Demography Puerto Rico After Hurricane Maria: Responses to Trauma and Constructing a Life in Central Florida - Angela Vergara, University of Central Florida Housing as Health Care: An Analysis of Homelessness in El Paso, Texas - Sarah McCarthy; Emma Vetter, American University; Deziree Jackson, American University 

3860.  Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session. Table 4. (Im)migration and Politics VAM, Room 59, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Table Presiders: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver; Julia E. Curry Rodriguez, San Jose State University Detained Immigrants Access to Justice - Mirian Giovanna Martinez-Aranda, UCLA Examining How the Political Participation of Undocumented Latinx Immigrants Has Changed since the 2016 Presidential Election - Nicolaus Espitia, University of Michigan “Fragmented and Communal Illegality: Racialization of Mexican undocumented women in the U.S.” - Heidy Sarabia, California State University-Sacramento; Laura Zaragoza; Jannet Esparza, CSU Sacramento Contentious Immigration Politics in a Multilevel Jurisdictional Field: The Case Study of Orange County, California - Walter Julio Nicholls, University of California, Irvine; Marieke De Wilde, University of Amsterdam Claiming Space: Settler Colonialism, Property, and Racialized Immigrants - Rocio Leon, University of Southern California 

3861.  Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session. Table 5. The Complexities of Family VAM, Room 60, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver; Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Table Presider: Gabriela León-Pérez, Virginia Commonwealth University Es Mi Familia: Lending and Financial Support among Mexican Immigrant Families - Nallely Mejia, University of California Berkeley 

> Session 3755 continued

# 99 MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 2021 99 

'I Want Him To Grow Up Feeling Safe': Latino Fathers and the Social Construction of Childhood - Fatima Suarez, UC Santa Barbara Familism among Latino/a Adolescents: Evidence from Time-Use Data - Elizabeth Ackert, University of California-Santa Barbara; Jocelyn Wikle, Brigham Young University The Racial and Ethnic Socialization Continuum: Racial Ideologies and Discourses in Latinx Families - Maria D. Duenas, University of California, Merced The Descent of the Institutionalized Marriage: Queer Latinx Millennial/ Gen Z Perspectives of Same-Sex Marriage -Sarah Cortez-Flores 

3862.  Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session. Table 6. Policing and Crime VAM, Room 61, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Chalane E. Lechuga, Metropolitan State University-Denver; Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Table Presider: Gloria S. Vaquera, John Carroll University Latina/os and Perceptions of Police Harassment - Maria Cristina Morales, University of Texas at El Paso; Crystal Rodriguez, University of Texas at El Paso Literature, Crime, and Biculturalism - Antonio Paniagua Guzman, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Criminals & Covid: São Paulo's Public Safety Issues During the Pandemic - Douglas Abdalla Namur, University of Central Florida 

3863.  Marxist Section Roundtables. Table 1: Latin America VAM, Room 62, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Daniel Auerbach, University of Wyoming Table Presider: Caitlin Hays Schroering, University of Pittsburgh Collaborative Knowledge Production and the Right to Water: Solidarity, Decolonization, and Translocal Learning Networks - Caitlin Hays Schroering, University of Pittsburgh Neoliberalism and the political economy of punishment in Argentina - Hugo Goeury, City University of New York, Graduate Center 

3864.  Marxist Section Roundtables. Table 2: Culture VAM, Room 63, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Daniel Auerbach, University of Wyoming Table Presider: Timothy A Perez Causality, Competition, and Culture: Bringing Capitalism Back into Economic Sociology - Joseph Reynolds van der Naald, The Graduate Center, CUNY Corridos and Migration: The Development of Corridos, Narcocorridos, and Migracorridos - Timothy A Perez; Jeffrey A. Halley, University of Texas-San Antonio Culture & Commodification: Critically Evaluating Viviana Zelizer’s Hostile Worlds thesis through Cultural Marxism - Aman Banerji, Cornell University 

3865.  Marxist Section Roundtables. Table 3: Crisis, the State, Labor, and the Future VAM, Room 64, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Daniel Auerbach, University of Wyoming Table Presider: Vince Montes, California State University-East Bay Capitalism and Coercion: Crisis in the Legitimacy of the U.S. State - Vince Montes, California State University-East Bay The Terraformation of Society in The Era of The Great Restructuring - Anthony Jerald Jackson, Howard Univerity 

3866.  Marxist Section Roundtables. Table 4: Race, Ethnicity, and Immigrant Justice VAM, Room 65, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Daniel Auerbach, University of Wyoming Table 4: Race, Ethnicity, and Immigrant Justice Table Presider: Richard L. Hogan, Purdue University Amnesty for All: Critical Perspectives on the Abolitionist Turn in the Immigrant Justice Movement - David Feldman, University of California at Santa Barbara Framing Ethnic-Based Inequality-Generating Mechanisms in France - Cihan Ozpinar White Nationalism and Populism: Is History Repeating as Farce -Richard L. Hogan, Purdue University 

3870.  Section on Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis. Current Research in Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis VAM, Room 69, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Albert J. Meehan, Oakland University Presider: Tanya Stivers, University of California-Los Angeles Negotiating the Mainstream: Mitigated Rejections of Far-Right Policy Proposals in Bundestag Debates - J Sterphone, University of California, Santa Barbara Error correction, conditional autonomy, and bodies in motion: The case of rope access training - Andrew Labonte, King's College London; Jon Hindmarsh, King's Business School; Dirk vom Lehn, King's College London Facilitating sequences: The case of grandparents in video calls between migrant parents and their children - Yumei Gan, Shanghai Jiao Tong University; Christian Greiffenhagen, The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Kobin Kendrick, University of York 

# Monday, 6:00 pm 3901.  Plenary Session. State of Sociology: Mid-Career View VAM, Room 0, 6:00-7:30pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Adia M. Harvey Wingfield, Washington University-St. Louis Panelists: Wendy Leo Moore, Texas A&M University-College Station; Whitney Nicole Laster Pirtle, University of California-Merced; Douglas Hartmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Dawn M. Dow, University of Maryland-College Park Discussant: Adia M. Harvey Wingfield, Washington University-St. Louis As noted in the senior panel on this topic, Recently James House published, “The Culminating Crisis of American Sociology and Its Role in Social Science and Public Policy: An Autobiographical, Multimethod, Reflexive Perspective in the Annual Review of Sociology. This piece argued that contemporary sociology, unlike in earlier periods, is experiencing a theoretical and methodological crisis. Yet, critics argue that contemporary sociology is experiencing a theoretical and methodological rebirth and innovation. This panel will examine the state of sociology to assess its current status and prospects. This panel will address the same issues but from the perspective of junior and mid-career sociologists. 

> Session 3861 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 100 Tuesday, 10:00 am 4013.  Meeting. Section on Environmental Sociology Council Meeting VAM, Room 12, 10:00-10:45am 4015.  Meeting. Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Council Meeting VAM, Room 14, 10:00-10:45am 4019.  Meeting. Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Council Meeting VAM, Room 18, 10:00-10:45am 4020.  Meeting. Section on Peace, War, and Social Conflict Council Meeting VAM, Room 19, 10:00-10:45am 4022.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Sexualities Council Meeting VAM, Room 21, 10:00-10:45am 4070.  Meeting. Family Section Council Meeting VAM, Room 69, 10:00-10:45am Tuesday, 11:00 am 4102.  Book Forum. The Revolution That Wasn't: How Digital Activism Favors Conservatives VAM, Room 1, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Carlson, University of Arizona Moderator: Jennifer Carlson, University of Arizona Panelists: Brayden G. King, Northwestern University; Christopher A. Bail, Duke University; Alex Hanna, Google Author: Jen Schradie, Sciences Po - Paris 

4104.  Special Sessions. Religion and Racialization: Global Islamophobia VAM, Room 3, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Neda Maghbouleh, University of Toronto Presider: Jean Beaman, University of California-Santa Barbara Panelists: Cawo Mohamed Abdi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Aneesa Aruna Baboolal, University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth; Atiya Husain, Carleton University; Hajar Yazdiha, University of Southern California 

4105.  Special Sessions. Towards a Sociology of Land Dispossession VAM, Room 4, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Michael Levien, Johns Hopkins University Presider: Michael Levien, Johns Hopkins University Panelists: Madeleine Fairbairn, University of California, Santa Cruz; Julia Chuang, Boston College; Ricado E Jacobs, University of California-Santa Barbara 

4106.  Section on Environmental Sociology. Environmental Sociology, Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations VAM, Room 5, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Presider: Angela Ann Gonzales, Arizona State University Co-constructing Stories of Tribal Nations in Forestry: "Anchor Forests" as a Narrative-Based Tool for Change - Meredith Jacobson Diné-centered Research Reframes the Gold King Mine Spill -Rebecca J. Clausen, Fort Lewis College; Carmenlita Chief, Northern Arizona University; Nicolette Teufel-Shone, Northern Arizona University; Manley Begay, Jr, Northern Arizona University; Perry Charley, Dine College; Paloma Beamer, University of Arizona; Nnenna Anako, Washington University; Karletta Chief, University of Arizona Neoliberal Bureaucratization, Settler Colonialism, and How NEPA “Modernization” Fails to Eliminate Uncertainty - Michelle L. Edwards, Texas State University; Hannah Edwards; Caden Ziegler, Texas State University; Briana Luna, UT Health San Antonio School of Health Professions PFAS in American Indian and Alaska Native Communities - Martha Powers, Northeastern University; Otakuye Conroy-Ben, Arizona State University; Alissa Cordner, Whitman College; Phil Brown, Northeastern University; Derrick Salvatore, Northeastern University; Kira Mok, Northeastern University The Power of Ascription: Settler-Ascribed Vulnerability as a Catalyst for Lived Vulnerability Within Indigenous Communities - Kirsten Rae Vinyeta, University of Oregon 

4107.  Thematic Sessions. Religion through Du Boisian Eyes (Joint ASA-ASR Session) VAM, Room 6, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: James Vernon Spickard, University of Redlands; Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, Colby College Presider: Michael Perry Okyerefo, University of Ghana ’Chief Churches and Noisy Missions’ in The Philadelphia Negro: An Empirical Foundation of Du Bois's Theory of African American Christianity - Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, Colby College The Souls of Violent Folk: A Nation Red in Tooth and Cross -Damon Mayrl, Colby College Becoming a Man: A Du Boisian Examination of the Experiences of Black Men Who Have Sex with Men - Sandra Lynn Barnes, Vanderbilt University What Would Be Different? How a Du Boisian Vision Would Have Improved the Sociology of Religion - Korie L. Edwards, Ohio State University Towards a Phenomenological Sociology of Religion: Tools from the Phenomenologies of W.E.B. Du Bois and Alfred Schutz -James Vernon Spickard, University of Redlands 

4108.  Thematic Sessions. The Souls of Black Folk, Black Reconstruction, and Africana: Du Bois’s Emancipatory Sociology and the Challenges of the 21st Century VAM, Room 7, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Thomas Ehrlich Reifer, University of San Diego; Carlton Floyd, University of San Diego Presider: angela nurse, University of San Diego Panelists: Gurminder K. Bhambra, University of Sussex; Anoa J. Changa; Carlton Floyd, University of San Diego; Thomas Ehrlich Reifer, University of San Diego; Phillip Luke Sinitiere, W.E.B. Du Bois Center at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst 

4109.  Professional Development Workshop. The Association of University Presses (AUPresses) Workshop on How to Publish with a University Press VAM, Room 8, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Leader: Ilene Kalish, New York University Press Co-Leader: Suzanne Nichols, Russell Sage Foundation TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 101 4110.  Ideas for Future Research. Intimate Partner Violence and Public Educational Practices Nationwide Needs VAM, Room 9, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Lindsey Jean Ritter-Ingorvaia, Pepperdine University Intimate Partner Violence and Public Educational Practices Nationwide Needs - Lindsey Jean Ritter-Ingorvaia, Pepperdine University 

4112.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender. #SayHerName: Attending to the Gendered Dynamics of Racialized Violence VAM, Room 11, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Emily Fairchild, New College of Florida; Queen Meccasia Zabriskie, New College of Florida Presider: Emily Fairchild, New College of Florida "I Might Just Kill You": Cis-Het Men & Cis-Les/Bi Women's & Murders of Black Trans Women - Alithia Zamantakis, Georgia State University Making Visible the Invisible: Intersectional black feminism and #SayHerName - Laura Grindstaff, University of California-Davis; Angelita Repetto, UC Davis; Larissa Carmel Saco, UC Davis; Colleen Sargent, University of California, Davis; Elizabeth Celene Lee Witcher, UC Davis #NoJusticeNoSleep: Hashtagging the Unjust Murder of Breonna Taylor - Mi'Chael Noel Wright, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities Visibility, Victimization, and Vulnerability: #MeTooBehindBars and the movement against police violence in women’s prisons -Jennifer Elyse James, University of California, San Francisco “’We Got Witnesses’: Black Women Navigating Police Violence and Legal Estrangement” - Faith M Deckard, University of Texas-Austin; Shannon Malone Gonzalez, The University of Texas at Austin Discussant: Queen Meccasia Zabriskie, New College of Florida 

4114.  Section on Drugs and Society. Impact of COVID-19 on Substance Use, Treatment, and Policy VAM, Room 13, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Alice Cepeda, University of Southern California Presider: Avelardo Valdez, University of Southern California “Big Events”: Long-term effects of the COVID-19, racism and economic crises on behavior & infectious diseases - Samuel R. Friedman, NYU Grossman School of Medicine; Pedro Mateu-Gelabert; Georgios Nikolopoulos; Magdalena Cerdá; Diana Rossi; Ashly E Jordan; Tarlise (Tarlie) Townsend; Maria R Khan; David C Perlman The Impact of COVID-19 on Drug Use in the United States - Dina Perrone, California State University-Long Beach; Ryan G Fischer, California State University, Long Beach Social Network Ties and Responses to COVID-19 among E-cigarette Users - Brian Christopher Kelly, Purdue University; Mark Pawson, Purdue University; Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University The Impact of COVID-19 and Social Networks on Adult Alcohol Use - Michael S. Pollard, RAND Corporation; Harold D. Green, Indiana University; Joan S. Tucker, RAND Corporation The Influence of COVID-19 Stress on Smoking and Alcohol Consumption - Shayna La Scala, University of California Riverside; Rengin Bahar Firat, University of California-Riverside; Bruce G. Link, University of California-Riverside 

4115.  Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work. Broadening the Conversation about Racism in Organizations, Occupations, and Work VAM, Room 14, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Alexandra Kalev, Tel-Aviv University Presider: Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Getting in: The Racialized Legitimation Strategies of Black Tech Entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley and Atlanta - Alicia Sheares, University of California, Berkeley In the Name of Love: Whiteness, Emotion Work, and Resource Distribution in Organizations - Sarah H. Diefendorf, Scholars Strategy Network; C.J. Pascoe, University of Oregon Mathematically Maintained Inequality: Racialized Organizations and Selective Organizational Change - Cassidy Puckett, Emory University; Brian Gravel, Tufts University “Their accent is just too much”: Tracing the sonic color line in public radio production - Laura Garbes, Brown University This is Why I Leave: Race and Voluntary Turnover - Adina Sterling, Stanford University, Graduate School of Business 

4116.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities. Africans/Africans in North American Diasporas VAM, Room 15, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Onoso Ikphemi Imoagene, New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) Presider: Dialika Sall, Lehman College-CUNY “How American am I?”: Comparing American Identity among US Black Muslims - Jauhara Ferguson, Rice University I’m Not Habesha, I’m Oromo: Ethnic Identity Boundary Work in the Washington D.C. Oromo Community - Beka Guluma, Stanford University Model Minorities? Teachers perceptions of African students’ behavior and academic abilities - Mercy Agyepong, New York University Discussant: Hewan Girma, University of North Carolina at Greensboro 

4117.  Special Sessions. Feminist Health and Well-Being Research VAM, Room 16, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Barret Katuna, Sociologists for Women in Society; Marlese Durr, Wright State University Presider: Barret Katuna, Sociologists for Women in Society Addressing Gender-based Violence and Domestic Violence During the Pandemic - Margaret Abraham, Hofstra University Intersectionality, Caregiving & COVID 19 - LaTonya J. Trotter, University of Washington Reproductive Rights and Justice in the 21st Century - Krystale E. Littlejohn, University of Oregon The Limits of Radical Feminist Research in Sociology: The Case of Trans, Non-Binary, and Intersex Health - Georgiann Davis, University of Nevada-Las Vegas Gender, Intersectionality, and Disability - Heather E. Dillaway, Wayne State University 

4118.  Section on Sociology of Religion. Nuancing the "Nones": Better Measurements and Concepts for Understanding Diversity Among the Nonreligious VAM, Room 17, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Jacqui Frost, Rice University; Joseph Blankholm, University of California-Santa Barbara Presider: Courtney Applewhite, University of California, Santa Barbara TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 102 

Mapping Religious Change across the US 1973-2018: State-level Trends Based on Multilevel Regression and Poststratification - Chaeyoon Lim, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Dingeman Wiertz, University College London Low Religion, No Religion? Improving Measurement with the Logic of Machine Learning - Evan Stewart, University of Massachusetts-Boston Atuakore - Exploring atheism in the Māori context - Masoumeh Sara Rahmani, Victoria University of Wellington The Structure of Spirituality: The Cross-Institutional Dynamics of ‘JewBus’ - Benjamin Kaplow, Yale University 

4119.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology. Challenges to Democracy: Do We Learn from the Past? VAM, Room 18, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Mabel Berezin, Cornell University Presider: Mabel Berezin, Cornell University Bloodlines: Antisemitism in the Weimar Republic and Contemporary America. - Robert Braun, University of California-Berkeley France then, America now? Insights and implications of the 1934 six février riots for our current political moment - Aliza Luft, University of California-Los Angeles Fascism, Populism, and Democratic Practice: Lessons from Latin America - Robert S. Jansen, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor "Authoritarianism and the Crisis of the Neoliberal State: Thinking through the Case of Contemporary Hungary - Dorit Geva, Central European University Discussant: Jeffrey Olick, University of Virginia 

4120.  Section on Peace, War and Social Conflict. Intervening Abroad: Protecting Human Rights or Imperialism? (cosponsored by the Human Rights section) VAM, Room 19, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Jeff Goodwin, New York University; David Cunningham, Washington University-St. Louis Presider: David Cunningham, Washington University-St. Louis Panelists: Marie E. Berry, University of Denver; Arjun Chowdhury, University of British Columbia; Neta Crawford, Boston University 

4121.  Section on Rationality and Society. Combatting Political Polarization VAM, Room 20, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Michael Maes, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany Presider: Michael Maes, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany Panelists: Kathleen M. Carley, Carnegie Mellon University; Daniel DellaPosta, Pennsylvania State University; Andreas Flache, University of Groningen; Sven Banisch, Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences; Sven Banisch, Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences 

4122.  Section on Sociology of Sexualities. Rethinking Transnational Sexualities VAM, Room 21, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizers: Ghassan Moussawi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Oluwakemi M. Balogun, University of Oregon Presider: Ghassan Moussawi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign India, Africa, and Pandemic Imagination - Gowri Vijayakumar, Brandeis University Queering & Decolonizing Domestic Violence - Diya Bose, College of William and Mary Queering Gentrification in Greater Los Angeles: Latinx Artistic and Creative Communities as Forms of Transnational Space-Making - Jessennya Hernandez, Univ of IL Discussant: Oluwakemi M. Balogun, University of Oregon 

4123.  Regular Session. Immigration to the United States VAM, Room 22, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Min Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Hasan Mahmud, Northwestern University Labor Migration to Silicon Valley: H-1B/H4 Visa Holders as Interconnected Categories Subject to Durable Relational Inequality - Ievgeniia (Eve) Zasoba, UMASS Boston The Double Demands of Legibility: Representing Claims to Humanitarian Status - Lilly Yu, Harvard University Return migration as an asset maximization strategy in retirement - Mara Getz Sheftel, The Graduate Center 

4124.  Regular Session. Schooling and the Unequal Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic VAM, Room 23, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Gilda Laura Ochoa, Pomona College Presider: Gilda Laura Ochoa, Pomona College Framing Resilience: How Social Class Shapes Family School Responses in Moments of Crisis - Alma Nidia Garza, Purdue University; Amy Petts, Purdue; Linda Renzulli, Purdue University; Thurston A. Domina, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Brittany Murray, Davidson College American and Finnish Parents’ Perceptions of the Distance Learning Experience During the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic - Annica Karlsson, Arkansas State University; Sarah M. Kendig, Arkansas State University-Main Campus Cross-National Variation in School Reopening Measures during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Christine Min Wotipka, Stanford University; Kate Steed Hoffman, Stanford University; Mariana Barragan Torres, University of California, Los Angeles The Role of the Teacher: Using crisis to reevaluate the purpose of the profession - Hilary Naa-Afi Tackie, University of Chicago 

4125.  Regular Session. The Social Implications of Immigration Law VAM, Room 24, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Monica C. Bell, Yale University Presider: Asad L. Asad, Stanford University Access to Legal Representation: Representing Eligible Youths or Choosing the “Compelling” Case - Chiara Galli, Cornell University Crimmigration? Yes and No: Immigration and Criminal Law in Immigration Removal Proceedings - Sabrina Charles, New York University Relief or Removal: relational masculinity and state logics of deservingness in removal proceedings - Dylan Farrell-Bryan, University of Pennsylvania Liminality and the Lived Experience of Law in Medicine: Undocumented Migration and Physicians' Legal Consciousness - Josephine T. V. Greenbrook, University of Edinburgh, School of Law/University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska Academy Medical School Does Immigrant Surveillance Decrease Crime Reporting? Police Notification Among Latinos/as in the United States - Marta Ascherio, University of Texas at Austin 

> Session 4118 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 103 4126.  Regular Session. Race, Gender and Class: Intersecting Axes of Inequality VAM, Room 25, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Tsedale Mekete Melaku, CUNY-Graduate Center Presider: Tsedale Mekete Melaku, CUNY-Graduate Center Controlling Images in Newspaper Constructions of State-Sanctioned Police Violence against Black Women and Men - Ashley Hollingshead, Rutgers University Fashion and Faith: Muslim American Women Marking Islamic Boundaries - Nazreen Sameena Bacchus, SUNY-Farmingdale Intersectional Self-Assessed Health Disparities across Race, Gender and Socioeconomic Status, 2001-2018 - Zachary Robert Franzoni, University of Utah Not BIPOC - Meera E. Deo, Thomas Jefferson School of Law Undergraduate Engagement with Faculty: The Role of Gender at a Hispanic-Serving Institution - Madison Garcia Discussant: Angie Beeman, CUNY-Baruch College 

4127.  Regular Session. Reproductive Decisions and Embodied Outcomes VAM, Room 26, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Rene Almeling, Yale University Presider: Rene Almeling, Yale University Out of Body: Abortion Embodiment Experiences - Danielle Bessett, University of Cincinnati; Ayesha Casie Chetty, University of Cincinnati; Annie McGhee, University of Cincinnati; Kathryn LaRoche, Indiana University; Angel M Foster, University of Ottawa Choosing Abortion for a Serious Fetal Health Issue: From Medical Information to Values - Katrina E. Kimport, UC San Francisco Health at the Margins: Self-Managed Abortion and the Role of Social Networks - Kathleen Broussard, University of Texas Do Pregnancy Intentions Matter? Revisiting Relationships with Pregnancy, Infant, and Maternal Outcomes - Nicholas Mark, NYU; Sarah K. Cowan, New York University Same Uterus, Different Paths: Examining Gendered Infertility Discourses Among Hysterectomy Patients - Andréa Becker, The Graduate Center, CUNY 

4128.  Regular Session. Sociological Theory 1 VAM, Room 27, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Claire Laurier Decoteau, University of Illinois-Chicago Presider: Isaac Ariail Reed, University of Virginia Contingency and Randomness - Ivan Ermakoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison Property and its Provenance: A Case Study of the Emergence of Ownership - Meredith Hall, The New School for Social Research Reconceptualizing eventful sociology - Thomas Angeletti, Université Paris Dauphine-PSL; Marcin Serafin, Polish Academy of Sciences The Making of Sociological Thought – A Cosmopolitan Inquiry - Cinthya J. Guzman, University of Toronto; Daniel Silver, University of Toronto; Lars Döpking, Hamburg Institute for Social Research; Lukas Underwood, University of Hamburg and the Sociological Research Institut Göttingen (SOFI) Discussant: Isaac Ariail Reed, University of Virginia 

4129.  Regular Session. Transnational Social Movements VAM, Room 28, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Manisha Desai, University of Connecticut Presider: Jackie Smith, University of Pittsburgh Disabled Bodies in Transnational Feminist Praxis - Valérie Grand'Maison, University of Guelph Globalizing femicide: Transnational Art and the Symbolization of the Murdered and Disappeared Women in Ciudad Juárez -Ana Lopez Ricoy, University of California San Diego Hiriira Temporalities; Mapping Oromo liberation in the German diaspora - Madeline Jaye Bass, Freie Universitaet Berlin/ University of Kent The Centrality of Difference in Coalition-Building: Palestinian, Israeli, and International Organizations in the Occupied West Bank - Michelle I. Gawerc, Loyola University Maryland Discussant: Jackie Smith, University of Pittsburgh 

4130.  Regular Session. Ecology, Pandemics, and Space in Historical Capitalism VAM, Room 29, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Ho-Fung Hung, Johns Hopkins University Presider: Ho-Fung Hung, Johns Hopkins University Amazon: Epitome of 21st century world capitalism? A Global Commodity Chains Approach - David A. Smith, University of California-Irvine; Spencer Louis Potiker, University of California, Irvine; Paul S. Ciccantell, Western Michigan University; Elizabeth Alexis Sowers, CSU Channel Islands Coloniality, Regimes of Disposability and COVID19 on the African Continent - Marilyn Grell-Brisk, University of California, Riverside The Logic of Dispossession: Capitalist Accumulation in Urban Bangladesh - Lipon K Mondal, University of Dhaka The rise of pacific powers in the nineteenth century capitalist world-system and China’s incorporation process - Sung Hee Ru, SUNY-Binghamton Discussant: Ho-Fung Hung, Johns Hopkins University 

4131.  Regular Session. Regular Session on Social Policy: States and Clients VAM, Room 30, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Bruce Western, Columbia University Presider: Brielle Bryan, Rice University Fostering Urban Inclusion through Administrative Justice: When Marginalized Communities seek out the State - Angela S. Garcia, University of Chicago; Marci Ybarra; Yanilda Gonzalez, Harvard Kennedy School The Switchboarding of Subsidized Childcare: Creating Inequality among the Equally Eligible - Jennifer Bouek, University of Delaware Unemployment and political trust across 24 western democracies: Evidence on a welfare state paradox - Carlotta Giustozzi, Goethe University Frankfurt; Markus Gangl, J.W.Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main Resignation without Relief: Self-Negation, Poverty Governance, and Child Protective Services - Gillian Slee, Princeton University; Matthew Desmond, Princeton University 

4132.  Regular Session. Knowledge, Power and Politics in the Global South VAM, Room 31, 11:00am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Julian Go, University of Chicago Presider: Katherine Jensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison Beyond the binary: Accounting for local contingencies in social TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 104 

science research from ‘the global South’ - Patricia Sarah Ward, Max Planck Institute; Muath Abudalu Heroes of the Developing World? Emerging Powers in WTO Agriculture Negotiations and Dispute Settlement - Kristen Hopewell, University of British Columbia “Licenses for Sale”: citizens, brokers, and state corruption in contemporary India - Sneha Annavarapu, University of Chicago Understanding Inequality in Global Knowledge Production: The Mechanisms of Academic Dependency - Caroline M. Schoepf, Hong Kong Baptist University Discussant: Katherine Jensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison 

4170.  Meeting. Family Section Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 11:00-11:30am 4171.  Meeting. Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility Business Meeting VAM, Room 70, 11:00-11:30am 4172.  Meeting. Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 71, 11:00-11:30am Tuesday, 11:30 am 4247.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 1: The Impact of COVID-19 on the Family VAM, Room 46, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Vadricka Etienne, University of Nevada-Reno Table Presider: Vadricka Etienne, University of Nevada-Reno Disenfranchised: Low-Income Mothers and Children, Food Access, and the Covid-19 Pandemic - Sinikka Elliott, University of British Columbia; Sarah Bowen, North Carolina State University; Sierra J Satterfield, North Carolina State University; Ginna Solorzano, North Carolina State University; Annie Hardison-Moody; Latasha Williams Families' Experiences with Incarceration during COVID-19 - Paul Jakhu, RYSE: Supportive Services Korean Mothers’ Career Aspirations in the Context of the COVID-19 Pandemic - Young Eun Nam, Purdue University The Unequal Impact of COVID-19 on Children’s Economic Vulnerability - Jessie Himmelstern, University of Minnesota; Ann Meier, University of Minnesota; Wonjeong Jeong, Cornell University; Anna Maria Bokun, University of Minnesota; Kelly Musick, Cornell University; Rob Warren, University of Minnesota 

4248.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 2: The Impact of COVID-19 on Work-Family Balance VAM, Room 47, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania Competing Demands: Adherence to Ideal Worker Norms among Parents during the Covid-19 Pandemic - Ashley Parry, Boston College The COVID-19 Pandemic and Changes in Housework and Care Time - Margaret Michele Gough Courtney, University of La Verne Work-Family Conflict and Parenting Behaviors: The Role of Gender and Work from Home During COVID-19 - Janine Bernhardt, German Youth Institute; Claudia Recksiedler, German Youth Institute; Anja Linberg, German Youth Institute, Munich, Germany Working from Home, Working for Home: Gender, Class and Household Work in Bangladesh during Covid-19 - Esha Sraboni, Brown University 

4249.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 3: Work-Family Balance and Conflict VAM, Room 48, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Sigrid Willa Luhr, University of Illinois-Chicago Career Breaks, Work Flexibility, and Self-Employment: Household Labor among Married Women in Japan - Makiko Fuwa, Tokyo Metropolitan University Long Work Hours, Couples’ Time Allocation and Family Formation in South Korea - Rachel Ganly Measuring Parental Involvement in Dual-Earner Qatari Families -Noora Ahmed Lari; Noor Al-Emadi, Qatar University Men's Employment Hours During the Transition into Fatherhood, from 1990 to 2019 - Anita Li Working from home, work–family conflict, and the role of gender and gender role attitudes - Deniz Yucel, William Paterson University; Heejung Chung, Kent University, UK 

4250.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 4: Childrearing and Parents' Relations with Young Children VAM, Room 49, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Haoming Song, Brown University Child-Keeping Troubles - Adam Talkington, University of Wisconsin - Madison Parenthood and Partnerships among Young Adults - Tayelor Valerio, United States Census Bureau; Yeris Mayol-Garcia, Penn State University Perceived Cultural Deprivation and Parenting Strategies among College-Educated Rural Professionals - Laura B. Backstrom, Florida Atlantic University “The Kind of Dad I Wanted”: Reflexive and Proactive Black Fatherhood - Chloe Dunston, The Ohio State University "They Don't Know How to Complain": How American Schools Have Forgotten Immigrant Parents - Isabel Frances Levin, University of Massachusetts-Amherst 

4251.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 5: Work-Family Policies and Paid Parental Leave VAM, Room 50, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Jessica Houston Su, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Deciding to Leave: The Role of Gender, Work, and Family in Fathers’ Parental Leave Decisions - Miriam Barcus, University of Wisconsin-Madison Do Work-Family Policies and Globalization of Domestic Work Reduce Inequality? - Eiko Strader, George Washington University South Korean fathers’ transitions back into the labour market after the end of their parental leave - Youngcho Lee, University of Cambridge 

> Session 4132 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 105 4252.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 6: Intergenerational Relationships and Extended Families VAM, Room 51, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania Table Presider: Lei Lei, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Extending Family across Race and Class Lines through Adoption -E. Kay. Trimberger, Sonoma State University Family Monetary Flows, Directionality and Divergences: Comparing First-Gen/Working Class Sociologists to their More Advantaged Peers - Wendi Leigh Johnson, Oakland University Gender Gaps across Welfare Regimes: Sisters and Brothers Caring for Their Aging Parents in Europe - Natalia Sarkisian, Boston College; Naomi Gerstel, University of Massachusetts Growing into Unequal Adulthoods: Daughters’ Responsibilities in Financially Struggling and Stable White Families -Annaliese Grant, University of Wisconsin - Madison On the Fence of a Family: Dynamics of Inter-generational Transfers, Contacts and Support in Step Families - Jingying He, University of Pennsylvania 

4253.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 7: Family Life and Health Outcomes VAM, Room 52, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Vadricka Etienne, University of Nevada-Reno Table Presider: Ashley B Barr, SUNY-Buffalo Adverse Childhood Experience and Children’s Mental Health: Separate versus Cumulative Risk Models and Potential Mediating Mechanisms - Jalal Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Gargya Malla, Department of Epidemiology University of Alabama at Birmingham; Helal Uddin, East West University; Lutfun Nahar Lata, School of Social Science The University of Queensland; D. Leann Long, Biostatistics, School of Public Health University of Alabama at Birmingham; Elizabeth Helene Baker, University of Alabama at Birmingham; April Carson, Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham Racial Discrimination and Health among Two Generations of African American Couples - Ashley B Barr, SUNY-Buffalo Relationship Desire and Life Satisfaction: Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Analyses - Elyakim Kislev, Hebrew University 

4254.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 8: Early Family Formation and Partner Selection VAM, Room 53, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Vadricka Etienne, University of Nevada-Reno Table Presider: Michelle Eilers, The University of Texas at Austin Does Online Dating Challenge Gendered Marital Practices? - Gina Potarca Intergenerational Educational Assortative Mating in Canada: A Study of Individuals Born Between 1970 and 1985 - Siqi Xiao; Alex Chow, Stanford University Molded between Individual-Collective, Tradition-Modernization, and State-Market: Gender, Family, Marriage, and Sexual Values in China - Xiaoling Shu, University of California-Davis Social Network Sites and Ghanaian Marriages: Lessons from the West - Rabiu K. B. Asante, University of Ghana The Traditional Gender Ideology in the Private Sphere: Gender Divide and The Role of Marital Status - Langou Lian, University of California Irvine 

4255.  Family Section Roundtable Session. Table 9: Family and Marriage Inequalities VAM, Room 54, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Vadricka Etienne, University of Nevada-Reno Table Presider: Rhiannon Miller, Johns Hopkins University Masculinity Ideologies, Sensitivity to Masculinity Threat and Fathers’ Involvement in Domestic Work - Shira Offer, Bar-Ilan University; Danny Kaplan, Bar Ilan University Parental Education, Hypogamy, and Household Wealth Accumulation in China - Cheng Cheng, Singapore Management University; Yang Zhou, Central University of Finance and Economics Stalled Revolution or Unwavering Parent-Child Bonds? Parental Role in Marriage Decisions - Shu Hu, Singapore University of Social Sciences; Xiaorong Gu 

4256.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 1. Theories of Inequality and Social Change VAM, Room 55, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Nancy DiTomaso, Rutgers Business School--Newark and New Brunswick The American Dream: Rhetoric of Opportunity and Reality of Exclusion - Joan Maya Mazelis, Rutgers University-Camden The Paradox, Contradictions, Interdependencies, and Stark Realities of Inequality and Freedom - Nancy DiTomaso, Rutgers Business School--Newark and New Brunswick 

4257.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 2. Policy and Practice VAM, Room 56, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Sarah K. Bruch, University of Delaware The Effects of State-Managed Marketplaces on Out-of-Pocket Healthcare Costs: Before and After the Affordable Care Act - Zachary Dillon Kline, University of Connecticut “This Court Ain’t Like Other Courts”: Constrained Judicial Discretion and the Production of Racial Wealth Disparity -Ryan James Parsons, Princeton University 

4258.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 3. Employment VAM, Room 57, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Joseph Raphael Blasi, Rutgers University A Slow Downward Road: Occupational Status Attainment in Mexico’s Development - Harold J. Toro, University of Notre Dame Unions and Racial Inequality In Wage Premiums In The U.S.: A Life Course Approach - Regina S. Baker, University of Pennsylvania; Tom VanHeuvelen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 106 4259.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 4. Inequality and the Pandemic VAM, Room 58, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Daniel J. Schneider, Harvard University “A Done Deal”: Evicted during a Pandemic - Rachael A. Woldoff, West Virginia University; Heather M. Washington, West Virginia University The COVID Connection: Pandemic Anxiety, COVID-19 Comprehension, and Digital Confidence - Laura Robinson, Santa Clara University; Jeremy Markham Schulz, University of California, Berkeley; Oyvind Nicolay Wiborg, University of Oslo; Elisha Johnston, El Camino College The Effect of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Low-Income Tenant Housing Security - Matt Zhongyi Fowle, University of Washington 

4261.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 6. Stratification I VAM, Room 60, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Xi Song, University of Pennsylvania The Effects of Female Education on Child Education: A Prospective Analysis - Michael Grätz, University of Lausanne Wealthy parents, wealthy kids? Exploring transmission mechanisms using housing wealth in the UK - Selcuk Beduk, University of Essex; Susan Harkness, University of Bristol 

4262.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 7. Stratification II VAM, Room 61, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Jennie E. Brand, University of California-Los Angeles Cycles of Poverty and the Timing of Disadvantage - Davis Daumler, University of Michigan Entwined Embedded Events: The Effect of Parental Incarceration Timing on Children's Academic Achievement - Matthew Peter Fox, SUNY Brockport; Ravaris LaDale Moore, Loyola Marymount University From Mobility Effects to Origin-Destination Effects: Methodological Tools and Empirical Evidence in the United States - Lai Wei, Princeton University; Liying Luo, Pennsylvania State University 

4263.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 8. Housing VAM, Room 62, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Brian James McCabe, Georgetown University "Can you keep it down over there?" Noise complaints as neighborhood social control - Jessica Rose Kalbfeld, Public Wise Exploring the Adaptation of Landlord Behavior Toward Low-Income Tenants - Anita Zuberi, Duquesne University Home Security, Privatized Amenities, and the Promotion of Micro-Segregation in Craigslist Rental Advertisements - Mahesh Somashekhar, University of Illinois-Chicago; Chris Hess, Cornell University; Ian Kennedy, University of Washington; Kyle Crowder, University of Washington 

4264.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 9. Education and Stratification VAM, Room 63, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Jessica Halliday Hardie, CUNY-Hunter College Competence Beliefs, Gender, and Educational Disparities - Daniela R. Urbina, Princeton University; Jennifer L. Jennings, Princeton University Horizontal Educational Stratification through a Genetic Lens -Fumiya Uchikoshi, Princeton University; Dalton Conley, Princeton University Sub-baccalaureate Credentials and Economic Inequality in Young Adulthood - Alec Rhodes, The Ohio State University Remedies to Urban Inequality: Causal Effects of Neighborhood Economic Diversity on Academic Achievement - Elena Vesselinov, CUNY-Queens College; Amy Lutz, Syracuse University; Lance Freeman, Columbia University 

4265.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 10. Employment and Discrimination VAM, Room 64, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Kristin Turney, University of California-Irvine Racial Inequality in Employee Selection: The Effect of Employment and Diversity Practices on Selection Decisions - Andrea Wessendorf, University of Cambridge; Lionel Paolella, University of Cambridge Stratifying, Equalizing or Both: The Relationship Between Job Quality Change and Gender Inequality, 1985-2017 - Shauna Dyer, University of Michigan 

4266.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 11. Service Access and Utilization VAM, Room 65, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Scott W. Allard, University of Washington Explaining WIC Nonparticipation among Low-Income Food-Insecure Households - Danielle George, University at Albany, SUNY Getting Out and Giving Back: Navigating Social Service Stigma in Disadvantaged Neighborhoods - Daniel Bolger, Rice University The Geography of Safety Net Access in Low Human Services Provision Counties - Shoshana Shapiro, University of Michigan TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 107 4267.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 12. Poverty and Well-Being VAM, Room 66, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Aaron Olaf Gullickson, University of Oregon Queer Poverty, Discrimination and Law - Rick Braatz, Southern Illinois University - Carbondale Relationship Dissolution, Stability, and Mobility Among the Rural Poor - Ryan James Parsons, Princeton University; Rama Michael Hagos, Princeton University; Lanora Johnson “Probably Had It Coming”: Boundary Work and Making Sense of Police Brutality in the North Country - Michael Branch, Syracuse University 

4268.  Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility. Table 13. The Reproduction of Disadvantage VAM, Room 67, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Peter Scholfield Hepburn, Rutgers University-Newark Table Presider: Megan Lee Comfort, RTI International A Program, Not the Projects: Reentry in the Post-Public Housing era - Gretchen Purser, Syracuse University; Madeleine Hamlin, Syracuse University “Hurry up and wait”: Stigma, Poverty, and Contractual Citizenship - Katherine Louisa Mott, Syracuse University “Maximizing Every Minute” and “Sleep is not a Constant”: How College Students Balance Work and Academics - Katrin Kriz, Emmanuel College; Janese Free, Emmanuel College Property Rights or Human Rights: Content Analysis of Media Depictions of the Unhoused - Lindsay Nettles Loftin, Texas State Universtiy 

4269.  Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology. Contributed Roundtable VAM, Room 68, 11:30am-12:25pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew A. Beveridge, CUNY-Queens College Contributed Roundtable Table Presider: Augusto Diana, DHHS/NIH/National Institute of Nursing Research Black Wall Street Journey: A Multi-Disciplinary Project Bridging Public Art and Sociological Research - Joshua Silver; Kathleen A. Cagney, University of Chicago Interpreting the World While Changing It: Participatory Research, Communities of Inquiry and Practice - Emanuel Guay, Université du Québec à Montréal; Baptiste Godrie Piecemeal Advocacy, Radical Accomplishments: Adding Normatizing to the Advocacy Toolbox - Ezra Joseph Temko, Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville Sociology as a Verb: The Practice of Sociotherapy - Joseph C Kanner, University of Alabama Birmingham 

# Tuesday, 12:45 pm 4302.  Book Forum. The Sociology of W. E. B. Du Bois: Racialized Modernity and the Global Color Line VAM, Room 1, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Michael Rodríguez-Muñiz, Northwestern University Moderator: Adia M. Harvey Wingfield, Washington University-St. Louis Panelists: Waverly Duck, University of Pittsburgh; Isaac Ariail Reed, University of Virginia; Jordanna Chris Matlon, American University Authors: Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University; Karida Brown, University of California-Los Angeles 

4303.  Special Sessions. Environmental and Climate Justice VAM, Room 2, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Monica White, University of Wisconsin-Madison Presider: Monica White, University of Wisconsin-Madison Panelists: Monica White, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Ife Kilimanjaro, USCAN; Kyle Whyte, Michigan State University 

4304.  Special Sessions. Sociologists for Women in Society: 50 Years of Feminist Research, Scholarship, and Activism VAM, Room 3, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Marlese Durr, Wright State University; Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Presider: Marlese Durr, Wright State University The History of SWS and the Establishment of Gender & Society -Christine E. Bose, University at Albany - SUNY Women of Color to SWS: The Challenges of Incorporating Intersectionality - Denise A. Segura, University of California-Santa Barbara Gaining Strength: ASA-SWS Relationship - Marlese Durr, Wright State University The Future of SWS: Gender Non-Binaries, Intersectionality, and Class Consciousness - Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College 

4305.  Presidential Panel. Sociology from the Caribbean and Related Areas VAM, Room 4, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Percy Claude Hintzen, Florida International University Panelists: Paget Henry, Brown University; George K. Danns, University of North Georgia; Rhoda Elizabeth Reddock, The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine Discussant: Percy Claude Hintzen, Florida International University Scholars including CLR James and Frantz Fanon have made important contributions to sociology. However, these contributions are not widely known or integrated into the sociological mainstream. This panel will explore works from these areas and highlight their relevancy for current sociology. 

4306.  Thematic Sessions. DuBoisian Sexualities: On the Politics of Race, Carnality, and Pleasure VAM, Room 5, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Shantel Gabrieal Buggs, Florida State University Presider: Prabhdeep Singh Kehal, Brown University Panelists: Angela Jones, SUNY-Farmingdale; Jason Orne, Drexel University Discussant: Shantel Gabrieal Buggs, Florida State University TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 108 4307.  Thematic Sessions. Reimagining Palestine: Racial Apartheid and Global Oppression in the 21st Century VAM, Room 6, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: David G. Embrick, University of Connecticut; Johnny E. Williams, Trinity College Presider: David G. Embrick, University of Connecticut Panelists: Sophia Azeb, University of Chicago; Rashid Khalidi, Columbia University; Nadia Alahmed, Dickinson College; Mezna Qato, University of Cambridge Discussant: Anaheed Al-Hardan, American University of Beirut 

4308.  Teaching Workshop. Author Meets Teacher Workshop VAM, Room 7, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Gregory Trainor Kordsmeier, Indiana University-Southeast Leader: Hephzibah Virginia Strmic-Pawl, Manhattanville College Co-Leaders: Jonathan M White, Bentley University; Victor M. Rios, University of California-Santa Barbara 

4309.  Policy and Research Workshop. National Science Foundation: Funding Opportunities in the Sociology Program and Beyond VAM, Room 8, 12:45-2:10pm 

Leader: Joseph M. Whitmeyer, National Science Foundation Co-Leader: Melanie M. Hughes, University of Pittsburgh 

4310.  Ideas for Future Research. Productive Methods VAM, Room 9, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Abigail Jorgensen, University of Notre Dame Productive Methods - Abigail Jorgensen, University of Notre Dame 

4311.  Ideas for Future Research. Using Correspondence Audits to Examine Discrimination: Methodological Issues and New Directions VAM, Room 10, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: S. Michael Gaddis, University of California-Los Angeles Using Correspondence Audits to Examine Discrimination: Methodological Issues and New Directions - S. Michael Gaddis, University of California-Los Angeles 

4312.  Family Section. Race, Ethnicity, and Families VAM, Room 11, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Christina Cross, Harvard University Presider: Sadiyah Malcolm, University of Michigan "Can't Just Send Our Children into the World": Black Motherwork around Adolescent's Experiences of Racism - Mia Brantley, University of South Carolina Family Complexity and Teachers’ Perceptions of Parental Supportiveness - Emma Romell, University of Wisconsin-Madison Income Heterogeneity among Black Families: Behavioral Explanations Versus Racialized Space - Deadric T. Williams, University of Tennessee-Knoxville; Regina S. Baker, University of Pennsylvania Shifting Ideological Racial Frames Among Interracially Married Black Women and White Men in the American Midwest -Sidney L Harris (Galan), University of Michigan Social Class or Social Context? Mexican Immigrant Parenting in Under-Resourced Latinx School-Communities - David Enrique Rangel, Brown University; Dylan Letellier, Brown University 

4313.  Meeting. ASA Council Members-at-Large VAM, Room 12, 12:45-2:10pm 4314. Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility. Causes and Consequences of Educational Inequality VAM, Room 13, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Claudia Buchmann, Ohio State University Presider: Deborwah Faulk, University of Richmond Double Jeopardy: Teacher Biases, Racialized Organizations, and the Production of Racial Disparities in School Discipline -Jayanti Johanna Owens, Brown University Higher Education and The Black-White Earnings Gap - Xiang Zhou, Harvard University; Guanghui Pan 'MRS Degrees' for Whom? Racial Disparities in Women's Household Economic Returns to College Quality - Jordan Conwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Natasha Quadlin, University of California-Los Angeles; Jia Wang Higher Education Wage Premium Over Time – The German Case - Jessica Ordemann, DZHW (Higher Education Research); Friedhelm Pfeiffer, ZEW – Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research & University of Mannheim Navigating Opportunity? A Randomized Controlled Trial of Placing College Navigators in Public Housing - Rebecca A Johnson, Dartmouth College; Michael DiDomenico; Rekha Balu; Mary Clair Turner 

4315.  Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology. Sociology in For-Profit Settings VAM, Room 14, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Karen Albright, University of Colorado Presider: Terceira A. Berdahl, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Panelists: Scott C. Whiteford, People Plus; Ray Sin, Deep Labs; Jessica Carbino, Tinder; Lindsay M. Stevens, Princeton University; Scott A. Adams, Northwestern Mutual 

4316.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities. Black Feminist Sociology VAM, Room 15, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Celeste Curington, North Carolina State University Presider: Kayla A. Preito-Hodge, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Black Girl Dreaming: The Affective Lives of Black Girlhood - Kenly Elizabeth Kelly Brown, Washington University-St Louis Hitting the pavement, sweating my curls out, and making my face visible.: Black women's participation in recreational running - Tiffany Gayle Chenault, Salem State University A Black Feminist Sociological Analysis of The Movement for Black Lives - Shaneda L Destine, University of Tennessee-Knoxville Protect and Serve? Police Neglect of Black Women Across Social Class - Shannon Malone Gonzalez, The University of Texas at Austin D-T-D2: Analytical Framework for a Black Feminist Sociology of Land Dispossession - Aurora Vergara-Figueroa, Icesi University Discussant: Aurora Vergara-Figueroa, Icesi University TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 109 4317.  Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work. Broadening the Conversation about Racism in Organizations, Occupations, and Work Section 2 VAM, Room 16, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa; Alexandra Kalev, Tel-Aviv University Presider: Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor "In a White Man’s Place": White Responses to Non-White Occupational Mobility in three US Cities, 1890-1910 - Joseph Oscar Jewell, Texas A&M University-College Station Interrogating Whiteness in Organizational Diversity Initiatives -Melissa Victoria Abad, Stanford University; Ethel L. Mickey, University of Massachusetts Amherst Race-Conscious and Unconscious Holistic Admissions: Racialized Organizations Managing Selective College Access - OiYan Poon, The Spencer Foundation Racialized Definition of Compliance with Organizational Policy: The Case of Community Policing - Jungmyung Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison The Inclusion Tax: The Price of the Ticket in White Spaces -Tsedale Mekete Melaku, CUNY-Graduate Center 

4318.  Section on Sociology of Religion. Religion, Gender, and Sexuality VAM, Room 17, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Courtney Ann Irby, Illinois Wesleyan University; Jonathan Scott Coley, Oklahoma State University Presider: Suzanne Elise Schenewerk, Duke University Bias Without Bigotry: Anti-LGBTQ Discrimination and Religious Accommodations in Mississippi - Pace T Ward, University of Notre Dame; Amy D. McDowell, University of Mississippi Religious Exemption, LGBTQ Rights, and the Social Construction of Harm and Freedom - Emily Kazyak, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Kelsy Burke, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Maia Behrendt, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Lora McGraw, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Debating Sacred Worth? How United Methodist Church Clergy Respond to the Denominational Vote on Homosexuality -Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Claire Chipman Gilliland, University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill Socialization in Religious High Schools and Gender-Role Beliefs and Behaviors in Adulthood - Shanna Corner, Hope College; Julie W. Dallavis, University of Notre Dame Discussant: Golshan Golriz, McGill University 

4319.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology. Comparing Across Cultural and Political Contexts VAM, Room 18, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Xiaohong Xu, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Presider: Xiaohong Xu, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor Economy, Geography, Articulation: Ecosystems of Right-Wing Populism in the Global South - Benjamin Bradlow, Harvard University; Tomas Gold, University of Notre Dame Emergency as an organizational form: colonial bureaucracy, mobility restrictions & citizenship in India & Israel/Palestine - Yael H Berda, Hebrew University of Jerusalem Race in Parentheses - Anna Katharina Skarpelis, Harvard University Theorizing Independence in French and Portuguese India - Kristin Plys, University of Toronto Discussant: Eric W. Schoon, Ohio State University 

4320.  Section on Disability in Society. Disability as an Axis of Inequality in the Wake of COVID-19 VAM, Room 19, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Allison C. Carey, Shippensburg University; Rachel Elizabeth Fish, New York University Presider: Kaitlin Roquel Yeomans, Portland State University Activating Disability Care: The Formation of Collective Disability Care Networks in China’s COVID-19 Outbreak - Shixin Huang, University of Washington COVID-19 among adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities receiving residential support services in New York City - Scott D. Landes, Syracuse University “Just the Right Degree of Disabled”: Documenting Disability Disclosure in the Legal Profession - Fitore Hyseni, Syracuse University COVID-19 and the mental health of Canadians with disabilities and chronic health conditions - David Nicholas Pettinicchio, University of Toronto; Michelle Lee Maroto, University of Alberta; Lei Chai, University of Toronto; Martin Lukk, University of Toronto Discussants: Laura Mauldin, University of Connecticut; ASL Interpreter 

4321.  Section on Peace, War and Social Conflict. The Social and Political Effects of Monuments and Memorials VAM, Room 20, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Ashley Veronica Reichelmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Presider: David Lee Rigby, UNC Chapel Hill ‘Tear Down the Fort’: A Fort National Monument and the Structure of American Racial Ideology - Camille Petersen, Northeastern University The Past in the Present: The Effects of Memorialization on Racial Attitudes Across Time - Ashley Veronica Reichelmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; James E. Hawdon, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; John Ryan, Virginia Tech The Writing is on the Monument: The Case of Kosovo’s NEWBORN Sculpture - Alissa Boguslaw, Coe College War Commemoration and Nationalism in Belgium, 1914-1945: The Role of Military Networks - Laura Acosta, Northwestern University; Robert Braun, University of California-Berkeley 

4322.  Section on Rationality and Society. Computational Approaches to Rational Choice VAM, Room 21, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Emily Anne Erikson, Yale University Presider: Emily Anne Erikson, Yale University Fair Diffusion on Networks - Jeffrey Kennedy Sachs, Yale University Seeing is Believing: Gender Stereotypes are Stronger in Images than in Text - Douglas Richard Guilbeault, University of California-Berkeley; Solene Delecourt, University of California, Berkeley "To rest on your laurels'': Status dynamics and cooperation in a large online community - Mario D. Molina, New York University Abu Dhabi What Kind of Work is Prestigious? The Embodiment of Occupational Status - Dustin S. Stoltz, Lehigh University TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 110 4323.  Section on Sociology of Sexualities. Pandemics and Sexualities VAM, Room 22, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Rick Braatz, Southern Illinois University -Carbondale Presider: Rick Braatz, Southern Illinois University - Carbondale Hooking Up in the Time of COVID-19: Symbolic Safety in College Students’ Sexual Decision-Making - Lara Janson, University of Chicago Identifying Risky Partners: Queer Sex in a Pandemic - Harry Barbee, Vanderbilt University; Tara A. McKay, Vanderbilt University; Laura M. Carpenter, Vanderbilt University Let's Spend the Night Together: A Challenge for Medically Optimal Coronavirus Social Distancing Policies - M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada; Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey; Sarah Kelley, Child Trends Playing the odds: Navigating risks associated with sexual behavior in the COVID-19 era - Amy Braksmajer, SUNY-Geneseo; Robert Cserni, State University of New York at Stony Brook The Grip of Pandemic Mono-normativity: Concealment in the Time of COVID-19 - Barbara Rothmüller, Sigmund Freud University 

4324.  Regular Session. School Segregation and Spatial Inequalities VAM, Room 23, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Gilda Laura Ochoa, Pomona College Presider: Dennis J. Condron, Oakland University 21st Century Segregation: Patterns between and within schools in a large urban school district - Vansa Shewakramani Hanson, Texas A&M University; Mary Elizabeth Campbell, Texas A&M University-College Station; Pat Rubio Goldsmith, Texas A&M University; Brendan Bartanen, Texas A&M University Choosing Routines, Choosing Schools? Activity Spaces and School Sorting Under Open Enrollment - Tyler McDaniel Choosing Schools as Expanding Local Citizenship (or Not) -Fangsheng Zhu, Harvard University Racialized Closures and the Shuttering of Black Schools: Evidence from National Data - Danielle Greene, Stanford University; Francis Pearman, Stanford University From the Margins to the Center: The History & Landscape of NYC Integration Activists 2012–2020 - Mira Catherine Debs, Yale University; Elise Castillo, Trinity College; Molly Vollman Makris, City University of New York-Guttman Community College Discussant: Dennis J. Condron, Oakland University 

4325.  Regular Session. Mental Health VAM, Room 24, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Ning Hsieh, Michigan State University Presider: Ning Hsieh, Michigan State University How Cultural Capital Shapes Mental Health Disparities on College Campuses - Katie R. Billings, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; Kathryne M. Young, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Momentary loneliness among older adults: Contextual differences and their moderation by gender and race/ethnicity - Ellen (Nell) Compernolle, NORC at the University of Chicago; Laura Finch, NORC at the University of Chicago; Louise Hawkley, NORC at the University of Chicago; Kathleen A. Cagney, University of Chicago Gendered Exposure, Gendered Response—Exposure to Wartime Stressors and PTSD in Older Vietnamese War Survivors -Yvette Young, University of Utah; Miles Owen Kovnick; Nhung Tran; Kim M. Korinek, University of Utah Discussant: Sirry Alang, Lehigh University 

4326.  Regular Session. Population Processes VAM, Room 25, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Diane Coffey, University of Texas-Austin Presider: Kimberly McErlean, University of Texas Austin Are Recent Cohorts Getting Worse? - Hui Zheng, The Ohio State University; Paola Echave, Ohio State University Race, Flourishing, and Mortality in the United States, 1995–2016 - Patricia Louie, University of Washington; Laura Upenieks, Baylor University Scars from a Previous Epidemic: Social Proximity to Zika and Fertility Intentions During the Covid-19 Pandemic - Leticia Marteleto, University of Texas-Austin; Molly Dondero, American University; Andrew Koepp, University of Texas at Austin The Effect of Immigration Policies and Enforcement on Healthcare Access among Immigrant Agricultural Workers, 1989-2018 -Rebecca Anna Schut, University of Pennsylvania; Courtney E. Boen, University of Pennsylvania Discussant: Federica Querin, European University Institute 

4327.  Regular Session. Reproductive Governance VAM, Room 26, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Rene Almeling, Yale University Presider: Rene Almeling, Yale University Unequal ‘Operations’: Female Sterilization and Social Disadvantage in India - Kanika Sharma, Emory University In women’s hands”: Misoprostol and the politics of reproduction in Francophone Africa - Siri Suh, Brandeis University Free, But at What Cost? How Crisis Pregnancy Centers Provide Services - Alexandra Kissling, University of Maryland-College Park; Priya Gursahaney, University of Cincinnati; Alison Norris, Ohio State University; Danielle Bessett, University of Cincinnati; Maria Gallo, Ohio State University Sustainable Advocacy: Comparing the Campaigns for Long-Acting Reversible Contraception in Texas and California - Anna Chatillon, University of California, Santa Barbara Teaching Our Teachers: Sexual Education and Sexual Citizenship in Three States - Abigail Newell, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 

4328.  Regular Session. Sociological Theory 2 VAM, Room 27, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Claire Laurier Decoteau, University of Illinois-Chicago Presider: Mathieu H. Desan, University of Colorado-Boulder An Integrated of Ideology - Huseyin Rasit, Ritsumeikan University Bourdieu in China: Language and Symbolic Power Beyond Western Models - Jeffrey Weng, Stanford University Not Taking Schutz for Granted: Transcendence, Symbols, and Socio-Cultural Analysis in Social Phenomenology - Besnik Pula, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Revisiting the Pragmatist Foundations for Theorizing Action and Personal Cultural Change - Bridget J. Ritz, University of Notre Dame Discussant: Mathieu H. Desan, University of Colorado-Boulder TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 111 4329.  Regular Session. Transnational Processes VAM, Room 28, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer L. Bair, University of Virginia Presider: Jennifer L. Bair, University of Virginia A Triangle: From Local to Global to National in the Onset of the Arab Spring - Mounira Maya Charrad, University of Texas, Austin Institutionalization through Contestation: Transnational Circulation of “Transgender” - Tara Marie Gonsalves, University of California, Berkeley Mapping the Middle: Evaluating How World Culture Shapes LGBT Issues in Domestic Media Coverage - Kristopher Velasco, University of Texas-Austin The Sending State and Co-Enforcement: The Mexican Consulate’s Role in Brokering Immigrant Worker Claimsmaking -Shannon Marie Gleeson, Cornell University, ILR School; Xochitl Bada, University of Illinois at Chicago Discussant: Gowri Vijayakumar, Brandeis University 

4330.  Regular Session. Voting and Electoral Processes VAM, Room 29, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Kyle Dodson, University of California-Merced Presider: Kyle Dodson, University of California-Merced Black Lives Matter Protests and Voter Turnout - Cameron G Kimble, Brennan Center for Justice; Kevin T Morris, Brennan Center for Justice; Kasey Zapatka, CUNY-The Graduate Center; Leanne Fan Did Anti-Trump Protests Create a Blue Wave? - Kenneth (Andy) Andrews, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Neal Caren, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Micah Nelson, University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill Does Public Financing Increase Voter Participation in Municipal Elections? - Brian James McCabe, Georgetown University; Jen Heerwig, Stony Brook University How Does the American State Recognize Movements? Social Movement Organizations Before Congressional Hearings, 1900-2000 - Thomas V. Maher, Clemson University; Charles F. Seguin, Pennsylvania State University; Yongjun Zhang, Stony Brook University Racialized Automobility as a Barrier to Voting in the US South - Stephanie A. Bohon, University of Tennessee-Knoxville; Abigail Tobias-Lauerman, University of Tennessee 

4331.  Regular Session. Sociology of Sport VAM, Room 30, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Gretchen Peterson, University of Memphis Presider: Gretchen Peterson, University of Memphis School segregation and winning at sports: Implications for theories of cultural capital and resistance - Pat Rubio Goldsmith, Texas A&M University; Richard D Abel, Texas A&M University Moneyball: A Preliminary Analysis of Capital & Culture in Changing Demographics of NCAA Division I Basketball -Jasmine Monique Sanders, University of California, Berkeley More talent, more leeway: Do violence against women arrests really hurt NFL player careers? - Daniel Sailofsky, McGill University Fox News' Slander of Colin Kaepernick: White Paternalism, Hegemonic Masculinity, and Maintenance of White American Masculinity - Katelyn E Foltz, University of Maryland - College Park Beating the Buzzer: The Construction of Aging Hockey Masculinity - Kristi A. Allain, St. Thomas University 

4332.  Regional Spotlight Session. Resilience During Multiple Epidemics: Centering Black Women and Girls’ Experiences and Responses to Covid-19, Gun Violence, and Police Violence in Chicago VAM, Room 31, 12:45-2:10pm 

Session Organizers: Ruby Mendenhall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Andrew V. Papachristos, Northwestern University Presider: Tennille Nicole Allen, Lewis University Panelists: Ruby Mendenhall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Geraldine Williams; Bertha Purnell; Madison Stroter, Girls Like Me Project; La'Keisha Gray-Sewell, Girls Like Me Project Discussant: Tennille Nicole Allen, Lewis University 

4368.  Meeting. Section on Drugs and Society Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 12:45-1:15pm 4369.  Meeting. Section on Environmental Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 12:45-1:15pm Tuesday, 1:15 pm 4447.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 1. Agriculture and the Environment VAM, Room 46, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Rachel G. McKane, Vanderbilt University Agricultural Production and Latin America's Neoliberal Treadmill: A Time Series Panel Regression Study - Andrew Robert Smolski, North Carolina State University; Timothy Clark, North Carolina State Do farmers know better? Co-production, sustainability, and innovation in the hop-breeding value chain - Matt Comi, University of Kansas Modernization, Metabolic Rift, and the Human-Animal Relationship: Results from a Three State Survey of Dairy Farmers - Michael D Briscoe, Utah State University 

4448.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 2. Agriculture in Society VAM, Room 47, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Carrie Seay-Fleming, University of Colorado Agritourism, sustainability, and cultural landscapes: The Prosecco Route in Italy - Marta Soligo, University of Nevada, Las Vegas Evolving Landscapes of Agriculture in Cuba: One Narrative in Cuba’s Environmental History - Emily M Landry, University of Tennessee-Knoxville; Christina A. Ergas, University of Tennessee-Knoxville Urban agriculture as a social movement: A spatial analysis of agriculture in Ohio neighborhoods - Kelsey Ryan-Simkins, Ohio State University 

4449. Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 3. Environmental Attitudes & Values VAM, Room 48, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Taylor Renee Heath, University of Pennsylvania Class Distinction, Income Inequality, & Environmentalism: TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 112 

A Cross-National Study of Willingness-to-Pay for Environmental Goods & Policies - Anthony Roberts, Colorado State University; Severin Mangold, Colorado State University Cross-National Environmental Influences on Life Satisfaction -Mark Suchyta, Michigan State University Inheriting a Climate Crisis: The Effect of Race and Family Structure on Support for Environmental Spending - Carrie McLachlin Leslie, University of Oklahoma; Cyrus J. Schleifer, University of Oklahoma The Effects of Direct Personal Impact on Climate Change Attitudes after Hurricane Harvey - Samantha Love, University of Pennsylvania 

4450. Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 4. Climate Change Mitigation & Adaptation VAM, Room 49, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Amber Michelle Blazek, Texas A&M University Weighing the Risks of Climate Adaptation: Selective Breeding and the Push to Save Pacific Salmon - Valerie Berseth, University of British Columbia How does the structure of global economy and trade affect nations’ responsibility for climate change mitigation? -Xiaorui Huang, Boston College Limitations to Adaptation: The Socio-Cultural Value of Nature in Vunisavisavi, Fiji - Amanda Rae Bertana, Southern Connecticut State University; Andreas Kopf, University of the South Pacific Everyday Adaptation: Theorizing Climate Change "Adaptation" in Daily Life - Brianna Castro, Harvard University; Raka Sen, University of Pennsylvania 

4451. Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 5. Climate Disparities VAM, Room 50, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Nadia Smiecinska, UC Davis Inequalities in Climate Change-Attributable Flooding during Hurricane Harvey in Harris County, Texas - Kevin T Smiley, Louisiana State University; Michael Wehner, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; Ilan Noy, Victoria University of Wellington; Dave Frame, Victoria University of Wellington Lessons from the Pandemic: Climate Change and COVID-19 -David Heath Cooper, University of Kansas; Joane Nagel, University of Kansas Neighborhood heat disparities in the Northeast United States -Roger Andrew Renteria, University of Utah; Sara Elizabeth Grineski, University of Utah; Timothy William Collins, University of Utah; Shaylynn Trego, University of Utah; Aaron B Flores, University of Utah Painting the “Bigger Picture”: Explaining Injustices of Louisiana’s Response to Climate Crisis and Coastal Land Loss - Simone Domingue, University of Colorado Boulder 

4452.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 6. Culture & Social Capital VAM, Room 51, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Kayleigh Ward, Michigan State University From cultural tastes to ecological action: Examining the relationship between cultural engagement and pro-environmental behavior - Robbe Geerts; Frederic Vandermoere, University of Antwerp; Stijn Oosterlynck The consolidation and diffusion of social capital in rural post-disaster Japan - Kayleigh Ward, Michigan State University Under Pressure: Social Capital and Trust in Government After Natural Disasters - Anthony Alex Priest, Rice University What is an Environmental Practice? - Allison Ford, Sonoma State University 

4453. Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 7. Environmental Hazards and Disasters VAM, Room 52, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Jocelyn West, University of Colorado Boulder A Rapidly Changing Ecology of Aid: Help-Seeking and Stigma in the Aftermath of Disaster - Anna Catherine Rhodes, Rice University; Max Besbris, University of Wisconsin-Madison Eventful Sociology and Environmental Catastrophes in the Global South - Nikhil Deb, Murray State University Flood Risk Perception and Responses among Urban Residents in the Northeastern United States - John Aloysius Zinda, Cornell University; Lindy Williams, Cornell University; David Kay; Sarah Alexander 

4454. Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 8. Energy & the Environment VAM, Room 53, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Amanda Sie, Rutgers University Community Attitudes and Complicating the Acceptance of Environmental Hazards in Southern West Virginia - Pierce Greenberg, Creighton University Socioenvironmental Priorities in Energy Host Communities - Emily Grubert, Georgia Institute of Technology “What Clean Air?”: Frame Contests in Ohio’s Energy Policy Debates - Anya Mikael Galli Robertson, University of Dayton Which Energy Future? Unionized U.S. Energy Workers Speak -Diane M. Sicotte, Drexel University; Kelly A. Joyce, Drexel University; Arielle Hesse, Drexel University The Impact of Energy Burdens on Self-Rated Health: A Panel Analysis (1999-2017) - Anna C. McCreery, Elevate Energy; Jeremiah Bohr, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh 

4455. Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 9. Environmental Governance VAM, Room 54, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Marilyn Grell-Brisk, University of California, Riverside A Network Approach to International Environmental Agreements - Selena Margarita Livas, University of California, Irvine Consensus vs. Majority Rule and the Production or De-Escalation of Polarization - Jill Richardson, University of Wisconsin-Madison Narratives of Environmentalism in National Laws - Jamie M Sommer, University of South Florida; Andrew Hargrove, Stony Brook University (SUNY); Alphonse Opoku; Shumaila Fatima; Nidhi Bangalore, University of South Florida; Farah Hennawi, University of South Florida; Sneha Saravanan, University of South Florida; Caroline Nabbie, University of 

> Session 4449 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 113 

South Florida; Andreas Duit, Stockholm University Networks of Negotiation for International Climate Change Cooperation - Zack W. Almquist, University of Washington; Benjamin E. Bagozzi, University of Delaware When France was not French: a neoliberal carbon tax? - Daniel Driscoll, University of California, San Diego 

4456.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 10. Environmental Health VAM, Room 55, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Maria Isabel Espinoza, Rutgers University Disproportionality in the Production of Pollution: Industry drivers of inequality in toxic releases in manufacturing - Simone Pulver, University of California, Santa Barbara; Mary B. Collins, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry; Ben Manski, George Mason University PFAS in drinking water: Evidence from New Jersey Demonstrates Failures of Federal Regulation - Rosie Mueller, Whitman College; Alissa Cordner, Whitman College; Derrick Salvatore, Northeastern University; Jamie Zwaschka, Whitman College; Phil Brown, Northeastern University Public versus private sector growth impacts on air pollution abatement - Benjamin Leffel, University of California-Merced The big plunge: how environmental policy lifts school attendance for the poor - Risto Conte Keivabu; Tobias Rüttenauer, University of Oxford 

4457.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 11. Environmental Justice I VAM, Room 56, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Roberto Rivera, University of California Riverside Borders and Environmental Injustice on the Akwesasne Mohawk Reservation - Macalah Pcolar Food and Environmental Injustice as Racial Injustice: Police Violence in a Spatial and Ecological Context - Stephen J. Scanlan, Ohio University Prospects for Climate Justice: Lessons from California - Andrew Boardman Jaeger, University of California-Berkeley State Violence, Black Lives, and Environmental Justice - Brigid Mark; Liam Downey, University of Colorado-Boulder 

4458.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 12. Environmental Justice II VAM, Room 57, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Shiv Issar, UW-Milwaukee Birdwatchers on the brownfields: The environmental justice of park development on active sacrifice zones. - Amanda McMillan Lequieu, Drexel University Environmental Justice Implications of a Non-Governmental Network of Air Quality Monitoring Sensors in Los Angeles County - Casey Jo Mullen, University of Utah; Sara Elizabeth Grineski, University of Utah; Timothy William Collins, University of Utah; Aaron B Flores, University of Utah Social equity in shore-based fisheries: identifying and understanding barriers to access - Kelsi Lynn Furman; Luiz Barbieri; Sharon L. Harlan, Northeastern University; Steven Scyphers, Northeastern University Water for Whom? Desalination, Financialization, and the Cooptation of the Environmental Justice Frame - Brian Francis O'Neill, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

4459.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 13. Environmental Theory VAM, Room 58, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Timothy Clark, North Carolina State Capitalism and Sustainability: An Exploratory Content Analysis of Frameworks in Environmental Political Economy - Timothy Clark, North Carolina State; Andrew Robert Smolski, North Carolina State University Sub-disciplining Science in Sociology: Bridges and Barriers Between STS and Environmental Sociology - Jordan Fox Besek, SUNY-Buffalo; Apollonya Maria Porcelli, College of the Holy Cross Transformative Just Transition Policy: When Emancipatory Embeddedness Meets Strategic Power - David M. Ciplet, University of Colorado Boulder Whiteness as Property, Corporate as White: Critical Race Theory and Environmental Sociology - Lauren Richter, Rhode Island School of Design 

4460.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 14. Gender, Culture and Embodiment VAM, Room 59, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Peter Ore, University of Arizona Gender and Sustainability in Ecological Intentional Communities: Fighting Climate Change with Feminist Real Utopias -Monica Bhatia Heutagogical Learning Through Embodiment: Environmental Sociology Classes as Thresholds for Social and Personal Transformation. - Cara Cancelmo; Phoebe Christina Godfrey, University of Connecticut Living in Crisis: Race, Culture, and Activism After Disasters in Japan - Vivian Shaw, Harvard University Occupations in Denial: Exploring oil worker masculine identities as a source of resistance to energy transition - Angeline Letourneau, University of Alberta; Debra J. Davidson, University of Alberta; Carrie Karsgaard 

4461.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 15. Public Opinion and the Environment VAM, Room 60, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Frederic Traylor Influence of Attitude toward Trump on Public Perception of Climate Change - Feng Hao, University of South Florida Public Opinion and the Politics of Environmental Inequality: The Problem of Color-Blind Environmental Racism - Dylan Bugden, Washington State University Testing the Relationship Between Political Threat and Environmental Opinion - Azdren Coma, Washington State University; Erik W. Johnson, Washington State University; Philip Schwadel, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Views on Three Environmental Issues and COVID-19 in Utah: Political Polarization and Hope for Social Change - Jennifer E. Givens, Utah State University 

> Session 4455 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 114 4462.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 16. Social Movements and Activism VAM, Room 61, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Robert Duffy, Rutgers University “Beyond Mainstream Green”: Building and Maintaining a Broad Coalition to Support Climate Equity in Oregon - Janet A. Lorenzen, Willamette University Creating a Dataset for Facebook Posts: A Methodology of Collecting Facebook Data for Qualitative Analysis - Kyle Breen, Louisiana State University; Jackson Pierce, Texas A&M University; Michelle Annette Meyer, Texas A&M University-College Station; J. Carlee Purdum, Texas A&M University; Stuart Nolan, Stephenson Disaster Management Institute, Louisiana State University; Brant Mitchell, Stephenson Disaster Management Institute, Louisiana State University; Abigail Bowers, Louisiana State University; Arthur Chambers, Texas A&M University; Romel Fernandez, Texas A&M University; Nathan Young, Texas A&M University Organizing for Environmental Justice During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Tactical Innovations and Southern Mexico’s Digital Divide - Alessandro Morosin, Depauw University Participatory Justice in Hydropower: A study of the Brazilian Amazon - Adam Mayer 

4463.  Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables. Table 17. Youth and the Environment VAM, Room 62, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Table Presider: Tyler J. Bateman A bird’s nest fungus becomes exciting: The dialectic of knowledge and emotion in ecological habitus - Tyler J. Bateman Is it only a (green) job? Exploring the impacts of conservation fieldwork on young adults - Ethan D. Schoolman, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Navigating the Culture of Denial: Youth Climate Activists, Public Spirited Political Conversations, and Emotion Management - Ann Gavin Ward, Brandeis 

4464.  Section on Drugs and Society Roundtables. Table 1: Substance Use, Stigma and Anomie VAM, Room 63, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Alice Cepeda, University of Southern California Table Presider: Ryan J Kaufman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln “But the cool kids AREN’T doing it!”: Peer Approval and Adolescent Substance Use - Sampson Lee Blair, University at Buffalo; Patricia Neff Claster, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania Morality Work as Stigma Resistance for White Individuals in Recovery from Opiate Addiction - Leslie Wood, Kent State University Trends in AIAN and White/Hispanic Substance-Induced Deaths in Two Southwestern States of the U.S. - Baksun Sung, Utah State University Between Self and Other: Anomie in Beat Literature and Lifestyle -Erik Gustafson, North Dakota State University 

4465.  Section on Drugs and Society Roundtables. Table 2: Drug Use and Policy VAM, Room 64, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Alice Cepeda, University of Southern California Table Presider: Suzan Walters, New York University Building on Policy Opportunity: The Adoption of Recreational Marijuana Legalization in the United States, 2012–2016 -Burrel James Vann, San Diego State University Surveillance, Social Control, and Managing Semi-Legality in U.S. Commercial Cannabis - Alexander Kinney Gender, tobacco control policies, and recalcitrant smoking among older adults in 20 European countries - Manjing Gao, University of California, Riverside; Chioun Lee, University of California-Riverside; Soojin Park, University of California, Riverside Is Policy in the Mind of the Beholder? True and False Awareness of Alcohol Policy - Mark Wolfson, University of California-Riverside; Samane Zare, University of California, Riverside 

4466.  Section on Drugs and Society Roundtables. Table 3: Drug Use and Context VAM, Room 65, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Alice Cepeda, University of Southern California Table Presider: Jeffrey A. Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Neighborhoods and Health: Assessing “Neighborhood Effects” on Accidental Drug Deaths - Christopher Contreras, University of California-Irvine Place Effects on Health: Heroin Use in Backcountry California -David Showalter, University of California, Berkeley Smartphone-based Ecological Momentary Assessment Data Collection: Reflections from People Who Use Drugs - Kelly Lorraine Markowski, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Jeffrey A. Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Gertrude Robin Gauthier, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Sela Harcey, University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

4467.  Section on Drugs and Society Roundtables. Table 4: Impact of Opioid Use VAM, Room 66, 1:15-2:10pm 

Session Organizer: Alice Cepeda, University of Southern California Table Presider: David Frank, New York University Bridging Institutional Logics: Implementing Naloxone Distribution for People Exiting Jail in Three California Counties -David Showalter, University of California, Berkeley; Lynn D. Wenger, RTI International; Barrot H. Lambdin, RTI International; Eliza Wheeler, Homeless Youth Alliance; Ingrid Binswanger, Kaiser Permanente Colorado, Institute for Health Research; Alex H. Kral, RTI International Perceptions & Attitudes of Problem-Solving Court Coordinators on Medications for Opioid Use Disorders - Lindsay Renee Smith, George Mason University; Fanni Farago, George Mason University Racism and Prohibition: The Triple-Knot of Overdose, Incarceration and Precarious Human Rights - Emily B. Campbell, College of the Holy Cross Feigning Symptoms to Obtain Prescription Drugs. A Vignette-Based Study on Its Conditions - Floris van Veen, Erfurt University; Sebastian Sattler, University of Cologne; Guido Franz Mehlkop, University of Erfurt; Fabian Hasselhorn, Institute of Sociology and Social Psychology, University of Cologne, Germany TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 115 Tuesday, 2:30 pm 4501.  Professional Development Workshop. ASA Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant (ASA DDRIG) Proposal Preparation Workshop VAM, Room 0, 2:30-3:55pm 

Leader: Carolyn Vasques Scalera, ASA Co-Leaders: Erynn Masi de Casanova, American Sociological Association; Melissa Villarreal, University of Colorado, Boulder; Lori Peek, University of Colorado, Boulder; Davon Norris, The Ohio State University; Rachel E. Dwyer, The Ohio State University 

4502.  Book Forum. Thick and Other Essays VAM, Room 1, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Joyce M. Bell, University of Chicago Moderator: Joyce M. Bell, University of Chicago Panelists: Brittany Cooper, Rutgers University; Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago; Dorothy E. Roberts, University of Pennsylvania Author: Tressie Cottom, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 

4503.  Thematic Sessions. The Global Rise of the Far Right, Nationalism, and Authoritarianism VAM, Room 2, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Marco Z. Garrido, University of Chicago Presider: Mabel Berezin, Cornell University Panelists: Kathleen Blee, University of Pittsburgh; Thomas Blom Hansen, Stanford University; Elizabeth McKenna, Johns Hopkins University; Marco Z. Garrido, University of Chicago 

4504.  Special Sessions. The Limits and Promise of Trans Politics VAM, Room 3, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Travers, Simon Fraser University; Mignon R. Moore, Barnard College Presider: Travers, Simon Fraser University Panelists: Travers, Simon Fraser University; Danya Lagos, University of California-Berkeley; Imara Jones, TransLash Media; Joss Taylor Greene, Columbia University; Tanya Saunders, University of Florida Center for Latin American Studies 

4505.  Presidential Panel. The Future of Du Boisian Sociology VAM, Room 4, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University Presider: Michael Schwartz, Stony Brook University Panelists: Karida Brown, University of California-Los Angeles; Saida Grundy, Boston University; Victoria Reyes, University of California-Riverside; Melissa F. Weiner, College of the Holy Cross Discussant: Michael Schwartz, Stony Brook University Over the last decade, sociology has witnessed the rise of Du Boisian sociology. This sociology draws on the large body of scholarship developed by W. E. B. Du Bois and his colleagues. This sociological tradition addresses race and modernity in novel ways that have not been absorbed into mainstream sociology. This erasure is slowly being corrected. Yet, it is unclear what the future of Du Boisian scholarship is likely to be. This panel will discuss what Du Boisian scholarship has already accomplished and what it is capable of accomplishing in sociology and the social sciences in the future. 

4506.  Thematic Sessions. Du Bois and the Intellectual Tradition of the Atlanta Sociological Laboratory VAM, Room 5, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Earl Wright, Rhodes College Presider: Marcus Brooks, University of Cincinnati Panelists: Earl Wright, Rhodes College; Kalasia S. Ojeh, University of Louisville; Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University; Marcus Anthony Hunter, University of California-Los Angeles Discussant: Nicole J. Lucas, Fayetteville State University 

4507.  Thematic Sessions. Social Movements and Liberation: Mobilizing Toward and Against Emancipatory Knowledge VAM, Room 6, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Hajar Yazdiha, University of Southern California Presider: Hajar Yazdiha, University of Southern California Panelists: Tianna S. Paschel, University of California-Berkeley; Veronica Terriquez, University of California, Los Angeles; Zakiya T. Luna, University of California-Santa Barbara; Dina G. Okamoto, Indiana University-Bloomington 

4508.  Thematic Sessions. The Double System of Justice: Prisons, Punishment, and “Racial Sorting” in America VAM, Room 7, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Reuben Miller, University of Chicago Presider: Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve, Brown University Panelists: Brittany Friedman, University of Southern California; Reuben Miller, University of Chicago; Michael Lawrence Walker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Patrick Lopez-Aguado, Santa Clara University 

4509.  Teaching Workshop. Uncovering University Debt: Teaching Activist Research VAM, Room 8, 2:30-3:55pm 

Leader: Sofya Aptekar, CUNY - School of Labor and Urban Studies Co-Leaders: Eleni Schirmer, University of Wisconsin Madison; Louise Seamster, University of Iowa 

4511.  Ideas for Future Research. Young and Faithful: Identity, Religion and Sex VAM, Room 10, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Ashley French, Graduate Center- CUNY Young and Faithful: Identity, Religion and Sex - Ashley French, Graduate Center- CUNY 

4512.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender. The State and Politics of Gender VAM, Room 11, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Carlson, University of Arizona Presider: Jennifer Carlson, University of Arizona Panelists: Brandon Andrew Robinson, University of California-Riverside; Nazanin Shahrokni, London School of Economics; Emine Fidan Elcioglu, University of Toronto 

4513.  Family Section. Families and COVID-19 VAM, Room 12, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Margaret Michele Gough Courtney, University of La Verne; Richard J. Petts, Ball State University Presider: Richard J. Petts, Ball State University Gendered Consequences of a Weak Care Infrastructure: School Reopening Plans and Parents’ Employment During the Pandemic - Caitlyn Collins, Washington University-St. Louis; Leah Ruppanner, University of Melbourne; Liana Christin Landivar, US Department of Labor; William Joslyn Scarborough, University of North Texas TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 116 

Gendering the Pandemic: Women’s and Men’s Time Use during COVID-19 - Liana C. Sayer, University of Maryland-College Park; Xu Yan, University of Maryland; Long Doan, University of Maryland-College Park; Robert Gordon Rinderknecht, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research Marital Status, Gender, and Health during the COVID-19 Pandemic in the US - Mieke Beth Thomeer, University of Alabama-Birmingham Mechanisms of gender gaps in paid work during the COVID-19 Pandemic - Yasmin Mertehikian, University of Pennsylvania; Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania “Sometimes It’s Okay to Be Bored” Social Class in Mothers' Oversight of Children’s Time During COVID-19 - Mahala Dyer Stewart, Hamilton College; Hope Medina; Jahmali Matthews Discussant: Daniel L. Carlson, University of Utah 

4514.  Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility. Economic Inequality VAM, Room 13, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Tom VanHeuvelen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Presider: Tom VanHeuvelen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Organizational Social Capital and Inequality - Nathan Wilmers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Di Tong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Victoria Zhang, MIT Sloan Hidden in Plain Sight: Public Employment and Social Welfare across the Federal System - Gregory Hooks, McMaster University; Linda Lobao, Ohio State University; Victor Iturra, Universidad Catolica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile; Mark Partridge, Ohio State University Do Federal Place-Based Policies Improve Economic Opportunity in Rural Communities? - Emily Parker, Cornell University; Laura M. Tach, Cornell University Why did Global Inequality Fall in the 2000s? - Roshan Kumar Pandian, Grinnell College 

4515.  Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology. Sharing and Visualizing Sociological Results VAM, Room 14, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew A. Beveridge, CUNY-Queens College Presider: Caren Arbeit, RTI International Did Over-the-Counter Availability of Emergency Contraception Differentially Impact Birth Rates Across Age and Racial/ Ethnic Groups? - Chloe E. Bird, RAND; Srikanth Kadiyala, UCLA; Preethi Rao, RAND Corporation; Brian Vegetabile, RAND Corporation; Rose Kerber, RAND Corporation Migration and Well-being: Visualizing Migrants' Health Processes and Psycho-sociocultural Coping Mechanisms - Roberta Villalon, St. John's University; Abraham G. Salazar "Our Philadelphia": Youth Participatory Filmmaking about Grief and the Aftermath of Gun Violence - Nora Gross, Boston College Visualizing State-Level Covid-19 Mortality Data in Fiber Art Form -Laura M. Carpenter, Vanderbilt University 

4516.  Section on Environmental Sociology. Environmental Justice: Critical and Multi-Scalar Perspectives VAM, Room 15, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Presider: Lacee Anne Satcher, Vanderbilt University Effects of State Disinvestment in Environmental Protections: How Michigan’s Extreme Austerity Caused the Flint Water Crisis - Katrinell Davis, Florida State University A Contextual Framework for How Power Shapes Environmental Injustice Across Space, Time, Culture & Scale - Stacia S Ryder, University of Exeter Caring about water: Social reproduction amidst environmental insecurity - Kate Cairns, Rutgers University-Camden Enclosing the Reproductive Commons: Gender and Class Resistance to Community Erasure in Rural Idaho - Leontina M. Hormel, University of Idaho; Denessy Rodriguez, University of Idaho The Soils of Black Folk: The Environmental Theories of W.E.B Du Bois - Ankit Bhardwaj, New York University 

4517.  Section on Drugs and Society. Section on Drugs and Society: Inequality and Substance Use VAM, Room 16, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Alice Cepeda, University of Southern California Presider: Jason A. Ford, University of Central Florida “But I don’t go wild”: Opting out of a collective identity of dysfunctional drug-use and spending - Allison Laing, UBC “Fake” Disabilities and Drug Money: Disability Assistance and Un-deservingness in the Opioid Era - Kristina Paige Brant, Harvard University Motivators and Barriers to Mothers Seeking Opioid Treatment - A Suburban Perspective - Aukje Lamonica, Southern Connecticut State University; Miriam W. Boeri, Bentley University; Jeffrey Turner, Southern Connecticut State University Racial-ethnic disparities in sources of substance abuse treatment, their socioeconomic correlates and clinical features -Matthew E. Archibald, College of Mount Saint Vincent Opioid Addiction, Public Stigma, and its Association with Race, Social Class, and Political Orientation - James Michael Ragsdale, University of Nevada, Reno; Marta Elliott, University of Nevada-Reno 

4518.  Section on Sociology of Religion. Sociology of Religion OPEN (preference for papers on the cross-national or international dynamics) VAM, Room 17, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Gary Adler, Pennsylvania State University; Rachel A. Rinaldo, University of Colorado-Boulder Presider: Rachel A. Rinaldo, University of Colorado-Boulder Boundary Reconfiguration, Gendered Autonomy, and Western Women Missionaries in Chinese Society, 1807-1954 - Kerby Goff, Penn State University Do Modern Conditions Cause Secularization? An Analysis of Trends in and Influences on Worldwide Religiosity, 1981-2014 - Louisa Roberts, University of South Dakota Local Expressions, Global Arenas: Pakistani Shia Muslims in Iraq -Eisar Haider Transnational Christian Kinship: Framing Middle Eastern Christians in International Religious Freedom - Miray Hany Wadie Philips, University of Minnesota Discussant: Shai M. Dromi, Harvard University 

> Session 4513 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 117 4519.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology. Nationalism, Populism and Radical Politics in Comparative Perspective VAM, Room 18, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Bart Bonikowski, New York University Presider: Bart Bonikowski, New York University Democratic Strain and Populist Fervor in India, America and Beyond - Sakeef M. Karim, McGill University; Alessandro Giuseppe Drago, McGill University Fiscal Austerity, Welfare Chauvinism, and the Demand-Side of European Ethnonationalism - Ned Crowley, New York University Globalization, Crisis, and Right-Wing Populism in the Global South: The Cases of India and Turkey - Sefika Kumral, University of North Carolina-Greensboro Varieties of European Populism: A Comparative Study of Political Orientations - Martin Eiermann, University of California-Berkeley Discussant: Ruth Braunstein, University of Connecticut 

4520.  Section on Disability in Society. The How of Studying Disability VAM, Room 19, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: David Nicholas Pettinicchio, University of Toronto Presiders: Michelle Lee Maroto, University of Alberta; Martin Lukk, University of Toronto Fashioning Disability Research: Enabling Disabled Narratives of Masculinity through Reflexivity and Wardrobe Interviews - Megan Strickfaden, University of Alberta; Alexis De Villa, University of Alberta; Michel Ghanem, Ryerson Unversity; Kristina McMullin, Ryerson University; Philippa Nesbitt; Malcolm Stielow, University of Alberta; Ben Barry Masking and Unmasking The Spectrum: The Consequences of Camouflaging Neurodiversity - Esperanza Teresa, Guadalupe Padilla, University of California, Berkeley Socialist state-building and the political construction of disability in postwar eastern Germany - Sandy Xu The use of participatory visual methods in research with learning disabled people: some methodological reflections - Alice Scavarda, Università di Torino Discussant: ASL Interpreter 

4521.  Section on Peace, War and Social Conflict. Violence and Nonviolence at Black Lives Matter Protests VAM, Room 20, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jeff Goodwin, New York University Presider: David Cunningham, Washington University-St. Louis The Swarm versus the Grassroots: Places and networks of supporters and opponents in #blacklivesmatter on Twitter - Sander van Haperen, University of Amsterdam; Walter Nicholls, University of Amsterdam; Justus Uitermark, University of Amsterdam What Happened in Portland? - Joshua Bloom, University of Pittsburgh 

4522.  Section on Sociology of Sexualities. Decolonizing Sexualities Studies VAM, Room 21, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Jessennya Hernandez, Univ of IL; Ryan DeCarsky, University of Washington, Seattle; Jeremy Brenner-Levoy, University of Cincinnati Presider: Jessennya Hernandez, Univ of IL Panelists: Anima Adjepong, University of Cincinnati; Lee Maracle, University of Toronto; TIffany King, Georgia State University Discussant: Ying-Chao Kao, Virginia Commonwealth University 

4523.  Regular Session. Patterns and Consequences of Immigrant Integration VAM, Room 22, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Min Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles Presider: Shaohua Zhan, Nanyang Technological University Economic Assimilation among the Children of (Latino) Immigrants: A Life Course Trajectory Approach - Nino Jose Cricco Doldan, Harvard University Brain Waste: Intersection of Gender and Under-employment among Educated First-Generation Iranian Immigrants in the United States - Homa Sadri, University of California Irvine; Mohammad A. Chaichian, Mount Mercy University The Multidimensionality of Legal Status: Divergent Immigrant Health Trajectories by Authorization Classification, Visa Category, and Citizenship - Rachel Zajdel, Vanderbilt University Decomposing the Suburbanization of Immigration - Aaron Berman Fernandez, Harvard University 

4524.  Regular Session. Vibes, Fears, Conflicts, and Longing: Racialized Emotions in the Politics of Everyday Life VAM, Room 23, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Paula Ioanide, Ithaca College Presider: Paula Ioanide, Ithaca College The Vibe of the South: Racialized Emotions and Carceral Structures - Corey Javon Miles, Tulane University "This is What My Fear Told Me": Fear as the Key to Understanding Political Action - Livnat Konopny-Decleve A Balancing Act: Black Men, Racialized Gendered Work Expectations, and the Conflict of Emotional Roles - Brionca Taylor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill White double consciousness, melancholia and the discontents of white reconstructionism - Blanca Gamez-Djokic, UC Berkeley Graduate School of Education 

4525.  Regular Session. Gender Inequality VAM, Room 24, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Utrata, University of Puget Sound Presider: Cinzia D Solari, University of Massachusetts-Boston (Not) On the Same Page: How Risk-Related Disagreements Contribute to Gender Inequalities in Cognitive Labor -Jessica McCrory Calarco, Indiana University-Bloomington; Emily Meanwell, Indiana University; Amelia S Knopf, Indiana University School of Nursing; Elizabeth Marie Anderson, Indiana University Worrying as a Form of Care Work: Gender Differences in Subjective Well-being during COVID-19 - Meera Choi, Yale University; Hannah Tessler, Yale University; Grace Kao, Yale University The Gender Order of Neoliberalism: A Preliminary Characterization - Cinzia D Solari, University of Massachusetts-Boston; Smitha Radhakrishnan, Wellesley College Making Sense and Making Nonsense: Gender knowledge and the persistence of gender inequality - Marianne Cooper, Stanford University; Sara Jordan-Bloch, Stanford University; Heather D. Evans, University of Washington TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 118 4526.  Regular Session. New Frontiers in the Sociology of Law VAM, Room 25, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth Chiarello, Saint Louis University Presider: Elizabeth Chiarello, Saint Louis University Early 20th Century Marijuana Criminalization: An Empirical Analysis of Race/Ethnicity, Framing, and Moral Entrepreneurship - Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University; Brian Christopher Kelly, Purdue University; Maria Orsini; Joy Kadowaki, University of Dayton; Laura Frizzell, The Ohio State University Fragments of Gender in the “State Effect”: Documenting Mental Damage in Cases of Sexual Assault - Tugce Ellialti-Kose, Trent University “You Want to Get Rid of Suburbia”: Property Rights, Conspiracy Theory, and the U.S. Anti-Sustainability Movement - Ellen Berrey, University of Toronto; Fatima Al Saadie, University of Toronto Discursive Mismatch and Globalization by Stealth: The Fight Against Corruption in the Brazilian Legal Field - Eduardo Gutierrez Cornelius, University of Toronto Walls Create Barriers: How the Work Environment of Investigators Affects Prosecutorial Effectiveness Against Corruption - Luiz Vilaca, University of Notre Dame Discussant: Calvin Morrill, University of California, Berkeley 

4527.  Regular Session. Reproductive Health Care VAM, Room 26, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Rene Almeling, Yale University Presider: Rene Almeling, Yale University “I don’t usually discourage; I try to educate”: Patient-centered care and “early” LARC removal - Jamie Manzer, University of Delaware; Ann V. Bell, University of Delaware Gaslighting, obstetric violence and the maternal health crisis in the United States - Priya Fielding-Singh, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah; Amelia Dmowska, UC San Francisco, UC Berkeley Born in the NHS? Pregnant migrants and the British NHS as an ‘affective borderscape’ - Gwyneth Lonergan, Lancaster University Pregnant Under Quarantine: How Women Maintained Access to Medical Care Under Wuhan’s COVID-19 Lockdown - Amy Hanser, University of British Columbia; Yue Qian, University of British Columbia Cumulative Advantage/Disadvantage or Selection: Chinese Women's Fertility History and Later Life Health - Jiao Yu, Case Western Reserve University 

4528.  Regular Session. Determining and Recognizing Transgender VAM, Room 27, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Miriam J. Abelson, Portland State University Presider: Jay Sorensen, University of Iowa Walking While Trans: Assessing Gender Presentation and Transgender Profiling in Sex Work-Related Arrest Reports -Kris Rosentel, Northwestern University Persistence of Medicalization in Transgender Employment Rights Claims-Making - Kyla Bender-Baird, The Graduate Center, CUNY Transgender Disclosures: How Gender Determination and Social Contexts Mediate Disclosure Processes Among Trans Men -Tristen Kade, University of California, Santa Barbara Gender as a Radial Category - Lilly Watermoon, University of Notre Dame Preclusive Portals: The Spatial Stakes of "Determining Gender" in Binary-Gendered Restrooms and Locker Rooms. - Ali Greey, University of Toronto 

4529.  Regular Session. Violence VAM, Room 28, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Amy Kate Bailey, University of Illinois-Chicago Presider: Stephanie Bonnes, University of New Haven Learning How to Not Use a Gun: Women Contemplating Lethal Force - Margaret S. Kelley, University of Kansas Rates and Predictors of Child Maltreatment Re-Perpetration against New Victims and Prior Victims - Marina Haddock Potter, Pennsylvania State University; Reeve Kennedy, University of New Hampshire; Sarah A. Font, Pennsylvania State University The Effect of the U.S. Crime Decline on Ethnoracial and Educational Inequality in Homicide Mortality - Alexander Roehrkasse, Duke University Discussant: Stephanie Bonnes, University of New Haven 

4530.  Regular Session. Regular Session on Social Policy: Social and Economic Insecurity VAM, Room 29, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Bruce Western, Columbia University Presider: Jessica T. Simes, Boston University Does State Policy Moderate Economic Insecurity? - Elizabeth Martin, The Ohio State University Removing Barriers: Jail Study - Meghan M. O'Neil, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Jeffrey Morenoff, University of Michigan; Brad Ray, Wayne State University; Jenna Pryor, University of Michigan; Candice Tudor, University of Michigan; Edward Dance, University of Michigan; Alyshia Dyer, University of Michigan Under the Radar: Criminal Justice Contact, State Policies, and Fathers’ System Avoidance - Allison Dwyer Emory, University at Buffalo; Shiyue Cui, University at Buffalo What She Says Counts: Maternal Depression and Student Academic Outcomes - Tanya Gardner; Danielle E Duffy, University of Kentucky 

4531.  Regular Session. Identities and the Social Structure VAM, Room 30, 2:30-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Jenny L. Davis, The Australian National University Presider: Anne Groggel, North Central College An Ecology of the Embedded Self: How Identity Structure Matters for Mental Health - Eun Hye Lee, Indiana University-Bloomington Defining Blackness: The Haitian Experience of the Looking Glass -Mollie Anne Innocent-Cupid, Georgia State University Modifying Stereotyping of Mexican Americans through Framing Social Norms and through Interactions - Jasmine Banks, Department of Psychology; Valerie Barron, University of South Carolina; Mario Paez-Arellano, University of Iowa; Jane Sell, Texas A&M University-College Station Pragmatic Bias Impedes Women’s Access to Leadership -Christianne Corbett, Stanford University; Jan Gerrit Voelkel; Marianne Cooper, Stanford University; Robb Willer, Stanford Universty "Walking on 'Mars'": Gendered Group Processes in Space Analog Missions - Inga Popovaite, University of Iowa; Alison J. Bianchi, University of Iowa TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 119 4532.  Meeting. Section of Sociology of Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations Business Meeting VAM,  Room 31, 2:30-3:55pm 4568. Meeting. Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 2:30-3:00pm 4569.  Meeting. Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 2:30-3:00pm Tuesday, 3:00 pm 4647.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 1. Critical Race Theory VAM, Room 46, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia 

Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. 

Table Presider: Katya Salmi, Montgomery College Attacks on Antiracism, Critical Race Theory, and Decolonial Thinking: A Multi-national Analysis - Katya Salmi, Montgomery College Getting Engaged: On the Relationship Between Segregation and Gentrification Literatures - Maura McGee, CUNY Graduate Center; Pamela R. Bennett, University of Maryland-Baltimore County It’s an Emergency: A Critical Realist Emergentist Approach to Institutional Racism at Work - Angela Martinez Dy, Loughborough University Mapping and Assessing Racial Schema in the US: A New Three Class Model - Benjamin Swartz Hartmann, Indiana University; Douglas Hartmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities; Jason Torkelson, University of Minnesota - Duluth 

4648.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 2. Race, Politics, and Protest VAM, Room 47, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Philip J. Pettis, Vanderbilt University Partisan Constraints on the Association Between Interracial Friendship and Implicit Racial Bias - Kristen Nelson, UC Berkeley "I feel like I Have to be Super Jewish to Prove Myself!” - Philip J. Pettis, Vanderbilt University 

4649.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 3. Race and Space VAM, Room 48, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Anna Rebrii, Binghamton University Detecting Racial Segregation in Activity Space: New Measures Adjusting for Residential Segregation - Liang Cai; Christopher R. Browning, Ohio State University “It's mental, it's spiritual, it's emotional to me”: Exploring Black Residents’ Experiences with Gentrification - Adrianna Spindle-Jackson, Boston University Race and Reputation: The Process of Resegregation - Amy Stuart Wells, Teachers College, Columbia University; Diana Cordova-Cobo, Teachers College, Columbia University; Abbey Keener, Columbia University, Teachers College Racial-Spatial Formation and the University of Southern California in Los Angeles - Leland T. Saito, University of Southern California Socio-Economic and Spatial Differentiation in Turkey’s Kurdish Region: Gated Communities of Kayapinar - Anna Rebrii, Binghamton University; Ali Murat Ozkaratas, Istanbul University, Geography Department 

4650.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 4. Race and Discrimination VAM, Room 49, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Janelle Ashley Viera, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill An Analysis of Wage Disparities among Registered Nurses in the US: Preliminary Summary of Findings - Sung David Chun, Mercy College of Ohio More refugees, more discrimination? A two-wave field experiment on ethnic discrimination in the housing market - Renate Lorenz, LMU Munich; Katrin Auspurg, University of Munich; Andreas Schneck, LMU Munich Perceptions of Racial Discrimination and Racism Among Stateside Puerto Ricans - Janelle Ashley Viera, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Why do Black British report more experiences of discrimination at school than Black French do? - Elodie Druez, University of Strasbourg 

4651.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 5. Racial Health Disparities VAM, Room 50, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Courtney E. Williams, Louisiana State University Acculturative Stress, Racism, and Mental Health among South Asian Americans - Shan Mohammed Siddiqui Black Babies Matter: Disparities in Preterm Births for Black Mothers - Courtney E. Williams, Louisiana State University Ethnic Diversity and Well-being: Evidence from a Hundred-Thousand-Person Panel - Mathias Kruse, Aarhus University; Thorbjørn Sejr Sejr Guul, Aarhus University; Kristian Kriegbaum Jensen, Aalborg University Marital Status Differences in the Perception of Neighborhood Safety and Financial Stress on Life Satisfaction - Abolade Oladimeji, Case Western Reserve University The Harms of Willful Ignorance: Maternal Healthcare Providers’ Insight on Racial Disparities - Cara Cancelmo 

4652.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 6. Race Among Youth VAM, Room 51, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Zohra Ansari-Thomas, University of Pennsylvania Criminal Identity and Social Networks - Cynthia Baiqing Zhang, Evergreen Campus LLC; Loren Henderson, University of Maryland-Baltimore County; Meredith Ille, University of Oklahoma Household Composition and Labor Force Participation among Ethnic Minority Women in the United Kingdom - Zohra Ansari-Thomas, University of Pennsylvania Lessons My Parents Taught Me: The Cultural Significance of Racial Socialization Within the Black Family - Debbie Griffith, University of Central Florida The Association Between Cumulative Social Risk and Adolescent Obesity Varies by Race-ethnicity - Helal Uddin, East West University TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 120 4653.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 7. Race and Identity/Identification VAM, Room 52, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Andrea Kauffman-Berry, University of Pennsylvania Claiming Black Lives: Reverse Passing and Racial Identity Work Among White Women - Matthew Oware, University of Richmond Multiracial Identity and Educational Attainment - Taylor Aquino, UCLA Racial Reminders and References: How Multiracial Individuals Construct Racial Identity through Interactions - Monica Heilman, Indiana University; Lisa M. Martinez, University of Denver The Racialized Mechanics of Latino Ethnic Classification in the U.S. - Andrea Kauffman-Berry, University of Pennsylvania To be or Not to be Counted: 2020 Census and the MENA Category - Bradley J. Zopf, Carthage College 

4654.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 8. Sociology of Latinx Populations VAM, Room 53, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Jonathan Calvillo, Boston University 9/11 Terrorist Attacks-Induced Adverse Experiences and Mental health in Latino Americans - Soyoung Kwon, Texas A & M University Kingsville; Yongsok Kim, Texas A & M University Kingsville; Jiyoung Moon, Grand Canyon University Immigrants' Messianic Movements in Brazil - Ethel V. Kosminsky Latinxs in the Emergence of Los Angeles Hip Hop - Jonathan Calvillo, Boston University Race, Labor, and Clashing Institutional Logics on Worksites in Rural Brazil - Ian Robert Carrillo, University of Oklahoma Trends in Exposure to Industrial Air Toxics Across the US Latine Populations - Kerry Ard, Ohio State University; Dax Fisher-Garibay, the Ohio State University; Daphney Bonner, the Ohio State University Bracero Agency and the Railroad Brotherhoods: Race and Labor on the Rails during World War II - Michael Aaron Calderon-Zaks, University of California-San Diego 

4655.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 9. Sociology of Asian Americans VAM, Room 54, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Joyce Chang, Baylor University #AsiansforBlackLives? The effect of interracial marriage among Asian Americans on attitudes toward BLM - Joyce Chang, Baylor University Boundaries of Asian-ness? Exploring South Asian Racial Identity and Activism - Sharan Kaur Mehta, Rice University The Racialization of Cultural-Tool Kit and the Making of Contemporary Korean Diaspora - Joong Won Kim, Virginia Tech 

4656.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 10. Sociology of Whiteness VAM, Room 55, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Jacob Robinson, Virginia Tech “A wonderful situation we have with so few black people”: White Organizational Involvement in Integration - Ashleigh Imani Cartwright, University of Pennsylvania Big City, Little Worries? Little City, Big Worries? Immigration, population and safety perceptions in urban Europe - Kevin T Smiley, Louisiana State University; Yulin Yang, Weill Cornell Medical College Elucidating the Distinction between Christian Nationalism and White Nationalism - Shatira Monique Woods, The Ohio State University Virtue Signaling, Performative Activism, or Meaningful Change? Meanings, Actions, and Interpretations of White Allyship - David L. Brunsma, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Ashley Veronica Reichelmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Jacob Robinson, Virginia Tech; Sasha Grossman, virignia tech 

4657.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 11. Race in Education VAM, Room 56, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Daiki Hiramori, University of Washington From Sarah to Linda: A Research Journey Exploring 100 Years of Segregated Schooling - Marisela Martinez-Cola, Utah State University; Samantha Castro, Utah State University; Carina Linares, Utah State University Institutional Choices, Individual Impacts: How University Practices Preclude Multiracial Identities - Sonia Giebel, Stanford University Preparing Early Career Teachers for Social Justice and Equity: Navigating New Challenges During Covid-19 - Elizabeth A Horning, University at Albany, SUNY; Kathryn S. Schiller, SUNY-Albany Rethinking Race, Ethnicity, and the Assessment of Intercultural Competence in Higher Education - Gemma Punti, Metropolitan State University; Molly J. Dingel, Unversity of Minnesota Rochester How to Teach the Sociology of Race and Ethnic Relations in Today’s Divided, Toxic, and Shifting Political Environment - Juchuan Colin Wang, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee at Waukesha Critically Quantitative: Measuring Community Cultural Wealth on Surveys - Daiki Hiramori, University of Washington; Emily Sue Knaphus, University of Washington; Elizabeth Litzler, University of Washington; James Lamar Foster, University of Washington 

4658.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 12. Race/Ethnicity and Gender VAM, Room 57, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Inaash Islam, Virginia Tech Black Ethnicities: Food and Culture among Louisiana Creoles in California - Faustina M. DuCros, San José State University Filling the Void: Social Media Usage and Network Expansion of Black Tech Entrepreneurs - Alicia Sheares, University of California, Berkeley Gendered Racism within the Beauty Industry: The Corporate Turn Toward “All-Natural” - Alannah Sheri Caisey, University of Pittsburgh; Christina Ong, University of Pittsburgh (Un)Veiling Expectations: The Racialized and Gendered Politics of the Muslimah Influencer Dejabi Controversy - Inaash Islam, Virginia Tech Investigating the Differences Between the Usage of Stop, Question, & Frisk Policing Practices - Emerald Jones TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 121 4659.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables. Table 13. Racial Inequality Across the World VAM, Room 58, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizer: Ryon J. Cobb, University of Georgia Table Presider: Michael Rosino, Molloy College Demographic Change and Perceptions of Racism - Christopher Maggio, City University of New York-Graduate Center Global norms, regional practices: Taste-based vs. statistical discrimination in German asylum decision making - Lidwina Gundacker, Institute for Employment Research (IAB), Nuremberg, Germany; Yuliya Kosyakova, Institute for Employment Research (IAB); Gerald Schneider, University of Konstanz, Germany Neoliberalizing race in international development - Skye Niles, University of Colorado The Racial Geography of Democracy: Racialized Space and Community Among Grassroots Progressives - Michael Rosino, Molloy College 

4660.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 1. Work during the COVID-19 Pandemic and Crises Times VAM, Room 59, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Moses Seenarine Categories and Crisis: Definitions of Essential in the COVID-19 Pandemic - Joshua M. Hurwitz, Stanford University Essential but Ill-Prepared: Mental Health Effects among Grocery Store Workers during COVID-19’s First Wave in Arizona -Brian Mayer, University of Arizona; Mona Arora, University of Arizona; Sabrina Helm, University of Arizona; Melissa Barnett, University of Arizona Meat Racism During SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic in 2020 - Moses Seenarine Priming and Resonance Institute Institution in Crisis Practice -Yuanhao Liu; Xiao Tang, Tsinghua University Teaching in the Time of COVID-19: Gender and Race Differences in Emotional Labor - Catherine White Berheide, Skidmore College; David A. Cotter, Union College; Megan Carpenter, Saint Lawrence University Why Zoom Is Not Doomed Yet: Privacy and Security Crisis Response in the COVID-19 Pandemic - Wenhong Chen, University of Texas-Austin; Yuan Zou Work and Family Conflict for Parents in Professional Occupations During the COVID-19 Pandemic - Angela Clague, University of California, Los Angeles; Chaitra Hardison, RAND 

4661.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 2. Gender and Work - 1 VAM, Room 60, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Dominika Kinga Sarnecka, Harvard University Access to Work-Family Resources in the Gender-Segregated Labor Market - Kaitlin Johnson, Indiana University Cohort Differences in the Effect of Children and Domestic Labor on Women’s Labor Outcomes - Angela Clague, University of California, Los Angeles Constraints or Commitment? Insider Partners and the Mobility of Women Out of Low-Wages - Michael A Schultz, University of Texas-Austin Female Perceptions of Bias and Obstacles Toward Advancement in the Department of Defense - Dianna Lynn Black, University of Phoenix From Organization Men to Career Men: Job Choice as Career Crafting - Dominika Kinga Sarnecka, Harvard University 

4662.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 3. Gender and Work - 2 VAM, Room 61, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Kristen McNeill, Brown University Gender and Success in Gaining Future “Gigs”: The Social Networks of Film Composers in Hollywood, 2000-2009 - Ju Hyun Park, Emory University Gender Differences in Fairness Perceptions of Own Earnings in 26 European Countries - Jule Adriaans, German Institute for Economic Research DIW Berlin; Matteo Targa, German Institute for Economic Research Gendered Work Experiences in a Hyper-Masculine Organization: Differences Between Cohorts - Chelli Plummer, Providence College Within occupational gender-segregation: Dynamics of competition between sub-occupations shape and re-shape job queues - Livia Baer-Bositis, Stanford University 

4663.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 4. Race, Ethnicity, and Work VAM, Room 62, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Fitore Hyseni, Syracuse University Enduring Racism: The Persistence of Racial Inequality in American Law Firms - Vitor Dias, Indiana University-Bloomington Racialized Expertise and the Character of Organizations: The Case of University DEI Personnel - Sandra Portocarrero Racializing Institutional Boundaries: The Case of the CHAZ/CHOP - Aliyah Turner; Maxine Wright “So, You Are the Wise Latina They Hired": Workplace Discrimination in the Legal Profession - Fitore Hyseni, Syracuse University; Fatma Altunkol Wise, Syracuse University “Trump Gave Them Wings”: Immployment, Legal Status, Citizenship, and Racism on La Esquina - Nancy Plankey-Videla, Texas A&M University-College Station; Cynthia Luz Cisneros Franco, Texas A&M University 

4664.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 5. Well-Being in the Workplace VAM, Room 63, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Elizabeth Nguyen Trinh, Michigan Ross Algorithmic Management, Nonstandard Schedules, and Gig Worker Wellbeing - Katherine Hill, University of Texas Avoiding, Resisting, Enduring: Responses to Workplace Violence in Professional Kitchens - Ellen T. Meiser, University of Hawaii at Manoa; Eli R. Wilson, University of New Mexico-Albuquerque Sociability Between Coworkers and Social Fit at Work - Thomas Lyttelton, Yale University TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 122 

Student Culture and the Normalization of Deviance in an Allopathic Medical School - Judson G. Everitt, Loyola University-Chicago; James M Johnson, Loyola University Chicago; William H Burr; Stephanie H Shanower The pain and possibility of departure: How experiences of meaningful work shape leader exit - Krystal Laryea, Stanford; Elizabeth Nguyen Trinh, Michigan Ross Tradeoffs in the Spotlight: The impact of creative core residence on artists’ career satisfaction - Adam Kaelin Schoenbachler, Vanderbilt University 

4665.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 6. Inequality and Work VAM, Room 64, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Chengzuo Tang, Duke University Employment and Unemployment Among Refugees in the United States - Mehr Mumtaz; Katherine Sobering, University of North Texas; Vincent J. Roscigno, Ohio State University Inequality in medical education and implications for trainees' career plans: an intersectional approach - Alyssa Browne, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Managing Power Dependence to Innovate Diversity Work: Tailor-Made versus Turnkey Institutional Practices - Vic Marsh, University of Colorado Boulder Occupational Specialization as a Roadblock to Professionalization - Lisa M. Lipscomb, University of Massachusetts Amherst Who gets a back door to success? Informal processes and the reproduction of inequality at work - Britiny Iris Cook; Erin Macke; Shannon Gilmartin, Stanford University Empathy as a Tool for Inclusion in Organizations - Christianne Corbett, Stanford University 

4666.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 7. White-Collar and Nonstandard work VAM, Room 65, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: Isabelle Zinn, University of Lausanne Getting a Job in the Arts. Merit, Mindset and Network in Precarious and Taste-Based Markets - Anna Gromada Interprofessional collaboration and boundary-work Care support workers in residential homes for the elderly in Germany -Isabelle Zinn, University of Lausanne Making Bad Jobs Worthwhile: How Educational Trajectories Shape Low-Status Workers’ Identity Work Strategies - Yingjian Liang, Indiana University Not Over ‘til it’s Over: Interorganizational Relationship Resilience in the Contingent Staffing Industry - Laureen K. O'Brien, Independent Researcher The White-Collar Opt-Out - Mustafa Yavas, New York University-Abu Dhabi 

4667.  Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables. Table 8. Organizational Success and Employment Relations VAM, Room 66, 3:00-3:55pm 

Session Organizers: Angelina Grigoryeva, University of Toronto; Argun Saatcioglu, University of Kansas Table Presider: David C Joseph-Goteiner, University of California, Berkeley From Dictator to Educator: The Emergence of a New Management Style in Global Fine Dining - Daphne Demetry, McGill University; Gillian Gualtieri, Vanderbilt University Head in the Books, Heart on the Beat: Understanding College Students’ Motivations for Entering Policing - Nidia Isabel Banuelos, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Jordan Waldron, University of Indianapolis; Laura Zinkan; Samantha Hupp, University of Indianapolis Latent Structure and Observed Structure of Employment Relations: A Network Approach - Xingyun Wu, Johns Hopkins University Lexicons into Categories: A Computational Approach to Category-Spanning Identity in Organizational Fields - Zhuofan Li, University of Arizona Locating Decline and Growth of Civic Associations in Communities: The Case of the YMCA, 1950-2000 - David C Joseph-Goteiner, University of California, Berkeley Network Embeddedness and Team Collaboration in the GitHub Community - Chao Liu, North Carolina State University 

# Tuesday, 4:15 pm 4702.  Book Forum. Trans Kids: Being Gendered in the Twenty-First Century VAM, Room 1, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Kate Henley Averett, University at Albany, SUNY Moderator: Kate Henley Averett, University at Albany, SUNY Panelists: J. E. Sumerau, University of Tampa; Freeden Blume Oeur, Tufts University; stef m. shuster, Michigan State University Author: Tey Meadow, Columbia University 

4703.  Special Sessions. From Ivory Towers to Ebony Towers: Transforming Humanities Curricula in South Africa, Africa and African-American Studies VAM, Room 2, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Adekeye Adebajo, University of Johannesburg Presider: Adekeye Adebajo, University of Johannesburg The Dilemmas and Challenges of Achieving Free Education in South Africa - Shireen Motala, University of Johannesburg Lessons from the Howard School of International Affairs - Krista Johnson, Howard University Lessons from the Atlanta School of Sociology - Aldon D. Morris, Northwestern University The Ghost of Cecil Rhodes: Historical Struggles to Transform South Africa’s Curriculum - Adekeye Adebajo, University of Johannesburg The Curious Case of African Sociology and Decolonisation - Jimi O. Adesina, University of South Africa 

> Session 4664 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 123 4704.  Special Sessions. The Legalization of Cannabis and Issues of Equity in Illinois VAM, Room 3, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Tiffany Davis, Chicago State University Presider: Tiffany Davis, Chicago State University Panelists: Jondae Scott, Minorities for Medical Marijuana, Illinois Chapter; Neffer-Oduntunde A. Kerr, NorthStar Minority Cannabis Association; Jon Patterson, Chicago State University; Mila K. Marshall, Herb & Planning Associates 

4705.  Regional Spotlight Session. Metropolis 2030: The Future of Chicago, Cities, and the Emancipatory Possibilities of Pandemics VAM, Room 4, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Tracey Lewis-Elligan, DePaul University; Heather M. Dalmage, Roosevelt University Presider: Michael I.J. Bennett, DePaul University Panelists: John-Jairo Betancur, University of Illinois at Chicago; Gina Ramirez, Natural Resources Defense Council; Richard Wallace, Soros Fellow, Equity and Transformation, Movement for Black Lives; Carla Shedd, CUNY-Graduate Center 

4706.  Thematic Sessions. Du Boisian Sociology and the Coronavirus: Implications for the Black Community VAM, Room 5, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Hayward Derrick Horton, SUNY-Albany Presider: Hayward Derrick Horton, SUNY-Albany Panelists: Lori Latrice Martin, Louisiana State University; Loren Henderson, University of Maryland-Baltimore County; Melvin E. Thomas, North Carolina State University; Verna M. Keith, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Deadric T. Williams, University of Tennessee-Knoxville Discussant: Robert Perkins, Norfolk State University 

4707.  Thematic Sessions. Social Movements and the Dynamics of Co-optation VAM, Room 6, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Chandra Russo, Colgate University Presider: Chandra Russo, Colgate University Panelists: Shannon Elizabeth Bell, Virginia Tech; Rodney D. Coates, Miami University-Ohio; Amaka Camille Okechukwu, George Mason University; Megan E. Brooker, University of Kansas 

4708.  Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility. The Pandemic and Inequality VAM, Room 7, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Yue Qian, University of British Columbia Presider: Yue Qian, University of British Columbia Coping with the Coronavirus: Use of Stimulus Funds and Expectations for the Future - Emma Ryan Bosley-Smith, The Ohio State University How Has the Pandemic Affected Mostly Undocumented Parents and their Mostly US Citizen Children? - Robert Courtney Smith, CUNY-Baruch College; Andrés Sebastián Besserer Rayas, Graduate Center CUNY Overcrowding in the Bay Area: Where Gentrification and the Housing Crisis meet COVID-19 - Jackelyn Hwang, Stanford University; Bina Shrimali, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco The Gender Gap in Covid-19 Research Authorship - Francois Joseph Lachapelle, University of B. C.; Elizabeth Hirsh, University of British Columbia 

4709.  Teaching Workshop. Let’s Talk about Sex: Promoting Discussion in Sociology of Sexuality Classes VAM, Room 8, 4:15-5:40pm 

Leader: Megan Henley, Colorado Mesa University Co-Leader: Laureen K. O'Brien, Independent Researcher 

4710.  Ideas for Future Research. School-Based Parental Involvement and Elementary School Students’ Outcomes in Math and Reading VAM, Room 9, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Beth Redbird, Northwestern University Table Presider: Matthew Erkenbrack, University of California, Irvine School-Based Parental Involvement and Elementary School Students’ Outcomes in Math and Reading - Matthew Erkenbrack, University of California, Irvine 

4711.  Section on Political Sociology. Polarization and Contention in Electoral Politics VAM, Room 10, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Richard Lachmann, SUNY-Albany Presider: Richard Lachmann, SUNY-Albany National Politics, Local Fissures: A Closer Look at the Rural-Urban Divide - Benjamin Hirsch Witkovsky, University of Wisconsin-Madison Racial Capitalism and the 2020 Election - Cedric de Leon, University of Massachusetts-Amherst The Local Origins of American Anti-Statism - Stephanie Lynn Ternullo, University of Chicago Why U.S. Conservative Movements Are More Influential: Asymmetrical Polarization and Politics Since the 1970s -Edwin Amenta, University of California-Irvine Discussant: Richard Lachmann, SUNY-Albany 

4712.  Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender. The COVID-19 Pandemic: Gendered Risks, Gendered Consequences VAM, Room 11, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Elizabeth Wrigley-Field, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Presider: Irma Mooi-Reci, University of Melbourne Choreographing Social Reproduction: Making Personal Protective Equipment and Gender During a Neoliberal Pandemic -Braden Leap, Mississippi State University; Kimberly Kelly, Mississippi State University; Marybeth C. Stalp, University of Northern Iowa Quarantined Courtship: The Cultural Implications of Dating during the Pandemic - Sam Kendrick, University of Kansas The COVID-19 Pandemic and Gender and Racial Discrimination in Hiring: Evidence from a Natural Experiment - Koji Rafael Chavez, Indiana University-Bloomington; Katherine Weisshaar, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill; Tania Cabello-Hutt, University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill "You Are Responsible for Your Own Safety": An Intersectional Analysis of Mask Wearing - Zachary Palmer, Texas A&M University-Commerce; Vasundhara Kaul, Purdue University 

4713.  Family Section. Open Family Section Session VAM, Room 12, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Hope Harvey, University of Kentucky; Kristin Perkins, Georgetown University Presider: Amira Allen Flexplace Work and Partnered Fathers' Time in Housework and Childcare - Daniel L. Carlson, University of Utah; Richard J. Petts, Ball State University; Joanna Pepin, University at Buffalo TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 124 

Friend, Foe, or Forget ‘Em? A Case Study of LGBTQ Adult Sibling Relationships - Rin Reczek, Ohio State University; Lawrence Wellman Stacey, Ohio State University; Chloe Dunston, The Ohio State University Racial Disparities in Family Trajectories and Financial Transfers to Young Adult Children - Mariana Amorim, Washington State University; Sarah Deming, Washington State University The Polarization of Everyday Family Life in Germany - Carolin Deuflhard, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin What Do They Mean by Egalitarian? How Couples Make Sense of Gender Equality in their Relationships - Maria Ines Martinez Echague 

4714.  Community and Urban Sociology Section. Responding to the Politicization of Space: Spatial inequality and Claims-Making VAM, Room 13, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Claudia Maria López, California State University-Long Beach Presider: Claudia Maria López, California State University-Long Beach To Trust or Not to Trust? Black Organizations in the Context of State-Led Gentrification - Angela E. Addae, University of Oregon Gentrifying the Gentrifiers? Small-Scale Landlords, Tax Abatements, and Development in Philadelphia - John E Balzarini, Delaware State University; Melody L. Boyd, SUNY-Brockport The Marginalizing Gaze: Electronic Surveillance and Bimodal Policing in Residential Spaces - Lisa Lucile Owens, Columbia University The Law of the Land: Capital-based Social Control Evidenced in Policing of Native Americans - Carrie D. Stallings; Kat Albrecht, Northwestern University Reclaiming Hong Kong through neighborhood-making: A study of the 2019 Anti-ELAB movement - Yao-Tai Li, Hong Kong Baptist University; Katherine Whitworth, University of Sydney "This is what happens when we organize, ya'll": Real Estate Speculation, Gentrification and Resistance - Mario R. Hernandez, Mills College; Emily Kinzel, Mills College Discussant: Amy Jonason, Furman University 

4715.  Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology. Using Sociology in Practice, Applied and Public Settings VAM, Room 14, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Andrew A. Beveridge, CUNY-Queens College Presider: Julia Ferrara Waity, University of North Carolina-Wilmington How to Improve Patient Satisfaction: What Works, Inconclusive Studies, and Opportunities for Future Research - Heather McKee Hurwitz, Cleveland Clinic Practicing Sociology at the Sonoma County CSW: Advancing Gender Equity Through Social Science Research - Katie M. Gordon, Stony Brook University; Janice Blalock, Sonoma County Commission on the Status of Women Right to Parent, or Only if Religion Lets You? Researching and Organizing for a Cause - Miriam Moster, The Graduate Center Transforming Academic Knowledge to Improve Lives - Amy T. Schalet, University of Massachusetts-Amherst Why We Need Sociological Theory, Sociological Practice, and More Gardens for Incarcerated Women - Daniela Franziska Jauk, University of Akron; Sharon Everhardt, Troy University 

4717.  Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities. Race, Ethnicity, Colonialism, and Global Geopolitics VAM, Room 16, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Hadi Khoshneviss, Rhodes College; Jack Jin Gary Lee, Kenyon College Presider: Dana Shalash, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Conquistador Statues, Latinxs and Race - Casandra Danielle Salgado, Arizona State University-Tempe Dispossessory Citizenship: The Settler Colonial State and the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ Relocation Program, 1952-1972 -Peter Ross Kent-Stoll, University of Massachusetts Amherst Now I Always Say I’m Afghan:” Examining Racialized Hauntings and Anti-Muslim Racism - Saugher Nojan, University of California Santa Cruz Pacific Islander’s Ethno-Racial Identity: Pasifika Wayfinding and Navigation through the U.S. Ethno-Racial Context - Sione Lynn Pili Lister, University of Arizona Settler Colonialism and American Sociology: Insights for political sociology, race and racialization, and disciplinary knowledge. - Erich W. Steinman, Pitzer College Discussant: Rick A. Baldoz, Oberlin College 

4718.  Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work. Inequality Across "Diverse" Workplaces VAM, Room 17, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Elizabeth Popp Berman, University of Michigan-Ann Arbor; Sharla N. Alegria, University of Toronto; Nicole Genevieve Denier, University of Alberta; Jiwook Jung, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Victor E. Ray, University of Iowa Presider: Sharla N. Alegria, University of Toronto Are organizational gender diversity management practices effective? - Sanjana Singh; Eva Jaspers, Utrecht University; Tanja van der Lippe, Utrecht University Doing Diversity like an Ideal High-Tech Worker: Avoiding and Making Compromises About Claims on Diversity - Annika M. Wilcox, North Carolina State University Maverick Management: Uneven Accountability in Performances of Trust - Sarah Elizabeth Mosseri, University of Sydney Two-Tiered Labor Market and the “Glass Moving Walkway:” Gender, Job Mobility, Segregation, and Wages - Emma Williams-Baron, Stanford University Will it be #MeToo? Occupational Choices and the Specter of Sexual Harassment - Emma Tsurkov, Stanford University 

4720.  Meeting. Section on Rationality and Society Business Meeting VAM, Room 19, 4:15-4:45pm 4721.  Student Forum. Teaching Emancipatory Sociology: How to Involve Undergraduate Students in Social Transformation VAM, Room 20, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Aaron Arredondo, University of Missouri; TehQuin Forbes, Florida State University; Amirhossein Teimouri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Chmapaign Leader: Aaron Arredondo, University of Missouri Co-Leaders: Juan José Bustamante, University of Arkansas; Jennifer Patrice Sims, University of Alabama-Huntsville; Geoff K. Ward, Washington University in St. Louis; Earl Wright, Rhodes College 

> Session 4713 continued

# TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 125 4722.  Regular Session. Race, Class, and Gender Across the Educational Pipeline VAM, Room 21, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Gilda Laura Ochoa, Pomona College Presider: Amanda J. Brockman, Vanderbilt University Classed Beings: The Socialization of Class in Preschool - Hannah Espy Arts Education and Black and Latinx Student Achievement: Evidence from HSLS:2009 - Victoria Lauren Isaac, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee; Marcus L. Britton, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Diversity or Gentrification: Middle-Class Parents at Working-Class Schools - Edward Watson, University of California - Irvine Examining the Black Gender Gap in Educational Attainment: The Role of Institutional Punishment - Marissa Elena Thompson, Stanford University Social Class and Mobility into the Sociology Graduate Pipeline - Allison L. Hurst, Oregon State University; Wendi Leigh Johnson, Oakland University; José A. Muñoz, California State University-San Bernardino 

4723.  Regular Session. The Persistence of Racial, Linguistic, and Class Stratification in Schools VAM, Room 22, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago Presider: Eve L. Ewing, University of Chicago The Evolving Logic of White Flight in School Desegregation Reform - Fithawee Tzeggai, University of Kansas Using Experimental Data to Explore Heterogeneity in Parents’ and Students’ Racialized Assessments and Preferences for Schools - Chantal Annise Hailey, University of Texas-Austin Using Recent Evidence to Evaluate School Choice Theories -Joanne W. Golann, Vanderbilt University; Lauren Ann Covelli, Vanderbilt University; Bailey A. Brown, Princeton University; Kara Mitchell, Vanderbilt University White Noise: The Raciolinguistic Marginalization of the Administratively Disadvantaged - Sarah Faude, YW Boston “You Need to Be More Responsible”: Math Homework as a Status-Reinforcing Process in School - Jessica McCrory Calarco, Indiana University-Bloomington; Ilana Horn, Vanderbilt University; Grace A Chen, Vanderbilt University Discussant: Patrick Denice, Western University 

4724.  Regular Session. Implications of the American Criminal System Beyond the Criminal Law VAM, Room 23, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Monica C. Bell, Yale University Presider: Monica C. Bell, Yale University Criminalized Subjectivity: Du Boisian Sociology and Visions for Legal Change - Matthew Clair, Stanford University “Cause I Don't Wanna Die”: Navigating the Shadow of Police Violence - Holly Campeau, University of Alberta; Ron Levi, University of Toronto Policing for Profit and the Undermining of Democracy - Jonathan Ben-Menachem, Columbia University; Kevin T Morris, Brennan Center for Justice The Exception as the Rule: Negligent Hiring and the Rise of Criminal Background Checks - David McElhattan, Purdue University “They’re going to take your property”: Disaster recovery amidst legal estrangement - Jasmine Simington, University of Michigan 

4725.  Regular Session. Gender Inequality II VAM, Room 24, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer Utrata, University of Puget Sound Presider: Sarah Adeyinka-Skold, Furman University “Be decent mother, go through PSLE”: Education as care labor -Youyenn Teo, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Which Women’s Rights? State Feminism, Women’s Work, and Automobility in Saudi Arabia - Lauren Clingan, Princeton University Reification of Gendered Initiation Norms on Dating Technology -Sarah Adeyinka-Skold, Furman University The double binds of making the gender bias against women salient at work - Chloe Grace Hart, Stanford University Gender and Charitable Crowdfunding Success: How Organizer Gender Shapes Aid to Emergency Victims - Kristin Kelley, WZB Berlin Social Science Center; Jorge Mejia, Indiana University; Alfonso Pedraza-Martinez, Indiana University 

4726.  Regular Session. Sociology of Technology VAM, Room 25, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: James A. Evans, University of Chicago Presider: James A. Evans, University of Chicago Boeing’s Jedi Mind Tricks: Discursive Framing and the Dark Side of Institutional Entrepreneurship - Dali Ma, Drexel University; Thomas John Fewer, Drexel University From Programming to Platform Expertise: Technical Reformers and the Reinvention of Institutions - Shreeharsh Kelkar, University of California-Berkeley Impacts for Whom? Assessing Inequalities in NSF-funded Broader Impacts Using the Immediacy Inclusion Criterion. - Sophia Boutilier, Stony Brook University; Thomas Woodson, Stony Brook University Is Organizational Innovation a Technology? Evidence from Patent Data - Valery Yakubovich, ESSEC Business School; Shuping Wu, ESSEC Business School Shifting racial frameworks: How genetic ancestry test results influence racial conceptualizations - Meredith Riley, Reed College; Kjersten Bunker Whittington, Reed College Strategic Subjects and Risk Mitigation: Predictive Policing in Cook County, Illinois - Elliot Lee Truslow, University of Arizona The Evolutionary Nature of Breakthrough Innovation: Re-Evaluating the Exploration vs. Exploitation Dichotomy - Dominika Kinga Sarnecka, Harvard University; Gary Paul Pisano, Harvard Business School 

4727.  Regular Session. Critical Theory VAM, Room 26, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Jennifer C. Mueller, Skidmore College Presider: Jennifer C. Mueller, Skidmore College A Critical Return to Actor-Network-Theory - Charles John Stubblefield, University of Alberta “Negative” White Psychological Wage -- Interrogating the Moral Logics of White Supremacy Post-Trump - Tauren Nelson, Brandeis University; Snehalatha Gantla Why is Life Worth Saving? Neoliberalism, COVID-19, and Boris Johnson’s Public Discourse - Jeremiah Morelock, Boston College; Yonathan Listik; Mili Kalia How National Exceptionalism Perpetuates A Hegemonic Assimilationist Paradigm: Complicit Cultural Chauvinism as a Societal Auto-Immune Disorder - Jacob Richard Thomas, Princeton University TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 126 4728.  Regular Session. Transgender Movements, Rights, Violence, and Resistance VAM, Room 27, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Miriam J. Abelson, Portland State University Presider: Miriam J. Abelson, Portland State University “Judith Butler is not suitable for us”: Queer Capital in China's Transgender Activism - Thelma Wang, Brandeis University “They kill us because they hate what it means to love us”: Desire and symbolic violence - Alithia Zamantakis, Georgia State University Telling the Story Right: Explaining Support for Transgender and Non-Binary Rights - Kylar Schaad 

4729.  Regular Session. Welfare States in Comparative and Historical Perspective VAM, Room 28, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Edwin Amenta, University of California-Irvine Presider: Edwin Amenta, University of California-Irvine Earned income in the free market and the welfare state: Ideals, reality, and coronavirus - M.D.R. Evans, University of Nevada; Jonathan Kelley, International Social Science Survey From Population to Problem: The Evolution of American Child Welfare, 1935-1980 - Matty Lichtenstein, University of California, Berkeley Precursors of the Gender Revolution’s Second Phase? Historical and Cross-national Expansions of Fathers’ Leave Provisions - Cassandra Engeman, Stockholm University; Sofie Burman, Stockholm University Re-Examining the EITC: America's Most Successful Anti-Poverty Program or Failed Welfare State? - Carmen Marie Brick, UC Berkeley Who gets the goods? Disentangling the effects of parliamentary representation and collective action on welfare spending - Caitlin Ella Wind, New York University; David Calnitsky, University of Western Ontario 

4730.  Regular Session. Prisons and Prisoners VAM, Room 29, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Brittany Friedman, University of Southern California Presider: Joshua Aaron Page, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Bourdieu and Prison: concepts, fields of application, perspectives - Andrea Borghini, University of Pisa (Italy) Prison Management of Gender Boundaries, 1941-2018 - Joss Taylor Greene, Columbia University The “Curious Eclipse” of Carceral Ethnography Revisited - Ashley T. Rubin, University of Hawaii, Manoa The Promise and Peril of ICE-funded Labor: A Case Study of The Dilley Detention Center - Marta Ascherio, University of Texas at Austin; Felipe Vargas The Role of Perceived Attractiveness and Social Network Position in Women’s Prisons - Story Edison; Sadé Lindsay, Cornell University; Dana L. Haynie, Ohio State University “They Need to Go In There”: Racialized Subjectivity Among Formerly Incarcerated People - Lucius Couloute, Suffolk University Discussant: Patrick Lopez-Aguado, Santa Clara University 

4731.  Section on Environmental Sociology. Climate Change and Social Transformation VAM, Room 30, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Norah MacKendrick, Rutgers University-New Brunswick Presider: Steven R. Brechin, Rutgers, State Univ of New Jersey Climate Change and Wildfire Sufferance among Rural California Residents - Zulema Valdez, University of California-Merced Democracy Underwater: Public Participation and Technical Expertise in Climate Infrastructure Planning in New York City - Malcolm Araos, NYU Embracing I-BRACE: Centering Indigenous Frameworks For Climate Change Adaptation in Public Policies and Initiatives - Lauren Amelia Dent, University of North Texas; Larry Campbell, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community; Jamie Donatuto, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community; Nicole Errett, University of Washington; Jeremy Hess, University of Washington How Structural Denial in the “Energy Field” Hampers Climate Action - Isak Ladegaard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Annika Rieger, Boston College The Business of Adaptation in Bangladesh - Danielle Falzon, Brown University 

4761.  First Nations and Indigenous Peoples VAM, Room 60, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Carmela Marie Roybal, University of New Mexico First Nations and Indigenous Peoples Table Presider: Carmela Marie Roybal, University of New Mexico Foundational Issues in Intimate Partner Violence Risk Assessment with Indigenous Populations in Canada - Olivia Peters, University of Guelph Gendered Responses to Violence against Indigenous Peoples in Canada - Dean R. Ray, York University “We’ve been here since time immemorial”: An Examination of Reporting on the 2020 Wet’suwet’en Actions - Olivia Megean Fleming, Oklahoma State University 

4762.  Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations VAM, Room 61, 4:15-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Carmela Marie Roybal, University of New Mexico Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations Table Presider: J. M. Bacon, Grinnell College America Does Not Exist: Sonic Decolonization Among Indigenous/Latinx Musicians - Everardo Reyes, University of California Berkeley Concealed Indigeneity: Essentialization of Indigeneity through Imperial Racialization of Japan - Masatoshi Kuniyoshi, Texas A&M University What is Settler-Fragility and How can we Measure it? -Harmandeep Kaur, Wayne State University Center of Urban Studies Whiteness at the Edges of Empire - Heidi Christine Nicholls, University of Virginia TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 127 4765.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Sexualities Business Meeting VAM, Room 64, 4:15-4:45pm 4767.  Meeting. Section on Peace, War, and Social Conflict Business Meeting VAM, Room 66, 4:15-4:45pm 4768.  Meeting. Section on Sociology of Religion Business Meeting VAM, Room 67, 4:15-4:45pm 4769.  Meeting. Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Business Meeting VAM, Room 68, 4:15-4:45pm 4770.  Meeting. Section on Disability in Society Business Meeting VAM, Room 69, 4:15-4:45pm Tuesday, 4:45 pm 4819.  Section on Rationality and Society. Environmental Decision Making, Consumption, and Public Goods: Rationality and Decision Making at the Policy Interface VAM, Room 18, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Carter T. Butts, University of California-Irvine Presider: Scott Leo Renshaw, University of California-Irvine Mind the gap? How neutralization theory can explain the concern-behavior gap in environmental decision making - Guido Franz Mehlkop, University of Erfurt; Robert Neumann, University of Technology Dresden, Germany The Shadow of Utility: How Consumption Choice affects the Choice to Cooperate - Michael C Hahn, Stanford University; Jered Abernathy, University of South Carolina; Brent Simpson, University of South Carolina-Columbia Discussant: Lorien Jasny, University of Exeter 

4847.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 1: Religion, Family, and the Life Course VAM, Room 46, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Fanhao Nie, Valdosta State University Are Older People More Religious? The Relationship between Age and Religiosity among Jews - Nadia Beider, Hebrew University How Religious Context Unites and Divides Us: Interracial Dating on Grindr in the Southern United States - Fanhao Nie, Valdosta State University; Joshua C Jones Mothers, Othermothers, and the Postpartum Sexual Contract: Improving Mormon Polygamy Ethnographies with Women's Sexuality Data - Michelle Mueller, Santa Clara University The Relationship Between Religiosity and Filial Norms of Elder-Care: A Comparison of Two Middle-Aged Cohorts - Joonsik Yoon, Syracuse University; Woosang Hwang, Syracuse University; Maria Brown, Syracuse University; Merril Silverstein, Syracuse University 

4848.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 2: Rituals, Culture, and Performance VAM, Room 47, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Jared Bok, University of Nevada-Reno Producing Safe Spaces: Everyday Practices in the New Sanctuary Movement - Erick Berrelleza, Boston University The Sacred Arts: How Religious Conservatism and Omnivorousness Influence Congregational Use of the Arts -Jared Bok, University of Nevada-Reno Exploring the Interactive Nexus of Social-Economic Values, American Protestantism and Political Orientation - Troy S. Okum, University of Florida 

4849.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 3: U.S. Religious Landscape VAM, Room 48, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Clara Gaddie A Search for Liberalizing Religion: Selection, Treatment, and Political Asymmetry in the American Religious Landscape -Landon Schnabel, Cornell University Secularization, Secularism and the Two Civil Religions: Seeing Political Polarization as a Religious Problem - Clayton Alexander Fordahl, University of Memphis The Effects of Perceiving Religious Discrimination on Opinions of Religious Minorities in the United States - Brenton David Kalinowski, Rice University; Elaine Howard Ecklund, Rice University; Christopher P. Scheitle, West Virginia University Unsacred Umbrella: Sticky and Diverse Nones Coming of Age in the USA - Clara Gaddie 

4850.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 4: Social Movements and Mobilization VAM, Room 49, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Kemal Budak, Emory University Amazon synod: recycling religious strategies amid the ecological crisis - Renan William dos Santos, The University of São Paulo / Brazil Inter-Diaspora Solidarity Among the Members of a Faith-Based Social Movement - Kemal Budak, Emory University The Catholic Church and the 2018 wave of protests in Nicaragua -Sergio Miguel Cabrales Domínguez The Role of Religious Engagement in Mobilizing Immigrants’ Political Participation - the Case of Sweden - Weiqian Xia, Stockholm University 

4851.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 5: Religion and Contemporary Social Issues VAM, Room 50, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Ellen Idler, Emory University A World Ritual in Times of Social Distancing: Institutionalization of the "Clap for Carers" during COVID-19 - Alexandre Rigal, EPFL; David C Joseph-Goteiner, University of California, Berkeley Narratives and Counter-Narratives in Religious Responses to COVID-19 - Ellen Idler, Emory University; John August Bernau, Emory University; Dimitrios Zaras, Emory University Protestant Fundamentalism and COVID-19 : Case Study on Sectarian Churches as Super Spreaders in South Korea. -Sae Hwan Lee; Seil Oh, Sogang Univ. Sociology Department Professor QAnon, Evangelical Christians, and 2020: A Perfect Storm - Maya Adelle Wendel TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 128 4852.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 6: Deviance and Crime VAM, Room 51, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Nicole Fox, California State University-Sacramento A Mixed Methods Longitudinal Exploration of the Role of Religion in Prisoner Reentry - Iman Said, Penn State University; Kimberly Davidson, Penn State Following Heavenly Orders: Heroic Deviance and the Denial of Responsibility in Narratives of Rescue - Nicole Fox, California State University-Sacramento; Jamie Wise, Ohio State University; Hollie Nyseth Brehm, Ohio State University Race and Perceptions of Religion-Biased Policing - Jauhara Ferguson, Rice University; Christopher P. Scheitle, West Virginia University; Elaine Howard Ecklund, Rice University Religious Identity and Delinquency: Comparing Muslim, Christian, and Non-religious Adolescents in the United Kingdom -Christopher H Seto, The Pennsylvania State University 

4853.  Sociology of Religion Roundtables. Table 7: Religion in Historical Perspective VAM, Room 52, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizers: Laura Krull, Saint Norbert College; Orestes Pat Hastings, Colorado State University Table Presider: Casey Philip Homan, University of California, Berkeley Changing Peoples, Changing Steeples: White Flight, Black Wealth, Immigration, and Congregations in Manhattan, 1939–1999 -Casey Philip Homan, University of California, Berkeley Democracy as a Discursive Instrument of Establishing Hegemonic Power and Consolidation of Anti-Secularist Base - Aysun Güneş Durmuş, Middle East Technical University Nationalism and Crises: Canadian Moroccan Jews’ Narratives on Québec - Övgü Ülgen, University of Montreal 

4854. Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 1: Race and Civil Rights VAM, Room 53, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Kane, University of Houston-Downtown Table Presider: Mary E. Vogel, University of Manchester Racialized Legalities: Rule of Law, Race, and the Protection of Women in the Modern British Empire - Jack Jin Gary Lee, Kenyon College [Working title] Marking “MENA”: Civil Rights legislation as a catalyst for racial institutionalization - Deniz Uyan, Boston College 

4855. Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 2: Postcolonial Development, South Korea VAM, Room 54, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Kane, University of Houston-Downtown Table Presider: Jundai Liu, University of Michigan Colonial Formation of Postcolonial Transformation: Making Social Conditions of Land Reform in South Korea - Chungse Jung, SUNY-Binghamton Toward a Postcolonial Sociology of Expertise - Kyunghwan Lee, University of Southern California 

4856.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology 4857.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 3: Social Category and Policy Construction VAM, Room 56, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Kane, University of Houston-Downtown Table Presider: Leila Wilmers, Cornell University Defining Post-Conflict Victimhood: The Construction of a “Victim” Category in Colombia, 2007-2011 - Kristin Foringer, University of Michigan Incorporating Exogenous Expertise through Hyper-Ideological Barriers: Evidence from Soviet Sociologists - Hsu Huang, Brown University Preparedness and Resilience: Emergent Disaster-Based Governmentalities and the Neoliberal Bio-Politics of Risk -Jonathan Nathaniel Redman, UC Irvine 

4858.  Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Refereed Roundtables. Table 5: Social Theory and Knowledge VAM, Room 57, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Anne Kane, University of Houston-Downtown Table Presider: Nicholas Hoover Wilson, Stony Brook University The Missionary Roots of the Print Revolution - Robert D. Woodberry, Baylor University The challenges of difficult lives and bad deaths: Discussions of suicide over time - Sanja Miklin, University of Chicago; Seth Abrutyn, University of British Columbia Social Theory, History and Modernity: Ambivalences, Entanglements and the Question of Emancipation/s -Kumud Ranjan, Jawaharlal Nehru University 

4859.  Disability and Society Refereed Roundtable Session. Table 1: Disability and Society VAM, Room 58, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Michelle Lee Maroto, University of Alberta Table Presider: James Dalton Stevens, Syracuse University Disability and Health Outcomes of Eastern European Immigrants to the United States - Ina Palii, Western University The Interplay of Power/Vulnurability Among Disabled Women, Personal Care Assistants, and Sex Workers in Facilitated Sex - Ji-Sun Won, University at Albany, SUNY 

4860.  Disability and Society Refereed Roundtable Session. Table 2: Disability and Society VAM, Room 59, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Michelle Lee Maroto, University of Alberta Table Presider: Jenny Dick-Mosher, Washington State University An Examination of the FHAA and the Distribution of Accessible Housing - Kaya Hamer-Small, Broward College; Samantha Friedman, SUNY-Albany Eugenics as Power Knowledge within Early American Reproductive Rights - Kyle Lamoin Callen, University of Oklahoma The impact of COVID-19 on CIL transition services - Jenny Dick-Mosher, Washington State University 

4863.  Section on Peace, War, and Social Conflict Refereed Roundtables. Table 1: Violent Exposures and Wellbeing VAM, Room 62, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Seth Behrends, University of Illinois-Chicago Table Presider: Amy Kate Bailey, University of Illinois-Chicago Exposure to violence and cycles of conflict: Evidence from the West Bank - Crystal Shackleford TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 2021 129 

Former child soldier identity in Colombia - Randall Salm, College of Southern Maryland Spousal Justifications and Excuses of Genocide and Psycho-Social Wellbeing - Laura Frizzell, The Ohio State University; Hollie Nyseth Brehm, Ohio State University; Kammi Schmeer, Ohio State University 

4864. Section on Peace, War, and Social Conflict Refereed Roundtables. Table 2: Political Power, Dissent, and Uprisings VAM, Room 63, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Amy Kate Bailey, University of Illinois-Chicago Table Presider: Seth Behrends, University of Illinois-Chicago Bandits, Militants, and Martyrs: Sub-state Violence as Claim to Authority in Late Antique North Africa - Gregory Goalwin, Aurora University Brexit as a ‘Constitutional Moment’ in Protestant/Unionist/Loyalist Politics? Examining Perspectives of Community-based Stakeholders in Northern Ireland - Curtis Carl Holland, SUNY-Old Westbury Diaspora Compound: Securitization Framework and the Turkish State’s Making of Dissent Abroad - Zeynep Selen Bayhan, 29 Mayis University Post-Terrorist Wars on Terror: Criminal Law and the Repression of Nonviolent Contention in Spain - Philippe Duhart, California State Polytechnic University-Pomona The Iraqi uprising: space, urbicide and necropolitcs - Zahra Ali, Rutgers University-Newark 

4866. Section on Sociology of Sexualities. Untold Stories of Studying Sexualities: A Simon-Gagnon Lifetime Achievement Award Conversation VAM, Room 65, 4:45-5:40pm 

Session Organizer: Salvador Vidal-Ortiz, American University Presider: Jyoti Puri, Simmons University Panelists: Gloria Gonzalez-Lopez, University of Texas-Austin; Theo Greene, Bowdoin College; Katie Linette Acosta, Georgia State University; Chaitanya Lakkimsetti, Texas A&M University-College Station 

# Tuesday, 6:00 pm 4901. Plenary Session. The Science and Prevention of Gun Violence in Chicago: The Promises of Emancipatory Sociology VAM, Room 0, 6:00-7:30pm 

Session Organizer: Ruby Mendenhall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Presiders: Ruby Mendenhall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Andrew V. Papachristos, Northwestern University Panelists: Jalon Arthur, Chicago Cred; Norman Kerr, Acting Deputy Mayor for Public Safety of the City of Chicago; Robert Vargas, University of Chicago; Kimberly M. Foxx, Cook County State's Attorney Discussants: Andrew V. Papachristos, Northwestern University; Ruby Mendenhall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Gun violence in Chicago, as in most American cities, remains stubbornly concentrated in a small number of neighborhoods that have been surveilled, locked up, and otherwise left out of economic, political, social, and educational investments. This session brings to life one meaning of emancipatory sociology by diving into these contexts of oppression and neighborhood violence. Panelists will offer their reflections and experiences on gun violence and gun violence prevention in Chicago, drawing on their experiences as drawing on their experiences as public officials, violence preventionists, social scientists, and those living in communities most impacted by gun violence. The discussion aims to serve as a bridge between emancipatory practices and policies that can provide healing to communities experiencing gun violence. The session will conclude with a celebration of those efforts that rises to the DuBoisian challenge. 

> Session 4863 continued

# PARTICIPANT INDEX 130 

# A

Aaron, Kayla  1712 Abad, Melissa Victoria  0203, 1307, 1526, 4317 Abascal, Maria  3708 Abdi, Cawo Mohamed  4104 Abdullahi, Mohammed Shamsidin  2255 Abdul-Malak, Ynesse  2317 Abecassis, Adrien  1457 Abel, Richard D  2251, 4331 Abelson, Miriam J.  1713, 4528, 4728 Abernathy, Jered  4819 Abraham, Margaret  4117 Abraham, Martin  2131 Abrahim, Fayise  3504 Abrams, Jennifer  2867 Abrams, Les  2856 Abrego, Leisy Janet  2107 Abromaviciute, Jurgita  2130 Abrutyn, Seth  4858 Abudalu, Muath  4132 Abumaye, Muhamed  2107 Acevedo, Gabriel A  3148 Ackert, Elizabeth  1305, 3666, 3861 Acosta, Katie Linette  4866 Acosta, Laura  2347, 2348, 2349, 2350, 2351, 2352, 2353, 2354, 2355, 2356, 2357, 2358, 2359, 2360, 2361, 2720, 4321 Adames, Alexander  2129, 3131 Adams, Alison E.  1126 Adams, Crystal M.  2526 Adams, Rebecca G.  1467 Adams, Scott A.  4315 Adamson, Erin M.  1855 Adamyk, Natalie Julia  3349 Addae, Angela E.  4714 Adebajo, Adekeye  4703 Adelman, Robert M.  1852 Adem, Muna  1850 Adesina, Jimi O.  2715, 3305, 4703 Adeyinka-Skold, Sarah  4725 Adjepong, Anima  4522 Adler, Gary  4518 Adler, Laura  1118, 2118, 2316, 3349, 3351, 3353, 3354, 3355, 3357, 3508, 3718 Adriaans, Jule  4662 Agadjanian, Victor  2131 Agarwal, Samantha  3266 Agarwala, Rina  2258 Agbai, Chinyere O  2506 Agius Vallejo, Jody  1104 Agyepong, Mercy  4116 Ahmed, Sarah  2467 Akalin, Nilufer  1454 Akchurin, Maria  2716 Akee, Randal  1533 Akova, Feyza  2865 Alahmed, Nadia  4307 Alang, Sirry  4325 Alarcon, Jasmine  0552 Alatas, Syed Farid  2115 Alatriste-Diaz, Rodrigo  3857 Alba, Richard D.  1503 Albrecht, Kat  1714, 4714 Albright, Danielle  1450 Albright, Karen  4315 Alcaraz, Melissa  3331 Alcauter, Bethany  1854 Aldana Marquez, Beatriz  2133, 2865 Aldanmaz, Bahar  3553 Alderson, Arthur S.  0531 Alegria, Sharla N.  3118, 3319, 3718, 4718 Al-Emadi, Noor  4249 Alemán-Díaz, Aixa  1510 Alemzadeh, Maryam  2123 Alexander, Michelle Jacqueline  1459 Alexander, Perry  3664 Alexander, Rachel  2315 Alexander, Sarah  4453 Alfarone, Caleigh  1647 Al-Hardan, Anaheed  1507, 4307 Ali, Zahra  4864 Alicea, Julio Angel  2319 Alimahomed-Wilson, Jake  2714 Alimi, Eitan Y.  1731 Alinor, Malissa  2718 Allain, Kristi A.  4331 Allard, Scott W.  3502, 4266 Allen, Amira  4713 Allen, Courtney  0548 Allen, Shaonta' E.  1307, 1523 Allen, Tennille Nicole  4332 Allen, Walter  1105, 2303, 2502 Allen, Warren  1450 Allen, Will L.  3732 Allison, Rachel Catherine  1325 Almanza, Pamela  0552 AlMasarweh, Luma Issa  1322 Almeida, Paul D.  1122 Almeling, Rene  4127, 4327, 4527 Almquist, Zack W.  2329, 4455 Aloua, Loke  1304 Alrefai, Hashem  3729 Al Saadie, Fatima  4526 Al-Sholi, Ahmad  3312 Alston, Brandon  2671 Altman, Claire E.  3724 Altunkol Wise, Fatma  4663 Alvarado, Arturo  1723 Alvarado, Sarah  1247 Alvarez, Camila Huerta  1516 Alvero, AJ  3350 Alvord, Daniel R.  3262 Amaral, Ernesto F. L.  2131, 3129 Amaya, Elena Marilin  3710 Amaya, Nicole V.  1534 Amenta, Edwin  4711, 4729 Amironesei, Razvan  1113 Amorim, Mariana  4713 An, Weihua  0102, 3517 Anadon, Isabel  3462 Anako, Nnenna  4106 Anderson, Alecia D  1720 Anderson, Elizabeth Marie  4525 Anderson, Kara Lindsey  3465 Anderson, Kathryn Freeman  0553, 3318 Anderson, Kevin B.  0106, 3114 Anderson, Vincent R.  1575 Andersson, Matthew  2248, 2313 Andrabi, Nafeesa  2261, 2671 Andrews, Abigail L.  1104 Andrews, Kenneth (Andy)  3327, 4330 Aneesh, Aneesh  3658 Angel, Jacqueline L.  2747 Angeles Figueroa, Joselyn Lissette  3857 Angeletti, Thomas  4128 Angelo, Hillary  1504 Angotti, Nicole  2262 Anguiano, Giovanni  0557 Anhaf, Muhammad Nuhan  1522 Annavarapu, Sneha  1528, 4132 Ansari, Shaz  1729, 2526 Ansari-Thomas, Zohra  2317, 4652 Anspach, Rachel  3121 Anthis, Jacy Reese  2352 Antonio, Robert J.  0106 Anyawie, Maurice  2332 Aparicio, Tania R.  1128, 1717 Apaza, Adrian  1450 Apkarian, Jacob  2860 Appel, Joy Dillard  3716 Applewhite, Courtney  4118 Aptekar, Sofya  1512, 3515, 4509 Aquino, Taylor  4653 Aragao, Carolina  3315 Aranda, Elizabeth M.  1315, 3116 Araos, Malcolm  4731 Arar, Rawan  2331 Aravena, Alonso  1254, 1519 Arbeit, Caren  2112, 2512, 4515 Arcario, Erin  2857 Arce-Trigatti, Andrea  1573, 1709 Archibald, Matthew E.  1572, 2310, 4517 Arciniega, Yolanda  0558 Ard, Kerry  4654 Arditi, David Michael  2523 Argibay, Sofia  1531 Aristizabal, Pedro  3666 Arjomand, Noah Amir  2733 Armenta, Amada  2124, 2671, 2724 Armitage, Janet S.  1574, 1724 Arnold, Carson  1520 Arora, Mona  4660 Arp, Holli  2712 Arredondo, Aaron  2322, 3859, 4721 Arriaga, Felicia  3314 Arriagada, Isabel  1129 Arsaelsson, Kristinn Mar  3731 Arseniev-Koehler, Alina  2359, 2716, 3462 Arslan, Melike  2853, 2854, 2855, 2856, 2857, 2858, 2859, 2860 Arthur, Jalon  4901 Arthur, Mikaila Mariel Lemonik  2329, 2710 Artiles, Alfredo J.  1247 Asad, Asad L.  3703, 4125 Asahina, Yuki  2717 Asante, Rabiu K. B.  4254 Ascherio, Marta  4125, 4730 Ashford, James  3521 Ash-Houchen, William  2259 Ashok P, Bharathan  1718 Ashwin, Sarah  2315 Asiedu, Christobel  1522 Atalay, Zeynep  1532, 1732 PARTICIPANT INDEX 131 

Athans, Chryssa  2266 Atiles, Jose  3463 Atkins, Celeste  2821 Atsbeha, Ezana Amdework  2127 Attewell, Paul A.  3133 Au, Larry  2654 Auerbach, Daniel  3863, 3864, 3865, 3866 Auldridge Reveles, Trevor Ray  1723 Auspurg, Katrin  4650 Austin, Jessica  1266, 1459 Austin, Kelly  1317 Auyero, Javier  1502, 2102 Averett, Kate Henley  2130, 4702 Aviles, Natalie B.  2122 Avrahampour, Yally  2860 Awwad, Amani Michael  2121 Ayala, Celine Maria  3310 Ayala, Cesar  2707 Ayala, Cristián  2356 Ayala, Jordan  1514 Ayala-Candia, Jesus  1853 Ayala-Hurtado, Elena  2358 Aygenc, Berfu  2730 Aylward, Alexandra  1247 Ayyala, Manasa  3707 Azar, Ariel R  2317 Azeb, Sophia  4307 Azedi, Arman  1451 Aziz, Ahmed T  2666 Aziz, Niaz Muhsin  1264 

# B

Ba, Yin  1258 Babbie, Earl  1301 Babel, Zach  1531 Babineau, Kathryn C  2513 Baboolal, Aneesa Aruna  4104 Bacchus, Nazreen Sameena  4126 Bacevic, Jana  2532 Backstrom, Laura B.  4250 Bacon, J. M.  4762 Bada, Xochitl  4329 Badawy, Philip James  1332 Bae, Youngjoon  2313 Baek, Chanwoong  2532 Baer-Bositis, Livia  4662 Baez, Robert  3149 Bagozzi, Benjamin E.  4455 Baik, Eun Se  3124 Bail, Christopher A.  4102 Bailey, Amy Kate  4529, 4863, 4864 Bailey-Hall, Miara  2323 Baiocchi, Gianpaolo  1120, 1456, 2729, 3320, 3719 Bair, Jennifer L.  4329 Baker, Benjamin  3353 Baker, Elizabeth Helene  3329, 4253 Baker, Regina S.  3317, 4258, 4312 Baker-Kimmons, Leslie  3103 Baldoz, Rick A.  2707, 4717 Baldwin, Davarian  1505 Balistreri, Kelly  1703, 2266 Ballakrishnen, Swethaa S.  2258, 3466 Ballif, Edmée  3351 Balogun, Oluwakemi M.  4122 Balu, Rekha  4314 Baluran, Darwin A  2515 Balzarini, John E  4714 Bandelj, Nina  1330, 1721 Bandhauer, Carina A.  1452, 3124 Banerjee, Madhumita  2320 Banerjee, Nilanjan  3521 Banerjee, Pallavi  1125, 1325, 3331, 3508 Banerjee, Tarun  2123, 3302 Banerji, Aman  3864 Bangalore, Nidhi  4455 Banisch, Sven  4121 Banks, Jasmine  4531 Banks, Patricia A.  1717 Bantigue, Irene  3572 Banuelos, Nidia Isabel  4667 Barahona-López, Kati  2107 Barbee, Harry  2329, 4323 Barber, Kristen  1312, 2525, 2533 Barbieri, Alisson Flávio  2131 Barbieri, Luiz  4458 Barcelos, Chris A.  3117 Barco, Jessica  3858 Barcus, Miriam  4251 Bargain-Darrigues, Gaelle  2323 Bargheer, Stefan  2330 Bariola, Nino  1470, 2323 Barkan, Steven E.  1301, 3463 Barnard, Alexander Vosick  1714 Barnes, Sandra Lynn  4107 Barnett, Melissa  4660 Barol, Shirin  2866 Barr, Ashley B  4253 Barr, Mary  2308 Barragan Torres, Mariana  4124 Barrett, Anne E.  3353 Barron, Valerie  4531 Barry, Ben  4520 Bartanen, Brendan  4324 Barton, Alan William  2312 Bartram, David  2328 Basaran Sahin, Duygu  1862, 2750 Bascunan-Wiley, Nicholas  1128 Bashi Treitler, Vilna Francine  1107, 3306, 3503 Basmechi, Farinaz  3729 Bass, Kristen  1453 Bass, Lilas  3722 Bass, Loretta  1852, 3668 Bass, Madeline Jaye  4129 Basseches, Joshua A.  1725 Bassett, Becca Spindel  1512 Bassett, Bryson Thomas  2257 Bastian, Savannah Claire  3356 Bateman, Tyler J.  4463 Bates, Christopher J.  3556 Bates, Julia  3120, 3328 Bates, Littisha Antoinette  0277, 1105, 3105 Battle, Nishaun  2103 Bauldry, Shawn  3725 Bayhan, Zeynep Selen  4864 Baykurt, Burcu  3320 Bea, Megan Doherty  1530 Beaman, Jean  1733, 3130, 3706, 4104 Beamer, Paloma  4106 Beard, Lauren  2326 Beattie, Irenee R.  2326 Beauvile, Roberson  2329 Becerra, Marisol  3717 Becerra, René A  1266 Bechky, Beth A.  1118 Beck, Colin J.  2651, 3312 Becker, Andréa  4127 Beck-McField, Armani  2723 Beckwith, Cary  2533 Bedera, Nicole  2527 Beduk, Selcuk  4261 Beeman, Angie  4126 Begay, Jr, Manley  4106 Begum, Neema  3712 Begum, Popy  2348 Behounek, Elaina Kay  2121 Behrends, Seth  4863, 4864 Behrendt, Maia  4318 Behrman, Julia A  1848, 2334 Beider, Nadia  4847 Bell, Ann V.  1647, 4527 Bell, Joyce M.  4502 Bell, Marcus  3154 Bell, Michael M.  2354 Bell, Monica C.  3121, 4125, 4724 Bell, Shannon Elizabeth  4707 Beltran-Lizarazo, Andrea  3461 Benanav, Aaron  2315 Benard, Stephen  1520 Bender-Baird, Kyla  4528 Benditt, Lauren  2519 Benefo, Kofi D.  1131 Benjamin, Jesse  1106 Benjamin, Ruha  2508, 3115 Ben-Menachem, Jonathan  4724 Bennett, Michael I.J.  4705 Bennett, Pamela R.  4647 Bento, Asia Inez  2506 Benzecry, Claudio Ezequiel  1719 Berda, Yael H  4319 Berdahl, Terceira A.  4315 Berezin, Mabel  3519, 4119, 4503 Bergen, Clara Ann Blomgren  1324, 3122 Berghman, Michaël  2355 Bergstrand, Kelly  1455 Berheide, Catherine White  2121, 4660 Berman, Elizabeth Popp  3118, 3319, 3718, 4115, 4317, 4718 Bermudez Tapia, Bertha Alicia  1858 Bernardes, Tereza  1131 Bernatzky, Colin  1728 Bernau, John August  4851 Bernburg, Jon Gunnar  1450 Berndt, Virginia Kuulei  1647, 2322 Bernhardt, Janine  4248 Berrelleza, Erick  4848 Berrey, Ellen  1702, 4526 Berry, Marie E.  4120 Berseth, Valerie  4450 Bertana, Amanda Rae  1126, 4450 Besbris, Max  1330, 2506, 2729, 4453 Besek, Jordan Fox  4459 Besen-Cassino, Yasemin  0533 Besserer Rayas, Andrés Sebastián  2331, 4708 Bessett, Danielle  1647, 2710, 4127, 4327 PARTICIPANT INDEX 132 

Best, Amy L.  3109 Best, Rachel Kahn  1302 Betancur, John-Jairo  4705 Better, Alison S.  2121, 2522 Beutel, Ann M.  1249, 2121 Beveridge, Andrew A.  4269, 4515, 4715 Bhallamudi, Isha  3755 Bhambra, Gurminder K.  1507, 4108 Bhandari, Aparajita  1464 Bhardwaj, Ankit  4516 Bhatia, Monica  4460 Bhatta, Tirth Raj  1658, 2317 Bianchi, Alison J.  4531 Bickell, Lauren  1864 Bickerstaff, Jovonne J  3503 Bidwell, Cilka  2732 Bielamowicz, Rebecca  1261 Bilaye-Benibo, Tamunosaki Triah Ibiesigha 

1519 Billard, Thomas J  2733 Billings, Katie R.  4325 Bimo, Sara  1464 Bing, Lindsay  2503 Binkovitz, Leah  3333, 3719 Binswanger, Ingrid  4467 Bird, Chloe E.  4515 Birhane, Abeba  2508 Birkhead, Colin  2853 Bishop-Royse, Jessica C.  3510 Bixby, Laurin Elizabeth  1729, 2317 Blaabæk, Ea Hoppe  3716 Black, Dianna Lynn  4661 Blackwell, Rebecca  3116 Blair, Sampson Lee  2468, 4464 Blake, Mary Kate  1247, 1248, 1249, 1250, 1251, 1252, 1253, 1254, 1255, 1256, 1257, 1258, 1259, 1260, 1261, 1262, 1263, 1305, 1512, 1712, 2505 Blalock, Janice  4715 Blanc, Eric Benjamin  2105 Blank, Grant  1458, 1460 Blankholm, Joseph  4118 Blasi, Joseph Raphael  4258 Blazek, Amber Michelle  4450 Bledsoe Gardner, Anita  2308 Blee, Kathleen  0106, 4503 Block, Fred  1302, 1502, 1707 Bloemraad, Irene H.I.  3327, 3512 Blom Hansen, Thomas  4503 Bloom, Joshua  2530, 4521 Bloome, Deirdre  2129, 2333 Bloss, Cinnamon  2259 Blosser, Emily Gwen  3726 Blume Oeur, Freeden  1128, 1306, 1728, 4702 Bo, Boroka B  2749, 3859 Bobo, Lawrence D.  1706 Bobzien, Licia  2854 Boch, Anna  1532 Boches, Daniel J.  3714 Boen, Courtney E.  1722, 2317, 4326 Boeri, Miriam W.  4517 Boese, Martina  3515 Boguslaw, Alissa  4321 Bohon, Stephanie A.  4330 Bohr, Jeremiah  4454 Bohrt, Marcelo A.  2466, 3332 Boichak, Olga  1528 Bok, Jared  4848 Boko, Semassa  1517 Bokun, Anna Maria  4247 Bolger, Daniel  4266 Bollen, Kenneth A.  2750 Bolton, Megan Elizabeth  1653 Bonaparte, Alicia D  1306 Bonatti, Valeria  3348 Bond, Brittany Marie  1861 Bonham, Vence L.  3150 Bonikowski, Bart  3712, 4519 Bonner, Daphney  4654 Bonner, Florence B.  1105 Bonnes, Stephanie  2727, 4529 Booker, Bianca  1114, 1868 Borghini, Andrea  4730 Borus, Matthew Gabriel  1454 Bose, Christine E.  3308, 4304 Bose, Diya  3713, 4122 Boselovic, Joseph  1258, 2529 Bosley-Smith, Emma Ryan  4708 Bosworth, Ixchel  1519 Bothner, Matthew S.  2857 Botto, Matteo  3354 Bouek, Jennifer  4131 Boulianne, Shelley J.  1454, 3326 Bouma, Jill  3309 Bourabain, Dounia  1513 Bourek, Maria  1720 Bourman-Karns, Natalie  0555 Boutilier, Sophia  2254, 4726 Boutyline, Andrei G.  2359 Bowen, Sarah  1718, 4247 Bowers, Abigail  1130, 4462 Bowers, Melanie  1267, 1313 Bowman, Amber  1718 Bowman, Catherine Griebel  2513, 3512 Bowman Williams, Jamillah E.  2705 Boy, John D  1463 Boyd, Melody L.  4714 Boyd, Reiko  1704 Boyd, Robert L.  1706 Boyle, Elizabeth Heger  3712 Boyle, Kait M.  1316, 1721, 1863 Boyles, Andrea S.  1319, 2124, 2311 Bozick, Robert  1251 Braatz, Rick  4267, 4323 Bracey, Glenn Edward  2706, 3119, 3306, 3505, 3727 Bradlow, Benjamin  4319 Brady, David  2313 Brady, Marnie  2729, 3320 Brainin, Esther  1463 Braksmajer, Amy  3356, 4323 Branch, Enobong (Anna)  2103 Branch, Michael  4267 Brand, Jennie E.  2471, 4262 Brandt, Emma  2358 Brandt, Philipp Soeren  3525 Brandtner, Christof  3118 Branigan, Amelia R.  3331 Brant, Kristina Paige  4517 Brantley, Mia  4312 Braun, Jerome  3258 Braun, Robert  3527, 4119, 4321 Braun, Yvonne Alexandra  1725 Braunstein, Ruth  4519 Brause, Saba Rebecca  1458 Brechin, Steven R.  4731 Breen, Kyle  1130, 4462 Breen, Richard James  2332 Brehm, Hollie Nyseth  4852, 4863 Breiger, Ronald L.  3472 Brenner, Neil  3320 Brenner-Levoy, Jeremy  4522 Brenton, Joslyn  3329 Brett, Gordon  2359 Brewer, Alexandra E.  1649, 3118 Brewer, Rose  1306 Brick, Carmen Marie  4729 Brinton, Mary C.  1131 Briscoe, Michael D  4447 Britton, Marcus L.  4722 Broadbent, Jeffrey  3153 Brock, Breanna D  3503 Brockman, Amanda J.  1520, 4722 Brønnum-Hansen, Henrik  2751 Brooker, Megan E.  1450, 4707 Brooks, Marcus  1506, 4506 Brooms, Derrick R.  2719 Brothers, Sarah  3728 Broussard, Kathleen  4127 Browe, Dennis  3664 Brower, Margaret  1112 Brown, Bailey A.  1257, 4723 Brown, Eliza  3347 Brown, Karida  2122, 3507, 4302, 4505 Brown, Kate Pride  2864 Brown, Kenly Elizabeth Kelly  4316 Brown, Letisha Engracia Cardoso  1316, 1859 Brown, Maria  3555, 4847 Brown, Phil  1514, 4106, 4456 Brown, Phylicia Xin Yi Lee  1326, 1725 Brown, Robyn Lewis  1329, 1529, 1729 Brown, Susan L.  2333 Brown, Tony N.  1509, 2706 Brown, Tyson H.  1114 Brown, Virginia A  1575, 1709 Browne, Alyssa  2325, 4665 Browne, Teri  3707 Browning, Christopher R.  4649 Brown-Saracino, Japonica  2106, 2307 Bruch, Elizabeth  1252, 2120 Bruch, Sarah K.  4257 Bruefach, Tyler  1722 Bruene, Sara  3532 Bruhn, Sarah  3524 Bruns, Angela  1866 Brunsma, David L.  0541, 4656 Bryan, Brielle  3131, 4131 Bryant, Chenoia  1516 Bryden, Anne  1529 Bryer, Ellen  3131 Bryson, Bethany P.  1532, 1732 Bubenik, Sara  3326 Bucca, Mauricio  3316 Bucci, Rebecca Ann  3724 Buchanan, Blu  1306, 1730, 3721 Buchholz, Larissa  2863 Buchmann, Claudia  4314 PARTICIPANT INDEX 133 

Buchwald, Dedra  3747 Budak, Kemal  4850 Budhiraja, Kriti  2650 Budnick, Jamie Louise  3662 Buffel, Veerle  1727 Bugden, Dylan  4461 Buggs, Shantel Gabrieal  1730, 2522, 4306 Buhl, Michael  2711 Bulanda, Jennifer Roebuck  2121 Bulut, Elif  1857 Bunker Whittington, Kjersten  4726 Bunnage, Leslie A.  3726 Burawoy, Michael  1901, 2102, 3710 Burciaga, Edelina M.  1858, 2107 Burden-Stelly, Charisse  3504 Burg, Ryan S.  2312 Burge, Stephanie Woodham  1249 Burgese, Tyler  0547 Burghart, D. Brian  2621 Burke, Colin  2259 Burke, Jordan C.  2751 Burke, Kelsy  4318 Burke, Nancy  1654 Burleigh, Patricia  1248 Burman, Sofie  4729 Burns, Andrew Robert  1457 Burow, Paul Berne  1130 Burr, William H  4664 Buscariolli, Andre  2722 Busch, Felix  2134 Buscha, Connie Ann  3330 Busse, Erika  3116 Bustamante, Juan José  4721 Butts, Carter T.  1462, 2329, 2726, 3326, 3521, 4819 Byron, Reginald Anthony  1526 

# C

C, Jayakumar  1718 Cabello-Hutt, Tania  3150, 4712 Cabrales Domínguez, Sergio Miguel  4850 Cadena, Roger S.  2133 Cadigan, Michele Lindsay  2104, 2855 Cagney, Kathleen A.  4269, 4325 Cai, Liang  4649 Cai, Tianji  3329 Cairns, Kate  4516 Caisey, Alannah Sheri  2718, 3552, 3553, 3554, 3555, 4658 Calarco, Jessica McCrory  2130, 4525, 4723 Calasanti, Toni  2749 Caldeira, Larissa  0548 Calderón Figueroa, Fernando A.  3266 Calderon-Zaks, Michael Aaron  4654 Calhoun, Craig  1901 Caliendo, Mary Amelia  1865 Callahan, Jessica  1647 Callen, Kyle Lamoin  4860 Calnitsky, David  4729 Calvillo, Jonathan  4654 Calvo, Esteban  2317 Cameron, Lindsey D.  1332 Camic, Charles  1505 Campbell, Emily B.  4467 Campbell, Larry  4731 Campbell, Mary Elizabeth  4324 Campeau, Holly  4724 Campos-Castillo, Celeste  2318, 2519 Cañarte, David  2126 Cancelmo, Cara  4460, 4651 Canizales, Stephanie L.  1104, 2108 Cannady, Emmanuel  2311 Cantu, Phillip A  2748 Cao, Likun  1530 Cao, Xuemei  1116 Caputo, Jennifer  2751 Carbino, Jessica  4315 Carbone, Luca  2354 Cardenas, Soraya  2733 Caren, Neal  4330 Carey, Allison C.  4320 Carian, Emily Kiyoko  1713, 2130 Carl, Catherine  0547 Carley, Kathleen M.  4121 Carll, Erin  2510 Carlson, Daniel L.  4513, 4713 Carlson, Elwood  1857 Carlson, Howard Jacob  2729, 3320 Carlson, Jennifer  4102, 4512 Carlson, Lisa  1525 Carlson, Shelby  1266 Carmi, Ruth  3357 Carmichael, Lewie Andrew  3353 Carney, Nikita  2125 Caronna, Carol A.  2121 Carpenter, Craig  1865 Carpenter, Laura M.  4323, 4515 Carpenter, Megan  4660 Carr, Dawn Celeste  1314, 1722 Carr, Deborah  2313 Carr, Lesley  2515 Carr, Mairead  3106 Carrera, Jennifer S.  1126 Carrillo, Dani  1654, 1715 Carrillo, Ian Robert  1718, 4654 Carrington, Ben  1308 Carrion, Alexis  1712 Carroll, Caitlin P.  1713 Carruthers, Bruce G.  2111 Carruthers, Charlene  1733 Carson, April  4253 Carter, Prudence L.  1901, 3702 Cartwright, Ashleigh Imani  4656 Carvalho, Rui F.  2728 Carver, Laura  3464 Casanova, Erynn Masi de  0277, 1301, 1534, 2115, 2310, 2709, 3109, 3308, 3572, 4501 Casanova, Felicia O.  1856 Casey, Alison  1261 Casie Chetty, Ayesha  2347, 4127 Cassard, Marion  1454 Cassidy, Steven Paul  3330 Castaneda Perez, Estefania  1850 Castillo, Elise  4324 Castro, Andres Felipe  1131 Castro, Brianna  1518, 4450 Castro, Ingrid E.  2262 Castro, Samantha  4657 Caudillo Contreras, Monica Lisette  1325 Cavalli, Nicolo  1852 Cavicchini, Andrea  2360 Cebulko, Kara  3857 Cech, Erin A.  3525 Cepeda, Alice  4114, 4464, 4465, 4466, 4467, 4517 Cerdá, Magdalena  4114 Ceron-Anaya, Hugo  3130 Cha, Youngjoo  3118 Chacko, Soulit  1325 Chae, Je Hoon  1466 Chai, Lei  4320 Chaichian, Mohammad A.  4523 Chakraborty, Payal  1647 Chakravarty, Debjani  2121 Chalfoun, Andrew  2324 Chambers, Arthur  1130, 4462 Chambliss, Daniel F.  1511 Chan, Esther  2515, 3350 Chance, Joseph  1118 Chandler, Genevieve  2313 Chang, Andy Scott  3713 Chang, Chae Yoon  3264 Chang, Gordon C.  2532, 2722 Chang, Joyce  4655 Chang, Kai-Wei  3462 Chang, Paul Yunsik  3124, 3316 Chang, Yung-Ying  1662, 3263 Changa, Anoa J.  4108 Chaplin, Kenneth Sean  1328 Charitopoulou, Effrosyni  1852 Charles, Jefferson  1457 Charles, Sabrina  4125 Charley, Perry  4106 Charrad, Mounira Maya  4329 Chase-Dunn, Christopher  1669, 1716 Chatillon, Anna  1659, 4327 Chaudhuri, Soma  2123 Chauhan, Bhumika  2664 Chavda, Ankur  1118 Chavez, Kerry  3527 Chavez, Koji Rafael  4712 Chazdon, Scott A.  2712 Cheeks, Lillian  2324 Chen, Anthony S.  3120 Chen, Feinian  2333 Chen, Grace A  4723 Chen, Hongye  2462 Chen, Janie  2515 Chen, Jieming  2264 Chen, Kenneth Han  1255 Chen, Qindian  1327 Chen, Wenhong  3526, 3550, 4660 Chen, Xi  1262 Chen, Xinyue  1859 Chen, Yvonne  2465, 3310 Chen, Zhaodi  3326, 3526 Chen, Zhenxiang  2731 Chen, Ziwen  1530 Chenault, Tiffany Gayle  4316 Cheney, Eric R.  1455 Cheng, Anthony Hoi-wa  1451 Cheng, Cheng  4255 Cheng, Edmund Wai  1451 Cheng, Siwei  2129 Cheng, Tony  2671, 3464 Cheng, Tyrone C  2259 PARTICIPANT INDEX 134 

Cheng, Yu-Ching  2122 Cheong, Amanda Rachel  1119, 1857 Cherry, Elizabeth  1313 Chettri, Shibani  1647 Chewinski, Max  3756 Chhabra, Natasha  3748 Chhan, David  3521 Chi, Guangqing  1518 Chiang, Tom  2468 Chiang, Yi-Lin  2468 Chiaraluce, Cara A.  1709 Chiareli, Isabella Ann  3755 Chiarello, Elizabeth  4526 Chicancham, Moises  0552 Chief, Carmenlita  4106 Chief, Karletta  4106 Child, Curtis D.  2855 Childers, Trenita Brookshire  2110, 3706 Childress, Clayton  1664, 3522 Chiles, Robert Magneson  2127, 3717 Chin, Jeffrey  2121 Chin, Julia Rose  1865 Chintala, Swati  2116 Cho, Eunsoo  0553 Cho, Yun Kyung  1249 Choi, Meera  2333, 4525 Chong, Kelly Haesung  2466 Choo, Hae Yeon  2304 Chorev, Nitsan  1119 Chouhy, Gabriel  2716 Choung, Yonglim  2266 Chow, Alex  4254 Chowdhury, Arjun  4120 Choyke, Kelly  1652 Christensen, MacKenzie Antoinette  1460 Christian, Michelle Marie  2315 Christie, Robert MacNeil  2351 Christie-Mizell, C. Andre  1314, 2318 Christin, Angele  2716, 3126 Christy, Kayonne  1715 Chu, Doris C  2259 Chuang, Julia  2464, 4105 Chuang May, Tiffany Jordan  2647 Chudyk, Elliot Noel  3713 Chun, Sung David  4650 Chung, Ha-Joon  2720 Chung, Heejung  4249 Chung, Hiu-fung  1451 Church, Anna  3747 Chykina, Volha  1259 Ciccantell, Paul S.  4130 Ciciurkaite, Gabriele  1729 Ciocca Eller, Christina  1512 Ciplet, David M.  4459 Cisneros, Natalie  2311 Cisneros Franco, Cynthia Luz  4663 Clague, Angela  4660, 4661 Clair, Matthew  4724 Clark, Brett  3504 Clark, Jaylexia  2714 Clark, Timothy  4447, 4459 Clark-Barol, Molly  2854 Clarno, Andy  2314, 2704, 3507 Claster, Patricia Neff  4464 Clausen, Rebecca J.  4106 Clayton, Kristen Annette  2519 Clay-Warner, Jody  0536 Cleary, Joseph Paul  1263 Cleckner, Callie  1255 Clemens, Patrick  1727 CLEMENT, Karine  2649 Clerge, Orly  1726, 3719 Clingan, Lauren  4725 CoatarPeter, Patrick  3153 Coates, Derek C.  1524 Coates, Rodney D.  4707 Cobb, Ryon J.  4647, 4648, 4649, 4650, 4651, 4652, 4653, 4654, 4655, 4656, 4657, 4658, 4659 Cobbina, Jennifer  1319, 2124 Cochran, Nicole  3319 Cochran, Susan  3462 Coffey, Diane  4326 Cohen, Daniel Aldana  3519 Cohen, Philip N.  1325 Cohn, Samuel  2257 Cole, Wade M.  2651 Coleman, Max Elliott  1722 Coley, J  2109 Coley, Jonathan Scott  3327, 4318 Collins, Caitlyn  1470, 4513 Collins, Devin  2248 Collins, Lainey  2320 Collins, Mary B.  2663, 4456 Collins, Timothy William  3717, 4451, 4458 Collischon, Matthias  3718 Colombarolli, Claudia  2854 Colwell, Brian  2463 Coma, Azdren  4461 Combs, Barbara Harris  3332 Comfort, Megan Lee  3502, 4268 Comi, Matt  3664, 4447 Comoglio, Ann  2519 Compernolle, Ellen (Nell)  4325 Compton, D'Lane R.  2128, 2328, 2528 Condron, Dennis J.  4324 Conley, Dalton  4264 Conlon Mayfield, Bridget A.  1709 Conn, Cameron  3858 Connell, Cati  2727 Connell, Raewyn  1507, 3305, 3709 Conner, Jerusha  2319 Conroy-Ben, Otakuye  4106 Constant, Andrea  2719 Conte Keivabu, Risto  4456 Contreras, Christopher  4466 Contreras, Juan  2331 Conwell, Jordan  4314 Conzon, Vanessa  3718 Cook, Amanda  1512 Cook, Britiny Iris  4665 Cook, Tanya N.  1447 Cook-Martín, David A.  2513 Cooper, Brittany  4502 Cooper, David Heath  4451 Cooper, Marianne  2302, 2519, 4525, 4531 Cooperstock, Alexandra C  1712 Copeland, Molly  1314, 1654 Coplin, Abigail  2327 Corbett, Christianne  2519, 4531, 4665 Corday, C.  3265, 3467 Cordeiro, Veridiana Domingos  2251, 2868 Cordner, Alissa  4106, 4456 Cordova, David  3666 Cordova, Teresa  3322 Cordova-Cobo, Diana  3314, 4649 Cornell, Devin J  2359 Corner, Shanna  4318 Cornfield, Daniel B.  1717 Corning-Myers, Micah  3357 Corral, Joanna  0552 Correll, Shelley J.  1103 Corrigall-Brown, Catherine  3756 Cort, David A.  1522 Cort, Malcolm A.  1522 Cortese, Daniel K.  2320 Cortez-Flores, Sarah  3861 Cotter, David A.  4660 Cottom, Tressie  2302, 4502 Couloute, Lucius  4730 Courtney, Margaret Michele Gough  4248, 4513 Cousins, Elicia Mayuri  3747 Covelli, Lauren Ann  4723 Covington, Lisa  3310 Cowan, Sarah K.  4127 Cox, Amanda Barrett  2119 Cox, Kiana  3508 Crabtree, Arialle Kaye  1447 Craemer, Thomas  3311 Craig, Katherine  2519 Crawford, Kate  1303 Crawford, Neta  4120 Crawley, S L.  1730 Creasap, Kimberly  3510 Creasey, Danielle Marie  2265 Crenshaw, Kimberle  0901, 3304 Crew, The HeArt Room  3556 Cricco Doldan, Nino Jose  4523 Crivello, Felicia  1457 Crocetto, Johanna  1574, 2320 Crockett, David K.  1330 Cromety, Warren  2503 Cronin, Cory  1652 Crooke, Catherine Louise  1519 Crooks-Allen, Ashley  1117, 3310 Crosnoe, Robert  1305, 3666 Cross, Christina  3708, 4312 Crowder, Kyle  4263 Crowley, Ned  1456, 2729, 3320, 3719, 4519 Crubaugh, Bryant  3132 Crumo, Camila Assunção  2523 Cruz, Taylor M.  1715 Csanády, Márton Tamás  1454 Cserni, Robert  4323 Cucchiara, Maia B.  1247, 1248, 1249, 1250, 1251, 1252, 1253, 1254, 1255, 1256, 1257, 1258, 1259, 1260, 1261, 1262, 1263, 1305, 1512, 1712, 2505 Cudennec, Arnaud  2250, 2347 Cueto Piazza, Alejandra  0548 Cueto-Villalobos, Daniel  1447 Cui, Shiyue  4530 Culatta, Elizabeth Tomlin  1863 PARTICIPANT INDEX 135 

Cummings, Jason Lamont  3707 Cunningham, David  3467, 3514, 4120, 4521 Curington, Celeste  1463, 2732, 4316 Curran, Sara R.  3665, 3666, 3667, 3668, 3669 Currier, Ashley  2304 Curry Rodriguez, Julia E.  3860 Czarnecki, Danielle  3663 

# D

Dagdelen, Gorkem  2667 Daghagheleh, Aghil  2334 Dahaghi, Kevin  3465 Dahir, Nima  3524 Dahlin, Eric C.  2651 Dahms, Harry F.  0106 Dai, Jingyun  3257 Dai, Simin  2855 Dalberg, Tobias  1252 DalCortivo, Anna  1120, 1452 DallaPiazza, Michelle  3707 Dallavis, Julie W.  4318 Dalmage, Heather M.  4705 Damaske, Sarah  3303 Daminger, Allison  1525, 3347, 3348, 3350, 3352, 3356 D'Amours, Jason V.  3148 Dance, Edward  3666, 4530 Daniel, Meghan  1867 Daniel, Reginald  3114 Danielson, Willis  1852 Danns, George K.  2862, 4305 Danton, Madison Orion  1852 Dao, Lili  1456, 3719 Darkwah, Akosua Keseboa  3305 Darling, Katherine Weatherford  3664 Darling, Rosalyn Benjamin  3308 Darrah-Okike, Jennifer Rene  2264, 2529 Dasgupta, Kushan  1650, 1713, 3307, 3731 Daumler, Davis  4262 Davenport, Christian  2303 Davenport, Erin Jane  1661, 1709 David, Emmanuel  2125, 2325, 2525 Davidson, Debra J.  4460 Davidson, Drew  3664 Davidson, Kimberly  4852 Davies, Scott  1512, 2505 Davis, Adam  3722 Davis, Georgiann  4117 Davis, Jenny L.  1113, 1520, 3550, 4531 Davis, Katrinell  4516 Davis, Korin  1510 Davis, Lundyn  3526 Davis, Rachel E.  3526 Davis, Tiffany  3103, 4704 Davis-Delano, Laurel R.  2334 Davis Gates, Stacy  2105 Davis-Randolph, Jasmine Lanisha  1263, 3720, 3726 Daviss, Claire  3125 Davoudpour, Shahin  1331 Dawson, Michael C.  3302 Dawson, Myrna  2504 Daye, Shameika  1660 Dazey, Margot  3119 DeAngelis, Reed  3148 DeArmon, Sarah  3466 Deb, Nikhil  4453 Debies-Carl, Jeffrey S.  1572 Debs, Mira Catherine  4324 DeCarsky, Ryan  0548, 4522 De Castro Galvao, Juliana  2529 Deckard, Faith M  4112 Decoteau, Claire Laurier  1114, 2321, 4128, 4328 de Deus Cunha, Daniel  1670 Deetz, Hartman  1304 DeFronzo, James V  3267 de Gravelles, Natalia Anne  3155 de Haas, Hein  1851 Dehrone, Trisha  2132 Deitch, Cynthia  1452 de Laat, Kim  1717 Delecourt, Solene  4322 de Leon, Cedric  4711 de Leon, Kathleen  1654 Delgado, Juan D.  1732 Delgado, Vanessa  2520 DellaPosta, Daniel  3521, 4121 de los Rios, Diego  3109 Del Real, Deisy  2331 DeLuca, Stefanie Ann  1251, 2529 DeLucchi, Caitria  1450 de Marchi, Scott  3155 Demetry, Daphne  4667 Deming, Sarah  4713 Denardo, Danielle  1522 Denice, Patrick  4723 Denier, Nicole Genevieve  3118, 3319, 3718, 4718 Denney, Justin T.  3330 Dennis, Alex  2324 Dennis, Alexis  1655 Dennison, Christopher Richard  3725 Dent, Lauren Amelia  4731 Denton, Emily  1113 Deo, Meera E.  4126 DePalma, Lindsay Jean  3349 Deppermann, Arnulf  3122 DeRose, Laurie F.  3665 Desai, Manisha  4129 Desai, Radhika  1716 Desan, Mathieu H.  4328 Desmond, Matthew  4131 de Sousa Dias, Lisa Maria  3328 Destine, Shaneda L  4316 Deuel, Ryan P.  1847 Deuflhard, Carolin  4713 De Villa, Alexis  4520 De Wilde, Marieke  3860 De Witte, Kristof  1331 Dhingra, Pawan H.  1308 Di, Di  3350 Diana, Augusto  4269 Dias, Felipe Antonio  1118, 3351 Dias, Vitor  4663 Diaz, Angel  2508 Diaz, Christina  3124 Diaz, Madelyn  0547, 0548, 0549, 0550, 0551, 0552, 0553, 0554, 0555, 0556, 0557, 0558, 1519, 3106 Diaz, Selene ines  3524 Dick-Mosher, Jenny  4860 DiDomenico, Michael  4314 Didyk, Kristina  1261 Diefendorf, Sarah H.  3356, 4115 Diehl, David Kalim  2329 Dietsch, Alia  1266 Dietsch, Susan E.  3714 Di Iorio, Jorgelina  1522 Dill, Brian J.  2256 Dillaway, Heather E.  4117 DiMario, Anthony J.  3132, 3728 Dingel, Molly J.  2121, 2320, 4657 Dinger, Samuel  2516 Dinovitzer, Ronit  3525, 3718 Dinsmore, Brooke  1305 Dinzey-Flores, Zaire Z.  3314 Diossa-Jimenez, Leydy  3152 DiRago, Nicholas Vincent  3556 Discola, Kristen L.  2249 DiTomaso, Nancy  4256 Dixon, Angela  3315 Dmowska, Amelia  4527 Doan, Long  4513 Dobbin, Frank  2705 DoCarmo, Tania Lopez  2315 Dodel, Matias  1460 Dodge, Kenneth A.  2263 Dodson, Kyle  4330 Doehne, Malte  2859 Doering, Jan  3263, 3322 Doering, Laura  1530 Doerschler, Peter E.  1124 Domina, Thurston A.  4124 Domingue, Simone  4451 Dominguez, Guillermo  3131 Dominguez, Silvia  2728 Donatuto, Jamie  4731 Dondero, Molly  3724, 4326 Doner, Kathryn  0551 Dong, Yige  1323 Donnelly, Rachel  3720 Donovan, Joan  2508 Döpking, Lars  4128 Dormani, Carmela Muzio  1328 Dorschel, Robert  1464 dos Santos, Reinaldo Onofre  2131 dos Santos, Renan William  4850 Dotsey, Senyo  1853 Douglas, Andrew  1505 Douglas, Rachel  3353 Douthat, Cameron  3461 Dow, Dawn M.  1103, 3331, 3531, 3901 Dowling, Julie A.  1503 Downey, Liam  3318, 3554, 4457 Drago, Alessandro Giuseppe  2864, 4519 Drane, Emily  3320 Dreby, Joanna  1515 Dreiling, Michael  1725 Driscoll, Daniel  4455 Drobnic, Sonja  3725 Dromgold-Sermen, Michelle S.  1315 Dromi, Shai M.  2122, 3458, 4518 Drori, Gili S.  2651 Drotning, Kelsey  2527 Drouhot, Lucas Germain  3316 PARTICIPANT INDEX 136 

Druez, Elodie  4650 Du, Shichao  2131 Du, Yue  3123 Du, Zicheng  2855 Duan, Haoshu  2748 Duan, Wenjie  2462 Duarte-Mayorga, Natalia  1456 Dubois, Elisabeth  2726 Duck, Waverly  3532, 3719, 4302 DuCros, Faustina M.  3128, 4658 Dudley, Jennifer Suzanne-Kempton  3259 Due, Brian  1524 Duenas, Maria D.  3861 Duffy, Danielle E  4530 Duffy, Horace Joseph  1305 Duffy, Robert  4462 Dufur, Mikaela  2463 Dugandzic, Audra  2347, 2348, 2349, 2350, 2351, 2352, 2353, 2354, 2355, 2356, 2357, 2358, 2359, 2360, 2361 Duggal, Sumeet  2857 Duhart, Philippe  4864 Duina, Francesco  3256 Duit, Andreas  4455 Dukhovnov, Denys  3859 Dum, Christopher P.  2503 Dunatchik, Allison  2134 Duneier, Mitchell  2330 Dunston, Chloe  4250, 4713 Duque, Richard  1261 Durham, Simone Nicole  2516 Durid, Mahmoud  1858 Durnova, Anna  1246 Durr, Marlese  4117, 4304 Duvisac, Sara  2729, 3320 Duxbury, Scott W.  2247, 2671 Dwyer, Rachel E.  4501 Dwyer Emory, Allison  4530 Dy, Angela Martinez  4647 Dyer, Alyshia  4530 Dyer, Shauna  4265 

# E

Earl, Jennifer  3327 Earl, Ryan  3129 Earle, Maya  3660 Earles, Jennifer  1730 Earl-Novell, Sarah  1709 Earnshaw, Valerie A  1522 Easley, Janeria Alexis  3315 Eason, John Major  2133 Eastwood, Jonathan  2864 Eberl, Andreas  3718 Ebeturk, Irem  3714 Eby, Margaret Ruth  3660 Ece, Ecem E  1531 Echave, Paola  4326 Ecklund, Elaine Howard  3528, 4849, 4852 Eddins, Crystal Nicole  1112 Edens, David  1256 Eder, Anja  1521 Edgemon, Timothy G  3714 Edin, Kathryn J.  3502 Edison, Story  1261, 4730 Edmunds, Chrisse  3555 Edwards, Hannah  4106 Edwards, Katie M  2328 Edwards, Korie L.  1703, 4107 Edwards, Linsey Nicole  1307, 2303, 3315 Edwards, Michelle L.  1326, 4106 Edwards, Zophia  1106, 3507 Edwards, Zophia  2111 Edwards-Capen, Theresa  2250 Egels-Zandén, Niklas  2315 Eidlin, Barry  2105, 3325 Eiermann, Martin  3262, 3714, 4519 Eilbaum, Nicolas  2330 Eilers, Michelle  1647, 4254 Einmann, Trisha  2326 Eisenberg, Anne Frances  3458 Eisenhauer, Emily  2312 Eisenmann, Clemens  1324 Ekl, Emily A.  1654, 1715 Elcioglu, Emine Fidan  2132, 4512 Eleazar, Alexandra  3310 Elias, Sean  3332 Elias, Vicky L.  2328 Eliasoph, Nina  1528 Ellialti-Kose, Tugce  4526 Elliott, James R.  1326, 1725 Elliott, Marta  3321, 4517 Elliott, Rebecca  1504 Elliott, Sinikka  4247 Ellis, Rachel  3331 Elo, Irma T.  2517 Elusma, Manasse  2256 Elvira, Marta  1118 Embrick, David G.  0541, 3528, 4307 Emeka, Amon S.  1708 Emerson, Michael O.  3119 Emeterio, Samuel  0557 Emigh, Rebecca Jean  1717 Engeman, Cassandra  4729 England, Lynn  1726 England, Paula  2134 Enriquez, Diana  3319 Eranti, Veikko  2868, 3262 Ergas, Christina A.  4448 Erigha, Maryann  3128, 3328 Erikson, Emily Anne  4322 Erkenbrack, Matthew  4710 Ermakoff, Ivan  4128 Ermida, Ana  2116 Errett, Nicole  4731 Erving, Christy LaShaun  1114, 1722, 1868, 3502 Escamilla Garcia, Angel Alfonso  1515 Escobar, Maria Andrea  1315 Escudero, Kevin  3512 Escue, Melanie  1851, 3116 Esguerra, Litany  2713 Esparza, Jannet  3860 Espinoza, Maria Isabel  4456 Espinoza-Kulick, Mario Alberto Viveros  1533 Espitia, Nicolaus  3860 Espy, Hannah  4722 Essig, Liam  3521 Estefan, Michel  1720 Etienne, Vadricka  4247, 4253, 4254, 4255 Eun, Terresa Ji Hyun  3530 Evans, Erin M.  1266, 1267, 1313 Evans, Heather D.  4525 Evans, James A.  1530, 3319, 3529, 4726 Evans, M.D.R.  1521, 1648, 2250, 3265, 3467, 4323, 4729 Evans, Megan  3129 Evcimen, Gamze  2647 Everhardt, Sharon  4715 Everitt, Judson G.  4664 Everson, David W.  2334 Ewert, Rebecca  1649, 2533 Ewing, Eve L.  1107, 1705, 3133, 4502, 4723 Eyo, Affiong Bassey  2713 Ezell, Jerel Michael  1522 

# F

Facciani, Matthew  2329 Fahlberg, Anjuli  1514, 3127 Fairbairn, Madeleine  4105 Fairchild, Emily  4112 Fajth, Veronika  1848 Fallin, Mallory  2350, 2516 Falzon, Danielle  4731 Fan, Leanne  4330 Fan, Wen  2130 Farago, Fanni  1868, 2262, 4467 Farber, Reya  2659 Farina, Mateo  3315, 3666, 3720 Farough, Steven D.  1860 Farrell, Jordan  3148 Farrell, Justin  1130 Farrell-Bryan, Dylan  4125 Fast, Idit  1259 Fatema, Kaniz  3347 Fatima, Shumaila  4455 Faude, Sarah  4723 Faulk, Deborwah  1316, 4314 Faulkner, Robert R.  1455 Fauser, Sophia  2667 Favor, Erica  1259 Feagin, Joe R.  3311 Fee, Molly  1849 Feinig, Jakob  1709, 2866 Feinstein, Yuval  3712 Feldman, David  3866 Feldman, Rachel Carly  1250 Felicetti, Andrea  3256 Feliciano, Cynthia  2732 Felix, Elizabeth  2247, 3154 Felmlee, Diane H.  3521 Felsman, Irene  3155 Fenelon, James V.  1304 Feng, Nan  2748 Fennell, Julie Lynn  1531 Ferguson, Jauhara  4116, 4852 Ferguson, Sherelle  1255 Ferguson, Susan J.  0277 Fernandez, Aaron Berman  4523 Fernandez, Roberto M.  1861, 2857 Fernandez, Romel  1130, 4462 Fernandez-Reino, Mariña  3732 Ferraro, Amanda Catherine  1321, 2263 Ferraro, Fabrizio  2360 Fetrati, Jalal  3149 PARTICIPANT INDEX 137 

Fewer, Thomas John  2654, 4726 Feyereisen, Scott  1652 Fiel, Jeremy E  2120, 2720 Fielding-Singh, Priya  4527 Fields, Lewis  2503 Figueroa, Francisco Ambrosio  2109 Fillingim, Angela Elena  1307 Finch, Laura  4325 Fiorito, Tara  1452 Firat, Rengin Bahar  2718, 3720, 4114 Fischer, Claude S.  3710 Fischer, Ryan G  4114 Fish, Rachel Elizabeth  2505, 4320 Fisher, Dana R.  1122 Fisher- Garibay, Dax  4654 FitzGerald, David Scott  1852 Fitzhugh, Sean M.  3521 Fjeldgaard, Jeppe  1847 Flache, Andreas  4121 Flacks, Richard  1731 Flagg, Julia  1725 Fleming, Crystal Marie  2706, 3503 Fleming, Olivia Megean  4761 Flores, Aaron B  4451, 4458 Flores, Jerry  1723, 2306 Flores, Luis  2506 Flores, Madeline  0558 Flores-Yeffal, Nadia Y.  2865 Floyd, Carlton  4108 Floyd, Jameson  3150 Foertsch, Steven  1254, 1519 Fogg, Linda M  3355 Foley, Alex  2319 Folse, Brandon  1323 Foltman, Leah Renee  3725 Foltz, Katelyn E  4331 Fomby, Paula W.  2259, 2260, 2261, 2262, 2263, 2264, 2265, 2266, 2333, 3516 Fong, Kelley  3331 Font, Sarah A.  4529 Foran, John  2660 Forbes, TehQuin  1316, 2322, 4721 Ford, Allison  4452 Ford, Jason A.  4517 Ford, Karly Sarita  2326 Ford, Laura R.  3114 Ford, Lexie  2257 Fordahl, Clayton Alexander  4849 Fordham, Tyeisha  2266 Foringer, Kristin  4857 Forstie, Clare  3510 Fortney, Susan Saab  3350 Fosse, Ethan  3732 Foster, Abigail  1647 Foster, Angel M  4127 Foster, Jacob Gates  3462 Foster, James Lamar  4657 Foster, Jordan  1465 Fouskas, Theodoros  1858 Fowle, Matt Zhongyi  4259 Fowler, Floyd J  3548 Fox, Emily C.  3354 Fox, Kimberly  3551 Fox, Matthew Peter  4262 Fox, Nicole  3514, 4852 Fox-Williams, Brittany Nicole  1712 Foxx, Kimberly M.  4901 Foy, Steven Larrimore  3554 Frame, Dave  4451 Frank, David  4467 Franklyn, Grace  1649 Frantz (Parsons), Elaine  2503 Franz, Berkeley  1652 Franzoni, Zachary Robert  4126 Fraser, Timothy  3529 Frederick, Angela  1329, 2713 Free, Janese  4268 Freelin, Brittany N.  2259 Freeman, Lance  4264 Freese, Jeremy  1318 Freidin, Betina  1648 Frémeaux, Nicolas  2333 French, Ashley  4511 Frenette, Alexandre  1328 Frey, William H.  3309 Frickel, Scott  1326 Friday, Gabreella  1454 Fridman, Daniel G.  1330, 2853, 2854, 2855, 2856, 2857, 2858, 2859, 2860 Friedkin, Noah E.  3472 Friedman, Brittany  2104, 3513, 4508, 4730 Friedman, Sam  1521, 3525 Friedman, Samantha  4860 Friedman, Samuel R.  0106, 1522, 4114 Friis, Camilla Bank  2725 Friis, Simon  1118 Frizzell, Laura  4526, 4863 Frost, Jacqui  4118 Frozel Barros, Natália  3463 Fruzsina, Mikó  1454 Fujimoto, Tetsushi  3755 Fujimura, Joan H.  3115 Fukushima, Annie Isabel  2504 Fuller-Thomson, Esme  1856 Fullerton, Kristina Marie  2652 Fung, Ka  1459 Furey, Jane  2129, 3133 Furl, Katherine  1713 Furman, Kelsi Lynn  4458 Fuwa, Makiko  4249 

# G

Gabur, Anna  2356 Gaby, Sarah  3327 Gaddie, Clara  2249, 4849 Gaddis, S. Michael  4311 Gage, Christopher Sebastian  0556 Galaskiewicz, Joseph  0553 Galaz Garcia, Sergio  2321 Gallagher, Mary  2249 Gallagher, Robert  3572 Galli, Chiara  1515, 4125 Galli Robertson, Anya Mikael  4454 Gallo, Maria  2526, 4327 Gallo-Cruz, Selina R.  3527 Galos, Diana Roxana  1460 Galper, Ari  3658 Galvez, Sebastian Muñoz-Najar  3660 Gamage, Siri  2115 Gamez, Patrick  1520 Gamez, Rebeca  2505 Gamez-Djokic, Blanca  4524 Gan, Yumei  3870 Gangl, Markus  4131 Ganly, Rachel  4249 Gantla, Snehalatha  4727 Ganz, Marshall  3102 Gao, Manjing  4465 Gapuz, Victoria-Jo  1123 Garbes, Laura  1728, 4115 Garboden, Philip M.E.  2529 Garcia, Angela Cora  2126 Garcia, Angela S.  2331, 2702, 3104, 4131 Garcia, Ashley  3720 Garcia, Lauren C  3261 Garcia, Lorena  3313 Garcia, Madison  4126 Garcia, Martin  0552 Garcia, Sarah  3530 Garcia, William  0557 García, Rocío R.  1117, 2502, 3314 Garcia del Moral, Paulina  2504, 2730 Garcia Holgado, Benjamin  3312 Gardner, Richard Edward  3326 Gardner, Tanya  4530 Gareau, Brian J.  3153 Garip, Filiz  2702 Garmash, Ludmila  1526 Garmon, Jeannie  2728 Garneau, Christopher RH  3260 Garner, Roberta  3322 Garner, Steve  2315 Garrett, Cal Lee  3662 Garrido, Marco Z.  2102, 2507, 4503 Garza, Alma Nidia  4124 Gasteyer, Stephen Philip  1858 Gatewood, Britany  1869, 2263 Gaulden, Shawn  1573 Gauthier, Gertrude Robin  4466 Gavrila, Simona Gabriela  1250 Gawerc, Michelle I.  1731, 4129 Gayles, Prisca  3127 Gaytan, Marie Sarita  1718 Gebel, Michael  2665, 2667 Gebremariam, Hana  1649 Geerts, Robbe  4452 Geffen, Rona  3516 Geist, Claudia  2651, 3352 Gelbard, Alexandra Pauline  1517 George, Danielle  4266 Geraldo Bastias, Pablo  3529 Gerlach, Anna  3718 Gerson, Judith  1133 Gerson, Kathleen  3303 Gerstel, Naomi  4252 Gerteis, Joseph H.  3731 Getachew, Adom  2707 Geter, Stephanie D  1256 Getman, Rebekah  1327 Geva, Dorit  4119 Geweke, Jonas  2859 Ghanem, Michel  4520 Ghassani, Ali  1858 Ghaziani, Amin  2307 Ghosh, Apoorva  2532 PARTICIPANT INDEX 138 

Gibadullina, Albina  1670 Giebel, Sonia  3350, 4657 Giffort, Danielle  2522 Gilbert, Keon  3719 Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend  4107 Gill, Jungyun  3267 Gill, Timothy M.  2654 Gilliam, Melissa  3117 Gilligan, Megan  1125, 2750 Gilliland, Claire Chipman  4318 Gillis, Alanna  3726 Gilmartin, Shannon  2512, 4665 Gilroy, Connor Craig  2350 Giordano, Peggy C.  3461 Girma, Hewan  4116 Girouard, Jennifer  3328 Giuffre, Andrea  3714 Giustozzi, Carlotta  4131 Givens, Jennifer E.  1720, 4461 Glass, Leah  1256 Glasser, Carol L.  1313 Gleckman-Krut, Miriam  3348 Gleeson, Shannon Marie  2116, 2702, 4329 Gleit, Rebecca  1305 Go, Julian  1110, 1507, 3709, 4132 Goalwin, Gregory  4864 Godfrey, Phoebe Christina  4460 Godrie, Baptiste  4269 Godwyn, Mary  3153 Goettlich, Walter Charles  3664 Goeury, Hugo  3863 Goff, Jessica  3551 Goff, Kerby  4518 Goh, Taekyeong  2256 Golann, Joanne W.  2361, 4723 Golash-Boza, Tanya Maria  3120, 3124, 3324, 3524, 3703, 3724 Gold, Jessica  1250 Gold, Steven J.  1856 Gold, Tomas  4319 Goldberg, Chad Alan  2321 Goldman, Alyssa W.  1314 Goldman-Hasbun, Julia  1520 Goldsmith, Pat Rubio  4324, 4331 Goldstein, Adam  3125, 3723 Goldstein, Rebecca  3265 Goler, Timothy D.  2317 Golio, AJ  0550 Golriz, Afshan  2656 Golriz, Golshan  1531, 4318 Gomez, Charles Jonathan  3660 Gomez, Cristian Mendoza  2262 Gomez, Laura E.  2133, 2502 Gomez Cervantes, Andrea  2133 Gomez Olive, F. Xavier  1522 Gomez-Pathak, Laura  1654 Gomory, Henry  2859 Gonalons-Pons, Pilar  2325, 4248, 4249, 4250, 4251, 4252, 4513 Gone, Joseph P.  2334 Gonsalves, Tara Marie  4329 Gonzales, Angela Ann  4106 Gonzalez, Alessandra L.  2857 Gonzalez, Jax J.  2522 Gonzalez, Kelsey E  3521 Gonzalez, Yanilda  4131 Gonzalez-Guarda, Rosa  3155 Gonzalez Guittar, Stephanie  1660 Gonzalez-Lopez, Gloria  4866 Gonzalez Marquez, Luis Ruben  1453 González-Parra (Pehuenche), Claudio  1304 Gooden, Amoaba  3707 Goodman, W. Benjamin  2263 Goods, Kenya Lanae'  2866 Goodson, Adria D.  1731 Goodwin, Deja Marie  2520 Goodwin, Jeff  2303, 2704, 3102, 4120, 4521 Goosby, Bridget  1114, 2747, 2748, 2749, 2750, 2751, 2752 Gopikuttan, Gopi Sankar  0554 Gordon, Katie M.  3267, 4715 Gordon, Neve  2704 Gorina, Evgenia  2131 Gorman, Elizabeth H.  3460, 3461, 3462, 3463, 3464, 3465, 3466 Gorski, Philip S.  3519 Gould-Wartofsky, Michael A.  3262, 3724 Gould-Werth, Alix Malka  3317 Gounden Rock, Alyson  0553, 3125 Gowan, Teresa  3728 Gowen, Ohjae  1131, 1512 Goyal, Shuchi  2134 Grabowski, Hannah Jade  1861, 3548 Grace, Matthew K.  1314, 3720 Grace, Philip Prince  1120 Grady, John  2708 Graetz, Nick  1722, 2317, 3517 Graff, Patrick Arthur  1305 Graif, Corina  3129, 3724 Gran, Søren T  3752 Grand'Maison, Valérie  4129 Grant, Annaliese  4252 Granville, Donna-Lee  1850 Grätz, Michael  3716, 4261 Grauerholz, Elizabeth  1660 Gravel, Brian  4115 Graves, Katelyn  2526 Gray, Andrew C  3552 Gray, Summer Marie  1504 Gray-Sewell, La'Keisha  4332 Green, Aaryn L.  1301, 1534, 3572 Green, Harold D.  4114 Green, Tiffany  3117 Greenberg, Max A.  2533 Greenberg, Pierce  4454 Greenbrook, Josephine T. V.  4125 Greene, Danielle  1712, 4324 Greene, Joss Taylor  4504, 4730 Greene, Sara Sternberg  2118 Greene, Theo  1724, 2522, 4866 Greenland, Fiona  1717 Greey, Ali  4528 Gregg, Maria Ardeth  0556 Greiffenhagen, Christian  3870 Greiner, Patrick Trent  2314, 3504 Grell-Brisk, Marilyn  4130, 4455 Griesbach, Kathleen Ann  3333 Griffen, Zachary Webster  3661 Griffith, Debbie  4652 Griffith, Mark Alexander  2128 Grigorian, Stella  2121 Grigoryeva, Angelina  2134, 4660, 4661, 4662, 4663, 4664, 4665, 4666, 4667 Grindstaff, Laura  1462, 4112 Grineski, Sara Elizabeth  3717, 4451, 4458 Griswold, Wendy  2358 Groeller, Katrina  1249 Groggel, Anne  3466, 4531 Groh, Sarah  2519 Gromada, Anna  4666 Gronert, Nona Maria  2527 Grošelj, Darja  1460 Grosglik, Rafi  1113 Gross, Nora  1860, 4515 Grossman, Sasha  4656 Grubacic, Andrej  1716 Grubert, Emily  4454 Grundy, Saida  4505 Grzanka, Patrick Ryan  3307 G. Smith, August Taylor  1256 Gu, Xiaorong  4255 Gualtieri, Gillian  1728, 4667 Guarino, Honoria  1522 Guay, Emanuel  2864, 4269 Gubina, Alexandra  3122 Guenther, Katja M.  1730 Guerra, Christian  2313 Guijarro, Delia  3722 Guilbeault, Douglas Richard  4322 Guittar, Nicholas A.  2510 Gulbis, Angelika Ruta  3111 Güler, Selen  2248, 2854 Gullickson, Aaron Olaf  0542, 4267 Guluma, Beka  4116 Gundacker, Lidwina  4659 Güneş, Önder  3266 Güneş Durmuş, Aysun  4853 Guo, Guang  1320 Gupta, Aashish  2256 Guran, Gozde  1530 Gursahaney, Priya  2526, 4327 Gurusami, Susila  2306 Guseva, Alya  2118 Gustafson, Erik  4464 Guterbock, Thomas M.  3669 Gutierrez Cornelius, Eduardo  4526 Gutierrez-Vazquez, Edith Yolanda  1131 Gutin, Iliya  1656, 2750 Guul, Thorbjørn Sejr Sejr  4651 Guzman, Cinthya J.  3732, 4128 Guzzo, Karen  3117 Gyan, Sylvia Esther  2349 Gyuras, Hillary  1647 

# H

Ha, Jaekyung  2523 Habeck, Alexandra  3714 Habicht, Isabel Maria  1253 Hadziabdic, Sinisa  2662, 2856 Haedicke, Michael  1126 Hagerman, Margaret A.  2259, 2319 Hagos, Rama Michael  4267 Hahn, Michael C  4819 Haider, Eisar  4518 Haider, Maheen  2717 PARTICIPANT INDEX 139 

Haile, Solome Solomon  1866 Hailey, Chantal Annise  4723 Haines, Cory  2348 Halford, Sarah J  1466 Hall, Meredith  4128 Hall, Richard  2361 Halley, Jeffrey A.  3864 Halley, Meghan C  2716 Hallink, Courtney Loree  3264 Haltom, Trenton M.  1264, 2522, 2524 Hamer-Small, Kaya  4860 Hamidjaja, Tiffany Chrysilla  3710 Hamilton, Amber M.  1465 Hamilton, Darrick  1108 Hamilton, Erin R.  1515, 2131 Hamilton, Lawrence C.  2733 Hamilton, Leah  1522 Hamlin, Madeleine  4268 Hammad, Adnan  1858 Hammad Mrig, Emily Allia  2726 Hammar, Colin  3667 Hammer, Gili  1513 Hammer, Ricarda  1106, 2658 Hammersmith, Anna M.  2313 Hammond, Michael  2863 Hamner, Bailey V  1522 Han, Chengming  2465 Han, Gru  2648 Han, Hahrie  3102 Han, Junghun  3526 Han, Sinn Won  1131 Han, Xiaowen  2718 Hanafi, Sari  2704 Hancock, Ange-Marie  3304 Handcock, Mark  2134 Handsman, Emily  1263 Hanna, Alex  1113, 4102 Hansard, Stephanie M  1575 Hanser, Amy  4527 Hanson, Joshua T  1724 Hanson, Kenneth  2528 Hanssmann, Christoph  3307 Hao, Feng  4461 Hao, Lingxin  3131 Haque, Syed Arefinul  1327 Hara, Yuko  3351 Harcey, Sela  4466 Hardie, Jessica Halliday  4264 Hardison, Chaitra  4660 Hardison-Moody, Annie  4247 Hargraves, Lee  3548 Hargrove, Andrew  2254, 4455 Harkness, Sarah K.  2725 Harkness, Susan  4261 Harlan, Sharon L.  4458 Harpaz, Yossi  2316, 3730 Harrell, Ashley  1520, 2621, 2725 Harrigan, Shaquilla  1260 Harrington, Brooke  2315 Harris, Alexes  2104 Harris, Nicole  1256 Harris, Travis T.  1718 Harris (Galan), Sidney L  4312 Harrison, Austin  3716 Harrison, Monique  1255 Hart, Chloe Grace  4725 Hart-Brinson, Peter  2310, 2516 Hartless, Jaime  1331 Hartmann, Benjamin Swartz  4647 Hartmann, Douglas  3710, 3901, 4647 Harvey, Hope  3516, 4713 Harvey, Kimberly Diane  3531 Harvey, Peter Francis  2718 Harvey Wingfield, Adia M.  1702, 3104, 3901, 4302 Haskett, Breon  2663 Haskins, Anna R.  3331 Hasmath, Reza  2656 Hasselhorn, Fabian  4467 Hassoun, Amelia  1458 Hastings, Orestes Pat  4847, 4848, 4849, 4850, 4851, 4852, 4853 Hatcher, Aliyya  1309 Hatteberg, Sarah Jean  3548 Hatton, Erin E.  2723 Hauer, Mathew  1518 Hawdon, James E.  4321 Hawker, Julie  2712 Hawkins, Stephen L  3714 Hawkley, Louise  4325 Hawks, Albert Lee  2347 Hawthorne, Camilla Alice  2107 Hayes, Adam  1530, 2729 Hayes, Bukata  2712 Hayes, Endia Louise  1264, 1265, 3120 Hayes, Matthew F.  2653 Hayes, Rebecca  3350 Haynes, Ada  1709 Haynes, Jackson r  2257 Haynes, Richard  2857 Haynie, Dana L.  4730 He, Jingying  3716, 4252 He, Yuanmo  3517 Headworth, Spencer  3464 Hearne, Brittany Nicole  1314, 1648, 3329 Heath, Christian C  1324 Heath, Taylor Renee  4449 Hebert, Luciana  3747 Hecht, Katharina  2129 Heerwig, Jen  3732, 4330 Heideman, Laura J.  2311 Heikkinen, Juulia  3262 Heilman, Monica  4653 Hein, James  1449 Hein, Patricia Helena  1729, 2526 Hein-Pensel, Franziska  3550, 3751 Heintz-Martin, Valerie  3516 Heinz, Erin  3153 Hekmatpour, Peyman  1326 Helm, Sabrina  4660 Helmuth, Allison Suppan  1864 Henderson, Aasha  3155 Henderson, Kent E.  2254, 2255 Henderson, Loren  4652, 4706 Hengstebeck, Natalie D.  2110 Henley, Megan  2121, 4709 Henn, Shachar  2750 Hennawi, Farah  4455 Henry, Joseph Leon  3726 Henry, Paget  4305 Henry-Lee, Aldrie Jennifer  3467 Hepburn, Peter Scholfield  4256, 4257, 4258, 4259, 4261, 4262, 4263, 4264, 4265, 4266, 4267, 4268 Herbolsheimer, Chancey  3463 Hernandez, Carolina  1117, 3151, 3152, 3153, 3154, 3155 Hernandez, Jessennya  4122, 4522 Hernandez, Maricarmen  1130 Hernandez, Mario R.  4714 Hernandez, Philip A  1255 Hernandez, Reyna  3313 Hernandez Cardenas, Aura Angelica  2256 Hernandez-Leon, Ruben  2513 Hernandez Perez, Johanna  1717 Hernandez-Swanson, Jocelyn  2712 Hernandez Vidal, Nathalia  3307 Herrera, Joel S.  3123 Herrera, Kailey  2262 Hertenstein, Hannah Foley  1257 Hertl-Fernandez, Alexander  2105 Herzog, Patricia Snell  2119, 2621 Hess, Chris  4263 Hess, Jeremy  4731 Hesse, Arielle  4454 Heuscher, Annie  2311 Hiadzi, Rosemond Akpene  2355 Hice-Fromille, Theresa Marie  2319, 2719 High, Catherine  1727 Hikido, Annie  3713 Hildebrand-Chupp, Rowan  2861 Hill, Katherine  1729, 4664 Hilmar, Till  1133, 2117 Himmelstern, Jessie  4247 Hina, Hafsa  3669 Hindmarsh, Jon  3870 Hintzen, Percy Claude  4305 Hipp, John R.  2329 Hiramori, Daiki  4657 Hironaka, Ann M.  3256, 3257, 3258, 3259, 3260, 3261, 3262, 3263, 3264, 3265, 3266, 3267, 3312, 3712 Hirschl, Noah  3133 Hirsh, Elizabeth  1321, 3118, 4708 Hitlin, Steven  1318 Ho, Jacqueline  2117, 3263 Ho, Phoebe  2515 Hoang, Kimberly Kay  1719, 2102 Hoekstra, Erin  1652, 2526 Hoffman, Kate Steed  4124 Hoffman, Shekinah  2727 Hoffman, Steve G.  1126, 1326 Hoffmann, Nathan Isaac  1848, 2132 Hogan, Jackie  3355 Hogan, Richard L.  3866 Hoiland, Sarah  0204, 1709 Holbrow, Hilary J.  2513 Holland, Curtis Carl  4864 Holleman, Anna  3155 Holleman, Hannah A.  2314, 2514, 3504 Holley, John Christopher  2351 Hollingshead, Ashley  4126 Hollingshead, William Edward  3550 Holmes, Andy Walter  3749 Holtkamp, William  2247 PARTICIPANT INDEX 140 

Holzer, Elizabeth  2127 Homan, Casey Philip  4853 Homan, Patricia  2517 Hong, Guanglei  2720 Hong, Sung Hee  3666 Hooks, Gregory  4514 Hopcroft, Rosemary L.  1221, 1320 Hopewell, Kristen  4132 Hopkins, Mary Elisabeth  1466 Hoppe, Alexander  2348, 2868 Hormel, Leontina M.  4516 Horn, Ilana  4723 Horning, Elizabeth A  1247, 4657 Horowitz, Veronica L.  1527 Horton, Hayward Derrick  1105, 3318, 4706 Hossain, Mobarak  2254 Hossen, M. Anwar  3514 Hossfeld, Leslie  2106 Hou, Yifei  1125, 2750 Houle, Jason N.  3131 House, James S.  1901, 3108 House-Niamke, Stephanie M.  3357 Houston, Derek  3110 Howard, Jay R.  0277 Howell, Junia  3704 Hoynes, William D.  1731 Hoyt, Lindsay Till  2313 Hsiao, Yuan  3667 Hsieh, Ning  2751, 3665, 4325 Hsin, Amy  1512 Hsu, Becky Yang  3522, 3722 Hsu, Doreen  1256, 1576, 2465 Hu, Hanzhi  2332, 2463 Hu, Olivia  2732 Hu, Shu  4255 Huang, Gejun  3526 Huang, Hsu  4857 Huang, Janna Zou  3710 Huang, Lewei  2462 Huang, Peng  2329, 3521 Huang, Shixin  4320 Huang, Tiffany Joyce  1251, 2132 Huang, Wan  1116, 2131 Huang, Wenrui  1262 Huang, Wenxuan  2262 Huang, Xiaorui  4450 Huang, Ya-Ching  2118 Huang, Ying  2750 Huebner, Beth  2104 Huft, Justin  1709 Hughes, Christina  1123, 2465 Hughes, Melanie M.  4309 Hughey, Matthew W.  2733 Hui, Karen  2116 Hung, Ho-Fung  4130 Hunter, Marcus Anthony  3311, 4506 Hupp, Samantha  4667 Hurst, Allison L.  1316, 4722 Hurwitz, Heather McKee  4715 Hurwitz, Joshua M.  4660 Husain, Atiya  4104 Hussain, Mushahid  2255 Hussein, Sophia  3526 Hutson, Ashley Colleen Feely  3348 Huynh, Chang-Wa  2250 Huynh, Jennifer  3318 Huyser, Kimberly R.  1533 Hwang, Jackelyn  2529, 3528, 4708 Hwang, Karam  1523 Hwang, Maria  1132, 3515, 3713 Hwang, Woosang  3555, 4847 Hyseni, Fitore  4320, 4663 

# I

Iacobucci, Asa  3318, 3554 Ibanez, Lindsey McKay  3319 Ibarra-Sevilla, Benjamin  1330 Idler, Ellen  4851 Igarashi, Akira  3549 Ikeler, Peter R.  1457 Ille, Meredith  4652 Imoagene, Onoso Ikphemi  1708, 4116 Inal, Irem  2860 Inara Rodis, Paulina dela Cruz  3526 Ince, Jelani  1470 Indelicato, Maria Elena ELENA  3458 Ingel, Sydney  2671 Ingersoll, Hannah  1717, 2309 Inglis, Patrick  3130 Innocent-Cupid, Mollie Anne  4531 Inoue, Hiroko  1669 Interpreter, ASL  1329, 1529, 1729, 2713, 4320, 4520 Ioanide, Paula  4524 Ipsen, Annabel  1718, 3523 Iqbal, Maleeha  1315 Irazabal - Zurita, Clara  1514 Irby, Courtney Ann  4318 Irby-Shasanmi, Amy  1314, 1651 Irons, Jenny  3110 Irwin, Katherine  2520 Isaac, Victoria Lauren  4722 Iskander, Natasha N.  2258 Islam, Inaash  4658 Islas Lopez, Maria  2712 Ispa-Landa, Simone  3354 Israel de Souza, Stefanie  3512 Issar, Shiv  3658, 4458 Ito, Daisuke  2752 Iturra, Victor  4514 Iturriaga, Nicole  1650, 1713 Itzigsohn, Jose  1106, 1505, 2466, 3507, 4302, 4506 Ivie, Rachel  2512 Iyengar, Tulasi  1717 

# J

Jabbar, Huriya  2329 Jabbari, Jason F  1262 Jabbarli, Ramin  2248 Jack, Anthony Abraham  3702 Jackson, Anthony Jerald  1863, 2314, 3865 Jackson, Brandon A.  1523 Jackson, Deziree  3859 Jackson, Heide  2134 Jackson, J'Mauri  3310 Jackson, Pamela Braboy  2126, 3270, 3321, 3516, 3720 Jackson, Pamela Irving  1124 Jackson, Taylor  2322 Jacober, Conrad  2858 Jacobi, Christopher Justin  3318 Jacobs, Elizabeth  2731 Jacobs, Ricado E  4105 Jacobs, Sunshine Amy  1518 Jacobsen, Cathrine  3350 Jacobsen, Wade C  3331 Jacobson, Meredith  4106 Jaeger, Andrew Boardman  4457 Jahn, Jaquelyn L.  3666 Jakhu, Paul  4247 Jalali, Rita  2257 Jalili, Jaleh  1452 James, Jennifer Elyse  1514, 4112 James, Kevin Lamarr  1720 James, Rina Lynne  1713 Jami, Waleed  3312 Jang-Trettien, Christine  2529 Jansen, Robert S.  4119 Janson, Lara  4323 Jarratt, Lindsay  2247 Jarvis, Jonathan A.  2463 Jasny, Lorien  4819 Jaspers, Eva  4718 Jasso, Guillermina  3472 Jaster, Daniel  1456, 2358 Jauk, Daniela Franziska  4715 Javidan, Pantea  2730 Jaworski, Gary D  2867 Jenkins, Makeiva  3310 Jenkins, Tania M.  2325 Jenks, Daniel  2262 Jenness, Valerie  2724, 3109 Jennings, Jennifer L.  1257, 4264 Jensen, Katherine  2507, 3328, 4132 Jensen, Kristian Kriegbaum  4651 Jensen, Warren Everett  2524 Jeong, Isaiah  3727 Jeong, Myung Eun  0549 Jeong, Wonjeong  4247 Jeong, Youngseo  0553 Jerke, Julia  3715 Jerolmack, Colin  3303 Jeske, Melanie  3715 Jewell, Joseph Oscar  4317 Jia, Ruo  3118 Jimenez, Anthony Michael  2526 Jimenez, Magda Catalina  1464 Jimenez, Tomas R.  2702 Johnson, Amy Lynne  1461 Johnson, Anna K  3527 Johnson, Erik W.  4461 Johnson, James M  4664 Johnson, Kaitlin  4661 Johnson, Krista  4703 Johnson, Lanora  4267 Johnson, Oshea Donnell  1869 Johnson, Rebecca A  3465, 3666, 4314 Johnson, Wendi Leigh  4252, 4722 Johnson-Palomaki, Sarah R.  1457 Johnston, Elisha  4259 Johnstonbaugh, Morgan  2128 Jonason, Amy  3753, 4714 Jones, Angela  1312, 3721, 4306 Jones, Chelle  1857 Jones, Emerald  4658 PARTICIPANT INDEX 141 

Jones, Imara  4504 Jones, Joshua C  4847 Jones, Leslie Kay  2302 Jones, Nicholas A.  2703 Jones, Nikki  2103, 3121 Jones, Shamika  3707 Jong, Melanie  3331 Joosse, Paul  0106, 1246, 2862 Jordan, Ashly E  4114 Jordan, Megan  2119, 2314 Jordan-Bloch, Sara  4525 Jorgensen, Abigail  2361, 4310 Joseph, Naomi  1867 Joseph, Nathanael Grant  1453, 3752, 3753, 3754, 3755 Joseph, Tiffany D.  3120 Joseph-Goteiner, David C  4667, 4851 Jou, Sue-Ching  2256 Joyce, Kelly A.  4454 Joyner, Kara  1703 Ju, Daeshin Hayden  2731 Juarez, Zayra  0552 Judd, Nicholas Clark  2862 Jue-Rajasingh, Diana  2254 Julien, Fabrice Stanley  3324 Jump, Vonda  1720 Jung, Chungse  4855 Jung, Jiwook  2316, 3118, 3319, 3718, 4718 Jung, Minwoo  3730 Jungleib, Lillian Taylor  3348 Juravich, Tom  2662, 2663, 2664, 2665, 2666, 2667 Jürgenmeyer, Julian  2858 

# K

Kadanoff, David  2121 Kade, Tristen  3721, 4528 Kadiyala, Srikanth  4515 Kadowaki, Joy  3147, 4526 Kahana, Netta  2119 Kahveci, Ihsan  3119 Kaiser, Julia  1524 Kalbfeld, Jessica Rose  4263 Kalev, Alexandra  4115, 4317 Kalia, Mili  4727 Kalinowski, Brenton David  4849 Kalish, Ilene  4109 Kalish, Rachel  3356 Kallas, John  2116 Kalleitner, Fabian  2854 Kallman, Meghan Elizabeth  2710, 3717 Kamata, Kanoko  2123 Kamis, Christina  1314, 1654 Kampler, Benjamin Joseph  3352 Kamran, Sidra  3749 Kane, Anne  4854, 4855, 4856, 4857, 4858 Kanelee, Ember Skye Willow  1316 Kang, Miliann  1312 Kang, Youbin  2856 Kanner, Joseph C  4269 Kao, Grace  1703, 2333, 4525 Kao, Ying-Chao  4522 Kapelle, Nicole  2333 Kaplan, Danny  4255 Kaplow, Benjamin  4118 Kapur, Devesh  2258 Karakaya, Yagmur  3552 Karam, Rebecca  1322, 1503 Karaoglu, Ezgi  1323, 1858 Karatasli, Sahan Savas  1669, 2530 Karell, Daniel  1246, 3326 Karides, Marina  1304 Karim, Sakeef M.  4519 Karlsson, Annica  4124 Karsak, Baran  2127 Karsgaard, Carrie  4460 Karthik, Manasi  2514 Karunakaran, Arvind  2316, 2853 Kass, Hannah  2354 Kathiravelu, Laavanya  3515 Katulamu, Charles  3668 Katuna, Barret  4117 Katz, Jennifer  3356 Katz, Ori  1513 Katz-Fishman, Walda  2314 Kauffman-Berry, Andrea  4653 Kaufman, Jerrold  2747 Kaufman, Rachel Catherine  1519 Kaufman, Ryan J  4464 Kaufman, Sarah Beth  1519, 2360 Kaul, Vasundhara  3466, 4712 Kaur, Harleen  2652 Kaur, Harmandeep  4762 Kaur, Navjotpal  3333 Kavalerchik, Anne  3659 Kawashima, Tenshi  3549 Kay, David  4453 Kayali, Nihal  3512 Kazyak, Emily  4318 Keahey, Jennifer  1317 Keefe, Andrew  1527, 3265 Keener, Abbey  4649 Keesman, Laura  2524, 3130 Kehal, Prabhdeep Singh  4306 Keith, Verna M.  3318, 4706 Kelekay, Jasmine Linnea  3121 Kelkar, Shreeharsh  4726 Kelleher, Ina  1860 Kelley, Jacob  1709 Kelley, Jonathan  1521, 1648, 2250, 3265, 3467, 4323, 4729 Kelley, Kristin  3118, 4725 Kelley, Margaret S.  4529 Kelley, Sarah  1648, 4323 Kelley, S.M.C.  2250 Kelly, Brian Christopher  4114, 4526 Kelly, Erin  3718 Kelly, Kimberly  4712 Kelly-Blake, Karen  3707 Kemp, Kayla  1261 Kendi, Ibram X.  0901 Kendig, Sarah M.  4124 Kendrick, Kobin  3870 Kendrick, Sam  4712 Kennedy, Ian  4263 Kennedy, Michael D.  1120 Kennedy, Reeve  4529 Kentikelenis, Alexander  1132 Kent-Stoll, Peter Ross  4717 Kepes, Jacob  3752 Kerber, Rose  4515 Keren, Ran  2867 Kerr, Neffer-Oduntunde A.  4704 Kerr, Norman  4901 Keskintürk, Turgut  3732 Keynton, Rachel  2347, 2348, 2349, 2350, 2351, 2352, 2353, 2354, 2355, 2356, 2357, 2358, 2359, 2360, 2361 Khachikian, Oshin  1252 Khalidi, Rashid  4307 Khalsa, Simranjit  1709 Khan, Cristina  2533 Khan, Maria R  1522, 4114 Khan, Salwa  3660 Khan, Zahra  3132 Khanna, Katharine  2248, 2725 Khoshneviss, Hadi  4717 Khunou, Grace  2715 Khuu, Ngoc-Thoa  2731 Kidder, Erin N.  1660 Kiderlin, Nina Teresa  2866 Kierans, Denis  3732 Kijakazi, Kilolo  1108 Kiley, Kevin Robert  2720 Kilicaslan, Alaz  3729 Kilimanjaro, Ife  4303 Kim, Alice  2305 Kim, Ashley F.  3663 Kim, Eunjae  2467 Kim, Harris Hyun-soo  3124 Kim, Hyejun  2523 KIM, HYEYEON  0549 Kim, Ilju  2125 Kim, Jessica  3712 Kim, JeungHyun  3555 Kim, Ji Hye  1260, 2359 Kim, Jinho  1650 Kim, Jiwon  2747 Kim, Jiyeon  3665 Kim, Joong Won  4655 Kim, Jungmyung  2856, 4317 Kim, Keon Sun  2323 Kim, Minjae  1118, 3521 Kim, Minjeong  2125 Kim, Minyoung  1711 Kim, Nadia Y.  1123, 1308 Kim, Sang-Joon  0549 Kim, Seung Wan  2262 Kim, Sojeong  0550 Kim, Veda Hyunjin  2530 Kim, Yongsok  4654 Kim, Young K.  1256, 3858 Kim, Young-Choon  3549 Kim, Young-Mi  3316 Kim, Yujin  1659 Kim, Yu-Ri  1115 Kimble, Cameron G  4330 Kimbro, Rachel Tolbert  2264 Kimmel, Isaac  0551 Kimpel, Jeanne E.  1521, 3719 Kimport, Katrina E.  4127 Kincaid, Reilly  2750, 3555 Kindel, Alexander  2354 King, Andrew  1258 King, Brayden G.  4102 PARTICIPANT INDEX 142 

King, TIffany  4522 Kinney, Alexander  4465 Kinzel, Emily  4714 Kirchoff, Alisha  1263, 3726 Kirk, Gabriela  2104 Kirkland, Anna  3113 Kirksey, Kristen  2127, 3523 Kirsh, Barbara  2112 Kirzner, Rachel  2750 Kislev, Elyakim  4253 Kissell, Rene Espinoza  1259 Kissling, Alexandra  2526, 4327 Kitts, James A.  3521, 3754 Kiviat, Barbara  2118 Kivisto, Peter  1315, 3458 Kjos, Andrea L.  2726 Klein, Toby Lauren Wagner  3752 Kleman, Han Noel  3330 Kleykamp, Meredith A.  3330 Kline, Zachary Dillon  1852, 4257 Klopack, Eric T.  3329 Kmec, Julie A.  2727 Knaphus, Emily Sue  4657 Knight, Carly  1118, 2118, 2316 Knoester, Chris  2352 Knopf, Amelia S  4525 Knorr, Karin  3751 Knowles, Eric  2132 Kobayashi, Karen  1856 Koch, Bernard  3307 Koch, Pamela Ray  2310 Koepp, Andrew  4326 Kogan, Victor M.  2354 Kohler, Ulrich  2313 Kokan, Zeba  3332 Kolb, Kenneth H.  1115, 1660, 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664, 1666 Kollath-Cattano, Christy  3548 Kolysh, Simone Alexandra  2522, 2727 Kondayya, Anupama  3353 Koning, Stephanie  3705 Konopny-Decleve, Livnat  4524 Konrad, Thomas R.  2863 Kopf, Andreas  4450 Kordsmeier, Gregory Trainor  0204, 4308 Korinek, Kim M.  4325 Koropeckyj-Cox, Tanya M.  3351, 3516 Korver-Glenn, Elizabeth  1330, 2506, 3333 Koslov, Liz  2507 Kosminsky, Ethel V.  4654 Kosyakova, Yuliya  2247, 4659 Kotanko, Adam  1721 Kotliar, Dan M  1113 Kou, Anne  2726 Kovacevic, Nikola J  3548 Kovnick, Miles Owen  4325 Kowalewska, Helen  3551 Kozimor, Michele Lee  0543, 2121, 3750 Kozlowska, Iga  2511 Kracman, Kimberly  2859 Kral, Alex H.  4467 Kramarczuk Voulgarides, Catherine  1247 Kramer, Brandon Lee  2532 Kramer, Rory  3119 Krauss, Celene  1866 Krawczyk, Noa  1522 Kreisberg, Anna Nicole  1854 Kretschmer, Kelsy  2730 Kretsedemas, Philip Alexander  2730, 3258 Krippner, Greta R.  1302 Krishnan, Preethi  1447, 1448, 1449, 1450, 1451, 1452, 1453, 1454, 1455, 1456, 3466 Kriz, Katrin  4268 Kröger, Markus  1317 Kronberg, Anne Kathrin  3718 Kroska, Amy  1246 Krull, Laura  4318, 4847, 4848, 4849, 4850, 4851, 4852, 4853 Kruse, Mathias  4651 Kühn, Mine  2751 Kuhnert, Petra  3550 Kulkarni, Veena S.  1248 Kumler, Alyssa  3548 Kumral, Sefika  2661, 4519 Kunichoff, Yana  1705 Kuniyoshi, Masatoshi  3329, 4762 Kuo, Karen  2515 Kuo, Rachel  1456, 3719 Kuperberg, Arielle  1254, 2528 Kuperberg, Jeremy Seth  1133 Kupsh, Dylan  0558 Kurakin, Dmitry  2868 Kurien, Prema Ann  1123 Kurisu, Sheri-Lynn S.  2503 Kuroshima, Satomi  1324 Kurti, Zhandarka  1716 Kurtz, Lester R.  3332 Kurtz, Mariam M  1132, 3332 Kus, Basak  2858 Kwan, Samantha  2524 Kwon, Hye Won  1260 Kwon, Hyeyoung  2520 Kwon, Hyunku  2359 Kwon, Minju  3355 Kwon, Soyoung  4654 Kyte, Sarah  3350 

# L

Labonte, Andrew  3870 LaBriola, Joe  3131 Labuza, Andrew  3151 Lacayo, Celia Olivia  3314 Lachapelle, Francois Joseph  3750, 4708 Lachmann, Richard  1502, 3302, 4711 Lacy, Karyn  3518 Ladegaard, Isak  2302, 4731 Ladner, Joyce Ann  1706, 2103 LaFleur, Jennifer Carol  1258 Lageson, Sarah Esther  3462, 3513 Lagos, Danya  2328, 4504 Lagos, Francisco  3754 Lai, Gina  1459 Lai, Jennifer  1249 Lai, Ruby YS  1325 Lai, Wenhua  2751, 3665 Laible, Marie-Christine  2247 Laing, Allison  4517 Laixely, Jadyn  2719 Lakkimsetti, Chaitanya  2304, 4866 Lalaki, Despina  2649 Laljer, David  2328 Lam, Ka Wang Kelvin  1849 Lambdin, Barrot H.  4467 Lamonica, Aukje  4517 Lamont, Ellen  2528 Lamont, Michèle  1128, 2102, 2516, 3525 Lampe, Nik  2526, 3354 Landes, Scott D.  3530, 4320 Landivar, Liana Christin  4513 Landry, Emily M  4448 Lane, Jonathan  3356 Lane, Rashon  3704 Langa, Neema  1658 Langman, Lauren  0106, 3114 Langmeyer, Alexandra  3516 Lanuza, Yader R.  1330 Laperrière, Marie  1869 LaPierre, Tracey A.  1575, 3726 LaPlant, Eric  2718 Lara, Joanna  3321 Lara-Garcia, Francisco  2331 Lara-Millan, Armando  2671, 3461, 3660 Lareau, Annette  1103 Lari, Noora Ahmed  4249 Larimore, Savannah  1866 Lariscy, Joseph T.  3530, 3705 LaRoche, Kathryn  4127 Larsen, Christian Albrekt  1847 Larsen Gibby, Ashley  2463 Larson, Ryan P  1527 Laryea, Krystal  3118, 3727, 4664 LaSaine, Emma-Claire  3258 La Scala, Shayna  2718, 4114 LaScala-Gruenewald, Angela  3659 LaSelva, Deirdre  1655 Laster Pirtle, Whitney Nicole  1107, 1306, 3901 Lata, Lutfun Nahar  4253 Latham-Mintus, Kenzie  1314, 1329 Latif, Mehr  0106 Latshaw, Beth A.  1655 Lattanzi, Grant  1461 Lau, Mandy  2752 Laughlin, Lynda L.  2510 Lauterwasser, Steven  1532, 3327 Lauve-Moon, Tim  3106 Law, Tina  3532 Lawrence, Elizabeth  2313 Lawton, Amy  1265 Laybourn, SunAh Marie  2253 Le, Andrew N.  4856 Leal, Diego F.  3127 Leap, Braden  2127, 4712 Le Barbenchon, Claire  1847, 1851 Lebel, Alexandre  1659 Lechuga, Chalane E.  3857, 3858, 3859, 3860, 3861, 3862 LeCount, Ryan Jerome  3263 Lee, Byung Soo  2752 Lee, Catherine  2532 Lee, Celeste Nichole  3103 PARTICIPANT INDEX 143 

Lee, Ching Kwan  2315 Lee, Chioun  4465 Lee, Dasom  2853 Lee, Elizabeth M.  2510 Lee, Eun Hye  4531 Lee, Francis  3667 Lee, Hedwig  1866, 2317 Lee, Hye Ji (Erica)  1120 Lee, Hyojung  3716 Lee, Jack Jin Gary  4717, 4854 Lee, Jennifer  3124 Lee, Kangsan  2657 Lee, Kenya  1260 Lee, KeunBok  3321 Lee, Kevin Woojin  1118 Lee, Kristen Schultz  3725 Lee, Kristina Elizabeth  3152 Lee, Kyunghwan  1671, 4855 Lee, Mark  2747 Lee, Naeyun  3730 Lee, Rennie  2731 Lee, Sae Hwan  4851 Lee, Sang Kyung  1732 Lee, Sangsoo  3755 Lee, Suzy K  2513 Lee, Yong Ryung  2664 Lee, Youngcho  4251 Lee, YoungLan  2751 Lee, Youngrong  2664 Leeds, Tyler  1466 Leffel, Benjamin  1669, 4456 Leggon, Cheryl B.  1303 Lehoucq, Emilio  1458, 2861, 2862, 2863, 2864, 2865, 2866, 2867, 2868 Lehpamer, Nicole  1654, 2126 Lei, Lei  4252 Lei, Ya-Wen  2327 Leider, Jonathon P.  3530 Leigh, Jenny Karla  1649 Lekhak, Nirmala  2317 Lemekh, Halyna  1847 Leon, Rocio  3860 Leonard, Samantha  1470, 1724 León-Pérez, Gabriela  1847, 3861 Leperlier, Tristan  3722 Lerch, Julia C.  2730 Lersch, Philipp  2333 Leslie, Carrie McLachlin  1326, 4449 Letak, Abigail  1115, 2354 Letarte, Laurence  1659 Letellier, Dylan  4312 Letourneau, Angeline  4460 Letourneau, Nicole R  3525, 3751 Leturcq, Marion  2333 Leung, Ming D  3125 Leurquin, Randall  3320 Levenson, Zachary  2314, 2661 Levesque, Christopher  3152 Levi, Ron  4724 Levien, Michael  1502, 4105 Levin, Isabel Frances  4250 Levine, Ethan Czuy  3551 Levine, Judith A.  2326 Levonyan Radloff, Timothy D.  1573 Levy, Brian L.  3132 Levy, Eldad J  1330 Lewin, Paul  3524 Lewis, Amanda Evelyn  1705 Lewis, Christian Joy  3310 Lewis, Demetrius  3118 Lewis, Tene T.  1114, 1868 Lewis-Elligan, Tracey  4705 Leyro, Shirley  2522 Leyton, Alex  2356 Li, Angran  2505 Li, Anita  4249 Li, Lulu  3348 Li, Peng  2751 Li, Qi  2126 Li, Rebecca S.K.  1461 Li, Shuang  2463 Li, Xiao  3669 Li, Xiaoqian  3526 Li, Yao  1454, 2464 Li, Yao-Tai  3332, 4714 Li, Yunlin  2260 Li, Zhuofan  4667 Lian, Langou  4254 Liang, Lily  2122, 3722 Liang, Yingjian  4666 Liang, Zai  2131 Liao, Celine  0548 Liao, Wenjie  3730 Lichtenstein, Matty  4729 Lichter, Daniel T.  2703 Lichterman, Paul R.  3731 Lieberman, Dahlia  3660 Light, Michael T.  3714 Light, Ryan  0542, 0801, 2901 Lim, Chaeyoon  4118 Lim, Misun  3151 Limoncelli, Stephanie A.  2854 Lin, Fen Jennifer  1262, 1458 Lin, Ken-Hou  1521, 2134, 3131 Lin, Lefeng Frank  3123 Lin, Meng-Jung  1320 LIN, SHIH-HAO  1521 Lin, Thung-Hong  1521, 2256 Linares, Carina  4657 Linberg, Anja  4248 Lindner, Andrew M.  1457, 1458, 1459, 1460, 1461, 1462, 1463, 1464, 1465, 1466, 1467 Lindsay, Sadé  1527, 2322, 4730 Lindsay, Sarah May  1267 Lindsey, Tonya D.  3109 Link, Bruce G.  2313, 3720, 4114 Linos, Eleni  2716 Lipscomb, Lisa M.  4665 Lipsitz, George  3505 Lisnic, Rodica  0203 Lister, Sione Lynn Pili  4717 Listik, Yonathan  4727 Litchfield, Robert C.  1462 Littlejohn, Krystale E.  1647, 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651, 1652, 1653, 1654, 1655, 1656, 1657, 1658, 1659, 3117, 4117 Litzler, Elizabeth  4657 Liu, Chang  3257 Liu, Chao  1320, 4667 Liu, Chuncheng  1113 Liu, Hexuan  1320 Liu, Hui  2751, 3665 Liu, Jia-Lin  3324 Liu, Jiaqi  1116, 2717 Liu, Jing  2666, 2749 Liu, Jingwen  2333 Liu, Jundai  4855 Liu, L. Larry  2656 Liu, Mao-Mei  3315 Liu, Michelle  2466 Liu, Mingtang  1671 Liu, Monica Haiyi  1132 Liu, Ran  1248, 2463 Liu, Ruo-Fan  2863 Liu, Shuyin  3668, 3754 Liu, Yingling  2752 Liu, Yitong  2464 Liu, Yuanhao  2355, 4660 Liu, Yucheng  2353 Liu, Yuetong  1324 Livas, Selena Margarita  4455 Lizardo, Omar A.  1318 Lo, Celia C.  2259, 3357 Lo, Iris Po Yee  1531 Lobao, Linda  4514 Loblack, Angelica Celeste  3128 Lockhart, Jeffrey W.  3662 Locklear, Sofia  2108 Loder, Kimya  1867 Loesch, Adam  3547, 3714 Loftin, Lindsay Nettles  4268 Logan, Allison  1525 Logan, Enid  3128 Logan, John R.  2703 Logan, Trevon D.  3311, 3506 Lohmeyer, Nora  2315 London, Andrew S.  2113 London, Rebecca  2106 Londoño, Melisa  0548 Lonergan, Gwyneth  4527 Long, D. Leann  4253 Longenecker, Anderson Julia  3717 Longest, Landen  1126 Longmore, Monica A.  3461 Lopez, Angelica  3318 Lopez, Jane Lilly  1323, 1847, 3324 Lopez, Steven H.  3319 López, Claudia Maria  1853, 2121, 4714 López, Nancy  2502, 3304 Lopez-Aguado, Patrick  4508, 4730 Lopez Colorado, Summer  2713 Lopez Ricoy, Ana  4129 Lorek, Melanie  2514 Lorenz, Katherine  3350 Lorenz, Renate  4650 Lorenzen, Janet A.  4462 Lorenzo, Frangi  2662 Lotesta, Johnnie  2319 Lotspeich-Yadao, Michael  1865 Loughran, Kevin  1725 Louie, Patricia  1114, 4326 Loustaunau, Lola  1718 Love, Samantha  4449 Lovell, Erik Stephen  3532 Loya, Jose  1866, 2729 PARTICIPANT INDEX 144 

Lu, Todd  3127 Lubben, Noah Riley  2519 Lucas, Nicole J.  2308, 4506 Lucas, Samuel R.  2120 Lucchesi, Lydia R.  3550 Luff, Paul  1324 Luft, Aliza  1470, 2117, 4119 Luft, Rachel E.  2311 Luhr, Sigrid Willa  3525, 4249 Luhtakallio, Eeva  2649, 2868 Luke Sinitiere, Phillip  4108 Lukk, Martin  3256, 4320, 4520 Lumley-Sapanski, Audrey  1853 Luna, Briana  4106 Luna, Zakiya T.  1306, 2705, 4507 Lundberg, Ian  2726 Lundquist, Jennifer Hickes  1463, 2332, 2732 Lung, Shirley Michelle  2466 Luo, Liying  2720, 4262 Luo, Xiaoshuang Iris  2329 Lusk, Jeniece Tyria  2523 Lutz, Amy  4264 Lutz, Elizabeth Norene  3350 Ly, Louise  2348 Lynch, Michael  2722 Lynn, Emma  2265 Lynn, Freda B.  2247 Lynne, Alyssa A.  3352 Lyon, Katherine  1576 Lyttelton, Thomas  4664 

# M

Ma, Dali  0555, 2654, 4726 Ma, Xiangyu  1115 Ma, Yuanye  1465 Mabry, Dustin  1264 MacCartney, Danielle  2121, 2320 MacColman, Leslie Elva  3265 Macias, Eric  1515 Mackay, Ried E  3728 Macke, Erin  4665 MacKendrick, Norah  3717, 4106, 4447, 4448, 4449, 4450, 4451, 4452, 4453, 4454, 4455, 4456, 4457, 4458, 4459, 4460, 4461, 4462, 4463, 4516, 4731 Mackin Freeman, Daniel  1260, 1329, 3151 MacKinnon, Neil J.  2318 MacLean, Alair  3330 MacMillen, Sarah L.  2351 Macort, Maxwell  0556 Maddock, Jay E.  2463 Madhavan, Sangeetha  2262 Maes, Michael  4121 Maggio, Christopher  2132, 4659 Maghbouleh, Neda  1315, 3706, 4104 Magnuson, Eric P.  1448 Magnuson, Shannon  2671 Magoqwana, Babalwa  2715 Magubane, Zine  1110, 2715, 3507, 3709 Mahadeo, Rahsaan  2719, 3725 Maher, Thomas V.  4330 Mahmud, Hasan  4123 Mahoney, James  2720 Mai, Sabrina  1462, 2726 Maier, Jean Marie  1254 Maietta, Justin T.  3720 Mäkinen, Elina I.  3660 Makofsky, David  3748 Makris, Molly Vollman  4324 Malcolm, Sadiyah  4312 Maldonado, Alex  1516 Malette, Nicole Solanges  1576 Malhotra, Ragini Saira  1723 Malin, Stephanie Ann  3717 Malla, Gargya  4253 Mallick, Rafia Javaid  3548 Malmuth, Andrew  3756 Malone Gonzalez, Shannon  1509, 4112, 4316 Maloney, Emily  3751 Man, Guida C.  2467 Man, Kit  1727 Manago, Bianca  1653 Manchella, Mohit  1722 Manduca, Robert Allen  3716 Mangcu, Xolela  1110 Mangold, Severin  4449 Mani, Dalhia  3353 Mann, Kay  1453 Manning, Alex  3552 Manning, Ryann  2117 Manning, Wendy Diane  2333, 3461 Manrique, Ruy  3128 Manriquez, Mariana  3320 Manski, Ben  4456 Manski, Sarah Grace  1317 Mansour, Rania  1858 Manza, Jeff  3104 Manzanares, Melissa  1854 Manzer, Jamie  1647, 4527 Maracle, Lee  4522 Maralani, Vida  2120 Marchia, Joseph M.  3352 Marcum, Christopher Steven  2112, 2312 Mark, Brigid  4457 Mark, Nicholas  4127 Markens, Susan  3728 Markowski, Kelly Lorraine  4466 Marom, Oded  2122 Maron, Samuel  3259 Maroto, Michelle Lee  4320, 4520, 4859, 4860 Marquart, Ingo  2857 Marques da Silva, Natália  3556 Marquez-Velarde, Guadalupe  1729, 2726 Marr, Matthew D.  3556 Marrett, Cora B.  2709 Marrow, Helen B.  2132 Marsala, Miles  1573 Marset, Mario  0549 Marsh, Vic  4665 Marshall, Douglas A.  1221 Marshall, Mila K.  4704 Mart, Sehrazat Gulsum  3731 Marteleto, Leticia  4326 Martin, Aaron  3554 Martin, Brittany T.  3714 Martin, Elizabeth  4530 Martin, Gabrielle Sara  1264, 2128 Martin, John Levi  1707 Martin, Karin  2104 Martin, Lori Latrice  1506, 4706 Martin, Skky  3514 Martinez, Caroline Grace  3152 Martinez, Daniel E.  1104 Martinez, Jessica  3666 Martinez, Juan R.  3103 Martinez, Lisa M.  4653 Martinez-Aranda, Mirian Giovanna  3860 Martinez-Cola, Marisela  3120, 3528, 4657 Martinez Echague, Maria Ines  4713 Martinez Mora, Maria De Jesus  1122 Martinez-Schuldt, Ricardo David  1854, 3752 Martucci, Sara Lucia  2525 Marvel, Stu  3661 Masek, Vaclav  3858 Masi, Anthony C.  2662 Mason, Emily L.  2347 Mason, Sarah  2514 Masood, Syeda Quratulain  3722 Massey, Douglas S.  3708 Massoglia, Michael  3714 Mateu-Gelabert, Pedro  1522, 4114 Matheny, Kaylee  1254 Matlon, Jordanna Chris  4302 Matsudaira, Jordan  3317 Matta, Nada  2704 Matthews, Jahmali  4513 Matthews, Morgan Carey  3357 Mattson, Greggor  1331, 2528, 3553, 3753 Mauldin, Laura  1529, 2317, 4320 Mayer, Adam  4462 Mayer, Brian  4660 Mayes, Elizabeth Carolina  3662 Mayol-Garcia, Yeris  4250 Mayrl, Damon  4107 Mays, Vickie  3462 Mazehuani, Ikiltezilani  2331, 3703 Mazelis, Joan Maya  2728, 4256 Mazrekaj, Deni  1257, 1331 McAlevey, Jane  3102 McAndrew, Siobhan  3712 McArthur, Daniel  2129 McAuley, Christopher  1505 McAuliffe, Erin L  1323 McCabe, Brian James  2529, 2729, 4263, 4330 McCabe, Janice  3702 McCall, Leslie  2103 McCallum, Jamie K  3325 McCamant, Jane Elizabeth  3114 McCannon, Kevin  1574 McCarthy, Michael A.  1120 McCarthy, Sarah  3859 McCauley, Erin Josephine  3129 McClain, Lauren N.  3111 McCloud, Laura  2121 McClymonds, Daniel G.  2530, 3756 McConnell, Kathryn  1130 McConnell, William R  1652, 1722 McCormack, Lauren Marie May  0555 McCoy, Julisa Amanda  3859 McCoy, Julya Paige  0555 McCrackin, Gina Marie  1720 McCreery, Anna C.  2312, 4454 McCumber, Andrew  3722 PARTICIPANT INDEX 145 

McDade, Thomas  3705 McDaniel, Tyler  4324 McDermott, Joshua Lew  3123 McDonald, Emily  2712 McDonald-Lopez, Karina Mercedes  3317 McDonnell, Terence Emmett  3522 McDowell, Amy D.  4318 McElhattan, David  4724 McErlean, Kimberly  4326 McGee, Ebony  1249 McGee, Julius Alexander  2314, 3504 McGee, Maura  4647 McGhee, Annie  4127 McGinty, Patrick J.W.  2867 McGraw, Lora  4318 McGuffey, C. Shawn  2705 McIntosh, Keith  3553 McKane, Rachel G.  1717, 4447 McKay, Dwanna L.  1533, 3306 McKay, Rachel  1659 McKay, Steven  2106 McKay, Tara A.  2329, 4323 McKeen, Patara  2864 McKenna, Elizabeth  4503 McKernan, Brian  1528 McKinnon, Izraelle  1114, 1868 McLaughlin, Megan  1660 McLaurin, Kelsey A  0547 McLay, Rachel  3260 McLeer, Jennifer  2253 McLemore, Brie  3121 McLeskey, Matthew Howard  2121 McManus, Patricia A.  2131 McMillan, Cassie  2261, 3521 McMillan, Sara  0106 McMillan Lequieu, Amanda  1504, 4458 McMullin, Kristina  4520 McNamara, Kelly  1868 McNeill, Kristen  2118, 4662 McZeal, Corey James  2121 Mead, Cassie  3517 Meadow, Tey  3303, 4702 Meanwell, Emily  4525 Mears, Ashley E.  1312, 3126 Medina, Hope  4513 Medley-Rath, Stephanie  1252, 2121 Meehan, Albert J.  2722, 3122, 3870 Mehlkop, Guido Franz  4467, 4819 Mehta, Sharan Kaur  3528, 4655 Meier, Ann  4247 Meiser, Ellen T.  4664 Mejia, Jorge  4725 Mejia, Nallely  3861 Melaku, Tsedale Mekete  4126, 4317 Melamed, David M.  2621 Mellacheruvu, Pranav  3747 Mellers, Ivana  1726 Melo-Velasco, Jenny  2512 Menchik, Daniel A.  1715 Mendenhall, Ruby  4332, 4901 Mendez, Dara  1704 Mendez, Jennifer Bickham  1712 Menjivar, Cecilia  1710 Menon, Alka  1128, 2327 Mercer, Katherine  2250 Merdjanoff, Alexis A.  1130 Merli, M. Giovanna  1851 Merriman, Benjamin  3463 Merryman, Molly  2708 Mertehikian, Yasmin  4513 Messamore, Andrew Ford  3132 Messineo, Melinda Jo  0277 Meszaros, Julia  1132, 3354, 3515 Meyer, David S.  1731 Meyer, Doug  2527 Meyer, Ilan H.  2724 Meyer, John W.  2651 Meyer, Michelle Annette  1130, 4462 Meyers, Nathan  2853, 2854, 2855, 2856, 2857, 2858, 2859, 2860 Michelson, Anna  1328 Mickey, Ethel L.  0203, 1316, 4317 Mijs, Jonathan Jan Benjamin  2354 Miklin, Sanja  3321, 4858 Miles, Andrew  2247, 2248, 2249, 2250, 2251, 2252, 2253 Miles, Brittney  2719 Miles, Corey Javon  4524 Milkie, Melissa A.  1325, 3531 Milkman, Ruth  1502 Miller, Andrea D.  2522 Miller, Brian J.  2361 Miller, DeMond Shondell  1130 Miller, Gabe  2319, 2726 Miller, Jessica  1518 Miller, Laura J.  1663 Miller, Mahala  3531 Miller, Reuben  4508 Miller, Rhiannon  4255 Miller, Sarah A.  2319 Mills, Charles W.  3505 Milne, EJ  2708 Milne, Mia Rosario  0554 Mincyte, Diana  2127 Mindes, Samuel  3524 Miner, Adam S  2716 Mingo, Meaghan  1305 Minkus, Lara  3725 Miranda González, Andrea  1851 Mirzoyan, Inna  2320 Mische, Ann  2516, 3731 Misra, Joya  0277, 1316 Mitchell, Brant  1130, 4462 Mitchell, Connor Douglas  3747 Mitchell, Kara  4723 Mittleman, Joel  2724, 3352 Miyawaki, Michael Hajime  3857 Mize, Trenton D.  1653, 1721 Mlynar, Jakub  3122 Model, Suzanne  1857 Moen, Phyllis  2130, 3270 Moghadam, Valentine M.  1716 Mogosanu, Andreea  3718 Moheit, Kiyanna  1514 Moinester, Margot  1853 Moison, Elizabeth  2319, 3352 Mojola, Sanyu A.  1131, 1522 Mok, Kira  4106 Mok, Shannon  1331 Mokhtari, Mitra  3147 Molina, Mario D.  4322 Molina, Santiago José  3657 Mollborn, Stefanie  1301, 2250, 2520 Molotch, Harvey L.  3320 Monaghan, David B.  3133 Mondada, Lorenza  1524 Mondal, Lipon K  4130 Monden, Christiaan  1257 Monihen, Lindsay  3858 Monk, Ellis Prentis  1318 Monnier-Reyna,, Madalena  1452 Monroe, Nicholas Charles  2505 Montes, Veronica  3116 Montes, Vince  3865 Montez, Jennifer Karas  2270 Montgomery, Alesia  3518 Montgomery, Sidra J.  2112, 2312, 2512, 2712 Montiegel, Kristella  1524 Montoya, Kayla  0552 Moody, Myles Daniel  1523 Moody, Travis  3320 Mooi-Reci, Irma  4712 Mook, Anne  2523 Moon, Jiyoung  4654 Mooney, Heather  1728 Moore, Abigail C  3466 Moore, Alexus  2517, 3716 Moore, Brenda L.  3330 Moore, Kelly  3307 Moore, Mel  1572, 2121 Moore, Mignon R.  1105, 1706, 2103, 2307, 4304, 4504 Moore, Natalie  2305 Moore, Ravaris LaDale  4262 Moore, Renee  1114, 1868 Moore, Robyn T  3752 Moore, Wendy Leo  3306, 3901 Mora, Fernanda  0552 Morales, Jose Israel  2257 Morales, Maria Cristina  3862 Moran-Thomas, Amy  2508 Morelock, Jeremiah  4727 Morenoff, Jeffrey  4530 Morgan, Rebekah  1252 Morgul, Kerem  2132 Morning, Ann J.  3503 Morosin, Alessandro  4462 Morrill, Calvin  4526 Morris, Aldon D.  0901, 1110, 1505, 1901, 2303, 2705, 2901, 3108, 3305, 3505, 3901, 4305, 4505, 4703 Morris, Kevin T  4330, 4724 Morris, R. C.  3263 Morris, Theresa  3129, 3329, 3350, 3351, 3728 Morrison, Daniel Ray  2867 Morrissey, Mary Beth  3751 Mortimer, Jeylan T  2718 Morton, Karisma  1863 Morton, Patricia M.  3148 Mose, Tamara  1509, 1534, 2108 Moseby, Kevin M.  3115, 3657 Moss, Geoffrey  3553 Mosseri, Sarah Elizabeth  4718 Moster, Miriam  4715 Motala, Shireen  4703 PARTICIPANT INDEX 146 

Moten, Octavian Jerel  3353 Mott, Katherine Louisa  4268 Moullin, Sophie Clare  2357 Moussawi, Ghassan  1133, 4122 Mouw, Ted  1851, 3128 Movahed, Masoud  1321, 3264 Mudge, Stephanie L.  1727 Mueller, Anna S.  1649, 2261 Mueller, Collin William  1516 Mueller, Jennifer C.  4727 Mueller, J. Tom  1130 Mueller, Michelle  4847 Mueller, Rosie  4456 Mugiyama, Ryota  3549 Muhammad, Bahiyyah M.  1125, 1869 Mukherjee, Meghna  2114, 3660 Mulayim, Gokhan  2865 Mullan, Brendan  2320 Mullen, Casey Jo  4458 Muller, Christopher Michael  3315 Mumtaz, Mehr  4665 Munasinghe, Hansini  1857 Munoz, Dora  0557 Muñoz, José A.  4722 Munoz-Paniagua, Lidia  2513 Muraco, Anna  2525 Murden, Raphiel  1114, 1868 Murphy, Alexandra K.  3317 Murphy, Demetrius Miles  2119, 3121 Murphy, James P  2329 Murphy, Kendra  3353 Murphy, Michael Warren  2507 Murphy, Teagan Hallene  1449 Murphy-Geiss, Gail  1301 Murray, Andrew  3664 Murray, Brittany  4124 Murray, Joshua  2314 Musick, Kelly  3516, 4247 Myers, Dan  3357 

# N

Nabbie, Caroline  4455 Nadler, Janice  1714 Nagel, Joane  4451 Nagi, Omar  1572, 2310 Nagy, Gabriela  3155 Nakajima, Seio  2856 Nam, Young Eun  4247 Namur, Douglas Abdalla  3862 Nanni, Antonio  2350 Naphan-Kingery, Dara Elizabeth  1249 Nápoles, Tessa M  1654, 1715 Narr, Gregory  3126 Nash, Sue Petrina  1574, 1724 Nashwan, Ayat  1858 Nations, Jennifer Marie  3262 Naus, Wendy  1508 Navarrete, Keyla  3514 Navas, Natalia  3724 Nave, Carmen  2722 Nawyn, Stephanie J.  1858 Nazir, Saman  3669 Ndiaye, Pap  2111 Negatu, Selam Esayas  2127 Negron-Gonzales, Melinda  1451 Neitz, Sarah M.  2347 Nelson, Alondra  3115 Nelson, Dylan  2316 Nelson, Hyeyoung Oh  1114 Nelson, Jennifer Lauren  2329 Nelson, Kristen  4648 Nelson, Kyle Anne  3314 Nelson, Kyle  1724 Nelson, Laura K.  1327, 1649, 2716, 3529 Nelson, Micah  4330 Nelson, Sara  2105 Nelson, Tauren  4727 Nepstad, Sharon Erickson  3527 Nerenberg, Kiara Millay  2529 Nesbitt, Philippa  4520 Neumann, Robert  4819 Newby, Robert  1105 Newell, Abigail  1714, 4327 Newhart, Michelle R.  3321 Newlands, Gemma  2866 Newmyer, Lauren  3129 Ng, Ka U  1855, 3263 Nguemeni Tiako, Max Jordan  1114 Nicholls, Heidi Christine  4762 Nicholls, Walter Julio  1452, 3860 Nicholls, Walter  4521 Nichols, Laura  1574 Nichols, Suzanne  4109 Nicholson, Daniel Adam  3317, 3517 Nicklas, Jeff  1654, 1715 Nicole, Hilary  1113 Nicorici, Irina  1133 Nie, Fanhao  4847 Nie, Ke  2856 Nie, Tianzhu  2116 Nikolopoulos, Georgios  4114 Niles, Skye  4659 Niño, Michael David  3329 Niska, Tuomas  3262 Noble, Safiya Umoja  1303 Noel, Melissa Elizabeth  1869 Nojan, Saugher  4717 Nolan, Daniel Andrew  2250 Nolan, Stuart  1130, 4462 Nolin, David  3754 Nomaguchi, Kei  1525 Norris, Alison  1647, 2526, 4327 Norris, Davon  2506, 4501 Norris, Dawn R.  3725 North, Mallory  1520 Noureldin, Laila  3727 Nousak, Samantha L  2503 Nowakowski, Alexandra Catherine Hayes 

2526 Noy, Ilan  4451 Noy, Shiri  2119, 2327 nurse, angela  2524, 4108 Nyoka, Bongani  2715 

# O

Obhi, Hardeep  2747 O'Brien, Daniel  3548 O'Brien, Jodi  2525 O'Brien, Laureen K.  4666, 4709 O'Brien, Shay  2720 O'Brien, Timothy L.  2327, 3714 OBrien, Rourke  1530 Ocejo, Richard E.  0532, 1666 Ochoa, Gilda Laura  1308, 4124, 4324, 4722 Ochoa, Theresa  2266 O'Connell, Heather Avery  2530 O'Connor, Lindsey Trimble  2727 O’Connor, Artemis  1310 O'Donnell, Catharina  3325 Ody-Brasier, Amandine  1530 Oehmen, Nicole M  1724 Oertel, Simon  3751 Offer, Shira  4255 Offidani-Bertrand, Carly  3124 Ofuokwu, Joy Ifeoma  2726 Ogley, Victoria  1850 Oh, Byeongdon ("Don")  3151 Oh, Hyunsu  3549 Oh, Jeong Hyun  2857 Oh, Jihye  3316 Oh, Seil  2323, 4851 Oh, Yoehan  3661 Ohsfeldt, Michael  2355 Ohtsuki, Shigemi  3155 Oi, Katsuya  2747 Ojeh, Kalasia S.  1506, 2326, 4506 Okai, Ewurama A  1848 Okamoto, Dina G.  0531, 2132, 4507 Okazawa, Ryo  2324 Okechukwu, Amaka Camille  1321, 4707 Oksuzyan, Anna  2751 Okum, Troy S.  4848 Okuwa, Oyindamola Adebola  3668 Okuwobi, Oneya Fennell  3528 Okyerefo, Michael Perry  4107 Oladimeji, Abolade  4651 Olaniyan, Abisola  1704 Oldham, Leah  3357 Oleschuk, Merin  2355 Olguin, Ana A.  1258 Olguin, Luis Manuel  3122 Olick, Jeffrey  4119 Olivarez, Jenny  1249 Oliveira, Gabrielle  3524 Oliver, Pamela E.  1107, 1304, 3704 Olivos, Francisco  2353, 2356 Olsen, Lauren D.  1649 Olson, Hannah  2317 Olthof, Doug  2510 Omar, Audrey Ruth  3150 Omar, Laila  1315 Omowale, Serwaa  1704 Onasch, Elizabeth  3130 Oncini, Filippo  1115 O'Neil, Meghan M.  2729, 4530 O'Neill, Brian Francis  4458 Önel, Gülcan  2126 Ong, Christina  3310, 3547, 3548, 3549, 3550, 3551, 4658 Oni, Daniel Oluwasetemi  3532 Oosterlynck, Stijn  4452 Opoku, Alphonse  4455 O'Quinn, Jamie  2527 Ordemann, Jessica  4314 Ore, Peter  4460 Ore, Tracy E.  2310 PARTICIPANT INDEX 147 

Orkodashvili, Mariam  1461 Orloff, Ann Shola  1327 Orne, Jason  1531, 4306 Orozco, Eduardo  0552 Orsini, Maria  4526 Ortiz, Robin  1722 Ortuno, David  3133 Osborne, Melissa  2328 Oser, Jennifer  1454 Osili, Una Okonkwo  2621 Osinsky, Pavel I.  1127 Osipian, Ararat L.  1248, 1451 Ostermann, Kerstin  2131 Osuji, Chinyere  1708, 3503 Ota, Kendall  1531 Oursler, Alyssa  1452 Over, Defne  3714 Overbey, Lisa  1250 Overdevest, Christine  2523 Oware, Matthew  4653 Owens, Jayanti Johanna  2713, 4314 Owens, Kellie  3658 Owens, Lindsay A.  3508 Owens, Lisa Lucile  4714 Owens, Timothy J.  2503 Owosela, Babajide  3150 Ozdemir, Cetin  3524 Ozdemir, Seyma  1860 Ozgode, Onur  2858 Ozkaratas, Ali Murat  4649 Ozpinar, Cihan  3866 

# P

Pace, Jennifer Ann  2520 Pachucki, Mark C.  2313 Packard, Chiara Clio  3147, 3148, 3149, 3150, 3462 Padilla, Beatriz  3116 Padilla, Esperanza Teresa, Guadalupe  4520 Paek, Eunjeong  3325 Paez-Arellano, Mario  4531 Page, Joshua Aaron  4730 Pagis, Michal  3727 Paik, Leslie S.  0535, 1703 Paine, Emily Allen  1715 Paine, Spencer  2356 Pait, Heloisa  1250 Pal, Soumya  1251 Palii, Ina  4859 Pallotta, Nicole R  1267 Palmaccio, Silvia  1331 Palmer, Zachary  4712 Palmgren, Pei  2717 Pals, Heili  2131 Pamplona, Roberta  2514 Pan, Guanghui  4314 Pan, Rui  2462 Pan, Yung-Yi Diana  1854, 3528 Pandian, Roshan Kumar  4514 Panfil, Vanessa R.  2724 Paniagua Guzman, Antonio  3862 Panighel, Marta  2653 Panofsky, Aaron  1650, 1713, 3307 Paolella, Lionel  4265 Papachristos, Andrew V.  1129, 2329, 4332, 4901 Papadantonakis, Max  3328 Pape, Madeleine  1513 Paredes, Cristian Luis  3320, 3514 Paret, Marcel  2314 Park, Bo Yun  1457, 3267 Park, Dongwoo  3718 Park, Hyunjoon  2462, 2463, 2464, 2465, 2466, 2467, 2468 Park, Jong-heon  3549 Park, Joohyun  1455 Park, Ju Hyun  4662 Park, Kiwoong  1650 Park, Soojin  4465 Park, Sung S.  1847, 1848, 1849, 1850, 1851, 1852, 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, 1857, 1858 Park, Susanna  2462 Parker, Emily  1327, 4514 Parker, Jeffrey Nathaniel  1528, 3753 Parker, Sebastien  3732 Parolin, Zachary  3317 Parrado, Emilio A.  3315, 3708 Parra Saiani, Paolo  3715 Parrenas, Rhacel Salazar  1308, 2507, 2901 Parry, Ashley  4248 Parsons, Kate  2320 Parsons, Ryan James  4257, 4267 Partridge, Mark  4514 Paschel, Tianna S.  2111, 4507 Pasciuti, Daniel  3465 Pascoe, C.J.  0542, 2319, 4115 Pasquale, Frank  2508 Patel, Sujata  1110 Patil, Vrushali  2304 Patterson, Evelyn Joy  3506 Patterson, Jon  4704 Pattillo, Mary E.  0901, 1706, 2104, 3322 Paulsen, Krista E.  1661 Pavasovic Trost, Tamara  3730 Pawson, Mark  4114 Payne, Charles  3302 Paz, Amira  2750 Pcolar, Macalah  4457 Pearce, Diana M.  1660 Pearce, Jessica  3126, 3326, 3526, 3726 Pearman, Francis  1712, 4324 Pedraza, Silvia  1849 Pedraza-Martinez, Alfonso  4725 Pedroza, Juan Manuel  3703 Peek, Lori  3704, 4501 Peele, Morgan  1722 Pekar, Alicia F.  3665 Peker, Efe  3263 Peksen, Sude  1467 Pellerito, Elizabeth  2662 Pellow, David  1725, 3504 Pelton, Julie  1720, 2121, 2320, 2821 Peng, Rui Jie  1116, 3523 Peng, Siyun  1722, 2750, 3530 Penn, Gershwin  2505 Peoples, Clayton D.  3312 Pepin, Joanna  4713 Pepper, Mollie Elizabeth  3514 Percheski, Christine M.  3665 Perez, Amin  3709 Perez, Marcos Emilio  3127, 3327 Perez, Timothy A  3864 Pérez Martín, Amalia  1451 Pericak, Kaitlin  1656 Perkins, Kristin  3716, 4713 Perkins, Robert  4706 Perkins, Tracy  3126, 3526 Perlman, David C  4114 Perlstadt, Harry  2709, 3308 Pernell, Kim  2316 Perone, Angela  3113 Perrett, Stuart Malcolm  1848, 3712 Perrin, Andrew J.  2862 Perrone, Dina  4114 Perry, Brea Louise  1318, 1654, 1715, 1722 Persaud, Christopher  0556 Peters, Olivia  4761 Petersen, Camille  4321 Peterson, Gabrielle L  1258 Peterson, Gretchen  3353, 4331 Pettinicchio, David Nicholas  4320, 4520 Pettis, Philip J.  4648 Pettit, Becky  2104 Petts, Amy  1321, 4124 Petts, Richard J.  1525, 4513, 4713 Pfaffendorf, Jessica  1520 Pfeffer, Carla A.  3354 Pfeiffer, Friedhelm  4314 Pham, Janelle Marissa  2325 Pharris, Mark H. K.  3259, 3731 Phelps, Michelle S.  1129, 3121 Philips, Miray Hany Wadie  1714, 3467, 4518 Phillippo, Katherine  1705, 1863 Phillips, Lora A.  3317 Pichizaca, Betsy  1256 Piehowski, Victoria I.  3554 Piemontese, Stefano  1515 Pierce, Hayley  2357 Pierce, Jackson  1130, 4462 Pierotti, Rachael S.  3349 Pike, Diane L.  2121 Pike, Isabel  3349 Pilgrim, Haley  3128, 3310 Pillet-Shore, Danielle  1524 Pincombe, Morgan  1718 Pinto, Katy M.  2525 Piontak, Rachel  3752 Pisano, Gary Paul  4726 Pittman, LaShawnDa L.  1125 Pittman Claytor, Cassi L.  1330, 1664 Piven, Frances Fox  2303, 3302 Pizarro Milian, Roger  1512 Plankey-Videla, Nancy  2106, 4663 Planson, Sonia  3124 Plascencia-Saldana, Brittney  1256 Plasencia, Melanie Z.  2748 Plassman, Brenda L.  2747 Plummer, Chelli  4662 Plys, Kristin  1127, 4319 Poe, Madison  2257 Poff, Jared M.  2463 Poirier, Nathan  1266 Polgar, Michael F.  3467 Polillo, Simone  1719, 2321 Poling, Jessica  2349 Pollard, Michael S.  4114 PARTICIPANT INDEX 148 

Polletta, Francesca  3327 Pollock, Anne  1709 Pollock, Sarah  1709 Polonijo, Andrea N.  2750 Polos, Jessica  1656, 3705 Ponce, Adriana  1125 Poole, Alicia  1849 Poon, OiYan  4317 Popovaite, Inga  4531 Porcelli, Apollonya Maria  2327, 4459 Portier, Camille  3129 Portocarrero, Sandra  4663 Portos, Martin  3256 Posada, Julian  1464, 2511, 3106 Potarca, Gina  4254 Potiker, Spencer Louis  4130 Potter, Hillary  1319, 2124 Potter, Marina Haddock  4529 Poudrier, Grace  3717 Powell, Brian  3702 Powers, Jillian  2112 Powers, Martha  4106 Prager, Susan B.  3308 Prasad, Monica  1127, 1327, 1707 Preito-Hodge, Kayla A.  1319, 1526, 2124, 4316 Prener, Christopher  3719 Presswood, Alane  1576 Preston, Kayla  1532 Price, Anne  1108 Price, Heather E.  3133 Price, Taylor  3750 Priest, Anthony Alex  4452 Prieto, Greg  3703 Prince, Barbara F.  0543, 3750 Prince, Chanel  2357 Prior, Francis Bruce  1860 Prost, Jonbita  3357 Protasiuk, Ewa  3553 Provenzano, Peyton  3121 Pruneda, Evelyn  2125 Pryma, Jane  1513, 3113 Pryor, Jenna  3666, 4530 Puchalski, Vance Alan  2118 Puckett, Cassidy  1467, 4115 Pugh, Allison  1103, 1721 Puglin, Jamie  1447, 1450 Pula, Besnik  1732, 4328 Pulido, Laura  3504 Pulley, Aislinn  1733 Pulver, Simone  2663, 4456 Punti, Gemma  4657 Purdum, J. Carlee  1130, 4462 Puri, Jyoti  4866 Purkayastha, Bandana  2304, 3305 Purnell, Bertha  4332 Puro, Neeraj  1652 Purser, Gretchen  4268 Pyles, Micah Anthony  3318 

# Q

Qato, Mezna  4307 Qian, Yue  4527, 4708 Qian, Zhenchao  3316 Qiao, Kunyuan  2360 Qiu, Fengxian  2666, 2749 Qu, Tianyao  2855 Qu, Xian  1671 Quadlin, Natasha  1512, 4314 Quan-Haase, Anabel  3550 Quark, Amy Adams  1712, 1718 Querin, Federica  3316, 4326 Quesada, Melissa  2326 Quesnel-Vallee, Amelie  1659 Quillian, Lincoln G.  3723 Quinci, Sofia  0557 Quinlan, Maria  2512 Quinn, Johanna S.  1250 Quinn, Sarah  1302 Quinsaat, Sharon  2717 Qunnie, Alonzo  2503 Qutami, Loubna  2704 Qvist, Hans-Peter Yogachandiran  3755 Qvist, Jeevitha Yogachandiran  3755 

# R

Rabii, Watoii  2533 Radhakrishnan, Smitha  1502, 4525 Rafalow, Matt  1467, 2112, 2716 Ragon, Kathleen  1526 Ragsdale, James Michael  3321, 4517 Rahmani, Masoumeh Sara  4118 Rainock, Meagan  1650, 1717 Raissian, Kerri  3665 Ralph, Laurence  2305 Ramaj, Sagi  2134 Ramanujam, Karthik Balaji  2665 Ramirez, Blanca A  1853 Ramirez, Francisco O.  1250 Ramirez, Gina  4705 Ramos, Howard  3260 Ranci Ortigosa, Francesco  3458 Randles, Jennifer  2723 Rangel, David Enrique  4312 Ranjan, Kumud  4858 Ransby, Barbara  1733 Rao, Aliya Hamid  1103, 1525 Rao, Preethi  4515 Rasit, Huseyin  3729, 4328 Rastogi, Ankit  3132 Rattling Leaf, James  3704 Raudenbush, Danielle  1715 Rauf, Tamkinat  2129 Rauhut, Heiko  3715 Ravenelle, Alexandrea J.  1714, 2302 Rawlings, Craig M.  1470, 3522 Rawls, Anne Warfield  1324, 1524, 2324, 2722 Ray, Brad  4530 Ray, Dean R.  4761 Ray, Ranita  2260 Ray, Rashawn  3104 Ray, Victor E.  1503, 1702, 2706, 3108, 3118, 3319, 3505, 3706, 3718, 4115, 4317, 4718 Raymond, Geoffrey  3122 Raza, Fizza  2463, 3668 Rea, Chris M.  1326 Reardon, Jenny  3664 Rebrii, Anna  1112, 4649 Rechitsky, Raphi  1849 Recksiedler, Claudia  3516, 4248 Recuber, Timothy  1113 Reczek, Rin  3551, 4713 Redbird, Beth  1311, 1511, 1708, 1711, 2309, 2334, 2511, 2711, 3111, 3511, 3711, 4110, 4310, 4311, 4511, 4710 Reddock, Rhoda Elizabeth  4305 Redman, Jonathan Nathaniel  4857 Reed, Allison  1112 Reed, Holly E.  1512 Reed, Isaac Ariail  1707, 4128, 4302 Reese, Ellen R.  2714 Reeves, Aaron  1521 Regan, Hannah  2128 Regilme, Salvador Santino Fulo  3467 Reginal, Travis  0557 Reich, Jennifer A.  2313 Reichelmann, Ashley Veronica  4321, 4656 Reichelt, Malte  3718 Reifer, Thomas Ehrlich  4108 Reijven, Menno H.  1324 Reinecke, David  3715 Rell, Emalie  3750 Remsberg, Renee  3527 Ren, Chunhui  3723 Ren, Jingqiu  1116, 3129, 3329, 3728 Rendall, Michael S.  2134 Rennick, Liz  3858 Renshaw, Scott Leo  2726, 4819 Renteria, Roger Andrew  4451 Renzulli, Linda  0540, 4124 Repetto, Angelita  4112 Restifo, Salvatore J.  3554 Revel, Manon  1457 Reyes, Carolyn  1518 Reyes, Everardo  4762 Reyes, Francisco Alfredo  3717 Reyes, Victoria  2102, 3523, 4505 Reynolds, John  1722 Reynolds, Kathryn  1522 Reynolds, Leslie Savatsky  2266 Reynolds, Megan M.  1727, 3705 Reyt, Jean-Nicolas  3125 Rhodes, Alec  3317, 4264 Rhodes, Anna Catherine  2264, 4453 Rhomberg, Chris  3325 Rhoten, Kimberly  3356 Rhym, Chad  1516 Ribas, Vanesa  2707, 2714 Ribet, Beth  3726 Rice, Collin  1730 Richardson, Derek  2257 Richardson, Jill  4455 Richter, Lauren  3717, 4459 Riddle, Leslie  1514 Ridgeway, Sadie  3148 Rieger, Annika  4731 Rieger, Shannon  1528 Rifkind, Lisa Dale  3547 Rigal, Alexandre  4851 Rigby, David Lee  4321 Riley, Meredith  4726 Rilinger, Georg  3715 Rimi, Tamanna A  2666 PARTICIPANT INDEX 149 

Rinaldo, Rachel A.  2130, 4518 Rinderknecht, Robert Gordon  4513 Ring-Ramirez, Misty Dawn  3327 Rios, Victor M.  1319, 1723, 2124, 4308 Rissing, Ben A.  3464 Rita, Nathalie P.  2529 Ritter-Ingorvaia, Lindsey Jean  4110 Ritz, Bridget J.  2347, 2348, 2349, 2350, 2351, 2352, 2353, 2354, 2355, 2356, 2357, 2358, 2359, 2360, 2361, 2861, 4328 Rivas, Diana  0552 Rivas-Drake, Deborah  2731 Rivera, Fernando I.  3704 Rivera, Lauren  1330, 3702 Rivera, Roberto  4457 Rivera Ayala, Luis Miguel  0548 Roach, Teresa  2528 Roberto, Elizabeth  3333 Roberts, Anthony  4449 Roberts, Dorothy E.  1107, 2306, 4502 Roberts, Louisa  4518 Robey, Derek James  2358, 3525 Robey, Jason  3147, 3714 Robinson, Brandon Andrew  4512 Robinson, Candice C.  2621, 3104 Robinson, Dawn T.  0536 Robinson, Jacob  4656 Robinson, Joan H.  3351, 3663 Robinson, John N.  1302, 2506, 3518 Robinson, Laura  1460, 1532, 4259 Robinson, Millicent N.  1523 Robinson, Rachel Sullivan  1119, 1522 Robinson, William I  1716 Robinson, William  1249 Robinson, Zandria Felice  1105 Robison, Kristenne M.  2503 Robson, Cierra  2508 Robucci, Ryan  3521 Rocha Beardall, Theresa  3513 Roche, Nadia  2349 Roche, Sarah  2517 Rödl, Malte  1115 Rodriguez, Ariel  0557 Rodriguez, Cassaundra  3324 Rodriguez, Crystal  3862 Rodriguez, Denessy  4516 Rodriguez, Ladislao Jesus  3150 Rodriguez, Liliana V.  1723 Rodriguez, Rebecca  0557 Rodriguez, Vanessa  1652 Rodriguez-Caceres, Andres  1124, 2334 Rodríguez-Muñiz, Michael  3115, 3313, 4302 Roehrkasse, Alexander  3315, 4529 Roessler, Meghann  1722 Rogers, Katie Kaufman  1862 Rogers, Kimberly Brooke  1721 Rohlinger, Deana  1450 Rojas, Fabio  0534 Roman, Anthony  3548 Romell, Emma  4312 Romero, Mary  1901, 2706, 3108 Ron-El, Yaniv  1448 Rooks, Pam  1455 Rosa, Alessandra  3116 Rosado, Shantee  1117 Rosado Marzan, Cesar F.  2116 Rosa-Lebron, Rocio  3857 Rosales, Rocio  2714 Roschelle, Anne R.  1860 Roscigno, Vincent J.  1702, 2510, 2729, 4665 Rose, Jarrett Robert  1655, 2357 Rose, Mary R.  3714 Rosen, Jennifer  1576 Rosenblatt, Peter  3320 Rosenfeld, Michael J.  1532 Rosentel, Kris  4528 Rosette, Jacob  1670 Rosino, Michael  4659 Rosinska, Anna  1122, 2662 Rossi, Diana  4114 Rossi, Giovanni  1524, 2324 Rost, Kaja  2859 Rost-Banik, Colleen  1867 Rote, Sunshine Marie  2747 Rotem, Nir  3712 Roth, Adam  1722, 3530 Roth, Benita  1454 Roth, Silke  1122 Roth, Wendy D.  3128 Rothmüller, Barbara  4323 Rotolo, Michael  2347, 2348, 2349, 2350, 2351, 2352, 2353, 2354, 2355, 2356, 2357, 2358, 2359, 2360, 2361 Rowell, Katherine R.  1572, 3309 Roxburgh, Susan  0537 Roy, Rwiti  2656 Roybal, Carmela Marie  4761, 4762 Royster, Michael D.  1448 Rozenfeld Kiner, Alina  3349 Ru, Sung Hee  4130 Rua, Merida  3313 Ruan, Hangqing  2333 Rubin, Ashley T.  1129, 4730 Rubineau, Brian  2857, 3125 Rubio, Ricardo  3717 Rucks-Ahidiana, Zawadi  1307, 2729 Rudes, Danielle S.  2671 Ruggero, E. Colin  1455 Ruiz, Jonathan  3329 Ruiz-Junco, Natalia  2867 Ruiz-Olaya, Isabel  3732 Rule, Alix E  1449 Rumore, Gina Maria  1656 Ruppanner, Leah  4513 Ruppel, Emily  2514 Russ, Megan  1715 Russell, David  1722, 2750 Russell, Kelli  2127 Russell, Nailah  1572, 1573, 1574, 1575, 1576, 1709, 2310 Russian, Anna E. Acosta  2126, 3516 Russo, Chandra  4707 Ruszczyk, Stephen P.  1323 Rutledge, Essie Manuel  1105 Rüttenauer, Tobias  4456 Ruvalcaba, Angelica  1249 Ryan, Allison  2731 Ryan, Charlotte M.  1731 Ryan, Joan  2254, 2255, 2256, 2257, 2258 Ryan, John  4321 Ryan-Simkins, Kelsey  4448 Rybinska, Anna  2263 Ryder, Stacia S  4516 

# S

Saatcioglu, Argun  1262, 4660, 4661, 4662, 4663, 4664, 4665, 4666, 4667 Sabanci, Halil  1118 Sacco, Timothy  3715 Sachs, Jeffrey Kennedy  4322 Sackett, Blair Suzanne  2728 Sacks, Tina  2621 Saco, Larissa Carmel  4112 Sadri, Homa  4523 Saenz, Rogelio  1503, 2703, 3306 Safford, Thomas G.  2733 Said, Atef S.  2314, 2864 Said, Iman  4852 Sailofsky, Daniel  4331 Saito, Leland T.  4649 Sajjad, Fatima Waqi  2115 Sakamoto, Arthur  2129 Salam, Rifat A.  1573 Salas Pujols, Jomaira  1117, 1723 Salazar, Abraham G.  4515 Salazar, Esmeralda Sanchez  1252, 3528 Salem, Rania  3351, 3523 Salgado, Casandra Danielle  4717 saliba, jim  2326 Salinas, Juan  2114 Salinas, Marisa D.  3858 Sall, Dialika  4116 Salm, Randall  4863 Salmi, Katya  4647 Salvatore, Derrick  4106, 4456 Salzinger, Leslie  2525 Samayoa, Erick  1724 Samila, Sampsa  2360 Sanchez, Mari  1128, 2516 Sandefur, Rebecca L.  3460, 3513 Sanders, Jasmine Monique  4331 Sanders-Smith, Stephanie C.  1258, 2719 Sandler, Or  2750 Sandoval-Hernandez, Efren  2513 Sandusky, Emily  3732 Sani, Hanisah Binte Abdullah  1127 Santana, Emilce  2732 Santana, Jessica J.  3550 Santellano, Karina  3116 Sanyal, Paromita  2656 Sapiro, Gisèle  3722 Sarabia, Heidy  3860 Saravanan, Sneha  4455 Sargent, Colleen  4112 Sariego, Chloe  2114 Sarkisian, Natalia  4252 Sarnecka, Dominika Kinga  4661, 4726 Satcher, Lacee Anne  2322, 3711, 4516 Satheesh, Silpa  1718 Satterfield, Sierra J  4247 Sattler, Sebastian  4467 Saunders, Clare  1122 Saunders, R. Kyle  1314 Saunders, Tanya  4504 PARTICIPANT INDEX 150 

Sausedo, Jasmine Cha  1251 Savage, Tamara  3707 Savaşkan, Osman  2132 Savelsberg, Joachim J.  1714 Sayer, Liana C.  4513 Scanlan, Stephen J.  4457 Scannell, Josh  1457 Scaptura, Maria Nicole  1721 Scarborough, William Joslyn  4513 Scavarda, Alice  4520 Schaad, Kylar  4728 Schachner, Jared N.  2134, 3324 Schad, Jessica  1720 Schaefer, David R.  2731 Schafer, Markus H.  2313, 2748 Schalet, Amy T.  4715 Schatz, Enid J.  1522 Scheibling, Casey  3354, 3531 Scheitle, Christopher P.  4849, 4852 Schenewerk, Suzanne Elise  4318 Scheppele, Kim Lane  3519 Scherer, Kory  1322 Scheuring, Sonja  2665 Schewel, Kerilyn  1851 Schieber, David  3354 Schiller, Kathryn S.  4657 Schirmer, Eleni  4509 Schleifer, Cyrus J.  4449 Schmeeckle, Maria  2265 Schmeer, Kammi  4863 Schmidt, Steven Edward  2529 Schmitz, Rachel M.  3352 Schnabel, Landon  4849 Schneck, Andreas  4650 Schneider, Daniel J.  1525, 2302, 4259 Schneider, Emily  1454 Schneider, Gerald  4659 Schneider, Lesley Erin  2718 Schneider, Rachel C.  3528 Schoenbachler, Adam Kaelin  4664 Schoepf, Caroline M.  2115, 4132 Scholes, Paul Brayden  0549 Schoolman, Ethan D.  4463 Schoon, Eric W.  4319 Schoonover, Julia Jean  1852 Schoots, Jonathan  1124 Schradie, Jen  1460, 4102 Schrage, Daniel  2129 Schroering, Caitlin Hays  3863 Schubert, Tinka Tabea  3514 Schueths, April M  3703 Schugurensky, Alejandro  1257 Schultz, Michael A  2134, 4661 Schulz, Jeremy Markham  4259 Schut, Rebecca Anna  2134, 2317, 3129, 4326 Schutt, Erika  1330 Schutt, Russell K.  1221, 1861, 3548 Schwadel, Philip  3260, 4461 Schwartz, Christine Renee  2120 Schwartz, David (Jed) D.  0106, 1669, 2255 Schwartz, Michael  2314, 3302, 4505 Schwartzman, Luisa Farah  1517 Schwarzenbach, Anina  2648 Schwoerer, Lili  1248 Scott, Christina L  2468 Scott, Gregory Shawn  2708 Scott, Jennifer  1854 Scott, Jerome  2314 Scott, Jondae  4704 Scott, Melissa Cambero  2349 Scott, Robert  2252 Scoville, Caleb Richard  1126 Scyphers, Steven  4458 Seabrooke, Leonard  1132, 2315 Seals, Dmitri S.  1466 Seamster, Louise  1516, 3307, 3333, 4509 Sears, Karen Powell  1506 Seaton, Eleanor K  2515 Seay-Fleming, Carrie  4448 Seenarine, Moses  4660 Segal, David R.  3308 Segre, Sandro  3458 Seguin, Charles F.  4330 Segura, Denise A.  4304 Seidman, Gay W.  2111, 3102 Seim, Josh  1332, 3728 Sell, Jane  4531 Sen, Raka  4450 Sendroiu, Ioana  2866, 3467 Sennott, Christie  1131 Senter, Mary Scheuer  3109 Seo, Giyeon  3351 Sepielak, Katarzyna  3130 Serafin, Marcin  4128 Serhan, Randa B  1322 Serpe, Richard T.  2249 Serrano, Uriel  1509, 2719 Serrano Zapata, Angela  1718 Serrao, Rodrigo  1311 Sethi, Karthik  3521 Seto, Christopher H  4852 Setter, Davyd  3154 Sever, Barış Can  2115 Severson Mason, Meryn  3716 Sewell, Alyasah Ali  3108, 3506, 3708 Shackleford, Crystal  4863 Shah, Bindi  2515 Shah, Vyoma  2253 Shahrokni, Nazanin  4512 Shaker, Yasamin  3153 Shalash, Dana  4717 Shams, Tahseen  2132 Shanahan, Jarrod  1716 Shandra, Carrie L.  2265, 3125 Shandra, John M  1326 Shank, Daniel B.  1520 Shanower, Stephanie H  4664 Shapiro, Ephraim  2750 Shapiro, Shoshana  4266 Shapiro, Thomas M.  1108 Sharma, Kanika  4327 Sharma, Shruti  3357 Sharone, Ofer  1103 Shaw, Vivian  4460 Sheares, Alicia  4115, 4658 Shedd, Carla  2306, 4705 Sheehan, Patrick  3319 Sheff, Elisabeth  3356 Sheftel, Mara Getz  4123 Shelby, Renee Marie  1513, 3663 Sheller, Mimi  1504 Shelton, Jeff Scott  1651, 3129 Shen, Jing  1856 Shen, Shannon  2328 Shen, Wensong  1256, 2260 Sheng, Junrong  3347 Shewakramani Hanson, Vansa  1253, 4324 Shi, Qianyi  2360 Shifrer, Dara  1260, 1329, 1863, 2713, 3151, 3350 Shifrin, Liza  0203 Shih, Elena  3713 Shim, Janet K.  1654, 1715 Shimada, Elisabeth Rose Pohaikealoha  1859 Shin, DongEun  3349 Shin, Eun Kyong  2467 Shin, Solee Irene  1332 Shinohara, Sayaka K  3755 Shockey, James W  3548 Shoffstall, Grant  1265 Shorette, Kristen  2651 Shorey, Ryan C  2328 Showalter, David  4466, 4467 Showers, Fumilayo  2317, 3151 Shrimali, Bina  2529, 4708 Shriver, Thomas E.  1126 Shtob, Daniel  1516 Shu, Xiaoling  4254 Shuker, Zeinab F.  3259 Shura, Robin  2317 Shuster, Stef M.  2519, 4702 Siciliano, Michael L.  2861 Sicotte, Diane M.  4454 Siddiqui, Shan Mohammed  4651 Sie, Amanda  4454 Sikirica, Amanda Lynn  1669 Siliunas, Andreja  1528 Siller, Laura  2328 Silva, Fabiana  2253 Silva, Vicente  2656 Silver, Blake R.  1253, 1316, 1859, 1860, 1861, 1862, 1863, 1864, 1865, 1866, 1867, 1868, 1869 Silver, Daniel  4128 Silver, Joshua  4269 Silverstein, Merril  2270, 3555, 4847 Simburger, Dylan  3318 Simes, Jessica T.  3666, 4530 Simington, Jasmine  4724 Simms, Angela Marie  2506, 3132, 3518 Simms, Lauren  3331 Simon, Daniel H.  3666 Simon, Jeanne  1304 Simon, Jonathan  1129 Simon, Tori  3127 Simons, Ronald L.  3329 Simpson, Brent  4819 Simpson, Chaniqua  1112 Sims, Jennifer Patrice  4721 Simula, Brandy L.  0277, 3510 Sin, Ray  4315 Sinclair, Kaimi  3747 Singh, Jennifer S.  1658 Singh, Sanjana  4718 Singh, Sourabh  1127 Sirard, John R.  2313 PARTICIPANT INDEX 151 

Sirois, Catherine  1129 Skaggs, Rachel  3522 Skalinder, David  3731 Skarpelis, Anna Katharina  2716, 3130, 4319 Skeete, Renée  2312 Skoczylas, Marie  1659 Skotnicki, Tad P.  2118 Slatton, Brittany C.  2308 Sledge, Piper  1730 Slee, Gillian  4131 Slez, Adam  2720 Small, Mario Luis  2471, 3303, 3502 Small, Shadrick Andrew  1862 Small-Rodriguez, Desi  1533 Smart, Andrew  1113 Smiecinska, Nadia  4451 Smiley, Kevin T  4451, 4656 Smirnova, Michelle Hannah  1514 Smith, Christian Michael  3133 Smith, Claire  2864 Smith, David A.  1669, 4130 Smith, David Norman  0106 Smith, Jackie  4129 Smith, Jeffrey A.  3529, 4466 Smith, Levity  1516 Smith, Lindsay Renee  1869, 2671, 4467 Smith, Mikaela  1647 Smith, Nicholas  1868 Smith, Robert Courtney  1710, 2331, 4708 Smith, Vivian C.  1125 Smith-Doerr, Laurel  1316 Smith-Lovin, Lynn  1318 Smith Maguire, Jennifer  2323, 2523 Smithsimon, Gregory  0535, 1703 Smock, Pamela J.  3316 Smolski, Andrew Robert  4447, 4459 Snellman, Kaisa Elina  1330 Snidal, Matthew James  1247, 1305 Snyder, Allison H.  2320 Sobering, Katherine  4665 Sokolov, Mikhail  3458 Sola, Justin Lucas  3265 Solari, Cinzia D  3724, 4525 Soligo, Marta  4448 Solorio, Aaron  0558 Solorzano, Ginna  4247 Somashekhar, Mahesh  4263 Somers, Margaret R.  3519 Sommer, Jamie M  1326, 2254, 4455 Son, Jaesok  1124 Song, Eun Young  3754 Song, Haoming  3316, 4250 Song, Hyunjin  1466 Song, Jing  3348 Song, Xi  2120, 2129, 2134, 3529, 4261 Song, Zach  3705 Song, Zijie  2462 Sorensen, Jay  4528 Sorjonen, Marja-Leena  1524 Sortkær, Bent  1260 Sosnaud, Benjamin  2517 Soto-Cambres, Adrián  2254 Sourati, Jamshid  3529 South, Eugenia  1114 Sowers, Elizabeth Alexis  4130 Soyer, Mehmet  1720 Spalter-Roth, Roberta M.  3109 Spangler, Derek  3521 Spanier, Tobias  2712 Spano, John  2503 Sparger, Kade  2865 Spates, Kamesha S.  3707 Spencer, Karen Lutfey  1114 Spencer, Sharon Zoe  1863 Spicer, Jason  3753 Spickard, James Vernon  4107 Spies, Ruby  1514 Spindle-Jackson, Adrianna  4649 Spotswood, Joelle  1251 Sprengeler, Chelsey  3349 Spring, Amy L.  2517, 3716 Sraboni, Esha  4248 Stabler, Samuel David  3458 Stacey, Lawrence Wellman  4713 Stafford, Allison  3155 Stallings, Carrie D.  2334, 4714 Stallone, Kiran  3527 Stalp, Marybeth C.  4712 Stanfield, John  2715 Staples, William G.  3664 Staudinger, Ursula M  2317 St. Clair, Victoria  3572 Steele, Jennifer L.  1709 Steele, Sarah M  3721 Steele, Stephen F.  2121, 3308 Jean Stefancic  3505 Steinberg, Hillary  2265, 2520 Steinman, Erich W.  4717 Steinmetz, George  1507, 3709 Stephan, Rita  1322 Stephen, Lynn  2504 Stepniak, Catherine  2750 Sterling, Adina  4115 Sterphone, J  3261, 3870 Stets, Jan E.  2318, 2725 Stevens, James Dalton  2713, 3530, 4859 Stevens, Lindsay M.  4315 Stevens, Mitchell L.  1255 Steward, Shelly  2510 Stewart, Evan  4118 Stewart, Lance  3550 Stewart, Mahala Dyer  4513 Stewart, Quincy Thomas  3506 Stewart, Remy  1458 Stewart, Robert Austin  1527 Stewart, Sheridan  2716, 3517 Stielow, Malcolm  4520 Stillerman, Joel P.  1662 Stilley, Jeff  2714 Stiman, Meaghan  3753 Stivers, Tanya  2324, 3122, 3870 Stober, Kaitlin  1529 Stojmenovska, Dragana  2325 Stolte, Allison  2517 Stoltz, Dustin S.  4322 Stone, Amy L.  2307 Stone, Anthony Jerome  3328 Stone, Ashley Yvonne  3511 Stone, Eric  1657 Stoner, Alexander M.  0106 Storer, Adam  1332 Storti, Luca  2854 Stovall, David  1705 Strader, Eiko  4251 Straubhaar, Joseph  3526 Streeter, Rayanne  1513 Strickfaden, Megan  4520 Strmic-Pawl, Hephzibah Virginia  2121, 4308 Strong, Myron T.  0204, 1128, 1328, 1576 Stroter, Madison  4332 Strother, Sita  2334 Stuart, Alanna  1717 Stubblefield, Charles John  4727 Stuber, Jenny M.  1301 Su, Bingtao  1267 Su, Jessica Houston  3665, 4251 Su, Ruolin  2260 Su, Ya  3355 Su, Yang  1327 Su, Zhixiang  2462 Suarez, Fatima  3861 Subramaniam, Mangala  3332 Suchodolski, Gabriel Locke  2123 Suchyta, Mark  4449 Sudeall, Lauren  3465 Suh, Siri  4327 Suitor, J. Jill  1125, 2750 Sullivan, Colleen  3460 Sullivan, Rachel  1253 Sumerau, J. E.  2526, 4702 Sun, Feinuo  3705 Sun, Haosen  2748 Sun, Jiaming  2652 Sun, Ken Chih-Yan  1116 Sun, Shengwei  3508 Sundar, Nandini  3305 Sunderland, Jillian  0555 Sung, Baksun  4464 Surridge, Paula  3712 Sutherland, D. Kyle  0556 Sutton, Jeannette  2726 Sutton, Tara Elizabeth  1863, 2328 Suzuki, Kazuko  1123 Švigelj, Melissa Marini  0558 Sward, Brandon  2863 Swartz, David L.  3114 Swartz, Mark  3320 Swartz, Teresa Toguchi  3531 Swed, Ori  3527 Sweet, Paige L.  1114, 2527, 2727 Sweet, Stephen A.  0277 Swidler, Ann  3727 Sykes, Bryan L.  2104, 3265 Szabo, Alexandria  3726 Szabo, Julia Colleen Campbell  1247, 1712 Szasz, Andrew  1109 Szendrö, Réka  2854 

# T

Tabatabai, Ahoo  2351 Table, Billy  1709 Tabler, Jennifer  3352 Taborda, Caty  1509, 2524 Tach, Laura M.  4514 Tack, Anjanette Chan  2515 Tackie, Hilary Naa-Afi  4124 Tagkaloglou, Sofia  3106 PARTICIPANT INDEX 152 

Taines, Cynthia  1259 Takasaki, Kara Leiko  1861 Talbert, Ryan D.  1648, 1650 Talesh, Shauhin Ahmadi  3113 Talkington, Adam  4250 Tami-Barrera, Lina Marcela  2127 Tamla Rai, Vijaya  0550 Tang, Chengzuo  3262, 4665 Tang, Xiao  4660 Tao, Yu  1303 Taplin-Kaguru, Nora E.  3532 Targa, Matteo  4662 Taskin Alp, Yasemin  0551 Tasmim, Samia  1326 Tatch, Andrew  3547 Tavory, Iddo  0539, 2122, 3303 Taylor, Brionca  4524 Taylor, Flint  2305 Taylor, Keeanga Yamahtta  0901 Taylor, Marshall A  2716, 3522 Taylor, Miles G.  1722 Teeger, Chana  1721 Tefera, Adai  1247 Teimouri, Amirhossein  2322, 3266, 4721 Teixeira-Poit, Stephanie Marie  2310, 2526 Tejada, Karen Ivette  3724 Temko, Ezra Joseph  4269 Temocin, Pinar  1449 Tenorio, Luis E.  1315 Teo, Youyenn  4725 Ternullo, Stephanie Lynn  3753, 4711 Terriquez, Veronica  2107, 4507 Tessler, Hannah  2333, 4525 Tester, Aaron W.  2648 Teufel-Shone, Nicolette  4106 Thakore, Bhoomi K.  3528 Theis, Nicholas  1516 Thiede, Brian  1518 Thiele, Megan Theresa  1309, 3321 Thomas, Carieta Oniefa  1125 Thomas, Christine  1709 Thomas, Christopher  3552 Thomas, Clayton  1652 Thomas, Jacob Richard  1116, 4727 Thomas, James Michael  3105 Thomas, Kevin J.A.  2131 Thomas, Loring J  2329 Thomas, Melvin E.  4706 Thomas, Shameka Poetry  3150 Thomas-Davis, Shenique S.  1125 Thomas Tobin, Courtney S  1114, 1523 Thomeer, Mieke Beth  3551, 3725, 4513 Thommes, Kirsten  3751 Thompson, Daniel  2129 Thompson, Marissa Elena  1252, 4722 Thompson, Philipp Alexander  2858 Thompson, W. Rafferty  2853 Thornhill, Ted  3706 Thorpe, Charles R.  0106 Tickamyer, Ann R.  1518 Tierney, Katherine  1658, 2114 Tietbohl, Caroline Kim  3122 Tilbrook, Ned  1863, 2855, 3350 Tillman, Korey  1107 Timmermans, Stefan  3303 Tinkler, Justine Eatenson  0536, 2519, 2705 Tinsley, Meghan  1133 Tisch, Daria  1525 Tittel, Katharina  1460 Tobias-Lauerman, Abigail  1864, 4330 Tolbert, Charles M.  1865 Tom, Thalia  3753 Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald  1526 Tomlinson, Christine  1459 Tong, Di  3319, 4514 Tong, Guangyu  1320 Tong, Hongmei  1856 Tong, Yuying  3348 Toprak, Vasfiye Betul  2357 Torkelson, Jason  4647 Tormos-Aponte, Fernando  1112 Toro, Harold J.  4258 Toro-Morn, Maura I.  3313 Torres, Ashley Lucia  0554 Torres, Mo  2321, 3333 Torres-Echeverry, Nicolas  1465 Torrico, Sarah  2123, 3556, 3747, 3748, 3749 Townsend, Tarlise (Tarlie)  4114 Trainer, Sarah  2525 Tran, Michael Tuan  3328 Tran, Nhung  4325 Tran, Van C.  1848, 2132, 2331, 2702, 2731 Tran, Victoria  2652 Tran, Windy  1514 Trappen, Sandra Lee  1720 Travers  4504 Traylor, Frederic  4461 Trego, Shaylynn  4451 Trejo, Andrea  0552 Trent, Mariam  3526 Trimberger, E. Kay.  4252 Trinh, Elizabeth Nguyen  4664 Trinidad, Jose Eos  2264 Triplett, Jennifer Elise  1732 Tripodi, Francesca  1465, 1714, 3126 Triventi, Moris  1115 Tropp, Linda R.  2132 Trotter, LaTonya J.  2723, 4117 Trouille, David  2513 Troxel, Hannah  1652 Trudeau, Libby  2352 Truong, Nghi  2857 Truslow, Elliot Lee  4726 Tschersich, Julia  1449 Tsui, Pamela Pui-kwan  3749 Tsukada, Yusuke  2468 Tsurkov, Emma  4718 Tsvetkova, Milena  3517 Tubi, Omri  1119 Tucker, Anjulet  3510 Tucker, Frederick T.  1124 Tucker, Joan S.  4114 Tucker-Shabazz, Q Aunrika  2349 Tudor, Candice  3666, 4530 Tueme, Nabil  3116 Tugal, Cihan Ziya  2315 Tuncer, Sylvaine  1324 Tung, Eugene Yi Cheong  0554 Tuntiya, Nana  1576 Tuohy, Brian  2507 Turner, Aliyah  2719, 4663 Turner, Jeffrey  4517 Turner, Jennifer  1316, 1863 Turner, Jonathan H.  1221 Turner, Katharine L  3356 Turner, Mary Clair  4314 Turner, Sydni  1869 Turney, Kristin  4265 Turowetz, Jason  1524, 3532 Tuttle, Steven  3556 Tuzov, Viktor  1458 Twine, France Winddance  1703 Tyberg, Sara  2868 Tyler, Deidre A.  2522 Tzeggai, Fithawee  4723 Tzoc, Kristen  2329 

# U

Uchikoshi, Fumiya  4264 Uddin, Helal  3754, 4253, 4652 Uddin, Jalal  3329, 4253 Uddin, Syed  2666, 3347 Uggen, Christopher  1527, 3710 Ugur, Dolunay  3658 Uitermark, Justus  4521 Ülgen, Övgü  4853 Ulibarri, Billy James  1450 Umamaheswar, Janani  2671 Umaña-Taylor, Adriana  2731 Umberson, Debra  2113 Underhill, Megan R.  3331 Underman, Kelly  1312, 3660 Underwood, Lukas  4128 Underwood, Mary Elizabeth  3356 Upchurch, Michael Joseph  1521 Upenieks, Laura  1114, 4326 Urban, Amber Isabel  2114 Urbina, Daniela R.  1525, 3668, 4264 Urbina Lazardi, Virgilio  1456, 3719 Urena, Anthony  1657 Urena, Stephanie  2747, 2748, 2750, 2751, 2752 Usmani, Adaner  1527, 3265 Usmanov, George S  3465 Utama, Rahardhika Arista  3123 Utrata, Jennifer  1125, 4525, 4725 Uyan, Deniz  4854 

# V

Vacca, Raffaele  2126 Vacchiano, Mattia  1462 Vaidyanathan, Brandon  3148, 3318 Valasek, Chad Justin  1265 Valayden, Chandiren  1709, 2866 Valdez, Avelardo  4114 Valdez, Zulema  4731 Valdivia, Carolina  3724 Valdovinos Olson, Maria  3461 Vale, Mira  3728 Valente, Riccardo  1462 Valerio, Tayelor  4250 Valle, Melissa M.  3105 Van Angeren, Joey  2316 Van Brown, Bethany Lee  1574, 2320 Van Cleve, Nicole Gonzalez  2305, 2706, 4508 PARTICIPANT INDEX 153 

Vandenberg, Femke  2355 Van de Putte, Thomas  1133 van der Lippe, Tanja  4718 Vandermoere, Frederic  4452 van der Naald, Joseph Reynolds  3864 van der Woude, Maartje  1104 Van de Velde, Cécile  3127 Van Dyke, Miriam E.  1114, 1868 Vang, Zoua M.  1315 Van Gundy, Karen T.  1655, 2751 van Haperen, Sander  4521 VanHeuvelen, Tom  2316, 2718, 4258, 4514 Vann, Burrel James  1714, 3260, 4465 Van Natta, Meredith  3113 Van Praag, Gabriel  3666 Van Riper, David  3530 van Stee, Elena  1325 van Veen, Floris  4467 VanWey, Leah K.  1518 Vaquera, Gloria S.  3857, 3858, 3859, 3860, 3861, 3862 Vargas, Edward D  2515 Vargas, Felipe  4730 Vargas, Nicholas  2502 Vargas, Robert  4901 Varshney, Kush  1303 Vasques Scalera, Carolyn  4501 Vasquez-Tokos, Jessica  1503 Vaughan, Diane  3118 Vaughan, Monisola  3552 Vaughn, Michael Patrick  1522 Vega, Irene I.  1104 Vegetabile, Brian  4515 Vela-McConnell, James A.  1301 Velasco, Kristopher  2132, 2322, 2647, 2648, 2649, 2650, 2651, 2652, 2653, 2654, 2656, 2657, 2658, 2659, 2660, 4329 Velasquez, Maya  3127 Velez-Velez, Roberto  3116 Velicu, Antonia  3715 Velitchkova, Ana  2653 Veloso, Danielle Kylie  0548 Venable, Kealani Leigh  1523 Venegas, Mario  2663 Venkataramani, Atheendar  1722 Veras, Edlin  2108 Veras, Mariana  3659 Vereta-Nahoum, André  2321 Vergara, Angela  3859 Vergara-Figueroa, Aurora  4316 Vermilya, Jenny R.  1313 Vertesi, Janet  3319, 3715 Vertovek, John  3556 Veselka-Bush, Alexandra  2114 Vesselinov, Elena  4264 Vetter, Emma  3154, 3859 Vezzoli, Simona  1851 Vgontzas, Nantina  2105 Vican, Shawna Bowden  1863 Vickerman, Milton D.  1703 Vidal-Ortiz, Salvador  4866 Viera, Janelle Ashley  4650 Vijayakumar, Gowri  3713, 4122, 4329 Vilaca, Luiz  4526 Viladrich, Anahi  2133, 2462 Vilbig, Karyn  3264 Villalon, Roberta  3314, 4515 Villarreal, Andres  1325 Villarreal, Melissa  4501 Villarrubia-Mendoza, Jacqueline  3116 Villegas, Celso M.  3258 Vineeth, K. Amrutha  1718 Vinson, Alexandra  3664 Vinyeta, Kirsten Rae  4106 Viscelli, Steve  1303 Vithayathil, Trina  0551 Vitullo, Margaret Weigers  1534 Vo, Austin  3512 Vo, Tiffanie  1321 Voelkel, Jan Gerrit  4531 Vogel, Mary E.  4854 Vogelsang, Eric M.  2750, 3705 Voigt, Torsten H  3657, 3658, 3659, 3660, 3661, 3662, 3663, 3664 Volkova, Tanja  1852 Volpintesta, Haley  2520 vom Lehn, Dirk  3870 Vosburg, Dawson Paul Richard  3119 Voss, Kim  3327 Voyer, Andrea M.  1852 Voyles, Caroline  1531 Vuola, Marketta Paula Sofia  1317 Vuolajarvi, Niina  3355 Vuolo, Michael  0538, 2718, 4114, 4526 

# W

Wade, Jeannette  2310 Wagner-Pacifici, Robin E.  2321 Waity, Julia Ferrara  4715 Wakeham, Joshua  2864 Waldfogel, Jane  3317 Waldron, Jordan  4667 Walker, Alicia M.  2528 Walker, Michael Lawrence  4508 Wallace, Derron  1728 Wallace, Lora Ebert  2726, 3350 Wallace, Richard  1733, 4705 Waller, Ian Anthony  3353 Walsh, Christine Elizabeth  2747 Walters, Suzan  1522, 4465 Walton, Tobin N.  2310 Walton, Tyler  3326 Wamsiedel, Marius  1651 Wan, Yifeng  1129 Wang, Bohui  1253 Wang, Cheng  1247 Wang, Cheng  0555 Wang, Grace Yuehan  1859 Wang, Huiru  3257 Wang, Jia  2260, 4314 Wang, Juchuan Colin  4657 Wang, Leslie T.C.  2121 Wang, Nan  1324 Wang, Qingyan  1129 Wang, Skyler  1462, 3660 Wang, Thelma  4728 Wang, Xi  3750 Wang, Yiwen  1331 Wang, Zhonghao  1722 Ward, Ann Gavin  1724, 4463 Ward, Anneliese  3121 Ward, Geoff K.  4721 Ward, Kayleigh  4452 Ward, Pace T  4318 Ward, Patricia Sarah  4132 Warde, Alan  1115 Warikoo, Natasha  1855 Warmus, Matthew  2503 Warner, Mariah K.  2352 Warren, Evangeline  2526, 3106 Warren, Mark R.  1456 Warren, Rob  1656, 4247 Washburn, David  2463 Washington, Heather M.  1527, 4259 Watermoon, Lilly  4528 Watkins-Hayes, Celeste M.  1705, 3502 Watson, Edward  1573, 4722 Watson, Jake  2331 Watson, Patrick G.  2722 Watters, Brieanna Marie  3128 Weathers, Tess  1314 Weber, Nora Jean  1250 Weddington, George  1452, 3750, 3751 Weden, Margaret M.  2134 Weffer-Elizondo, Simon Eduardo  3116 Wehner, JoAnne  2512 Wehner, Michael  4451 Wei, John  3548 Wei, Lai  4262 Weidner, Matylda  1524 Weinberg, Jill  3113 Weiner, Melissa F.  1507, 4505 Weinstein, Liza  2507 Weiss, Inbar  2653 Weisshaar, Katherine  4712 Weister, Tyson  1310 Welch, Levin Elias  1327 Weller, Niki  2266 Wells, Amy Stuart  4649 Wells, Kevin  3261 Wen, Fangqi  2463 Wen, Ming  3705 Wen, Yunhan  2257 Wendel, Maya Adelle  4851 Weng, Jeffrey  4328 Wenger, Lynn D.  4467 Werth, S. Rose  3132 Wessendorf, Andrea  4265 West, Jessica  1329, 1654 West, Jocelyn  1130, 4453 Westbrook, Laurel  2504 Western, Bruce  4131, 4530 Westlund, Erik  2247 Wetts, Rachel  3104 Wetzel, Dominic Vincent  2533 Whalen, Ian M.  2130 Wheeler, Eliza  4467 Wherry, Frederick F.  1330, 1530 Whetstone, Sarah L  3728 White, Alexandre  1106, 1517, 3507 White, Jonathan M  4308 White, Luna  2122 White, Monica  4303 White, Susan  2512 Whiteford, Scott C.  4315 Whitehead, Ellen  1572 PARTICIPANT INDEX 154 

Whitehead, Kevin A.  2324, 3122 Whitley, Cameron Thomas  1267, 1313 Whitlock, MC  1730 Whitmer, Jennifer  2121 Whitmeyer, Joseph M.  4309 Whitnah, Meredith C.  3119 Whitney, Jasmine  2263 Whitsel, Christopher Michael  1248 Whitworth, Katherine  4714 Whyte, Kyle  4303 Wiborg, Oyvind Nicolay  3716, 4259 Wiertz, Dingeman  4118 Wiesenfeld, Batia  3125 Wiggs, Devin Scott  3748 Wikle, Jocelyn  2265, 3861 Wilbur, Tabitha Gabrielle  2332 Wilcox, Annika M.  4718 Wilcoxson, Anna  2320 Wilder, Esther Isabelle  3309 Wileden, Lydia  2252 Wilkins, Kiana Kristine  1516 Wilkinson, Lindsay R.  2313 Wilks, Mary-Collier  2254, 3523 Willard, Rachi  3150 Willer, Robb  4531 Williams, Apryl A.  1113 Williams, Christine L.  2302 Williams, Courtney E.  4651 Williams, David R.  2726 Williams, Deadric T.  4312, 4706 Williams, Eli  1331 Williams, Faith J  1847 Williams, Geraldine  4332 Williams, Johnny E.  3105, 4307 Williams, Joshua R  3547 Williams, Latasha  4247 Williams, Leslie D  1522 Williams, Lindy  4453 Williams, Matthew S.  3748 Williams, Rhys H.  3119 Williams, Seth A.  3556 Williams-Baron, Emma  4718 Wilmers, Leila  3149, 4857 Wilmers, Nathan  1118, 2118, 2316, 4514 Wilson, Eli R.  2707, 4664 Wilson, Gregory D  3719 Wilson, James A.  3110 Wilson, Nicholas Hoover  4858 Wilson-Corzen, Vondora  1574, 1720 Wimberly, George L.  2112, 2712 Wimer, Christopher  3317 Winchester, Daniel A.  3727 Wind, Caitlin Ella  4729 Winder, Terrell James Antonio  1331, 1531, 2307, 2724 Winders, Bill  1670 Windsor, Elroi J.  2121 Winer, Canton  3353 Winfield, Taylor Paige  2117 Winicki Brzostowski, Paula  2714 Winiecki, Donald J.  1529 Winkler, Richelle  2703 Wise, Harper  3127 Wise, Jamie  4852 Witcher, Elizabeth Celene Lee  4112 Witkovsky, Benjamin Hirsch  4711 Wladyka, Dawid  3130 Wodtke, Geoffrey Thomas  2134, 2316 Wohl, Hannah  2350 Woinska, Marzena  3728 Woldoff, Rachael A.  1462, 4259 Wolf, Andrew  2514, 3325 Wolfe, Joseph Daniel  3329, 3551, 3725 Wolfe, Matthew  1862 Wolff, Thomas  2725 Wolfson, Mark  1657, 4465 Won, Ji-Sun  4859 Wong, Chi Pan  1514, 2356 Wong, Jaclyn S.  1525 Wong, Michael  3858 Woo, Hyeyoung  1659, 2467, 2717 Wood, Jennifer  2621 Wood, Leslie  4464 Wood, Michael Lee  2357, 3522 Wood, Suzanne  1263 Woodberry, Robert D.  4858 Woodell, Brandi  1653 Woods, Shatira Monique  3119, 4656 Woodson, Thomas  4726 Wooten, Chelsey  1854 Wooten, Melissa  1526, 1702 Workman, Joseph  1260 Worth, Eve  1521 Worthen, Meredith Gwynne Fair  2328 Wotipka, Christine Min  4124 Wozny, Anna  2732 Wray, Dana  1525 Wrenn, Corey Lee  1266 Wright, Earl  1506, 4506, 4721 Wright, Jackson  1123 Wright, Kelsey Quinn  1647, 3665 Wright, Lisa-Marie  3726 Wright, Maxine  4663 Wright, Mi'Chael Noel  4112 Wrigley-Field, Elizabeth  2130, 3530, 4712 Wu, Cary  2728, 3531 Wu, Lingfei  3319 Wu, Shuping  4726 Wu, Tongyu  1861, 2533 Wu, Xingyun  4667 Wurm, Greg  2865 Wynn, Colleen Elizabeth  1726, 2121, 2320 

# X

Xia, Weiqian  4850 Xiao, Haifan  1852 Xiao, Siqi  4254 Xie, Lexing  3550 Xie, Yu  2120, 3529 Xu, Bin  3522, 3722 Xu, Duoduo  1262 Xu, Fang  2649 Xu, H. Brin  2752 Xu, Janet  2117, 3723 Xu, Patrick  2462 Xu, Sandy  4520 Xu, Xiaohong  4319 

# Y

Yakubovich, Valery  4726 Yamashiro, Jane H.  2652 Yan, Xu  4513 Yan, Xuewen  2261 Yang, Duanyi  3718 Yang, Lawrence H  1522 Yang, Michael  1113 Yang, Rujun  2723 Yang, Wenqi  3130 Yang, Wenyi  1658 Yang, Xiuqi  2265 Yang, Yang Claire  2747 Yang, Yiqing  3555 Yang, Yulin  4656 Yao, Mengzheng  3149 Yao, Yuan  2264 Yarbrough, Sydney  3126, 3526 Yasumoto, Saori  2752 Yavas, Mustafa  2647, 4666 Yaworsky, William  3130 Yaylaci, Sule  3128 Yazdiha, Hajar  4104, 4507 Ybarra, Marci  4131 Ye, Jing  2748, 2749 Ye, Liangfei  2464 Ye, Zi (Leafia)  1848 Yeatman, Sara  1131 Yee, Sharon  2121 Yellow Horse, Aggie Jooyoung  2515 Yen, Irene  1654 Yeomans, Kaitlin Roquel  4320 Yerman, Savannah  3521 Yetter, Alyssa M  3724 Yi, Youngmin  3316 Yildirim, Irem  2666 Yilmaz, Engin Burak  1317 Yin, Fan  2329 Yin, Yi  2352 Yoo, Grace  1514 Yoon, Eunsung  0553 Yoon, Hesu  1726, 2118 Yoon, Joonsik  4847 Yoon, Sharon  2717 York Cornwell, Erin  1314, 1722 You, Shunan  2650 Young, Abby  1249 Young, Allison  2264 Young, Gay  3154 Young, Kathryne M.  3513, 4325 Young, Kevin  2314, 3302 Young, Nathan  1130, 4462 Young, Yvette  4325 Younkin, Peter  1330 Youssef, Maro  3729 Yu, Crystal  3669 Yu, Jiao  4527 Yu, Lilly  4123 Yu, Mia  2747 Yu, Wei-hsin  3530 Yucel, Deniz  1655, 4249 Yue, Jing  1263 Yuen, Nancy Wang  1328, 3105 Yun, Jee sun  0549 PARTICIPANT INDEX 155 

Yun, Jiwon  1116 Yung, Vincent  2350 Yup Lee, Sang  1466 

# Z

Zabriskie, Queen Meccasia  4112 Zadeh, Hannah  3307 Zajacova, Anna  2517 Zajdel, Rachel  3720, 4523 Zajicek, Anna  3752 Zaloznaya, Marina  1707 Zaman, Bobbi  1713 Zamantakis, Alithia  3721, 4112, 4728 Zambrana, Ruth E.  3304 Zamora-Kapoor, Anna  3747 Zang, Emma  3705 Zapatka, Kasey  2529, 4330 Zaragoza, Laura  3860 Zaras, Dimitrios  2348, 4851 Zare, Samane  4465 Zarifa, David  1512 Zaslavsky, Katherine  1328, 3310 Zasoba, Eve  2730 Zasoba, Ievgeniia (Eve)  4123 Zawdu, Adane  1855 Zayim, Ayca  1530, 3123 Zeng, Nanxi  1129 Zerubavel, Eviatar  2330 Zevallos, Kevin  3116 Zhan, Heying Jenny  2666, 2749 Zhan, Shaohua  4523 Zhang, Amy  2462 Zhang, Bolun  1127 Zhang, Chenghui  1859 Zhang, Cynthia Baiqing  4652 Zhang, Dan  2333 Zhang, Han  2656, 3312, 3529 Zhang, Iris  3528 Zhang, Jie  2867 Zhang, Karen Xuan  2514 Zhang, Lu  1669, 1670, 1671 Zhang, Shun  2264 Zhang, Tianhao  2324 Zhang, Victoria  4514 Zhang, Weiwei  2463 Zhang, Xiaorui  2466 Zhang, Xing  2313 Zhang, Xueqing  3126 Zhang, Yan  3516 Zhang, Yang  2333 Zhang, Yijia  1463 Zhang, Yongjun  4330 Zhao, Jun  2519 Zhao, Linda  1129, 2731 Zhao, Mengyang  1332 Zheng, Hui  3530, 3705, 4326 Zhou, Amy Yuan  1119 Zhou, Jianhua  2462 Zhou, Jun  2125 Zhou, Min  3515, 4123, 4523 Zhou, Min  2462 Zhou, Mujun  3257 Zhou, Xiang  3517, 3529, 4314 Zhou, Xiaoqing  3256 Zhou, Yang  4255 Zhou, Yimang  1127 Zhou, Yimang  1127 Zhou, Yun  1131, 3316 Zhou, Zheng  1451 Zhu, Fangsheng  4324 Zhu, Li  2353 Ziegler, Caden  4106 Ziewitz, Malte  2117 Zilberstein, Shira  1128, 2516 Zinda, John Aloysius  4453 Zinkan, Laura  4667 Zinken, Jörg  1524 Zinn, Isabelle  4666 Zipp, Daniel Yoder  2464 Zippel, Kathrin  3529 Zopf, Bradley J.  1322, 4653 Zou, Yuan  4660 Zuberi, Anita  4263 Zuberi, Tukufu  3506 Zumbyte, Ieva  3349 Zvavitch, Polina  2134 Zwaschka, Jamie  4456 SESSION INDEX 156 American Sociological Association 

American Sociological Association Meetings - 3071, 3371, 4313 ASA Honors Program - 0668, 1301, 3572 Publishing in and Reviewing for ASA Journals and the Rose Series: Roundtable Conversations with Editors - 0531, 0532, 0533, 0534, 0535, 0536, 0537, 0538, 0539, 0540, 0541, 0542, 0543 

ASA Retirement Network (previously Opportunities in Retirement Network) - 2509, 2709, 3109, 3308 

Book Forum - 1103, 1302, 1502, 1702, 2102, 2302, 2502, 2702, 3102, 3302, 3502, 3702, 4102, 4302, 4502, 4702 

Course - 0102 

Ideas for Future Research - 1311, 1511, 1708, 1711, 2309, 2511, 2711, 3111, 3511, 3711, 4110, 4310, 4311, 4511, 4710 

Minority Fellowship Program - 0605, 1509, 2108 

Open Refereed Roundtables - 3147, 3148, 3149, 3150, 3151, 3152, 3153, 3154, 3155, 3547, 3548, 3549, 3550, 3551, 3552, 3553, 3554, 3555, 3556, 3747, 3748, 3749, 3750, 3751, 3752, 3753, 3754, 3755, 3756 

Plenary Session - 0801, 0901, 1901, 2901, 3901, 4901 

Preconference - 0106, 0203, 0204, 0277 

Presidential Panel - 1110, 1505, 1731, 1733, 2111, 2705, 3305, 3505, 4305, 4505 

Regional Spotlight Session - 1705, 2305, 3313, 3322, 4332, 4705 

Regional Sessions 

Activists and Activism - 1122 Affirmative Action and Anti-Discrimination Policy - 1321 Aging - 1722 AIDS, Social Dimensions of - 1522 Arabs and Arab Americans - 1322 Asians and Asian Americans - 1123 Blacks and African Americans - 1523 Body, Sociology of the - 2524 Children/Youth/Adolescents - 1723 Citizenship - 1323 Collective Behavior - 2123 Collective Memory - 1133 Community - 1726 Comparative Historical Sociology - 1127, 1327 Consumers and Consumption - 2323, 2523 Criminology - 1527 Cross-National Sociology - 1727 Culture and Identity - 1128, 1728 Culture and Narrative - 1528 Culture, Popular - 1328 Culture, Sociology of - 3522, 3722 Development - 3123 Development and Gender - 3523 Deviance and Social Control - 1129 Disability and Society - 1329, 1529, 1729 Disaster - 1130 Economic Sociology - 1330, 1530 Education - 4124, 4324, 4722 Education Policy - 3133, 4723 Emotions - 4524 Environmental Policy - 1725 Environmental Sociology - 1126, 1326 Ethnic Conflict - 1124 Ethnography/Ethnographic Studies - 1724 Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis - 1324, 1524, 2324, 2722 Family and Kinship - 1125, 1325 Family and Work - 1525 Feminist Theory and Epistemology - 1730 Fertility - 1131 Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Studies - 1331, 1531 Gender - 2723 Gender and Work - 2125, 2325, 2525 Gender Inequality - 4525, 4725 Globalization - 1132 Global South - 4132 Group Processes - 2725 Health and Well-being - 2126 Health Care and Care Delivery - 2526 Health Policy - 2726 Higher Education - 2326 Historical Sociology - 2530 History and Sociology of Sociology - 2330 Housing/Housing Policy - 2529, 2729 How the COVID-19 Pandemic is Transforming Gendered Divisions of Labor in the United States - 2130 Human Rights - 2730 Immigrant Communities/Families - 3124, 3324, 3524, 3724 Immigration to the United States - 4123, 4523 Indigenous Peoples/Native Nations - 2334 Internal Migration - 2131 International Immigration - 2132, 2331, 2731 Interracial Marriage/Assortive Mating - 2332, 2732 Jobs, Occupations and Professions - 3525 Knowledge - 2532 Labor/Labor Movements - 3325 Labor Market - 3125, 3723 Latino/as - 2133 Law - 4526 Law and Society - 4125, 4724 Life Course - 3725 Marriage, Civil Unions, and Cohabitation - 2333 Masculinities - 2533 Media Sociology - 2733 Medical Sociology - 3129, 3329, 3728 Mental Health - 4325 Methodology, Qualitative - 3130 Methodology, Quantitative - 3529 Middle East and Muslim Societies, Sociology of - 3729 Military - 3330 Mortality and Morbidity - 3530 Nations/Nationalism - 3730 Organizations - 1526 Parenthood - 3331, 3531 Peace and Conflict - 3527 Political Culture - 3731 Political Sociology - 1532, 1732 Population Processes - 4326 Poverty and Wealth - 3131 Prisons and Prisoners - 4730 Public Opinion - 3732 Race and Ethnicity - 3128, 3328 Race, Class, and Gender - 4126 Racial and Ethnic Inequality - 3528 Racism and Anti-Racism - 3332 Religion - 3727 Reproduction - 4127, 4327, 4527 Rural Sociology - 2127 Science - 2327 SESSION INDEX 157 

Sexual Harassment and Violence - 2527, 2727 Sexuality - 2128, 2328, 2528 Social Capital - 2728 Social Class - 2129 Social Media and the Internet - 3126, 3326, 3526 Social Movements - 3127, 3327 Social Networks - 2329 Social Policy - 4131, 4530 Social Psychology - 1520, 4531 Social Stratification and Inequality - 1521, 2134 Space and Place - 3333 Sport - 4331 Teaching Sociology - 3726 Technology - 4726 Theory, Critical - 4727 Theory, Sociological - 4128, 4328 Transgender Studies - 4528, 4728 Transnational Processes - 4329 Transnational Social Movements - 4129 Urban Issues - 3532 Urban Sociology - 3132 Violence - 4529 Voting and Electoral Processes - 4330 Welfare State - 4729 Work and the Workplace - 1332 World Systems - 4130 

Community and Urban Sociology Section 

A Critical Lens on Urban Sociology - 3719 Community and Urban Sociology Section Meetings - 3020, 3520 Community, Policy and the Politicization of Space - 4714 Pandemic and the Modern Metropolis - 3320 Racial Equity, Repair, and the Global Movement for Black Lives - 3121 

Family Section 

Families and COVID-19 - 4513 Family Patterns and Population Change - 3316 Family Section Meetings - 4070, 4170 Family Section Roundtable Session - 4247, 4248, 4249, 4250, 4251, 4252, 4253, 4254, 4255 Open Family Section Session - 4713 Parenthood and Families Across the Life Course - 3516 Race, Ethnicity, and Families - 4312 

Section on Aging and the Life Course 

Aging and the Life Course at a Time of Multiple Crises - 2317 Geography and Health Across the Life Course - 2517 Section on Aging and the Life Course: Matilda White Riley Lecture - 2270 Section on Aging and the Life Course Meetings - 2070, 2169 Section on Aging and the Life Course Roundtables - 2747, 2748, 2749, 2750, 2751, 2752 

Section on Altruism, Morality and Social Solidarity 

Black Lives Matter: Considering the Altruism, Morality, and Social Solidarity in Supporting Racial Justice Efforts - 2621 Open Session on Altruism, Morality, and Social Solidarity: Advocating for Morality and Prosociality in Unsettled Times -2119 Section on Altruism, Morality and Social Solidarity Meetings -2071, 2570 

Section on Animals and Society 

Animals and Society Roundtables Session - 1266, 1267 Open Theme Animals and Society Paper Session - 1313 Section on Animals and Society Meetings - 1170 

Section on Asia and Asian America 

Section on Asia and Asian America Meetings - 2369 Section on Asia and Asian America Roundtable Session - 2462, 2463, 2464, 2465, 2466, 2467, 2468 Session on Asia and the Global Asian Diaspora - 2717 Session on Asian America - 2515 

Section on Children and Youth 

Black Children Matter: Toward an Emancipatory Sociology for Youth Racial Justice - 2719 Child and Youth Perspectives on Social Problems and Social Change - 2319 Power, Agency, and Resistance in the Lives of Children and Youth - 2520 Section on Children and Youth Meetings - 2167 Section on Children and Youth Roundtables - 2259, 2260, 2261, 2262, 2263, 2264, 2265, 2266 

Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements 

Collective Behavior and Social Movements Refereed Roundtables - 1447, 1448, 1449, 1450, 1451, 1452, 1453, 1454, 1455, 1456 Intersectionality and Social Movements - 1112 Male Supremacism and Right-Wing Movements - 1713 Pandemic-Inspired Social Movements - 1514 Race, Ethics, and Protest Research - 2311 Section on Collective Behavior and Social Movements Meetings - 1368 

Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology 

Open Paper Session on Digital Sociology - 1113 Open Paper Session on Media Sociology - 1714 Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Meetings - 1369 Section on Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Sociology Refereed Roundtable Session - 1457, 1458, 1459, 1460, 1461, 1462, 1463, 1464, 1465, 1466, 1467 

Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology 

Challenges to Democracy: Do We Learn From the Past? - 4119 Moving Forward/Looking Backward: Crisis, Comparison and History - 3519 Nationalism, Populism and Radical Politics in Comparative Perspective - 4519 Representations and Representation: Blackness and Comparative-Historical Sociology - 3120 Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Meetings -4019, 4769 Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Open Submissions - 4319 Section on Comparative-Historical Sociology Refereed Roundtables - 4854, 4855, 4856, 4857, 4858 

Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance 

Justice, Policing, and Incarceration: Lessons Learned from National Protests and Movements for Abolition - 1319 Open Topics on Crime, Law, and Deviance - 2671 Policing, Punishment, and Victimization of LGBTQ+ People - 2724 Reimagining Policing and Public Safety in the Era of Black Lives Matter - 2124 Section on Crime, Law, and Deviance Meetings - 2572 SESSION INDEX 158 Section on Disability in Society 

Disability and Society Refereed Roundtable Session - 4859, 4860 Disability as an Axis of Inequality in the Wake of COVID-19 - 4320 Section on Disability in Society Meetings - 4770 The How of Studying Disability - 4520 

Section on Drugs and Society 

Impact of COVID-19 on Substance Use, Treatment, and Policy - 4114 Section on Drugs and Society: Inequality and Substance Use - 4517 Section on Drugs and Society Meetings - 4368 Section on Drugs and Society Roundtables - 4464, 4465, 4466, 4467 

Section on Economic Sociology 

Economic Sociology Open Session Submissions - 1118, 2118, 2316 Racial Processes in Economic Sociology - 2506 Section on Economic Sociology Meetings - 2769 Section on Economic Sociology Roundtables - 2853, 2854, 2855, 2856, 2857, 2858, 2859, 2860 

Section on Environmental Sociology 

Climate Change and Social Transformation - 4731 Environmental Justice: Critical and Multi-Scalar Perspectives - 4516 Environmental Sociology, Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations - 4106 Environmental Sociology: Open Topic - 3717 Section on Environmental Sociology Meetings - 4013, 4369 Section on Environmental Sociology Roundtables - 4447, 4448, 4449, 4450, 4451, 4452, 4453, 4454, 4455, 4456, 4457, 4458, 4459, 4460, 4461, 4462, 4463 

Section on Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis 

Current Research in Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis - 3870 New Directions in Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis - 3122 Section on Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis Meetings - 3022, 3769 

Section on Evolution, Biology, and Society 

Author Meets Critics Session: The New Evolutionary Sociology by Jonathan H. Turner and Richard S. Machalek - 1221 Evolutionary Demography and Biodemography - 1320 Section on Evolution, Biology, and Society Meetings - 1171 

Section on Global and Transnational Sociology 

Doing Decolonial Theory in the North vs. the South - 2115 Global and Transnational Sociology Roundtables - 2647, 2648, 2649, 2650, 2651, 2652, 2653, 2654, 2656, 2657, 2658, 2659, 2660, 2661 Open Topics in Global and Transnational Sociology - 2315 Section on Global and Transnational Sociology Meetings - 2568 Sociology in and from Africa: The Epistemic Challenge - 2715 “The World and Africa” Today: Building on Du Bois’s Pan-Africanist Challenge to Sociology - 1517 

Section on History of Sociology 

History of Sociology and Social Thought - 3114 Section on History of Sociology Meetings - 3070, 3370 Section on History of Sociology Refereed Roundtables - 3458 

Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility 

Causes and Consequences of Educational Inequality - 4314 Economic Inequality - 4514 New Approaches to Understanding and Addressing Inequality - 3517 Open Topic Session of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility - 3716 Poverty Trends and Mechanisms - 3317 Refereed Roundtable of the Section on Inequality, Poverty, and Mobility - 4256, 4257, 4258, 4259, 4261, 4262, 4263, 4264, 4265, 4266, 4267, 4268 Section on Inequality, Poverty and Mobility Meetings - 4171 The Pandemic and Inequality - 4708 

Section on International Migration 

Bringing Emotions into the Scholarship of Migration and Incorporation - 1315 Children and Youth as Migratory Actors - 1515 International Migration Refereed Roundtables - 1847, 1848, 1849, 1850, 1851, 1852, 1853, 1854, 1855, 1856, 1857, 1858 Mobility, Immobility, and the Covid9 Pandemic - 1116 Section on International Migration Meetings - 1770 Temporary Migration - 2513 

Section on Labor and Labor Movements 

Labor and Labor Movements Roundtable - 2662, 2663, 2664, 2665, 2666, 2667 Labor and Race - 2714 Section on Labor and Labor Movements Meetings - 2069, 2569 The New Labor Activism - 2116 

Section on Latina/o Sociology 

Implications of Knowledge Production on Latinxs (Moving Beyond Latinxs as a Variable) - 3314 Latinxs and Crises - 3116 Section on Latina/o Sociology Meetings - 3768 Section on Latina/o Sociology Roundtable Session - 3857, 3858, 3859, 3860, 3861, 3862 

Section on Marxist Sociology 

Marxist Section Open Submission Session - 2514 Marxist Section Roundtables - 3863, 3864, 3865, 3866 Racial Capitalism and Abolitionist Marxisms - 2314 Section on Marxist Sociology Meetings - 3767 

Section on Mathematical Sociology 

Computational Sociology - 3521 Mathematical Sociology Section Coleman Lecture: Noah E. Friedkin, "Interpersonal Influence Systems" - 3472 Section on Mathematical Sociology Meetings - 3359 

Section on Medical Sociology 

Black Health Matters: Racism, Health, and Health Care - 1114 Health and Health Care Policy Across the Life Course - 2313 Qualitative and Ethnographic Studies of Health and Health Care - 1715 Section on Medical Sociology Award Ceremony and Reeder Address - 2113 Section on Medical Sociology Meetings - 1014, 1568 Section on Medical Sociology Refereed Roundtables - 1647, 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651, 1652, 1653, 1654, 1655, 1656, 1657, 1658, 1659 Social Integration and Health - 1314 

Section on Methodology 

Methodology Section Duncan Lecture - 2471 Methodology Section Session - 2720 Section on Methodology Invited Session - 2120 Section on Methodology Meetings - 2370 SESSION INDEX 159 Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work 

Broadening the Conversation about Racism in Organizations, Occupations, and Work - 4115, 4317 Open Topics on Organizations, Occupations, and Work - 3118, 3319, 3718, 4718 Section on Organizations, Occupations and Work Meetings -4015, 4568 Section on Organizations, Occupations, and Work Roundtables -4660, 4661, 4662, 4663, 4664, 4665, 4666, 4667 

Section on Peace, War and Social Conflict 

Intervening Abroad: Protecting Human Rights or Imperialism? (cosponsored by the Human Rights section) - 4120 Section on Peace, War and Social Conflict Meetings - 4020, 4767 Section on Peace, War, and Social Conflict Refereed Roundtables - 4863, 4864 The Social and Political Effects of Monuments and Memorials - 4321 Violence and Nonviolence at Black Lives Matter Protests - 4521 

Section on Political Economy of the World System 

COVID-19 and the Capitalist World-System - 1716 Political Economy Approaches to Technology and the Environment - 1317 Political Economy of the World System Refereed Roundtables -1669, 1670, 1671 Section on Political Economy of the World System Meetings - 1546 

Section on Political Sociology 

Militating for Political Voice: Confronting Alternative, Second-class, and Non-citizenship - 3512 Open Session - 3312, 3712 Polarization and Contention in Electoral Politics - 4711 Section on Political Sociology Meetings - 3068, 3168 Section on Political Sociology Refereed Roundtables - 3256, 3257, 3258, 3259, 3260, 3261, 3262, 3263, 3264, 3265, 3266, 3267 

Section on Race, Gender, Class 

Intersectional Inequalities and Higher Education - 1316 Intersectionality and Population Health Disparities - 1516 Intersectional Perspectives on Disability - 2713 Reproductive Justice: Co-Sponsored by the Section on Race, Gender, and Class and the Section on Body and Embodiment - 2114 Section on Race, Gender, and Class Roundtables - 1859, 1860, 1861, 1862, 1863, 1864, 1865, 1866, 1867, 1868, 1869 Section on Race, Gender, Class Meetings - 1071, 1771 The Meanings of Colonialism, Racism, and Latinidad for Black Latinxs - 1117 

Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities 

Africans/Africans in North American Diasporas - 4116 Black Feminist Sociology - 4316 Race, Ethnicity, Colonialism, and Global Geopolitics - 4717 Race, Racism, and COVID-19 - 3318 Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Meetings - 4569 Section on Racial and Ethnic Minorities Roundtables - 4647, 4648, 4649, 4650, 4651, 4652, 4653, 4654, 4655, 4656, 4657, 4658, 4659 The Suburban Black Middle Class in Metropolitan Area Context - 3518 

Section on Rationality and Society 

Advances in Rational Choice - 4121 Computational Approaches to Rational Choice - 4322 Rationality and Society Open Session - 4819 Section on Rationality and Society Meetings - 4720 

Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology 

A New Canon for SKAT: Working in the Tradition of Du Bois, Wells, and Duster - 3115 Money for Nothing? Science Between Markets and Politics - 3715 Science, Knowledge and Technology Section Roundtables - 3657, 3658, 3659, 3660, 3661, 3662, 3663, 3664 Section on Science, Knowledge, and Technology Meetings -3015, 3571 Sociologies of Science, Knowledge, and Technology in “Revolting Times” - 3307 

Section on Social Psychology 

Cooley-Mead Award Ceremony and Address - 2318 Rotten Trees and Bad Apples: Social Psychological Insights into Discrimination - 2718 Section on Social Psychology Meetings - 1067, 2168 Section on Social Psychology Refereed Roundtables (Cosponsored with Section on Sociology of Emotions) - 2247, 2248, 2249, 2250, 2251, 2252, 2253 Tumultuous Times: Social Psychology Amidst Social Upheaval - 2519 What's Wrong with Social Psychology? - 1318 

Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology 

Contributed Roundtables - 4269 Section on Sociological Practice and Public Sociology Meetings - 4172 Sharing and Visualizing Sociological Results - 4515 Sociology in For-Profit Settings - 4315 Using Sociology in Practice, Applied and Public Settings - 4715 

Section on Sociology of Body and Embodiment 

Embodied Labor - 1312 Livable Bodies: Protest, Resistance, and Change - 1513 Section on Sociology of Body and Embodiment Meetings - 1169 Sociology of Body and Embodiment Roundtables - 1264, 1265 

Section on Sociology of Consumers and Consumption 

Consumers, Consumption, and Well-being - 1115 Section on Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Meetings - 1567 Sociology of Consumers and Consumption Roundtables - 1660, 1661, 1662, 1663, 1664, 1666 

Section on Sociology of Culture 

Between Collapse and Utopia: Foresight, Imagination and Social Change - 2516 Culture and Computation in Theory and Practice - 2716 Culture and Morality in Times of Crisis - 2117 Graduate Student Professionalization Panel - 1470 New Perspectives in Sociology of Art and Music: BIPOC Artists and Creative Agency - 1717 Section on Sociology of Culture Meetings - 1371, 2068 Sociology of Culture Section Roundtables - 2347, 2348, 2349, 2350, 2351, 2352, 2353, 2354, 2355, 2356, 2357, 2358, 2359, 2360, 2361 

Section on Sociology of Development 

Environment and Migration: Short Term Shocks, Long Term Crises - 1518 Food as Struggle, Food as Resistance - 1718 Refereed Roundtables - 2254, 2255, 2256, 2257, 2258 Section on Sociology of Development Meetings - 2171 The Development of Underdeveloped Public Health - 1119 SESSION INDEX 160 Section on Sociology of Education 

Section on Sociology of Education Meetings - 1168 Section on Sociology of Education Paper Sessions - 1305, 1512, 1712, 2505 Section on Sociology of Education Refereed Roundtables - 1247, 1248, 1249, 1250, 1251, 1252, 1253, 1254, 1255, 1256, 1257, 1258, 1259, 1260, 1261, 1262, 1263 

Section on Sociology of Emotions 

Chair's Hour: Exploring the Role of Emotions in Political Beliefs and Political Behavior - 1246 Emotions and Inequality - 1721 Section on Sociology of Emotions Meetings - 1145 

Section on Sociology of Human Rights 

Intersectional Human Rights: A Global Agenda - 3514 Section on Sociology of Human Rights Meetings - 3369 Section on the Sociology of Human Rights Roundtables - 3467 

Section on Sociology of Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations 

Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations Roundtables - 4761, 4762 Section on Sociology of Indigenous Peoples and Native Nations Meeting - 4532 

Section on Sociology of Law 

Access to Justice at the Nexus of Civil and Criminal Law - 3513 Courts and Legal Process - 3714 Law, Medicine, and Claims-Making - 3113 Section on Sociology of Law Meetings - 3069, 3368 Sociology of Law Refereed Roundtables - 3460, 3461, 3462, 3463, 3464, 3465, 3466 

Section on Sociology of Mental Health 

Challenges in Mental Health Research - 3270 COVID-19 and Mental Health - 3720 Free to Be Me: Defining Mental Illness and Assessing Risks - 3321 Section on Sociology of Mental Health Meetings - 3067, 3169 

Section on Sociology of Population 

Health, Mortality, and Inequality - 3705 Racism and the Demography of Racial and Ethnic Inequality - 3315 Reproductive Access, Autonomy, and Justice - 3117 Section on Sociology of Population Meetings - 3570 Section on Sociology of Population Refereed Roundtable - 3665, 3666, 3667, 3668, 3669 

Section on Sociology of Religion 

Section on Sociology of Religion Meetings - 4768 Sociology of Religion OPEN (preference for papers on gender & sexuality) - 4318 Sociology of Religion OPEN (preference for papers on non-religious or nones) - 4118 Sociology of Religion OPEN (preference for papers on the cross-national or international dynamics) - 4518 Sociology of Religion OPEN (preference for papers on the State or power dynamics) - 3119 Sociology of Religion Roundtables - 4847, 4848, 4849, 4850, 4851, 4852, 4853 

Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender 

Gender in the Academic Labor Market and Beyond: Taking a Feminist Sociology Beyond the Academy - 3508 Intimate Labor, Sex Work, and Queer Kinship - 3713 #SayHerName: Attending to the Gendered Dynamics of Racialized Violence - 4112 Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Meetings - 3112 Section on Sociology of Sex and Gender Roundtable - 3347, 3348, 3349, 3350, 3351, 3352, 3353, 3354, 3355, 3356, 3357 The COVID-19 Pandemic: Gendered Risks, Gendered Consequences - 4712 The State and Politics of Gender - 4512 

Section on Sociology of Sexualities 

Decolonizing Sexualities Studies - 4522 Pandemics and Sexualities - 4323 Rethinking Transnational Sexualities - 4122 Section on Sociology of Sexualities Meetings - 4022, 4765 Simon-Gagnon Lifetime Achievement Award Winner: Gloria González-López - 4866 Trans Sexualities: Race, Power, Pleasure - 3721 

Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology 

Bringing Our Whole Selves to the Sociology Classroom: Impacts of Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Teaching - 2522 Caring Pedagogies: Teaching in Challenging Times - 2320 Hans O. Mauksch Award for Distinguished Contributions to Undergraduate Sociology Address - 2821 Harnessing Student Agency in the Classroom through Student-Centered Teaching - 1720 Mentoring Roundtables  on Teaching Upper Level Courses - 2121 Section on Teaching and Learning in Sociology Meetings -2021, 2771 

Theory Section 

Lewis A. Coser Lecture and Salon - 1719 Pragmatist Theorizing in Sociology: Emerging Directions - 2122 Theorizing Crisis - 2321 Theorizing Liberation and Emancipation - 1120 Theory Section Meetings - 1020, 2770 Theory Section Roundtables - 2861, 2862, 2863, 2864, 2865, 2866, 2867, 2868 

Sociology in Practice Settings Symposium - 2112, 2312, 2512, 2712 

Special Session - 1104, 1105, 1303, 1304, 1503, 1504, 1703, 1704, 2103, 2104, 2105, 2303, 2304, 2503, 2504, 2703, 2704, 3103, 3104, 3105, 3303, 3304, 3503, 3504, 3703, 3704, 4104, 4105, 4117, 4303, 4304, 4504, 4703, 4704 

Student Forum 

Student Forum - 2322, 3323, 4721 Student Forum Open Topic Paper Session - 3106 Student Forum Refereed Roundtable - 0547, 0548, 0549, 0550, 0551, 0552, 0553, 0554, 0555, 0556, 0557, 0558 Student Forum Special Topic Paper Session - 1519 

Teaching and Learning Symposium - 1109, 1309, 1572, 1573, 1574, 1575, 1576, 1709 

Thematic Session - 1106, 1107, 1108, 1306, 1307, 1308, 1506, 1507, 1533, 1706, 1707, 2106, 2107, 2306, 2307, 2308, 2507, 2508, 2706, 2707, 2708, 3108, 3306, 3311, 3506, 3507, 3515, 3706, 3707, 3708, 3709, 4107, 4108, 4306, 4307, 4503, 4506, 4507, 4508, 4706, 4707 

Workshops 

Policy and Research Workshop - 1508, 4309 Professional Development Workshop - 1310, 1510, 1534, 1710, 2110, 2310, 2510, 2710, 3110, 3310, 3510, 3710, 4109, 4501 Teaching Workshop - 2109, 3309, 4308, 4509, 4709
