Title: The Los Angeles Mayor's Accidental Endorsement of Hillary Clinton

URL Source: https://www.governing.com/archive/tns-garcetti-clinton-endorsement.html

Published Time: November 06, 2015

Markdown Content:
_By Peter Jamison_

Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti's attempt to endorse Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton in the 2016 presidential campaign quickly devolved into an embarrassment for the mayor Thursday afternoon.

Garcetti's office first sent out an email endorsing Clinton and an hour later followed up with a second, one-line news release reading: "Today's statement on Hillary Clinton was sent in error."

The follow-up message, which quickly went viral on social media, was put out after The Times asked the mayor's office whether the original endorsement might have been a misuse of city resources for campaign purposes. Both city and state law prohibit the use of government staff time and equipment for campaign news releases, including endorsements.

In a subsequent interview, a Garcetti staff member said the original Clinton endorsement was sent from the wrong email account but declined to comment on whether the endorsement of Clinton was being retracted. The mayor's staff referred that question to Bill Carrick, Garcetti's 2017 reelection campaign consultant.

Carrick said Garcetti's endorsement of Clinton stands, and would shortly be reissued through a non-governmental email account. He said he could not explain the circumstances surrounding the first endorsement statement.

"It was supposed to go out from me and someone in the (mayor's) office inadvertently sent it out from the -- I don't really know what the explanation is," Carrick said.

He said the mayor's staff sent the "error" email after realizing that the first news release was an inappropriate use of city resources.

"They obviously know that was a no-no," he said.

Late Thursday afternoon, Garcetti's campaign sent its own email to supporters re-endorsing Clinton.

Garcetti's endorsement comes a week after New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio declared his backing for Clinton's candidacy. The support of the mayors of the nation's two largest cities marks a further step in Clinton's consolidation of party support for her nomination after a shaky summer on the campaign trail.

"I'm proud to endorse Hillary Clinton for president because I know that she understands the challenges and opportunities facing our cities and will be a powerful leader in building our future," Garcetti said in the original endorsement.

"Like Mayors across the country, I am working hard to bring shared prosperity to every corner of our city. And in Hillary Clinton, Mayors will have a partner -- someone who is ready to stand up for our mainstream economy, and the people who need help the most."

The endorsement announcement represented a new stage in Garcetti's uneven relationship with one of America's preeminent political dynasties.

In 2008, then-Councilman Garcetti was an early supporter of President Barack Obama, Clinton's opponent in the Democratic primary. In the 2013 mayoral election, President Bill Clinton endorsed Garcetti's opponent, former City Controller Wendy Greuel.

Garcetti endorsed Clinton several weeks after Vice President Joe Biden announced he would not challenge the former first lady and secretary of State for the Democratic nomination.

Garcetti and Biden have allied on efforts to raise the minimum wage. In September -- when speculation surrounding a potential Biden presidential run was at its height -- Garcetti hosted the vice president for a private dinner at the mayoral residence in Windsor Square.

_(c)2015 the Los Angeles Times_
