Title: 

URL Source: https://www.usfk.mil/Portals/105/Documents/The_Seoul_Survivor_2014-2015(1).pdf

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2015 03:49:58 GMT

Markdown Content:
HIGH RELOCATION WORLDWIDE 

To view the High Relocation Worldwide Korea key sesrvice, go to http://www.highrelo.com. 

“ OUR LOCAL AND INTERNATIONAL FRIENDS ” 

“ YOUR PRT; YOUR PRICE; OUR SERVICE ” 

“A NEW MEANING FOR TOTAL LOGISTICS SERVICES ” 

“ Anything, anywhere with High Relocation Logistics Services “ 

“ Door to Port, Door to Handover, Door to Door “ 

* Guaranteed delivery date protection and options 

* Up to $50,000 in loss protection insurance 

# HOUSEHOLD GOODS 

# PET ANIMAL TRANSPORT 

# LOGISTIC SERVICES 

# AUTOMOBILE TRANSPORTATION 

For more information, call 02-795-2604 / Bright Yoon Email: bright@highrelo.com / www.highrelo.com 

For more information, call 02-795-2604 / Soy(Sohee) Yoon Email: highpetrelo@highrelo.com / www.highrelo.com 

For more information, call 010-9476-7928 / Jim Burke Email: jimburke@highrelo.com / www.highrelo.com 

For more information, call 010-9476-7928 / Jim Burke Email: jimburke@highrelo.com / www.highrelo.com Dr. Kim is a 

specialist with 20 years of clinical experience in the U.S. and Korea. 

With 15 years of dental studies and training at the most prestigious schools and hospitals 

(University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, NYU Medical Center), Dr. Kim has successfully treated thousands of patients of all ages and ethnic backgrounds. 

Dr. Kim has written numerous publications 

in his areas of expertise, including a recent textbook chapter: Orthodontics Basic Aspects and clinical considerations 

■FIRST CHOICE FOR YOUR FAMILY BRACES 

▪ University of Pennsylvania 

School of Dental Medicine (DMD) 

▪ University of Illinois at Chicago 

Orthodontic Specialty Residency/ MS 

▪ NYU Medical Center 

Reconstructive Plastic Surgery: Fellowship 

▪ Catholic University of Korea 

Director & Professor 

▪ Member of American Association of Orthodontists 

▪ Free Taxi for New Patients with TRICARE from YongSan 

▪ * Subway # 7 Line (Exit .12) 

▪ Find Us on Facebook “IVY dentalclinic” Orthodontics (BRACES) 

- Children / Adults - Speed Braces/ Clear Braces / Invisalign 

Comprehensive Dental Care 

- General check-ups, Cleaning - Fillings, Crowns, Root Canal, Implants - Cosmetic Dentistry : Veneers, Whitening 

Dr. JAY H KIM DMD, MS 

TRICARE APPROVED PREFERRED PROVIDER 

> IVY League Educated & U.S. Board Certified Orthodontic Specialist

# CHUNGDAM IVY DENTAL CLINIC Your Family. Your Orthodontist. 

Dental Program 

Special Offers for New Patients and Family Members 

# 02-518-2722 E-mail. ivyface@naver.com / Website. www.IVYsmile.kr CHA Gangnam Fertility Center With high success rates standing alongside major US hospitals, CHA Fertility Center was part of CHA Health Systems. This health system had included hospitals and research centers throughout the world. It was also surprising to find that Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in the US was actually run by CHA Health Systems. The NCOA Outstanding Large Chapter of the Year The NCOA Korea Dragon Hill Chapter #1507 represents All Branches of Service. We serve our Military and the surrounding communities by sponsoring or co-sponsoring many Service Member Recognition programs, Civic organizations, School, Community programs and activities. We contribute funds and or promotional items to Unit activities, Charitable Organizations, BOSS Programs and the NCOA Scholarship Fund. Additionally, we have a Local Chapter Scholarship Program. We sponsor the Give Out Love Handicap Home and Bosung Girls Middle and High School in support of the USFK Good Neighbor Program. For more information send email to: 

## chairman.joe@gmail.com OR visit us at www.your.ncoakorea.org Dr. Gina Sohn U.S. Licensed Dentist Tufts Graduate 

Dental Program 

Located at Park Tower Apartment 1 min from Yongsan South Post Gate 13 

## MAP 

# www.drginasohn.com call : 02-553-7512 US. Dental 

• Practiced in Massachusetts, Connecticut • Currently Licensed in 

Massachusetts,Connecticut, New Jersey 

• Graduated from Tufts University, Boston. • Studied at University paris 5. • Implant Dentistry Trained at NYU. • Languages - English, Japanese, Korean, French 

# Dr. Gina Sohn 

• American Dental Association 

• American Academy of Cosmetic Dentistry • American Academy of Implant Dentistry • American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry • Massachusetts Dental Society • Connecticut State Dental Association 

Memberships 

• Teeth Cleaning & Check up / General Dentistry • Braces & Invisalign, Dental Implants • Smile Makeover / Cosmetic Dentistry • Whitening, Veneers / Lumineers, Gummy Smile • Root Canal, Widom Teeth Extraction • Dental Care for Your Children 

Services 

# Dr. Gina Sohn U.S. Licensed Dentist Tufts Graduate The Offical Healthcare Center for Foreigners in Northern Gyeonggi-do. Introduce One of Greatest System CMC Network in Korea. 

# About History Uijeongbu St. Mary’s Hospital was established in 1957 to practice the teachings of Christ by caring for the sick, conduct medical research and serve the community. 

# About Medical Service Uijeongbu St. Mary’s Hospital has been offering advanced medical services based on love 

# About Philosophy of CMC Uijeongbu St. Mary’s Hospital, sharing the love of Jesus Christ. 

Korea Institute for Healthcare Accreditation 

AAHRPP Full Accreditation 

Dialysis Center  Cardiovascular Center  Health Promotion Center Radiation Oncology with Rapid-Arc 

Breast cancer surgery Colorectal cancer surgery Cesarean Section(C-Section) 1st Grade Certigication by Hira 

Surgical Trauma Helicopter Transport System Completion 

# The Canteen 

# VFW Post 8180 

# “ The Canteen” 

An American Bar and Lounge. 

Your first and last stop while enjoying all the beauty of Korea 

• Our Mission is to serve and provide the US, foreign and local neigh -

borhood community with a safe, fun and relaxed social atmosphere. • Our location is just outside of Gate 21, Yongsan US Army base and a 5 minute walk into the “melting pot” community of Haebangchon, just under the famous Seoul Tower, Namsan. 

# • Tel: 02-794-8180 * 44-18 Yongsan-gu, Yongsan-dong, downstairs 

Circa 1979 *Bilingual Staff *Big screen cable TV *Live music *Pool&Darts *Full Bar SSC Group Photo. Photo by Brian Gilbert AFSC Executive Board 2013-2014 

AFSC 2013-2014 Members Dec Luncheon. Photos by Marisa Johnson Greetings! It is my great pleasure and indeed an honor for me and Oriental Press to present this latest edition of the “Seoul Survivor,” the ever-popular orientation guide prepared by the American Forces Spouses’ Club each year. This year’s edition for 2014 - 2015 marks the 28th consecutive year of its publication, and we – Oriental Press have been ever so proud to have been partner to its existence for 20 of those years But there are more things about the new Seoul Sur-vivor that are special than just its history; as this year presents a complete updating of all pertinent details of the USFK community – reflecting the substantial and significant changes the US military is undergoing and how it effects military members and their families here in Korea. Since our humble beginnings in 1987, Oriental Press has seen many changes and much growth here, and we are so proud to be a part of this all-important community publication, which we know will remain an invaluable resource that will continuously grow and expand in the years to come. And of course, no project of this type can be created alone, but it is usually spearheaded by one individual or a small group of them, and the “Seoul Survi-vor” is no exception. As such, we would like to express our sincerest gratitude and our congratulations to Mrs. Cleo Klopfleisch and her tireless staff of volun-teers for an exceptional job, and to both the out-gone president of the AFSC – Mrs. Emily Grace, and Mrs. Erin Gonzalez – current AFSC president, and all the wonderful members of the American Forces Spouses’ Club for entrusting Oriental Press with this, their labor of love Sincerely, Charles Chong President, Oriental Press 

# A message from the Oriental Press EDITOR’S NOTE 

Welcome to the Republic of Korea. All the mem-bers of American Forces’ Spouses’ Club join me in letting you know we are grateful to you, the men and women of the American Forces and your family members, for serving far away from your home and loved ones. Americans have been serving in Korea and de-fending freedom, since the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950. Today over 4200 Service –mem-bers are now in Korea on normal three-year tours with their families, my family included. Raised in the small town of Huachuca City, AZ, Seoul was quite a leap for me. The driving, the high rises, and the fashion are all novel and excit-ing for this small town girl. My family and I have found the Korean people to be very hospitable, they greeted us with open arms. During our three-year deployment we took time to explore this wonderful country by participating in the many tours and travel programs. I hope you and your family will do the same. You and your family will have many opportunities to make lifelong friendships, and have numerous unique experiences here -as we did. The information provided within these pages is a great amount of material to assist you and your family members with your in-processing and becom-ing aware of what to expect for the duration of your deployment. Take time to book mark pages and make a bucket list of “to see and to do” items, time flies when you are having fun. Keep a copy of the Seoul Survivor in your car and at home, or just book mark on your smart phone. The guide can answer questions from telephone numbers, ‘what to, how to, where to, and when to.’ I consider the AFSC Seoul Survivor to be a Military How To Book & Expatriates Travel Guide for all in Korea. Regardless of nationality, gender, age or military affiliation there is something for everyone in this book. The book will abso-lutely help you survive in Seoul. For all the love and support our girls Naomi and Renee, my husband Quint and myself have been provided… I believed volunteering with the American Forces’ Spouses’ Club and editing the AFSC Seoul Survivor would be my little gift back to the Military community. Little did I know, it was my reward serving with a talented & diverse group of folks and an amazing Seoul Survivor Com-mittee! Enjoy! 

> P. Cleo Klopfleisch, photo by Marisa Johnson

The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 1

# THE SEOUL SURVIVOR 2014 - 2015 

## A publication of the 

# American Forces’ Spouses’ Club 

Twenty-eighth Edition 2014-2015 NEW This edition is available as an eBook. May not be reprinted without the permission of: American Forces’ Spouses’ Club PSC 450, Box 9, APO, AP 96206-0009 

www.afscyongsan.org 

# Acknowledgements 

Appreciation and an absolute honor to have had the opportunity to work together with the wonderful people at Oriental Press; President Mr. Charles Chong, Joseph Terry, Younie Park, and Ken Bringer. Without your continued guidance, generous contributions, support and mentorship with AFSC and USAGY, the AFSC Seoul Survivor would not have existed for the past 28 years. A very special thank you to each and every Seoul Survivor Committee Member. We are family, near and far - XXOO. Thank YOU for all your countless hours and hard work! To the 2013-2014 AFSC President Emily Grace, the amazing advisors, and the AFSC Board members. Each of you with diverse talents, a multitude of philanthropy hours… how lucky I am to have had a sparkle of each of you in my life. To our girls Naomi and Renee, love you around the world back and again! Finally, to my wonderful “honey” Quint ~ my love, my hero! LY, YW 

> Acknoledgments OP Award Photo By Marisa Johnson

## 2 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 3

Korean Welfare Projects  Haing J. Choi Membership  Jackie Bishop Public Affairs  P. Cleo Klopfleisch Reservations  Marcille Millet Reservations Co-Chair  Marci Quale Scholarship  Shelby Cooper Seoul Survivor Editor  P. Cleo Klopfleisch Volunteer Coordinator  Michelle Keier Ways & Means  Amanda France Ways & Means Co-Chair  Carla Chancellor Webmaster/Facebook  P. Cleo Klopfleisch 

## SEOUL SURVIVOR EDITORS 

1984 - Judy Bridenbaugh 1985 - Helen Adams 

1999 - Carolyn I.J. Mcinnis 1986 - Linda Melvin 1987 - Monte Hess 

1988 - Delores Stetson 

1989 - Bobbye Geary 

1990 - Jane Earles 

1991 - Marianne Pastor 

1992 - Pat Manzy 

1993 - Lonny Rogers 

1994 - Janet Lee 1995/96/97 – Jennifer Musser 1998 - Donna Repaty 2000 - Judy Hunter, Temple Wood 2001/2 - Lisa Wood 2003/4 - Suzette Mackenzie 2004/5 - Heather Applegate 2006/7 - Christine Chae 2008/9 - Cathi Ferri 2009/10 - Debora Rinehart 2010/11 - Tina Fox 2011/12 - Miriam Walker 2012/13 - Mary Soergel 2013/14 - Emily Grace 2014/2015 P. Cleo Klopfleisch 

# 2014-2015 AFSC BOARD MEMBERS 2014-2015 Honorary Presidents 

Senior Honorary President  Cindy Scaparrotti Honorary President  Mary Sue Champoux Honorary President  Sandra Troxell 

## 2014-2015 Advisors 

AFSC Advisor  Cathy Hurley American Welfare Projects Advisor  Susan Grove Korean Welfare Projects Advisor  Jo Ann Golden Scholarship Advisor  Lisa Yenter 

## 2014-2015 Executive Board Members 

President  Emily Grace 1st Vice-President  Carl Wiley 2nd Vice-President  Morgan Gallo-O’Bryant Secretary  Ginger Chun Operations Treasurer  Judy Orrick Welfare Treasurer  Jennifer Clement Parliamentarian  Amy McLaughlin 

## 2012-2013 Appointed Chairpersons 

Activities  Erin Gonzalez American Welfare Projects  Kristen Pastino Auction  Morgan Gallo-O’Bryant Chosun Chatter  Novelda Sommers Historian  Marisa Johnson Hospitality  Zayda Barros 4 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 5

QUICK REFERENCES  7HELPFUL WEBSITES  8AMERICAN FORCES’ SPOUSES’ CLUB  17 HISTORY OF U.S. FORCES AT YONGSAN  19 KOREA  24 

Facts about South Korea  26 Korean National and Religious Holidays  27 The Korean Spoken and Written Language  30 Useful Korean Phrases  31 

KOREAN CULTURE AND CUSTOMS  35 

Korean Non-Verbal Behaviors and Etiquette  35 Traditional Korean Meals  38 

PLANNING YOUR PCS  42 

What to Do and When to Do It  42 Details, Details, Details!  42 What to Bring  48 Travel Day  55 

TOUCH DOWN!  56 

Incheon International Arrival  57 Osan Airbase Arrival  59 In-Processing  60 

FIRST THIRTY DAYS  62 PRACTICAL INFORMATION FROM A TO Z  67-142 

# TABLE OF CONTENTS 2014-2015 SEOUL SURVIVOR COMMITTEE 

Kimie Bruch, Lynette Feldman, Eunice A Garcia, Virginia Gilbert, Erin Gonzalez, Elaine Harman, Michelle Keier, John Nowell, Sarah Pasquantonio, Lee Anna Smith, Gregory Ulma, and Katie Wendt. 

Cover photo by Teresa A. Fowler 1st Place Winner of the 2014 AFSC Seoul Survivor Cover Contest “Seoul Tower at Night” Cover design by Younie Park & P. Cleo Klopfleisch 

This publication was originally conceived, written and compiled by Judy Bridenbaugh in an attempt to ease the frustration experienced by military members and their families when moving to a new location, especially, in a foreign country. We continue each year to add multifaceted information. In keeping with modern technology for this edition we have added download-able Smart Phone apps; and The AFSC Seoul Survivor is now available as an E-Book. 

Military / expats alike use the AFSC Seoul Survivor as an informative Armed Forces Resource Guide & as a South Korea Travel Guide Book in one. Input for the annual issues has been gathered from the best available sources at the time of publication. Every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the information and maps at the time of printing. American Forces’ Spouses’ Club would be grateful to receive any information from the reader concerning errors and omissions. 

afscseoulsurvivor@gmail.com 6 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 7

# Phone Number Prefixes 

To call a military phone number (DSN) on an Army installation from a commercial or cell phone, dial 05033 plus the last six digits of the number. Example: The DSN for the Dragon Hill Lodge is 738-2222. To call from a cell phone, the number to dial is 0503-338-2222. To call a military phone number (DSN) on non-Army installations from a commercial or cell phone, dial 0505 plus the seven-digit number. To call to a commercial phone/cell phone from a military phone, dial 99 then the number. To call a commercial phone from a cell phone, dial 02 then the number. 

## ON POST (Yongsan) 

Operator Assistance  0 or 723-1110 Fire/Police  117 (Commercial – 02-724-6695) Ambulance  116 (Commercial – 02-737-6132) AAFES Taxi  Commercial 02-1544-9080 Suicide Prevention Hotline  118 Commercial 0808-555-118 

Emergency Housing Repair: 

South Post  DSN 724-3360 

## OFF POST (Seoul Area) 

Operator Assistance  114 Korean National Police (Central Interpretation Center)  02-313-0842 Seoul Metropolitan Police  02-738-9997 Fire and Emergency (Ambulance)  119 Seoul Help Center for Foreigners  02-731-6800 Tourism  1330 Volunteer Service for Translation (Enter 1 for English)  02-1588-5644 

Note: All Yongsan telephone numbers and hours of operation are available online at yongsan.korea.army.mil and on the USAG Yongsan Facebook page .

# QUICK REFERENCES SHOPPING IN SEOUL  163 

What to Buy  164 Where to Buy  175 Special Interest  185 

RESTAURANTS  188 

Restaurants On Post  188 Restaurants Off Post  190 

TRAVEL IN KOREA - THE ADVENTURE AWAITS  205 

Traveling within Seoul  205 Places of Interest  206 Palaces, Museums and World Heritage Sites  211 Seoul Festivals  213 Parks, Theme Parks and Zoos  214 

TRAVEL OUTSIDE OF SEOUL  220 

Northern Locations  222 Central Locations  225 Southeast and Coastal Locations  227 

TRAVEL OUTSIDE OF KOREA  230 

Travel Medicine Clinic  232 Emergency or Urgent Health Care while Traveling  233 Where to Go  235 Travel Services  249 

INSTALLATIONS IN KOREA  250 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SELECTED RESOURCES ON KOREA  258 INDEX  259 USAG-YONGSAN GATES  266 8 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 9

Information about Camp Humphreys that may be useful for the upcoming move. 

Career One Stop for Spouses : www.careeronestop.org/militaryspouse/ 

Look for information on finding a job. 

Commander, U.S. Naval Forces Korea: www.cnic.navy.mil/Korea/index.htm 

Information regarding housing, recreation, and general information about living in Korea. 

Commissaries: www.commissaries.com 

See commissary hours and add digital coupons to your rewards card. 

DEERS: https://www.dmdc.osd.mil/milconnect 

Military Connect allows CAC holders to update DEERS and other information. 

Defense Finance/Pay: www.dfas.mil 

Pay tables, myPay login, etc. 

Exchange Food Court: http://myexchangefood.com 

Order delivery or take-out from Exchange restaurants. 

Girl Scouts : http://westpacificgirlscouts.org/ 

Join or start a troop; volunteer as a leader. 

Korea Housing Management : www.kohomm.org 

On-post leased housing in Korea. 

Military.com : www.military.com/spouse 

Information about employment, schooling, and internships. 

Military Health System Official : www.health.mil 

Combined medical information. 

Military Impacted Schools Association: 

http://militaryimpactedschoolsassociation.org 

Advocacy and resources for military students. 

Military OneSource: www.militaryonesource.mil 

Crisis line, counseling, job help, and other services for military families. 

Military Space Available Travel: www.spacea.net 

Introduction and Q&As about Space A (unofficial site). 

Military Youth on the Move :

http://apps.militaryonesource.mil/MOS/f?p=MYOM:HOME2:0 

Resources for youth and parents to help prepare for a military move. 

MWR Yongsan : www.mwrkorea.com/myinstallation/yonsan.php 

The Community Connection Magazine, At Glance at Yongsan Newsletter, and MWR information. 

National Military Family Association: www.militaryfamily.org 

NMFA, non-profit advocacy and resources for military families including 

## Military/Yongsan Websites: 8th Army Pacific Victors : http://8tharmy.korea.ary.mil 

Electronic version of their welcome guide and links to military information and the AFN-Korea website. 

AAFES: www.aafes.com 

Online Exchange Store shopping, information on Military Star Card, etc. 

Air Mobility Command: www.amc.af.mil/amctravel/index.asp 

Comprehensive information on Space A travel. 

American Forces’ Spouses’ Club of Korea : www.afscyongsan.org 

Social and charitable activities on post. 

American Red Cross Military Services :

http://www.redcross.org/find-help/military-families 

Emergency messages, financial assistance, resources, and referrals. 

America’s Promise: www.americaspromise.org 

Strategic student support and resources. 

Animal Quarantine Inspection Service :

www.aqis.co.kr/index.php?sitelang=eng 

Animal quarantine inspection service for bringing pets into Korea. 

Army Civilian Personnel Homepage: http://cpol.army.mil 

Employment, check the listings for Korea. 

Army Family Readiness Groups : www.armyfrg.org 

Connect with your FRG and resources for leaders and members. 

Army Homepage : www.army.mil 

Current Army news as well as links to official Army social media sites. 

Army MWR : www.armymwr.com 

Comprehensive Morale, Wellness, and Recreation information. 

Army OneSource : www.myarmyonesource.com 

Find information on volunteering, Army Family Team Building, and Army Life. 

AUSA Family : www.ausa.org/family 

Non-profit advocating and providing resources for Army families. 

Boy Scouts : www.scouting.org 

Join or start a troop; volunteer as a leader. 

Camp Humphreys homepage : www.army.mil/humphreys 

# HELPFUL WEBSITES 10 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 11 

Wounded Warrior Project: www.woundedwarriorproject.org 

Resources, donations, support for wounded veterans. Websites on Korea/Activities in Korea 

Adventure Korea: http://adventurekorea.com 

Organizes group excursions and short trips within Korea. 

American Women’s Club Korea : www.awckorea.com 

Social and philanthropic group not associated with the military. 

Animal Rescue Korea: www.animalrescuekorea.org 

Many shelter dogs and cats available; also volunteer pet courier opportunities and resources.s 

Camarata Music Company: www.camaratamusic.com 

Non-profit open and auditioned community choirs performing choral music and musical theater. 

Cine In Korea : www.cineinkorea.com 

Online movie ticketing in English for local theaters including CGV Yongsan (iPark Mall). 

City of Seoul-Official Website http://english.seoul.go.kr/ 

Information for visiting, living, or doing business in Seoul including municipal events calendars. 

Danuri: www.liveinkorea.kr 

Information and a guidebook to make living in Korea easier, especially for multicultural families. 

Dave’s ESL Café : www.eslcafe.com/jobs/korea/ 

English teaching abroad information and jobs board. 

Fight Tonight CrossFit : www.fighttonightcrossfit.com 

Official website for the military CrossFit affiliate at Yongsan. 

The First Class Pet : www.thefirstclasspet.com 

Pet travel arrangements in Korea. 

GMarket : http://global.gmarket.co.kr/Home/Main 

Closest thing to Amazon.com within Korea 

Interpark Ticket : http://ticket.interpark.com/Global/index.asp 

Buy tickets for musicals, plays, and concerts here (in English). 

Itaewon Global Village Center : http://global.seoul.go.kr/itaewon/ 

Offers free language classes and other activities for foreigners. 

Korea Animal Transport: www.cwhospital.com/kat/process(eng).htm 

Korean animal transport site. 

Korea4Expats : www.korea4expats.com 

Resources, reviews, and event calendars from expatriates in Korea. camps and scholarships. 

NGB Family Programs : www.jointservicessupport.org/fp 

Support, education, and readiness programs for National Guard families. 

Oconus.com : www.oconus.com/main/korea.asp 

Links to bases in Korea, including lodging, schools, movie times, commissaries, etc. 

Osan Air Passenger Terminal :

www.osan.af.mil/units/731stairmobilitysquadron.asp 

Information on Space A flights to and from Korea. 

Patriot Express Information: www.usfk.mil/usfk/hot-topic.patriot.express.470 

Schedule for Space A military flights to and from Korea. 

Points of Light Foundation : www.pointsoflight.org 

Post and search volunteer opportunities. 

Tricare: www.tricare.mil 

View benefit information including tips for obtaining care while traveling. 

Yongsan Library: http://mylibraryus.armybiznet.com/search~S64 

Garrison library: catalog, digital/paper books, and language training. Register in person for user ID. 

U.S. Government Web Portal www.usa.gov 

Links to all U.S. government agencies. 

USAG Yongsan Installation : http://www.army.mil/yongsan 

Yongsan Garrison online event calendar, telephone book, welcome guide, daily weather, etc. 

USA Jobs : www.usajobs.com 

Apply for U.S. government and civil service jobs. 

U.S. DODEA Pacific : www.korea.pac.dodea.edu 

The website for the DoD schools. Download the student handbooks and enrollment forms. 

USO-United Service Organizations: www.uso.org 

Maintains two facilities on Yongsan, connect with local center and activities including tours. 

United States Forces Korea: www.usfk.mil 

USFK homepage provides links to military websites and other helpful resources. 

Veterans Affairs: www.va.gov 

Health care, education, training, and information on other veteran’s benefits. 12 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 13 

## Helpful Blogs for Exploring Korea: www.beyondkimchee.com: 

Great Korean recipes in an easy-to-follow format. 

http://blog.korea.net/ :Korean government sponsored; multiple contributors. 

http://crazykoreancooking.com : More Korean cooking ideas. 

www.cuteinkorea.com : Fun and unique diversions in Korea. 

www.drawerfullofsocks.com : A family’s adventures in Seoul. 

http://kidsfuninseoul.wordpress.com : What to do with your kids in Seoul. 

www.oneweirdglobe.com :Oddities, pointers, and guides for multiple Asian locales. 

http://seoulsuburban.com/ :Subway station area details: restaurants, attractions, etc. 

http://sippycupsojourner.blogspot.kr/ :Websites to visit before moving, Seoul with a baby. 

www.sixinseoul.com : Information for before and during a PCS to Korea. 

The Korea Guide : www.thekoreaguide.com 

Information about Korean employment, housing, and relocation. 

Korean Class 101 : www.koreanclass101.com 

Free online Korean language lessons. 

Korean National Police Agency : www.police.go.kr/eng/main.do 

Crime prevention guide for foreigners and police department information. 

Korea on the Rocks : http://koreaontherocks.com/ 

Information on rock climbing in Korea. 

Koreaye : www.koreaye.com 

Articles and photos to help demystify Korea. 

Official Korea Tourism Organization: www.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/index.kto 

Information on tourist spots and other recreational activities. 

Official Tour Guide to Everything Seoul: www.visitseoul.net/en/index.do 

This site includes an interactive subway map. 

Seoul City Improv : www.seoulcityimprov.com 

Improvisational comedy group with English performances. 

Seoul International Women’s Association : www.siwapage.com 

Social and philanthropic women’s organization. 

Seoulistic : http://seoulistic.com 

Lists and tips about living and traveling in Korea. 

Seoul Metro : www.seoulmetro.co.kr/index.jsp 

Seoul mass transit system maps, directions, and trip planner. Select English at the top of the page. 

Seoul Players : www.seoulplayers.com 

Theater performances in English. 

Tales From a Small Planet : www.talesmag.com 

Post reports and other information from U.S. government families assigned abroad. 

Talk to Me in Korean : www.talktomeinkorean.com 

Free online Korean language lessons and podcasts. 

Waygook: Teach, Travel, Learn: www.waygook.org/index.php 

Especially helpful for English teachers; jobs board and a forum about Korean life. 14 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 15 

free. No Selling. 

Giving Back: An opportunity to donate your time teaching English to un-derprivileged children 

Hannam Flea Market: For buying and selling at Hannam Village 

Hannam Village: Information dedicated to those living in Hannam Village 

Itaewon Acres Resident Association: For residents of Itaewon Acres on South Post 

Kimchi Fried Rice and More: More restaurant recommendations 

Osan Passenger Terminal: Flight schedules for Space ‘A’ Military flights from Osan AFB 

Pet Sitting Network: Find people to watch your pets while you’re traveling locally or abroad 

SeaTac AMC Passenger Terminal: Information for Space ‘A’ Military flights to and from Seattle 

Seoul Eats: Restaurant reviews 

Seoul USEA: U.S. Embassy Association announcements and sales at the USEA restaurants 

Sites in Seoul: Very helpful with recommendations and hints on every as-pect of living in Korea 

Things Uncle Sam Never Told You About Korea Traveling Throughout South Korea and neighboring countries: Good 

group for travel questions 

USAG Yongsan: The official Facebook page 

USAG Yongsan Army Community Service USO Korea: Recreational activities and tour information 

When in Korea: Offers tours and weekend trips 

Where to Eat in South Korea: Restaurant recommendations 

Wilderness Adventures Korea: Information on climbing activities and oth-er pursuits 

The Yongsan Flea Market: A place to buy and sell goods 

Yongsan Home Business Support Yongsan Pilates Yongsan Zumba HELPFUL FACEBOOK PAGES 

Go to www.facebook.com and look for the following pages. Many are closed groups you may have to request to join. 

Military Spouses’ Groups American Forces ’Spouses’ Club (Korea): Information about club activities, membership, and events 

AFSC Book Club AFSC Bunko AFSC Photography AFSC Running Club AFSC Shopping and Tours Club Marine Spouses in Korea: For all Marine spouses on the peninsula 

Navy Fun: Fun activities for military spouses 

Navy Family Readiness Group Seoul: For Navy families YG Hikers: Hiking group for military spouses 

Pregnancy and Childcare Groups Adopting in Korea Breastfeeding Support Group of Pyeontaek Cloth Diapering Army Wives in South Korea KISS Korea Infertility Support System: An infertility support group 

LLLSeoul: La Leche League of Seoul for breastfeeding support 

Milky Mamas in Korea: Another breastfeeding support group 

Monday Baby Story Time Yongsan Library Natural Minded Pregnant Moms in South Korea PAKT Playgroup: USAG Yongsan: A playgroup for mothers and children 

Pregnant in Osan: Pregnant Army Wives in South Korea: Support for new and future mothers 

Other Helpful Groups: Festivals and Events in Korea Free Share in Seoul: A group for trading and giving away your old items for 16 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 17 

# THE AMERICAN FORCES’ SPOUSES’ CLUB 

“More than just a Spouses’ Club – We are a support network of friends!” The American Forces’ Spouses’ Club (AFSC) is a combined community spouses’ organization operating on Yongsan Garrison in South Korea. This “Purple Club” is a mix of all U.S. Branch Services and civilians. We are Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine spouses, both active duty and retired. We are DOD civilian employees and spouses; DoDDS teachers and their spouses; directors and spouses for the American Red Cross, USO, Special Services; and adult fam-ily members of U.S. Department of State and The U.S. Diplomatic Mission per-sonnel. With the inclusion of United Nations Command Officers’ spouses, we are truly a “purple” bunch. The mission of AFSC is two-fold: First, it is to enhance the lives of spouses across the Republic of Korea peninsula. Our focus is on building friendships and is centered on our desire to connect people and provide support for spouses stationed in USAG-Yongsan and the surrounding communities. We encourage these relationships through monthly themed luncheons, which in addition to offering delicious food and shopping experiences with local Korean and Ameri-can vendors, we provide quality programs and the opportunity to get involved in one of the many activities and peer groups the AFSC offers. These activities are member generated and operated; the possibilities are as endless as our members’ interests are. Monthly AFSC Clubs have included Book Club, Pho-tography Club, Running Club, and the Shopping Club. This year peer groups will range from our youngest AFSC family members to our veteran spouses – Infant Outings, Toddler Adventurers, and Coffee After Dark – to name just a few. The AFSC offers this and so much more to our members, to include one of our largest contributions to the military and civilian community is the AFSC Seoul Survivor. This book is an invaluable resource providing a comprehensive introduction to life in Seoul, Korea. Second, our mission is to enhance the area in which we live through chari-table giving to our local Korean and American communities. During the 2013-2014 year the AFSC gave more than $200,000 USD for Scholarships, Korean Welfare, and American Projects. Korean and American Welfare Projects includ-ing orphanages, elderly care facilities, the Wounded Warrior Project, Toys for Tots, MWR events, and Military balls. Additionally 34 recipients, who included high school and college-aged children and spouses of active duty service mem-

# SMART PHONE APPLICATIONS 

HeyWire by MediaFriends, Inc. Free app that gives you a US phone number for texting only. Good if you have friends who don’t yet have smartphones. KaKao Talk by KaKao Talk. Chat, text, call, and picture mes-sage people in the US or Korea, as long as you both have this free app! MangoPlate by MangoPlate. The up-and-coming Yelp! of Seoul. Some good restaurant ideas, but still lots of room for new places. Naver Map by Naver Corp. Unfortunately, iPhone and Google maps do not work well in Korea. Naver Map can help, but the interface is in Korean. However, it can still be useful to find where you are now relative to the subway or busses, even if you don’t read Hangeul. MilSpaceA by Take-a-Hop. The only one of these apps that’s not free, but it could save you money if it helps you schedule a Space-A military flight. Seoul Bus 3 – Metropolitan Bus by Juwan Yoo. Helps you navigate the Seoul bus system. The interface is in English, but most of the bus stop names are in Korean. Subway Korea (Jihachul) by Broong, Inc. The most critical app. for finding your way around Seoul. Use this to navigate the subway system, plan a route, find train times, etc. 18 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 19 

# HISTORY OF UNITED STATES FORCES AT YONGSAN 

In 1910, after five years of occupation, the Japanese Empire annexed Ko-rea and immediately began a major building program to consolidate its politi-cal and military control over the country. It established the headquarters for the Imperial Japanese Army in Korea at Yongsan (Dragon Mountain) shortly after annexation. The Japanese compound included the areas known today as Yongsan Main and South Posts, Camps Coiner and Kim, Hannam Village, the Republic of Korea (ROK) Ministry of National Defense, and the ROK War Museum. During its occupation from 1905-1945, the Japanese garrisoned the post with an infantry division headquarters, at least two infantry regiments, and a cavalry unit. In addition, they located the colonial administrative and governmental headquarters on South Post. When World War II ended in 1945, the U.S. government sent Lt. Gen. Hodge’s XXIV Corps to Korea to accept the surrender of Japanese forces south of the 38th Parallel. Meanwhile, Soviet forces moved into the area north of the parallel. In September 1945, the U.S. 7th Infantry Division established its 

> Eighth United States Army – Photo by Marisa Johnson

bers, received scholarships for the school year 2014-2015 ranging from $500-$5,000 USD. The organizations and individuals who received these funds were the direct beneficiaries of the hard work of the volunteers of the AFSC and the staff and volunteers of the forgone Chosun Gift Shop. Check out website at www.AFSCYongsan.org or our Facebook page, Ameri-can Forces’ Spouses’ Club (Korea) to find out more about what the AFSC has to offer and to start receiving updates for the monthly events we offer. Be sure to enquire about our AFSC Annual Auction Gala. Better yet, become a member, join our cause, receive our monthly newsletter the “Chosun Chatter,” partake at our monthly memorable themed luncheons. This coming year the AFSC 2014-2015 luncheon themes include; Homemade Holidays, A Fashion-able Mystery, A World of Thanks, The Mad Hatter’s Tea Party…and many more. 

Luncheon Dates for the 2014-2015 AFSC Year are: 

• September 16, 2014 • October 21, 2014 • November 18, 2014 • December 9, 2014 • January 13, 2015 • February 10, 2015 • March 10, 2015 • April 14, 2015 • May 12, 2015 20 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 21 

huts to a modern installation. Today, Yongsan garrison consists of 630 acres and has over 4,000 military personnel assigned to its headquarters and support agencies. The major ten-ant organizations on Yongsan are the UNC/CFC/USFK Headquarters, 8th U.S. Army Headquarters, U.S. Navy Forces Korea, U.S. Marine Forces Korea, 501st Military Intelligence Brigade Headquarters, 1st Signal Brigade Headquarters, the 65th Medical Brigade, the Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital, and the Joint U.S. Military Advisory Group Korea (JUSMAGK). Approximately 1,200 U.S. and 6,000 Korean civilian employees augment the U.S. Military. In ad-dition, more than 1,000 KATUSA (Korean Augmentation to the U. S. Army) Sol-diers serve on post. Some 7,000 military and civilian employee family members reside on South Post or on the local economy in neighborhoods adjacent to the compound. Although the Headquarters for the 2nd Infantry Division (2ID) is north of Seoul, many 2ID family members live in Seoul or on USAG-Yongsan. The 2ID Combat Aviation Brigade resides at USAG-Humphreys, but has an aviation battalion as-signed to K-16. Yongsan Garrison and the city of Seoul have come a long way since 1965, when the USS Breckenridge, one of many U.S. Military troop ships crossing the Pacific Ocean, first made landfall at Incheon. The 400 soldiers on that ship probably could have used a copy of The Soul Survivor, but their arrival pre-dated the first publication of this book by 21 years. Although today’s military families arrive at Incheon Airport via high tech jetliners, those early soldiers came by ship and were transported north by bus or rail to Camp Casey or Camp Howze. Other camps were spread from Busan (then Pusan), throughout South Korea, as well as Seoul, and all the way north to the DMZ. Some lucky soldiers were even assigned to Yongsan Garrison. In the 1960s very few civilians were assigned to Korea, but those who came here often reported to Yongsan. Military families lived on the South Post, while civilians found homes out in town. Most single soldiers were living in quonset huts on post – Camp Coiner was covered with these huts for billeting as well as offices. A few of these huts remain today. Many aspects of family life on post have changed since those early days. Hannam Village, Itaewon Acres, and other housing areas didn’t exist, nor did the various restaurants on South Post. The Seoul American High School was a small, single-story building located where Army Community Services stands today. Although families could use the Seoul Military Hospital on South Post, the 121st Evacuation Hospital was located at ASCOM/Camp Market in Bupyung headquarters at Yongsan. It helped provide administration, order, and security of the southern zone, pending establishment of a single government for the entire peninsula; however, a unified Korea proved impossible as the Soviets sealed the border at the 38th Parallel and created a communist North Korean state. All U.S. forces, with the exception of the Korean Military Advisory Group (KMAG), departed Korea in mid-1949. At the request of the ROK government, the U.S. Military formed the KMAG at Yongsan to develop and train ROK secu-rity forces. These security forces were first organized into police constabularies and later became the foundation of the ROK Army. The North Korean invasion that began on 25 June 1950 turned Korea into a battlefield. Seoul changed hands four times between the Communist and the United Nations forces. The opposing armies inflicted substantial damage on the city and garrison. In 1952, U.S. forces reestablished headquarters at Yongsan and began restoring the post. The Eighth U.S. Army moved its head-quarters from Seoul National University (present day Seoul National University Medical School) to Yongsan on 15 September 1953. On 1 July 1957, the United Nations Command (UNC) headquarters moved from Tokyo to Seoul in conjunction with an overall reorganization of U.S. Mili-tary forces and command structures in the Pacific. The U.S. Secretary of De-fense, the Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the ROK Minister of National Defense created the Combined Forces Command (CFC) in 1977; and was formally activated on 7 November 1978. This two-nation command, head-ed by a U.S. Four-Star General, who also serves as the Commander of United Nations Command, USFK, and the senior U.S. Army officer in Korea, will serve as the war fighting headquarters in the event of any future hostilities between the two Koreas. As the state of “No war, No peace,” embodied in the Armistice Agreement of 1953, stretched through the ensuing years, the garrison at Yongsan expand-ed its support facilities. Over the years the post went through three major building phases. From 1952 to 1955, the U.S. Army constructed many Quonset huts on Camp Coiner and other parts of the post for soldier billeting and offic-es. Through the 1960s to about 1972, the Army started replacing the Quonset huts with multi-story, concrete & steel barracks, concrete mess halls, and gym-nasiums to improve soldier living conditions. The third period of construction started about 1977 and went on into the 1990s. Construction included: new troop facilities, family units, schools, the White House (Bldg. 2310), and the Dragon Hill Lodge. Slowly, Yongsan changed from rows of olive drab Quonset 22 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 23 

installations still stand. The Seoul Survivor aims to assist the military and family members of those installations in enhancing their knowledge of Korea, their comfort in Seoul, and their enjoyment of this tour in “The Land of the Morning Calm.” 

Information in this section was provided with the help of a former USAGY Area II Historian, John Nowell, an American residing in Korea for the past 46 years, and the USFK Command History Office. For more information, please contact the Heritage Center located on South Post, Building 4260, at 723-5213. The Heritage Center has an excellent downloadable booklet on a walking tour of USAGY. 

until June 1971. Recreational and shopping facilities have evolved over the years. The Drag-on Hill Lodge wasn’t built until 1990 – tennis courts and officer billets previ-ously occupied that space. The Commissary (now Walker Center), which was once located near the current Fire Station was open only to military families and civilians above level GS12, or Command sponsored status until 1972. The National Museum of Korea didn’t exist in those days; instead, Yongsan Gar-rison boasted an 18-hole golf course. Official buildings on post have also migrated through the decades. The UN Command, USFK, and the 8th Army were combined into the current 8th Army headquarters building. The library, Exchange, and Post Office were all in dif-ferent locations. Where enlisted barracks once stood, the AAFES Four Seasons and Community Bank are present today. Two theaters occupied land next to the current USFK headquarters and predated the R&R Grill. Though many of the gates on Yongsan Garrison are now locked shut, in the early years these gates provided access to pedestrians and vehicles. Parking wasn’t a problem, because very few military and civilian personnel had per-sonal vehicles. In fact, few Koreans owned motorized vehicles of any kind! It’s hard to imagine in the crowded traffic of today’s Seoul. The changes on Yongsan Garrison only begin to scratch the surface of the dramatic differences that have reshaped the city of Seoul in the past fifty years. For example, the first tunnels through Namsan Mountain appeared in 1969. There were once only four bridges crossing the Han River – a landscape now teeming with dozens of bridges, parks, and buildings. Seoul’s massive sub-way began in 1974 with the opening of the Jungno Line #1; before that, people used streetcars, buses, taxies, or hopsungs (microbuses made from several 55 gallon metal barrels placed on a truck frame). Transportation was not nearly so comfortable or safe as it is today! In addition to the difficulties in transportation, navigation around Korea was made much more difficult by the lack of accurate maps of the country. The Korean government was concerned that detailed maps would find their way into enemy hands, and their caution may have helped thwart a 1968 assassina-tion attempt on the president. It has only been since 1980 that tourist maps have been available to the public! To date, the 28 editions of The Soul Survivor have helped military fami-lies in Seoul learn to navigate the beautiful and intriguing country that Korea has become. Seoul has evolved from a city of 3.2 million in 1966 to a thriving metropolis of 25 million people, yet Yongsan Garrison and many other U.S. 24 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 25 

journey may surprise you in new and wonderful ways. Soon after you arrive, you will realize the Korean people are very friendly. They will exert themselves to the utmost to understand you. Many Koreans, especially in Seoul, speak some English. At times though, communication can be a frustrating task. The key is to exercise patience, speak slowly (not loudly!) and express gratitude. Your reward will be their readiness to cooperate and support you. Korea’s history is an amazing mixture of events and trends. Against the backdrop of strong cultural uniformity that started to emerge in the seventh century and has continued up to the present day, we find a pattern of rich con-trasts. Buddhist pagodas stand side by side with Confucian Shrines, cycles of great commercial growth are set against downturns of financial decay and nu-merous foreign invasions are countered by attempts at territorial expansion. A land-owning aristocratic scholar class ruled over a rigid social structure, supported by less-respected merchants and agricultural peasants who toiled as tenant farmers. Within the Korean government, periods of factional strife and political coups contrast with long periods of stability. Learning about Ko-rea’s past helps put the present into true perspective. On a busy day in Seoul, we guarantee you’ll notice the following: • The industriousness of the people: The official work and school week is Monday through noon Saturday. The second and fourth Saturdays are not official work days. • Traffic: Everyone tries to “get there first.” The traffic in many parts of Korea is legendary and rivals the worst that New York, Paris, London, or Wash-ington D.C. has to offer. Rather than a methodical, legalized culture of driving, Korea’s driving habits have been described as currents in a vast river all flowing in the same general direction. • A myriad of aromas: Visitors quickly come to believe garlic must be the national food staple. It is used extensively in Korean dishes. Two very pop-ular dishes are Bulgogi (barbecued marinated beef) and kimch’i (a fermented vegetable dish with as many variations as there are Korean cooks). Once you acquire a taste for it, eating Korean-style can be inexpensive and delicious. • The clothing: Koreans are much more formal in their dress than most Westerners and take great pains with their appearance. As the culture becomes even more westernized, the number of Koreans who still wear a tra-ditional Korean dress called “Hanbok” (graceful, full-length garment in several pieces) is declining except on holidays or for formal occasions. • The Korean alphabet, Hangul: This phonetic alphabet, invented by King Sejong and a group of scholars in 1443, is actually straight forward but Most Americans have little or no knowledge of Korea’s history and culture, and much of what they do know may be an erroneous impression garnered from the news media or old newsreel footage from the Korean War. In reality, the Republic of Korea is a vibrant, vital country of more than 50 million people, all striving to keep up in this fast-paced, modern society. Koreans have be-come world travelers, world-class economic competitors, and they are highly-regarded participants in world affairs. Underpinning all their vast economic and commercial accomplishments over the last twenty-five years though, lays the Korean people’s spiritual wealth, their traditional respect for elders, their strong belief in community, their love of nature, and their sense of national pride. Many newcomers find South Korea to be an exotic place. Keeping an open mind and being willing to experience and appreciate cultural differences will make your tour of duty here one of the most memorable of your military ca-

reer. 

Embark on your Korean experience with a sense of adventure and your 

# KOREA 

> The Han River and Building 63 – Photo by Marisa Johnson

## 26 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 27 

prised of mountains and uplands. Mount Hallasan (6,396 feet/1,950 meters) on Jeju Island is the tallest mountain. The longest rivers are the Nakdonggang River, the Kum River, and the Han River, which flows through Seoul. 

Area: 8,452 square miles/ 99,237 sq. km (about the size of Indiana). 

Climate: Long, cold winters and short, hot, humid summers with late mon-soon rains and flooding. Temperatures in January average 21°F to 35°F. (How-ever, 2009 & 2010 have had several weeks of below 20°F temps.) In July the averages are 71°F to 82°F. The annual rainfall varies from year to year but usu-ally averages more than 39 inches or 100 centimeters. Of that total, two-thirds of the precipitation falls between June and September. 

President: Park Geun-hye, the first female president of South Korea 

Capital City: Seoul (Estimated population of 10 million) 

Monetary Unit: Won 

Population: Approximately 51 Million (2013) 

Largest Cities: Seoul, Busan, Daegu, and Incheon 

Religions: no affiliation 46%, Christian 26%, Buddhist 26%, Confucianism 1% 

Literacy Rate: Over 98% (one of the highest in the world) 

Industry: South Korea’s workforce is 20 million strong. 52% of the labor force work in the service industry with 27% in mining and manufacturing. Exports include: agricultural products, electronics, machinery, textiles, steel along with metal and chemical products. Major products: clothing, textiles, processed foods, chemicals, and electronics. 

Natural Resources: Iron, copper ore, tungsten, and graphite 

National Bird: Magpie (traditionally said to bring good news) 

National Flower: Mugunghwa (Rose of Sharon) 

## KOREAN NATIONAL AND RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS January 1 (New Year’s Day): The first day of the New Year is celebrated with friends, coworkers and families. The most popular event is the bell-ring-ing ceremony at Bosingak in Jongno, literally “bell street,” Seoul on December 31st. The bell-ringing event on New Year’s Eve draws throngs of people from all over Seoul. The bell ringing is preceded by various events like congratula-tory performances by Korean stars. After that, all citizens participate in the countdown to the New Year. Then, as the New Year starts, celebrities, civil representatives, and senior members from various fields ring the bell 33 times in celebration of a good year. On New Year’s Day, it is common for Koreans to travel to famous sunrise spots in order to make New Year’s wishes as they greet the first sunrise. The sun first rises in the East Sea off the coast of Korea often intimidating to foreigners. The 1988 Olympics in Seoul encouraged the Koreans to print most major road and street signs in both Hangul and English. • The jostling crowds: Space is precious in Seoul. Koreans are accus-tomed to tight crowds, and they assume everyone else is too. Therefore, push-ing and shoving without apology is normal and not to be taken personally. • The markets: Nowhere in the world, Hong Kong included, are there markets and shopping areas to rival those of Seoul. Itaewon, located just out-side Yongsan Garrison, is probably the most famous of the Korean shopping meccas. The true Korean markets, however, are not as Western in style as Itae-won. In the traditional markets like Dongdaemun (East Gate) and Namdaemun (South Gate), products are grouped according to type. Astonishingly you will encounter rows and rows of leather jacket vendors in one place, miles of fabric in another, and thousands of electronic gadgets in another. The range is truly amazing! See Markets under the Shopping section for more information. As with any other prospective assignment, try to visit or correspond with others who have been stationed here before you come. Stay open minded, though, to form your own opinions. While you are here, take every opportu-nity to venture off Yongsan and explore this beautiful, mountainous country. Strike up conversations with the Korean people, taste the delicious and some-times unusual food and enjoy the cultural arts. It will definitely be an experi-ence you will never forget. 

## FACTS ABOUT SOUTH KOREA History: Korea is said to have been founded about 4,300 years ago. Its re-corded history dates back to 300 B.C. The Republic of Korea (South Korea) was established in 1948. 

Language: The Korean written language is referred to as Hangul; the spo-ken language is simply called Korean (Hanguk-mal). 

Geography: Korea is a peninsula thrusting from the northeast Asian main-land in a southerly direction for about 625 miles or 1,000 kilometers. The pen-insula, contiguous to the two continental powers of China and Russia to the north and nearby oceanic Japan to the south, functioned for a long time as a land bridge through which continental culture was transmitted to Japan. Its peninsula location has both the advantage of easy access to adjacent cultures and the disadvantage of becoming the target of aggressive neighbors. South Korea shares a land boundary with North Korea of about 150 miles or 238 kilometers. 

Topography: Approximately 70 percent of South Korea’s land area is com-28 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 29 

and businesses may be closed. 

May 5 (Children’s Day): This day is celebrated with various programs for children who spend the day enjoying themselves with their parents. 

June 6 (Memorial Day): On this day, the nation pays tribute to the soldiers and civilians who have given their lives for their country. At 10 a.m., a siren sounds, calling for a one-minute silent tribute. Memorial services are held at the National Cemetery in Seoul. 

August 15 (Liberation Day): On this day in 1945, Korea was liberated from Japan after 36 years of colonial rule. It also marks the 1948 establishment of the government of the Republic of Korea. 

Harvest Full Moon (Korean Thanksgiving Day known as Chuseok): It is celebrated on the fifteenth day of the eighth month by the lunar calendar (September/October). Chuseok is Korea’s most important national holiday. On the morning of Chuseok Day, Songpyeon, a type of Korean rice cake, and food prepared with the year’s fresh harvest are set out to give thanks to ancestors through Charye, which is an ancestor memorial service. Formal Charye ser-vices are held twice a year: during Seollal (Lunar New Year’s Day) and Chuseok. The difference between the two services is that during Seollal the major rep-resentative food is white Tteokguk, a rice cake soup, while during Chuseok the major representative food is freshly harvested rice. People visit family tombs and present food offerings to their ancestors. Most Koreans will return to their hometowns during this holiday, so traffic is unusually heavy and travel times double. 

October 3 (National Foundation Day): This day commemorates the tradi-tional founding of the Korean nation in 2333 B.C. by the legendary god- king Dangun. A simple ceremony is held at an altar on top of Mt. Manisan in Gang-hwado Province. The altar is said to have been erected by Dangun to offer thanks to his father and grandfather in heaven. 

December 25 (Christmas Day): Celebrated as a national holiday in Korea as in many other countries. It is a religious holiday for Christian families (over twenty-five percent of Korean population), while it remains more of a party for younger generations and couples rather than family gatherings or gift giving. However, families with little children observe Christmas the same as American families; believing in Santa and Christmas decorations. Christmas Trees in Ko-rean homes are small and most of them are artificial: while Christmas cakes are colorful and gaudy, and very popular and common. 

so many New Year events are organized on the East Coast. 

Lunar New Year (Chinese New Year’s Day): Seollal (Lunar New Year in Ko-rean language) is one of the most celebrated national holidays in Korea, next to celebrating Chuseok (Korean Thanksgiving Day). It is celebrated in a similar way to January 1, but on a grander scale. This three-day holiday is celebrated the day before the first day of the first month, on the day of, and the day after the first day of the month according to the lunar calendar. Traditional Con-fucian families perform ceremonies to commemorate their ancestors. Most notably, the “bowing to their ancestors” is commonly practiced and is very much a part of Confucian tradition. It is a matter of religion for them as well. Confucianism is melted in Korean culture much like Saint Patrick’s Day is in America, it doesn’t really matter whether you are Irish or not. However, many of Korean Christians and non-Confucian families don’t bow to their ancestors, due to their faith and practice. Family members rise early and put on their best clothes. Following the rite and for the remainder of the time, everyone eats the ritual food of Tteokguk, rice cake soup. Tteokguk is the main food of Seollal and eating it is believed to add a year to one’s age. Along with eating Tteokguk, there is much singing and more traditional food is served. Some examples of traditional foods include: Kimch’i, rice, and Bulgogi (a Korean seasoned fla-vored beef dish) to name a few. Holiday celebrations are an important part of family life in Korea. All celebrations, no matter how large, center on the home. Women can spend hours preparing the traditional dishes; sometimes a fam-ily’s reputation depends on the amount and the quality of the food. After the holiday meal the younger members bow to their parents and grandparents as a reaffirmation of family ties, receive gifts of money and words of advice for the New Year. 

March 1 (Independence Movement Day): Koreans observe the anniversa-ry of the March 1, 1919, Independence Movement against the Japanese Occu-pation. This day was officially designated as a public holiday to commemorate men and women who died during the Independence Movement. The March first Independent Movement was highly influenced by U.S. President Wood-row’s Declaration of the Principle of Self Determination at the Paris Peace Con-ference in January 1919. 

Buddha’s Birthday: Celebrated on the eighth day of the fourth month of the lunar calendar. Solemn rituals are performed at Buddhist temples, and the day’s festivities culminate with a “lotus lantern” parade. The Sunday before Buddha’s birthday these lanterns are lit and carried in parades in the evening. 

May 1 (Labor Day): This is not a government holiday, however many banks 30 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 31 

dio and video cassettes for circulation. The AAFES Main Post Exchange carries similar products as well as useful phrase books and Korean language computer programs. A wonderful book for simply learning to read the alphabet is, Yes, You Can Learn Korean Language Structure in 40 Minutes. Additionally there are many apps available for your cell phone to help you when you are out and about and need language assistance and most taxis offer free interpreters on the phone if you need assistance in communicating. English has been taught in Korean schools starting in the first grade since 1998. In the past, English was taught in Korean schools beginning in the sev-enth grade with an emphasis on grammar instead of speaking. The mainly test-ing- oriented educational system means that many Koreans have memorized a lot of English grammar and vocabulary, but feel quite shy about their conver-sational skills. When you talk to Koreans in English, speak slowly and simply to increase your chances of being understood. 

USEFUL KOREAN PHRASES 

The following Korean phrases may assist you during your tour in Korea. They are simple conversational words and phrases designed for newcomers. Koreans will be impressed you have made the effort to learn even a little of their language. The key is not being afraid to try and having the ability to laugh at yourself. 

GREETINGS        

> Good morning Ahn-nyong ha-say-yo Good afternoon Ahn-nyong ha-say-yo Good evening Ahn-nyong ha-say-yo Hello (on the telephone) Yo-bo-say-yo May I have Your name? Ee-ru-mee moo ot shim nee ka? I’m glad to meet you Mahn-nah-suh bahn-gah-wuh-yo Good-bye (by Host) Ahn-nyong-hee kah-say-yo

SHOPPING       

> How much does it cost? Ol-mah yeh-yo? Do you have_______? _______it-suh yo? Show me another one Darun-gut johm bo-yuh-ju-say-yo It is expensive Bee-sah-yo Can you reduce the price? Chom sah-keh-heh ju-say-yo I’ll take this Egut ju-say-yo

## THE KOREAN SPOKEN AND WRITTEN LANGUAGE 

The Korean language has evolved throughout the centuries. No one knows how long it has been spoken and, despite the geographical closeness of China and Japan, Korean is linguistically distinct from Chinese and Japanese. Chinese characters were used to write Korean until the 15th century. How-ever, since they were hard to learn and were very different from the Korean spoken language, most people remained illiterate. In 1446, after many years of study and testing by the ruler, King Sejong and his scholars introduced a unique Korean alphabet. It was devised on a purely phonetic basis and consisted of 28 characters. These were arranged in syllable units or blocks and not into linear words. This meant the syllables could be written horizontally or vertically on a page. Over time from this original alphabet, Hangul, the modern alphabet, has evolved. It has 24 characters and follows the Western convention of writing from left to right. Chinese characters are rarely used today in conjunction with the Korean alphabet, especially in newspapers, as it is possible to communi-cate fluently without using them. During your tour in Korea, you will find ample opportunity to study the Korean language. Many bases have language classes that are offered without charge during the duty day or after duty hours. Formal classes are also of-fered on post; check with ACS for details (Also see the Language section in this book). The post libraries offer many language-learning books, along with au-32 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 33 

Itaewon shopping area  Itaewon she-jahng South Gate Market  Nam-dae-moon she-jahng East Gate Market  Dong-dae-mun she-jahng 

WHEN TRAVELING 

Give me one ticket to ____ ____hahn-jahng ju-say-yo Western-style room  Cheem-dae bahng Toilet  Hwa-jahng-shill Parking lot  Ju-cha-jahng Reservation  Yay-yahk 

DAYS OF THE WEEK 

Monday  Wol-yo-il Tuesday  Hwa-yo-il Wednesday  Soo-yo-il Thursday  Mok-yo-il Friday  Kum-yo-il Saturday  To-yo-il Sunday  Il-yo-il 

MONTHS OF THE YEAR 

January Il-wahl  July Cheel-wahl February  Ee-wahl  August  Pahl-wahl March  Sahm-wahl  September Guu-wahl April  Sah-wahl  October  She-wahl May  Oh-wahl November June  Yu-wahl December  Shib-ee-wahl 

KOREAN NUMBERS 

Chinese numbers are often used when counting sequentially. This includes money, telephone numbers, dates, mileage, etc. When shopping, listen for the Chinese numbers, particularly for the endings which mean hundred, thousand and ten thousand. Notice that Korean numbers go as far as 99. Beyond 100, Chinese numbers are used. When counting how many people, use Korean It’s too big  Noh-moo kuh-yo It’s too little  Jjug-uh-yo 

AT THE RESTAURANT 

It is very delicious  Ah-ju mah-sheet-so-yo It is hot (spicy)  Mae-wo-yo I would like a glass of cold water  Mool ju-say-yo I would like a bottle of beer  Mack-ju hahn-byong ju say yo Please give me _______  _______ju-say-yo An English menu  Yong-oh menu The bill  Keh-sahn-suh 

CONVERSATION 

Do you speak English?  Young-oh hahm-nee-ka? Where is _______?  _______o-dee itsum nee-ka? The police station  Kyong-chal-suh The restroom  Hwa-Jahng-shil Yes  Yeh (or Nay) No  Ah-ni-yo Thank you  Kam-sah ham-nee-dah You are welcome  Chon-manh-neh-yo I am sorry  Mee-ahn hahm-nee-dah Come here  Ee-ree o-say-yo Please help me  Jom, dough-wah ju-say-yo Call a policeman (an M.P.)  Kyung-chal (huhn-byung) -For me please -bul-luh ju-say-yo Call this number for me, please?  Ee bon-ho-ro jon-hwa jom, heh-ju-say-yo 

TAKING A CAB 

Please take me to the nearest U.S.  Kah-kah-woon mee-goon -Military installation  -boo-dae-ka ju say yo Stop here  Yo-gee se-wo ju-say-yo What is this place called?  Yo-gee-gah-aw-deem-nee-ka? How much is the fare?  Ol-mah eem-nee-ka? Please take me to _____  ____ kab-she-dah 34 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 35 

# KOREAN CULTURE AND CUSTOMS 

South Korea’s population shares a common ethnic and cultural heritage. Intense feelings of nationalism, so evident in athletic events like the 1988 Olympic Games held in Seoul and the World Cup soccer games of 2002, reveal a sense of pride concerning South Korea’s place in the world. More than West-ern people, South Korean individuals tend to view themselves as a tightly knit national community with a common destiny. This chapter contains sections on Korean personality traits, factors that have contributed to making them the way they are, and discussions of important traditions, cultural attitudes, and etiquette. Your awareness of these factors will greatly reward you as you meet and interact with new Korean friends. 

The Seoul Survivor Committee is grateful to Mr. Young K. Chang, instructor at the Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center, Presidio of Mon-terey, California, from whose publication, Cultural Orientation (Korean), much of this chapter is extracted. 

## KOREAN NON-VERBAL BEHAVIOR AND ETIQUETTE 

Customs and attitudes are different in Asia from those of Western coun-tries. Korea has its own set of courtesies. If you take the time to learn and observe them, the rewards are significant. The traditional bow has given way to the handshake, but friendly backslaps or arm squeezing is considered rude here. Koreans meeting for the first time introduce themselves only at the invita-tion of a third party. The formal ritual of introduction is similar to this: The person who knows everyone in the group invites his friends to introduce them-selves. One says, “I am seeing you for the first time.” The other repeats the same sentence, and the elder one suggests that they introduce themselves. The introductions and formal bows are followed by an exchange of calling/ business cards. These cards are very important in Korea. They give an oppor-tunity for each person to discover the other’s position without rudely inquir-ing about them. Cards also do away with the need of asking someone’s name twice. When someone presents you with a business card, take a moment to read it before putting it away as a sign of respect. numbers. Sometimes in the smaller restaurants the prices will be written in the Chinese figures, usually from top to bottom. The following chart offers a brief glimpse of some of the differences in the two systems: NUMBER  CHINESE  KOREAN 1 il  hah-na 2 Ee  dool 3 sahm  set 4 sah  net 5 oh  tah-sot 6 ruk  yo-sot 7 chil  eel-gop 8 pahl  yo-dol 9 goo  ah-ope 10  ship  yol 20  ee-ship  sue-mool 30 sahm-ship  so-run 40  sah-ship  ma-hun 50  o-ship  She’en 60  rook-ship  yeh-soon 70  chil-ship  ee-run 80  pahl-ship  yo-dun 90  koo-ship  ah-hun 100  baek  baek 200  ee-baek  ee-baek 300  sahm-baek  sahm-baek 1,000  chon  chon 2,000  ee-chon  ee-chon 10,000  mahn  mahn 100,000  ship-mahn  ship-mahn 36 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 37 

• Try to wear conservative clothes. • Ask your Korean guest more than once to help himself to more food and drink. • See your guest off at the gate, and stay there until your guest is gone. • “Yes” is often used simply to acknowledge what is said by one’s counter-part; it does not necessarily mean one is in agreement or understanding. • Do not suggest splitting the bill each person/family should alternate pay-ing. Just remember when it is your turn to pay. • You may often see two male friends or two female friends walking affec-tionately arm-in-arm. This is in no way an indication of their sexual preference. • Remember Koreans will want to touch and hold your children when you are out together (especially blondes and redheads). Koreans love children and in this culture, children are treated as “everyone’s treasure” to cherish and protect. If your children are uncomfortable with this, then remove yourselves from the situation as politely as possible. A simple “No, thank you” usually suffices. The proper use of names in Korea is also important. A person’s name is considered his or her personal property. Koreans regard their name with rever-ence. The persistent wave of Westernization has accustomed Koreans to being addressed by their family name, but only intimate friends and family greet each other on a first-name basis. Koreans prefer titles rather than names. For example, you would call the company president “Sa-jang-nim” or someone with a Ph.D. “Bak-sa.” Teacher or “Sun-saeng-nim” is an acceptable title for anyone. Try to remember that no matter how “Western” many Koreans may appear on the surface, their thinking is still governed by traditions, which are based on a culture several thousands of years old. The following list covers some important traditions relating to etiquette: • Avoid eye contact. Looking into an acquaintance’s eyes was generally considered not polite. This is not necessarily true today. • Use your right hand when performing tasks such as presenting gifts, pay-ing a bill, or pouring a drink. Your left hand should loosely cup your forearm. The closer your left hand is to your wrist the less respect that is being given while your left hand cupping your forearm near your elbow would show great-er respect. Using the left hand for these tasks is considered very impolite, but many Koreans do understand that Western culture is different. • Do not point the index finger toward a person or gesture with your foot, it is considered insulting. You may gesture with your full hand, palm upward. • Do not write someone’s name in red ink, e.g., endorse checks, letters, etc. (a name written in red means death). • If invited to dine at someone’s home, bring a gift. When presenting the gift, use the etiquette mentioned above. • Take your shoes off when entering a Korean house or restaurant with low tables. • Do not start eating before your guest of honor or senior. • Do not say, “I don’t drink” when offered unwanted alcoholic beverages. It is more polite to say, “I’m not feeling very well today.,” “I am a designated driver.,” or “I’m on medication.” • Karaoke is very big in Korea. This takes place in a private room at a Nore-bang (karaoke bar). Sing one of your favorite songs when asked. • Do not eat or drink without offering your food or beverage to your col-leagues. • Do not pour your own drink; pour for someone and let him reciprocate. 38 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 39 

preparing the traditional dishes; sometimes a family’s reputation depends on the amount and quality of the food. At an elegant Korean dinner, the first course might be Ku-jol-p’an (nine compartments dish). It is somewhat similar to a French hors d’oeuvre tray. The cooked meat and vegetables are arranged on a large platter with a mound of pancakes in the center. Homemakers in Korea, like many others in advanced nations, usually have little time to prepare these traditional foods and are well acquainted with fro-zen fare, microwave lunches, and other high tech cooking conveniences. Fast food restaurants, Chinese takeout/delivery (speedily brought on the back of a motor scooter with a heated box strapped to the back) and food stalls for the passerby are very popular for the busy Korean housewife. The visitor to Korea will find native food offered in small restaurants, in the large hotels, and in gourmet sections of the large department stores, such as Lotte or Shinsegae. “TRY IT, you’ll enjoy it!” In fact, Korean supermarkets usually have sample stations scattered throughout, where they will encourage everyone to try their wares. The following is an alphabetical list of traditional foods and beverages that are served in many Korean restaurants: • 밥 Bap - Rice. • 비빔밥 Bibimbap - (mixed rice) This Chonju specialty is a bowl of veg-etables, rice, and chili paste; topped with a soft fried egg. • 불고기 Bulgogi - Thin strips of beef, marinated in sesame oil, soy sauce, sugar, and garlic, then grilled at your table. • 빈대떡 Bin-de-ddok - Vegetables, pork and spices cooked in batter; a North Korean pancake. • 볶음밥 Bokkumbap - Korean fried rice • 보리차 Boricha (barley water) - In lieu of tea, cups of this tepid drink are brought to the table as soon as you are seated in a Korean restaurant. • 불갈비 Bul Kalbi - Literally roasted short ribs. Marinated the similar to Bulgogi. • 차 Cha - Tea. • 작설차 Chaksol Cha (Solluk Cha) - Different kinds of Nock-cha, Korean green tea. • 잡채 Chapchae - clear noodles, generally mixed with vegetables and soy based dressing. May be served hot or cold. • 사이다 Cider - A local bottled soft drink, similar to 7-Up. Chilsung Cider is a popular brand, served in a green glass bottle. • 돼지갈비 Daeji Galbi - Pork short ribs marinated and cooked over hot 

## TRADITIONAL KOREAN MEALS 

Either plain or cooked with other grains, rice (Bap) is the main dish at most Korean meals. Rice is accompanied by a variety of side dishes. Favorite side dishes include bean paste soup, roasted beef and fish, as well as steamed and seasoned vegetables. Soy sauce, soybean paste, red pepper paste, ginger root, sesame oil and sesame seeds are other seasonings, which are essential to Ko-rean food. Kimch’i, a dish of highly seasoned pickled cabbage or turnip, is served at most every meal. Koreans enjoy beef dishes, with Bulgogi being one of the most popular. Another popular dish Daeji Galbi (known as “Korean barbe-cue” or “beef and leaf”) consists of thin slices of pork ribs marinated and then cooked on a grill over hot charcoal. The marinating sauce is made of soy sauce, sesame seed oil, garlic and other seasonings. The traditional Korean homemaker believes that much of her family’s hap-piness depends on her culinary expertise. She often begins her day by pre-paring a substantial breakfast of hearty soup, meat or fish, steamed rice and kimch’i. A light lunch follows which is similar to the breakfast fare. A generous evening meal is favored, consisting of up to 15 or 20 dishes for special occa-sions. Food is usually eaten with a pair of chopsticks and a large spoon. Holiday celebrations are an important part of family life in Korea. All cel-ebrations, no matter how large, center on the home. Women can spend hours 

> Photo by Mary Soergel

## 40 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 41 

myon are made with buckwheat, potatoes, or mung beans. • 냉면 Nang Myon - Cold noodles that are 70% buckwheat and served in a dish of cold water to which you may add a dollop of chili paste. This is consid-ered a perfect complement at the end of a bulgogi meal. • 사케 Sake - Called chonjongg in Korea, this is traditional Japanese rice wine served in tiny cups. • 삼겹살 Sam Gyeop Sal - Thick slices of pork belly meat similar to uncured bacon, grilled and often dipped into a spicy pepper paste. • 삼계탕 Sam-kye tang - Ginseng chicken soup. A summer specialty, the chicken is boiled with a piece of the medicinal root, jujubeas and is stuffed with glutinous rice. • 참깨 Sesame - A herb frequently used in Korean cooking. Kae is Korean sesame. The leaves are added to soup, the seeds to vegetables and meat mari-nades, and the oil for flavoring in cooking. • 설렁탕 Seolleongtang - Beef soup served with rice. • 신선로 Shinselo - A casserole once served only to royalty. Fried eggs, fish, meat, and vegetables are cut into strips and simmered in broth in the distinc-tive charcoal brazier. • 소주 Soju - distilled beverage native to Korea and traditionally made from 

rice. 

• 송편 Songpyon - Chusok half-moon shaped rice cakes. • 간장 Soy Sauce - Made by fermenting the liquid of boiled soy beans, this is one of the most popular condiments in a Korean kitchen. • 스시 Sushi - Slices of raw fish dabbed with wasabi and curled over a clump of sticky rice. • 유자차 Uja Cha - Citron tea, usually served in winter. • 약주 Yakchu - Can mean any kind of clear liquor, a respectable word for liquor. For recipes, try the AAFES cookbook section or the main library. There are many good Korean cookbooks on the market. Korean food gives us a glimpse into the Korean Culture. Certain foods are associated with festivities as well as the seasons. ACS offers great classes. Take advantage of the Korean Food Discovery class. The class gives a general overview of what dishes consist of as well as a “kid meter” – what may or may not appeal to children. The class includes food tasting and lunch. Call the ACS at 738-7505 to sign up for the Korean Discovery class. Enjoy! charcoal • 닭갈비 Dakagalbi - Broiled spicy chicken and vegetables. • 떡 Ddok - Rice cake. • 떡국 Ddokguk - Rice cake soup traditionally served on the Lunar New 

Year. 

• 두부 Dooboo - Bean curd called tofu by the Japanese and dofu by the Chinese, it is the compressed white liquid squeezed from cooked soy beans. • 돌솥비빔밥 Dolsot bibimbap - Steamed rice mixed vegetable and egg (sometimes beef) with chili paste in a hot stone pot • 김 Ghim - Paper-thin sheets of salted laver seaweed. • 김밥 Ghimbap - This popular food consists of sticky rice rolled with as-sorted vegetables, egg, and meats into a sheet of seaweed, and sliced into bite-sized pieces. It’s known as Korean Fast Food or the Korean MRE. • 군만두 Goon Mandu - Fried Mandu. A perfect hors d’oeuvre when served with a soy sauce. Yaki Mandu is the Japanese term. • 인삼 In Sam - Ginseng. A root long prized for its medicinal properties, it is also used in cooking. 백삼 Paeksam is white ginseng; 홍삼 Hongsam is red ginseng. • 인삼차 In Sam Cha - Ginseng tea. • 갈비 Kalbi - Pork or beef short ribs. (Kalbi Jhip - A Kalbi restaurant.) • 갈비탕 Kalbi Tang - Kalbi soup, the least expensive way to eat Kalbi. • 김치 Kimch’i - Cabbage, radishes or other vegetables pickled with garlic, chili pepper and ginger, then fermented in huge jars buried in the ground. NO Korean meal is complete without it! • 김치찌개 Kimch’i jjigae - Kimch’i stew • 구절판 Ku-jol-pan (“Nine treasures”) - Strips of egg and vegetables are served in a compartmented dish with thin crepes in which you wrap the other eight treasures. • 찐만두 Jjin Mandu - The Korean equivalent of Chinese won ton, made of minced pork or beef and vegetables wrapped in thin pastry crescents, steamed and served with soy sauce. • 막걸리 Makkolli - Rice wine, the drink traditional to farmers. • 맥주 Maek-ju - Beer. • 무우 Moo - The large white Japanese daikon radish used in summer kimch’i. • 물 Mul - Water. • 면 Myon - Noodles, sometimes thin and white if made from flour. Other 42 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 43 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

hicles in A-Z). Most families are authorized to ship one vehicle. Please keep in mind that a motorcycle counts as personal property and NOT a vehicle. If your vehicle is financed, you will need permission from the lender to ship your ve-hicle overseas (contact your lender for specifics). If you are leaving a vehicle in the U.S., consider providing a special POA to the person keeping the vehicle or make sure that they are authorized to speak on your behalf with your lender and/or insurance company. Contact your insurance provider to find out their requirements and take care of these issues early. Insurance is available in Ko-rea through USAA, GEICO and CIGNA. 

Computers and Electronics: Check with the manufacturer of your comput-er or other electronic devices to ensure that you will be able to get parts and service. Know that technology changes in the blink of an eye and many times a newer, better product is also cheaper. The Korean Electronics market is close to USAG-Yongsan and might become your new “best friend.” 

Driver’s License: Make sure that your U.S. driver’s license is current and will remain current for your entire tour in Korea (and a few months beyond). Most Departments of Motor Vehicles will allow you to renew your license at any time, so it is wise to do this before you leave the U.S. Within the first thirty days of your arrival, you will need to obtain a United States Forces Korea (USFK) license to drive on post or anywhere in Korea. Check at ACS for more information. 

International Driver’s License: If you plan on extensive travel in Asia (Ja-pan, Malaysia, Indonesia, etc.,) we strongly suggest you visit your local AAA of-fice to obtain an international driver’s license. International licenses are avail-able in Korea, but it is easier to obtain one before you arrive. 

Employment Records: Family members wishing to work in Korea should hand carry proof of previous employment, such as official personnel records, letters of recommendation, pay stubs, etc. Also, bring copies of any diplomas and transcripts and a copy of your marriage license to assist in qualifying for Military Spouse Preference. Family members wishing to work on the Korean economy, for instance as an English teacher, should bring their original diplo-mas. Copies of diplomas are not sufficient for the required E-2 visa. Some em-ployers and colleges require an official, sealed transcript with a signature or stamp along the seal line of the envelope. Also see Employment in A to Z. 

Eye Exam: If you wear contact lenses, particularly the soft or extended wear type, have your exam and purchase contacts before leaving the U.S.. The Optometry Clinic gives contact lens exams only for medical problems and ex-isting prescriptions that may need changes, so you should have your initial 

# PLANNING YOUR PCS WHAT TO DO AND WHEN TO DO IT 

Congratulations on your assignment to Korea! The Soul Survivor guide is here to assist with your transition. Take a trip to your Army Community Service (ACS), Air Force Family Service Center or Navy and Marine Family Service Center to sign up for an Overseas Move Class for Korea. If you and your family belong to a service branch other than the Army, remember to tell the person helping you that Yongsan Garrison (known as USAG Yongsan) is in Seoul, South Korea, and is an Army installation. In addition, be sure to look in your local bookstore or library and on the Inter-net for assistance. If you have not heard from a sponsor as your move draws near, take the ini-tiative and contact your gaining unit, either by email or telephone, and ask for any sponsorship information they can provide. A sponsor should be assigned automatically, but sometimes this is unintentionally overlooked. Korea is an assignment where a sponsor is necessary and can be a relocating family’s big-gest asset. Your sponsor can get your email and/or mailing address, assist with kennel reservations, check availability of quarters, provide you with Internet sites for learning more about relocation, as well as the bases and surrounding communities in Korea. 

## DETAILS, DETAILS, DETAILS! 

As we all know, moving involves many details, and a successful move re-quires careful planning. The following information is included to assist with your move to Korea. 

Power of Attorney: It is wise for all Service Members and their spouses to have a current Power of Attorney. Remote assignments, deployments and Noncombatant Evacuation Operations (NEO) requirements make a Power of Attorney an absolute necessity in Korea. Whether your family will be coming with you to Korea or remaining in the United States, it is a good idea to have a Power of Attorney prepared before leaving your current duty station. 

Automobile: There are several options available to service members and their families, but regulations vary. (See the sections – What to Bring and Ve-44 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 45 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

in-processing, you will need a second form of identification to gain access to base. A copy of your pinpoint orders can be used to gain access to any AAF-ES facility but you will not have access to the commissary until a ration card has been issued. For more information see Ration Cards, under YOUR FIRST THIRTY DAYS. A SOFA Stamp can only be issued to your DEROS date or the expiration date of your ID card whichever is first, so if your ID is expiring dur-ing your stay here in Korea, renew it prior to arrival or at the 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company (Building 4034, DSN 723-6527). 

Immunizations: The requirements on this can vary, so it is important that you contact your stateside medical facility for current information. (Preventa-tive Medicine is the best clinic to speak with.) It is important for this to be one of your first steps, because several of the immunizations may require a series of shots given over the course of a few weeks or months. It is important to get PPD testing done for every member of your family before coming to Ko-rea. This is required for school and youth activities enrollment, and must be updated yearly. Make sure the results are recorded in your yellow shot record card or in your digital military shot record. Refer to Immunizations in A to Z. For more information on immunizations recommended by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention visit the following website: www. cdc.gov/ travel/eastasia.htm. 

Insurance: Adequate automobile is required and it is recommended that you consider a personal property insurance policy as well. Check with your insurance company and make sure your renter’s and auto policies cover living abroad. Insurance in Korea is available through USAA, GEICO and CIGNA. Also, see Insurance in A to Z. 

Legal Documents: Make sure all necessary documents are up-to-date and copies are given to a trusted friend, relative, or attorney. Hand-carry original documents such as birth certificates, marriage licenses, and wills on the plane. One of the first things you will need to do after arrival is create a Noncomba-tant Evacuation (NEO) packet, and these documents will be required. Contact your unit’s NEO officer for more information regarding your NEO packet. 

Mail: Your sponsor or gaining unit should assign a mailing address so you can fill out change of address forms before you PCS. Most people stationed in USAG-Yongsan are required to receive personal mail through their workplace. The positive effect of this policy is that you will be able to obtain your perma-nent mailing address in Korea before leaving the U.S. since your address is not based upon your housing unit. Mail is not delivered to offices on weekends or holidays (United States or Korean). exam and prescription done in the U.S.. You can purchase lenses on the Korean economy at similar prices to optometry clinics in the Unites States, but you may find it easier to have a supply already with you. If you already order con-tacts online, be sure that your provider will ship to an APO address. Due to the pollution, many contact lens wearers find that they are unable to constantly wear their lenses here. Also see Medical in A To Z and Special Interest Shop-ping in Shopping. 

Furniture: Accompanied military members are either entitled to full furni-ture transport (depending on branch of the military and/or rank) or 50% fur-niture transport. If you are an accompanied military family living on post, you are authorized full furniture support from the Housing Office regardless of any household goods that you shipped. If you are an accompanied military family living off-post and are only entitled to bring partial household goods support, you are authorized furniture support from the Housing Office for your entire tour. If you are entitled to bring full household goods and live off post, you are only authorized furniture support for 6 months. Civilian families are only au-thorized six months furniture support as they are automatically entitled to full household goods shipments. It is important to note that if items are in storage and you then move to another overseas location, you may be entitled to have all your items shipped from long term storage to a new location. However, it is not possible to ship some items and leave some in storage and items in long term storage cannot be released until you have a final address in your new as-signment after Korea. 

Housing: Contact your sponsor or gaining unit to learn what housing is available and when you can expect quarters. Reservations can be made at the Dragon Hill Lodge (located on USAG-Yongsan). The website is: www.dragonhill-lodge.com or from CONUS dial: 011-822-7918-2222, FAX: 011-82-2-7901576. This is an international call so be aware of international rates. When making your reservations at the Dragon Hill Lodge, err on the side of caution and book for 60 days. The remaining nights on the reservation can be canceled without a cancellation fee when housing is secured. You should notify the front desk as soon as you have secured housing to avoid any issues. The Housing Office must approve stays longer than 10 days in the temporary quarters, but having the reservation for 60 days ensures that you and your family will not be “wait listed” or moved to an off-post hotel during your transition. 

Identification card: Your military identification card is your lifeline over-seas. You will need this to get on post and gain access to most facilities. Until your ID card is registered in DBIDs and a ration card is issued, typically during 46 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 47 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

members are required to have a passport with a proper Korean A-3 Visa and SOFA Stamp per individual. Contact your local personnel office for the proper forms and information. The government will provide a no-fee passport with the A-3 Visa (which allows for multiple entries into Korea) to all eligible com-mand-sponsored family members. The processing time is generally between 6 and 8 weeks, so begin the process as soon as orders for command-sponsor-ship are approved. Do not depart your losing installation without receiving the Government passport. All family members, civilians, and even newborns must have an A-3 Visa and SOFA Stamp within 90 days upon arrival. Each person in the family (to include the military member) is encouraged to have a United States Tourist passport as well. This allows you the option to travel in Asia while you are here. Family members may also choose to travel to Korea with their tourist passport instead of a no-fee government passport to avoid having two passports for travel. 

Pets: Many people choose to bring their pets to Korea. Be aware, how-ever, that pets are not allowed in the Burke Towers housing complexes. Ko-rean apartments generally do not provide areas for walking pets; however, Yongsan garrison does have a very nice dog park for use by all ID card holders. Check with the Housing Office to find out about the availability of housing and whether pets can be accommodated. Be sure and check with your airline about the cut-off dates for heat restrictions when shipping your pet. There are very specific rules and regulations on the importation of your pet and the size of pet carrier allowed. For more information see Pets in A-Z, or contact the 106th MED DET (VM) Unit at DSN 737-2450 or from CONUS 011-822-7917-2450. For boarding and/or grooming call the Yongsan Pet Care Center 736-6426. The United States Army’s Yongsan Garrison Pet Care Center is the primary Seoul Area Pet Care Provider for all pets in a PCS Inbound status. For those Service Members who arrive in Seoul after normal duty hours or on weekends, the Dragon Hill Lodge now has a designated area inside of the building where pets can temporarily stay in their travel kennels until they can be moved to the Garrison’s Pet Care Center. While in the Dragon Hill Lodge holding area, sponsors are responsible for the feeding and care of their pets. The Dragon Hill Lodge Security Office which is located in close proximity to the pet holding area has oversight of the pets and may notify the sponsor if a pet is showing signs that attention is needed. 

School Records: Make sure that copies of all school records are up-to-date and hand-carried. For guidelines on the documents needed for the DoDD schools on post, visit www.korea.pac.dodea.edu. School records (diplomas 

Medical Records: You and all of your family members will be required to obtain a medical clearance and EFMP screening. Any EFMP will be considered in approving of command sponsorship to make sure that services are available to you and your family members. Make sure your medical records are up to date and include up-to-date shot records are accessible while going through Incheon Customs and Immigration. Arrange to have your annual medical ex-amination and obtain extra refills for needed medications before you leave the U.S.. This will give you a little less to worry about and enable you to get through the transitional period before your first medical appointment. 

Money: If you are coming from a major city with banks or private com-panies that deal in foreign currency, it may be possible for you to buy some Korean Won at an advantageous rate. Check with your sponsor or gaining unit to see what the current exchange rate in Korea is and then compare that to the exchange rates available stateside. Once at USAG-Yongsan, all the ATM ma-chines dispense your choice of Dollars or Korean Won. A note of caution: Be aware of any fees or commissions that could cancel out any advantage of the quoted rate. Dollars are widely accepted in Seoul, so you may be able to pay for some things with United States dollars or your credit card. You will be able to exchange United States dollars at the airport, but it is not recommended that you exchange large amounts as this rate is generally the lowest available. www.x-rates.com has information on exchange rates. 

Mosquitoes: These pests can be a huge problem in Korea depending on the rain and are active from mid-spring well into the winter months. There are some options available on the economy to minimize mosquito problems, but it is recommended that you bring any products that have worked for you in the past. Probably the best and most effective mosquito plan is mosquito nets over the bed, so bring them with you if you can. Although nets can be purchased in the local stores and markets supplies and styles are often limited. 

Orders: Always have multiple copies of your orders with amendments, pinpoint orders, and any separate orders for family members available for in-processing both at Korean Immigration and on-post. At least 10 extra cop-ies are recommended so you will not be caught short-handed. If you need to make additional copies, your unit or 1st Replacement Company/19th Person-nel Company can assist you. 

Passport/Visa: Although an active duty Service Member can generally travel with his or her military ID card accompanied by military orders to the overseas duty station and will be allowed to stay for the full length of the as-signment without a VISA, all personal travel requires a tourist passport. Family 48 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 49 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

When you first arrive, you may have to “live out of your luggage” for four to eight weeks or make purchases at the PX, Second Hand Rose thrift shop, or on the economy. Before you leave the U.S., find out which of your favorite stores will ship to an APO address and find out their website addresses. You can also use www.shipitAPO.com for business that will not ship to an APO. On a positive note, clothing on the economy, particularly at the large markets, is relatively inexpensive and plentiful, but be aware that sizes are typically avail-able for men and women of small build and children’s sizes typically run much smaller than American children’s sizes. 

## PLAN YOUR PACKING IN FIVE COMPONENTS 1. HAND CARRY: passports, copies of orders, power of attorneys, medical, school, immunization records, pet documents, employment records, address book, personal toiletries, any essential medicine, and all identification cards. Bring your car seats, even if they are merely checked. To ride on-post in per-sonal vehicles, your children must be properly belted in. Pack something to occupy yourself and your children (iPods, DS Lites, books, etc.) and food to snack on during what may possibly be the longest flight of your life (11 to 12 hours nonstop from the West Coast and 15 to 16 hours from the East Coast). Due to increased airport security, please check with your airline or visit http:// www.tsa.gov/traveler-information for more information on what is allowed in carry-on luggage. 

2. BAGGAGE FOR THE PLANE: What you include will be limited by the bag-gage weight limits, but the following are some suggested “essentials”: current seasonal clothes and several pairs of comfortable shoes. You will do a lot of walking compared to what is common in the U.S. especially since your vehicle won’t be here yet. Remember to check your orders and check with your air-line about the number of bags and the weight limit. Some actually have very generous allowances for military on orders. Seasonal “must haves” include: raingear, including an umbrella and rain boots, during the summer months and warm layers during the winter. Car seats, boosters seats, and strollers can often be checked free or as one of your checked bags. Check with your airline regarding any in-flight car seat requirement for your child’s age, height and weight. Each family member should have their own ticket, therefore each fam-ily member is entitled to luggage. Bring the maximum number of suitcases necessary to ensure you have all you and your children need, but keep in mind and/or transcripts) are required to take college-level courses at the university campuses on-post. 

Telephone Calling Cards: There are several options for long distance service from Korea to the U.S.. The most widely used system involves pre-paid phone cards sold by PX concessionaires. Many of these cards offer excellent rates (6 to 8 cents per minute to the U.S. and sometimes lower). MCI and Sprint allow credit card holders to make calls from Korea and then the charges are posted on their credit cards. Prepaid cards for cell phones (local and international call-ing) or International Calling Rates from a Korean cell phone offer good rates as well and are available at the Dragon Hill Lodge, PX concessionaires and the One-Stop Shop located by the Embassy Row Starbucks. Voice Over IP options (such a Vonage or Skype) are also options for calling the U.S. while in Korea. 

Unaccompanied Tour: If you decide to join your sponsor on an unaccom-panied tour, there are some things you will need to consider. School- aged children are wait-listed for the DoDD schools, and are not guaranteed a space from year to year. Many of these families choose to home school, as a result. See Homeschooling, in the A to Z Section for more information. Non-command sponsored family members pay for their own transportation to Korea and must travel with tourist passports but are eligible to receive an A-3 Visas and SOFA Stamps once they are in country. Non-command sponsored families are not eligible for on-base housing, but family members who are eligible for Identi-fication cards and are registered in DEERS are eligible for ration control cards and all on-post services, including medical and dental services. Contact your local TRICARE office for more details. 

Command Sponsorship: Command sponsorship is in the process of restruc-ture. All command sponsorships are given through the incoming command on a space available basis. Check with your assigned command for determination and availability. 

# WHAT TO BRING 

With any PCS move, one of the biggest issues is what to move and when to move it. A word of advice: under-pack your household goods if possible. There are so many things to buy, both on the local economy and when traveling, that nearly everyone goes home with more weight than they originally brought. This must be balanced, however, with the fact that there are some things that simply are not available (at least not at a reasonable price) in Korea. Therefore, prudent packing can be the key to a successful PCS. 50 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 51 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

to ship. Bring the things that you cannot live without, but keep in mind that your life may become filled with “treasures” from Asia. Do not bring things “just in case” you might need them. Housing varies widely, but most quar-ters are smaller than state-side homes and have minimal storage space; you can quickly find yourself over-crowded. There is typically no additional storage space in off-post housing. 

CONSIDER BRINGING THE FOLLOWING ITEMS: 

• Room air cleaners and filters: Plan on bringing enough filters (or find a website that ships what you need to an APO) for your entire stay in Korea. These are EXTREMELY necessary for those with breathing conditions and small children. Some units and filters may be available through self-help or housing if you find you need them after arrival but if you have your own consider ship-ping it as availability is sometimes limited. • Small tools: Saw, impact-hammer drill (important as walls are concrete in most housing), mortar bits, etc. If you are sure you will be in government housing, these tools are available at the Self Help Center on Yongsan Garrison but at times are difficult to reserve. You may also contract with individuals at self-help to come and hang items at your home including pictures, curtains, and mirrors. • Baby items: Furnishing Management Office (part of Housing) does not have cribs, toddler beds, changing tables or any other baby furnishing items to loan. If you have a baby or are expecting bring baby furniture in your house-hold goods. ACS does have limited supplies of pack ‘n plays available for loan until your baby items arrive. • Specific clothing needs: Buying a large supply of underwear, bras, and shoes prior to your PCS is recommended. Don’t laugh – go into your exchange and if they carry the brands, styles, and sizes you prefer, you are in luck; other-wise get shopping! The choices over here on the economy tend to be for the young and the small. Lack of planning will result in trying to buy these comfort items over the internet. PLAN AHEAD! • Sports equipment: Golf clubs, tennis equipment, ski gear, and sports shoes for your children in the next size up if they prefer certain brands. • Sewing machine: Have your machine serviced before you come and bring all essential accessories. Some items can be purchased at the Fabric Market, see Shopping in A to Z. • Gas grill: If you are assigned quarters on base you may be able to have a gas grill at or near your home. Be aware that you cannot ship your own tank you and your wife will have to carry the two 50 pound suitcases you bring for your infant in addition to what you have packed for yourselves. 

3. UNACCOMPANIED BAGGAGE (Hold/Express Baggage): Although this cargo plane shipment might be slightly delayed, it may still be the only ship-ment you receive for months if you have to live in a hotel or temporary housing until your permanent housing becomes available. Even if you move into your permanent housing right away, your household goods may not arrive for a few months. Plan your hold baggage carefully. While the Army Community Service (ACS) Loan Closet can help you with some items until your shipment arrives, consider sending the following items in “hold/express baggage”: • Kitchen and eating necessities, including plates, utensils, pots and pans. • Small appliances such as a microwave oven, toaster, and coffee maker. • Household supplies (broom, vacuum) • Shower curtain and hooks • Towels (bath and kitchen) • Bed linens including blankets and pillows • Clothing to span the current season and the next. • At least one evening dress/suit, for various social functions • Children’s items, particularly their favorite games and toys • Baby: crib, changing table, jogger stroller, etc. • Computer equipment • TV/DVD player and electronic accessories • Small hand tools (hammer, screwdriver) • Lightweight decorations 

4. HOUSEHOLD GOODS vs. STORAGE - The government allows a percent-age of your total weight allowance, typically 50% or less, to be shipped to Ko-rea. The remainder of your items will need to be placed in storage at govern-ment expense. Weight allowances vary depending on branch of service and rank, so check with your Personnel Office, Travel Management Office, or Per-sonal Property Office for the correct information. Army families are typically allowed to ship only 50% of the Joint Federal Travel Regulation (JFTR) allowed weight allowance. Your household goods shipment may take several months to arrive, so you may want to consider sending this shipment early. Inventory this shipment very carefully. If you are sending special items, take color photos prior to packing and hand carry those photos to help settle any claims. Regardless of your weight allowance, think carefully when deciding what 52 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 53 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

border materials, and mulch available free of charge in the spring, but planters have to be purchased. • Dehumidifier/humidifier : Dehumidifiers are issued at Self-Help, but quantities are very limited. If you have one, bring it. Dehumidifiers are also available on the economy and simple to identify as they have a “hippo” as a logo. Dehumidifiers are a necessity during monsoon season (95% humidity) as they reduce the moist sheet feeling in bedding or mold/mildew problems in your house. In the winter, you have the opposite problem – you need moisture (15% humidity). Bring a humidifier to reduce bloody noses and dry coughs. • Slipcovers for standard size living room furniture : Certainly not a neces-sity, but since all the furniture in housing looks the same they can help express your individuality. • Stepladder (small) 

• Fans : Some housing areas have ceiling fans, but many do not. Pedestal fans are available at the PX seasonally. • Router for wireless net : If you have one, bring it as you will probably want it. However, they are sold at the PX. 

CONSIDER NOT BRINGING THE FOLLOWING ITEMS: 

• Large pieces of furniture, since Housing provides basic household furni-ture. (See Furniture in A to Z.) • Irreplaceable or light colored upholstered items because the dust here will make them dingy. • Large outdoor toys or play sets, because storage is an issue, and you may not have a downstairs housing unit to set up the items. • China and crystal inner services, unless you routinely do formal entertain-

ing. 

• Major appliances such as a stove, refrigerator, dishwasher, washing ma-chine and dryer as they are furnished by Housing. 

5. AUTOMOBILE - (See Vehicles in A to Z). You must give thought to wheth-er or not you will want your car in Korea. For most eligible individuals, the answer is usually YES. Although there are buses (free post shuttle) and taxis on post, using them can be time-consuming and expensive. Most areas on post are accessible by foot, but some housing areas can be as far as two miles from one’s workplace. If you are allowed to ship a vehicle, it will be indicated in your orders. If you are authorized to register a vehicle on post, you will be allowed to register one automobile and one motorcycle/moped per family. Since it is (even purged). You can get propane tanks at the PX Mini Mall. • Rugs and carpets : Floors in most quarters are linoleum over concrete, and they are cold. Area rugs are available at the AAFES Furniture Store at reasonable prices though selection is limited. Rugs and carpets are available through AAFES vendors and on the economy, but may be expensive. Consider bringing your own rugs and carpets (and carpet padding) with you. • Christmas and other holiday decorations : These are a must to bring. You may want to downsize the quantity due to the size of your new living space. Some Christmas decorations are available at the PX/Four Seasons and on the economy. Fresh Christmas trees are sold through the Boy Scouts Organiza-tion. The prices are comparable to the United States or slightly higher but you should make a mental note to pre-purchase when you see the Boy Scouts pre-selling in the PX or Commissary. • Craft supplies : Bring a sufficient quantity of regularly used items, espe-cially water-based craft paint which is difficult to find in Korea. USAG-Yongsan Arts and Crafts center does not have facilities for stained glass and do not sell stained glass supplies. • Pictures, books and decorative items that transform a house into a home : Be sure to include plenty of these because they are real morale boost-ers. Keep in mind, though, that most quarters have walls made of concrete. You may want to consider leaving irreplaceable treasures in storage or with family members so pollutants will not damage them. • Entertainment center/stand : Check with Housing to see if one will be provided with your allotted furniture. It will depend on whether you are au-thorized government furniture and may or may not fit your television if you have a large television. If you chose not to ship your entertainment center consider going to the Furniture Management office and looking at other items that could be used as a television stand including a buffet table. • Futon, air mattress, or some type of sleeping arrangements for visitors you may have : Housing provides only enough mattresses and bed furniture for each family member. A note about bedding: The mattresses tend to be hard, and the largest bed available is queen size. If you prefer a soft mattress or a king-sized bed, bring your own mattress, box spring, and frame. The twin-size beds provided by housing are extra-long so if you are shipping your standard twin mattress you will also need to ship your box spring and bed frame or pur-chase ones upon arrival. A feather or other mattress topper in queen size is a good alternative to shipping your own bed and are often available at the PX. • Planter boxes or pots : The self-help store has flowers, seeds, dirt, rocks, 54 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 55 

> PLANNING
> PLANNING

the U.S. at your own expense, prices vary from $2,000-5,000 but must meet United States safety and emission standards. 

# TRAVEL DAY 

The flight to Korea from the United States is very long. If you have airline mileage points, this would be a good time to use them and upgrade your seats. To make yourself more comfortable on your fight, you might consider bringing: • Ear plugs • Eye mask • Eye drops • Snacks, gum, lollipops • Small skin lotion • Books and magazines (if you travel through airports that have a USO you can take advantage of their book swap tables) • Travel pillow (not all domestic flights offer them) • Toiletry kit – always expect the unexpected! • iPads, Kindles, Nooks, etc. are nice lightweight options for entertainment but don’t forget power cords or extra batteries. 

Note: Due to increased airport security, please check with your airline or 

TSA prior to arrival at the airport for travel fluid sizes and restricted items. To avoid dehydration, be sure to drink plenty of water during your flight and remember to stand up and stretch or walk around often during your flight. 

If you are flying with children: 

• Encourage your children to stand up periodically and stretch. • Bring favorite snacks or foods if you have a child with specific preferences. • Bring a car seat; you will want them on the plane for smaller children. • Bring puzzles, notebooks, books, small games, handheld electronics, iP-ods and portable DVD players. They can be a sanity saver. • Give your children something to look forward to during a long plane or car ride, prepare surprise packets that will be opened by them periodically during the journey. Check with your airline about car seat requirements, and liquid restric-tions. If transporting breast milk, check what quantities will be allowed in your carry-on, some airlines allow it to be frozen ahead of time and brought on the plane with freezer packs considered a recreational item, you are allowed to ship your motorcycle with your household goods but it will count against your weight allowance. If you are not authorized to ship a vehicle, check with your gaining unit to see if you are eligible to purchase one upon arrival. Send your vehicle as early as you can from the U.S....you’ll be glad you did. There are a variety of used cars (hoop-ties) for sale, usually sold by outgoing personnel. These are local Korean cars, often several years old but reasonably priced. Most of these cars have seen better days, but may be a better option than sending your new car from the U.S.. Remember, if you drive off post, roads can be very congested with narrow streets and small parking spaces. Expect many dings and dents on whatever car you decide to use. The single automobile policy is in effect, regardless of whether you ship or purchase one. There are certain exceptions to policy on POV entitlements. Generally E6 and below are not authorized to ship a vehicle on orders. In country, command- sponsored military families independent of rank are generally authorized to own and register a POV on a case by case ba-sis. Exceptions to policy are granted for a second POV. Several factors should go into your decision of whether to ship or purchase a vehicle: • Arrival time and cost: Inexpensive ($500-$3,000) used cars are normally available during PCS season. Should you decide to ship your car, seriously con-sider the options that will enable you to ship your vehicle early, as it can take six weeks to two months for a shipped car to arrive. Though most areas of the post are accessible by foot, walking during the hot summer months can be exhausting, especially if you have young children. In addition, you may be re-quired to live off-post, either permanently or until your quarters are available. Information about shipping vehicles is available at www.whereismypov.com. • You are authorized to sell one vehicle during your command-sponsored tour. This is a tricky area, so you should seriously consider this before making any shipping decisions based on intent to sell. You are only authorized to sell to other SOFA members. All sales to Korean nationals must go through the For-eign Goods Transaction Office (FGTO). You can contact them at DSN 724-4371 or visit http://www.fgtousfk.com. • Any vehicle must pass a safety inspection before installation pass and tags are issued. If your POV is coming from the United States and it has a crack in the windshield glass of 1” or more, be sure to repair or replace it before shipment. • Finally, if you wish to ship a vehicle back to the U.S. at government ex-pense, you must have shipped one to Korea. A vehicle may be shipped back to 56 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 57 

provided at the military reception desk at Gate 1 unless a sponsor has ob-tained the proper clearance from the 1st Replacement Company/19th Person-nel Company (723-5461) to transport the military member. For other branches of service a sponsor will need to pick you up or you can check in and utilize the Military processing transportation bus to USAG-Yongsan located at Gate 1. All family members (except pets) are allowed to accompany the military member on the Military Processing transportation bus to USAG-Yongsan. 

## INCHEON INTERNATIONAL ARRIVAL 

There are four main stages to getting through the airport and the process can last about an hour or more. First stage, you will travel from the international gate to the main terminal via the train shuttle. People who know the system will be moving fast to try to beat the crowd, so you may experience some jostling along the way. Keep your sense of humor and be prepared to either wait for the next shuttle or squeeze into the first one. Once you exit the shuttle, you’ll follow the flow of people toward the Korean Immigration lines. You will stand in single file to wait your turn. Second stage is Korean Immigration. For military members have your DA 31 and ID card ready; that’s all you need. For family members, make sure they stamp your passport with an entry stamp. This is very important for the pur -

poses of your SOFA stamp later. It is better to go through Korean Immigration as a family and not individually. A copy of orders is helpful. Third stage is the Customs area, but you will need to follow the crowd to the luggage pick up area and get your luggage first. There are luggage carts handy that are free of charge. Once you’ve collected your belongings, walk to the exit and the Customs lines. There will be a couple of selections based on whether you have anything that you need to declare. Fourth stage is going through the automatic doors to the main terminal to meet those that are there to greet you or make your way over to the Military Reception desk and USO is located at Gate 1 to arrange transportation. USAG-Yongsan is about 45 miles from the airport and will take about an hour and a half to travel. If you arrive during daylight, you’ll enjoy seeing the mountains that rise up all around. If you arrive in the evening hours, you’ll enjoy the beau-tiful city lights. You may want to find something to eat before leaving the airport depend-

# TOUCHDOWN! 

> Incheon International Airport

When you arrive at Incheon International Airport outside of Seoul, one thing is almost certain– you will be tired and wish you were anywhere other than standing in line for Korean Customs and Immigration. Make sure you have your passport as well as the Customs Declaration and Arrival Card you filled out on the flight with your passport and easily accessible. You may take a train shuttle to the main terminal before beginning the check in process. Follow fel-low passengers and pay attention to airport signs, which almost always have the English translation. Ask for assistance if you are unsure. Airport personnel often speak English and will help you or find someone who can. Do not, under any circumstances, try to bring weapons or contraband into Korea. While the customs inspectors are pleasant and helpful, they are also very thorough. Contraband items such as drugs, weapons, and deer antlers will get you into trouble, not only with the Korean authorities, but also with the Military Police. Decorative swords should be shipped with your household goods. All other weapons should be left in storage. The Incheon International Airport website is http://www.airport.kr/eng/. 

Important Note: All personnel is required to use the military transportation 58 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 59 

tions on the outside of the taxi. AAFES authorized taxi’s park to the far right as you exit the airport near terminal section F. The AAFES Taxi Stand is in front of Exit Gate 14. All AAFES-authorized taxis have meters and accept U.S. dollars. If you must take a Korean taxi, have Korean Won or verify that they will accept credit cards. Try to select a cab which has clearly visible identification about both the driver and vehicle. A taxi ride to post will cost around $60-$70, and a van for the family will normally cost between $70-$80. AAFES-authorized taxi drivers appreciate and expect a tip whereas the Korean taxi drivers do not expect tips. USAG-Yongsan offers airport shuttle services throughout the day from the Dragon Hill Lodge (www.dragonhilllodge.com). Please check with the concierge and obtain a copy of the schedule. The Capital Hotel, which is located right outside of Gate 6 (Commissary) on USAG-Yongsan, has a shuttle that runs every 20 minutes from 5:30 am-11:30 pm. The cost is about ₩20,000 (approximately $20.00). The shuttle is located near exit door 11. The shuttle service employees are very helpful and will assist you getting onto the Capital Hotel Shuttle. The journey will take about 90 minutes with several stops along way. The shuttle is extremely western and the recorded information on the route is in English. 

Upon arrival Soldiers will typically be required to present two complete copies of their orders and all amendments; medical and dental records; and DA 31. OSAN AIRBASE ARRIVAL 

From the point of view of clearing customs, landing at Osan is definitely easier than landing at Incheon. Here, you only have to contend with other mili-tary personnel and the Korean customs officials, who which will go smoothly as long as your paperwork is in order. Have your passport, military orders, and customs declaration ready and you should move quickly from the area where you pick up your baggage through immigration and customs. Once you have cleared immigration and customs, you will find you are out-side the Osan Passenger Terminal. Whether your sponsor or someone from your gaining unit is waiting for you or you are taking the shuttle to USAG-Yong-san, prepare yourself for the ride to Seoul. The trip can take anywhere from an hour to several hours, depending on traffic conditions and accidents on the expressway. 

Buses run from Osan to Yongsan on a regular basis. Personnel at the MAC Terminal can assist you in getting current information. 

ing on your time of arrival. Eating facilities on post are normally closed by 21:00. There is an AAFES Shoppette at the Dragon Hill Lodge with extended hours that will have basic items and snacks available. 

Army Liaison Pick Up: After you arrive at Incheon, you will need to locate the U.S. Military Liaison desk/USO for transport via military bus to USAG-Yong-san (about a one-hour drive). The U.S. Military Liaison Office/USO is located near at Gate 1. Once you arrive on post, the military member will have a short briefing before you check into lodging. 

Sponsor Pick Up: If your sponsor is meeting you, be careful not to follow the military liaisons. They are highly visible and it is easy to get caught up with the flow. Even though they are calling for all military members, you will need to go through the regular lines like any civilian passenger. You will complete the four stages of the airport and walk out to the arrival area. Your Sponsor will have a signed Pick Up memo from the 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company Commander or First Sergeant authorizing the PCS Pick Up and the Sponsor should understand that they are required to bring the PCS Soldier directly to the 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company for in-processing prior to taking them to lodging. Sponsor pick up is the best way to really have a stress-free arrival to your new home and is a must if you have pets flying with you. If your pet was able to fly with you, follow the signs in the luggage carousel area for animal health services. You must have all your pet records available for inspection. After your records and your pet have been cleared, the animal is free to be transported to USAG-Yongsan but may NOT use government provided transportation. You should coordinate with your sponsor to make sure space is available in their vehicle to transport your fam-ily, your pet and your luggage. 

Individual Transportation: All PCSing Soldiers are required to ride the shut-tle bus to Yongsan for in-processing as provided unless prior authorization has been approved for sponsor pick-up. No one is approved for taxi service nor will they be reimbursed (usually stated in the Soldier’s Orders). If you need are traveling to USAG-Yongsan after personal travel, go through any of the exit doors. You can take either a taxi (expensive) or the military bus (free) to USAG-Yongsan. If you wish to take the bus, look for signs to Military Reception. If the desk is open, they can tell you when the next bus to USAG-Yongsan is depart-ing. Military service members in PCS status have priority above anyone else wishing to ride the bus (aside from others in PCS status). Taxis are located just outside the terminal. The taxis allowed on-post all have English speaking driv-ers and will have a sticker that says “on-post access” posted in a variety of loca-60 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 61 

> Army Community Services (ACS) – Photo by Marisa Johnson

Yongsan Garrison... Army Community Services (ACS) 

Core services available from the ACS Yongsan Center include: 

Mobilization and Deployment Readiness and Stability and Support Operations The Commander’s Principal Family Readiness Agency, providing comprehensive, coordinated, and responsive services supporting readiness of Soldiers, Civilian Employees, and their Families during peace and war. DSN 738-7505 - Building #4106, South Post 

For more about ACS and the services available see Army Communication Services (ACS) A-Z. 

## IN-PROCESSING 

All military personnel are required to in-process shortly after arriving in Ko-rea. Locations for in-processing vary depending upon branch of service. Your military liaison or sponsor should know exactly when and where you will need to go for in- processing. However, the following information is provided for your convenience. • U.S. Air Force: Members of the Air Force will need to in-process with the Air Force Element (AFELM). Call 723-8538. • U.S. Army: Army personnel need to in-process at 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company (1RC/19PC) across the parking lot from the Dragon Hill Lodge, Bldg (4034), DSN: 723-6452. 2ID personnel and their family members also in-process through 19PC. The 2ID Liaison NCOIC is the point of contact at DSN: 723-5617. • U.S. Navy: Naval personnel begin their time in USAG-Yongsan with the Personnel Support Detachment (PSD) on Main Post. Please call 723-4651. • U.S. Marine Corps: Marines arriving in Seoul in-process with the Admin-istrative Office on Main Post. For more information, please call 723-7032 or 723-3385. Family members also have a lot of things to do in the first few days after arriving in Korea. It is highly recommended that you go to Army Community Services Building (ACS) as soon as possible. ACS (Bldg 4106) is behind Popeye’s and Burger King. Be prepared; carry your Identification Card, Ration Control Card, multiple copies of orders, a Power of Attorney, and your passport with you wherever you go for the first two weeks. It is also helpful to call before you go to verify information and to check hours of operation. This can help cut down on your frustration and save valuable time. Detailed information can be found in the Practical Information from A to Z section for many items on the First 30 Days Checklist. 62 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 63 

days of arrival in country) .Yongsan Client Legal Services at ACS will review ap-plications for A3 Visa and/or SOFA Stamp and will assist with directions to go to one of the three convenient Seoul Immigration Office locations. Client Legal Services Division assistance is on a walk-in basis during normal duty hours. The Korean Immigration offices are at Sejongno , Mokdong and Osan Air Base. You must have your passport, ID card, copy of identification card (front and back), copy of sponsor’s ID card, the Ministry of Justice Supplemental Visa Applica-tion Form, and an original Letter of Verification of Assignment to receive the Korean Immigration Stamp. The SOFA Stamp should be valid until your spon-sor’s DEROS date or the expiration date on the Sponsor’s ID card, or the expira-tion of the individual’s passport (maximum of 2 years from the date your A-3 Visa/SOFA stamp is issued). If your A3 Visa and/or SOFA Stamp expires while in Korea, the Visa and Stamp will need to be reissued. Check: http://8tharmy. korea.army.mil/sja/clientlegalsvc/. You will find information on the process, detailed directions to Immigration offices, and forms. • Participate in the USAG-Yongsan Spouse and Civilian Newcomers’ Ori -

entation. The military sponsor must attend a mandatory 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company (1RC/19PC) Orientation packed full of training-required briefings that he/ she must attend before reporting to the unit. Family members and civilians may attend one of the ACS coordinated Newcomer’s Orientations created to encourage exploration of the USAG-Yong-san Community and Seoul area. The Newcomer’s Orientation typically include a Yongsan Windshield Tour, Seoul City Tour, tour of the Namsan Folk Village and lunch at a Korean Restaurant. At the conclusion of the tour, there will be a “mini-Expo” of community agency representatives available for you to pick and choose for your family’s needs. The entire family, including children, is encouraged to participate in the Orientation. Free child care is available for children ages four and under if prior arrangements are made with ACS. A vari-ety of Newcomer cultural tours occur throughout the year, check with the ACS desk for specific information on scheduled events at DSN 738-7505. • Housing and Furniture . Active Duty Service Members must complete the 1RC In-processing program before making a registration appointment at the Housing Division. Command-sponsored Family Members can come to Housing representing the military member within 48 hours of arrival. Family members must have a Power of Attorney. A Housing Brief is required prior to searching for off-post housing. Briefs are held Tuesday and Thursday at 1530 in the 1RC briefing room. For Housing information, stop by the ACS Building (4106), Room 205, DSN 738-4069. 

# FIRST THIRTY DAYS WHAT TO DO WITHIN THE FIRST 30 DAYS OF YOUR ARRIVAL 

• Enroll in D.B.I.D.S. (Defense Biometric Identification System). The spon-sor must be in the system before Family Members can be enrolled. You must have your identification card with you. You need to be in D.B.I.D.S. before you can register your vehicle or receive your ration control card. All Family Mem-bers must be enrolled in D.B.I.D.S. (1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company Building (Bldg 4034), ID card Section). This office operates on a pull a number and wait system, so please be patient. Depending on the time of year, wait time can be 30 minutes.. • Obtain a Ration Card at the 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company Building (Bldg 4034), ration control section. You will need a copy of the Service Member’s orders showing assignment and command sponsorship number, a copy of passport(s) for all family members, and a copy of all ID cards front and back. Service Member must be present to accomplish this task; a Power of Attorney cannot be substituted for the Service Member. 

Note : Entry to the PX and Commissary require a ration card. During the first two weeks in country, carry orders with Family Members names printed on them for access to above-mentioned purchase points. Civilian Employees, Re-

tirees and Family Members must have identification cards and ration cards to make purchases. Active Duty Military members may enter and purchase items from the Commissary and PX at any time by showing their ID card. For more information, Ration Control USAG- Yongsan DSN: 738-4612. • Visit Army Community Services (ACS). Building 4106 on South Post is located behind Popeye’s and Burger King (and less than 100 yards from the ground floor back door of the Dragon Hill Lodge). This is where you can take care of many of the items on your checklist. ACS has a great checklist to let you know what needs to be done so be sure to pick one up while you are there. Ask for the Welcome Folder full of Korean Tourism information and the Commu-nity Telephone Book. Also sign up for Korean Language Class, Transportation 101 (How to use the Mass Transit in Seoul), and Korean Food Discovery Class. • A3 Visa/SOFA Stamp (Active Duty Family Members, Civilians Employees and their Family Members must have an A3 Visa and SOFA Stamp within 90 64 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 65 

• School Registration . This office is located in the Army Community Servic-es Building (4106) ground floor, room 121, DSN 738-7707. Be sure to speed up the process and pre-register online (www.korea.pac.dodea.edu) and print the forms before you arrive in the office. When you register your child/children, the following information is required: vaccination records, orders (must have dependent’s names on orders), previous school records and any IEPs, kinder-garten and 1st graders need a copy of their birth certificate or passport, and the applications and any supplemental information. High School Students will need to report to room 108 at the High School to sign up for classes with the guidance counselor. This office also has information on School Bus Transporta-tion for eligible families (Hannam Village and off-post). Each school also has new student programs designed to help students meet and make new friends. Seoul American Elementary school (SAES) has Dolphin Delegates, Seoul Amer-ican Middle School (SAMS) has Bulldog Ambassadors and Seoul American High School (SAHS) has the Student- 2-Student Program. The school registrar or transition representative should have the points of contact for these pro-grams. For more information see Schools in the A to Z. • Stop by Child, Youth and School Services (CYSS) Central Enrollment and Registration . to register children for activities in Bldg 5210 738-5036/3001. Sign up for classes, activities, youth sports, and SAS, After School Care. You must bring proof of immunizations, PPD results, orders, and an updated physi-cal before you can participate in any services offered. • Veterinary Services . Located on South Post Bldg. 4728 (by the Gas Sta-tion) 738-4261/5145. Register your pet and turn in records (need health cer-tificates, rabies vaccination records, and proof of a microchip in your pet). Pets must be registered within 10 days of arrival. • Cable Service . This office is located in the Army Community Service Build-ing on the 2nd floor and is a pretty quick process once you have your housing location. They will give you your cable boxes and instructions. Ask for a listing of channels. DSN 738-4310. If you live off post, MWR Cable is not available. Many of the rental agreements for apartments off-post include SKY satellite cable access. Military channels are not available through SKY, but there are many English-Asia stations available. • Korean Language Class. ACS has wonderful Korean Language classes. This is a great way to meet new people and get a handle on some of the culture questions you might have. The class is taught by Korean National Contractors and includes Korean cooking classes and culture lessons intertwined with the language lessons. Classes are also available off post at Itaewon Global Village • Stop by Transportation . (Incoming Household Goods) ACS Building (4106), Room 120, DSN 738-4818. Check on the estimated arrival date of your hold baggage, household goods and vehicle. Make sure and give them a local contact number so that they may notify you as items arrive. Track the date of arrival for your vehicle by visiting www.whereismypov.com. • Driver’s License . You will need a stateside driver’s license, orders, and identification card to take the driving test. You need to study USFK PAM 385-2, “Guide to Safe Driving in Korea” before taking the test. The guide is available from the library, your sponsor, or on the 8th Army’s website under Safety/Mo-tor Vehicle Safety. Driver’s Testing is located in the ACS Building (4106), Room 235, 738-5568/3235. The USFK Driver’s License is required to drive in Korea, even if just on the installation. Driver’s testing appointment hours are Monday to Thursday, 0800-1130 and 1300-1430. Testing Appointment Slots are made for either 0800 or 1300. If you pass the test, you return for a safety video and new driving license. • Seoul Vehicle Processing Center (VPC) & Registration . The Seoul VPC is located on the western corner inside Camp Kim, Building C-1230. Call 798-7031 for detailed instructions before you begin. The service member must register the vehicle or the family member must have a Power of Attorney and be regis-tered in D.B.I.D.S. in order to pick up a vehicle. Note: Receiving and registering your vehicle can be a lengthy and complicated process. See vehicles in A to Z. • NEO (Noncombatant Evacuation Operations) . Service members are re-sponsible for obtaining the NEO briefing packet for his/her entire family within the first 30 days after arrival. NEO drills are conducted in the fall and spring to equip family members with specific scenarios in case of an evacuation opera-tion. • TRICARE and the Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital (BAACH) .

Otherwise know as 121 Hospital South Post 7005. The BAACH Help Desk is DSN 737-4357. Visit the TRICARE Office to turn in your medical records, register for TRICARE, and complete immunizations if necessary. The United Concordia dental insurance office is also located within the TRICARE office. Call 737-1433. Also see Medical in A to Z. • Drop off Dental Records at the Dental Clinic . Active Duty Personnel are assigned to South Post Dental (Clinic #2) in Bldg 5107, 736-4779 or the Carius Dental Clinic on Main Post Bldg 1665, 725-3063. The Dental Clinic for adult family members is near the hospital and is called Dental Clinic #2. The Dental Clinic for youth family members (Clinic #3) is located behind the Elementary School Cafeteria (on Stoves Avenue) Bldg 3576, 736-5221. 66 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 67 

> A

# AACRONYMS 

The following list may be useful during your stay: 

1RC/19PC  1st Replacement Company/ 19th Personnel Company 

19PC  19th Personnel Company 

AAFES  Army Air Force Exchange Service 

ACS  Army Community Service 

AFAP  Army Family Action Plan 

AFN-K  American Forces Network-Korea 

AFSC  American Forces Spouses Club 

AFTB  Army Family Team Building 

BAACH  Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital 

BOSS  Better Opportunities for Single and Unaccompanied Soldiers 

CLASS VI  Package/Liquor Store 

CFC  Combined Forces Command 

COLA  Cost of Living Allowance 

CYSS Child Youth and School Services 

DMZ  Demilitarized Zone 

DPW  Directorate of Public Works 

DSN  Defense Switching Network 

DEROS  Date Estimated Return from Overseas 

DoDEA  Department of Defense Education Activity 

DoDDS  Department of Defense Dependent School 

EML  Environmental Morale Leave 

EUSA  Eighth U.S. Army 

FED  Far East District 

FMWR  Family, Morale, Welfare and Recreation 

# PRACTICAL INFORMATION FROM A-Z 

(free) and various universities. • Self Help . South Post Bldg. 5274 (between Gate 13 and Collier Field house). If you will be living on post, stop by and see what they have to offer. Call DSN 736-7818. Self help closes early on Mondays. • Telephone/Internet . The telephone provider you use depends on where you live: If you live in any of the on-post housing areas, you must first establish line connectivity by visiting the 41st Signal Battalion (Bldg 2320, call 738-6900). The telephone/internet provider for all Yongsan housing areas (including Han-nam Village and K-16 Air Base) is LG Dacom or Korea Telecom (KT). LG Dacom office is located on the 1st floor of Moyer Community Activity Center, call 723-7023/7030 or 02-6355-5000. Korea Telecom (KT) is located off post, 02-797-0060. They offer several different plans, including VOIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol) phone numbers. The off-post provider will be Korea Telecom (KT). See Telephone in A to Z for more information. Check with ACS for current pro-viders and more information on options. 

Special note for 2ID personnel and family members. Because policies for command sponsorship in areas north of Seoul are changing rapidly as the Army moves toward tour normalization in Korea, 2ID families must investigate where they will be living thoroughly. Check with receiving command for most current information. 68 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 69 

> AA

(EPA) issued guidelines for outdoor activity levels based on measured levels of dust particles in the air. People with heart or lung disease, older adults and children are at the highest risk. For dust concentration levels above 200, high-risk individual should try to avoid outdoor physical activity. All others should avoid prolonged or heavy outdoor exertion. For levels above 300, those most at risk should remain indoors and keep their activity levels low. Others should avoid all unnecessary outdoor activity. To minimize the adverse effects of “yellow dust,” wash exposed parts of the body with soap and water after coming indoors and seek medical attention promptly if you experience adverse health effects. The Korean Meteorological Administration (KMA) (www.kma.go.kr, click on English) issues an information notice at dust level concentrations above 200, a watch at concentrations above 300 and a warning at concentrations above 500. This is a weather website so it will only contain Yellow Dust information during the spring season. To learn more about yellow dust, contact your local health care provider or visit the Environmental Protection Agency web site at www. epa.gov/airnow. To learn more about yellow dust, contact your local health care provider or visit the Environmental Protection Agency web site at www. epa.gov/airnow. Yellow dust advisories are aired on Channel 3 and the USFK and USAG-Yongsan web sites: www.usfk.mil and www.korea.amedd. army.mil/ webapp/yellowsand 

## ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES/RESOURCES Adolescent Substance Abuse Counseling Service: (Bldg 3792, South Post, next to the Chapel, 738-4579) This organization also offers courses and prevention groups in areas of life skills (self-esteem, relationships and social skills), parenting and teen anger management. Counselors are also available in the middle school and high school. 

Alcohol and Substance Abuse Program (ASAP): (Bldg 5216, 736-5187/3291) The center offers rehabilitation counseling, individual and group therapy, education and smoking cessation for active duty, DoD civilians and family members. 

Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous: (736-5187, www. AAinKorea.org) Alcohol and Substance Abuse Program (ASAP) 

Alcohol Treatment Center: (Bldg T7163, South Post next to the hospital, 737-5208) 

JUSMAG-K  Joint U.S. Military Affairs Group, Korea 

KATUSA  Korean Augmentee to the U.S. Army 

NEO  Non-Combatant Evacuation Operation 

OHA  Overseas Housing Allowance 

POV  Privately Owned Vehicle 

ROK (A)  Republic of Korea (Army) 

SAES/SAMS/SAHS  Seoul American Elementary/Middle /High School 

SOFA  Status of Forces Agreement 

SUSLAK  Special U.S. Liaison Advisor, Korea 

USAG  U.S. Army Garrison 

USFK  U.S. Forces Korea 

USO  United Services Organization 

WRC  Warrior Readiness Center 

## ADULT EDUCATION 

There are many programs available both on and off post. The Education Center (Bldg. 2212 on Main Post, in the same building as the Main Post Office, 723-4290/4286/4298/7783) provides counselors for military and family members. Pamphlets and brochures from the various colleges are also available. Available programs include: • 2-year program: Central Texas College 725-1537/3184 (www.pfec.ctcd.edu) • 2- and 4-year programs: University of Maryland 723-4300/4295 (www.asia.umuc.edu) • Graduate Programs: University of Phoenix 723-7807 (www.phoenix.edu) • Troy University 723-7508 (http://trojan.troy.edu/global/campus/pacific/offices.html) • Off Post: There are many educational programs available in Seoul. Contact the local education counselors for more information. • Korean Language classes: See Korean Language in A to Z. 

## AIR POLLUTION 

The major contributor to air pollution in Seoul is automobile emissions. Additionally, a yellow dust or “HwangSa” arrives from the deserts of China, Mongolia and Manchuria (usually in the dry spring months). The small dust particles in the air can cause or exacerbate respiratory problems, eye conditions, and eczema. The United States Environmental Protection Agency 70 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 71 

> AA

entire plane ticket. Contact your chain of command regarding travel regulations for your family. 

## ARMY COMMUNITY SERVICE (ACS) 

The ACS is the center from programs informing and assisting military, DoD civilians and their family members and Contractors (Bldg 4106, South Post across from the Dragon Hill Lodge and behind the Burger King, 738-7505, Mon-Fri 8am – 5pm). The ACS provides Welcome Packets to newcomers. They will also send the Welcome Packets to incoming personnel upon request. They also offer language classes, parenting classes and other cultural programs. Be sure to check their Facebook Page: Yongsan Army Community Service for the latest offerings. A monthly calendar for available classes and programs is available at http://yongsan.korea.army.mil/ACS and click on the calendar link to the right of the page. The ACS offers several programs including: the Newcomers’ Orientation Tour, Transportation 101 English as a Second Language and Korean Language Classes, Lending Closet as well as those listed below: 

Army Emergency Relief (AER) (738-4655, or www.aerhq.org) offers financial assistance for rent, food, utilities, emergency travel expenses and other verified emergencies. AER also provides scholarships for college students and spouses. 

Army Family Team Building (AFTB) (738-7047) was created for family members to help make military life easier. Open to all military service and DoD civilian family members, AFTB is a support program that offers free classes on such topics as stress management, leadership, problem-solving, military benefits and time management. Master Resilience training and certification is provided. 

Mobilization and Deployment (738-7047) information is provided on mobilization and NEO information. Training is provided upon request to units. 

Employment Readiness (738-8977) offers assistance with critiquing resume writing, employment opportunities and job preparation. 

Exceptional Family Member Program (EFMP) (ACS Bldg 4106, 738- 5028) offers information, referral and resource identification for military and civilian family members with special needs. The EFMP committee meets the first Thursday of each quarter to discuss EFMP issues. It sponsors monthly support groups and activities. It also coordinates medical, educational and community support and personal services with other military agencies. 

Family Advocacy Program (FAP) (738-7505) is designed to promote effective family functioning. Its goal is to prevent and educate families about 

## AMERICAN RED CROSS 

The primary mission of the American Red Cross in Korea (Bldg 2259, Moyer Recreation Center, Room 215, DSN 738-3670/Fax 738-9012, Comm. 02-7918-3670/Fax 02-7918-9012) is to serve military personnel and their families, improve the quality of human life, enhance self reliance and concern for others and help people avoid, prepare for and cope with emergencies. The Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital and its clinics host a wide spectrum of Red Cross volunteers. Potential opportunities include leadership, administrative, and casework positions. American Red Cross services include health and safety classes such as CPR, First Aid and AED classes, Life Guarding and Water Safety, Babysitter Training, Instructor Training, Pet First Aid and Disaster Services. Available classes vary by community. Please contact your local area Red Cross station for class availability and cost. 

Armed Forces Emergency Service (AFES) : The Red Cross provides rapid communications between military members, DoD civilians and their families regarding death, serious illness, child care breakdowns, birth, health and welfare reports, and other personal or family problems. Family members back home should call their local Red Cross to request emergency message service (to locate a local chapter, visit www.redcross.org and enter the zip code in the space provided or call toll free 1-877-272-7337). Your family will need your current rank, social security number, and military address for the request. Answers to frequently asked questions are listed below. 

How do I send a message? For requests between 8 am-4 pm, call your installation Red Cross Office. After hours, contact the USAG-Yongsan Office 738-3670. A caseworker will process your message. To expedite service, please provide as much pertinent information related to the situation as possible (i.e., local point of contact, name and phone numbers, doctor’s name and phone number, location of patient, your 1SG’s or Company Commander’s name and phone numbers). 

What do I do if I get a message? For emergency messages, your 1SG will be called to copy its contents and deliver them to you. If a non-emergency message arrives every effort will be made to locate you in order to deliver its contents to you directly. Once you have received your message, discuss the situation with your chain of command. 

Will the service pay my way home? If you have been placed on Emergency Leave with Funded Travel Orders, the military will pay for your plane ticket to a port of entry on the west coast. Any follow-on travel will be your responsibility. Ordinary Leave under Emergency Conditions requires that you pay for the 72 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 73 

> AA

to do your quilting based on an hourly rate and type of thread used. Batting is available for purchase at the center. The center also has a well-equipped wood shop and the equipment is available for personal projects. The staff is available to direct one to any type of art or craft supplies that are needed. Just go into the area marked ‘Sales Room’ and ask for assistance. Monthly class offerings are listed in the Community Connection Magazine. 

## AUTOMOBILE 

(See Vehicle) 

# B

## BABY ITEMS 

Though the PX and Furniture Store carry most baby items, choice is extremely limited. If you want a particular stroller, baby jogger or high chair, purchase it prior to departing the U.S. and ship it in your household shipment. Most online vendors (including eBay sellers) will not ship large items to APO addresses. If they do, the shipping costs can be more than the actual item purchased. Baby furniture items such as cribs, mattresses, changing tables and rocking chairs are not supplied by the Furnishings Management Office and can be expensive to purchase in Korea. Infant and toddler clothing stocks in the PX are quickly depleted. Newborn clothing can be very expensive at the department stores. The PX has a maternity section but, like infant clothing, items sell out quickly. The thrift store often has gently used maternity clothes and baby items in stock. For more information, see the Shopping section for local shopping ideas. Also, check out the Facebook Page: The Yongsan Flea Market. 

## BANKING/CHECK CASHING Community Bank : operates the banking facilities on all posts and bases in Korea with full service banking: direct deposit, won conversion, auto loans 

> B

child/spousal abuse and neglect through support programs such as stress management, counseling referral and crisis intervention. 

Financial Readiness (738-4655/8861) offers consumer affairs assistance, information and advocacy, financial counseling budgeting assistance, checkbook management and personal financial management classes. Group counseling classes are available. 

New Parent Support (738-7034) offers several program including childbirth preparation classes, breastfeeding support groups, Boots and Booties class for expectant soldiers, parenting classes, infant care, single parent support and a children’s playgroup (ages 3 and under). 

Relocation Readiness (738-7186) provides relocation information to military personnel and families. The services of this program include newcomer orientations, welcome packets, SOFA stamp assistance, passports and visa assistance, non-command-sponsored family member assistance, the loan closet, emergency food bank, English and Korean Language classes, and American Sign Language. Contact this office if your group would like to reserve meeting space in the ACS building. 

Volunteers Program (738-7389) volunteer coordinator directs interested parties to volunteer opportunities across the installation and provides information on registering in the Volunteer Management Information System (VMIS). 

Sexual Assault Response (SHARP) for the Garrison (738-5150/3034, 24/7 hotline DSN 158 or 763-5700 or 0503-363-5700) Provides information on the Army’s Sexual Assault Response (SARC) mission. Support for all the Garrison SARC information and SARC personnel. 

Victim Advocate (738-7035/7074 24/7 hotline 153 & 0503-364-5997) provides information and/or briefings on domestic and child abuse. Training is provided upon request for training on how to recognize both and/or all abuse. 

## ARTS & CRAFTS 

The Yongsan Arts and Crafts Center (BLDG 4253/4254 South Post, near the Shoppette, 738-4750, Tuesday through Saturday, 1000-1800, offers classes in ceramics, photography, painting, flower arranging, paper doll crafting and others. They also have unpainted ceramic pieces that you or your children can buy and paint on site. The center offers a variety of craft classes for children and offer birthday party activities. The frame shop, on the second floor, will mount and frame any pictures and paintings at a reasonable fee. A computerized long-arm quilting machine has thousands of patterns for quilting. Trained staff is able 74 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 75 

> BB

Company/19th Personnel Company, 738-6976, Mon-Sat 9 am-6 pm). 

## BEAUTY Salons : There are several nice salons on post that offer manicures, pedicures, massages and hairstyling. Locations: Dragon Hill Lodge Clippers (738-2222 ext. 6810, Mon-Sat 9 am-7 pm/Sun 10 am-7 pm); Main Beauty Shop (Mini Mall/Four Seasons, 723-2066, 9 am-8 pm daily); and Stylique (behind the Yongsan Fire Station on South Post, 738-4520, Mon-Sat 9 am-7 pm/Sun 9 am-6 pm). Prices vary but expect to pay U.S. prices; ask for pricing beforehand. There are also many salons in Seoul; however, some are currently off limits by order of the area commander, so check before venturing off-post. 

Products : If you have any special hair care products, check the online websites to see if your product can be ordered and shipped to an APO. Two sites that many spouses have had good luck with are www.aveda.com and www. hairretail.com. If your favorite products are not available for order, try to bring some with you. Even though some products can be purchased off post, they can be hard to find and very expensive. 

## BLACK MARKET 

Under the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), the United States is allowed to import certain products, duty free, for the Commissary and Exchange services. These products are strictly for the personal use of authorized personnel. Black Marketing is the illegal sale of those goods into the Korean economy. This practice can be cause for severe disciplinary action. The original goal of ration control was, and still is today, to control black marketing. Report anyone who is engaged in this practice to the Black Marketing Hotline: 738-5111. 

## BOSS 

Better Opportunities for Single Soldiers (Bldg 4253, 723-4135 for program manager) is a program dedicated to enhancing the quality of life for single or geographically single Soldiers of all ranks. Soldiers and MWR advisors work with Commanders, Command Sergeants Major and First Sergeants to provide leisure programs and help direct the resolution of quality of life issues. 

## BOWLING CENTER 

Yongsan Lanes (Main Post, 723-7830/5820) offers numerous specials and (new and used) and ATM access. The Community Bank ATM card offers 24/7 banking with no fees for withdrawing U.S. dollars, Korean won or balance inquiries. Community Bank offers 13 full-time branches, two part-time offices and a network of 51 ATMs on the peninsula. Yongsan Branches: Main Post (Four Seasons Mini-Mall, 724-4724/4725 Tues-Fri 9:30 am-5 pm, Sat 9:30 am-3:30 pm, and payday Mondays); South Post Dragon Hill Lodge (738-3520/5540, Mon-Fri 9 am-3 pm). ATM locations include the Dragon Hill Lodge, PX Community Bank, Camp Coiner, the back entrance of the Moyer Community Activities Center, the parking lot between the Furniture Store and the Movie Theater, outside the Commissary and inside the Brian Allgood Hospital. 

Navy Federal Credit Union: (Bldg 1479, between the Main Post food court and Trent Gym, 725-4056/3282, Mon-Fri 10 am-4 pm) offers online banking, credit and debit cards, auto loan, line of credit, signature loans, CDs and IRAs. There are no ATM machines serviced by Navy Federal Credit Union. 

USAA : Call and set up a system for local withdrawals at ATMs depending on your needs. The ATM restrictions usually allow only $500 withdrawals at one time, so you would need to make multiple withdrawals depending on your needs. 

Bank Cards : You may obtain cash or make account inquiries with your credit card, or any other ATM card which displays the AFFN or CIRRUS Network logo. Ask your bank about service fees that may apply. Many banks will not charge ATM or currency conversion fees for members on active-duty overseas orders. 

Cashing Checks : Many people elect to keep their checking account at a U.S. bank or credit union. The Community Bank will only cash checks if you have an account with them. You may cash checks for up to $200.00 at the PX in the Customer Service Section. The 175th Finance office will cash only the first month’s rent and security deposit checks. Note: The banks on post observe both U.S. and Korean holidays. 

## BARBER SHOPS 

There are several barbershops on Yongsan. Current locations are Brian Allgood Community Hospital (Bldg 7005,737-5285, Mon-Fri 9 am-5 pm); Camp Coiner Mini Mall (Bldg 1094, 724-5169, Mon-Fri 9 am-7 pm/Sat 10 am-5 pm); JUSMAG-K/Navy Club (Bldg 1575, Main Post 725-6555, Mon-Fri 8:30 am-6 pm); Main Post Mini Mall/Four Seasons (Bldg 1447, 723-7858, 9 am-8 pm daily); South Post (Mini Mall/Shoppette, 738-8176, Mon-Fri 9 am-7 pm); and South Post (Bldg 4035, behind One Stop Processing Center/1st Replacement 76 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 77 

> C
> CC

## CELL PHONES 

Korea is the most wired country in the world. Note: Only unlocked American cell phones will work in Korea (and vice versa), but you will need to purchase a Korean SIM card and calling plan. Investigate your options: an unlocked iPhone from the U.S. will only get 3G service in Korea. Some Korean cell phone plans also include calls to and from the U.S. at reasonable prices, so check your options before you buy. Some carriers offer a phone number you can call that will connect you to the U.S. without any additional fees: for example, calling 1688-8501 from a KT/Olleh phone will allow you to use your cell phone minutes to dial the U.S. In addition, your Korean cell phone will work throughout the country (except at the DMZ) including subways and most buildings. The one frustrating dead zone is in the hilly area on post, which encompasses Watkins Ridge and the gas station. 

Important Note: The U.S. Military and the Korean government require drivers to use a “hands free” device (NO HEADSETS). If you must take a call while driving, find a safe place to pull over and take the call. 

Where to Buy a Phone: There is a concession stand in the PX. New and used phones are available, ranging in price from $50 to $500. The sales people are very helpful and plans vary with the service and minutes you require. A basic plan starts for as little as $10 per month plus the cost of the phone. Read all service agreements carefully, some plans charge for all calls made to cell phones operated by other service providers. The Second Hand Rose Thrift Store sells used phones (with pre-programmed number and charger) for around $25.00. You can also use the New Yongsan Buy & Sell Facebook groups to find someone who is leaving Korea who would like you to take over their cell phone plan. Unlike in the U.S., military orders will not allow you to cancel your cell phone contract. If you leave before your contract is complete, you will need to either pay off the remaining months of the plan or “sell” your plan to someone else. If you take over a contract, you will need to take the phone to the place of purchase and change the payment information associated with the phone. The Business Center in the Dragon Hill Lodge and the ONE STOP Center (U.S. Embassy Association Bldg S-8105 792-6655, above Starbucks) sell new and used cell phones and plans. The new phones at the ONE STOP Center are less expensive (prices begin around $50), but both locations offer many different plans (teenager plans, roll over minutes, roll over text, Bluetooth world roaming, etc.). Connections are usually same-day and the staff will bowling leagues, including a youth league. The center can also be used for birthday parties or special events. Yongsan Lanes Food Court features fast food items and some Korean dishes. 

## BUSES (On and Off Post) : See Transportation in A to Z. 

## BUSINESS CARDS 

It is customary in the Korean culture to give a business card to a new acquaintance. They also come in handy when moving to a new location. You may want to bring some cards with you from the U.S. with your name, email and new APO address. You can write in phone numbers etc, as you get them. To help during in-processing, keep a card for yourself and write important numbers you may need on the back (e.g., taxi service, CDC, Youth Services). Oriental Press (Main Post, 738-5005 or oppress@kornet. net) is one vendor. There are also business card vendors located in the Moyer Community Activity Center and the Gallery (723-5347). If you have cards made in Korea, use a reputable printer or you might find yourself having the cards reprinted. It helps to type the information to give to the printer. Have the information printed in English on one side and Hangul on the other. 

# C

## CARPETS 

Very few quarters or apartments have carpeting. The floors in most government quarters are linoleum over concrete and can be very cold. Off-post apartments, in contrast, generally have heated floors. Due to lack of carpets and rugs available in Korea, consider sending carpets and rugs in your HHG shipment. For more information see “Shopping” section for local purchase options. 

> BB

## 78 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 79 

> C
> CC

staff, and may be able to offer more flexible hours than CYSS facilities. 

SAS (Bldg 4211, 738-4707) offers before and after school care and activities for grades 1-5. 

Middle School/Teen Center: (Bldg 4215, South Post, 738-2310/738-8113) offers after school and weekend activities for grades 6-12, including lock-ins, field trips, clubs, and more. 

Youth Sports (Bldg 4215, 738-5567/738-8117) seasons run during different parts of the year. Sports clinics are offered during the summer months. Programs offered include soccer, flag football, volleyball, softball, and more. For a season schedule, please visit Parent Central. 

SKIES Unlimited : (738-8122/2311) instructional classes are offered year-round and include martial arts, dance, and more. For a full class listing and schedules, please visit Parent Central. 

Volunteering for CYSS programs : CYSS is always in need of adult volunteers and coaches for the various youth programs scheduled. Call 738-5567/738-8117 or 736-8122. Background checks are required for volunteers and this process may take some time. If you wish to participate with your child, start the paperwork early! 

## CHRISTMAS TREES 

The Boy Scouts sell live-cut trees imported from the U.S. They presell the trees that usually arrive in November and are distributed through advertised locations on Main and South Post. Artificial trees are available at the AAFES Four Seasons Store in the Mini Mall on Main Post. Both live and artificial trees are available on the economy, though they are much more expensive than those available on post. Many people buy trees and decorations at the Express Bus Terminal on the third floor (subway lines 3 and 7). The Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop (Bldg 4222,in the movie theater parking lot) usually has a selection of artificial trees along with a varied assortment of ornaments and other Christmas decorations at very reasonable prices. Christmas tree stands are in short supply so you may consider placing a stand in your HHG shipment. Before purchasing, consider storage requirements for artificial trees and the difficulties of disposing of live trees if you live off base. 

## CLAIMS 

A claim is a written demand for a specific amount that you calculate is suitable reimbursement for the replacement of your lost or damaged goods during a PCS move. Generally, the transportation service provider (TSP) program your phone in English. You can also choose the last four digits of your own 010 number here. The ONE STOP Center also services and repairs computers and laptops, and offers fax, photocopying, wireless internet and designing services and making military coins. 

Payment : It is very easy to set up a monthly billed phone service on-post for cell phone plans. Prepaid time/phone cards to program into the phone are another convenient option. More time can be purchased and added, or have several months programmed in at a time (usually W10,000 minimum per month). Once you have used up your minutes you cannot make outgoing calls until you add more (you can still receive calls). Several businesses on post sell phone minutes (e.g., the PX concession and the DHL Business Center) and they will program your phone for you. Ask for details about programming cards and expiration dates when purchasing your phone. 

Apps : See the Quick Reference Section under Smartphone Applications. 

## CHILD YOUTH AND SCHOOL SERVICES (CYSS) 

The CYSS Yongsan services children/youth from 6 weeks to 18 years. Programs include the Child Development Center (CDC), School-Age Services (SAS), Family Child Care (FCC), Middle School/Teen Centers, Youth Sports and SKIES Unlimited. Registration is open to active duty military personnel, APF and NAF DoD civilian personnel, reservists on active duty or during inactive duty personnel training, DoD contractors, and their families. Please call Parent Central or visit www.cysskorea.com to verify current enrollment requirements. To enroll in any CYSS program, children must be registered with CYSS First. Please visit CYSS Parent Central (Bldg 5210, 736-5036/736-3015, Mon, Tues, Wed, and Fri 0800-1645, Thurs 10 am-5 pm). Please be aware that waiting lists for childcare at CDC and SAC do exist and can be lengthy. Priority for placement goes first to single parent, dual military, and dual command sponsored families, second to military or civilian sponsors with locally hired or full time student (in-person classes only) spouses, and third to all others. 

CDC : (Bldg 4280, 738-3404/3406, front desk Mon-Fri 0545-1800) offers full day care (Mon-Fri 0545-1800), hourly care, and Sure Start/Kindergarten before and after school care. Hourly care (0830-1230 Mon-Fri) is provided at $4.00/ hour, with a limit of four hours of care per day and up to sixteen hours of care per week. Once registered in CYSS, reservations can be made with the CDC from 0800-1600. 

FCC : homes offer childcare provided by military family members in on-post housing. FCC Providers receive the same training and support as facility based 80 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 81 

> C
> CC

Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop (see Thrift Shop in A-Z). The proceeds from the shop are used to support AWC charities in both the USFK and Korean Communities. 

Church Clubs : and Bible Studies See Religious Activities in A-Z. 

Military Clubs: There are a number of clubs throughout post. Some, such as the Main Post Club (723-5678/5685) and the Navy Club (725-7731/Food Delivery Service: 725-6108/6114), are open to everyone. The Hartell House is a members’ club, although all are welcome to dine (discounts are offered for members). 

Royal Asiatic Society (RAS) : (raskb@kornet.net, 02-763-9483, www.raskb. com) is a non-profit organization for those interested in knowing more about Korea. The RAS programs address different aspects of Korean life and culture, such as dance, music and mask drama. Events are free and you are encouraged to bring friends with you. The RAS also sponsors excellent tours and bi-monthly lectures (all of which are announced in the local papers). Members receive discounts on the various RAS tours to places of historic and scenic interest and on the Society’s publications that include some excellent books on Korea. 

Seoul International Women’s Association :(SIWA, www.siwapage.com) is one of the largest organizations dedicated to expatriate women living in the greater Seoul area. There are currently over 50 nationalities represented. In addition to the Monthly Coffee Mornings and Newcomers Welcome, some of the activities are tours (museums, skiing, rafting, hiking trips, discovery of Seoul, etc.), classes (languages, arts and crafts, cooking, games), and evening or weekend activities. The Welfare arm of the organization puts together a Diplomatic Bazaar and raises funds for Korean charities. There is also a Working Women’s network and members receive the bi-monthly magazine Discovery. The membership fee is modest (about 50,000 KRW) and the benefits are great. This is one of the quickest ways to get to know Seoul and make friends from different horizons. 

Special Interest Clubs : There are several groups on post formed by people with specific interests such as quilting, photography, or hiking. These groups meet at various locations. Check cable channel 3 on AFN, bulletin boards, the Morning Calm Newspaper, the internet (Facebook Groups, www.meetup.com, Yahoo! Groups, etc.), or through word of mouth. If you have an interest, there is probably a group for you. Or... start one of your own! 

## COMMISSARY 

The Yongsan Commissary is the largest overseas commissary under one is required to replace any item that is lost or destroyed with a new item or pay the cost of a new item of the same type and quality without making a depreciation deduction. However, damaged items may be repaired by the TSP if repair is less than the full replacement value of the item. Repair will be to the extent necessary to restore the item to its condition when received by the TSP. Regulations change often, so contact Military Claims office, Legal Services Division (2nd floor, ACS Bldg 4106, 738-8111). They will advise you on how to file a claim with your TSP. 

## CLUBS AND ORGANIZATIONS 

See the Quick References: Facebook Groups section for more clubs and organizations. 

American Forces’ Spouses’ Club (AFSC): www.afscyongsan.org (see the membership form in this book to join) is open to all military, civilian, and DoD spouses stationed in Korea. Associate membership is available for retired and widowed members of the U.S. Armed Forces, ARC, USO and special service personnel who are authorized with SOFA/MOFA. Meetings are held monthly (September through May) at the Dragon Hill Lodge. A welcome coffee is held in early fall and new members can join throughout the year. 

The Chosun Chatter is a monthly publication of the AFSC and the group updates, edits, and publishes The Seoul Survivor annually. AFSC sponsors an annual auction and other funding raising events which require a great deal of volunteer support. JOIN US! The AFSC also sponsors activities and clubs which can include book club, bunko, tennis, hiking, running, international cooking, lunch bunch, needlework circle, scrapbooking, shop-n-tour, etc., based on member interests. A membership form is available in the back of this book. Forms are also available at club meetings, on the official website, and on the club Facebook page. 

American Women’s Club (AWC) : www.awckorea-seoul.org or visit the Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop and pick up a pamphlet to join. Regular membership is open to all U.S. citizens and associate membership to all other persons. The AWC provides many social and cultural activities for expatriate women and families in Seoul. It sponsors newcomer coffees (normally held the second Tuesday of the month) as well as monthly lunches featuring different themes and speakers. A very popular activity is one where members can go out of Seoul (all expenses paid) for a day to interact with school children in the morning and tour and shop in the afternoon. The AWC also operates The 82 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 83 

> C
> CC

shipments and any items shipped to you through the APO system, providing they are for your own personal use. There are, however, some restrictions. You may not import the following items: • Weapons (including ornamental replicas) such as firearms, knives, explosives or hazardous substances. Firearms for hunting may be cleared; speak with your travel management office for details. • All illegal narcotics, as well as some other drugs like Viagra and diet pills. • Protected live animals and plants or articles manufactured from them. Examples: tigers, leopards, elephants, ostrich, owls, cobras, tortoises, crocodiles, coral, etc. or any part or products made from them (this includes deer antlers). • Precious metal (excluding ordinary golden rings, pendants, etc.) and securities. • Plants, vegetables and agricultural products. • Items infringing upon the intellectual property rights of others, such as counterfeit books, movies, or other forged items. • Counterfeit currency or securities. Upon return to the United States you will be allowed duty free entry for your household goods, providing all of the items you have purchased in Korea are for your own personal use. However, you will not be allowed to take back the following items: • Drugs not approved by the FDA. • Goods that violate trademark or copyright protections (fake designer clothes, watches, toys, etc.). • Heritage Items and Cultural Property unless you have the proper export permits. • Dog and cat fur, fish, wildlife and firearms. People traveling to the U.S. as a “returning resident” (on TDY, vacation, or returning from a visit in Korea) may carry back $800 in foreign manufactured items duty free. Children and infant travelers are entitled to the same dollar amount as the adults for duty free goods. Families travel under a combined total amount (a family of four is allotted $3,200 total). Also, under current regulations, you and your visitors can mail up to $200 worth of merchandise for personal use and up to $100 worth of gifts to the U.S. duty-free per day. Additionally, there are many items, such as fine art and household effects which are considered duty free no matter the value, and will not be charged against your total. Visit the U.S. Customs website for further information (www.customs.gov, select “Travel,” then “Know Before You Go”). roof (South Post near Gate 6, 736-3301/3064, Tues-Sun 10 am-7 pm, Thurs/Fri until 8 pm, Early Bird Hours 7 am-10 am Tue-Fri for 15 items or less; closed Mon, all U.S. Federal holidays and several Korean holidays). Patrons must present a valid military ID and ration card to enter the store (visitors are NOT allowed to enter). If you do not have your ration card yet, you must bring your orders, which are good only for your first 14 days in country. The Command Unique Tracking System (CUTS) assists USFK law enforcement agencies in collecting data for inventory control and to curb black-marketing. For local commissary information visit www.commissaries.com and search the Geographical List under Locations. This site offers alphabetical and by-aisle product information, store hours, upcoming events, and much more! Also, check out www.militarycoupons.com. You can use coupons up to 6 months after the expiration date. 

## COMMUNITY SERVICES/RESOURCES Educational & Developmental Intervention Services (EDIS) (738-4422) is designed to assist parents of children from birth to age three. Free developmental screenings are offered to assess whether children are functioning at developmentally appropriate levels. A variety of services and programs is available. 

## COMMISKEYS CAC 

Rooms are available to rent out for conferences, training, banquets, and other social events. Also available are pool tables, Internet services, and gaming stations. Additionally, Commiskey’s holds fun events and instructional classes for families and individuals to participate in. DSN 738-6879/6880/6883 Open Tuesday-Sunday & Holidays 1000-1900. 

## CURTAINS/MINI-BLINDS 

Housing supplies mini-blinds for all quarters on South Post. They come in various shades of off white. You must supply your own curtains. 

## CUSTOMS REGULATIONS 

It is very important to know both U.S. and Korean customs regulations (www.customs.go.kr/eng). Korean government allows all U.S. Government employees (civilian and military) coming to Korea for an extended duty assignment to import certain goods duty free. This covers your household 84 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 85 

> DD

good Army Community Hospital, Room 1150. Contact the S. Korean TRICARE dental representative, Mr. Suh Kyu Ho kyu.suh@amedd.army.mil DSN 736-5051/COMM 0505-736-5051, for further information regarding insurance and off-post referrals. Turn right after the main entrance/reception desk. Mr. Suh’s office is in the first hallway on the right. For additional information, visit www. korea.amedd.army.mil. Several Korean dentists come highly recommended and have modern and up to date equipment and practices. Check with neighbors and local adver-tizing for contact information. Preferred providers will file appropriate forms with TRICARE. 

## DISEASES Tuberculosis is present on the Korean peninsula. Each year about 30,000 cases of active TB are reported. To test for this disease, have a PPD (Purified Protein Derivative for tuberculosis infection) prior to coming to Korea, every year while in Korea, and just prior to leaving Korea. This is a mandatory re-quirement for Active Duty service members and highly recommended for all others. DoDDS and Child Youth and School Services require current proof of PPD testing for registration. 

Vector-Borne Diseases are similar to those in the U.S.; diseases transmit-ted by mosquitoes, mites, ticks and rodents are present in Korea. 

Vivax Malaria is transmitted by mosquitoes and is present at relatively low levels, primarily in areas north of Seoul and near the DMZ. For protection, military personnel should use repellents on exposed skin when in malaria risk areas during hours when mosquitoes are present. As mosquitoes can also bite through clothing, DEET repellent spray can be applied to the outer garments for protection. Soldiers should use permethrin impregnated ACUs during the malaria season. 

Common House Mosquito (Culex. pipiens) is often found in abundance on military installations, including Yongsan Garrison. In Korea it is not attributed to the transmission of any disease. Populations breed in standing water on and off post and in government housing complexes, making pesticide applica-tions less effective. Mosquitoes are more prevalent at night; they enter houses through air conditioning systems or any small opening (e.g., under the door and through the drains). Bed nets, drain covers and indoor space sprays (avail-able from the military self help supply facility) are often effective. One Korean product that seems effective is called MOGSOL (needs a plug adaptor) and is available off post at grocery stores. 

# D

## DELIVERY SERVICE 

A-Frame Delivery will pick up and deliver large household items for a fee of around $35 (AAFES Furniture Store, South Post, 738-5052). 

## DENTAL SERVICES 

Patients receive dental treatment in Korea through a combination of in-house care in military clinics and referral to Preferred Host Nation Providers. Because the DENTAC mission encompasses Soldier readiness throughout the peninsula, family member dental care in military clinics is limited. While there is some degree of space-available in-house family member care, the majority of family member care occurs through a network of Preferred Host Nation Pro-viders. Selected providers practice dentistry in line with U.S. standards, main-tain modern facilities, engage in infection control and sterilization protocols in accordance with U.S. standards and Center of Disease Control guidance. They sometimes accept UCCI insurance in lieu of upfront payment from the patient. The DENTAC strongly encourages all sponsors to ensure coverage of their family members through participation in the TRICARE Dental Program. Their website, www.tricare.mil/dental, provides up-to-date dental informa-tion. Active-duty family members comprise the only Other-Than-Active-Duty category that may obtain routine space-available care in military dental clinics. However, the DENTAC will always provide emergency care to address pain, in-fection, or trauma to members of all beneficiary categories. Patients may seek after-hours emergency dental care by reporting to the emergency room at the local military hospital or treatment facility. Yongsan Dental Clinics for Active Duty Personnel are South Post Dental (Clinic #2) in Bldg 5107, 736-4779 or the Carius Dental Clinic on Main Post Bldg 1665, 725-8271/3063. The Dental Clinic for adult family members is near the hospital and is called Dental Clinic #2. The Dental Clinic for youth family mem-bers (Clinic #3) is located behind the Elementary School Cafeteria (on Stoves Avenue) Bldg 3576, 736-5221/5799. The TRICARE Dental Office at Yongsan Garrison is located in the Brian All-86 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 87 

> DD

rean traffic rules. Get a copy of the manual from the Driver’s Testing Office (ACS Bldg 4106,738-5568/3235-6) or download A Drivers Study Guide for Safe Driving in Korea (English Version) from http://yongsan.korea.army.mil (family members do not need to know the Military Drivers section). Tests are by ap-pointment only; call to schedule. Motorcycle/moped owners must complete an Army-approved Motorcycle Safety Course to receive a USFK Motorcycle or Moped License and Motorcy-cle Safety Foundation Experienced Rider Course or Motorcycle Riders Course Completion Card (consider taking this course before you arrive due to the lack of course availability in Korea). 

> Dragon Hill Lodge – Photo by Marisa Johnson

Dragon Hill Lodge (DHL) Eligibility: Active duty, retired military, dependents, DOD civilians, Survivor Support Program, and all foreign non-Korean Military with orders to USFK. All must present either DD Form 1173 or DD Form 2. Reservations are accepted 24 hours a day. 

## DOG PARK 

A Dog Park/Playground (5 am-10 pm daily) is located beside the Pet Care Center near Gate 13 and has two large fenced areas designated for you to exercise and play with your pets off the leash. Please observe the rules of ‘pe-tiquette’ posted in the park. (Owners are responsible and liable for their pets’ actions; owners must pick-up and dispose of all pet waste; aggressive pets or pets in heat are not allowed in the park; pet owners may have no more than two dogs with them per visit). This is a wonderful place for those living both on and off-post to exercise and socialize their dogs. It is also a great place for dog owners to socialize. 

## DRAGON HILL LODGE 

The Dragon Hill Lodge is one of five Armed Forces Recreation Centers (from U.S: 011-822-7918-2222, Fax 011-822-790-1576; from Korea: DSN 738-2222, From cell within Korea 050-3338-2222/Fax 790-1576). Email reservation re-quests to: reservations@dragonhilllodge.com or write to Dragon Hill Lodge, Reservations Dept. Unit 15335, APO, AP 96205-5335. Reservations can also be made online at www.dragonhilllodge.com. Per-sonnel in PCS status have priority and may make reservations one year in ad-vance. Located in the center of Yongsan Garrison, it is the hub of activity for those living in or visiting Seoul. The hotel has 394 guest rooms, 6 restaurants and 2 lounges. A hotel guestroom contains a queen size bed, a sleeper sofa, re-frigerator and microwave oven, TV with MWR cable, DVD/VCR player, ironing board, coffee maker, fireproof safe and a complete set of utensils for in-room dining (cribs are available at no extra charge). Market Square, the hotel’s retail shopping area, offers a range of stores including a PX Shoppette, Flower Shop, Dynasty Furniture, clothing, Exchange New Car Sales, dry cleaners, beauty shop, cyber café, car rental, local tours and much more. The DHL Children’s Park is a great place for the youngsters to play. 

## DRIVER’S LICENSE 

If you plan to drive in Korea, even solely on military installations, you must have a USFK license (you may use your stateside license to legally drive in Ko-rea for the first 30 days after your arrival). Your USFK license, along with a valid stateside license, will allow you to drive throughout Korea. There are various categories of driver’s licenses in Korea, but most personnel will only need a USFK license. All applicants are required to take a written test regarding Ko-88 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 89 

> EE

## ENHANCED SECURITY PEDESTRIAN GATES (ESPG) 

The Enhanced Security Pedestrian Gates (ESPGs) are unmanned walk-through gates for gaining entry onto and exiting post. This system continues to be enhanced to better serve our community. To utilize the ESPG, swipe your ID card with the bar code to the left. Once you see the green entry light, step inside and place the finger you registered with Defense Biometrics Identification System (DBIDS) on the fingerprint reader. If you have bags, hold them in front of you. Leave your finger on the reader until the screen says “Enter the Site.” If the fingerprint is rejected, press the Exit button for one second to leave the booth and try again. Some points to keep in mind: If your card is not accepted multiple times, you will need to get your card replaced. If your fingerprint cannot be read after numerous attempts, stop by DBIDS in 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company and have your fingerprints retaken. If you are at the booth with small children, alert the guard by using the outside intercom call box. Do not use the fingerprint reader and ignore “Leave the booth” on the screen. Once you’ve spoken with the guard over the intercom, they will override the door and allow entry. Be prepared in case you are denied access. You can walk over to a manned gate, like Gate 1/the Dragon Hill Lodge Gate or Gate 13/the South Post Visitor Center Gate, which are open 24/7. As a last resort, you can call an AAFES taxi at 1544-9080. If you use a local cab, you can call the AAFES taxi service and they can translate for you, or you can call 02-120 on your cell phone to speak with a translator provided by the Seoul Metropolitan Government. For more information and to view ESPG usage videos, please visit USAG Yongsan’s Facebook page at www.facebook.com/youryongsan. If you find yourself at the booth and would like to call the Yongsan ESPG Control Desk by cell phone, please call 0505-724-6707. 

## EMPLOYMENT 

It may take some time and patience to find a job for spouses desiring to work, but with determination and a lot of networking, it can be done. Full-time or part-time jobs are listed through the Seoul Civilian Personnel Office (CPO). The ACS has a Family Member Employment office, with an excellent staff, which will assist you in your job search and in filling out Form SF171 for GS positions (ACS Bldg 4106, South Post, 738-8977. Spouse Employment and Education Seminars are held semi-annually. Look for banners and advertisements in the 

# E

## EMBASSY INFORMATION 

Most countries maintain an embassy or consulate in Seoul. They can be very helpful in providing you with travel information for their country and will assist in any visa arrangements if you are not traveling with a group that is handling details for you. The embassies can also tell you of any necessary vaccinations/immunizations required for travel in their country. Do not expect the embassy to warn you of potential difficulties/dangers of travel in their country; most try to encourage tourism. Check with the U.S. Embassy for travel advisories for specific countries. The Community Help Book or post phone book (obtain a copy at the ACS building) has the phone numbers for embassies from many countries. Check with the Yongsan library or the American Embassy (721-4114, Commercial 02-397-4114 or www.asktheconsul.org) for any current telephone numbers or addresses you may need. The U.S. Embassy Association (USEA) exists not only for the American Embassy community but also for Military Members and Civilians assigned to or visiting USAG-Yongsan (Bldg 8105, Yongsan South Post next to Starbucks, from U.S. 011-822-7918-6124; from Korea DSN 738-6124/Commercial 02-397-4487/Fax 796-9488, or www.useaseoul.com, Mon-Fri 8:30 am-5 pm, closed on all American and Korean holidays). The USEA can accommodate many of your needs, such as a comfortable and quiet TDY suite at a low rate ($100) on Yongsan Garrison. The TDY suite guestrooms contain a queen size bed, sitting room, kitchenette, full bath, cable TV, a DSN telephone and Internet service. The USEA also offers Event Hall rentals for official functions or private parties, for either formal or informal functions. Several options are available which are guaranteed to meet the needs of your meetings and special events. USEA logo items are available for sale in the Main Office. USEA vendors include the Business Center, Jamba Juice, Starbucks, Fuji Restaurant (sushi), Korea Palace, and Philo Nature Day Spa/Massage and Nail Art. 

## EMERGENCIES See American Red Cross Medical. 90 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 91 

> F
> E

Informative Websites 

www.milspouse.org www.military.com/spouse www.eslteacherboard.com www.touch4teaching.com www.eslcafe.com www.reachtoteachrecruiting.com 

## EXPRESS BUS TERMINAL (BANPO) 

Located across the Han River and easy access by bus, subway, or car, the flower market is located on 3rd floor of the Express Bus Terminal and an extensive subway shopping experience is located underground. Recently renovated, the underground shopping is extensive and offers a completely unique Korean shopping experience weaving between three different subway line stops. See Shopping– Markets. 

# F

## FITNESS CENTERS 

Several fitness centers are located on-post. All are open seven days per week, but hours vary. Each center is open to all USFK ID cardholders. Use of the facilities is free of charge with the exception of The Point, a state-of-the-art fitness center located in the Dragon Hill Lodge (738-2233 ext.6240, Commercial 790-0016). Other fitness centers located on Yongsan offer a wide range of services including Nautilus equipment, separate free-weight rooms, multipurpose rooms, basketball, squash courts, instructional classes and locker rooms with saunas. 

Collier Fitness Center (South Post Bldg 5200), 736-4588 

Trent Gym (Main Post Bldg 1496), 724-8466 

Main Post Mini Gym (Main Post Bldg S2609), 724-7255 

> E

Morning Calm regarding the next planned seminar. The following websites can provide more information visit the Civilian Human Resources Agency at http:// cpoc-www.korea.army.mil; for government service employment, try U.S. Army Civilian Personnel On-Line at http://cpol.army.mil. 

Teaching Substitute teachers are always needed on post. If you wish to teach at the Seoul American Elementary, Middle or High Schools, either full-time or on a substitute basis, make inquires at the main office of the school at which you wish to work. A high school diploma and background check are required for substitute teaching positions. Teaching positions are also available at public and private schools located in Seoul; you can either write to the schools directly or contact them as soon as you arrive in Korea. They often advertise in The Morning Calm, bulletin boards located throughout Yongsan, the Commissary and the PX. It is to your advantage to contact schools before your arrival in Korea. Aspects of the E-2 visa process, which is required for any foreigner who teaches English, must be done outside Korea. Visit www.reachtoteachrecruiting.com for a thorough review of the E-2 visa process. Review any contracts carefully with the ACS Employment Readiness staff before accepting any position. Also, even though you will have 90 days to obtain a SOFA stamp, you must have it in your possession before you can apply for a job. 

Summer Youth Employment Program is available for DoD military and civilian family members who are full-time students between the ages of 14-22. Although many of the jobs involve general office assistance, there are also a variety of areas where specific skills and background are required. One requirement for summer employment with USFK activities is a personal Social Security Number (SSN). Parents whose children are outside of Korea should ensure that their children possess a SSN before traveling to Korea if they wish to work here during the summer. Students must also have proof of full-time student status in the U.S.. 

Winter-Hire Program is designed for after-school and weekend work for students aged 16-22. Youth or spouses planning to work on the economy should check with the U.S. Embassy (www.asktheconsul.org) in advance to see what types of visas are required. For more information, check with the Student Hire Office at ACS (738-8977). There are always numerous babysitting opportunities for teenagers. Red Cross Babysitting Certification can be completed at the Moyer Recreation Center. 92 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 93 

> FF

and 1530AM issue warnings affecting those affiliated with the government. Korean National Police are always present at these demonstrations to provide additional security. Finally, as with any other large metropolitan city, you should practice common sense when venturing out. The buddy system is highly encouraged and at times is mandatory. There is a curfew for family member minors during weeknights and on weekends. Because curfew hours and days vary for all other personnel, check the current curfew times at http://yongsan.korea.army.mil. 

## FURNITURE STORE See Shopping. 

## FURNITURE SUPPORT 

Furniture support is available from the housing office for civilian, DoD, and military personnel. However, be aware that the authorized furniture support period varies. If you are an accompanied military family living on post (whether you brought all or partial household goods), you are authorized full furniture support from the Housing Office (738-7539). If you are an accompanied military family living off-post and are only entitled to bring partial household goods support, you are authorized furniture support from the Housing Office for your entire tour. If you are entitled to bring full household goods and live off post, you are only authorized furniture support for 6 months (whether you brought all or partial household goods). Finally, if you are a civilian family or DoD employee, you are only authorized six months of furniture support because you are automatically entitled to full household goods shipment. 

Camp Coiner Mini Gym (Camp Coiner Bldg 1496), 724-7255 

K-16 Gym (K-16 Bldg S158), 741-6316 

Intramural Sports Activities include basketball, flag football, softball, soccer and volleyball. Contact Collier Fitness Center for information regarding sports tournaments (e.g., basketball, racquetball, power lifting, tennis) (738-8606 for sports director). 

Equipment and Class Requirements For information on aerobics, racquetball, martial arts and certified personal trainers contact the Collier Fitness Center director at 736-7746 or Trent Gym on Main Post at 724-8466. 

Running/Jogging There are 5k and 10k “fun runs” on South Post about one weekend a month. These will be advertised outside Collier Fitness Center. Reflective vests or belts are required. Events are posted in the Community Connection and on Facebook. 

## FLOWERS AND PLANTS See Shopping - What to Buy. 

## FORCE PROTECTION/DEMONSTRATIONS 

Korea remains a relatively safe country. However, it is important to be aware of the measures taken to ensure safety during your tour of duty. U.S. military installations are secure facilities. No one is allowed access to the post without a valid ID card. You must physically hand ID cards to the guards so they are able to view both sides. In addition, only vehicles with proper registration decals are allowed access to the post. Authorized ID card holders may escort visitors and vehicles onto the post. (See Visitors in A to Z .) As with all military installations, USAG-Yongsan operates security procedures based upon levels of Force Protection (FP CON). The FP CON levels change according to the level of threat. Force Protection levels range from FP CON Alpha (lowest threat) to FP CON Delta (highest threat). The current FP CON level will generally be posted at the installation gates, for specific information visit www.usfk.mil, the USFK Force Protection site. For those living on post, the commander’s channel is another good source of information for the latest updates. Another safety concern you should be aware of are the demonstrations periodically held throughout the peninsula. Protesters demonstrate for a variety of reasons, including opposition to the U.S. military presence in Korea. These demonstrations are sometimes held just outside the Garrison gates. Military officials on the post TV channels, Facebook, and radio stations 102.7FM 94 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 95 

> H
> G

For tee times, annual memberships and bus schedules call 736-3483/3490. Sung Nam has a Ladies’ Golf Association, and Thursday mornings have been designated as ladies’ day. Tee times are set aside each Thursday morning for members of the Ladies’ Golf Association. Open play is permitted prior to and immediately following the Association’s use of these times. The Ladies’ season runs from April-October each year. For more information, call 736-3483/3490 and check the board in the ladies’ locker room at Sung Nam. 

## GOLF DRIVING RANGE/PRO SHOP 

The driving range at USAG-Yongsan is a fun place to practice your swing and brush up on your putting skills (Bldg 4271, South Post off X Corps Blvd, across from the Fire Station, 738-4190). A pro Golf Shop on the range carries a variety of golfing accessories, shoes, clubs and clothing in American sizes (the AAFES Four Seasons Store also sells a variety of golf equipment). 

# H

## HOME-BASED BUSINESSES 

A home business not only adds extra support to the family income, it also provides mobility for the military lifestyle. Here on USAG-Yongsan there are some restrictions to operate a home business legally. In order to conduct a home business a written request must be submitted and approved by the Gar-rison Commander. The request must include… • A description of product or services to be sold • Name of individual/agency, address, phone number, and email. • Documentation of registration or licenses • General description of fees or charges Please keep in mind not all application will be approved on the basis of services or products already provided on the Garrison. For more information on restrictions and use of your APO address please contact the following indi-viduals… 

> G

# G

## GALLERY See Shopping - On Post. 

## GASOLINE 

The AAFES Gas Station fuel prices are considerably cheaper than on the Korean economy (near Gate 5, close to Itaewon Acres Housing, 738-7649, Mon- Fri 7am-7pm/Sat-Sun 8am-7pm). You must present your ID card and Ra-tion Control Card before you pump gas. You can purchase drinks, some auto needs, oil, wiper fluid and some snacks at the small shop on site. Selection and quantities are very limited. Vacuums are available as well as free air for tires. If you must purchase fuel on the economy, make sure you are getting the proper grade for your vehicle. Korean gas is measured and priced in liters and is expensive, so have enough Korean Won with you before having your vehicle filled. 

## GAS GRILLS AND PROPANE 

Propane tanks (even purged) cannot be shipped with your household goods. The Four Seasons, located in the Main Post Mini Mall, carries gas grills and propane tanks and has a good supply during summer months. Currently, the Four Seasons refills tanks (check with the sales associates for policy chang-es). They also have maps with information on locations off post where tanks can be refilled. Most picnic areas near the various housing complexes have charcoal grills for public use. 

## GOLF 

The Sung Nam Golf Course and Driving Range (736-3483/3490) is open to all military ID card holders and features an 18-hole par 72 course. The club-house features a dining room and pro shop as well as on-course snack bars and refreshment stands. They also have practice putting greens, a driving range and club facilities complete with daily-use lockers, club storage, showers, hot tubs, and rental power carts. Buses to Sung Nam leave from the parking lot situated between the MWR Arts & Crafts Center and the Burke Towers tennis courts. 96 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 97 

> HH

Youth Sports program provides great opportunities for all age groups to excel in sports, to include baseball, soccer, T-ball, volleyball, flag football, swimming and softball. Many homeschooling families are very active in the Youth Sports program. Coaches are always needed. Contact the Youth Sports Director for CYSS at 738-4581 for more information. Unique opportunities to participate in martial arts programs are also available. 

Legal issues To find out some of the legal issues concerning homeschooling overseas, visit the Homeschooling Legal Defense Association (website www. hslda.org, search “Military Homeschooling Overseas”). The association offers discounts to military members. Because school age children of a U.S. military member or a DoD civilian in Korea do not reside in any of the 50 states, they are not subject to U.S. State Mandatory Attendance Statutes. Additionally, because of the Status of Forces Agreement, they are not subject to home-schooling laws in the host country. However, families can be investigated on an individual basis. Of course, it is highly recommended that you keep thorough records, conduct school for the minimum number of days required by your permanent state of residence and document attendance. You will need this documentation should you either put your child in regular school or transfer to a state with more stringent homeschooling laws. 

## HOTELS 

Most incoming military personnel stay at the Dragon Hill Lodge on South Post (see Dragon Hill Lodge in A to Z). If the Dragon Hill Lodge does not have any rooms available, the Reservations Department will assist you in reserving rooms at the JW Marriott (02-6282-6282). If you have to seek accommoda-tions elsewhere on the economy, Seoul has a wide variety of hotels with vary-ing prices. Request the Hotel Referral List from the Dragon Hill Lodge Guest Services Desk. An abbreviated list is included below. To make reservations at hotels without DSN access, you may use pay phones in the lobby of the Dragon Hill Lodge. To make reservations at any of these hotels from the U.S., first dial 011-82-2 and then the last seven numbers listed. If dialing from a DSN number, follow the procedure for dialing listed at the beginning of the handbook. 

Hotels in the Yongsan Area/cost per night/phone number 

• Grand Ambassador Seoul associated with Pullman, W139,000 to W181,000, plus 10% tax 02-2270-3251 •Elle Inn, double W130,000 to suite W220,000, 02-792-8700 • USAG-Red Cloud: Mr. David Funkenbusch, tel: 730-8670, bldg: #T429 • USAG-Yongsan: Ms. Kyong Hui Pak, tel: 723-8670, bldg: #1560 • USAG-Humphreys: Mr. Yang Nae Chong, tel: 753-6131, bldg: #572 • USAG-Daegu: Ms. Hui Chong Pae, tel: 768-6360, bldg: #T1254 

## HOME REPAIRS/SELF-HELP 

The Building Utility Repair Team Self-help (BURTS) Center (Bldg 5274, South Post, next to the Quartermaster laundry by Gate 13, 736-7818/5512/5513, Mon 8 am-12 pm/Tue-Sat 8 am-5 pm, closed daily 12 pm-1 pm, Sundays, and KoreanHolidays) stocks items needed to maintain your post quarters (e.g., fluorescent tubes, glass light fixtures, kitchen drain baskets, etc.) along with a full range of hand tools and power equipment to check out for short time periods. The BURTS Center sometimes carries bedding plants (in the spring) and a variety of interior decorating supplies for do-it-yourself landscapers and interior decorators. Self Help is not authorized to issue supplies to personnel living off-post. 

## HOMESCHOOLING 

Many families who have chosen to home school find their time in Seoul filled with great adventures, fun social groups, and a variety of activities. The cooperative nature of the DoDDS community provides opportunities for homeschoolers to be involved in school classes and activities. This is a special arrangement not always available in the U.S.. Your student can register with the school and take single classes in Elementary, Middle and High School. For example, there are students who take only Korean or Chinese classes. 

Groups : The best way to find out what groups are currently active is to check in with the Seoul American Homeschool Network (SAHN) on Facebook or http://groups.yahoo.com/group/yongsan-homeschool-group/. Child Youth and School Services have a home school liaison, who can be contacted through the outreach coordinator at 738-8122. 

Field trips : Opportunities abound because of the urban setting and ease of transportation: zoos, aquariums, markets, museums, fortresses, palaces and so much more! Two fabulous museums are located within walking distance of Yongsan: the Korean War Museum and the Korean National Museum are both located right outside the garrison. 

Arts and Crafts Center : (South Post, Bldg 4253/4254, 738-4750) Staffed with professional artists who teach such skills as woodworking, pottery, draw-ing, painting and much more. They offer special classes for homeschoolers. 98 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 99 

> HH

Limited storage facilities exist in Korea for extra household goods. Contact your servicing Housing Office prior to shipping any household goods or for informa-tion on storage options. 

## HOUSEHOLD HELP 

Many people choose to hire household help during their tour in Korea. The best way to find a reliable person is by word of mouth from friends and neighbors. Occasionally you can “inherit” household help from departing co-workers or neighbors. Do not hire anyone without a recommendation from a friend or former employer; make sure you both agree on all conditions before hiring. Pay rates vary depending on the duties performed, but daily house-cleaners request wages of $70-$80 per day. Some ask for payment in won, others in dollars; some want to be paid weekly, others prefer a lump sum once or twice a month. Housemen ask for around $50-$70 per day and will work inside or outside the house doing heavier work such as windows, floors, gar-dening, car cleaning, etc. Most want to work at least one day every week. It is customary for all hired help to receive a bonus at Chusok (Korean Thanksgiv-ing), Christmas, and/or Lunar New Year. If you are not sure what would be an acceptable amount, ask friends or neighbors. It is at your own discretion to decide whether your household help will get American or Korean holidays off and whether they are paid holidays or not. You may want to talk with other families employing the same person to ensure consistency. Although most household help already have post passes, it may be neces-sary for you to assist yours in obtaining one, unless you plan to pick them up at the gate each time they work for you. See Visitors in A to Z for information on obtaining a post pass. Pass renewals are required yearly; it is your responsibil-ity to collect expired passes from household help and return them to the Pass and ID Office so that they do not fall into the wrong hands. Due to SOFA Agreement issues, there has been a huge debate on who can be hired as household help. Generally, you may not hire anyone who is spon-sored by the Embassy. Please contact the post command for all rules and regu-lations concerning the hiring of babysitters or household help who may not be U.S. citizens or Korean Nationals. There are strict fines (up to $10,000) im-posed by the Korean Government for those who hire help illegally. Also, due to the supply and demand of legal household help, pay rates (daily and monthly) are starting to rise dramatically. • Gaya Hotel, double $65 to suite $205, 02-798-510 • Crown Hotel, double W131,000, DSN 723-7218/Commercial 02-797-4111 • Capital Hotel, double W180,000, DSN 723-8661/Commercial 02-792-1122 • Hamilton Hotel, about W145,000, 02-794-0171 • Grand Hyatt Seoul, about W230,000, 02-797-1234 Prices may vary depending on the exchange rate. Most of the hotels listed offer military discounts to U.S. service members and their families. When se-lecting a hotel, always ask to see your rooms before making your final decision, as some rooms have limited space. Many of the nicer hotel chains (e.g., Grand Hyatt Seoul) offer great restaurants and shopping. Even if you are not staying overnight, take the opportunity to enjoy their world-class cuisine. 

Billeting On Post 

• Walker Center, Free, 736-1048 • Religious Retreat Center, $20(Leave), $30(TDY), 723-7314/723-7593 • U.S. Embassy Association Suites (Bldg.8105), $100, 738-6124 or 02-397-4487 

Korean Inns 

Once you have become accustomed to the culture in Korea, you may want to try staying in a Korean Inn or “yogwan.” A stay at a Korean Inn can range from W12,000-W25,000 per night. This depends upon your preference for a Western- style bed and bath or “Korean style accommodations.” Be aware that some Korean Inns have bathrooms in the rooms, but many do not. This is definitely an experience that the adventurer will enjoy! See Travel in Korea for ideas and information on other hotels in Seoul, or travel needs in other parts of Korea. 

## HOUSEHOLD GOODS (JFTR) WEIGHT ALLOWANCE 

As of February 2009, U.S. Army officials increased the Joint Forces Travel Regulation (JFTR) weight allowance to 50% of household goods to Korea for accompanied tours (except Chinhae Fleet Activity Command and Osan AFB, which are full JFTR weight allowance locations) and 25% for unaccompanied tours for Army Service members. Housing Offices do have loaner furniture and appliances available for reporting personnel (see Furniture Support). Government quarters on-post and leased quarters off-post may have lim-ited storage capacity to accommodate entire JFTR weight allowance if shipped. 100 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 101 

> HH

rival, or if you are granted concurrent travel to economy quarters, you may be authorized to reside off post and receive Overseas Housing Allowance (OHA). Accompanied service members of all ranks and branches, as well as DoD civil-ians, are strongly advised not to seek economy housing quarters prior to in-processing with the Housing Office. There are several AFH areas in Yongsan. Below is a description of each type. For photos and floor plans go to yongsan.korea.army.mil, click on Community and follow the link to Housing. 

Helo Acres : Officers in grades O6 and above reside in this area, located between Seoul American Elementary School, Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital and Gate 14. Quarters are single story duplexes and have all major appliances (including dishwashers), window blinds, air conditioning units and outdoor storage areas. The majority of these homes have linoleum floor tiles. There is one designated uncovered parking space for each unit and limited visi-tor parking. Personnel assigned to these housing units may have two domestic pets and are responsible for their care, maintenance and cleanup. 

Watkins Ridge : Command Sergeants Major (CSM) live on South Post be-hind Burke Towers and Eagle Grove housing areas. Sergeants Major (SGM) may also reside in Watkins Ridge if units are available. These quarters are primarily single story duplexes with some quadplexes. All units have window air condi-tioning units, oil heating systems, window blinds, all major appliances (includ-ing dishwashers) and outdoor storage areas. The majority of these homes have linoleum floor tiles. There is one designated uncovered parking space for each unit and limited visitor parking. Personnel assigned to these housing units may have two domestic pets and are responsible for their care, maintenance and clean up. 

Burke Towers: This apartment complex was opened in June 2004 and is designated for O-4/5 and WO-4/5. The 5-story towers consist of thirty apart-ments each: twenty 3-bedroom units, nine 4-bedroom units, and one 5-bed-room unit (located on the first floor). The complex features a BBQ area, tot lot, playground and basketball court. Two tennis courts with nightlights are next to the South tower complex. Handicapped parking is available near the north tower. There are six elevators per building. Each apartment unit has an assigned underground parking space. Overflow/visitor parking is located in the middle garage between the two towers. Burke Towers’ features include central air and heating system, ceiling fans in each room, Pergo no-wax floors, and sliding glass patio doors with vertical blinds. Burke Towers is a “no pet” hous-ing area and there are no exceptions. For additional information call 738-3211. 

## HOUSING 

The Housing Office will work to make your transition into your new home as smooth as possible, whether you are accompanied or unaccompanied (ACS Bldg 4106, 738-3211). This includes Temporary Lodging Allowance (TLA), which you may be authorized prior to moving into your permanent residence. All ser-vice members regardless of branch of service or status must inprocess with the Housing Office within 48 hours of arrival or completion of in-processing with 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company. All DoD civilians eligible for a Living Quarters Allowance (LQA) are also required to in-process with the Housing Office. All civilians, unless designated as Key Essential Personnel with specific approval to reside on post, are required to live in off post accommoda-tions. The Civilian Personnel Advisory Center (CPAC) will advise you on your Temporary Quarters Subsistence Entitlements (TQSE) and LQA entitlements. 

Unaccompanied Personnel Housing (UPH) (738-5506/International: 011-82-2-7918-5506) Unaccompanied personnel of all ranks and branches of ser-vice are normally housed in UPH on the installation. Personnel in pay grades of E4 and below will reside in the barracks. Personnel in pay grade of E5 and E6 may reside in barracks if adequate space and privacy criteria are met, or they will reside in the Bachelor Enlisted Quarters (BEQ). Unaccompanied officers and NCOs in the ranks of E7 and above will be assigned Bachelor Officer Quar-ters (BOQ) or Senior Enlisted Bachelor Quarters (SEBQ). Only in the event of adequate quarters being unavailable will an unaccompanied service member be authorized to reside off post. While all UPH meets or exceeds the criteria for square footage, they may not be able to accommodate a full weight allow-ance of HHGs. Full furnishing support is available in all UPH. 

Accompanied Housing On Post/Army Family Housing (AFH) Command sponsored accompanied personnel and certain designated Key and Essential civilians are housed on post in AFH. Your PCS travel orders will normally state concurrent travel to government quarters and indicate bedroom number au-thorization and housing area location. The Housing Office personnel will brief you on projected quarters availability, Temporary Lodging Allowance (TLA) or TQSE and place your name on the appropriate waiting list. Bedroom requirement is determined by the size of your family. Couples with no children and families (either married couples or single parents) with one child receive two bedroom units. Families with two children typically re-ceive three bedroom units and those with three or more children usually qual-ify for four or five bedroom units. If Quarters are not projected to be available within 60 days of your ar-102 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 103 

> I
> H

# I

## IMMUNIZATIONS 

The following table lists of vaccinations by your status. Check with your medical treatment facility, family doctor or school nurse for recent updates on immunization requirements. Family members are not typically required to receive any additional immunizations but some are recommended for this area. For school immunization requirements visit the DoDEA website at www. 

dodea.edu. 

M=mandatory, R=recommended, HR=recommended only for persons at high risk, A=available, N/A=not available Acronyms used: EEC (U.S.): U.S Emergency Essential Civilian. DoD: Department of Defense. DoDDS: Department of Defense Dependent School CYSS: Child, Youth and School Services *Anthrax vaccination is available for family members 18-65 years old. For active duty service members, at least 3 shots in the series are required prior to coming to Korea. ** Smallpox vaccination is available for family members age 18 and older. Active duty service members should receive this vaccination prior to coming to Korea. Immunization EEC (US) DoD Civilians Family Members & DoDDS Employees DoDDS Students & CYSS Anthrax M A A* _Smallpox M A A** -Hepatitis A R A A MHepatitis B R HR HR MInfluenza R R HR RMeasles R R R MMeningitis Required for all Military, Civilian Personnel and Dependents over the age of 11yrs. Mumps R R R MRubella R R R MPolio R R R MTetanus M R R MDiphtheria M R R MTyphoid R A A -Japanese Encephalitis A A _ _Varicella HR HR HR MHemophilus influenzae type b R for over 2 yrs. Pneumococcal 23-valent R for > 65 yr, 7-valent R for young children 

Krzyzowski Hill (Itaewon Acres), Koelsch Grove (Eagle Grove) and Loring Village (Black Hawk Village) : These areas consist of multi-family townhouse style units. The units consist of 2, 3, or 4 bedroom homes. The 4-bedroom units are two stories and have ground floor access. The 2- and 3-bedroom units are either one story with ground floor access or two stories with second floor entrances. They are designated for field grade officers (O-4/5, and WO-4/5). The complexes are located in different areas of Yongsan South Post. The units have central air conditioning and heating, all major appliances (including dishwashers), and mini-blinds on all windows. Each unit has one exterior stor-age area; however, storage space in all units is limited. All units have linoleum floor tiles. There is one designated uncovered space for each unit and limited visitor parking. Personnel assigned to these housing units may have two do-mestic pets and are responsible for their care, maintenance and clean up. 

Off Post Housing : Housing on the economy is plentiful and offers a wide variety of styles, to include many high-rise apartments and villas, as well as a limited number of duplexes and single family dwelling units. If you are eligible to reside off post due to non-availability of adequate government quarters, or if you are a DoD civilian, you will be issued a statement of non-availability (SNA) from the Housing Office. Once you receive an SNA, you will be required to attend an Off Post Housing Briefing (offered Tuesdays and Thursdays 1500 at 19th ESC by Dragon Hill Lodge). The briefing will provide you a multitude of information about leasing on the economy, such as realtor information, security checklists, utility rates and housing allowance entitlements. Service members residing on the economy are entitled to a monthly Overseas Hous-ing Allowance (OHA) and Miscellaneous Housing Allowance (MIHA). The MIHA is provided to help defray the costs of setting up the off-post residence. Once you choose your off-post unit, the Housing Office will assist you with all the contract negotiations. You may choose to hire a realtor to assist with finding off-post housing to ease the selection process and expedite the negotiations with owners. For more information, call 738-3489. 

Note : DO NOT enter into a lease agreement without prior approval from the Housing Office. 104 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 105 

> K
> I

# K

## THE KOREAN FLAG 

Taegeukgi, the national flag of the Republic of Korea, consists of a blue and red yin-yang circle in the center, one black trigram in each of the four corners, and a white background. The white background symbolizes light and purity and reflects the Korean people’s traditional affinity for peace. The yin-yang circle represents the dual cosmic forces of yin (blue) and yang (red). It symbolizes universal harmony, in which the passive and the active, the feminine and the masculine, form a whole. The four trigrams represent Heaven, Earth, Water and Fire. Collectively, the yin-yang circle and the four trigrams represent universal harmony and unity. Taegeukgi embodies the ideals of all Koreans, who have pursued creativity and prosperity under universal principles and truth. For the Korean people their flag is a source of pride and inspiration. During the Japanese occupation period, beginning in 1910, the Korean flag was outlawed in public places. For the next 35 years the Taegeukgi flags were kept hidden until Liberation Day in 1945. The Korean flag is a symbol of the country’s struggle for independence and freedom. 

If you plan to travel outside Korea, check with the Clinical Preventive Medicine Ser-vice (PM) for current requirements in other countries (Bldg 5447, South Post just inside Gate 6, on the corner close to the Commissary, 736-3025). Websites for more informa-tion about immunizations and traveler’s health: U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Travelers Health: www.ced. gov/travel .

World Health Organization: www.who.int/en .

## INSURANCE 

The two types of insurance most commonly required by service members and their families in Korea are automobile insurance and household goods/ personal effects insurance. Automobile liability insurance is required to reg-ister a motor vehicle with the Provost Marshal. Many service members also choose to carry a “renter’s policy” to cover their personal property against fire and theft. Insurance is available locally or through companies in the U.S. The insurance company you do business with in the U.S. may also provide cover-age in Korea. You should confirm this prior to departing the U.S. There are also affordable, reputable companies in Korea who will provide coverage to Americans serving here. 

## INTERNET ACCESS 

The internet/telephone provider you use will depend on where you live. Contact the 41st Signal Battalion first to establish line connectivity (Bldg 2320, 738-6900). Generally, the internet provider for on post housing areas, includ-ing K-16 Air base, is LG Dacom (1st floor, Moyer Community Activity Center, 723-7023/7030/Commercial 02-6355-5000). If you live off post, your internet provider will likely be Korea Telecom (KT) (02-797-0060). To get to the KT of-fice, exit Gate 14, walk to the main road and turn right. The office is a short distance up this road on the right side. See Telephone in A to Z. 

## INTERNET CAFÉ 

A Cyber Café is located at the Moyer Recreation Center (723-7023, 9 am-9 pm, daily). Usage rates are determined on a sliding scale, based on the amount of hours purchased. The Business Centre in the Dragon Hill Lodge (738-2222/6826) and the One Stop Center (02-792-6655) located above the Embassy Starbucks, also offers fee paying internet access call. Free Wi-Fi ac-cess is available at the Food Courts on both Main and South posts as well at the Navy Club and the library. 106 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 107 

> L
> K

Real and personal property : Purchase, sale, or rental of property. 

Economic issues : Includes debt, banking, credit and non-government claims. 

Civilian administrative issues : Includes immigration and naturalization. 

Military administrative issues : Line of duty investigations, reports of survey, evaluation report appeals and security clearance revocation. 

Other Services : Notarization services 

Eligibility : The following people are eligible to receive legal assistance at the Yongsan Legal Assistance Office: Active Component (AC) members of the U.S. military and their family members; Reserve Component (RC) service members serving on active duty pursuant to orders, and their family members; surviving family members of AC, RC, and retired service members who would be eligible for legal assistance if the service or retired member were alive; DoD civilian employees and their family members and civilian contractors, if the Department of Defense is contractually obligated to provide such assistance. Contractors must provide a copy of their contract or accreditation letter to verify this obligation (not all services are available to contractors). 

## LIBRARY SERVICES 

The Yongsan Library is the Main Post Library for HQ, 8th U.S. Army and USAG-Yongsan installations. The library is the clearinghouse for all inter-library loans. Over 80,000 materials are available for circulation, including fiction, non-fiction, children’s books, reference books, DVDs, music CDs, language tapes and audio books, as well as an extensive listing of magazines and stateside newspapers. The library offers research computers and workstations dedicated to Internet access. These are popular with patrons, so a sign up system has been instituted. Free Wi-Fi is also available throughout the building. The library offers weekly story time every Tuesday 10-11 am for children ages 2-5 years old. Yongsan Post Library Bldg 2215, 723-7380/6862, Daily 10 am-7 pm. Story Hour Tuesday 10:30 am-11:30 am. K-16 Library Seoul Air Base Library offers access to a wide range of library materials and online databases (Sung Nam City, Bldg: #S302, 741-6994, Tues-Sat 11 am-7 pm Closed Sun. and Mon. Story Hour Wed. 11 am-12 pm.) 

## KOREAN LANGUAGE CLASSES 

Korean language classes are offered periodically through ACS (Tues and Thurs evenings in the ACS building, 738-7505). These classes are usually free of charge but a small fee may apply for workbooks. The classes help you master enough Korean to get around the country. Koreans appreciate the fact that you are trying to learn their language and will often offer assistance. Classes are advertised in the free weekly newspaper The Morning Calm. The PX and the Mini-Mart book section at the Dragon Hill Lodge maintain a good selection of books on learning the Korean language. Many come with audiotapes. The University of Maryland campus at Yongsan Garrison offers university-level Korean classes (723-4300/723-4294/723-4295, www.asia.umuc.edu. The Global Village of Itaewon as well as other locations in Seoul offer Korean language classes throughout the year. For more information please call 02-2199-8883. 

# L

## LAUNDRY FACILITIES 

A 24-hour AAFES launderette is located in Bldg 4220 (near the South Post Mini-Mall). AAFES also provides other dry-cleaning and laundry services on Main Post. 

## LEGAL ASSISTANCE 0FFICE 

The Yongsan Legal Assistance Office (Bldg 4106, South Post Room 229, Mon-Wed, Fri 9 am-4:30 pm/Thurs 1-3:30 pm) offers a wide variety of legal services in the following areas. Services in a particular listed area may be limited. 

Family law : Includes marriage, annulment, legal separation, divorce, financial nonsupport, child custody/visitation, paternity and adoption. 

Estates : Wills, living wills, health care powers of attorney, and the designation of beneficiaries under life insurance policies. 

> L

## 108 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 109 

> M
> M

contractors, and their family members. • To make doctor’s appointment at the 121st CSH BAACH, you need to call Central Appointing Line at 737-CARE (2273). You may expect to obtain an appointment for an acute/same day care within 24 hours. You can expect to obtain an appointment for an acute/same day care within 24 hours; open access (same calendar day); routine (7 calendar days); wellness (28 calendar days); and specialty care (28 calendar days). 

Hospital Telephone Directory 

CLINICS LOCATION HOURS OF OPERA -

TION PHONE                                                   

> Alcohol Treatment Center (Clearing Bldg # 3707) 737-5208 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Ambulatory Care Clinic (ACC) 737-1142/1147 121st CSH M-F 0730-1300 Ambulatory Surgical Center (ASC) 2nd Floor 737-3209 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Anesthesiology 737-1353/1362 121st CSH (2nd Floor) M-F 0730-1630 Audiology 737-1225 121st CSH (1st Floor) M-F 0730-1630/ Thursday 1300 Behavioral Health (Outpatient Psychiatry) 737-5508 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630/ Thursday 1300-1630 Behavioral Health (Inpatient Psychiatry Unit) 737-1455 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Behavioral Health Clinic Patient Appointment 737-5508 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630/ Thursday 1300 Billing Office for Insurance Claim 737-3685 121st CSH (1st Floor, Next to PAD) M-F 0730-1130/ 1300-1630 Central Appointing Line 737-2273 121st CSH (2nd Floor) M-F 0700-1800 Except US Holidays Chaplain Services 737-1635/1638 121st CSH M-F 0730-1700 Dental Clinic #1 725-8271/3063 Next to TMC Main Post M-F 0730-1630 Dental Clinic # 2 736-4779 Next to Hospital M-F 0730-1630 Dental Clinic # 3 736-5221/5799 Behind Elementary School M-F 0730-1630 Dental Emergency 737-5545/6001 121st CSH After Working Hours & Holidays Dermatology Clinic 737-1172 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 EDIS (Handicap educational Development) 737-1300/1301 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630

# M

## MILITARY POLICE Yongsan : Bldg 1397, Main Post, 724-3004/3005/6695/4258, Commercial 02-797-4096/4097, DSN 050-5724-3004/3005 Lines manned 24 hours daily. 

The Provost Marshal’s Administrative Office : 724-4281. The Provost Marshal’s Office (PMO) has many phone numbers that are listed in the Community Help Book, available at ACS. 

Other Emergency Numbers 

Ambulance/Fire: 119 off post/911 on post land-line Korean National Police: 112 Military Police: 911/724-3004/3005 

## MATERNITY CLOTHING See Shopping - Special Interest. 

## MEDICAL SERVICES 

The 121st CSH Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital (BAACH) is located South Post nearby Gate 13 (Visitor’s Gate, Icheon Subway Station). The hospital provides medical care to the activity duty soldiers, retirees, and their family members. DoD civilian employees, contractors, and their family members may be seen doctors at the 121st CSH BAACH based upon space availability. The hospital operating hours are from 0730 to 1630 Monday thru Friday except holidays. For more information please go to www.korea.amedd.army.mil. The followings are priority of care: • Priority 1: Active duty service members • Priority 2: Active duty family members who are enrolled in the Tricare Prime (Command Sponsored Family Members) • Priority 3: Retirees, their family members, and survivors who are enrolled in the Tricare Prime • Priority 4: Active duty family members who are not enrolled in the Tricare Prime (Non-Command Sponsorship Family Members) • Priority 5: All other eligible persons such as DoD civilian employees, 110 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 111 

> M
> M

Pharmacy for Inpatient 737-4633/3055 121st CSH M-F 0730-2000 Sat.Sun & Holiday Pharmacy for Outpatient 737-2072/2076 121st CSH M-F 0730-1800 Pharmacy for Refill 737-2074 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Podiatry Surgery 737-1180 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Primary Care Clinic 737-1142 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Pulmonary Function Tests 737-5560 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Radiology 737-1476 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Respiratory Therapy 737-1579/1577 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Social Work Services (Coun-seling Behavior) 737-1901 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Speech Pathology 737-2062 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Surgical Clinic 737-1047 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Tobacco Cessation 725-4930/4919 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Telephone Consult (T-CON) – Primary Care Clinic Internal Medicine 737-1011 737-5514 121st CSH 24/7 Treasury Office for DoD Civilians 737-1858 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 TRICARE Office for Active Duty FM & Retirees 737-1433/1074 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 TRICARE Dental Clinic 736-5051/737-1450 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Veteran Affairs for Medical 738-5121 M-F 0730-1630 Women Infant Care Unit 737-4243 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Women Infant Care Overseas 737-6074 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Yongsan Health Clinic (Troop Clinic) 737-1396/1397/1398 Main Post Bldg 1663 M-F 0730-1630 Telephone Key Punch System Central Appointment Office: 737-CARE (2273) Emergency: Press 9 At any time to cancel an appointment: Press 3 121 (BAACH) Hospital: Press 1 Outlying Health Clinics: Press 2 Cancelling an Appointment: Press 3 Information Desk: Press 4 

Internal Medicine: Press 1-1 Primary Care Clinic (Family Practice): Press 1-1 Ear, Eye, Nose & Throat (EENT) 737-1285 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Exceptional Family Member Program (EFMP) 737-1282/1283 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Emergency Room (ER) Ambulance Service 737-5545/6001 737-3505 121st CSH 24/7 Family Advocacy Program 737-1901 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Immunization Desk 737-1162 121st CSH M-F 0730-1530/ Thursday 1300-Information Desk (After 1630 hrs Staff Duty) 737-1411/ 3085/3155 121st CSH 24/7 Intensive Care Unit (ICU) 737-1455/1456 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Internal Medicine 737-1143 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Laboratory 737-6918 121st CSH Mon-Fri 0730-1630 Closed 1st Thurs Medical Records 737-1866/1867 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Mental Health Clinic/Hotline 737-5508 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Multi-Care Unit 737-1823/1824 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Neurosurgery 737-1375/1378 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 New Parent Support Home Visit Nurse 738-5311/7034 ACS M-F 0730-1630 Nutrition Clinic 737-1570 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 OB/GYN 737-1310/1311 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Occupational Health Services 737-1750 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Occupational Health Nurse 737-1746 Bldg 5477, Nearby Commissary M-F 0730-1630 Occupational Health Nurse 737-6167 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Operating Room 737-1362/1363 121ts CSH M-F 0730-1630 Optometry 737-1464 Main Post Bldg 1625 M-F 0730-1630 Oral Surgery 737-1257/1301 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Orthopedic Surgery 737-1375/1378 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 OT/Physical Therapy/ Physical Medicine 737-1180/1181 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Pathology 737-2042 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Patient Administration (PAD) 737-5800 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Patient Advocacy 737-1125/1126 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 Pediatrics Clinic 737-1144/1145 121st CSH M-F 0730-1630 112 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 113 

> M
> M

Central Appointment Desk: Press 2-5-1 

TRICARE Office: Press 2-5-2 

Telephone Consult Line: Press 2-5-3 

Prenatal Care and Childbirth : There are many options for giving birth in Seoul hospitals. Contact the OB/GYN clinic and TRICARE for more information. The resources section of www.birthinginkorea.com lists birth centers in the Seoul and Kyunggi Provinces, as well as contact information for the Korean Midwives Association. Doulas provide non-medical, labor, breastfeeding and post-partum support. Doulas without post access can be signed onto post for births at the BAACH or homebirths on post. 

Homebirths/Natural Birth : A midwife is a medically trained professional who is an expert in natural birth. Some midwives in Korea attend homebirths. Their level of English varies. Rosa (Kim Ok-Jin) OK Birth Center/MediFlower (Excellent English) - www. okbirth.com; 019-2447-8321 

Medi Flower Birthing Center: Dr. Hwan Wook Chung, whose MediFlower Clinic is located in Gangnam near the Seoul University of Education metro stop, will also attend homebirths and can be signed on post. He speaks English very well. Several people have been successful in getting reimbursed for his fees by TRICARE in the past few years. The birthing center is brand new and offers water birth and a lactation specialist. They can handle high-risk pregnancies and can perform cesarean surgeries if necessary. The clinic has special rates for military. Most of the staff speak English. 02-548-9400 Direct Line to English-speaking consultant, Stella: 010-8550-9742. Medi Flower has a Facebook page and is in the process of developing a web page. 

Childbirth Education/Labor Preparation Classes : On post childbirth preparation classes are held at the hospital and taught by CAPT Landis from the WICU. She is in the process of trying to get breastfeeding classes started again as well as a breastfeeding support group. Classes are free. For those choosing to birth off-post or wanting a more in-depth childbirth course there are several options including in the resources section below. 

La Leche League (LLL) : The La Leche League is a volunteer-based organization that provides free mother-to-mother support. La Leche League meets the fourth Thursday of the month at 10:30. For more information, La Leche League of Seoul on Facebook or visit http://www.llli.org/groups/@ llli*group*seoul. Pediatrics: Press 1-1 Dermatology: Press 1-1 For Special Clinic: Press 1-2 

OB GYN: Press 1-2-1 

Orthopedics, Podiatry, Neurosurgery: Press 1-2-2 

Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Physical Med: Press 1-2-3 

Surgical Clinic: Press 1-2-4 

EENT: Press 1-2-5 

Optometry: Press 1-2-6 

Audiology: Press 1-2-7 T-Con Line for leaving a message 24/7: Press 1-3 Behavioral Health: Press 1-4 

Mental Health: Press 1-4-1 

Social Work: Press 1-4-2 Pharmacy: Press 1-5 Radiology or Laboratory: Press 1-6 

Radiology: Press 1-6-1 

Laboratory: Press 1-6-2 TRICARE Office: Press 1-7 More Information: Press 1-0 Go Back to Main Menu: Press 1-# Hear These Options Again: Press 1-* Yongsan Troop Medical Clinic: Press 2-1 

Central Appointment Desk: Press 2-1-1 

Telephone Consult Line: Press 2-1-2 Camp Casey Medical Clinic: Press 2-2 

Central Appointment Desk: Press 2-2-1 

TRICARE Office: Press 2-2-2 

Telephone Consult Line: Press 2-2-3 Camp Humphrey Medical Clinic: Press 2-3 

Central Appointment Desk: Press 2-3-1 

TRICARE Office: Press 2-3-2 

Telephone Consult Line: Press 2-3-3 Camp Carroll Medical Clinic: Press 2-4 

Central Appointment Desk: Press 2-4-1 

TRICARE Office: Press 2-4-2 

Telephone Consult Line: Press 2-4-3 Camp Walker Medical Clinic: Press 2-5 114 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 115 

> M
> M

Erin is a mother of five. She and her husband, David, are trained in the Bradley Method of Husband Coached Childbirth. She offers childbirth classes and doula services in/near Pohang along with the Women’s Hope Center. • Gail Lantz: Seoul and Gyeonggi (on maternity leave until September) http://praisebabiesdoula.weebly.com/ Gail Lantz is CBI (Childbirth International) certified. She can help women in Songtan, Pyeongtaek, and Seoul with labor assistance and doula care. While on maternity leave she will still be able to help women via phone or email. • Jamie Scholberg: Pyeongtaek https://www.facebook.com/groups/240929022685476/ jscholberg@gmail.com, 010-5184-4554 Jamie has base access. She’s a military spouse who facilitates a local breastfeeding support group for mothers in Camp Humphreys/Pyeongtaek area once a month. She’s also available to meet with moms one-on-one. • Jinny Lee: Seoul http://www.mamadoula.co.kr jinnycanfly@mamadoula.co.kr 010-8902-4180 Jinny is certified by DONA (Doulas of North America) International as a birth doula, a certified HypnoBirthing practitioner, and certified by the IAIM (International Association of Infant Massage). • Lisa Boston lisajboston@gmail.com She’s studying to be a doula with CBI (Childbirth International). • Milky Mamas in Korea http://www.facebook.com/groups/145572678911543/ A Facebook group for breastfeeding moms in Korea. • Miriam Mangano: Seoul http://www.birthinginkorea.com miriamdoulainseoul@gmail.com Miriam has base access. She’s working on her birth doula certification through CBI (Childbirth International). She will be starting her certificate for placenta encapsulation soon. She speaks English, Italian, and Korean. • Morgane Constanty: Seoul http://www.birthinginkorea.com morgane.doula@gmail.com She’s a certified birth doula with CBI (Childbirth International). She speaks English, Spanish, and French. 

BIRTH RESOURCES 

• Adele Vitale Roh: Ulsan http://www.maternachildbirth.blogspot.com adele.vitale@gmail.com Adele is studying to be a birth doula and childbirth educator with CBI (Child Birth International). She speaks Italian, Chinese, and English. • Amy Brand Holt: Pyeongtaek (will be going on maternity leave starting in May), 010-2721-8962 Amy has base access. She is studying to be a CBE (Childbirth Educator) with ICEA (International Childbirth Educators Association). • Casey Kim: Medi Flower, Seoul http://www.mediflower.co.kr, mediflower.clinic@gmail.com http://www.bellyblisskorea.com, bellyblisskorea@gmail.com At the moment Casey is offering doula services for women who birth at Medi Flower or with women who have home births with Medi Flower’s doctors/midwives. She trained with DONA (Doulas of North America) and is certified as a doula and breastfeeding counselor through CBI (Childbirth International). She’s able to do placenta encapsulation for anyone in Korea. She’s a certified placenta encapsulation specialist (PES) through PBi (Placenta Benefits Information). Encapsulation helps with postpartum recovery, lactation, and prevents fatigue and postpartum depression. • Chantal Marie: Seoul/Seongnam http://www.chantalmariedoula.com chantalmariedoula@gmail.com Chantal is studying to be a birth doula with CAPPA (Childbirth and Postpartum Professional Association). She also does birth photography. As a military spouse, Chantal has base access and volunteers for Operation Special Delivery. She offers discounts for military. • (Dr.) Chung, Hwan-wook: Seoul http://www.mediflower.co.kr 02-548-9400 Dr. Chung is an obgyn at Medi Flower. He is a certified HypnoBirthing practitioner. • Diana Penuela: Ulsan dianapenuela1@gmail.com She is studying to be a birth doula. She speaks English and Spanish. • Erin Mundy: Pohang erin@whckorea.org 116 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 117 

> M
> M

VKharberRYT@gmail.com 010-6736-0511 She teaches prenatal and postpartum yoga. She’s a certified postpartum doula through CBI (Childbirth International). She also teaches free breastfeeding classes a couple times a year. • Victoria Berezenska: Seoul and Gyeonggi; willing to travel kievvika@yahoo.com She trained as a doula through DONA (Doulas of North America) and is working on her certification. • Youngjoo Shin: Busan 010-3864-4852 Youngjoo is an English speaking international lactation consultant. 

Off Post Medical Care : For individuals who require medical care off post, there are several doctors and clinics that service the foreign community. The 18th MEDCOM currently maintains partnerships with 19 state-of-the-art Korean hospitals. These hospitals feature American educated and trained specialists, as well as English speaking staff members to assist American personnel and offer a wide array of services to those serving throughout the Korean peninsula. Emergency: 119 Seoul Help Center for Foreigners English Help Line: 02-797 8212. Mon-Fri 9:30 am-12:30 pm & 2-5 pm 24-Hour English Medical Referral Service. 010-4769-8212, 010-8750-8212 Seoul Help Center 02-731-6800, Fax 02-731-6803, Mon-Fri 9 am-6 pm 

Off Post Patient Health Care Guide : BAACH has implemented a new patient program to ensure TRICARE Representatives, Nurse Case Managers and Host Patient Liaisons are assigned to the BAACH and each of the outlying health clinics are available to help. Providers will refer you (transport and guides are provided) to host nation partnership hospitals and/or clinics for the specialty care you require when the services are not available within the military system. Host nation partnership hospitals and clinics provide the highest quality of health care and all are accredited by the Joint Commission International or the Korean Hospital Association. Many of the medical staff speak English and a significant number were trained in America. A staff of Host Nation Patient Liaisons assist patients as well. The Nurse Case Mangers visit all our beneficiaries if they require hospitalization and conduct telephone follow ups with the Korean healthcare team providing your medical care. • Natascha Otto: Andong, Gyeongsangbuk nataschaotto2@gmail.com , 010-4058-3341 Natascha is a qualified physiotherapist and is studying to be a birth doula with CBI (Childbirth International) • (Dr.) Park, JieWon: Seoul http://www.yeonandnature.com 02-518-1300 Dr. Park is an obgyn who works at Yeon and Nature. She is a certified HypnoBirthing practitioner. • Postpartum Depression Support in Korea https://www.facebook.com/groups/ppdepressionkorea/ This is a Facebook group run by a counselor and a woman who suffered from PPD. • Rachel Stols: Seoul and Gyeonggi rachel.stols@gmail.com She’s studying to be a doula through CBI (Childbirth International). • Rosa (Kim Okjin) http://www.okbirth.com 031-410-8597, 010-2447-8231, or 019-447-8231 ojkim80@hanmail.net Rosa is a midwife and a certified HypnoBirthing practitioner. • Sarah Houser: Seoul and Gyeonggi sarah.m.houser@outlook.com She lives in Songtan (near Osan and Humphries). She is certified through CBI (Childbirth International). In addition to labor doula services, she teaches a natural birthing class and offers free breastfeeding support. • Sharon Couzens: Seoul www.tenderembracebirthing.blogspot.com sharondehinojosa@gmail.com 010-9129-3981 She is a certified child birthing educator through CBI (Childbirth International) and is working towards her postpartum doula certificate with CBI. 

• Vanessa Reid: Gwangju and Jeolla vanessa_c_reid@yahoo.ca She’s studying to be a doula and a breastfeeding counselor with CBI (Childbirth International). • Vania Kent Harber: Seoul www.vkharber.com and https://www.facebook.com/pages/VKHarber-RYT 118 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 119 

> M
> M

## MOVIE THEATER 

The Multi Purpose Training Facility (MPTF) is a complex used for business meetings and family entertainment. It houses three movie screens offering a variety of movies, including recent releases and 3D movies. Movies are provided for a nominal fee (Bldg 4218, South Post, for a listing of movies and times call 738-7389/3154 or visit Movie listings are found at the movie theater and various eateries on post. 

> South Post Movie Theater

The BAACH provides a free shuttle service for patients and their family members to and from appointments at several host nation partnership hospitals. Visit the TRICARE section of the 65th Medical Brigade Website, www.korea.amedd.army.mil, for more information on each of the host nation partnership hospitals, as well as maps and answers to frequently asked questions. 

Optical : For information on frames, lenses or complete pairs of eyeglasses, see Shopping– Special Interest. For eye examination appointments call 725-3601/5432. No contact lens fittings are done at the hospital, so bring a valid contact lens prescription and a 6 month to a 1 year supply of lenses with you. You can reorder contacts at the Optical Shop with a valid contact lens prescription, on the Korean economy or over the internet. 

Referrals : Most visits to a host nation partnership hospital or clinic typically begin with a referral from your Primary Care Manager at the local Military Treatment Facility (MTF). If the needed care is not available at the Military Treatment Facility, a Host Nation Appointment Clerk or TRICARE Representative at your local TRICARE Office will assist in making your appointment at one of our host nation partnership hospitals or medical clinics. Usually, the Host Nation Appointment Clerk will make your appointment, schedule transportation on one of the TRICARE courtesy shuttles, and provide you with a claim form and any necessary medical documentation or care authorizations needed for your medical appointment. Although our host nation partnership hospitals and clinics accept self referrals, it is best to work through your local 65th Medical Brigade TRICARE Office to coordinate your care. The payment for your care at the Korean facility will depend on your TRICARE status or other insurance plan you may have. When you call to make your appointment TRICARE staff will advise you on your coverage and financial responsibilities at that time. 

Tricare : See TRICARE in A to Z. 

Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) Overseas : A program designed to provide: nutritious food, tips on how to prepare a balanced meal, nutrition/ health screening and access to resources to lead a healthier life (Bldg 5210, South Post, across from the BAACH Emergency Room, for information or to find out if you are eligible call 737-6074). Camp Red Cloud 732-8403 Tuesdays 8-2:30 Bldg. 2451 Unit 15707. Camp Casey 730-3436 M-F 8-4:30 ACS– Bldg 15543. Camp Humphreys 753-6909 M-F 8-4:30 Bldg 1127 Unit 15528. Osan Air Base 784-3806 T,W,Th 8-3:30 Bldg 768. Camp Daegu 768-9424 T,W, Th 8-4:30, Bldg. 1425. The program provides benefits to eligible pregnant women, and later, their infants for at least six months and possibly up to one year. Eligible children may participate up to age five. 120 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 121 

> N
> M

of payment since many delivery people have limited English skills. The Stars & Stripes and USA Today are widely available in vending machines on post. The 

Morning Calm Weekly is a complimentary newspaper available every Friday. The Yongsan Library offers several large city newspapers, which generally ar-rive three to four days after publication dates. • Morning Calm : The Morning Calm is not available for home delivery but can be picked up for free at various locations on base to include the food courts, Burger King and some shoppettes, 738-5005 • Stars & Stripes : www.stripes.com, 721-7140 or email circkorea@pstripes. osd.mil • The Korean Herald : www.koreaherald.com, (82)-1588-0533, email sub-scribe@heraldm.com • Korean Times : www.koreatimes.co.kr 02-724-2715 or email subscrip-tion@koreatimes.co.kr • International New York Times : www.global.nytimes.com • USA Today : www.usatoday.com 

## NONCOMBATANT EVACUATION OPERATIONS (NEO) 

While Korea is a relatively safe location, it is important that all noncomba-tants be prepared to evacuate both quickly and safely. Noncombatant Evacua-tion Operations (NEO) is directed by the U.S. Department of State, to evacuate eligible personnel from foreign countries where their lives are endangered by war, natural disaster or civil unrest to safe haven. Those U.S. personnel con-sidered noncombatants are family members of U.S. DoD military and civilian employees, non-emergency essential U.S. civilian employees and DoD invited contractors and their families. Both command sponsored and non-command sponsored families are eligible for evacuation assistance from Korea. Military members and emergency essential civilian employees are not considered noncombatants and will remain in Korea until directed otherwise. All DoD af-filiated noncombatants must register for NEO with their NEO warden. To help noncombatants prepare for a possible evacuation, U.S. Forces Korea conducts a semi-annual Courageous Channel Exercise. All DoD affiliated noncombatants are required to participate in these exercises in order to rehearse evacuation procedures and to train personnel who support NEO execution. In addition to participating in Courageous Channel, each family is required to maintain a NEO kit that includes important documents, enough food and water for three days and protective gas masks (issued by the military). For more information see Force Protection in A to Z. 

## MOYER COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES CENTER (MCAC) 

(Bldg 2258, Main Post near Gate 2, 723-3291/3292 or http://www. mwrkorea.com/). MCAC has a family oriented atmosphere and is one of the largest multipurpose facilities on post, with game rooms, pool tables, darts, table tennis, foosball and Korean billiards. Various events are held throughout the year, such as chess, card tournaments, and Wii tournaments, flea markets and special holiday and family events. The BOSS lounge is available on the second floor. In addition, you can relax in comfortable chairs and watch movies, sports or your favorite shows on TV in the lounge. The Cyber Café (723-7023) is located on the first floor. You can check email, talk to friends and family or just have fun surfing the web. Musical instruments and sound rooms (723-3266) are available for rent upon request and instruments include guitar, bass and drums. Also located on the first floor is the Smoothie King. There is a MWR Trophy Shop located on the first floor that provides engraving services for items such as trophies, plaques and nameplates. The American Red Cross is also located at MCAC. See American Red Cross in A to Z. Moyer Outdoor Rec is also located in the MCAC building. They offer rentals including bounce houses, cotton candy machines, and more for birthday parties and events as well as reserving picnic areas on Yongsan. MCAC is also the hub for all post bus transportation. Current bus schedules are available at the Military Bus Office and the Korean Bus Ticketing Office on the ground floor. Buses depart regularly to and from Osan Air Base, Camp Humphreys and many other locations. If you want to travel to other parts of Asia or the world, visit Leisure Travel Services for official and unofficial travel, located on the second floor of MCAC. See Travel– Travel Services for more information. 

# N

## NEWSPAPERS 

Subscriptions for the Stars & Stripes, The Korean Herald, The Korean Times ,

and USA Today are available for delivery. The International New York Times 

and USA Today do not deliver papers on Sunday. Keep your receipts for proof 

> N

## 122 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 123 

> P

# P

# PETS 

The 106th Medical Detachment (VSSD) primarily provides preventive veterinary medical and surgical care for privately owned animals on a space available basis as demand exceeds clinic staffing and capabilities. Six Veteri-nary Treatment Facilities (VTFs) in Korea are located at USAG Casey, USAG Red Cloud, USAG Yongsan, Osan Air Base, USAG Humphreys, and USAG Walker. The six clinics work together to provide a range of veterinary care services including vaccinations, lab work, x-rays and ultrasound, microchips, surgery, dental cleaning, and health certificates. VTFs do not provide after-hour emer-gency care services. Veterinary care at VTFs is limited during military training exercises. For more information, visit the 106th Medical Detachment (VSSD) web-site at www.korea.amedd.army.mil/veterinary/index.html. Yongsan VTF offers services by appointment only. Call DSN 737-2450 or 02-7918-5145. If calling from the United States, dial 011-822-7918-5145. The Yongsan VTF is located on South Post, Building 4728, adjacent to the AAFES gas station. 

## IMPORTING A PET TO KOREA 

Bringing your fur baby to the Republic of Korea requires you start the pro-cess early (3-4 months for dogs/cats). A checklist for bringing cats and dogs is included below. All other pets require different paperwork and have different quarantine specifications. For more information, start by contacting the pro-jected airline, your local vet, and researching the internet for country restric-tions (both ingoing and outgoing). If you encounter problems at Incheon airport, contact the USFK Incheon Customs Office or call DSN 723-7561, Monday through Friday 8:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. After duty hours or on weekends and holidays, contact the USFK Customs Senior On-Duty Officer at 010-8834-0267. 

NOTE: All pets must be registered at the nearest VTF within 10 days of ar-rival or purchase. ISO compatible microchips are mandatory on and off the military installation. Pet owners not living on a military installation must also register (license) pets at the city hall nearest their residence 

# O

## ORIENTAL PRESS 

Oriental Press is a commercial printing and publishing contractor with a long-term presence and commitment to the U.S. military community in Korea (Bldg 1440, Main Post behind the Community Bank, 738-5005, PSC 450, Box 758, APO AP 96206). Since 1990, the company has been a valued resource for a variety of services, to include printing of business cards and other stationery, military gift items such as unit coins, plaques and presentation projects, in-cluding specialty articles of almost any description. Oriental Press prints and distributes The Morning Calm Newspaper and The Seoul Survivor Publication ,free of charge, as a service to the community. 

## OFF BASE MEDICAL CARE 

One of the surprising things about living in Korea is the lower cost of elec-tive care procedures off base. A service that helps many families is the infertil-ity options. From IUI to IVF and everything in between, Korea’s infertility clinics offer options not covered by TriCare at a fraction of the cost of treatments in the United States. Many doctors in Korea studied abroad and speak English. Some are even certified in the U.S. or have had practices there. Additionally, if you have thought about Lasik Eye Surgery, Cosmetic Sur-gery, Laser Hair Removal or Chiropractic Care, you could save hundreds to thousands of dollars by having those procedures done here. As with any medi-cal service talk to other spouses and ask for recommendations on where to go. There are a ton of us who have taken advantage of these services and chances are you will meet someone who has done what you are thinking about right now. 

> O

## 124 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 125 

> PP

Your pet may accompany you on your flight to Korea or your pet may travel unaccompanied. If you choose unaccompanied travel for your pet, you may want to consider using an animal or pet broker that will serve as your repre-sentative to negotiate the process for you. The following links for commercial pet travel brokers are listed for informa-tional purposes only: AQIS (Animal Quarantine Inspection Service): www.aqis.co.kr/index. php?siteLang=eng The First Class Pet: www.thefirstclasspet.com Korea Animal Transport: www.cwhospital.com/kat/process(eng).htm VESCO (Korean only): www.vesco.kr/home2/htm/main.htm 

## PET QUARANTINE 

The Quarantine Inspection Agency determines if your pet meets all re-quirements for entry into the Republic of Korea. Quarantine is located near the Incheon Airport or at the Yongsan Pet Care Center (an official quarantine facility for military personnel). The pet must be registered as soon as it is released from quarantine. For official information on quarantine, visit http:// www.qia.go.kr/english/html/Animal_livestock/02AnimalLivestock_007-8.jsp. 

## DOG RESTRICTIONS 

No specific dog restrictions are listed for entering the Republic of Korea; however, airlines have specific guidelines for certain breeds. Contact your car-rier for more detailed requirements for transporting your pet. If you own an American Staffordshire Bull Terrier (Amstaff), Bull Terrier, Argentinean Dogo, Japanese Tosa, Staffordshire Bull Terrier (English Staff), Pit Bull Terrier, Brazilian Fila and Rottweiler including mixed breed dogs that appear to be a predomi-nant breed listed, you should verify the specific breed restrictions at your new duty location prior to your PCS. 

## PET BOARDING AND GROOMING SERVICES 

Yongsan Pet Care Center is located next to Gate 13 at Building 5256. The phone number is DSN 736-6426 or 723-3291. The Pet Care Facility houses 21 dogs and 17 cats in condo-like quarters with 24 hour veterinary care and is an official quarantine facility for the Republic of Korea. Services available are grooming and boarding. Hours are Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. -6:00 p.m. and Saturday 9:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. The facility is closed on Sundays and 

## WHAT TO EXPECT: PET AIRLINE TRAVEL 

United States airports require physical screening of all pets and kennels transported in the passenger cabin, accompanied baggage, or as air cargo. If your pet is “carry-on luggage,” you will remove your pet from its kennel and walk through passenger screening at the security checkpoint. The kennel will undergo the same procedures as carry-on luggage or checked bags. For pets transported as cargo, the airline may require you to remove your pet from its kennel to allow for security screening of the kennel before your pet begins transport. Most airlines only allow a limited number of pets on a flight, so you may want to book earlier rather than later. Be prepared to provide your pet’s breed, size, weight, and crate dimensions. Ask about the airline’s requirements, including health checks and docu-ments to confirm that there have been no changes. 

## PET TRAVEL ON KOREA’S TWO MAJOR AIRLINES 

Korean Air and Asiana Airlines permit pets on flights under certain condi-tions: 1) All pets must be kept inside a carrier during flight. Some pets may be brought into the cabin, while others may not. Guide dogs may be brought into the cabin without any size or weight restrictions. 2) Pets (cats and dogs) may be brought into the cabin if the combined weight of a pet and its carry-on carrier does not exceed 5kg (11lbs). Carrier must fit under the seat, dimensions must not exceed 115cm (Height restric-tions: 20-22cm on Korean Air; 21cm on Asiana Airlines). 3) Pets (cats and dogs) must travel in the cargo compartment if the com-bined weight of a pet and its carrier exceeds 5kgs (11lbs). The carrier’s di-mensions must not exceed 246cm (Height restrictions: 86-88cm on Korean Air; 84cm on Asiana Airlines). Also, the combined weight of a pet and its carrier may not exceed 32kg (70lbs). 4) All other animals including rabbits, hamsters, turtles, etc. must be trans-ported in a separate cargo aircraft operated by a cargo airline. 5) Each passenger is allowed to carry only one pet onboard. 

## UNACCOMPANIED PET TRAVEL 

Moving can present some interesting hiccups. You have choices if you want to bring your pet bird, guinea pig, rabbit, cat or dog. 126 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 127 

> PP

rabies vaccination and other health certificates are not required. Not all birds are granted entry to Korea. Requirements are subject to change at any time, please check before importing your bird by calling 82-32-740-2660. 

Required Documents for Other Animals 

Guinea pigs, rabbits, and other rodents pose a set of unique circumstances for moving to the Republic of Korea. The two major airlines coming to Korea do not allow rodents in the cabin or on the plane as baggage. These exotic pets must fly cargo. Either work directly with airlines or hire a pet broker. The quarantine for the exotic pets is mandated by the Quarantine Inspection Agency. 

## HOUSING – AUTHORIZATION OF PETS Military Housing 

Government and civilian housing policies differ as to authorization, num-ber, and types of pets. Pets are not permitted in the Dragon Hill Lodge. Care for your pet will have to be pre-arranged prior to arrival at Dragon Hill Lodge or temporary housing. Statements of Non-Availability (SNA) for off post housing are not always an option. USAG–Yongsan housing areas that allow two domestic pets are: Helo Acres, Watkins Ridge, Krzyzowski Hill (Itaewon Acres), Koelsch Grove (Eagle Grove) and Loring Village (Black Hawk Village). Burke Towers and Hannam Village are “no-pet” housing areas and there are no exceptions (discuss with housing beforehand if you have a service animal). 

Housing on the Economy 

Housing on the economy does not always accommodate pets, especially large pets. Korean apartments that allow pets are difficult to find because few allow pets. Ask your property manager or landlord about pet allowances before signing a lease. 

## PET NON-COMBATANT EVACUATION OPERATION (NEO) IN KOREA 

USFK will make reasonable efforts to evacuate pets of DoD affiliated per-sonnel but pets are likely to be separated from their families during an evacu-ation. The evacuation of people takes priority over pets. Only two pets per household are authorized transport in the event of a NEO. Pets registered and tracked by the NEO Tracking System help reunite pets with their families. All unaccompanied pet owners need to ensure they have a pet care plan. Please see your unit NEO warden on arrival. holidays. Payments can be remitted by cash or check, no credit card services available. Find them on Facebook at www.facebook.com/YSPCC. The staff can also function as a pet broker and will pick your pet up at the airport, clear customs, and deliver to the Pet Care Center for a fee. Contact the Pet Care Facility at 010-8633-1125 for more information. The Pet Care Center is not part of the Vet Clinic and is located in a different area on South Post. Adjacent to the Pet Care Center is a dog park for super-vised off leash dog exercise. The park is open every day 5:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. Note that pets are not allowed on ball fields, tennis courts, and basketball courts even if on a leash. PCS season means planning. Pets are not allowed at the Dragon Hill Lodge during your transition. For emergencies, please call 010-4397-3991. 

## PAPERWORK NEEDED TO MOVE YOUR PET TO KOREA 

The following are guidelines to make the transition easier. Transition be-gins as soon as you find out you are headed to Korea. 

Checklist: Import of cats and dogs aged 90 days or older 

1.  _____Vaccination Certificate 2.  _____ISO-compliant microchip (ISO11784 and 11785 standards) im-plant 3.  _____Rabies-neutralizing antibody test (“FAVN” test) 

> The rabies-neutralizing antibody test must be administered by an internationally approved laboratory or by the competent authority of the exporting country within 24 months prior to boarding. For a list of internationally approved laboratories for rabies antibody tests, visit: http:// ec.europa.eu/food/animal/liveanimals/pets/approval_en.htm

4.  _____Health certificate issued by USDA authorized veterinarian 

> Must confirm microchip number and list the result of the rabies antibody test

5.  _____Medical record 6.  _____Flight itinerary 7.  _____Letter of acclimation 8.  _____Copy of your orders 9.  _____Telephone number of a person at the destination 10.  _____Unit Forwarding Address in Korea 11.  _____Feeding schedule for your pet 12.  _____Personal Information about your pet 

Required Documents for Birds 

A quarantine certificate, issued by the exporting country’s quarantine au-thorities, is required when importing birds into Korea. Other documents like 128 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 129 

> PP

where to purchase a pet. Most VTFs handle the adoption of strays including many pure breeds. Ev-ery year during the PCS season, owners struggle to find new homes for animals they can no longer care for because of unforeseen reasons. Please research how much the airlines charge to ship pets in addition to reading the Dangerous Dog section prior to obtaining a pet. Be aware of the potential complications of pet ownership. 

## PCS FROM KOREA WITH A PET 

The cost of transporting your pet to your new duty station is your respon-sibility. Allow adequate time to meet any new requirements of your follow-on assignment. Consult with the Veterinary Treatment Facility and visit www. korea.amedd.army.mil/veterinary/index.html for detailed requirements to en-sure your pet can move with you. Transporting your pet to Europe, Hawaii, Ja-pan and several other destinations requires planning six months prior to your move date. 

## RETURNING TO THE UNITED STATES Useful Links 

Many publications are available online. Research the country of your pro-jected next duty station as early as possible and begin preparation as early as six months before moving. If you have any questions, contact the specific agency mentioned. The following websites provided useful information for this section about traveling with your pets. 

Code of Federal Regulation 

www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2002-title9-vol1/xml/CFR-2002-title9-vol1-sec93-600.xml 

Frequently Asked Export Questions 

www.aphis.usda.gov/regulations/vs/iregs/animals/animal_faq.shtml#one 

United States Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) 

www.cbp.gov/linkhandler/cgov/newsroom/publications/travel/pets_wild. ctt/pets.pdf 

Centers for Disease Control 

www.cdc.gov/animalimportation/dogs.html 

United States Department of State Pet Travel Policies 

www.state.gov/m/fsi/tc/c10442.htm 

USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services 

www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_welfare/pet_travel/pet_travel.shtml In the event pet owners decide to transport their pets out of country com-mercially, all costs associated with commercial transportation are the sole re-sponsibility of that family. If the United States Government transports a pet on a military or chartered aircraft, the military covers only the cost of transporting the animal from Korea to the first CONUS port of entry. The family is respon-sible for all costs incurred from port site to the family’s final destination. For more information on NEO and documentation, visit the 106th Medical Detachment (VSSD) website at www.korea.amedd.army.mil/veterinary/index. html. 

## LIFE WITH PETS IN KOREA Subways and Taxicabs 

Only small pets are permitted on public transportation as long as they are kept inside a pet carrier or bag at all times and do not make other passengers feel uncomfortable. Most taxicab services will not transport pets in South Korea. 

Shuttle bus 

Services between installations will allow pet transportation based on space available. If the pet can ride in the lap of the owner inside a carrier then there will be no additional charge. However, if the animal is large enough to require its own seat then you will be required to purchase ticket(s) for the seat space occupied. Pets are not authorized to travel underneath the bus as baggage. Small animals can travel on the free military shuttle that travels to and from the Incheon Airport and Dragon Hill Lodge at USAG Yongsan. However, large and giant breed animals must be transported via pet broker or pre-coordinat-ed travel arrangements (see Unaccompanied Pet Travel section). 

Tourist Sites 

Tourist sites and cultural facilities have different pet regulations. While pets are not permitted at most places, they may be permitted as long as they are kept inside a pet carrier or bag at all times. 

Public Places 

Visitors may bring their pets to most public parks. Visitors must put a collar (identification/ license tag) on their pet and properly dispose of any pet waste. Large pets must be muzzled. Pets are not permitted at major department stores and large supermarkets. Pets may be permitted at convenience stores with consent. Pets must be kept inside a pet carrier or a bag at all times. 

Pet Adoption 

There are many options to acquire a pet both on and off your local installa-tion. Visit your local VTF for informational websites, maps, and directions on 130 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 131 

> PP

traveling to and returning from overseas and Hawaii on official PCS orders are now exempt from Delta’s May 15th – Sept. 15th embargo. This means pet owners are allowed to ship their pets as accompanied baggage, barring any other daily temperature restriction. 

United Airlines 

If you are a United States Government employee traveling on official PCS orders, please identify yourself as such to the United representative when making your pet shipping arrangements. International Reservations: 1-800-538-2929 Live Cargo: 1-800-825-3788 www.united.com/web/en-us/content/travel/animals/exceptions.aspx 

## PET CONTAINERS 

Airlines have various animal transport rules. Check with your airline well in advance of travel. 

## RETURNING TO THE UNITED STATES WITH CATS AND DOGS 

Bringing your pet cat or dog back home to the United States is not as dif-ficult as it is when coming to the Republic of Korea. The following sections will tell you what is required, what to keep in mind, and where to find the informa-tion about traveling back to the United States with your beloved pet. Leaving Korea • ___Proof of rabies vaccination within last year • ___USDA health certificate • ___Korean health certificate 

> Take all three documents with your pet to the Korean Animal Quarantine Office (KAQC) located at Incheon Airport, 011-82-032-740-2660. The Korean vet will issue a certificate while you wait. Cost is 10,000 won.

Animals that meet Korean requirements will meet United States require-ments. Korea requires a Korean Health Certificate for any pet to leave the country. These requirements apply equally to service animals such as Seeing Eye dogs. Pet cats and dogs are subject to inspection at ports of entry. If a pet appears to be ill, or evidence of infectious disease is present, further examina-tion by a licensed veterinarian at the owner’s expense might be required and entry into the United States may be denied. 

Importation of Unvaccinated Cats or Dogs 

Thinking of bringing your puppy or kitten back with you but are unsure of the requirements? Here are some things to keep in mind: 

## INTERNATIONAL PET TRAVEL ON AMERICAN CARRIERS 

Airline policies regarding other pets may vary; contact airlines directly for additional information. Regulations of service animals/service dogs in air transportation are at www.iaadp.org/airline.html. Three ways you can ship your pet via the airlines: 1) Your pet can travel on the plane with you (either in-cabin or in the cargo). Pet is excess/accompanied baggage and charged accordingly. Some airlines no longer offer this option. 2) You can book your pet on a separate flight. Pet is considered cargo rate (more than excess baggage). Some airlines no longer offer this option. 3) You can have your pet shipped through a licensed commercial shipper. You will be charged the cargo rate plus the shipper’s fee. Several airlines re-quire this method unless your pet is small enough to fit in the cabin. 

Note: As a rule, animals 100 lbs. or larger (including the weight of the cage) will be charged as cargo even if they travel on the same plane as you (for Unit-ed Airlines the limit has been raised to 150 lbs, call for specifics). It is important to check with the airline if your pet is close to that weight and to determine if the policy may vary from this general 100 lb. rule. 

## AIRLINES American Airlines 

www.aa.com/i18n/travelInformation/specialAssistance/travelingWith-Pets.jsp Reservations: 1-800-433-7300 Air Cargo Section: 1-800-227-4622 

Delta 

If you are a United States Government employee traveling on official PCS orders, please identify yourself as such to the Delta representative when mak-ing your pet shipping arrangements. Reservations: 1-800-241-4141 Live Animal Desk: 1 (888) 736-3738 or 1-888-SEND PET or 1-866-782-2746 http://delta.com/planning_reservations/special_travel_needs/pet_travel_ information/pet_travel_options/index.jsp As of June 10, 2012, due to a reconfiguration in the cargo section of the Delta’s 767-300 and 767-400 long-haul international planes, pets will no lon-ger be allowed on these flights as excess/accompanied baggage in the cargo hold or as cargo in the cargo hold – only as in-cabin, if they are eligible. The following Delta waiver now exists only if the plane type for the flight is differ-ent than the 767-300 and 400 series: United States Government employees 132 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 133 

> PP

Import/Export Center 

Phone: 301-734-3277 

## RETURNING TO THE UNITED STATES WITH OTHER LIVE ANIMALS Birds 

The USDA defines pet birds as birds imported for personal pleasure of their individual owners and are not intended for resale. Poultry, which includes pigeons and doves, are not considered pet birds. Strict requirements must be met to import or export a bird. For information regarding general requirements, veterinary health certifi-cate information, import process, importation fees and quarantine require-ments, contact the National Center for Import and Export at 301-851-3300 or visit http://nvap.aphis.usda.gov/import_export/animals/return_pet_bird. shtml. 

Fish 

There are no CDC regulations regarding the importation of live fish. How-ever, there are specific requirements regarding fish considered endangered. For more information, importers should visit the United States Fish and Wild-life Service at www.fws.gov. Live finfish of most species may be imported into the United States without import requirements from USDA. However, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) does have import restrictions on live fish, fertilized eggs and gametes susceptible to spring viremia of carp (SVC), an extremely conta-gious viral disease of carp. For more information, visit http://www.aphis.usda. gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/importexport. The National Marine Fisheries Service may also have regulations. For cur-rent information, visit http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov. 

Rabbits, Guinea Pigs, Hamsters, Ferrets and Other Pet Rodents 

There are no CDC or FWS restrictions or requirements on these animals if brought in as pets. 

Turtles, Snakes and Lizards 

The United States CDC limits imports of small turtles, tortoises and terra-pins and their viable eggs. Turtles with shell length (carapace) less than 4” and viable turtle eggs may NOT be imported for commercial purposes. As many as six (6) small turtles or six (6) eggs or any combination totaling six (6) or fewer turtles and turtle eggs for noncommercial purposes The United States Fish and Wildlife Service regulates the importation of reptiles. For regulations on reptiles, fish, injurious or endangered species • Always check with the airline for the most current information. 

Key requirements for transport: 

• Dogs not accompanied by proof of rabies vaccination, including those that are too young to be vaccinated (i.e. less than three months of age), may be admitted if the importer completes a confinement agreement and confines the animal until it is considered adequately vaccinated against rabies (the vac-cine is not considered effective until 30 days after the date of vaccination). Confinement agreement for non-vaccinated dogs: www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq/ animal/dogs.htm. • Puppies that are too young for vaccination (i.e. less than three months of age) must be kept in confinement until they are old enough to be vaccinated, and then confined for at least 30 days after the date of vaccination. • Unvaccinated dogs must be vaccinated within four days of arrival at their final United States destination and within 10 days of entry into the United States, and must be kept in confinement for at least 30 days after the date of vaccination. • Dogs may not be sold or transferred to other owners during this pe-riod of confinement, and the person who signs the confinement agreement is responsible for ensuring the conditions of the agreement are met. • Importers must provide a contact address where the dog will be dur-ing the confinement period. All points of contact must be provided if the im-porter will be housing the dog at several addresses or traveling with the ani-mal. 

Importation of Cats or Dogs for Commercial/Breeding Purposes 

Are you thinking of bringing a dog or cat to the United States for breeding? Check out the rules for bringing domestic cats and dogs into the United States specifically for breeding in United States regulation 42 CFR 71.51. More ques-tions? Contact: • United States Customs and Border Protection Customer Service Center 

Phone: 703-526-4200 

Toll Free 1-877-227-5511 

www.cbp.gov • United States Public Health Service Centers for Disease Control and Pre-vention 

Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (E-03) 

www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq/animal/index.htm • USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Technical Trade Ser-vices, Animal Products Staff United States Department of Agriculture National 134 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 135 

> PP

for the past ten years is any new building must have western-style toilets in-stalled. As a result, western style toilets are becoming easier to find. Most large department stores, fast food restaurants, and modern buildings have both kinds of toilets. Stickers are on the doors to let you know what awaits you behind the door. If you are lucky, you might get a toilet that has seat warmers. I urge you to look at the pictures before pressing any buttons. If you must use a local facility, ask “Hwa-jahng-shilo-dee-eh i-suh-yuh” (Where is the restroom?) A good rule of thumb is to carry tissue on your per-son, just in case the toilets do not have any available. When you walk into the restroom, you will notice toilet paper dispensers on the wall. It is a good idea to stop and take some as it signals that the stalls do not have their own rolls. Foreigners sometimes miss paper in bathrooms because it is often in large dis-pensers similar in size to a paper towel dispenser. Also, you might see a waste basket and many signs that read not to throw toilet paper into the toilet. Seoul grew very quickly and the pipes are still trying to catch up. You will clog up the toilet if you flush too much paper down at once –and you never know if the person before you flushed some down clogging it for the next unsuspecting person. So just pinch your nose, don’t look too closely, and toss your waste paper in the waste basket. Soap is communal. You might find it on a stick prodding you to go ahead and rub your hands on it like so many before you. 

## PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION For more information, see Transportation in A to Z. 

## PYEONGTAEK is a city south of Seoul, home to USAG-Humphreys and Osan Air Base. go to: http://www.anstaskforce.gov/Documents/Injurious_Wildlife_Fact_ Sheet_2007.pdf. 

Other Animals 

APHIS generally does not have animal health requirements for the impor-tation of other non-livestock animal species, such as rodents or carnivores, provided they have not been inoculated with any pathogens for scientific or other purposes. Animals inoculated with pathogens for scientific or other purposes must be accompanied by an import permit. For details, visit http:// www.aphis.usda.gov. 

## POST EXCHANGE (PX) See Shopping. 

## POSTAL SERVICES 

The Army Post Office (APO) processes all mail coming to and from the Armed Forces Pacific (AP) Region. Sending mail to and from this region costs the same as continental United States postal rates. Fed Ex and UPS deliver to Korea at international rates. Several USPS mail drop boxes are located through-out Yongsan USAG. Priority Mail gets to and from the U.S. in about 4 to 10 days. Parcel post takes 6-8 weeks. Priority mail flat rate boxes are available in several sizes and the shipping cost is around $9- 15 regardless of weight. The postal employees are friendly and helpful and will do their best to help you. General Delivery is available for those not serviced by a unit mailroom. Ap-plications and specific details are available from the South Post Annex. Limited individual postal boxes are available for select South Post family residents and retirees, and are located at the Postal Service Center (PSC) (adjacent to the South Post Annex Postal Service Center, 738-4412). Main Post Office is located between the library and Gallery. If you have questions, call 723-3460/4659/9019. Hours of operation are Monday through Friday 0900 to 1700, Saturday and Training Holidays open 0900 to 1300. Fed Ex is located inside the Gallery. 

## PRODUCE See Shopping - What to Buy. 

## PUBLIC RESTROOMS 

Public restrooms are available throughout Seoul. Depending on the age of the establishment, you might find yourself with one of two types of toilets. There are western style toilets and there are in-ground toilets. Korean policy 136 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 137 

> RR

Most chapels offer a variety of activities for all age groups to include religious education programs, choirs, Bible study groups and various chapel sponsored organizations. The ministry teams of the Army, Navy and Air Force in Korea also offer a wide variety of religious services and worship opportunities to mili-tary members and their families. Chaplains offer daily morning devotions on AFN Monday through Friday. Also available are: counseling services, marriage enrichment programs along with outreach programs for non-command spon-sored spouses and family members. Bible Studies and Religious Clubs: There are a large variety of bible stud-ies and religious clubs offered on post (call South Post Chapel 738-6054 for a current listing). A small sampling includes AWANA, Military Council of Catholic Women (MCCW), Men of the Morning Calm, PWOC, Vacation Bible School, FUSION Youth Group, Club Beyond, and various bible studies. Chaplain Family Life Center (CFLC) (Bldg 5213, South Post 736-3018). CFLC provides confidential counseling for individuals, couples, families, and groups to include complex life challenges, gambling and eating addictions, trauma re-covery, battlefield stress, sexual assault and domestic violence. 

## On Post Religious Services South Post Chapel (Bldg 3702 across from the Dragon Hill Lodge, 738-6054/4043) 

Protestant “Contemporary”  Sunday  0900 Protestant “Nondenominational”  Sunday  1100 Protestant “Gospel”  Sunday  1300 Mision Penecostal Hispana Monte Sion  Sunday  1500 Jewish  Friday  1900 

Memorial Chapel (Bldg 1597, Main Post, 725-4076/8182) 

Catholic Mass  Sunday  0800 Protestant “Liturgical”  Sunday  0930 Catholic Mass  Sunday  1130 United Pentecostal Church International  Sunday  1330 Catholic Reconciliation  Saturday  1600 Catholic Mass  Saturday  1700 Catholic Daily Mass  Mon-Fri  1145 Katusa Worship  Tuesday  1830 Catholic Mass/Blessed Virgin Mary  1st Sat of month  0900 

# R

## RATION CONTROL & BLACK MARKET 

The Ration Control Program exists to prevent the transfer of duty-free goods to those who are not entitled to receive them. Active duty military members need only present their military ID when making purchases. How-ever, Ration Control Plates (RCP) are required for family members entitled to make AAFES or Commissary purchases. To receive a Ration Control Card, you must first be entered into the D.B.I.D.S system (located with the ID Card issuing section Bldg 4034 (19th Personnel Company), adjacent to the Ration Control desk, DSN 738-4612). The sponsor must accompany all family members to the Ration Control Office (in 19th Per-sonnel Company) with their ID cards. Ration cards will be ready for pick up in about four hours. You may show a copy of your sponsor’s orders to purchase anything before obtaining your RCP. RCPs must be presented when entering duty free facilities (e.g., Class VI stores, AAFES gas station, PX and commis-sary) when an ID checker is present. When an ID checker is not present at the entrance to a duty free facility, the cards must be presented at the point of sale. Consider keeping your receipts for large ticket items in case questions are raised about your buying habits. You will be given information on the cur-rent rules and regulations concerning black marketing during in processing. Remember, you may not purchase items in excess of your immediate family needs. Many products are considered illegal for gift giving to Korean Nationals. For questions regarding the sale of controlled items or gifts to personnel not authorized duty free import privileges, contact the Ration Control Office (Bldg 4034 (1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company), Room 105, 738-4612) for information on proper legal procedures. Information is also available from USFK regulations 643-1 and 60-1. 

## RELIGIOUS SERVICES AND ACTIVITIES 

There are many religious programs available to our community, tailored to meet the unique needs of all military and DoD civilian personnel and their fam-ilies (Religious Support Office, 738-3011, or the South Post Chapel, 738- 3917). 138 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 139 

> RR

Orthodox 

•St. Nicholas Cathedral, Some services are in English, some in Greek. 02-365-3755. 

Mormon 

•The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints English, President P.J. Rog-ers, 02-723-3081. 

Buddhist 

•Lotus Lantern Int’l Buddhist Center Ceremonies in English, 735-5347. •Seoul International Zen Center English, Meditation and Dharma talk, 02-900-4326. 

Islam 

•Seoul Central Masjid Juma Prayers conducted in Korean, Arabic and Eng-lish. Services are held at the mosque in Hannam-dong, Yongsan 02-794-7307. 

Jehovah’s Witness 

•Jehovah’s Witnesses Seoul English Congregation. Meetings held Friday and Sunday, the Kingdom Hall is in the Hannam Building, across from the Cheil Communications building. 

## REPAIRS See Shopping - Special Interest. 

Korean Christain Fellowship Association  3rd Tue of month  1145 ROK Catholic Mass  3rd Thu of month  1800 

Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital Chapel (737-5000) 

Protestant Traditional  Sunday  0930 Episcopal  Sunday  1100 Seventh Day Adventist  Saturday  0930 

K-16 Chapel (Bldg S-302, 741-6687) 

Protestant Contemporary  Sunday  1030 

## Off Post Religious Services Protestant 

International Lutheran Church, 726-39 Hannam-Dong, Yongsan-Gu, Sun 0830/1100, 02-794-6274 •Jubilee Church, Sun 1000/1330 •Kwang Lim Methodist Church, 571-2 Shinsa-Dong, Kangnam-Gu, Sun 0900, 02-546-0151/0152 •Onnuri Community Church, Sun 1130/1630 •Seoul International Baptist Church, Sun 1100, 02-793-6268 •Seoul Union Church, Sun 0930, 02-333-7393 •Yoido Full Gospel,Sun 1045/1800, 02-783-4135 •Yongsan Baptist Church, Itaewon-Dong (near Crown Hotel), Sun 1100/1800, 02-796-0284 •Yongnak Presbyterian Church 2069 Jeo-dong, Chung-ku, Sun 1000/1500, 02-2280-0228 •Victory Christian Fellowship 181-8 Itaewon-dong, Yongsan-gu, Sun 0915/1700, 02-703-7418 

Roman Catholic 

•Catholic International Parish of Seoul, across from Hannam Village Apts, 02-793-2070. •Myeongdong Cathedral Myeongdong, Chung-Gu, 02-774-3890. •The Catholic International Parish 707 Hannam-Dong, 02-715-0141. •St. Francis Chapel Hannam-Dong, Yongsan-Gu, 02-793-2070. •Cathedral & Parish Church of St. Mary & St. Nicholas, 02-724-6597. 140 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 141 

> SS

Only a sponsor or spouse may register the children for school. Hand carry all school records when you PCS. You can only register for school when you are physically in Korea. For registration you need the following: •Shot Records. The Immunization Clinic at the Brian Allgood Army Com-munity Hospital will ensure they are up to date. •Orders. One copy of the sponsor’s orders verifying command sponsorship (must have dependent’s name on orders). •Birth certificate or passport. Kindergarten and first grade students only. •High School students should report to the High School to sign up for class-es with the guidance counselor before the school year begins. 

Bus Transportation : Provided for students who live in designated areas (Bus Transportation Office, Bldg 3706, Room 103, 738-5032 for current infor-mation). Bus passes will be issued only to a parent. You will need to show paperwork verifying that your student is registered. 

JROTC Program : (738-7421/7423) The JROTC program of the Seoul Ameri-can High School (SAHS) is vibrant, with generally more than 70 ROTC/Academy Scholarships awarded annually. 

OTHER DoDDS in Korea : DoDDS Pacific Schools on the Korean Peninsula are constantly being upgraded. New schools are also being introduced in some areas. 

Chinhae, U.S. Navy Base, Command Fleet Activities ,Korea CT Joy Elementary School www.ctjoy-es.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 762-5466/5477, from US: 011-82-55-540-5466 Fax DNS: 762-5465, Fax from US: 011-82-55-540-5465 Email: PRINCIPAL_*JOYES2@pac.dodea.edu 

USAG-Daegu, Daegu 

* Daegu American School, K-12 www.daegu-un.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 768-9501, from US: 011-82-53-473-4354 Fax DSN: 768-7787, Fax from US: 011-82-53-470-7787 Email: principal_daeguehs@pac.dodea.edu 

USAG-Humphreys, Pyongtaek 

* Humphreys American School, K-8 www.humphreys-es.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 753-6313, from US: 011-82-31-690-6313, Fax DSN: 753-8992, Fax from US: 011-82-31-690-8992 Email: PRINCIPAL_*HUMPHREYES@pac.dodea.edu 

# S

## SCHOOLS 

If you are coming to Korea as a command-sponsored family, your children are eligible to attend the Department of Defense Dependent Schools located on Yongsan South Post. Non command-sponsored children are accommodated on a space available basis. School buses are provided to certain areas off post. Please check at the school registration office in the ACS building for bus sched-ules and pick up locations. Seoul American Elementary School (SAES), Seoul American Middle School (SAMS), and Seoul American High School (SAHS) are fully accredited schools that offer a wide variety of classes and services, includ-ing classes for talented and gifted, special education and English as a second language. General school registration is held in June. Check the websites for online pre-registration process 

Korea District Superintendent’s Office 

U.S. Eighth Army Garrison, Yongsan Email: KoreaSUPT_DSO@pac.dodea.edu Phone: 738-5922 From the U.S: 011-82-2-7918-5922 Web Site: www.korea.pac.dodea.edu 

Seoul American Elementary School (grades K-5, PSCD-Preschool Service for Children with Disabilities, and Sure Start) 

Email: principal.seouls@pac.dodea.edu Phone: 736-4613/5978 From the U.S: 011-82-2-7916-4613 Web Site: www.seoul-es.pac.dodea.edu 

Seoul American Middle School (grades 6-8) 

Email: PRINCIPAL_SEOULMS@pac.dodea.edu Phone: 736-7337/7361 From the U.S: 011-82-2-7916-7337/7361 Web Site: www.seoul-ms.pac.dodea.edu 

Seoul American High School (grades 9-12) 

Email: PRINCIPAL_SEOULHS@pac.dodea.edu Phone: 736-5261/5263/5265 From the U.S: 011-82-2-7918-5261/5263 Web Site: www.seoul-hs.pac.dodea.edu Registration:(DoDDS Seoul Registration Office, ACS Bldg 4106, 738-7707). 142 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 143 

> SS

## LIMITS (Many of the foreign schools require admission tests.) Yongsan International School Seoul (YISS) is a Christian school located in Hannam, 10-15 minutes east of Yongsan Garrison. The school has kindergarten through 12th grades, with approximately 70 students in each grade. http:// www.yisseoul.org 02-797-5104 

Centennial Christian School (CCS) is a Christian school located in Yongsan-gu and offers a US-style education for preschool through grade 12. www.cc-slions.com 02-772-9275 

Korean Kent Foreign School offers a US-style education K-12th. www.kkfs. org 02-2201-7091 

Seoul Academy International School offers a US-style education K-8th. www.seoulacademy.net 02-554-1690 

Seoul Foreign School (SFS) offers a US-style education and a British educa-tion K-12th. www.seoulforeign.org 02-330-3100 

Seoul International School (SIS) is located five minutes from K-16 In Sung-nam City on the border of Seoul City limits. 

Asia Pacific International School (APIS) is located in Nowon-gu, Seoul, on the way to Camp Red Cloud in Uijongbu. 

Dulwich College School is located in Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu 

Dwight School Seoul is the only international school in Seoul offering all three International Baccalaureate programs from ages 3 to Grade 12. Dwight School Seoul is committed to finding and igniting the “spark of genius” in every child. Visit www.dwight.or.kr, or call +82.2.6920.8600. 

## SEOUL PRESCHOOLS: CRADA International Kindergarten is located in Apujeong. There are sev-eral bus stops for CRADA throughout Seoul. For more information, visit www.i-crada.com or call 02-543-5563. 

Early Childhood Learning Center International School located in Hannam-dong. Visit www.eclcseoul.com or call 02-795-8418 

Franciscan School located in Hannam-dong. Visit http://franciscanschool. com or call 02-798-2195 

British International Kindergarten located in Seocho-dong. Visit www.eng-lishedseoul.com or call 02-790-9025 

Namsan International Kindergarten located in Sindang-dong. Visit www. seoulforeign.org or call (82-2) 330-3100 * Humpreys High School, 9-12 http://www.dodea.edu/Pacific/Korea/USAGHumphreys/HumphreysHS/ DSN:754-9425, from US: 011-82-31-690-8894 Email: HMHS.Principal@pac.dodea.edu 

Osan Air Base, Osan 

* Osan American Elementary School, www.osan-es.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 784-6912, from US: 011-82-31-661-6912 Fax DSN: 784-5733, Fax from US: 011-82-31-661-5733 Email: PRINCIPAL.OSANES@pac.dodea.edu * Osan American Middle School, www.osan-ms.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 784-2282, from US: 011-82-31-661-2282 * Osan American High School, www.osan-hs.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 784-9076/9098/9096, from US: 011-82-31-661-9098 DSN: 784-9121, Fax from US: 011-82-31-661-9121 Email: PRINCIPAL.OSANHS@pac.dodea.edu 

USAG-Casey, Dongduchon 

Casey American School, K-8 www.casey-es.pac.dodea.edu DSN: 730-6444, from the US: 011-82-505-730-6444 Email: principal@pac.dodea.edu 

## PRESCHOOLS AT USAG-YONGSAN 

There are three schooling options available on-post for preschool age chil-dren. Register as soon as possible, because space is very limited and classes fill quickly. •Sure Start : A program designated for children ages 3 and 4 of parents ranked E-7 or GS6 and below or children who otherwise qualify (736-4378, program runs Mon-Fri 8am-12pm). There is no fee for enrollment. Parents are encouraged to commit to a minimum number of volunteer hours. •Yongsan Child Development Center : Offers a part-day preschool program for children ages 3-5 (See Child Youth and School Services in A to Z; Central Registration, 738-5036). 

## HOMESCHOOLING INFORMATION - There is a homeschooling group at Yongsan, which includes co-op. Look for homeschooling informa-tion on their private Facebook page: Seoul American Homeschool Network: https://www.facebook.com/#!/groups/286732984689476 Other links: www. usdla.org and www.Homeschool.com. 

## FOREIGN SCHOOLS IN SEOUL AND ADJACENT TO SEOUL CITY 144 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 145 

> SS

## SCOUTS 

Active scouting programs are available for boys and girls. Adult volunteers are welcome. Registration drives begin in the fall. Check with the school office, Channel 3 and Morning Calm for flyers and current contact information. 

Girl Scouts : See Girl Scouts A-Z. 

Boy Scouts : The Boy Scout Hut is located in Bldg S3646 next to South Post Chapel, 738-4860, boyscout@zama.army.mil, Far East Council www.fareast-bsa.org. 

## SIZING CHART(S) 

> Seoul American Elementary School – Photo by Marisa Johnson Seoul American Elementary School – Photo by Marisa Johnson Seoul American High School – Photo by Marisa Johnson

## 146 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 147 

> SS

rean Immigration Stamp. The SOFA Stamp should be valid until your sponsor’s DEROS date or the expiration date on the Sponsor’s ID card, or the expiration of the individual’s passport (maximum of 2 years from the date your A-3 Visa/ SOFA stamp is issued). If your A3 Visa and/or SOFA Stamp expires while in Ko-rea, the Visa and Stamp will need to be reissued. Check: http://8tharmy.korea. army.mil/sja/clientlegalsvc/. You will find information on the process, detailed directions to Immigration offices, and forms. 

## SPACE AVAILABLE FLIGHTS 

Space Available Flights, also referred to as Space ‘A’ Travel or Patriot Ex-press, is air travel that is offered at a highly reduced cost to active and retired members of the military as well as qualifying members of their families. Space ‘A’ Travel is possible if seats remain available after military personnel travel-ing under orders receive their seats. There are various restrictions governing Space ‘A’ travel so familiarity with these guidelines is highly recommended. A key starting point for first time and repeat Space ‘A’ Travelers is the Air Mobility Command website at www.amc.af.mil/amctravel/index.asp. This site offers comprehensive information on Space ‘A’ Travel including travel eligibil-ity, available destinations, document requirements, registration guidelines and a wealth of other relevant material. In Korea, Space ‘A’ Travel is provided at Osan and Kunsan Air Bases. Osan Air Base is located one hour south of Seoul and is conveniently and inexpen-sively reached by bus service departing from Yongsan’s Moyer Bus Terminal or the Dragon Hill Lodge. Travel information specific to flights to or from Ko-rea can be obtained by visiting the Osan Air Base website at www.osan.af.mil/ units/731stairmobilitysquadron.asp or the USFK website at www.usfk.mil/ usfk/hot-topic.patriot.express.470. However, to ensure the most accurate and up to date information, travelers should speak directly to personnel at the Osan Passenger Terminal. The terminal opens at 6:00am Tue/Thu and 7:00am Mon/ Wed/Fri. The terminal closes at 6:00 pm. For calls originating in Korea use: DSN 315-784-1854 (fax 315-784-4897) or from any cell phone, 031-661- 1854. For calls from an international location use: 011-82-31-661-1854 (fax 011-82-31-661-4897). Email contact is also possible at OsanSpaceA@Osan.af.mil. The passenger terminal at Osan Air Base is newly renovated with excel-lent modern facilities including a spacious, well-equipped play area for fami-lies traveling with children. There are also free-to-use computer terminals and phone lines. The passenger terminal is a short walk from the bus station. The Space ‘A’ flights depart from Osan Air Base and arrive in the United States at 

## SKIING See Travel in Korea. 

## SOFA 

The Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) is the treaty between the American and Korean governments that ensures certain privileges and rights to Ameri-can military members and their families in the Republic of Korea. The SOFA covers all aspects of the American presence in Korea and is continually re-viewed and revised by a bi-national committee. American passports with the A-3 visa stamp should be stamped with a SOFA stamp also. Family members whose passports are not stamped with a SOFA stamp may experience detain-ment or fines when re-entering Korea. This stamp is NOT automatic, and you must obtain it within 90 days of arriving in Korea. Both command and non-command sponsored family members need this stamp. A3 Visa/SOFA Stamp is for Active Duty Family Members, Civilians Em-ployees and their Family Members (command sponsored or non command sponsored) must have an A3 Visa and SOFA Stamp within 90 days of arrival in country. 2ID family members receive their SOFA Stamp through the 2ID Liaison NCOIC at the 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company (1RC/19PC) Building (4034), DSN: 723-5461. Legal Client Services at ACS will review ap-plications for A3 Visa and/or SOFA Stamp and will assist with directions to go to one of the three convenient Seoul Immigration Office locations. Client Legal Services assistance is on a walk-in basis during normal duty hours. The Korean Immigration offices are at Sejongno, Mokdong and Osan Air Base. You must have your passport, ID card, copy of identification card (front and back), copy of sponsor’s ID card, the Ministry of Justice Supplemental Visa Application Form, and an original Letter of Verification of Assignment to receive the Ko-148 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 149 

> T
> S

# T

## TELEPHONES 

The telephone/internet provider you use will depend on where you live. 

On Post Housing : LG Telecom provides internet and telephone service for Government Owned and Government Operated housing, it’s located at Moyer Recreation Center (Bldg#2259 Rm#104). Please contact Mr. Kim at DSN 723-7023 or email: kimkh@lbhunet.com for new service or troubleshooting. KT Telecom provides internet and telephone service for leased housing: (Eagle Grove, Black Hawk & Itaewon Acres). Please contact Mr. Kim, Dong Wan (Mike) at 02-797-4227 or 010-2776-0905 for new service or service calls. To find KT’s office exit Gate 14, walk to the main road and turn right. The office is a short distance up this road on the right, 02-797-4227). You can make bill payments on post at the Business One Stop Center (above Starbucks in the Embassy As-sociation building) or at the following locations for a small service fee: 7 Elev-en, Family Mart, or any Post Office. For DSN lines please contact the telephone control office desk at 738-6900. It is located in Bldg 2320. LG Daecom located on the 1st floor of Moyer Rec offers several different plans as well as VOIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol) phone numbers. This is a U.S. phone number that friends and family can use to call you at U.S. local/long distance rates instead of expensive international rates. You can even request the area code where your family lives, so all calls to you will be local calls. If your current telephone/internet provider is KT, you are not required to switch to LG Daecom. However, the VOIP is only available through LG Daecom. Providers and options continue to change, so check the plans and fees carefully. 

Off Post Housing: Your telephone/internet provider will vary. It is often in-cluded in your rent or utilities fees. Discuss choices with your rental company or contact one of the above numbers to see if they service your area. If you do not have a telephone in your quarters, there are overseas telephone lines available for use at MCAC and at the USO. You can use the phones and pay for calls in dollars, won or by using pre-paid telephone cards. The USO also has CALL FOR FREE phones at Camp Kim (contact them at 724-7003/3301). You can Seattle International Airport. Connections from Seattle are via regular com-mercial airlines. Connecting commercial flights are not part of Space ‘A’ Travel and are at the traveler’s personal expense. Here are the basic steps for successful Space ‘A’ Travel. 1. Identify your eligibility travel category. 2. Determine your departure and arrival points, and intended travel dates. 3. Prepare required documentation and obtain requisite authorization. 4. Register with the Passenger Terminal (the earlier this is done, the bet-ter). B sure to register for both your departing flight and your return flight. 5. Call the Passenger Terminal 24-48 hours prior to departure date to re-ceive flight status updates, required “show-time” and projected seat availabil-ity. 6. Check-in at the Passenger Terminal on flight departure date. Be sure you have ALL required travel documents (ie. Passport, ID card, authorized letter to travel and any other documents you were instructed to bring.) 7. Listen for the seats available announcement. If you are selected for a space available seat, be prepared to check-in immediately. 8. Board the plane and have a great flight! To ensure you have a positive Space ‘A’ Travel experience, keep in mind that Space ‘A’ Travel is not a reliable means of transportation. Unlike commercial airlines there are usually no back-up flights if a plane is diverted. There are also no guarantees that seats will be available. This means travelers must be flexible and if necessary prepared with an alternative travel plan. If you keep this in mind, and follow all the required guidelines, you will no doubt find that Space ‘A’ Travel is well worth the money you save. 

## SUBWAY See Transportation in A to Z. 

## SWIMMING 

There are three swimming pools on post. Swimming Pool 3 is covered for year round use and located on Main Post (just before Camp Coiner, 725-6984). The Point Health Club at the Dragon Hill Lodge also has a year round pool (available to hotel guests and fee paying members of The Point). The outdoor pool is located next to the high school (South Post, 738-4537). The swimming season for this pool runs from Memorial Day weekend to Labor Day weekend. A fourth pool is located adjacent to the gymnasium on K-16 Air Base, and is open year round to all ID card holders. 150 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 151 

> TT

many service force protection advisories (Military websites also carry many of the same advisories). Service members and DoD civilians who rent a property where DTH equipment installation is not available must sign a Housing Office statement of acknowledgement. If the landlord does allow installation of AFN DTH equipment on his property, the Soldier must obtain written permission beforehand. Contact the Housing Services Office 738-3489, for more informa-tion. 

Internet Television: Another television viewing option available to both on and off-post residents in Korea is via the computer. Apple TV sells and rents current season TV shows and movies (in both high definition and regular for-mat) via the iTunes website. An Apple computer is not required for this service, but you must buy an Apple TV box (available at the PX). Internet options con-tinue to become available. 

## TENNIS 

Numerous courts are scattered around Main and South Posts. Adult and children’s lessons are available for a fee (contact Collier Gym for court reserva-tions or information, 736-4588). 

## THEATRES 

The AFN Pacific-Yongsan posts information about Yongsan concerts and ac-tivities, as well as new listings of cultural events in the area (visit http://yong-san.afnpacific.net for more information including links to the AFN Facebook page where additional community information is posted). The Seoul Word also offers weekly information about cultural events in the area. 

## THRIFT SHOP 

Volunteers from the American Women’s Club of Korea Thrift Shop Associa-tion operate the Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop in conjunction with the U.S military. The Thrift Shop, a non-profit organization, offers a wide range of re-sale items, including clothing, electronic equipment and furniture. All are wel-come to shop and/or donate items. Donations are taken during store hours. A donation bin located near the side entrance of the shop is available 24 hours a day. Consignment of items is a service provided by the thrift shop, but only active American Women’s Club members (See Clubs/Organizations in A-Z) and government ID card holders can consign items. Proceeds from the Thrift Shop are used to support charities in the local community and on post. Hours are use pre-paid phone cards at all local pay telephones and in Korean cell phones. For additional information see Cell Phones in A to Z. 

Telephone Dialing Information 

Offices and some housing areas in the Yongsan area have Defense Switch-ing Network (DSN) phones. These have seven digits. The Yongsan Post is di-vided into six areas with six different prefixes: 723, 724, 725, 736, 737 and 738. K-16 prefix: 741. Cell phones prefixes: 010, 011, 016, 017 and 018. 

Calling Within Korea 

From a Military Phone: To a military phone number in Korea, dial the seven digit number direct. To a commercial phone or cell phone, dial 99 then the number. From a Commercial or a Cell Phone: To call a military phone, dial 05033- then the last six digits of the number. To call a commercial phone from a cell phone, dial 02 then the number. 

Calling Seoul Phone Numbers from the U.S 

From the U.S. to a commercial phone in Seoul, dial 1-011-822-XXX-XXXX. From the U.S. to a cell phone in Seoul, dial 1-011-82+last two prefix digits + rest of phone number. From the U.S. to a military phone in Seoul, dial 1-011-822-791X-XXXX. 

## TELEVISION 

MWR Cable Television (MWR CATV) is available to those living on post (Bldg 4891, South Post, beyond the Auto Skills Center, 738-2288/4310). A variety of American Forces Network (AFN), U.S. and Asian channels, along with com-mand channels which provide community information and force protection advisories, are available. Projected weekly schedules are given in area publica-tions such as the Stars and Stripes, Korea Herald and Korea Times. Also visit afnkorea.com/tv.htm for the latest TV schedule. Pamphlets listing channels of-fered and fees are available at the CATV business office. Personnel living off post will need to lease a decoder box and purchase a Direct to Home (DTH) cable TV satellite dish at the PX to receive AFN programming. Fees include an installation charge (usually between $100-200) and a monthly decoder fees (about $15). Installation service in the Seoul area is available through NASA, an off-post Korean company (02-717-2256/2257). NOTE: Many apartment complexes and rental properties do not permit installation of AFN DTH equip-ment. Refer to the list provided by the housing office. Review AFN availability carefully before entering into a lease agreement, since AFN is the source of 152 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 153 

> TT

Off Post Public Transportation 101 : Once a month, ACS offers Transportation 101, a class that provides classroom and “real world” experience on subways, buses and taxis. Classes fill quickly, so sign up early. All participants will receive a free T-Money card, but you should take at least W5,000 to load onto your card, with about another W10,000 for your lunch out in Seoul (see the Subway sec-tion below for more information about T-Money cards). The class takes brief trips to the Express Bus Terminal, Namdaemun Market, Lotte Mart store or City Hall/Chang-dok Palace. Children are welcome. Contact ACS at 738-7505 for more information. 

City Buses : Seoul is served by an excellent bus system. In the city, the bus-es are plainly numbered and run frequently to most destinations. The fare is very inexpensive. Buses can be extremely crowded during peak rush hours, so plan accordingly. Hotel personnel, as well as the information staff at Moyer Community Activities Center, can assist you with bus routes. Buses and taxis use the same T-Money cards as the subway, so you can alternate payment between the bus and subway easily (see the Subway section below for more information about T-Money cards). The buses are split into four colored categories. Blue buses travel long distances along major arterial routes; green buses are for shorter hops, red buses travel to the suburbs, and yellow buses travel in tight loops. Route numbers and colors are marked on the side and rear of the bus, e.g. Y is yel-low, R is red, etc. Adult fares start at W950 for yellow, W1950 for red and W1150 for blue and green and increase with distance traveled. For additional detailed bus information, visit http://www.visitseoul.net/en/article/article. do?_method=view&art_id=39545&lang=en&m=0004007002011&p=07. The Express Bus Terminal is the hub of all long-distance bus traffic in the Republic of Korea, so this is where your journey will begin if you are traveling long distances. It may help you to know that the terminal is busy on a normal day and jammed on Korean holidays. To get to the terminal, take the subway to the Express Bus Terminal Station (Line 3 or 7, exit 1). Another option is to take a local bus; it can be faster. At Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) take a right, walk to the stop light and cross the street to the bus stop. Take bus 143 and get off at the second stop after you cross the river. For the return journey, make sure you are on the opposite side of the street and again take bus 143 to the first stop after crossing the bridge (Hangang Middle School), which is close to Gate 6. 

Subway : Seoul has a comprehensive subway system that will get you eas-ily and quickly to almost any part of the city. It is possible to go to USAG-Red Mon and Sat 10 am-3 pm, Wed 10 am-6 pm; consignments are by appoint-ment only. Located in Bldg 4222 near the movie theater on South Post. Phone: 02-795-7675 or visit www.facebook.com/pages/Second-Hand-Rose-Thrift-Shop/114666625219838. 

## TOY ALLEY See Shopping - Markets. 

## TRANSPORTATION On Post Shuttle Bus : This is a free bus service which runs from the bus terminal at Moyer CAC on Main Post to Camp Coiner and the South Post areas, with stops at the hospital, various housing areas, the commissary, and various other loca-tions. Route maps are available at ACS and Moyer CAC. The newly constructed/ renovated bus stops are visible throughout the post, marked by white “shuttle bus” signs. ID cards are required to ride the bus. During duty hours, buses run every 20 minutes and then every 30 minutes until 1800. Bus schedules are posted at all of the bus stops. 

Taxis: AAFES provides taxi service for use by military ID card holders (call or text 1544-9080 for taxi dispatch services, or email taxi@ftnholdings.com,; when submitting a taxi request via text, text your request in the following for-mat: #pickup location #destination ##. The taxi service will respond via text to let you know that your order was received; the service will send a second text to let you know when the taxi will arrive as well as the number and color of the taxi. Note that there is a W1,000 fee for taxi request services in addition to the regular transportation fare. Taxi service is available 0500-0100 daily for Yongsan and reservations can-not be made in advance. These taxis are available for destinations both on and off post. AAFES cabs are the only taxis permitted on post. The drivers speak some English, and the fare is paid in U.S. currency or won. The taxi stands are located at Dragon Hill Lodge, BAACH, commissary, PX (during operating hours) and the bus terminal on Main Post. The company offers regular taxi service in and around the Yongsan area as well as an airport taxi service. 

Military Buses : In addition to the on post shuttle bus service, there are buses that provide transportation to Osan AFB, USAG-Humphreys, USAG-Red Cloud, USAG-Casey, Camp Jackson, and all other local camps. See Camps and Posts in Korea. Tickets can be purchased at Moyer CAC. 154 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 155 

> TT

bers indicate the station the train just left, and where the train is going next. Pay attention to which direction you want to go. Some station signs only men-tion the beginning or ending of the line you are on, or line transfer station (signified by the multi-colored swirl on the map) along the way. Koreans are very helpful and will do all they can to point you in the right direction if you are lost or confused. When you reach your destination, go up the steps and swipe your ticket or T-Money card at the turnstile. Each station usually has numerous exits leading to different sides of the street. Refer to your map or look for the directory in each station; it will inform you (in English) which exit you need. The subway closes at midnight. You will be forced to leave the subway at that time, regard-less of your location or destination. The subway website is www.seoulmetro. co.kr/eng. Another useful website is http://asiaenglish.visitkorea.or.kr/ena/ TR/TR_EN_5_4.jsp. Also see the subway map at the back of this book. 

Subway etiquette : Koreans on the subway are very quiet. Be respectful of their customs by not talking too loudly. During rush hour, it can become quite congested. There are designated areas at the end of each subway car reserved for pregnant women, handicapped and the elderly. You may sit in this area if no one fitting that description needs the seat…otherwise you will be expected to give the seat to an elderly person or pregnant woman. 

Trains : Riding the train in Korea is a wonderful way to discover Korea with-out having to worry about the traffic or car problems in an unfamiliar area. A ticket office is located on Main Post (Bldg S2664, at Gate 2). There are several different trains to choose from. The KTX Train is the fastest and most comfort-able way to get to Daejon, Daegu and Busan. It costs a little more, but it is more comfortable and does not make any other stops along the way. The green and orange lines will take you to the local stops between Seoul and your destina-tion, so the ride is somewhat longer. You can purchase tickets at Seoul Station (located just outside the subway stop of the same name). There is a ticket line designated for foreigners. For more information about the Korean National Railroad, visit www.korail.go.kr and select English. 

Local Taxis : Always make sure there is a meter or negotiate a price before you get into the taxi. It is also helpful to know a few directional words when riding with Korean taxi drivers. Tipping cab drivers, like most other services in Korea, is not necessary, but accepted. AAFES taxi drivers expect a small tip. Local Korean taxis are not permitted on post, but the on post cabs will pick you up from wherever you are in and around Seoul. If you take a local taxi to Yongsan, you will be deposited outside one of the many gates leading into Cloud, USAG-Casey and Osan Air Base by subway, and an extension now reach-es Incheon International Airport. Subway fares are very reasonable, starting at W1050 for adults (less for children) and rarely exceeding ₩2,000. There are two ways to pay: 1. Buy a single journey ticket card from a ticket vending/reload machine inside the station. The single journey ticket is valid only for the subway, not for buses or taxis. Validate the ticket at the turnstile with the lighted arrow. Do not discard or lose your ticket because you will need it to exit the subway at your destination. Return the ticket at the deposit-return machines for a refund of the W500 deposit. Purchase a T-Money card (either from the subway station booth or at con-venience stores) for W2,500. This is especially ideal if you are staying in the Seoul area for more than a few days. You may purchase a T-Money card the size of a credit card or a miniature card that easily attaches to a key ring or cell phone. There are advertisements for it on the booth window, which you can point to if you encounter a language problem. You will have to load the card with at least W5,000 initially, but may reload it in the future with any amount between W1,000 and W90,000. Using a T-Money card offers several benefits: it saves W100 off the basic cash fare on each subway or bus ride, provides transfer discounts and is simply more convenient – you will already be on the subway while others are still waiting in ticket lines. Cards can be reloaded at any convenience store or in the automated subway ticket machines (instruc-tions in English are available). 

Using the T-Money card : When you go to the subway turnstile, lay your card flat with the T sign facing up and scan it. The machine will register the amount charged for the trip and show your remaining balance. Upon exiting the subway, repeat the process by scanning your card. T-Money cards can also be used on city buses and in many taxis. When you purchase your subway ticket or T-Money Card, ask for a subway map in English at the kiosk. On the back of the map is a detailed listing of places to go in Seoul, what line to get on, what stop to get off at, which exit to take, and how far you have to walk on foot. It is a fantastic pocket guide to Seoul! The admission fees and times of operation listed are subject to change. 

Understanding the subway system : All station stops are identified by sta-tion name in Hangul and English, along with station numbers. Pay attention; announcements are made in Korean and English, but you can easily miss your stop. Look at the big center number at the station stop; the name of the sta-tion will be listed with smaller numbers to the left and right. These small num-156 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 157 

> V
> T

# V

## VEHICLES Pickup, Inspection and Registration: All processing, pick-up, and outbound shipments are handled through the Yongsan Vehicle Processing Center (Camp Kim, Gate 17, Bldg C-1244-CK-068, 02-798-7032/7031 or 723-8912/8916, Mon-Fri 8 am-5 pm). To pick up and register a shipped vehicle, you will need your ID card, Vehicle Inspection Shipping Form (VISF-issued by port of embar-kation to owner), a copy of your orders authorizing shipment to Korea, proof 

# U

## USO (UNITED SERVICE ORGANIZATION) 

The USO has been in Korea since 1954. It provides a lounge, Cross Cultural School, Good Neighbor Program, language classes, information, referral, out-reach services and is an excellent place to book tours in Seoul and through-out Korea. You can also book many wonderfully exotic overseas vacations at reasonable prices. The USO also generally has a comprehensive selection of helpful guidebooks and maps (this is the go to place for information on how to get around town and travel in general). There are two USO offices at Yongsan: USO at Camp Kim, located in Building 1224 across the street from Gate 17 (724-7003/3301; Hours of Operation: Mon-Sat 8 am-5 pm, closed Sun); and USO Seoul, located in Building 4034 on South Post near the Dragon Hill Lodge (723-5364; Hours of Operation: Mon-Fri 8 am-7 pm, Sat 9 am-7 pm, closed Sun). Visit www.uso.org/korea for more information. 

> U

Main or South Post, so make sure you know what gate you need. Most local taxi drivers know Yongsan if you say that, but you may end up on the other side of post, so learn the landmarks! The closest subway station to where you want to go is a landmark that will be able to be communicated easily. The local taxis have medium-sized cabs, are usually gray or white in color and are recogniz-able by the blue sign on the roof. They are usually quite reliable as long as you know your desired destination in Korean (have someone write it out for you in Hangul). Some cabs now offer “Free Interpretation” service with an English speaking phone interpreter to help get you to your destination. There is also a Volunteer Translation Service (02- 1588-5644) called BBB that you can call for help in communicating. 

Deluxe Taxis : These feature somewhat larger cabs, and are black with a yellow sign on the roof and have the words “Deluxe Taxi” written on the side. The rates for these cabs are double the regular taxis, but the drivers generally speak some English. Again, check for a meter and negotiate a price before-hand. 

## TRAVEL SERVICES See Travel Outside of Korea - Travel Services. 

## TRICARE Korea 

The Department of Defense Health Care Program provides health care for military service members and their families around the world, www.tricare. mil. Enrollment forms are available at all military treatment facilities and at the TRICARE Service Center Across from the Emergency Room at the Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital. 

USAG-Yongsan: Bldg 7005, Room 1150, inside BAACH. Tricare Service Cen-ter 737-1433 

USAG Humphreys: Bldg S555, inside the Health Clinic, 753-7708/737-2780 

USAG-Daegu : Bldg S221, inside the Wood Clinic on Camp Walker, 764-4683 158 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 159 

> VV

center, and special orders can be costly. You can also purchase parts online. Hours: Monday-Friday 8 am to 5 pm, Saturday 9 am-5 pm, closed Sunday. • Korean Garages: There are many garages on the economy around Yong-san. Word of mouth is generally the best way of finding a good mechanic on the economy. The Auto Skills Center may also be able to refer you to a helpful garage. Also, see the Shopping – Repairs section for a list of garages. 

NOTE: It is against U.S. Army policy to pay a claim for items stolen from a POV unless it is something like a jack, a spare tire, a first aid kit, or a child car seat. Secure your personal property! 

## VETERANS AFFAIRS 

The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) office at Yongsan is identified as a Benefits Delivery at Discharge (BDD) Center (Bldg 4037 near the barber shop, behind the 1st Replacement Company/19th Personnel Company build-ing and across the parking lot from the DHL, 738-5121 or toll-free 800-827-1000). The focus of the Yongsan BDD operation is to provide separating and retiring military members of all services the opportunity to start VA claims for service-connected disability compensation before they retire. Personnel also provide assistance to retirees as time allows. The VA office offers a wealth of information on health care, disability compensation, vocational rehabilitation, employment, home loan guaranty, survivors’ benefits and insurance. Veterans residing on the Korean peninsula will be served by the regional office in Pitts-burgh, Pennsylvania. The correspondence address is Department of Veterans Affairs, Pittsburgh Regional Offices, 1000 Liberty Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15222. If you are already a veteran arriving to Korea, there is little they can do for you aside from offer you the above address. For further information, visit one of the following websites: • www.va.gov • www.turbotab.org • www.vba.gov 

## VIDEO RENTAL 

There are several locations to rent movies on post. They all have a good va-riety of movies (except on weekends), so rent early. Most new releases may be rented for 3 days. South Post Shoppette Video Rental is the largest store and carries movie snacks and magazines, as well as movies to rent/buy (Bldg 4209, beside the South Post fire station). The Dragon Hill Lodge Shoppette and the Mini-mall Shoppette on Main Post carry a smaller selection of movies to rent of ownership and insurance, the vehicle inspection certificate, and your USFK driver’s license. Motorcycles/moped registration also requires Motorcycle Safety Course certification. (See Drivers License in A to Z.) After pickup, you must obtain a vehicle safety inspection from the Car Care Center at Camp Kim or the Auto Skills Center located on the hill behind Itaewon Acres housing area (turn left just before the post exit at Gate 6, then take the first left). Once your inspection is complete, take the inspection form and the completed reg-istration forms to the Vehicle Registration office (Camp Kim, Bldg 1230, 724-5768/4811) to receive your license plates. 

Buying Used Cars: Used cars for sale on post range in price from $500 and up. Older models generally can be found for under $3000. Newer models in good shape go for higher prices. Check the bulletin boards at the Main PX, Moyer Community Activities Center, Embassy Starbucks and the Townhouse (food court at the PX) for personal ads. There will be cars on post with for sale signs on them or check the BOSS lot, a small area in the commissary parking lot designated for private car sales. Contact the Vehicle Registration office for reg-istration questions. These vehicles are generally appropriate to drive on post, but it is your responsibility to make sure they have a current safety inspection. Because breakdowns can be expensive, be cautious if you plan to drive a less reliable vehicle off post for long distances. Do routine maintenance. Kore-an law is very strict concerning car accidents. Soldiers have found themselves barred from leaving the country for minor fender benders. 

Importing a New American Vehicle : You may import a new American-made vehicle during the first 6 months after your arrival in Korea if you have not already shipped one. 

Importing a New Foreign Vehicle : Requires a memorandum from the Unit Commander, this is endorsed by the PMO, and recommending approval (you must pay shipping and customs costs). American specifications are not required in Korea, but they will be if you wish to ship your vehicle stateside when you PCS. 

Local Purchase: AAFES Exchange offers new car sales (near the Community Bank by the PX, at the Gallery and the Dragon Hill Lodge, exch@militarycars. com, www.encs.com). There are many dealerships off post; ensure you choose a reputable one. 

Vehicle Maintenance : There are several options available for maintaining your car: • AAFES Garage: The Car Care Center (Camp Kim, 724-6037): The center can perform basic maintenance. A limited selection of parts is available at the 160 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 161 

> VW

ID or U.S. Passport), which the security officials will retain in exchange for a temporary pass. U.S. citizens will be allowed to keep their passport, but must provide some other form of identification, such as a driver’s license, that will be retained. It is advisable that visitors contact their insurance company and add a spe-cial rider to their policy in the event that they need hospital care. Visitors not eligible for military benefits will be hospitalized in Korean hospitals. In some cases, Medicaid has refused to pay for hospitalization stays. 

# W

## WATER 

The water on post is safe for drinking and water fountains are available in several places, including the PX, 121, CYSS, and the schools and gyms. Water is also available to purchase. Water is available by the bottle or case at the com-missary. Another option is home delivery by Seoksu Water located in the foyer of Main Post PX. Call 724-7567 to schedule delivery. Hours: Monday to Friday 10 am-7 pm Saturday to Sunday 10 am-6 pm, closed Monday. Free deliveries are made weekly on and off post. Hot/cold water dispensers are available to purchase or to rent. Hand pumps that fit over the bottles are also available for purchase. Many housing units off post may include hot/cold water bottle dispensers and water delivery; check with your property owner or manager to determine what is included with your housing unit. 

## WEATHER 

The weather in Seoul is much like the weather in Washington D.C. or Phila-delphia with very cold winters and hot, humid summers. Korea does have a monsoon season in mid to late summer. Take flood warnings seriously. The ter-rain is very hilly and rainwater gathers quickly in certain areas during monsoon season. The spring is a great time to sightsee, with mild weather and many col-

> V

in their stores. Hannam Village Video Store is located in Bldg K. Yongsan Library has thousands of movies and television series for adults and children available to check out at no cost to you. 

## VISAS 

The best way to get accurate information on visas is to contact the relevant embassy several months prior to the time you are interested in traveling. Con-ditions are constantly changing around the world, so be prepared for some travel changes. Travel agents can help groups of travelers obtain passport in-formation and visas. 

## VISITORS TO KOREA 

Each visitor will need a valid passport. A Korean visa is not required if the period of stay in Korea is 90 days or less. Before your visitors purchase airline tickets, check with travel agents in Korea (both on and off post). Often they will be able to provide you with cheaper fares on flights from the U.S. to Korea. 

Temporary Post Pass : Visitors need a pass issued so that they can have ac-cess to the post. Prior to their arrival, pick up an application form for a tempo-rary post pass from the Law and Order office (Bldg 4305, Room 105, 738-4612, go north on the road behind the Dragon Hill Lodge, go down the hill until the road ends. Bldg 4305 is on the left, and is also the Garrison Commander’s of-fice). Return completed forms to the Pass and ID office. Pass processing and approval takes about three working days. You may request a pass for up to 30 days. When you pick up the approved pass, you can also pick up a letter that will allow your visitors access to the PX and Chosun Gift shop (escorted by you); this process can easily be done before your visitors arrive. Once your visitors arrive in the country, take the completed paperwork, your visitors and their passports to the Pass and ID section of the Provost Mar-shal’s Office (Camp Kim, Bldg 1230, Mon-Fri 8:30 am-4 pm/closed holidays). Visitors must be present to have their thumbprint scanned for the D.B.I.D.S system. They will also have their photograph taken and will be issued a pass valid for their entire stay. If your visitors arrive after hours or on a weekend you will be able to sign them on post for a 24 hour period. You will need to re-sign them in every 24 hours until you obtain a pass for them. This can be especially inconvenient if your visitors arrive just before a long holiday weekend. Thus, you may want to have your guests plan their arrival dates carefully. 

Signing Visitors On Post : You will need to take visitors to a designated gate. Your visitors need a form of identification that verifies citizenship (e.g., Korean 162 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 163 

> SHOPPING

# SHOPPING IN SEOUL 

Here’s a newcomer’s glance at what is available in Seoul. For in depth in-formation look for local books and magazines or visit the tourist information booths located around the city. The AFSC Shopping Club and other groups on post offer guided local shopping excursions and day trips. For many, military duty in Korea somehow seems to be an intrusion on the real mission: shopping for yourself and everyone you know in the United States. Shopping in Korea is so good, in fact, that it can easily become an addic-tion. However, before you buy loads to send back, be sure to check the United States Postal and Customs regulations. (See Customs in A to Z.) With new auto-mated equipment, the United States Customs Office has been cracking down on illegal exports, including military members sending illegal gifts stateside. Stiffer regulations from the Korean government have narrowed the counterfeit label distributors drastically. Still, if you intend to join the legions of shoppers attacking the stores with a vengeance (and almost everyone does at one time or another), keep a few simple guidelines in mind: • Always know the exchange rate between dollars and won before you shop. You may be able to get a better deal using one currency over the other, depending on current economic conditions. Be aware that if you pay by credit card, the currency exchange rate is in the seller’s favor. • If you use a credit card, be cautious and never pay a service charge to the merchant for using the card. If the merchant insists on doing this and you ab-solutely have to have the item, make them write the charge separately on your receipt and report them to the credit card company. This is an illegal practice and most merchants will back off if you stand your ground. Keep your credit card receipts and ensure the charge that shows up on your bill matches the re-ceipt. Using your card may also be disadvantageous because many businesses will offer a “cash” discount if you pay for your items in won. Be sure to ask about this as most businesses are not going to offer this on their own. • Many U.S. banks now charge service fees for use of their cards overseas. Contact your bank for more information on this practice. It’s generally easier (and cheaper) to shop with cash, whether in dollars or won. USAA at this time does not charge service fees and will refund some of the services fees for using international ATMs. • Outside of Korean department store, many Korean stores do not have dressing rooms. Be prepared to slip things on over your clothes or change in orful flowers in bloom (most known for the rows of cherry blossom trees). Au-tumn generally brings lovely foliage colors, clear skies and many opportunities for outdoor activities. Winter brings enough snow for mountain skiing. Parts of Korea, particularly the island of Jeju to the extreme south, are much warmer and experience milder winters. Other sections, such as the area around the DMZ, are much cooler and do not get the locked-in heat of a summer in Seoul. 

# Z

## ZOO 

There are many petting zoos and animal attractions in Seoul. Please refer to the Travel in Korea section at the back of this book for more details. 

> WZ

## 164 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 165 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

whelmed at first. Visit a variety of shops over a period of several weeks. Ask questions! Reputable dealers will tell you if a piece has been repaired, what wood it is made from, where it originated in Korea and how old it is. When looking at antique pieces, look for bamboo nails, tongue-in-groove joints and cut-out or etched fittings and locks. When you purchase an antique, ask the shop owner for a certificate of authenticity that will describe the piece, list the materials and decorative metals used to make it, and detail its usage and measurements. Always negotiate on the price! Keep your receipt, the certifi-cate, and a picture of your antique, in case of damage or loss. Note : National Treasures may not be removed from the country. In most cases, they would be entirely too expensive to purchase. For more information, call the Office of Cultural Affairs, Seoul City Hall at 02-731-6188. 

Hannam-dong : Located beyond the fire station in Itaewon and just around the corner from Hannam Village, it is easily accessible and a well-known area. Most shops have reproductions in the front and better antiques in the rear. Generally, the shopkeepers speak excellent English, which can be a big factor in making a purchase. Go often to look and compare. The shops are constantly replenishing their inventory. Ask if the shop has more items; there is often an upstairs or downstairs area which you would never find on your own. 

Insadong or “Mary’s Alley” : Located in downtown Seoul between the U.S. Embassy and Pagoda Park, it can easily be reached by taking the subway to Anguk Station (Line 3, Station 328, exit 6) and walking about 50 feet straight ahead, then turn left or....just follow the crowds. Approximately 41% of Korea’s antique shops are located in this shopping area. It is not only a great place to shop for antiques, but also has many wonderful art galleries available to visi-tors. Prices are high, but the quality of goods is generally quite good. There are many good tea shops and restaurants to be found down some of the interest-ing side streets around this shopping area. On Sunday afternoons, the streets are closed to vehicle traffic and shopkeepers set up their wares in the street, along with various entertainers and artists. It’s a great place to spend a Sunday afternoon with the family. A cultural space called ‘Ssamziegil’ is a mall with handicrafts as its theme. The space was planned by fashion accessory maker, Ssamzie. An area of three stores was forced to close, due to economics in the area. Ssamzie rebuilt this building, which now consists of six floors, housing 70 shops that are all connected by a long spiral path that leads to the Sky Park on the top floor, offering views of the streets below. This mall is located on the left, down towards the middle of the long main street. 

Janghanpyeong and Dapsimni Antique Art Markets: If you like flea mar-a makeshift dressing that consists of a curtain that has been hung for your privacy. • If you find an item you like but are not prepared to buy at that time, ask the merchant for a business card so you can find the store again. However, keep in mind that the item may not be available later. When you see some-thing you want and have done the research to know the price is right, buy it! This is even true for stores on base. Seasonal items are generally put out ahead of what you expect in the United States and sometimes sell out; so if you don’t get your Easter baskets when they hit the shelves the Easter bunny might be leaving your child a note with cash attached. • If you really like the items and prices at a particular store, ask for extra cards to refer your friends. Many times, merchants will give discounts for your word-of-mouth referrals. • Shopping bags are not free at grocery and some department stores, but for a few cents, you can buy bags for what you need. It’s best to come prepared with some sturdy bags or a rolling cart if you plan to make many purchases. Additionally many stores offer an area to box your own purchases at no cost. • New stores open all the time and some old favorites may move or go out of business, so ask your neighbors, colleagues and American and Korean friends to recommend shops that cater to your interests. • With the exception of some food and flower markets, most stores do not open before 10 am. Many markets are closed on a particular weekday, so check before you go. The last week of July and the first week of August is tra-ditionally vacation time for the Koreans, so be prepared for the markets to be closed for a few days or even a week. This also occurs during Chusok (Korean Thanksgiving holiday) and Lunar New Year. 

# WHAT TO BUY 

The following list, though certainly not complete, highlights a variety of products available for purchase in Korea: 

## ANTIQUES 

For those interested in Asian antiques, Korea offers one of the best shop-ping places in the region. “Treasures” are everywhere and although prices continue to climb, many things are still well within the average budget. Unless you are truly a connoisseur of Asian antiques, shop carefully. Before you buy, spend a lot of time looking and comparing items and prices. You will be over-166 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 167 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

## ARTS & CRAFTS 

Local markets such as Dongdaemun, Namdaemun, E-mart and the Alpha Store (a chain of art/stationary stores) have a broad range of art, craft, statio-nery and architectural supplies available. 

## BOOKS 

The Main PX on Yongsan Garrison carries a wide variety of books and mag-azines, as does the Osan Air Base BX. Some local bookstores worth a visit are: 

Bandi and Lunis’ : Located inside the COEX mall, take the subway to Sam-seong (Line 2, Station 219, exit 6). 

Jongno Book Center : Located just across the street from the YMCA Hotel, take the subway to Jongno 3(sam)-ga (Line 1, Station 130, exit 4). 

Kyobo Bookstore : Located in the basement of the Kyobo building just two buildings south of the United States Embassy in downtown Seoul, take the subway to Gwanghwamun (Line 5, Station 533, exit 3). There is a large sign for the bookstore at this exit, which leads you immediately into the store. The for-eigner’s section here is excellent and some of the “coffee table” books are truly beautiful, though expensive. There is an entire section devoted to dictionaries for translating English and Korean. Within the foreigner’s section is a very large wall of travel books (including the Lonely Planet and Seeing Eye series) as well as books on teaching English. 

Seoul Selection : This is another treasure near the United States Embassy. Take the subway to Gwanghwamun (Line 5, Station 533, exit 2). East side of Gyeongbokgung Palace, across from the parking lot. www.seoulselection.com; phone: 02-734-9565. 

What the Book? : Conveniently located in Itaewon, this bookstore sells new and used English books. They also buy used books. It is located on the same side as the Hamilton Hotel on the main road in Itaewon, nestled on the second floor under the Thai restaurant Wang Thai. www.whatthebook.com; 02-797-2342. 

## CARPETS 

If you think you are going to want carpets, consider buying them at your local PX or Furniture Store and bring them with you in your express shipment. It is a lot easier to lay carpet down in a fairly empty home than to add carpet once you have unpacked. Good color choices are hard to come by locally, par-ticularly neutral colors. If you have room-sized rugs that are not too heavy, it is a great idea to include them with your shipment. You will be glad you did. kets interspersed with fine antiques and a few nice shops, this is the desti-nation for you! Located between Dapsimni (Line 5, Station 542, exit 4) and Janghanpyeong (Line 5, Station 543) is the Janghanpyeong antique market which boasts an array of traditional goods. Many furniture retailers purchase wholesale from this market. Just a short walk away you’ll find another nearby antique market area known as Dapsimni (or take the subway to Dapsimni Sta-tion Line 5, Station 542, exit 2). This market offers three large buildings of trea-sures waiting to be explored. The buildings– 2-dong, 5-dong, and 6-dong– are fairly easy to spot since the signs are in English as well as Korean. English is not spoken by many of the shopkeepers here so negotiating can be challenging. 

Minsok Gol-dong Pum Market : This quaint market is located near the Hwanghak-dong flea market in Seoul. Take the subway to Sindang (Line 6, Sta-tion 635). You will pass a wedding hall before you exit the subway. Once out-side, go immediately to the left across the steps, then behind the row of doors for sale. You will be in the market ready to explore for hidden treasures. You can find antiques, character statues (similar to the statue found in Itaewon, across the street from McDonalds), kitchenware, old books, trinkets, etc. 

Seoul Folk Flea Market (Hwanghak-dong Flea Market) : This market is lo-cated along a few blocks under the Cheonggye elevated road. This is Korea’s oldest flea market dating all the way back to the Korean War. So you can imag-ine the antiques…books that are more than one hundred years old, ceram-ics, old LPs and so much more. The famous saying goes, “If you can’t find it at Hwanghak-dong, you won’t be able to find it anywhere else!” The market has close to 1,000 shops selling hard to find antiques along with second hand goods. To some it may look like junk, but savvy shoppers may find antique treasures here. It is recommended that you go with someone who speaks Ko-rean. Take the subway to Sinseoldong (Line 1, Exit 9) and walk straight ahead for 100m. Open daily; 10:00 am-7:00 pm and closed the second and fourth Tuesdays of every month. 

## ART 

There are several areas in Seoul to purchase art or browse in the galleries. Off-post between Gate 14 and Gate 16, you can find inexpensive art galleries that will frame your purchases as well as create custom art from photographs. There are also galleries located in the following areas: City Hall (Line 1, Station 132), Gyeongbokgung (Line 3, Station 327) and Insadong–Anguk (Line 3, Sta-tion 328, exit 6). 168 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 169 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

## CLOTHING 

There are many clothing shops that offer great prices; however, if you are larger than a size 8, you may have trouble finding clothing in Korea. Doota Mall, across from the fabric market in Dongdaemun, has information about stores that carry larger sizes. Ask at the information booth on the ground floor and they will give you a slip of paper with a list of store numbers. Some places to shop for clothing include department stores, outlets, brand shops, Nam-daemun and Dongdaemun Markets, Myeong-dong, Itaewon, and the stands in front of Ehwa Women’s University. Please see ‘Where to buy’ in this section for directions to these places. For pre-made Korean apparel, there are some sizing differences that you should note. Basically, the sizes are: 44=Extra Small, 55=Small, 66=Medium (about a U.S. size 8), 77=Large, and 88=Extra Large (extremely difficult to find in a small store). Pants are often sized by the waist measurement in centime-ters or occasionally inches. Shoe sizes can be difficult since some shoes have Korean sizing and some have European. For women’s shoes, the largest size sold is typically 270 (U.S. size 10), but these are hard to find. For men, most shops only carry up to a size 290 (U.S. size 11). Shoes are measured in mil-limeters.                                                        

> Korea (mm) 220 225 230 235 240 245 250 255 260 265 270
> Japan (cm) 22 22.5 23 23.5 24 24.5 25 25.5 26 26.5 27
> U.S. 55.5 66.5 77.5 88.5 99.5 10
> Europe 35 36 36.5 37 37.5 38 38.5 39 40 41 42
> UK 2.5 33.5 44.5 55.5 66.5 78

Men’s Shoes Size Conversion Chart                                                        

> Korea (mm) 240 245 250 255 260 265 270 275 280 285 290
> Japan (cm) 24 24.5 25 25.5 26 26.5 27 27.5 28 28.5 29
> U.S. 66.5 77.5 88.5 99.5 10 10.5 11
> Europe 38 38.5 39 40 40.5 41 42 42.5 43 44 44.5
> UK 55.5 66.5 77.5 88.5 99.5 10

(http://www.korea4expats.com) Also, check with departing personnel. Many may have purchased Korean carpets specifically for the Yongsan quarters and are willing to sell at a good price. The AAFES Furniture Store carries some area rugs, carpeting and pad-ding at a variety of prices and sizes up to 12’x15’; however, be forewarned that they sell out quickly. They do have a waiting list so join the list and they’ll notify you when new carpets arrive. Ask at the PX about ordering rugs for delivery to the local store from the Online Catalog. Occasionally, carpet vendors set up displays and sell various sizes of decorative rugs and carpets in the AAFES Four Seasons Store. Several off-post vendors will come in and lay down wall to wall carpeting. The cost varies with carpet choice and vender. The fabric market at Dongda-emun has great carpets on the ground floor level. 

## CELADON 

This unique Korean art form has evolved into some of the most beauti-ful ceramics available anywhere in the Orient. The celadon wares of the Ko-ryo Dynasty, produced in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, surprised even the highly cultured Chinese. Koryo celadon pieces are now praised as rare art forms. While it is extremely doubtful that you will ever purchase an original Koryo celadon (and you probably would not be able to get it out of the coun-try even if you could afford it), celadon copies abound. Prices range from a few dollars for a small, inexpensive copy to thousands of dollars for an origi-nal work by one of the current “living treasures,” a designation given by the government to masters of ancient Korean arts. Pottery can be purchased at pottery villages, Insadong, the Hwanghak-dong Flea Market, festivals or at the Gallery on Yongsan Garrison. The Icheon Pottery Village and the Yeoju Pottery Village are the most famous. The AFSC, the USO, and various groups on post offer bus trips to the pottery villages. 

Eden Pottery : This beautiful shop in Itaewon is located across the street from McDonald’s and up a little way, beneath the ABC Mart. Look for their sign because it is in a basement and just has the staircase leading down. This shop is a little more expensive than the souvenir shops around it, but the quality of the pieces surpasses others. Phone: 02-793-0828 

Koryo Art Ceramics : This little shop is filled to the brim and spills out onto the sidewalk. The salesperson speaks English well and is happy to explain the symbolism behind the items. Located in Itaewon on the right side of the main strip, past the first alley. Look for stairs leading down; the store is tucked back from the sidewalk at the top of the stairs. Phone: 02-798-2577 www.koryoc-eramics.co.kr 170 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 171 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

Dragon Hill Lodge on the lobby level near the elevators. Featuring a selection of beautiful fresh and silk flowers, the shop also accepts special orders and will make arrangements based on pictures you provide. Phone: 738-2222 x6816. 

Burt’s Self Help: If you live in government quarters, annual flowers and shrubs are sometimes available seasonally. These are free, but there is usually a limit on the quantities given per unit. Located on South Post between Collier Field House and Gate 13. 

Dongdaemun (East Gate Market) : There is a market for landscaping mate-rials, flowers, bushes, and trees in the Dongdaemun area. Take the subway to Jongno 5(O)-ga (Line 1, Station 129) or Dongdaemun (Line 4, Station 421, Exit 9) and walk straight ahead for about two blocks. 

Express Bus Terminal : The flower markets are located on the 3rd floor and in the basements (Line 3, Station 339, Exit 1). You can also take bus 143, 401 near the Commissary gate. Get off at the second stop after crossing the river. The shopping area is on your right. 

In Full Bloom Flower Shop : Conveniently located in the Main Post Mini Mall (Four Seasons), the shop carries a variety of fresh flowers, but is relatively pricey. Phone: 723-2076. 

Hatonae (Flower Area) : This is a great place to shop if your interests lie more with yard and houseplants. Seasonal yard plants are outside and house-plants inside. Some of these plants are rare and can be expensive, so always shop around and negotiate the price before purchasing. To get there by per-sonal vehicle or taxi, take the Chamsu Bridge (lower section of the Banpo Bridge) to the south side of Han River. Drive straight through the traffic light at the intersection of the Express Bus Terminal, Palace Hotel and hospital. Go up the hill on the other side where you will see greenhouses lining the street on both sides. 

Namdaemun (South Gate Market) : Take the subway to Hoehyeon Station (Line 4, Station 425, Exit 5), exit street level take a right turn into the market on the Main Alley. The flower market is on the third floor of a large building on your right about 300 yards into the market and features real and artificial flowers and ribbons. 

The Yangjae Flower Market : Take the subway to Yangjae Station (Line 3, Exit 7) and walk south for 10-15 minutes. The market is on the right. This is a good place to find yard and houseplants, gardening tools, and cut flowers. To get there, drive across the Hannam Bridge. Go straight until you reach Yangjae-dong. The flower market is a little bit out of town and is located on the right side of the road. 

## TAILORS AND SEAMSTRESSES 

Selecting a good tailor from the hundreds available in Seoul is yet another one of those things where word of mouth is helpful. Most people who have been in Seoul for a few years have a favorite tailor, so when you see a person wearing a custom suit or uniform that you like, ask him or her who made it. After you select a tailor, make sure you select a fabric that will be compatible with the style of garment you have chosen. Be sure to review all of the details of the garment (type of lapel, pocket flaps, cuffs, etc.) with the tailor so you will be pleased with the final product. Do not accept unsatisfactory workmanship and do not pay for the garment in full until it is completed to your satisfac-tion. Another tip if you are willing to make the trip is to shop for custom suits, gowns, and more in Osan. Often you can save 25% or more by taking the time to make this trip and will often see even bigger savings if you order more than one item (i.e. a gown and custom suit, a custom suit and jacket, etc.) Many military personnel have found that custom uniforms can be made very reasonably. The tailor shop at the Dragon Hill Lodge is a good place to have uniforms and custom dress shirts made; they carry the authorized fabric, but for Army uniforms only. The Military Clothing Sales Store (MCSS), located in the Mini-Mall on Main Post, carries fabrics and buttons authorized for Army uniforms only. The selection of Air Force, Marine, and Navy uniforms here is limited and some items have to be ordered Osan or from the United States, so make sure you plan ahead!! For clothing services off post, you may need to purchase your own fabric. After the tailor has taken all the necessary measure-ments, ask how much fabric he will need to make the uniform. A man’s jacket normally takes about 2½ yards and the pants require about 1½ yards. Check at the MCSS to make sure you have all the necessary trim and measurements for its placement. Word of mouth is a good way of finding out who specializes in custom tailoring. Women’s clothing is more difficult to make than men’s and is more expensive, so ask to see samples and prices before committing to a garment. 

## FLOWERS AND PLANTS 

Koreans, like Americans, value anything that makes their lives a little more pleasant and attractive. This attitude is clearly reflected in their love of flowers, which can be found in abundance and are very inexpensive. There are literally hundreds, possibly even thousands, of flower vendors in Seoul. Note: These markets close around lunch time so be sure to go early. 

Blossoms : For those who prefer to stay on-base, this shop is located in the 172 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 173 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

ket, in the five-story white building (Line 4, Station 421, Exit 9); Namdaemun Market, Building C 3rd floor (Line 4, Station 425, Exit 5); and on Osan Air Base. 

## JEWELRY 

Like most of Asia, Korea seems to abound with jewelry. The beautiful crafts-manship makes these articles very tempting buys. There are several important factors to remember when shopping for jewelry: • As in the U.S., deal with a reputable merchant if you plan on purchasing precious stones and metals. • Know which countries specialize in what type of precious stones in or-der to get the best price. Korea’s special stones are amethyst and topaz. True Korean amethyst has become very expensive, so you will find many shops sell the cheaper Brazilian amethyst. The Korean jade supply was mined out several years ago; consequently, most of the jade you see comes from other Southeast Asian countries. Merchants can, and do, make high-quality synthetic stones. • Always comparison shop before you purchase. The PX carries a variety of jewelry from different parts of Asia; check out their selection and prices. They always stand behind the products they sell and you may wish to eliminate any doubt when purchasing a high dollar item like fine jewelry. Payment plans are available or purchases can be made using most major credit cards. • All Seasons Jewelry and Joy’s Jewelry in Itaewon offer many beautiful pieces and they do custom work. As with all things Korean, word of mouth advertising is the best way to go. Some shops specialize, so ask around before committing to any purchase. • When purchasing expensive jewelry, ask for certificates of authenticity and carefully inspect all merchandise. Certificates of authenticity are required even from the PX and required for insurance purposes. 

## KIMCH’I POTS 

If you are thinking of buying a brown-ware kimchi pot, there are many places to buy them. A wide variety of kimchi pots are available just outside Gate 21. This gate is officially called the Friendship House Gate as indicated by the sign above the gate, but is unofficially and widely known as the Kimchi Pot Gate. Kimchi pots make nice decorative crocks. They can also be found at various vendors throughout the city and at the pottery villages. Spouses have been known to find a “defective” kimchi pot (one that cannot be used to actu-ally prepare kimchi) for less than W20,000 in the pottery villages. 

## PICTURE FRAMES 

Many people choose to have artwork framed in Korea due to the relatively low cost. There are many places in Seoul that provide framing. The Frame Shop in the Gallery on Main Post has fairly reasonable prices and the owners speak English. They are familiar with the concept of double matting and work hard to accommodate American tastes. The MWR Arts and Craft Centers of every post offer custom matting and framing services for a reasonable fee, or you can do your own framing. For a more extensive selection of frames, there are approximately 30 shops located off-post between Gate 14 and Gate 16. The best deals are off-post. The language barrier can sometimes prove frustrating or just something fun to write about in your journal. A nice store to have artwork framed is 0901. To get to 0901, go out of Gate 14 and turn right at the traffic light. The store is near Samgakji Station on your right hand side. Two shops before 0901 is a small shop selling unframed canvas artworks. The owner does the paintings and for a very reasonable fee will turn any treasured photograph you may have into a wonderful canvas oil painting. Note: Plastic frames are widespread so if you are offered an unbelievably low price on the framing, check for plastic! 

## GINSENG 

Ginseng is Korea’s traditional medicinal herb. This herb, known as the “miraculous medicine” or “Koryo Ginseng,” is believed to calm the mind and strengthen the body. There are many ginseng products including the root, tea, canned drinks, and even candy. It can be purchased at many markets in town, duty-free shops, and during regional ginseng festivals. It is definitely an ac-quired taste for the majority of Americans, so it is advisable to taste test before you purchase. Ginseng products can be costly. The USO offers trips to pick your own Ginseng root and visit the local Ginseng markets. The Foreign Goods Transaction Office also has a ginseng shop and give special prices to military personnel. 

## HANBOK 

The hanbok is the traditional Korean attire of both men and women. Han-boks can be very elaborate depending upon the fabric and handwork involved. They are still worn on official occasions and holidays such as Chuseok, wed-dings, and other special family gatherings. If you are interested in having a hanbok made, there are hanbok tailor shops in Itaewon; Dongdaemun Mar-174 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 175 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

can be bought by the yard or by the bolt along with a huge selection of no-tions: tassels, thread, zippers, and really anything else you can imagine. Take the Ichon Station (near Gate 13) or Sinyongsan Station (near Gate 14) subway to Dongdaemun (Line 4, Station 421, Exit 9). If you’re interested in quilting and sewing, visit the Arts and Crafts Center on South Post. There you’ll find information on quilting and sewing classes as well as a long arm quilting machine located on the first floor. One quilting group, the Yongsan Quilt Group, participates in the Quilts of Valor program and makes and donates quilts for babies born at the Brian Allgood Army Communi-ty Hospital. The group welcomes both military spouses and civilians and meets regularly, offering instruction and providing all quilting supplies (including sewing machines) to anyone wishing to volunteer to help make the donated quilts. For more information, visit www.facebook.com/pages/Yongsan-Quil-ters/110379432330282. To contact the Arts and Crafts Center, call 738-4750 or visit Building 4253/4254 on South Post. Hours are Tuesday-Saturday 10:00 am-6:00 pm, closed Sunday, Monday and some holidays. See Arts & Crafts in A-Z for more information. One popular fabric shop, Happy Quilt, has top quality cotton and seasonal fabric (B-5215, 5216 inside Dongdaemun Fabric Market). Happy Quilt is a regu-lar vendor at the AFSC monthly luncheons. They have a warehouse located in the Osan area. Some other popular Korean items to shop for include lacquer ware, paper craft called Hanji, calligraphic works and paintings, paper fans, masks, teas, and fashion accessories. 

# WHERE TO BUY 

There are so many shopping opportunities in Seoul that it is easy to become overwhelmed. The listing below is by no means complete, but it’s a good place to begin your Korean shopping adventures. The locations are broken down into three categories: Markets, Shopping Districts, and Department Stores. A trip to a department store or a shopping district can be great fun, but the markets are where you will find the best deals if you have the time to spend. 

## MARKETS 

Korea is world famous for its shopping markets. Exploring these markets 

## LEATHER 

Another popular item in Korea is leather, whether in luggage, jackets, hand-bags, or shoes. There are many good bargains to be found, but a few words of caution apply: If you cannot tell the difference between cow, lamb or pigskin, shop with someone who can! Quality lambskin is the most expensive and you certainly do not want to pay for lamb and end up with treated cow; this also applies for fleece linings. If you are placing an order, NEVER pay for the entire garment in advance. Make the smallest down payment possible since the mer-chant will be much more interested in seeing that the final product meets your specifications and completed in a timely manner. Do not accept a garment until you are happy with it. 

NOTE : It is not the merchant’s fault if you picked a style that is unbecoming to you. Know what looks best on you before placing a customized order, or you could end up forfeiting your deposit. In most cases you will have to purchase the item since large sizes will be difficult for the tailor to sell. 

## MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

Many people have found good bargains in Seoul on various musical instru-ments. Nakwon Musical Instrument Arcade is located behind Tapgol Park (Pa-goda Park) near Insadong. This large indoor market has the widest variety and best selection of musical instruments, from piccolos to pianos. Korean-made guitars appear to be a good buy, but there may be better bargains elsewhere for American made guitars. Take the subway to Jongno 3(sam)-ga Station (Lines 1, 3, 5, exit 5). Subway stations Jonggak and Anguk are also nearby. 

## QUILTS AND FABRIC 

Korea is a nation filled with fabric, garment manufacturers and innovative entrepreneurs who do not let a scrap of fabric go to waste. The Korean quilt-ing industry was born literally from the remnants of other works. Most Korean quilts are sewn by machine and made of washable fabrics. Some are sewn by hand from ornate silks and satin fabrics, but these are usually not washable and more for decoration than everyday use. You can spend anywhere from a few dollars to several hundred on a Korean quilt. A quilt can be made to order; prices vary widely so shop around for the best prices, quality of fabric, and workmanship. Dongdaemun Market is the best place to purchase fabric, sewing notions and quilts. You will be amazed at the sheer volume of fabrics available. Fabric 176 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 177 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

and notions of every imaginable sort. It is overwhelming at first, so plan to spend a few hours. Look for the Happy Quilt fabric store (5th Floor B Bldg, 5215-6) as the owner, Mr. Kang, also sells his fabrics at the monthly AFSC Lun-cheons. Note: The fabric market is closed on Sundays. 

Mango’ Building : A good place to buy socks, clothes, etc. is Mango’ Build-ing. Take the subway to Dongmyo Station, (Line 6, Station 636, Exit 6). The building is immediately to your right as you come out of the exit. Take the elevator to the 7th floor. 

Namdaemun (South Gate Market) : Located just down the hill from the Hilton Hotel and across from Seoul Station. This market is a unique cornucopia of clothing, jewelry, dishes, appliances, folk art, flowers, gift bags, stationery items and foods. The market serves as a major manufacturers’ outlet opening very early at 2:00 am and doesn’t close until 6:00 pm. One of the best features in Namdaemun is the huge wholesale flower market, but go early since that section closes around 1:00 pm. Namdaemun is a good place to buy children’s clothing, with many buildings selling nothing but children’s clothes and shoes. The Alpha Store is located on Stationery Alley and has a great variety of crafts, art supplies, and office needs. The market is easily accessible by taking the subway to Hoehyeon Station (Line 4, Station 425, Exit 5). You can also take bus 143, 149 (outside Gates 14 or 16) and bus 401 (outside Gate 3). Parking is available in the underground lot at the Hilton Hotel; fees can be high if you spend more than a couple of hours. If you would like to walk from Yongsan, exit post at Gate 19 (Camp Coiner) and take a left out of the gate. Walk up the hill to the Hilton Hotel and then down to the market. Free shopping guide books filled with market information, detailed maps, and building numbers are available at information booths located along the market’s main arteries. 

Noryangjin Fish Market : This is Seoul’s largest fish market. It is run by the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries and houses over 700 shops selling seafood from 15 fishing ports around Korea. It also includes numerous restaurants that will cook your purchased fish for you, an auction floor, and an adjacent agricultural section. It is open from 3:00 am-9:00 pm daily; however, wholesalers are off on Sundays and holidays. Take the subway to Noryangjin Station (Line 1, Exit 2). 

Toy Alley: This is a favorite shopping area for toys, games, stationery, craft items, party supplies, and more. Birthday gifts and party favors are fun to find here, as well as gift bags and cool school supplies. Take the subway to Dong-myo Station, (Line 6, Station 636, Exit 6). As you exit to the street, walk about can be the adventure of a lifetime. The following are just some of the market areas frequented by many of the Yongsan community: 

Bangsan Market : Looking for a great place to shop for baking supplies? Take the subway to Jongno 5(o)-ga (Line 1, Exit 7). 

Dongdaemun (East Gate Market) : The largest of the shopping markets in Seoul and possibly the most popular with both Korean and foreign shoppers. Dongdaemun is famous for a variety of wares including fabric, sweaters, linge-rie, shoes, sports equipment, clothing, Korean bedding, jackets, leather items, handbags, jewelry, toys, and much more. It is located in the eastern sector of the city and is easily reached by taking the subway to Dongdaemun (Line 4, Station 421, Exit 8 or 9). It is also possible to drive and park in the FED com-pound (free to all ID card holders and roughly three blocks away). The market is well marked on almost all Seoul roadmaps. 

Express Bus Terminal : To Westerners, the huge Express Bus Terminal just south of the Han River is sometimes called the Banpo. This bus terminal is the hub of all long-distance bus traffic in the Republic of Korea. It is busy on a nor-mal day and jammed tremendously on Korea holidays. It also contains several floors of restaurants and interesting, inexpensive shops. There are fresh flower markets in the basement and third floor. There is also a huge artificial flower market with home goods on the third floor. Christmas and other holiday items are available seasonally. Take the subway to the Express Bus Terminal Station (Line 3 or 7, Exit 1). To go by bus, exit Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) and take a right; walk to the stop light and cross the street to the bus stop. Take bus 143 and get off at the second stop after you cross the river. For the return journey make sure you are on the opposite side of the street and again take bus 143. Once the bus has crossed the bridge, get off at the first stop (Hangang Middle School) which is close to Gate 6. 

Dongmyo : This area near Dongdaemun which is a good place to shop for toys, stationery, clothing, socks, etc. Take the subway to Dongmyo Station (Line 6, Station 636, Exit 6). 

Doota Mall : Located across from Dongdaemun Market and directly across from the History and Culture Park, look for another large white building across the street (and stream). Many of the shops carry European sized clothing. Ask at the information booth on the ground floor and they will give you a slip of paper with a list of store numbers that sell the larger sizes. There is also a very nice food court on the 7th floor. 

The Fabric Market : Located outside of Dongdaemun Station (Line 4, Sta-tion 421, Exit 9). The market is a five-story white brick building full of fabrics 178 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 179 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

ping adventure. Many of the vendors speak English and it is not quite as over-whelming as some of the larger markets in Seoul. You can find numerous items such as: clothing, shoes, travel bags, luggage, leather and eel skin goods, brass, antiques, and reproductions. 

The Underground : Be sure not to miss the underground section of shops called “The Underground,” about a block away from McDonald’s and across the alley from “The Bag Man” purse shop. There are many entrances to “The Underground” and once inside, you can easily find your way around. There are hundreds of vendors selling an array of “brand name” clothing, shoes, jackets, underwear, and souvenirs. There is a limited amount of children’s clothing, but not at bargain prices compared to the sales available in the United States. Some stores will not let you try on clothes, but most encourage you to, wheth-er they have a changing area or not. Take the stairs, leading up or down, to see more floors packed with hundreds of vendors and their wares. 

Boutique Area: Follow the small street that leads to “The Underground.” Keep walking until you pass a small ‘Tag Store’ on the right hand side. This store will sew your name (in Korean) on luggage and clothing tags while you wait. It’s a nice shop and also sells hats and ready-made luggage tags. Once you pass the tag shop, you will see Monica’s Custom Tailor store. Turn right in front of this store. Walk down a narrow, steep alley-way, leading downhill. At the bottom of the hill you will find boutiques lining both sides of the street. They sell a variety of beautiful clothing for both men and women. Note: On Tuesdays, a lot of these stores are closed. 

Hamilton Shopping Center: There is a wide variety of stores in this four level shopping center attached to a hotel and often simply referred to as the “Hamilton” or the “Hamilton Hotel.” The lower levels sell watches, jewelry, purses and souvenirs; the top two floors are mostly clothing, purses, and lug-gage. Have a specific item in mind when shopping the lower levels, as the ven-dors tend to be a bit aggressive as they pressure you to buy. Take the escalator to the top level where there are also bathrooms. There is also a reputable rug dealer with a nice selection of Persian rugs. He also offers rug cleaning and re-pair. Some shops take United States dollars, but exchange rates can vary from store to store. 

Remix : This store has a great selection of clothing. It is on the right side of the main street towards the middle section of the Itaewon shopping area. It is easy to walk by and miss the store. 

Shoe and Boot Shop (no name on store front) : This shop is located imme-diately before the Remix clothes shop. You have to go downstairs to get to the 100 feet to the first intersection at which you will turn right and walk down the alley to the vendors and stores. 

Yongsan Electronics Market : This market houses enough computers, stere-os, cameras and general electronic gadgets to keep an electronic whiz busy for months, maybe even years. Do not just shop in the main building. The entire market consists of more than two dozen buildings and the surrounding streets are packed with vendors selling thousands of electronic gadgets and gizmos. This market is located in Yongsan- gu, an easy walk out of Gate 14 (turn left at the traffic signal and follow the signs). If you are driving, exit Gate 14, turn left at the light and immediately get in the right lane and make a right turn at the next traffic signal. The lanes are confusing, so pay attention. Go straight ahead taking the underpass in front of you. Turn left at the first traffic signal after the underpass. The market is 300 yards on the left, behind the train station and E-Mart. There is a large parking lot in front of the building. It is helpful to have a Korean speaker accompany you to the Electronics Market as most vendors speak little English. 

Note: As with any other market, compare prices and bargain before you buy. Also, this is an important place to remember that a brand label is just that, a label. They can be put on or taken off very easily. Check for quality and performance. 

Buyer Beware: Most product information is written in Korean and warran-ties are not valid in the United States. If you live on post or are planning on taking the products with you upon PCS, ensure all products you buy are dual voltage. 

## SHOPPING DISTRICTS 

Certain areas of Seoul have developed reputations as special shopping and commercial districts. The most popular among the American military commu-nity is Itaewon, mainly because of its convenient location to Yongsan Garrison and the fact that most shop owners speak English. A list of some of the more popular shopping districts is below and a trip to any of them will be sure to provide an afternoon or evening of enjoyment. 

ITAEWON 

This area is conveniently located outside Gate 5 (the Gas Station Gate) and across the street. It is a good place to venture off-post for your first shop-180 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 181 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

town, lots of fun little shops, hair salons, and small restaurants dot the area. With many universities adjacent to it, Sinchon has been called the “Street of Youth” and is rumored to be the up and coming Myeong-dong. Where else would they put the first Krispy Kreme Donuts in Seoul? Theaters line the street near Sinchon Station (Line 2, Station 240) and an On the Border Mexican Grill & Cantina restaurant is also there. Take the subway to EWHA Women’s Univer-sity (Line 2, Station 241, Exit 2). 

## DEPARTMENT STORES 

Korean department stores are not only an excellent and entertaining way to learn what products are available here, but also give you a glimpse of the Korean way of life. While featuring the finest and most expensive items, the department stores are almost a microcosm of Korean society, with most also containing grocery stores and restaurants. The huge Lotte World Department Store on the south side of the Han River also has an amusement park and museum within its confines. Someone is usually available to answer questions in English. 

COEX Mall : Everything can be found at this enormous shopping complex. In addition to the endless stores, you will find restaurants, food courts, clubs, an aquarium, and a movie theater. Be prepared for an adventure and huge crowds! There’s a lot to see, so plan to spend the entire day. It is easy to ac-cess from Samseong Station (Line 2, Station 219, Exit 6). The subway exit leads straight into the mall. www.coex.co.kr/eng 

D-Cube City Department Store : This nine-story indoor shopping mall has lots of great stores including H&M and Uniqlo. There are also two full floors of restaurants. You can find an information cube on each floor in English to help you navigate your way around. There is also a Pororo Theme park on the 4th floor– very popular with young children! To get there by subway, go to Sin-dorim Station (Line 1, Exit 1). Follow the signs for the D-Cube City Department Store which will take you straight to the entrance. www.dcubecity.com/opot/ ENRDDepart.onen?goTo=depart. 

Galleria Department Store : This department store is located on the south side of the river near the Olympic complex. The store is a large white build-ing with wide steps leading up to the entrance. There is a great supermarket in the basement. The closest subway stop is Apgujeong (Line 3, Station 336, Exit 2). Expect a 15-minute walk or take a taxi. If driving: from Riverside Drive (Highway 88), turn right at the next bridge, go past Hannam Bridge (also called store. It carries a good selection of ladies shoes and boots at reasonable prices. 

A-One : This is another store that has a great selection of shoes and boots. It is located on the right side of the main street towards the middle of the shopping area. 

The Morning Calm Antique Furniture Store : This store has a huge selection of beautiful Korean antiques and reproductions. The store has very unique pieces of furniture and the owner is willing to make a deal. 02-790-2420 

MYEONG-DONG 

This is one of the busiest and most fashionable shopping districts in Seoul. It is said that one million people pass through here each day. The narrow streets and alleys contain hundreds of clothing and accessory boutiques, shoe stores, tailors, dressmakers, huge department stores, specialty shops and the Myeong-dong Cathedral. This district stretches for about a mile in any direc-tion from the Myeong-dong Station, so everything is within walking distance. The area is popular with teenagers and has many familiar stores such as Gap, Old Navy, H&M, and Forever 21. Some of the familiar stores even sell Euro-pean sized clothing. There are many good restaurants here that represent the best of Eastern and Western establishments. Myeong-Dong claims to sell the biggest ice cream treat in the world at 16 inches high. There are always lines of people waiting to sample this mile high treat– even on bitterly cold winter days! During the warmer summer evenings, the streets abound with hundreds of shoppers as the vendors stay open at least until midnight. Take the subway to Myeong-dong (Line 4, Exits 7 or 8). 

APGUJEONG 

This trendy, upscale fashion district, surrounded by many luxury apart-ments, is located south of the Han River in Gangnam-gu. You will find depart-ment stores, clothing stores, shoe shops, and boutiques. There are also numer-ous restaurants, cafés, coffee houses, nightclubs, cinemas, theaters, and other entertainment spots. Some stores you will recognize like The Body Shop (one of many around town) and L’ Occitane. This area can be reached by taking the subway to either the Apgujeong or Sinsa Stations (Line 3, Stations 336 or 337). 

EWHA WOMEN’S UNIVERSITY AND SINCHON 

These quaint shopping areas are very close to one another and are fast becoming the new fashionable places to shop. With the feel of a small college 182 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 183 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

stores. They even have a kimbap rolling machine and you can watch while the deli attendant rolls perfect kimbap. You can purchase many ready to eat Korean food items, including already marinated bulgogi and kalbi meat, as well as frozen items like yaki mandu. This is an excellent place to buy fresh fruit, vegetables, and bread. 

I-Park Mall : A huge one-stop shopping/entertainment complex, this mall houses a great Multiplex containing 11 movie screens, a putt-putt golf course, and a skateboard and rollerblade ramp area. There is an open air stage within the courtyard of the complex where bands and other entertainers perform during the summer months. There are two floors of nothing but restaurants, so you’ll never go hungry. The Living Digital store carries an assortment of elec-tronics, furniture, and a Korean bookstore. There is also a fashion mall with shoes, clothes and accessories, nail and hair salons and hobby shops. The op-posite end of the mall contains the I-Park Department Store, and in the base-ment of the I-Park Department Store is E-Mart. This mall is within easy walking distance to Yongsan Garrison or take the subway to Yongsan Station (Line 1, Station 135). www.iparkmall.co.kr. 

Times Square Mall : This very large scale department store is filled with many shops and places to eat. There are also a few cinemas. There’s some-thing here for everyone– from average-priced clothing and home decor to luxury designer shoes and bags. You can easily spend all day here and still not get to everything. To get to Times Square Mall by subway, go to Yeong-deungpo Station (Line 1). The mall is directly connected to the station. www. timessquare.co.kr/en. 

Toys-R-Us : Although not a department store, many people enjoy taking their children to this familiar store. There are several locations around Seoul and South Korea; however, the most popular is the one near Jamsil Station that is located on the upper level of the Lotte Adventure World Complex. From USAG-Yongsan take Subway Line 4 (light Blue) from either Gate 13 or 14 to Sadang Station. At Sadang Station, transfer to Line 2 (Green). Follow the signs for Line 2 and be sure to go up the stairs at the very end of the station and make a sharp “U” turn to the right, which leads to the platform for line 2. Take the Line 2 train to Jamsil Station and follow the signs to Exit 3– Lotte Adventure World. Continue walking underground past the information booth. You will see signs leading to the Toys- R-Us Store which is located on the upper levels of the complex. Dongho Bridge) and turn left at the first traffic light. There is another much closer branch of the store located at Seoul Station (Line 4, Station 426). 

Lotte Department Store and Lotte Mart : There are numerous locations for the Lotte Department Store and Lotte Mart in and around the Seoul area. They are good places to learn about Korean products and different foods. The stores have grocery and clothing departments and can be compared in qual-ity to stateside Target stores. The closest store to USAG-Yongsan is beside the Seoul Station (Line 4, Station 426). There is another, much larger store located in Jamsil (Line 2 or 8, Station 216, exit 3). http://store.lotteshopping.com/han-dler/AmbassaMain-StartEn 

Central City/Shinsegae : Located next to the Express Bus Terminal, Shin-segae Department Store is huge, with hundreds of shops on each floor. There are many places to shop in Central City, so you’ll want to allow for a full day shopping excursion. Visit the large Korean food court, located on the base-ment floor. It is similar to the food courts in American Malls and offers a great variety of foods to tempt anyone’s palate. Take the subway to the Express Bus Terminal (Line 3 or 7, Station 339, exit 5 or 6) or you can take the bus. www. shinsegae.com/english 

Hyundai Department Store : This is another beautiful department store with lots to offer and is located in Apgujeong (Line 3, Station 336). 

Costco : Just like in the U.S., you can even find Kirkland’s brand items in this Korean superstore. There is an annual membership fee and it’s a bit of a drive, but if you like to shop in bulk and get Costco deals, this is the place for you. The items in the store are geared toward the Korean shopper, so you will find different merchandise than is available Stateside. You can use your unexpired Stateside Costco card here, so be sure to take it with you. Visit the Costco Ko-rea website at: www.costco.co.kr (click on English, then ‘Locations’ for maps and written directions). The Yangjae location is right off Highway 1, across from the flower market. There is a large parking garage on the premises. The Costco sign is the same as the stateside store signs and is visible from the highway. 

E-Mart : This chain store has many locations throughout Seoul. The closest location to Yongsan is out of Gate 14 in the basement of the I-Park Mall Build-ing. There is a parking garage, or you can walk from Gate 14 to the Yongsan Station subway entrance. Use the subway to get on the other side of the busy street (Exit 5). You can’t miss the building with a huge I-Park sign; also look for the distinctive yellow E-Mart signs. E-Mart is in the same building as Yongsan Station (Line 1, Station 135). This department store has everything from pet grooming items to groceries, and is similar in quality to Stateside Wal-Mart 184 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 185 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

right next door. Phone: 723-7635. 

Post Exchange (PX) : The largest PX facility is located at Yongsan on Main Post, surrounded by a series of smaller stores run by AAFES and AAFES conces-sionaires. The main PX sells electronics equipment (stereos, televisions, cam-eras, and computers), clothing, health and beauty aids, and household items. Phone: 724-4365 (Main Post); 723-4461/4462 (Hannam Village); www.aafes. 

com 

Mini Mall (also known as The Four Seasons) : Located on Main Post across the parking lot from the main PX and contains these AAFES stores: • Alterations/Tailors: 723-2080 • Barber Shop: 723-7858 • Four Seasons/Toyland: Stocks toys, pet supplies, camping and out-door cooking supplies, sports and exercise equipment, hardware, and lawn and garden equipment. 723-2072 • In Full Bloom Flower Shop: Carries a variety of fresh and artificial flowers and plants. 723-2076 • Military Clothing: 723-2079 • Shoppette/Class VI: 723-2069 • Stylique Main Beauty Shop: 723-2066 

# SPECIAL INTEREST SHOPPING MATERNITY CLOTHING 

Ordering through United States Websites is probably the easiest and cheap-est way to get maternity clothes; however, you can find maternity clothes and bras locally. 

Yongsan PX and Osan BX: A selection of maternity wear can be found at the Yongsan PX and the Osan Air Base BX; however, they tend to sell out quickly. 

Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop : They carry gently used maternity items, but their stock is dependent upon what people consign or donate. Located in building 4222 on South Post, 02-795-7675. 

Doota : Located across the street from Dongdaemun subway station (Line 4, Exit 8), you’ll find a selection of maternity clothes on the 6th floor with the baby clothes. There are individual vendors so be sure to go around the floor to compare prices. 

Shinsegae Department Store: There are several Shinsegae branches in 

## INTERNET SHOPPING 

Many people who have never bought a single item on the Internet find themselves die-hard Internet shoppers after moving to Korea, as Western goods are more expensive out on the economy due to import taxes. Many Internet sites ship to APO addresses. Be sure to check what shipping method a company intends on using to ship the goods to you. The quickest, easiest and most convenient way for APO/FPO shipments is USPS Priority Mail. This usually takes 1-2 weeks. Some companies use “Smart Mail” allowing them to use UPS as their carrier. UPS takes the package from the company and deliv-ers it to the military postal facility. The package is then shipped via parcel post with USPS to the APO. This often means that the package takes 6-8 weeks to arrive. For those items that cannot be shipped to an APO/FPO address, there are companies who specialize in forwarding packages to APO/FPO address. They provide you with a stateside shipping address and then charge shipping and handling to forward it on to your APO address. www.apobox.com, www. shipitapo.com 

ON-POST Furniture Store : This shop is located on South Post next to the South Post Mini-Mall. It carries a limited variety of United States furniture for living rooms, dining rooms, and bedrooms. Appliances, lamps, and bound carpeting can also be purchased at the store. The carpet stock is constantly in demand and a good rule of thumb is if you want it, buy it because it will be gone tomorrow, if not sooner. They carry 6x9’s, 9x12’s, and 12x15’s in two different grades of carpet-ing. They often have carpet in the back out of sight, so ask for help if you don’t see anything you want. You can find baby gear (e.g., cribs, strollers, high chairs, baby carriers, gates, bathtubs, activity centers, etc.) here. Be careful with any special orders because anticipated delivery dates can be anywhere from one to eight months. Phone: 738-5052 

The Gallery (AAFES Concessionaires) : Located on Main Post across the street from the PX and next to the library, this is a great place to get items from local vendors. Items sold include art, blankets, lacquer-ware, clothing, embroidery, shoe shop/shoe repair, furniture, jewelry, pottery, leather goods, and clothing. There is also a dry-cleaner and optical shop here. You can ship packages from the Gallery FedEx desk to arrive in the U.S. within 2 days; how-ever, this service is pricey. There is even a ‘Pack and Wrap’ located here to help you get your items ready to mail. The Main Post Office is conveniently located 186 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 187 

> SHOPPING SHOPPING

variety of produce from overseas and Korea. There are also huge markets, Ko-rean stores, and street vendors that carry fruits and vegetables. Namdaemun Market is one of the largest wholesale fruits and vegetables markets; Bondong Sangga at Namdaemun (Subway Line 4, Hoehyeon Station 425, Exit 5 at Nam-daemun Market) sells all kinds of fresh fruits at very low prices. 

## REPAIRS 

For getting things repaired, word of mouth is always the best way. There are new shops appearing all the time. Check a shop’s current reputation before leaving anything for repair. 

On-Post 

• Bicycles: Four Seasons on Main Post, 723-2072/2073. • Computers: The Gallery on Main Post, 723-4030; One Stop Business Center, Bldg S8105, 02-792-6695. • Shoes: The Gallery on Main Post, 723-5149. 

Off-Post 

• Charley’s Auto Repair, 02-793-7919 • Kim’s Garage, 02-795-3712 • Mr. Han’s Garage, 02-797-0909 (outside Gate 6– the Commissary Gate). For those who do not care to drive off post, Mr. Han’s Garage will pick up and return your car for you. • Do All Interior Co, 02-797-3213/02-798-1237. They repair furniture, upholstery, glass, carpet cleaning, draperies, and many other odd jobs. Seoul, but the closest ones are at Central City Mall (Express Bus Terminal Sta-tion (Seoul Subway Line 3 and 7)– the subway station is directly connected to the department store) and Myeongdong (Hoehyeon Station (Line 4, exit 7)). http://english.shinsegae.com/english/main.asp 

Sarah Mesa Department Store : Located in Namdaemun Subway (Line 4, Hoehyeon Station, exit 7), the maternity clothes can be found on the 1st and 2nd floors. 

Baby Malls : Located in Namdaemun (right around the corner from Mesa), there are some inexpensive women’s shops on the second floors. 

Migliore : Located in Myeong-dong (Myeong-dong Station, Line 4, Exit 6), there are quite a few maternity shops in the basement. 

Lotte Department Store: There are several Lottes, but the closest is in My-eong-dong. The prenatal (what they call maternity) section is on the 4th floor and has a good selection of work pants and jeans. 

## OPTICAL 

You can make an appointment to have your eyes examined by calling the Optometry Clinic on Main Post at DSN 737-1464; however, no contact lens fittings are done so bring a valid contact lens prescription and a 6-12 month supply of lenses with you. With a valid contact lens prescription, you can reor-der contacts at the Optical Shop, on the Korean economy or over the Internet. Frames, lenses, or complete pairs of eyeglasses can be purchased at a reason-able price from the Optical Shop in the Gallery on Main Post, at the Dragon Hill Lodge or any off-post optical shop. There are hundreds of eye glass shops in the markets and department stores about town. Word of mouth for recom-mended places works best. The Korean market offers very affordable frame and lens options. 

## PRODUCE 

Fresh fruit and vegetables are available from many sources on and off post. Korean fruits such as apples, pears, persimmons, strawberries, and water-melon and imported fruits like mangos, oranges, and pineapples are all avail-able. If you regularly do business with a particular vendor, you may get better prices and quality. Be aware that Korea allows the use of pesticides, which are banned in the United States. However, organic produce is available and is noted on the product labels. As with any produce, always thoroughly wash or peel any fruit or vegetables you buy on the economy. The Commissary stocks a 188 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 189 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

• Pizza Hut and Subway : Located downstairs. Call 738-7494 for delivery on post only or visit http://www.imenu360.com/clients/aafes/. • Dragon Hill Deli and Bakery : Offers a delightful array of baked goods, hot meals, and sandwiches for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Located downstairs. • Sun Dae’s : They have Mr.G’s ice cream! It is wonderful and made fresh daily. Sun Dae’s also offers your favorite cappuccino, pastries, candy, and more. It is located next to Clippers Hair Salon on the Lobby Floor. • Whispers Lounge : Offers daily specials and is located beside the Green Street. • Bentley’s Pub : Located across from the Shoppette. • Hartell House : Located across the street from the Dragon Hill Lodge, this location offers a more formal dining atmosphere for both lunch and dinner. Everyone is welcome; memberships available. Member discounts apply for dining and other special events. Call 738-2222 x6791 for more information or to make reservations. 

Embassy Center 

• Fuji : A Japanese Fusion and Sushi restaurant offering many different kinds of wonderful sushi along with Udon, chicken on a stick and fried dumplings. If you have a special occasion, they also offer Sushi roll cakes and party trays. You can also call 02-797-3854 for delivery between 4 pm and 9 pm. For an up-to-date menu and pricing, visit their website at www.myfuji.co.kr. • Korea Palace : You can eat a Korean style buffet at lunch as well as order from their menu. They are also open for dinner. • Jamba Juice : Located next to the Starbucks, it features many varieties of smoothies as well as several coffee options. Jamba Juice also offers energy bars, snacks and sandwiches. • Starbucks : This Starbucks offers a spacious area to sit and relax as well as a large menu with a nice selection of snacks and drinks. 

KATUSA Snack Bars 

There are three on post: near Collier Field House on South Post (Bldg 5211), Main Post (Bldg 2667) and in Camp Coiner (Bldg 1099). These snack bars are like a Korean cafeteria. KATUSA soldiers can eat here at a reduced rate, hence the name, but all are welcome. These are great places to eat lunch or dinner on-post and try new Korean dishes! Payment is made in won here or by cred-it card. The food is very affordable and good! Their japchae (glass noodles), chicken fried rice, and steamed or fried mandu (dumplings) are favorites! 

# RESTAURANT RESTAURANTS ON POST AAFES Food Courts on Yongsan Garrison 

There are food courts located on South Post by the Furniture Store, Main Post at the PX (Townhouse) and Camp Coiner. Each food court has a variety of restaurants, as listed below: • American Eatery : Camp Coiner, Townhouse • Anthony’s Pizza : Camp Coiner, Townhouse, and South Post. For on-post deliveries, call 738-3086 • Baskin-Robbins : Townhouse and South Post • Burger King : Townhouse; the main restaurant is on South Post, close to the Dragon Hill and contains a play place. • Charley’s Grilled Subs : South Post • Starbucks Coffee : Townhouse and Embassy Center • Manchu Wok : Townhouse • Popeyes : Townhouse; the main restaurant is on South Post, close to the Dragon Hill. On-post delivery is available by calling 738-6228. • Subway : Townhouse • Taco Bell : Townhouse Some of these restaurants offer on-base delivery service; order online at http://www.imenu360.com/clients/aafes/ 

Dragon Hill Lodge 

The Dragon Hill Lodge has a variety of food choices from fast food to formal dining. Call 738-2222 for more information and restaurant reservations. • Green Street: Casual dining for breakfast, lunch, and dinner with a buffet and menu choices all day. Located in the main lobby. • The Oasis : Tex-Mex grill and bar with a Korean twist! (Try the kimchi fries!) Casual dining for lunch and dinner with daily buffet and specials. They also feature their own brewery on site. Located downstairs next to the deli/ bakery. • Sables : It is an upscale restaurant for a more formal evening dining ex-perience with a great dessert buffet. Located in the main lobby. Reservations recommended. Closed Mondays. 190 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 191 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

is not visible and you are concerned about prices, feel free to ask the hostess/ host to see a menu before you are seated. As with any nice restaurant around the world, many of the fine restaurants in Seoul have a dress code. If you are planning an evening out, either check with someone who has been there before or call the restaurant to find out what is expected. Remember, you are not in an English speaking country, and if you cannot speak Korean, communication can be difficult, especially over the phone. Your best bet when going out to eat is to wear nice, casual attire that is comfortable. Wear shoes that are both comfortable for walking and easy to remove when you arrive, as is often required in traditional Korean restaurants. Please enjoy the next few pages of restaurants. For your convenience, most of them are of Western or European style. As you become comfortable in your new surroundings, do check out some of the local Korean cuisine. The Seoul Magazine consistently features new restaurants, so pick one up next time you are at the USO. The publication can also be found in many restaurants in Itae-won as well as the tourist booth in Itaewon. 

## WESTERN Bennigan’s : American style foods with some Mexican and Italian dishes. There are many locations in and around the Seoul area. For location and menu information visit their website at www.bennigans.co.kr (Korean only). The closest one is in Seoul station (Line 1 or 4, Station133/426, exit 1). 

Buenos Aires : specializing in steaks and chops, this nice place serves up mouthwatering cuts. Free Tango show downstairs every hour. Just over the bridge in Sinsa. Free parking, and easily accessible by taxi, bus or subway. 02-3444-6634 www.buenosaires.co.kr/lang2/contact/contact.asp. 

Butterfinger Pancakes : Are you craving a trip to IHOP or Denny’s? BP has a great menu filled with familiar breakfast fare such as pancakes, sausage and eggs, and the not-so-familiar items such as cream cheese and mozzarella pan-cakes (they come highly recommended). A bit pricey, but they offer large por-tions and good service. 88-9 Cheongdam-dong, Gangnam-gu (Cheongdam). Valet parking is available. Phone: 02-3448-1070. Take metro line 7 to Gangnam District Office Station, exit #4. Note: The station is about .6 miles from the res-taurant. They also have 2 other locations: Jeongja– Bundang (10 minute walk from Jeongja Station) and in the Apgujung area (exit 8, but quite a walk). 

California Pizza Kitchen : Offers pizzas with non-traditional toppings as well as pastas, salads, sandwiches, appetizers and desserts. There are four loca-tions in Seoul; however, the closest two are in Myeong-dong across from Lotte Department Store and in I’PARK Mall. www.cpk.com/locations 

R&R BAR & GRILL 

This facility is located on Main Post behind The Moyer Community Activi-ties Center and next to Yongsan Lanes. You can see the pyramid-shaped roof from the overpass bridge. This facility includes a bar, dining facility, special events center, and gaming. They cater events and have outdoor BBQs. They host special events and ‘Chef’s Night Around the World,’ which has become extremely popular. Find out about upcoming events in the Community Con-nection Magazine. • R&R Restaurant : Offers lunch and dinner featuring menu items such as grilled chicken sandwiches, burgers, and many other American favorites. • R&R Lounge : This lounge has weekly specials as well as entertainment depending on their schedule. Check the Community Connection Magazine for monthly events or call 723-5678. 

Moyer Community Activities Center 

• Smoothie King : Smoothie King offers fresh blended smoothies, sport beverages, energy bars, healthy snacks and more. 

Navy Club 

The Navy Club is located on Main Post up the hill to the left of Memorial Chapel. This is a popular restaurant with a truly unique atmosphere and is open to everyone. They offer an extensive dining menu for lunch and dinner, as well as Mongolian BBQ every Thursday evening and breakfast on the week-ends. Other activities include karaoke rental, free Wi-Fi, billiards, darts, a cigar lounge and a game room. They also have a room available by reservation and cater for special events. For more information, call 725-7680. 

# RESTAURANTS OFF POST 

Virtually any type of food imaginable is available in Seoul. Prices vary ac-cording to the type of cuisine ordered and the area of town in which you dine. There is an abundance of good restaurants as well as thousands of little car-ryout, or “sidewalk” tents, where you can have a quick and inexpensive meal. If you have adventurous taste buds, you will love experimenting with the foods in Seoul. If not, stick to the more “moderate” facilities, which cater to the tour-ists’ palate. To be on the safe side, ask for bottled water when dining out or order soda or beer in cans or bottles. Beer and liquor can be extremely expen-sive, so you may want to check the prices prior to ordering. Most restaurants have menus displayed outside that show pictures and prices of food. If a menu 192 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 193 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

a flight of stairs. Location: about a five minute walk into Itaewon, on the left hand side, 2nd second floor. Phone: 02-794-7278. 

The Original Pancake House – The Original Pancake House is a great place to go for breakfast or brunch. It has a great menu filled with pancakes, waffles, smoothies, eggs, sausage and more. It is also a bit pricey, but the pancake por-tions are large. The service is great as well. Parking is not available near this restaurant, so it is recommended to take the subway or a taxi. It is located at 523-20 Sinsa-dong, Gangnam-gu. If you are taking the subway, it is just a short walk from Sinsa Station exit 8. 02-511-7481, www.originalpancakehouse.com. 

Outback Steakhouse : Outback offers high-quality food and service, gener-ous portions at moderate prices and a casual atmosphere suggestive of the Australian Outback. Although beef and steak items make up a large portion of the menu, the steak house also offers a variety of chicken, ribs, seafood, and pasta dishes. There are many locations throughout Seoul: Namdaemun, Express Bus Terminal and close to Gate 16 (MP Station Gate) toward Seoul Sta-tion. http://www.outback.co.kr (Korean only). 

Pizza School : Turn left out of Gate 19 (Camp Coiner Visitor Center Gate), then it’s on the left just after going straight through the intersection. Good pizza, whether you stick with cheese and pepperoni or stretch a bit and try the sweet potato or roasted meat toppings. There are many more to choose from! Take-out or eat-in without hurting your wallet. 02-824-2222. 

Pizza Peel : Brick oven pizza with western pizza options. You can either dine in or call in to pick up your order. Located in Itaewon on the main road; turn right at the first alley after passing beneath the Itaewon arch. 02-795-3283 or visit www.facebook.com/PizzaPeelSeoul. 

Suji’s : A reasonably priced restaurant serving great American breakfasts, Spanish omelets, fish and chips and more. Free valet parking is available. It is located in Itaewon the second floor on the right hand side of the street after passing beneath the Itaewon arch. 02-797-3698 or visit www.sujis.net. 

TGI Fridays : This is a favorite dining establishment of millions of Americans, especially on Fridays! There are numerous franchises all over the city of Seoul. Check the website for locations. The closest is in I’PARK Mall. www.tgif.co.kr 

The Flying Pan Blue : A sandwich and salad shop that also has delicious waffles, pancakes, and homemade desserts. They are famous for their week-end brunch menu. It’s a bit expensive, but the food is good. Location: Itaewon, turn left up the alley immediately after passing the Hamilton Hotel. It is on the right side of the street down a short set of stairs. Phone: 02-793-5285. 

Tony Roma’s : American-style barbecue ribs and more. The closest location 

Copa Cabana : This Brazilian churrascaria offers all-you-can-eat meat and a small salad and sides buffet for 29,000 won. While you’ll certainly enjoy the se-lection of meats, save room for dessert: the cinnamon-sugar grilled pineapple will melt in your mouth. The restaurant is small, so reservations are recom-mended. Location: Itaewon, up the alley just before the Hamilton and turn left. Look for it on the first floor on the left side. Phone: 02-796-1660. 

Craftworks Taphouse : If you’ve been yearning for a true, craft brewed beer since arriving in Korea, look no further than Craftworks Taphouse. An American-style brewery and eatery recently featured in the Wall Street Journal (Sept 2013), this brew-pub delights diners and beer connoisseurs alike. You’ll find seven house beers and two seasonal beers on tap nearly all the time (the smooth, nutty Geumgang Mountain Dark Ale is a favorite). An international staff takes orders on iPhones and serves up delectable dishes including burgers made with organic grass-fed Australian beef, spaghetti bolognese, hearty beef chili with just the right amount of heat, freshly cut French fries, and so much more. Location: Of the several locations, Namsan is the closest. Exit Gate 21 (Friendship House Gate/Kimchi Pot Gate) and cross the street via the under-pass, exiting the underpass using the stairs on the left. Walk straight (crossing an intersection); Craftworks Taphouse is on the right about two blocks ahead. 02-794-2537; www.craftworkstaphouse.com. 

Johnny Rockets : American burgers, hand-dipped shakes, fries and more. Bottom floor of Shinsegae Department Store by the Express Bus Terminal (Sub-way Line 3, 7, 9). By bus, exit the Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) and turn right. Cross the street and look for the bus stop. Take the 401 or 143 bus two stops and you will see Shinsegae on the right. Phone: 02-3479-1220. 

Mercado Brazilian Steak House – This Brazilian churrascaria in Apgujeong is one of the best and most affordable in Seoul. For only W25,000 per person, you get all-you-can-eat meat (flank steak, bacon-wrapped filet bites, sirloin, rump steak, veal, chicken and chicken hearts) and sides (garlic rice, coleslaw, potato salad, sweet pickles and pico de gallo). Beverages are extra. Location: Take Line 7 to Gangnam District Office Station, exit 3; turn around and walk towards the main intersection and turn left; walk down about 2 blocks and turn left at The Coffee Bean; walk straight and turn right at J’s Wine and Paris Baguette (Tom N Tom’s is also on that street). Mercado is on the second floor (look for the green sign). Phone: 02-515-3288 www.mercado.co.kr. 

Neal’s Yard – Neal’s offers wonderful coffee, drinks and fabulous desserts. The portions are generous and the presentation is beautiful. You can enter Neal’s Yard from the front or the side. In both cases you will need to go up 194 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 195 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

ing into Park Tower parking garages; Gingane will be on your right before you reach the end of the road. 

Korea House : The Korea House offers a “royal buffet” with performances that include the Korean court dance, mask dance, fan dance, Buddhist monk dance and Korean classical music. Private dining rooms are available with res-ervations. You can make reservations for performances only, which are won-derful. Location: Chungmuro Station (Line 4, Station 423, exit 3); look for a big blue sign on the wall by the gas station. 02-2266-9101; www.koreahouse.or.kr/ eng/?en_skin=index.html. 

Maple Tree House : A moderately priced Korean pork/beef BBQ restau-rant serving up USDA Prime beef, Korean aged sirloins and marinated bone-less short ribs, and other Korean offerings. Located in Itaewon in the alley behind the Hamilton Hotel. Phone: 02-790-7977. There is another location near Gyeongbokgung Palace in Samcheong-dong. Phone: 02-730-7461. www. mapletreehouse.co.kr. 

TEA HOUSES Lobby Lounge Bar : Treat yourself to an afternoon tea with your choice of tea and a gorgeous dessert tower while surrounded by a modern atmosphere with views of Seoul from high above. The afternoon tea set is offered Monday through Saturday 2 pm-5 pm for a surprisingly low flat rate per person (around W12,000). This is an ideal stop during a girls’ shopping day at D-Cube City De-partment Store or perfect for a fun, romantic afternoon date. Located on the 41st floor of the Sheraton Seoul D-Cube City Hotel in the D-Cube City Complex. To get there by subway, go to Sindorim Station (Line 1, exit 1). Follow the signs for the D-Cube City Department Store Complex. The hotel is accessible from within the complex; take the elevator to the lobby on the 41st floor. Phone: 02-2211-1740. 

O’Sulloc Tea House : There is nothing quite like experiencing afternoon tea at a traditional Korean tea house. In the Insadong area, you’ll find many tea houses, but one of the true gems is O’Sulloc Tea House. While O’Sulloc is known for its green tea, there are many tea varieties from which to choose. If you’re looking for an interesting or unusual tea to sip with your sweets, try the Omija “five spice” tea. The O’Sulloc Tea House has several locations, but this particular location is in Insadong at 170 Gwanhun-dong, Jongro-gu. Via subway, go to Anguk station (Line 3, exit 6). Turn left onto Insadong main strip and it will be on your right less than a block down. Phone: 02-732-6427. is next to the Seoul Art Center; drive out of Gate 6 (Commissary Gate), cross the Banpo Bridge and make a U-turn immediately before the Seoul Art Center. Valet parking is available. Other locations in Seoul: Myeong-dong, Gwanghwa-mun, and Yeouido. Visit www.tonyromas.com/locations or call 02-587-4501. 

The Wolfhound : Great Western food, chicken and beef burgers, fries, fish and chips, etc. The food is inexpensive but drinks can be costly. It may take a while to catch the eye of a server, but once you have ordered, the wait won’t be long and the food is really good. It tends to get crowded in the evenings and can also get smoky in this little pub. Location: Itaewon, follow the main road until you reach the major intersection at the Hamilton Hotel. At the intersec-tion turn right and you will see Taco Bell across the street. Across from Taco Bell is a small alley. Turn right down this first alley and The Wolfhound is lo-cated on your right about 40 meters down on the second floor and third floors. Call 02-749-7971 or visit http://www.wolfhoundpub.com. 

## KOREAN Don Valley : A great Korean BBQ restaurant, but a little pricey compared to other BBQ places. If you don’t speak Korean there are pictures on the menu to help. The atmosphere is fresh and clean and the food is good and served in decent portions. This is a “beef and leaf” type of place, where the meat is cooked in front of you and you load up whatever you want on top of a let-tuce or sesame leaf. Location: Itaewon; just outside Itaewon Station exit 3 on the corner of the street directly across from the Hamilton Hotel (Bogwang-ro). Phone: 02-796-2384. 

Foody Goody Korean BBQ Cuisine : A moderately priced and popular Ko-rean galbi spot with good cuts of pork and beef. Both low and Western style ta-bles and a menu with English translation. Located just outside Gate 19 (Camp Coiner Visitor Center Gate). They have free valet parking on the ground level with the restaurant in the upper three levels. It is easy to park in Camp Coin-er, walk out the gate, turn left and walk to the lighted intersection. Cross the street diagonally so you get to the opposite side of the street. Foody Goody is on the east side of the street in the middle of the block. This restaurant is an AFSC friend! 

Gingane : A little eatery with an extensive Asian menu all for under 6,000 won. The food is tasty, the place is clean and the staff is friendly. They even have forks if your chopstick skills aren’t up to par. They also feature a great picture menu and items for young kids. This place is always crowded! Exit Gate 13 (South Post Visitor Center Gate) and turn right. Take the first right as if turn-196 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 197 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

Foreign Restaurant: Delicious Indian and Arabic foods with a very reason-ably priced set lunch menu at W9,000. Location: Itaewon; walk past the Ham-ilton Hotel and turn right at the Itaewon Fire Station. The restaurant is about 2 blocks down on the left side of the street. Phone: 02-794-9292. 

Moghul : This Pakistani restaurant specializes in curries and fantastic breads. They also offer a nice buffet. Location: Itaewon; up the alley to the left of the Hamilton Hotel. 02-796-5501; www.moghulkorea.com (Korean only). 

Taj Palace : This is a popular Indian restaurant offering a wide selection of Indian delicacies. They have a buffet menu on weekends. Location: Itaewon; past the Hamilton Hotel to the next intersection where you’ll see the Itaewon Fire Station on the corner, turn right and you’ll see Taj Palace across from the King’s Club. Phone: 02-790-5786. 

Usmania : This is an authentic Pakistani restaurant featuring lamb, fish, tan-doori bread, chef specials and much more. The weekend buffet is an excellent way to sample a variety of delicacies. Location: Itaewon; up the alley to the left of the Hamilton Hotel, the restaurant is on the left. Phone: 02-798-7155. www. usmania.com.ne.kr. 

## CHINESE Chai Wok : This chain restaurant has good food and quick, friendly service. Location: Yongsan Subway Station, I’PARK Mall – East street section. Go in the main doors of the mall (the escalators will be directly in front of you) and ride the escalator to the fourth floor. Walk around the escalators until you’re facing the Sweet Shop. The restaurant is down on the left. 

Chinese Fine Dining Chung : This Korean-style Chinese restaurant is very popular even though it’s kind of pricey (W28,000 and up). It has an outside-seating area that is very popular, so you may want to call for a reservation. Location: Center of SamChunt Road about a 10-minute walk from the United States Embassy, near Gyeongbok Palace. Phone: 02-720-3396; www.chinese-chung.com. 

Geumhong : This Korean-Chinese style restaurant offers authentic Chinese vegetable and noodle dishes, dumplings, soups and Dim Sum all with a hint of Korean spice. This is a small busy restaurant so reservations are recommend-ed. Location: Exit Gate 13 (South Post Visitor Center Gate) to the right across the railroad tracks. Turn left at the next light, then right at the next street. The restaurant is on your right. Valet parking is available. Phone: 02-794-7378. 

Ho-Lee Chow : American style Chinese food that is delicious, but somewhat expensive. Location: Itaewon; in the Hamilton Hotel on the second floor. You 

## THAI Buddha’s Belly : A beautiful Thai restaurant in Itaewon offering food that is both delicious and reasonably priced. Let’s hear it for panang curry! Here you’ll find all the essential Thai dishes, from spicy to mild your choices are only as limited as you want them to be. Takeout is available. Location: Itaewon; in the alley behind the Hamilton Hotel, on a corner next to Scrooges Bar. Buddha’s Belly is upstairs on second floor. Phone: 02-796-9330. 

My Thai : Excellent Thai food. Don’t be fooled when the server tells you “no spice”– you’ll definitely need a Thai iced tea to cool the heat. Location: Itae-won; Walk past Itaewon Station exit 2 and make the first left up the side-street next to the Hamilton Hotel. My Thai is on the right just before Flying Pan Blue. Phone: 02-794-8090. 

Pattaya Thai : This restaurant offers a wide selection of Thai dishes; the lunch sets are a great value and include delicious desserts. They also offer sim-ple rice and noodle dishes that children (of all ages) may enjoy. Location: turn left up the side street next to the Hamilton Hotel, make a left at the end of the street and go straight about three minutes. Pattaya Thai is located just past 3 Alley Pub on your right. 

Sanchon : Offering Vegetarian Buddhist Temple style food, Sanchon is close to Sanchon Temple, so it’s a perfect lunch spot before sightseeing. Lunch is around W33,000 per person. Visit www.sanchon.com (Korean only). Sanchon is located in Insadong at 14 Kwanhoon dong, Chongro-gu. Phone: 82-2-735-0312. 

Thai Orchid : This restaurant is one of the best for authentic Thai food in Seoul. Location: Itaewon; at the far end of the shopping district. It’s on the third floor in the building on the right side across from Hana Bank. Take the elevator up to the third floor and it is immediately on your right. Phone: 02-795-3338. 

Wang Thai : Offering excellent Thai food and great service with wonderful Thai décor. Give their pumpkin and custard dessert a try! Wang Thai is a friend of AFSC. Location: On the main Itaewon street opposite Starbucks inside the Young Hwa building on the third floor. 02-749-2746; http://www.wangthai.kr. 

## INDIAN AND PAKISTANI Agra : A traditional Indian restaurant where you can enjoy main dishes that are baked in a tandoori oven and various curries. There are several locations, but the closest is in Itaewon near the Hamilton Hotel (on the same side of the street as the Hamilton) and beneath Burger King. 02-797-7262; www.agra.kr. 198 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 199 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

offering many spaghetti dishes and specialty pizza. Location: Itaewon; towards the end of the main shopping strip walk past the Itaewon Fire Station; about 20 meters past the GS Caltex gas station you will find Sortino’s Cucina on the second floor. 02-797-0488/0489; www.sortinos.co.kr. 

Ristorante Kraze : This is a great Italian Restaurant for pizza, pasta, and even steaks. They also have great burgers and a good selection of wine and beer. It is a little pricey, but the atmosphere is great.It is located in Itaewon: Blue Square in Hannam-dong, Yongsan-gu, Seoul, 727-56. Phone: 02-6399-7601. 

Trevia Pizza di Roma : Founded by two Korean sisters who studied Italian cuisine in Italy, Trevia offers fabulous pizza on homemade dough with a slew of both familiar and more interesting toppings. From the simple quattro formag-gio and pepperoni pizzas to the scrumptious pumpkin, potato and mortadella pizzas, there is something here for everyone. Salads, paninis and lasagna are also available. This inexpensive place is often packed, but the wait is usually not long. Location: In Gyeongnidan (the Itaewon neighborhood directly across from Gate 21). Exit Gate 21 (Friendship House Gate/Kimchi Pot Gate) and cross the street via the underpass, exiting the underpass using the stairs on the right. Trevia is a short distance ahead on the left. 

Vapiano Geoje : Featuring an assortment of Italian foods such as antipasto, pizzas and salads, Vapiano Geoje has a self-service type ordering system with separate counters for the variety of Italian foods offered. There are counters for fresh pasta as well as pizza. There are several locations, but the one inside D-Cube City is a good spot to sit and relax after a day of shopping inside the huge D-Cube City complex. To get there by subway, go to Sindorim Station (exit 1 or 2 to reach D-Cube City Department Store). D-Cube City is located in between Home Plus and Techno Mart. 02-2211-0532, www.vapiano.kr. 

## EUROPEAN STYLE Bärlin (Deutsches Wirtshaus) : Hungry for some true authentic German Cuisine? Then this is the place to go. The menu is filled with delectable dishes, such as Medallions of Pork Tenderloin with Champignon Cream Sauce, Spätzle and Salad, and Munich White Sausage with Sweet Mustard, Sliced Radish and Pretzel. Though more upscale and somewhat expensive, diners say it’s worth every penny. The atmosphere is crisp and clean, yet rustic. Take the subway to Anguk Station (Line 3, exit 6). Once above ground, walk straight ahead to the Somerset Building, past the stop lights and to the left down an alleyway. The restaurant is located on the bottom floor. Reservations can be made by calling 02-722-5622 or online at www.baerlin.co.kr/html_e/main.html. can also enter the restaurant from the alley behind the Hamilton Hotel. 02-793-0802; www.holeechow.co.kr. 

Johnny Dumpling : An intimate dumpling specialty house in Itaewon with a limited but delicious and inexpensive menu. Location: Itaewon; off the main street, take a right at the street across from the Hamilton Hotel, take another right at the first alley and it will be tucked away on the left. Phone: 02-790-8830. 

## ITALIAN Bistecca Italian Restaurant : It is a bit expensive, but the food is great and the Tiramasu is said to be the best in Seoul. Bistecca also has steak, pasta and many other Italian style foods. It is located on the hill going up towards the Grand Hyatt Hotel. Phone: 02-792-7746. 

Casantonio : This is a restaurant serving authentic Italian cuisine, offering choices of meat or fish. Location: Itaewon; walk past the Hamilton Hotel and turn left onto Itaewon-ro 27-gil (the alley across from the fire station); Casan-tonio is on the right. 02-794-8803; www.casantonio.co.kr. 

La Cucina : While specializing in Italian dishes, the menu here is continen-tally diverse and prepared with skill. The atmosphere is marvelous and you can enjoy views of the N Seoul Tower while dining on the terrace at night. Coat and tie recommended. Can be expensive, but worth it. Location: Itaewon, directly across from the Grand Hyatt Seoul hotel, in the basement of an art gallery. 02-794-6005; www.la-cucina.co.kr. 

La Tavola : As advertised: wood oven pizza, wine, music, and more. This is a fun place to go for lunch or dinner. It is nice to sit by the windows overlooking Itaewon. Enjoy delicious homemade pizza and view a rotating art gallery. Loca-tion: Itaewon; past the Hamilton Hotel and on your left. Look up for their sign; it is on the second floor of a three-story building. Phone: 02-793-6144 

Mad for Garlic : Italian Wine Bistro serving delicious pasta dishes with subtle garlic flavorings. The food is fantastic and moderately priced. There are locations all over Seoul; check their website for locations near you. Phone:01-546-8117; www.madforgalic.com/english. 

Olea Kitchen & Grocery : Down the hill from the Grant Hyatt Seoul on Hoenamu-ro, you’ll find surprisingly delicious Italian fare at Olea Kitchen. In a slightly upscale but very welcoming atmosphere, diners make their selections using iPad menus. From squid ink risotto to calamari salad and much more, Olea Kitchen should be on your list to try. 02-7926004; www.oleakitchen.com. 

Sortino’s Cucina Italiana Pizzeria & Bar : This is a cozy little Italian eatery 200 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 201 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

dishes. They also offer wonderful homemade desserts. Afternoon tea and wine-tasting parties can be arranged. Location: Itaewon; at the end of the al-leyway behind the Hamilton closest to USAG Yongsan. 02-795-2465 or visit www.lesaintex.kr. 

Paris Croissant: If you haven’t yet made a trip to the Seorae Village (aka “Little France”) in Seoul, plan to do so soon. Among the interesting things to experience during your visit should be the Paris Croissant bakery and eatery. It’s a much larger, fancier, expanded version of its sister store, Paris Baguette (found on nearly every corner in Seoul), and features a café and coffee shop, a bakery with fruit-filled pastries, tarts, and breads galore, and a lower floor dedicated to wines, cheeses, gorgeous cakes, and homemade chocolates. Also, the breads in this particular bakery are made with flour imported from France. Location: 2, Seorae-ro 5-gil, Seocho-gu, Seoul. Take the subway to the Express Bus Terminal Station (Line 7, exit 5). Upon exiting, walk straight ahead down the tree-lined, paved walkway for about 10 minutes until you reach the pedestrian bridge on the left. Cross the bridge and walk straight up the street into Seorae Village; Paris Croissant is on the right a couple of blocks up the hill. 

Paris Grill : This lavish restaurant is perfect for a special night out. Designed in a Paris brasserie style of the 1930s with dark wood and marble, this fine dining establishment has impeccable service and tasty offerings. The chef puts his passion for cooking into every dish. It is expensive, but the lunch buffet is considered a bargain. Sunday Brunches are special. Location: Inside the Grand Hyatt Seoul in Itaewon. 02-799-8161; http://seoul.grand.hyatt.com/en/hotel/ dining/TheParisGrill.html. 

P’tit Paris : Tucked back from the main street of Itaewon is a wonderful little crepêrie boasting a cozy atmosphere, friendly service, reasonable prices and portions large enough to share (though it’s so good you may not want to). You’ll find an assortment of both savory and dessert crêpes with fillings such as mushroom, chicken and squash to citrus, Nutella and more. Directions: After passing beneath the blue arch at the entrance of the Itaewon main strip across from USAG-Yongsan, take the first left and walk up the hill facing back the op-posite direction. Turn right into the first alley on your right; P’tit Paris is on the left on the first floor. www.facebook.com/itaewon.ptitparis, 070-4243-3302. 

Santorini: A Greek restaurant serving generous portions, make sure you enjoy a freshly made brownie on your way out. Location: Itaewon; at the be-ginning of the main shopping strip just past Skin Food. The restaurant is on the right on the second floor. Phone: 02-790-3474. 

The Jell : Membership wine bar and shop featuring an extensive wine selec-

Castle Praha : Who would have thought that a small, European-style castle exists in Seoul? It does, and it houses delicious, Czech-style food and drink. Boasting several varieties of homemade sausage, stuffed meatloaf, hearty goulash, brick-oven pizzas, and baked stuffed pumpkin, Castle Praha exceeds even the highest of expectations. Yet, there’s more: seven unique Czech beers on tap. The restaurant itself is awe-inspiring, from the magnificent, palatial exterior– complete with a replica of the Prague Astronomical Clock, to the striking and beautifully designed interior. Visit once and it will likely join your list of favorites. Location: The grandiose Castle Praha is in Hongdae, but the restaurant has some smaller locations, too (including Pub & Grill Praha in Itae-won behind the Hamilton Hotel). Hongdae location address: 1st & 2nd floor Castle Praha Building, 395-19 Seogyo-dong, Mapo-gu, Seoul. Phone: 02-337-6644; www.castlepraha.co.kr/new/home/eng/page1.php. 

Chalet Swiss : European style dishes of steak, chicken, fish and burgers. Lo-cation: 104-4, Itaewon-dong, Yongsan-gu, Seoul; across from the Itaewon Fire Station near the Hyatt Hotel. A busy restaurant with a moderately priced menu, reservations are recommended. 02-797-9664 or visit www.swisschalet.kr. 

Chef Meili : Austrian Deli and Café Restaurant with tasty Austrian food and very friendly service– the chef will sometimes come out to visit with diners! Food is cooked to order so be prepared to wait a bit, but The restaurant is upstairs and the deli is downstairs. Located in Itaewon on the street directly across from the Hamilton Hotel (Bogwang-ro). The restaurant is at the corner of the first street on your right side. Phone: 02-794-7024 

El Comedor : Great food from Paraguay. A must to try here are the empa-nadas (dough pocket filled with beef, chicken, corn and cheese, or ham and cheese). They also serve chipas (soft doughy bread on the inside and crusty on the outside) and Sopa Paraguaya (kind of like corn bread or hush puppies). It is a small take-out place, but they have a few tables and Latin music in the background. Closed Mondays.Located in Itaewon on the street directly across from the Hamilton Hotel (Bogwang-ro). Turn right at the first street; go past the small grocery store and down the hill. El Comedor is on the left hand side on the second floor. Phone: 02-749-2827. 

Un Deux Trois Brasserie : You can enjoy nightly specials and delicious mus-sels at this sidewalk café. It has a moderately priced menu with meat and fish. Location: Itaewon; just past the Hamilton Hotel, you can’t miss the bistro ta-bles on the left. 02-796-1244; https://www.facebook.com/123Brasserie. 

Le Saint-Ex : French wine bar and bistro. The chef prepares daily specials that change two to three times a week. Specials include meat and seafood 202 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 203 

> RESTAURANTS
> RESTAURANTS

Sultan Turkish Kebab House : This is a favorite place to grab a quick chicken or lamb kebab. It is very small, but the food is superb. The service is fast and inexpensive. Location: Itaewon; across the street from the Hamilton Hotel, walk down Bogwang-ro about a block and take the alley on the left. The little restaurant is on the left.02-749-3890 or visit www.sultankebab.co.kr (Korean only, but a location map is provided). 

## TEX-MEX Cirilo : Cirilo is a great place to go for Mexican style grilled tacos, burritos, quesadillas and drinks. You get a lot for your money, and it is fairly inexpensive. It is located not far outside Gate 6 (Commissary Gate). If you walk out the com-missary gate, turn right and cross the street as if you are going to the Starbucks on the corner. Cirilo is located on the other side of Starbucks. It is a small place, but they have both indoor and outdoor dining areas. Phone: 02-793-3358. 

Don Charly : If you haven’t had authentic, homemade chorizo since landing in Korea, then you haven’t eaten at Don Charly. A tiny restaurant in the heart of Gyeongnidan (the Itaewon neighborhood directly across from Gate 21), this Mexican eatery often has a long line of hungry patrons anxiously waiting for a table or to place a take-out order. The menu is only tacos and sandwiches, both of which are filled with perfectly seasoned meats that will leave you plan-ning your return visit as soon as possible. Location: Exit Gate 21 (Friendship House Gate/Kimchi Pot Gate) and cross the street via the underpass, exiting the underpass using the stairs on the left. Take a right at Hoenamu-ro and walk up the hill towards the Grand Hyatt, staying to the right when the road splits. Don Charly is on the right not too far after the road splits. Closed Sunday and Monday. 010-5342-4475 or visit https://www.facebook.com/pages/Don-Charly/166646000142050. 

On the Border : A Tex-Mex chain restaurant from the U.S. offering a great selection of Mexican-American style menu items such as fajitas, ribeye steaks, enchiladas, stuffed jalapenos and guacamole made from scratch. There are several locations in Seoul, but the Itaewon branch is the closest– located on the main Itaewon street on the same side as the Hamilton Hotel and about a block down from the Café Bene. The website has an English option and con-tains detailed maps for all locations. 02-792-0682~3 or visit www.ontheborder. co.kr. 

Tomatillo : Southern California-influenced Mexican food such as tacos, bur-ritos, quesadillas and tostadas are prepared with fresh ingredients. There are tion. 02-797-6846; www.jellwine.com/index_eng.php. 

Zelen : Featuring authentic Bulgarian cuisine, this is a great place for a spe-cial occasion or date night. Dinner is excellent. They also offer a buffet lunch Tues-Sat for 12,000. Location: Itaewon; in the alley behind the Hamilton Hotel, near the end of the alley closest to USAG Yongsan, Zelen is on the second floor above Pattaya Thai and across from My Thai China. 02-749-0600; www.zelen. co.kr. 

## JAPANESE Saboten : This restaurant specializes in Donkatsu, serving up the standard pork cutlet as well as varieties with sweet potato or mozzarella cheese. While you wait for your food, you are given a bowl of seeds to crush up as part of the sauce. Location: Yongsan Station (Line 4) I’PARK Mall, West street section. Go to the fourth floor and work your way to the back side. It overlooks the train station. Phone: 02-2012-0442. 

Tsukushi : They have set lunch menus on weekdays of Donkatsu dishes, tempura, udon, sushi and sashimi a la carte. The restaurant is very small and gets full quickly so reservations are recommended. Location: outside Gate 16 (MP Station Gate/PX Gate), turn right at the U.S. Embassy Resource Center and turn right on 3rd alley. The restaurant is on the left and the sign is in Japanese only. The door to the restaurant is blue with a picture of fish. 262-14, Hangang-daero, Yongsan-gu, Seoul, Phone: 02-755-1213. 

## ARABIAN, MEDITERRANEAN AND TURKISH Petra : This is a reasonably priced Middle Eastern restaurant serving de-licious dishes of humus, tabouli, kebabs and an assortment of lamb dishes. Location: Itaewon; go over the pedestrian overpass close to Noksapyeong Sta-tion. After crossing the pedestrian bridge, turn right. You will see the restau-rant on the left on the upper level of a building about 50m ahead. There is a very steep set of stairs leading up to the restaurant. Phone: 02-790-4433. 

Saffron : Arab & Indian cuisine including kebabs, curries, naan and khubz, hummus, babaganoush, lamb, chicken, saffron rice and biryani, vegetarian choices, lassis, teas, coffees and gulab jamun– delicious, with a lovely atmo-sphere and great service. Take the subway to Euljiro 1(il)-ga Station (Line 2, exit 6). Walk straight ahead until you will see the sign for Saffron or the Ibis Hotel on the left (they are in the same building). You could also just hop in a cab and tell them to take you to the Ibis Hotel in Myeong-dong. Phone: 02-6361-8644. 204 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 205 

> TRAVEL
> RESTAURANTS

# THE ADVENTURE AWAITS 

> Saemangeum Seawall at Kunsan – Photo by Claire Wentzel

There is an abundance of things to see and experience in Korea, it can be hard to know where to begin. If you are the adventurous sort, buy a good map and an English/Korean dictionary, acquire some won, and just go explore. Ko-reans are friendly and relish the opportunity to teach you about their about their country and culture. Another option is to start your exploration by joining a group tour with the USO, The Royal Asiatic Society or spend the day on the Seoul City Bus tour. 

# TRAVELING WITHIN SEOUL 

The majority of the sites in this section can be easily reached using the subway or bus. You may want to stop by the USO or ACS before heading out to pick up English maps, information on local cuisine and culture, subway maps and bus schedules. Once out in the city, most tourist areas have tourist infor-mation booths, or guides wearing red shirts, with maps of the local neighbor-hoods and businesses. Keep an eye out for a monthly publication called The several locations in Seoul, including one in Itaewon behind the Hamilton Hotel. 02-794-9225 or visit http://tomatillo.co.kr/en. 

Vatos Urban Tacos : A great Mexican restaurant with owners who spent some serious time in Texas. All kinds of menu options (galbi tacos, anyone?) with great margaritas! Located in Itaewon on the street behind the Hamilton Hotel. You’ll reach the restaurant before reaching the Hamilton Hotel. 02-797-8226 or visit http://vatoskorea.com. 

## VIETNAMESE Le Saigon : Along the main road across from Gate 21 (Friendship House Gate/Kimchi Pot Gate), you’ll find Le Saigon – a quaint little gem offering tasty Vietnamese cuisine. Start with some spring rolls or wings, then enjoy a bowl of beef pho, a Saigon wrap or a bahn mi sandwich. Or if you’d prefer, try a fried rice or noodle dish or one of the house specials such as five spice beef. Regard-less of your selection, you really can’t go wrong here – the food is delicious and is reasonably priced. The restaurant also offers a few set menus, allowing you try a combination of items for one set price. In addition to the location in Gyeongnidan across from Gate 21, there’s a location in the main part of Itae-won as well. 02-790-0336, www.lesaigon.co.kr. 206 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 207 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

Directions: Anguk Station (Line 3, Exit 3) 

CHEONGGYECHEON STREAM This is a rebirth of nature in the middle of downtown Seoul. After being covered up for 40 years, Seoul began the res-toration of this historical treasure. Cheong Gye Cheon Stream is 8.4 km long and offers wonderful walkways and rocky areas to sit and have lunch. At night, lights accentuate the fountains and provide a romantic feel for a warm sum-mer night stroll. The recommended walk for people is to arrive at Gwanghwamun station. Take the exit Gwanghwamun and start your journey. You can follow the course until it meets up with the Han River. On the way you will notice many interest-ing art pieces, people having picnics or learn about Korean history. For more information about events and walking courses you should take a look at the of-ficial site http://english.sisul.or.kr/grobal/cheonggye/eng/WebContent/index. html. Directions to Cheonggye Plaza: Gwanghwamun Station (Line 5, Exit 5) or City Hall Station (Line 1, 2 Exit 4) 

COEX MALL: See Shopping– Department Stores. 

DLI (DAEHAN LIFE INSURANCE) 63 BUILDING: The tall, golden building south of the Han River is one of the tallest skyscrapers in Korea and was the tallest building in Asia when it opened in 1985. The 1st floor has a marvelous aquarium that features seal and sea lion shows and an IMAX theater. The 56th to 59th floors have Western, Chinese, and Japanese restaurants. An observa-tion deck on the 60th floor offers a great view of the surrounding area. Admis-sion prices vary depending on the attraction visited. Directions: Subway line 5, Yeouinaru Station 527, exit 1, 20 minute walk on foot. There is a parking garage if you decide to drive. 

HAN RIVER BOAT CRUISE: A boat cruise along the Han River is one of the best ways to view Seoul’s river front areas. Several boats cruise the waters of the Han, making one-way and round-trip tours. In addition to the regularly scheduled tours, the boats can be chartered for special occasions and parties. It can be a little chilly during cool evenings so try to put this on your must see list for a late spring through early fall. For reservations call 02-3271-6900 or visit https://www.elandcruise.com/_kor/index/index.asp for more informa-tion. Tickets can also be purchased through the Discover Seoul desk inside the Dragon Hill Lodge (DSN 738-2222 x6286). 

MUSIC CLUBS: Seoul boasts live music venues in several different areas of the city. Three jazz clubs, in particular, are well known and popular among locals and visitors alike: • All That Jazz : As one of the more established jazz clubs in Seoul, All That Beetle Map that features certain areas of interest. The official website of the Korea Tourism Organization is http://english.visitkorea.or.kr. You can find infor-mation on what is happening in and around Seoul along with interactive maps of Seoul and other areas throughout the country. Another useful site is the Official Seoul City Tourism Website: www.visitseoul.net/en/index.do. Google Maps is a useful tool when searching for specific locations in Seoul. The search engine works better if you can copy and paste the Hangul name of the location or business into the search bar. The map itself is written in Hangul so keep an English map close by for translation. For ideas and information on lodging accomodations in Seoul or other parts of Korea, visit http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/1031_Accommodations.jsp or other popular travel-related sites (e.g., www.tripadvisor.com, www.orbitz. com, etc). 

City Transport 

Driving in Seoul can be extremely hazardous, especially if you are new to Korea. Case in point, Koreans who drive in Seoul are required to have a special driver’s license to navigate the streets of their capital. So, it’s a good thing Seoul is covered by an efficient and extremely comprehensive public transpor-tation system. For detailed information on subways, buses, and taxis, refer to the Transportation – Off Post section within the A-Z section of this book. 

## PLACES OF INTEREST BUKCHON HANOK VILLAGE: Bukchon Hanok Village is a village where tra-ditional Korean houses called hanok form a group, which encompasses Ga-hoe-dong, Jae-dong, and Samcheong-dong in Jongno-gu. Bukchon has been a traditional residential district for more than 600 years. The name Bukchon (meaning North Village) originated from it being the north village of Cheong-gyecheon and Jong-no. The village is located between two palaces arranged according to principles of Sung Confucianism, which was the dominant ideology during the Joseon Dynasty, and has a large concentration of traditional Korean houses against an excellent landscape. Visitors can feel the warm heart of Korea from the land-scape; the eaves of houses are connected and walls are shared. These homes are often still resided in by Korean families so consideration should be made regarding large groups and rowdy behavior. The Gahoe-dong Traditional Village Cultural Festival is held in the streets of Bukchon Hanok Village by the Bukchon Nobility Life & Culture Pavilion and sculptures symbolizing Bukchon Hanok Village, where visitors can enjoy the lives of historical Koreans. 208 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 209 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

purchased through the Discover Seoul desk inside the Dragon Hill Lodge (DSN 738-2222 x6286). 

NATIONAL MUSEUM OF KOREA : Until October 2004, the National Muse-um was located in the Seokjojeon building in Gyeongbok Palace in the former Imperial Household Museum. It re-opened in October 2005 in a new building within Yongsan Family Park. Inside the museum, benches and resting spaces have been installed in many places for tired visitors. There is a food court, cultural products stores, coffee/tea shops and restaurants. No admission fee is required for the permanent exhibits, the Children’s Museum, and temporary exhibitions. Special exhibits sometimes require separate tickets that must be purchased at the ticket booth. Visitors must get a free admission pass at the ticket booths before entering the museum. Directions: Walk out gate 13 (South Post Visitor Center Gate), turn left and walk about 150 meters toward Yongsan Family Park. Museum is on the left. Hours: Tuesday, Thursday & Friday: 9 am-6 pm; Wednesday & Saturday: 9 am-9 pm; Sunday & Holidays: 9 am-7 pm. Closed Mondays. Visit www.mu-seum.go.kr/site/main/index002 for more information. 

THE PALACE DISTRICT : This area of central Seoul is bounded by five grand palaces (see the subsequent Palaces, Museums and World Heritage Sites sec-tion for descriptions). While visits to one or two palaces may satisfy your curi-osity of old palace life, the treasures and history doesn’t end there. Check out the traditional tea shops and trinkets of the major tourist center in Insadong-gil; the art galleries in Samcheong-dong; and stroll through streets studded with traditional hanok buildings in Bukchon-dong. The official South Korean presidential residence, Cheongwadae, also known as the “Blue House,” is also located within this district. 

SEOUL ARTS CENTER : This amazing center houses many concert halls and galleries. This extensive space offers many options for any lover of the arts. There is an Opera House, Music Hall, Hangaram Art Museum, Hangaram De-sign Museum (which features rotating exhibits), Seoul Calligraphy Art Muse-um, several gift shops and a small restaurant. There is always something going on so check their website www.sac.or.kr/eng or call 02-580-1300. Directions: It is an easy drive– straight across the Banpo Bridge to the last stop light and you will be facing it. Don’t take the tunnel; it goes right under it. Turn left at the light and then make an immediate right into the parking area where there is a nominal parking fee. The Seoul Arts Center is also acces-sible by subway (Line 3, Nambu Bus Terminal Station, exit 5, then take the free shuttle bus (the stop is just outside subway exit 5). Jazz has been entertaining audiences for nearly forty years. The club features a different jazz band each night and offers patrons a full dining menu. While the menu prices are a bit on the expensive side, the small cover charge (around W5,000 per person) makes this club an unbelievable deal! Directions: Located behind the Hamilton Hotel. From Itaewon Station exit 1, walk up the alley to your left, turn right and walk straight ahead for a short distance. www.allthat-jazz.kr. • Club Evans : This warm, inviting, sophisticated jazz club in Hongdae at-tracts musicians and listeners of all ages. Club Evans features jam sessions each week, which are very organized and well-run, and are really a lot of fun to experience (as a listener or a player). The feature and house bands never fail to captivate the audience’s attention with a variety of jazz styles. This club is a favorite, so it gets quite crowded on the weekends; head over there early to get a seat. There is typically a cover charge (usually W7,000-10,000). Direc-tions: Via subway, go to Sangsu Station, (Line 6, exit 1). Walk straight ahead on Wausan-ro for about five minutes and on the left you will see Club Evans on the second floor of the building with 7-11 on the first floor. www.clubevans. 

com. 

• Club Palm : This cozy club features an ever-changing calendar of jazz per-formers. Its location in Hongdae makes it especially popular with the college students living in the area. It’s a nice little place to relax, have a drink and hear some great live music. There is usually a cover charge (around W10,000). Di-rections: Via subway, go to Sangsu Station, (Line 6, exit 1). Walk straight ahead on Wausan-ro for several minutes and turn left on Wausan-ro 19-gil; Club Palm will be on the left (very close to Hongdae park). You can’t miss the bright neon palm sign at the entrance. www.clubpalm.co.kr (Korean only). 

NAMSANGOL TRADITIONAL FOLK VILLAGE : Located in P’il-dong and just north of Namsan Park, the Seoul government recreated a small village that resembles the architecture and gardens of the area during the Joseon Dynasty (1392-1910). The area contains five restored traditional houses decorated with authentic furniture and decorations from the period. Standing programs featuring traditional Korean Arts and Cultural Activites make this a must see for the family and the free admission makes it a perfect attraction no matter what the budget for your family’s weekend excursion. 

NANTA COOKING THEATRE : This is an interesting theatrical show that fea-tures music created with cooking instruments. You’ll experience “flying food and flashing blades” according to the pamphlet. Pick one up at the USO or call the booking number, 02-739-8288. www.nanta.co.kr. Tickets can also be 210 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 211 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

## PALACES, MUSEUMS AND WORLD HERITAGE SITES 

Seoul is the ancient seat of Korea’s royalty and, as such, there are a num-ber of palaces that offer a glimpse into the country’s past. The royal palaces of Seoul are the pride of Korea. Although most of the buildings were damaged or destroyed by war, their historical and aesthetic significance are still appreci-ated throughout the world. All of the palaces and their contents date from the Joseon Dynasty (1392-1910) and restorations are ongoing. The royal palaces are located in downtown Seoul. At specific times during the day, there are spe-cial ceremonies performed such as the changing of the guard or a traditional Korean wedding ceremony. Most palace admission fees are between W1,000 and W5,000 and special tickets can be purchased for multiple palaces at dis-counted rates. The palaces listed below open at 9 am but closing hours vary. 

CHANGDEOKGUNG AND BIWON (SECRET GARDEN) : A UNESCO World Heritage Site, this palace was first built in 1405 and was the seat of power between 1618 and 1896. The buildings have all been recently restored and repainted. Buildings of particular note include the blue-roofed Seonjeongjeon, which was the king’s office, and the Daejojeon (“Great Making Hall”), his bed-chamber, but most famous of all is the Biwon (“Secret Garden”) in the back. Access to the Biwon complex is by guided tour only. http://eng.cdg.go.kr/ main/main.htm Directions: Jongno 3-ga Station (Lines 1, 3 or 5, Exit 6) or Anguk Station (Line 3, Exit 3) Hours: 9 am to 5:30 pm (closing hours vary upon season). Closed Monday. English tours are offered at 10:30 am and 2:30 pm for the palace and 11:30 am, 1:30 pm, and 3:30 pm for the Secret Garden; Korean language tours are available throughout the day. Admission: Adults W3,000, youth (Ages 7 to 18) W1,500. Secret Garden access is an additional W2,000 for adults and W1,000 for youth. 

CHANGGYEONGGUNG : Changgyeonggung Palace (“Palace of Bright Rejoic-ing”) was built in 1104 as a summer palace by Goryeo King Sukjong and was originally named Suganggung Palace. It later became one of the main palaces during the Joseon Dynasty and was used as a temporary home for the king while Gyeongbok Palace was being built. Unlike other palaces that have a north-south orientation, Changgyeong Palace faces East-West. Accessible on the same entry ticket is the UNESCO World Heritage site, Jongmyo Shrine. The two sites are connected byS a foot bridge. Directions: Hyehwa Station (Line 4, Exit 3) Go 20m and then turn left at Seoul Jongno Pharmacy ( 서울종로약국 ). Go 180m and then turn left at Jeong-

SEOUL CITY BUS TOUR : This bus tour takes you all over the city. The best part is, you can get on and off the bus as many times as you wish, visiting what-ever interests you. There are English speaking guides as well as audio guides on the bus. A one day pass is W12,000 for adults and W10,000 for children and tickets may be purchased as you get on the bus. Check their website for more details: http://en.seoulcitybus.com. You can catch the bus across the street from the War Memorial of Korea, outside Gate 1 (Main Gate/Dragon Hill Lodge Gate) (look for the red pillar marked Seoul City Bus Tour) and also in front of the I’PARK Mall. The bus is marked Seoul City Bus Tour. No buses run on Mondays. 

N SEOUL TOWER : Visible from almost anywhere in Seoul, N Seoul Tower serves as an excellent landmark. Built on a 262 meter peak in Namsan Park, the tower reaches to 480 meters above sea level. When the weather and pol-lution levels cooperate, visiting the observation tower (370 meters above sea level) allows you to view the entire city and surrounding areas. There are sev-eral restaurants at the Tower, including a rotating restaurant above the obser-vation deck. Directions: See Namsan Park in the subsequent Parks, Theme Parks and Zoos section for more information. 

WAR MEMORIAL OF KOREA : Across the street from Korea’s Department of Defense, and next to the U.S. Army’s Yongsan Garrison, is a fitting place for the War Memorial of Korea. Its impressive granite facade and surrounding park with vintage airplanes and tanks catch the eyes of people passing by along the main road. The museum building has six rooms displaying nearly 5,000 years of history of foreign invasions, from before the Three Kingdoms Period through the Korean War. https://www.warmemo.or.kr/eng/main/main.jsp This museum also has rotation of children friendly exhibits and play areas that are featured in the lower level of the building. Entrance fees for this area do apply but this feature makes the War Memorial of Korea an excellent choice for an activity that will entertain every member of your family no matter how young or old. Directions: This is located on the road that runs between South Post and Main Post. From the Dragon Hill Lodge gate turn left and the Museum will be across the street a short 3-5 minute walk ahead. It is accessible by subway Samgakji Station (Lines 4 and 6, Exit 12). Hours: 9 am-6 pm, closed Monday; if a holiday falls on a Monday then the museum will be open that Monday but closed the following day. Admission: Free. 212 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 213 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

Directions: Seodaemun Station (Line 5, Exit 4). Go straight 150 meters to the Naeil Newspaper Office and turn right. Walk approximately 10 minutes to Gyeonghuigung. Hours: 9 am to 6 pm. Closed Monday. Admission: Free. 

UNHYEONGUNG : Located in the middle of Seoul’s current business district, Unhyeongung Royal Residence was the home of young Gojong, who later be-came Emperor during the Joseon Dynasty. This small palace has several el-egant buildings to tour. In the Spring and Fall, the wedding ceremony of King Gojong and Queen Myeongseong is reenacted here. For more information call 766-9090 or visit http://www.unhyeongung.or.kr/index_eng.php. Directions: Anguk Station (Line 3, Exit 4) or Jongno 3-ga Station (Line 5, Exit 4) Admission: Free. English interpretation services offered for a W1,100 rental fee. Hours: 9 am to 6 pm (closing hours vary upon season). Closed Monday. 

## SEOUL FESTIVALS CHERRY BLOSSOM : Festivals to celebrate the spring season, specifically the blooming of the cherry blossom trees happen throughout the peninsula, usu-ally in April. The exact days are hard to predict, but “Seoul-ites” get their picnic gear together as soon as the soft pink buds start to open. The most popular place is Yeouido; bring a bottle of soju and a bunch of friends. The Yeouido Spring Flower Festival, the closest to Yongsan Garrison, is located near the National Assembly building, and is famous for its 1,400-1,600 Korean cherry trees. Directions: Yeouido Station (Lines 5 or 9, Exit 5), then take Bus 162, 262, or 461 to National Assembly or National Assembly Station (Line 9, Exits 1 or 6) and walk 5 minutes to Yeouiseo-ro. 

HI SEOUL FESTIVAL : The Hi Seoul Festival is one of the main festivals of Seoul and features a variety of cultural and art programs and numerous exhib-its. Taking place in the fall, this event is held along the famed Gwanghwamun Square, Seoul Plaza, Cheonggye Plaza and in downtown Seoul. http://www. hiseoulfest.org/eng/main/main.php 

BUDDHA’S BIRTHDAY PARADE : Also known as the Lotus Lantern Festival, this is a must see for the entire family! Seoul celebrates the birth of Buddha with a festival of paper lanterns. Before the festival, traditional lanterns are exhibited at Bongeun-sa Temple. On Yeondeung-nori, the eve of the festival, there are traditional Buddhist celebrations at the 14th-century Jogyesa Tem-min Onnuri Pharmacy ( 정민온누리약국 ). Go 200m and then turn left. Go 60m and then cross the road to arrive at Changgyeonggung Palace. Hours: 9 am to 5:30 pm (closing hours vary upon season). English tours are available at 11:00 am and 4:00 pm. ClosedMonday. Admission: Adults W1,000, Youth (7-18 years) W500, ages 6 and under are free. 

DEOKSUGUNG : This palace is a vivid contrast to other nearby palaces. Built during the mid-fifteenth century, the architecture is a fusion of both Korean and Western architecture. Deoksugung is located across from City Hall. Chang-ing of the Royal Guards ceremonies are held at 11:00 am, 2:00 pm, and 3:30 pm. The ceremony course along with additional information can be found at http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/SI/SI_EN_3_1_1_1.jsp?cid=264316. Directions: City Hall Station (Lines 1 or 2, Exit 2) Hours: 9 am to 9 pm. Closed Monday. Interpretation Services are offered. Admission: Adults: W1,000 (groups of more than 20: W800) Youth (7-18 years) W500 (groups of more than 20: W400). 

GYEONGBOKGUNG : Built in 1935, Seoul’s grandest and most beautiful pal-ace was the seat of power for centuries before it was razed in 1592 and again in 1910 by the Japanese. Large parts have been restored and the most repre-sentative edifices of the Joseon Dynasty, Gyeonghoe-ru Pavilion and Hayang-wonjeong Pond, are still relatively intact. The vast grounds house the National Palace Museum of Korea and the National Folk Museum. http://www.royalpalace.go.kr/html/eng/main/main.jsp Directions: Gyeongbokgung Palace Station (Line 3, Exit 5) or Gwanghwa-mun Station (Line 5, Exit 2) Hours: 9 am to 5 pm (closing hours vary upon season). Closed Tuesday. English tours are available at 11:00 am, 1:30 pm, and 3:30 pm departing from the Heungnyemun Gate and last approximately 1-1 ½ hours. Admission: Adults: W3,000 (groups of more than 10: W2,400), Youth (7-18 years old) W1,500 (groups of more than 10: W1,200), ages 6 and under are free. 

GYEONGHUIGUNG : This palace, which historically served as a second-ary palace where the king moved to in times of emergency, boast beautiful architecture which complimented the slanted geography of the mountains surrounding it. Also called Seogwol “A Palace of the West,” this palace was commissioned by King Gwanghae in 1617 and is located near the Seoul His-tory Museum and Deoksugung Palace. http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/SI/ SI_EN_3_1_1_1.jsp?cid=264308 214 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 215 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

Directions: Via Car: Take Highway 1 to the I-50 split. Exit onto I-4 toward Wonju (heading east) and follow signs to Everland. For your return, follow signs to Seoul, they will put you back onto Highway 1. Via subway and bus: Gangnam Station (Line 2, Exit 5 or 10). Take bus 5002 to Everland. (Travel time: 50 min) Admission prices vary depending on your choices. Season passes are avail-able. Check out http://www.everland.com/web/multi/english/everland/main. html or call 031-320-5000 (then press 4 for English or Chinese) for details. Hours are subject to change depending on the season. 

HANGANG RIVER PARK : A “development project” in the 1980s, Hangang River Citizen’s Park covers a large area along the river’s edge. A sports haven, you can see people strolling or jogging along the trail paths, in-line skaters, bicyclers, and soccer fields or basketball courts. Citizen’s Park is composed of Gwangnaru, Jamsil, Ttukseom, Jamwon, Banpo, Ichon, Yeouido, Yanghwa, Mangwon, Seonyudo, Nanji, and Gangseojigu– a total of 12 districts. Citizen’s Park is filled with the lights from the River and the city buildings in the eve-nings. Ichon is the closest to Yongsan Garrison but Yeouido and Ttukseom tend to be the most popular because Korean dramas often use these parks to shoot scenes. Directions: To get to Ichon Hangang Park, go out Gate 13 (South Post Visitor Center Gate), cross underground through Ichon Station, exit 4 and continue walking 10 minutes to the river. 

LOTTE WORLD : A giant indoor/outdoor activity complex and amusement center. In the complex itself you’ll find a year-round indoor ice-skating rink (skate rental available), indoor swimming pool, folk museum and bowling al-ley. The main attraction, however, is Lotte World Adventure and Magic Island! Lotte World Adventure offers indoor rides for younger children, a monorail, musical acts and a laser show that takes place nightly at 9 pm. Thrill seekers should venture to Magic Island, the outdoor fun park, where they can free fall 70m on the heart stopping Gyro Drop ride. Directions: Jamsil Station (Lines 2 and 8, Exit 4) and Lotte World is directly connected to the station. Hours: 9:30 am-11 pm though closing times may vary throughout the year. Inquiries: 02-411-2000/3400 (ask for English speaker), www.lotteworld.com Admission: Prices range from W14,500 to W40,000 for adults (less for chil-dren) and vary based on the options selected. 

NAMSAN PARK : Seoul’s main peak, Namsan or “South Hill,” once marked the southern edge of old royal Seoul. Remains of the city walls can still be seen ple in Insadong. The opening ceremony for the parade itself is held at nearby Dongdaemun and the procession of lanterns then moves along Jongno Street to the Jogyesa Temple. The festival is notable not only for its large colorful lanterns on the backs of trucks, but for the thousands of delicate hand-held lanterns in the shape of lotus flowers carried by adults and children wearing traditional hanbok. Check dates and a schedule of events at www.llf.or.kr/eng. 

SEOUL PERFORMING ARTS FESTIVAL : The festival features a wide variety of the arts, from international artists and Korea’s finest. These events take place at various venues across Seoul during a three week period around late September or October. http://www.spaf.or.kr/2013english/ 

## PARKS, THEME PARKS AND ZOOS 

There are several large theme parks in the vicinity of Seoul. A day out to these parks requires planning to avoid massive crowds (avoid public holidays and Saturday afternoons if you can) and take plenty of sun protection in sum-

mer. 

CHILDREN’S GRAND PARK : This older, but large park, has so much to offer on it’s more than 530,000 square meters. From the zoo and botanical gardens to play areas with sand pit and a separate water area where kid’s can splash in the summer, this park will thrill your kids who love amusement park rides or still let you stop and smell the roses. www.sisul.or.kr Directions: Children’s Grand Park Station (Line 7, Exit 1) Admission: General admission to the park is free. Tickets must be pur-chased for amusement park rides, animal rides, and certain special features. Hours: Park Hours 5:00 am-10:00 pm; Zoo Hours 10:00 am-5:00 pm (sub-ject to change due to weather conditions) 

EVERLAND : Composed of play facilities, shopping facilities, and restau-rants, Everland is the seventh largest theme park in the world. It is divided into 3 areas: Festival World, Caribbean Bay, and Speedway. Festival World is a theme park complex consisting of 5 theme zones known as Global Fair: Ameri-can Adventure, Magic Land, European Adventure, Equatorial Adventure, and Safari World. Caribbean Bay offers a thrilling water park experience with ac-tivities for people of all ages. But for those of us who get a chance to escape children free, Carribean Bay offers what is considered some of the best spa and relaxation facilities available. Everland Speedway is the “only” racing track in Korea. You can drive your car on the speedway as well as watch a race. This park also contains a full-scale zoo which includes a “mini” bus safari through the African animal complex. 216 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 217 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

THE NATIONAL MUSEUM OF CONTEMPORARY ART AND SEOUL LAND are 

attached to Seoul Grand Park, so visitors can stop at all three places at the same time. Admission fees vary depending on your choices. You may purchase tickets for the zoo and Seoul Land at the USO or inquire about the foreigner’s discount at the Guest Services kiosk outside the entrance gate. Hours are sub-ject to change depending on the season. Check out www.moca.go.kr/eng for more information. Directions: Seoul Grand Park Station (Line 4, Exit 1) Walk to the tram or fol-low the signs to the zoo, amusement park or museum. 

NATURE PARK : Near the Grand Hyatt Seoul in Itaewon is a series of stroller-friendly nature trails. Walking along the hilly trails in the thick woods you’ll for-get you’re in a crowded city. There is parking across from the high-end fashion shops that are to the left and across from the Hyatt. It is also possible to find street-side parking on a weekday near the left side of the Hyatt. 

OLYMPIC PARK : This park contains the World Peace Gate, the remains of a Mongchontoseong Earthen Fortress, an outdoor sculpture garden, sports fa-cilities and walking trails. One of the world’s top five sculpture parks, Korea’s Olympic Sculpture Park is also located in Olympic Park. Olympic Sculpture Park was built to celebrate the 24th Olympics held in Seoul as a cultural event and to commemorate its spirit ‘Harmony and Progress’. The Sculpture Park has over 200 large modern sculptures by world-class artists. The Seoul Olympic Museum is also located here. This museum has various displays for the avid sports fan and an AV theater where you can share in the excitement of the Seoul Olympic Games. More information can be found at http://www.olym-picpark.co.kr/jsp/english/index.jsp. Olympic Park is also the Home of the Doo-san Bears, Korea’s first baseball team, and the LG Twins. Check the website for game times at www.doosanbears.com and click English in the top right hand corner. Both teams play at Jamsil Stadium at Olympic Park. Directions: Olympic Park Station (Line 5, Exit 3) or Mongchontoseong Sta-tion (Line 8, Exit 1) Admission: Although admission to the park is free, there are fees for the Olympic Museum (W3,000) and some other attractions have small fees of typi-cally less than W500. Hours: The attraction hours vary but the park is open 6:00 am-midnight. 

SAJIK PARK : Originally built around a stone altar that was erected in 1394, this park was officially recognized in 1922 during Japan’s occupation of Korea. Sajik Park is also home to other famous historical landmarks including Dangun Shrine, Jongno Municipal Library, the Municipal Children’s Library and statues in some of the park’s wooded areas and around the top area of the mountain. In addition to N Seoul Tower, Namsan Park contains many other places of in-terest such as Namsan Botanical Gardens, Namsan Public Library and several statues in memorial of Korean patriots. The park also contains a Paljakjung or octagonal pavilion, an aquarium and a cable car leading to N Seoul Tower. Additionally, there are several eateries and occasional traditional Korean per-formances at the area around the top of the mountain near the N Seoul Tower. Admission prices vary for each attraction but there is no fee to go explore what Namsan Park has to offer or to watch the cultural events that are at the top of Namsan near N Seoul Tower. N Seoul Tower hours are Sunday-Thursday 10:00 am-11:00 pm and Friday-Saturday 10:00 am to midnight. The Cable Car oper-ating hours are daily 10:00 am-11:00 pm. For more information, visit http:// parks.seoul.go.kr/eng/common/park_info/introduce.jsp?park_id=namsan. Information about N Seoul Tower can be found at http://www.nseoultower. co.kr/eng/index.asp Directions: By car: drive or take a taxi, park at the National Theater of Ko-rea parking lot. You will see a food stand near the entrance to the National Theater; this is a bus stop. A main line bus (Namsan Circular Line) will come and pick you up and take you up to the Tower. You can use a T-Money card or the cost is approximately W600 per person. When leaving, you will have to take the whole bus route to return to the National Theater, but this only takes about 20 minutes. You can also ride a cable car from the Namsan cable car sta-tion. There is a parking lot available there as well. By subway to Namsan Park: Chungmuro Station (Line 3, Exit 2) then trans-fer to the Namsan Circular Line (bus main line 402 or branch line 0014, 4012). By subway to cable car station: Myeong-dong Station (Line 4, Exit 3) It is a ten minute walk uphill to the cable car station. By foot: Exit Gate 19 (Camp Coiner Visitor Center Gate), turn right at the stop light. Follow the road uphill until it becomes a path. Follow the path and signs all the way up. Another route via foot is to exit Gate 21 (Friendship House Gate) and turn right. Cross the street via the underpass and exit the underpass using the staircase on the left. Walk a short distance until you reach the street named Hoenamu-ro (this is the main street that goes up the hill to the Grand Hyatt). Turn right and walk up Hoenamu-ro. Cross the Hyatt parking lot to the left and enter the park via a pedestrian bridge. You’ll see directional signs and paved walkways leading up to the mountaintop. Take a bottle of water with you!! 218 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 219 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

Admission: Adults W3,000 (group of 30 or more W2,100), Teenager (Ages 13-18) – W2000 (group of 30 or more W1,400), Children (Ages 4-12) W1,000 (group of 30 or more W700), Toddlers 3 and under are free. Hours: 9:00 am-7:00 pm (closing hours vary upon season) 

SEOUL LAND AMUSEMENT PARK : Korea’s first theme park offers theme areas each with its own special characteristics, and has over 40 rides and 5 outdoor amphitheaters. Performances, exhibitions and events such as flower festivals take place in the park. The Tulip Festival is held from April to May; the Starlight Rose Festival from July to August; the Chrysanthemum Festival from September to October; and the Snow Light Festival from December to Febru-ary. http://eng.seoulland.co.kr/ Directions: Seoul Grand Park Station (Line 4, Exit 2) Admission: Adults W34,000, Teenagers (Ages 13-18) W30,000, Children (3-12) W27,000. Toddlers under 36 month are free. Hours: 9:30 am-10:00 pm (Closing times vary by season.) 

> Seoul Zoo – Photo by Mary Soergel

of Sin Saimdang, Hwanghakjeong, and Yi I. An archery range is located at the rear of the park, and every year a national competition is held. Visitors can hike to Mt. Inwansan from the main gate of the park. Nearby is Gyeongbok Palace and Gyeonghui Palace. Directions: Gyeongbokgung Station (Line 3, Exit 1)– Walk straight ahead for about five minutes; the park is on the right. 

WOONGJIN PLAYDOCI : Visit Korea lists Woongjin Playdoci or Play City as the third best water park for a day trip with your family. This indoor theme park is equipped with Korea’s first indoor ski slope, driving range, fitness club, spa, and water park. You will find all of what you expect at a water park, includ-ing a wave pool, lazy river, kiddie play area and an array of water slides, but will also find areas unique to Woongjin Playdoci including an AquaBar, event pools decorated in themes of different countries, hot spring pools scented with nat-ural ingredients, foot baths and water jet massages. Take towels; you can rent towels but they are very small. When you check in you get an electronic watch, which is the lock for your locker, and also an electronic charge device for you to pay for lifejackets and food. When you check out, you pay for what was charged to your watch. Don’t forget to take advantage of the military discount. http://www.playdoci.com/eng/Index.aspx Directions: Bugae Station (Line 1, Exit 2) - Take Town Bus 579 or City Bus 79 and then get off at Sangil High School (about 5 min). From the school, walk for 5 minutes to Woongjin. Alternatively, you can take a taxi at Bugae Station. Driving Directions: Go out Gate 14 (Hospital Gate), cross the Hangangyo Bridge, follow it until it turns into I-120, then take a left (South) on I-100. You’ll see signs for Woongjin Parkdoji. Parking is free. 

SEOUL GRAND PARK : Located in the suburbs of south Seoul, this enormous park has a number of attractions. It is definitely worth the trip for its two great zoos. It’s a long, uphill walk from the parking lot or you can take the tram up the steps to the station. The larger zoo contains a good collection of animals plus it has a fabulous dolphin and seal show. The zoo is located on a hill so it can be a long walk for little ones, but you can get a roundtrip ticket for the lift and ride to the top of the hill so that your journey is downhill rather than uphill. The children’s petting zoo allows you to feed llamas and donkeys and pet free-roaming pigs and watch monkeys. The Seoul Land Amusement Park is also located on these grounds. http://grandpark.seoul.go.kr/Eng/html/main/ main.jsp Directions: Seoul Grand Park Station (Line 4, Exit 2) 220 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 221 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

own. Rental items are available at most resorts, but buying ski items there can be expensive! Some MWR offices may also have equipment for rent so check before heading on your ski adventure. There are several resorts located within two hours of Seoul, but the more luxurious resorts are up to five hours away. Look into Yongpyong and Muju if you are interested in a “world class” resort. The following list describes just a few of the ski areas available. Visit http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/SI/ SI_EN_3_6.jsp?cid=860692 for more information. 

BEARS TOWN SKI RESORT: Located an hour outside of Seoul in Pocheon, Gyeonggi Province, the resort has a slope exclusive for expert skiers, two slopes for advanced skiers, two slopes for advanced/intermediate skiers, and three slopes for beginners. All slopes are open for snowboarding and with 8 lifts and one express lift your wait between runs won’t be as long as some of the smaller resorts. Plus the snow sledding field provides fun that all family members can enjoy. Directions: Cheongnyangni Station (Line 1) – Take Bus No. 707, get off at Gwangneungnae. Change to Bus No. 7.5.1001 and get off at Bearstown Ski Resort. Or, from Gangbyeon Station (Line 2) – Take Bus No. 1001 and get off at Bears Town Ski Resort. Via bus, take an Ildong bound bus from Seoul’s Sangbong Intercity Bus Ter-minal. Get off at Naechon Station and take a 2-minute taxi ride to the resort. Or, take Bus No. 5, 7, 33, or 1001 and get off at Bears Town Ski Resort. Admission: All day, half day and night rates are available. Rates and hours for passes, as well as other valuable information, are available at http://www. bearstown.com/bt_eng/eng_01.php. 

CHONMASSAN STAR HILL RESORT : Located one hour northeast of Seoul, this resort has six slopes each with its own exclusive lifts. Call 02-2233-5311. Visit www.starhillresort.com (Korean only) or http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/ enu/SI/SI_EN_3_6.jsp?gotoPage=1&cid=860690#2 for more information. Directions: Take a city coach bus in Seoul, get off at Mukhyeon-ri, Gyeong-gi-do or at Maseok Terminal. Coach buses are at Cheongryangri Station (No. 330-1, No. 765, No. 765-1, No. 1330, No. 3300), Samsil Station (No. 115, No. 901), or Gangbyeon Station (No. 1115-2). Hours: 9:00 am-22:30 pm 

PHOENIX PARK : Located in Pyeongchang, the host city of the 2018 Winter Olympics Games, Phoenix Park has become one of Korea’s most famous resort complexes. The environmentally friendly resort, which was created with least amount of disruption to surrounding nature, offers attractions for the snow lover, golf lover, and swimmer alike. Excellent accommodations include the 

YONGSAN FAMILY PARK : Located next to the National Museum of Korea in Yongsan, this park is the former golf course for the U.S. Military – so it’s all rolling hills, great open grassy spaces, and a pond. It is a natural habitat for various species of birds, as well as more than 80 different kinds of trees. There is a large exercise machine area, but no kids’ playground. Large public art and Weeping Willow trees over the pond make for great pictures, so bring a cam-era, food and a picnic blanket and something to feed the ducks. Directions: Walk out Gate 13 (South Post Visitor Center Gate) and take a left toward the National Museum of Korea. The park is on your left. If you drive, note that the front parking lot is small, but you can also park in the mu-seum parking lot and walk around the back way. 

# TRAVEL OUTSIDE OF SEOUL 

Travel outside of Seoul can seem intimidating but it is worth the time to see and explore the different regions and terrains of South Korea. Let this list serve as a launching pad for your own adventure travels around South Korea. See the Camps, Posts & Other Installations in Korea section for information on visiting other military installations in Korea. 

## HIKING 

Hallasan National Park: This large park on Korea’s Jeju Island is one of the UNESCO World Heritage sites. There is only daytime hiking available, but you can also camp there as well. It is a beautiful landscape with a vast ecosystem of plants. Most all of the hiking trails located here are 10K. Parking is available here for a small fee and admission is free. Visit www.hallasan.go.kr for more information. This National Park is located on Jeju Island and the address is Haean-dong, Jeju-do, 2070-61. 

## SKI RESORTS 

There are several ski resorts in Korea. The ski season is rather short, gen-erally between mid-December and early March. If the season is mild, most resorts have facilities for artificial snow. Toward late February conditions tend to be wet and slushy by mid-morning, so go early. There are a lot of begin-ners on the slopes, so it is advisable to be cautious and to be aware of who is coming down behind you. Skiing is rapidly becoming one of the most popular sports in Korea. Although there are a variety of resort areas with ski slopes, the popular areas are very crowded on weekends. The USO frequently spon-sors group trips. Ski clothing is abundant and inexpensive but the equipment is another matter. If you have ski equipment and plan on skiing a lot, bring your 222 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 223 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

mation can be picked up at the desk in the Dragon Hill Lodge. Goseong Unification Observatory and Tongil Security Park: The Goseong Unification Observation Platform, located in Goseong-gun, Gangwon-do, is one of the places that provides you with living evidence of the division of the Korean Peninsula. At the Park are the Entrance Report, Tourist Bureau, Education Assembly, stalls with vendors selling various souvenirs (from North and South Korea), a Dining Room and Natural Mineral Museum. This is also where you fill out the paperwork to gain permission to continue on to the observation platform, located within “The Civilian Passage Restriction Line.” Paperwork requires the following information: your family name, the license plate number of your car, and the first names and ages of those going to the observation platform (there is no age limit here as at Panmunjom). There is a parking fee along with the entrance fee. Admission: Adults W3,000, Children (18 & Under) W1,500. Parking: Vehicles up to 9 seats W3,000, Over 10 seats W4,000. Buses W3,000. About 4 km down the road from the Unification and Security Park toward the observation platform is a military checkpoint. Show your paperwork and obtain another pass which you put on the dashboard. To the left of the parking lot is the 6.25 Museum dedicated to the Korean War and the inevitable gift shop at the end of the museum tour. Wear sturdy shoes as there is a climb up to the observation platform, which is 700 meters above sea level; at the half-way point you will pass the LAST RESTROOM!! The Observatory was opened in February 1984, and the North Korea Hall opened June 1988. It provides a wonderful view of the 4 km wide DMZ, North Korea and Mt. Geum-gang, the mountain range that looks like the two humps on a camel’s back. There is also a view of an island in South Korea. Between the Observation Platform and the Unification and Security Park is the DMZ Museum. This is a fairly new addition which opened in August 2009. Although the observatory, park, and museum are on many people’s must see list, the information at these sight are not always written in English so it may be helpful to find a Korean friend to accompany you for this sightseeing adventure. For more information, visit http://www.tongiltour.co.kr/english/main/main.html, http://www.tourdmz.com/english/02dmz/p2-2_01.php, or call the Tong-il Se-curity Park at 033-682-0088. Directions: Take National Road 46, to National Road 6, to National Road 44. This road will take you through Seoraksan to National Road 7 which runs along the East Coast. Hours: Open year round, 9:00 am to 3:50 pm (closing hours vary based upon season). main condo, the Euro Villa Condo, a youth hostel and a luxury hotel. For resort information, call (82) 1577-0069, then press #1. https://www.phoenixpark. co.kr/global/english/default.aspx. 

YANGJI PINE RESORT : This all-season resort is just 40 minutes outside of Seoul in Yongin, Gyeonggi Province. In addition to the seven-grade skill slopes and six lifts, there is an international scale 27-hole golf course and an open air in-woods swimming pool. The resort has a good mix of beginner and ad-vanced ski slopes as well as some slopes for sledding. They also offer ski and snowboard lessons for both private and group. http://www.pineresort.com/ yangji_eng/index.html Directions: From Seoul Nambu Bus Teminal, take an intercity bus bound for Yongin via Yangji. Get off at Yangji Terminal or Yongin Intercity Bus Terminal and take a shuttle bus or taxi to Yangji Pine Resort. Admission: Season passes, all day, and half day passes are available and prices vary but can be found on the above website. 

YONGPYONG (DRAGON VALLEY) : Korea’s “Skiing Mecca,” Yongpyong, which hosted the World Cup Alpine Ski Competition in 1998 and the Winter Asian Games in 1999, was the first domestic ski resort opening in 1975. Al-though it is 215 km from Seoul, the construction of a 4-line highway has cut travel time to as little as 2 hours. With 18 slopes and 15 lifts, this resort offers one of the largest variety for the beginner to the expert. Golf, forest baths, archery, tennis courts, and more can be enjoyed when you need a break from the snow. For resort information call 033-335-5757. http://www.yongpyong. co.kr/eng/index.asp Directions: Shuttle bus service is available more details are available at http://english.triptokorea.com/english/viewtopic.php?popup=yes&today=no &printable=yes&t=19128&postdays=0&postorder=desc&start=0. Yongpyong also has an office in Seoul that can assist you in planning your trip. Call the lo-cal office at 02-3270-1231 for more information. 

## NORTHERN LOCATIONS DEMILITARIZED ZONE (DMZ) AND PANMUNJOM : This is such an impor-tant part of Korean History and very important to see in order to truly under-stand the effect of being so close to the most heavily fortified border on the planet. Panmunjom is the most forward location in the DMZ that can be visited by civilians. This tour is better with a group where somebody else handles the necessary clearances. There are tours available through the USO and Discover Seoul. The USO has a great tour that is very affordable; reserve your spot early because the buses fill up fast. The Discover Seoul is more expensive and infor-224 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 225 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

one-night, two-day trip. http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/SI/SI_EN_3_1_1_1. jsp?cid=1051901 The Sinbuk Hot Spring Resort is fed by springs from 600m below the earth and the naturally occurring sodium bicarbonate help create a soft and smooth texture and is said to have anti-aging as well as general skin care benefits. Alongside the hot spring baths and other water attractions, the saunas and walking trails attract a diverse variety of people who can enjoy the beautiful streams and dense forest that this resort has to offer. http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/SI/SI_EN_3_1_1_1.jsp?cid=1895711 

SEORAKSAN NATIONAL PARK : There are various places to hike in Korea, but one of the most renowned is Seoraksan National Park. Seoraksan means “Snow Big Mountain.” This mountain is always busy, particularly during the peak season during the fall when the leaves change. By 6:00 am the park is packed with thousands of Koreans ready for a day’s hike. There are restau-rants, temples, and statues, including a big Buddha statue. The park is crowded and if you are looking for peace and quiet you will not find it here. It cannot be denied, however, that Seoraksan is one of South Korea’s ‘Wonders’ because of the breathtaking scenery. Stretching over four cities and counties, the peaks and valleys, home to more 2,000 animal spe-cies and 1,400 rare plant species, have various streams that meet up in the Baekdamcheon valley, which is also the location of the Baekdamsa Temple. Seoraksan has been recognized since 1982 as a Biosphere Preservation District by UNESCO. There are no entrance fees and camping site fees are less than 2,000 won per person. The USO has some hiking tours available during the fall hiking season. Check their calendar for upcoming events and overnight tours to Seoraksan. For more information on the park, check out http://english.knps. or.kr/Knp/Seoraksan/Intro/Introduction.aspx. 

## CENTRAL LOCATIONS ICHEON/YEOJU CERAMIC KILNS : Icheon Village of Ceramics should defi-nitely be on the list of destinations for those interested in pottery. It is fa-mous for its Celadon manufacturing and there are numerous ceramic studios, ceramic shops and even a ceramic museum. Various experiences related to ceramics can be enjoyed at the Icheon Ceramics Festival held from the end of September to early October. There are also unusual ceramic sculptures on display that attract many visitors. Icheon Ceramics Festival provides a place for learning and experiencing the culture of ceramics through international exhibitions. The World Ceramic Exposition Foundation has a wonderful web-

GANGHWADO : Also known as Ganghwa Island, this 5th largest island in Korea is located approximately 50km to the west of Seoul, and less than 1 km off the coast of Incheon, in the West Sea and is rich in both history and natural beauty. Visitors can easily find Ganghwado local products such as Hwa-munseok (a mat woven with flower patterns), rice and ginseng at the town markets. Famous for its ‘stamina producing’ ginseng, Ganghwado is still a rural island that seems oddly distant from the bustle and craziness of Seoul, de-spite the fact that it is less than a two-hour bus ride away. Egrets stalk through verdant rice fields, gulls chase ferries and the pace of life is slow. Attractions include numerous small fortifications; the Ganghwa dolmens, which are one of Korea’s largest dolmens and a UNESCO World Heritage Site; Mt. Manisa, which is the site of the Chamseongdan Alter; and a 10km coastal bicycle track. http:// english.ganghwa.incheon.kr/ 

INCHEON : This bustling industrial port 36km west of Seoul is big enough to warrant its own subway line. The international airport sits on an offshore island, so be sure (if you’re heading to the airport) that you don’t go to Incheon proper. The city has a nice waterfront area with amusement rides, sushi shops, stores and ferries, as well as a very accessible Chinatown. Come here for a great day trip out of Seoul, sample some different foods, stroll along with the dating couples or tour groups in Wolmido waterfront or use Incheon as a step-ping stone to the more remote islands. The Memorial Hall for Incheon Landing Operation, a park commemorating the sight of MacArthur’s famous landing in 1950, is located in this busy port city. The hall was created by the Incheon citizens to honor those who sacrificed their lives to preserve democracy and freedom on the Peninsula. There is also a small museum that houses the city’s collection of archeological and historical materials. Take the train or travel during off hours or the normally one-hour trip can take two more hours. Plus don’t forget that the location on the sea makes this a great place to pick up an amazing seafood meal. 

POCHEON HERB ISLAND & SINBUK HOT SPRING : These two travel destina-tions near Camp Casey are eco-friendly tours enhanced by the aroma of herbs. Both sites are within a 10 minute bus trip from each other, making a combined trip convenient and worthwhile. The Pocheon Herb Island houses both outdoor and indoor gardens with over 180 different herbs, a bookstore that carries herb-related books and ac-cessories, a craft store selling herb craftworks, a bakery selling herb bread and cookies as well as a restaurant and coffee shop all within an area of 8.3 acres. There is also an aromatherapy facility, making it a great place for a relaxing 226 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 227 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

sorts of household furnishings and tools. In this historical and rural village at-mosphere, artisans wearing hanbok (traditional Korean clothing) create pots, make paper, and weave bamboo. Other workers tend to vegetable plots, pigs and chickens. Even most of the confections are handmade; look for the ‘ma-gician’ making dragon’s beard candy – it’s made from honey hand-pulled to widths of a human hair. http://www.koreanfolk.co.kr/folk/english/ Directions: Located about an hour south of Seoul, it is accessible by car or subway. Via subway, at Suwon Station (Line 1, exit 4) take the shuttle bus to Korean Folk Village. General Admission: Adult W15,000, Youth (ages 13-18) W12,000, Child (ages 4-12) W10,000; Full Admission: Adult W24,000, Youth (ages 13-18) W19,000, Child (ages 4-12) W17,000 Hours: 9 am to 5:30 pm (closing hours vary based upon season). In the warmer months (around March through November), a variety of special per-formances occur, including traditional musicians, dancers, acrobats and tight-rope walkers and a Korean wedding ceremony. These events happen twice daily and usually start around 11:00 am and 2 pm. 

## SOUTHEAST AND COASTAL LOCATIONS CHINHAE : Chinhae (also sometimes spelled “Jinhae”) is not only home to the Korean Navy, but is also the only U.S. Navy base in South Korea. Command Fleet Activities Chinhae comprises approximately 84 acres and is adjacent to the largest ROK Navy Base. Chinhae is also home to the ROK Naval Academy. Located on the southern coast, Chinhae is approximately a seven hour drive from Seoul or around four hours by the KTX Train. Try to stay in one of the bil-leting rooms if you visit, for more information Contact Command Fleet Activi-ties Chinhae at DSN: 723-7251 Chinhae is also quite well known for its Cherry Blossom Festival. The event is held annually and honors of Admiral Ye Sun Shin, a famous Korean naval hero who helped defeat the Japanese during the invasions of 1592-1598, with a military parade. The festival usually begins in late March or early April and runs for 10 days. During the 10 days, a profusion of cherry blossoms is in full bloom on the mountains, along the highways and all around town. It is one of the largest cherry blossom festival in the world, with approximately 2,000,000 visitors annually. During this time, food vendors and stands offering Korean goods line the streets of Chinhae, along with street performers, carnival stalls and street lighting. Just south of Chinhae lies Korea’s second largest island, Geojedo, and is site that gives information on various museums including the Icheon Ceramic Festival. For more information, visit http://www.kocef.org/eng/. The Yeoju Ceramic Art Complex is an area of about 600 ceremic shops east of Icheon and is also home to many pottery factories. There are excellent shops where you can find perfect pieces that will be amazing artistic additions to your home as well as defected pieces which, although you would never be able to find the inconsistency in the ceramic or the pattern, are sold at a small fraction of the cost of other pieces. Additionally, in Yeoju, you can find many cultural relics including the Silleuksa Temple Resort, the royal tomb of Yeong-neung, and the ruins of Godalsa Temple. The USO as well as the American Forces’ Spouses’ Club offer tours throughout the year. 

INDEPENDENCE HALL OF KOREA : Located just south of Osan, the Inde-pendent Hall of Korea commemorates the people who struggled for freedom against foreign invasions throughout Korea’s long history. There are seven large exhibit halls, all of which are easy to navigate and feature many descrip-tions in English. http://www.i815.or.kr/html/en/ Directions: If driving, it’s an easy afternoon trip located off the Kyongbu Expressway. Otherwise, from Cheonan Intercity Bus Terminal, take an intercity bus bound for Jincheon. Get off at The Independence Hall of Korea. Admission: Free. Hours: Mar-Oct 9:30 am to 6 pm, Nov-Feb 9:30 am to 5 pm. Closed Monday. 

GYEONGJU : Known as “the museum without walls,” Gyeongju was once the capital of the Shilla Dynasty and it remained so for nearly 1000 years. In the 7th century under King Munmu, Shilla conquered the neighboring kingdoms of Goguryeo, Baekje and Gyeongju becoming the capital of the whole peninsula. Gyeongju holds more tombs, temples, rock carvings, pagodas, Buddhist statu-aries palace ruins, pleasure gardens and castles than any other place in South Korea. Tumuli Park is the most conspicuous and accessible of the sights and even if entering the Heavenly Horse Tomb isn’t your cup of tea, a picnic and stroll by the pond would be a beautiful way to end the day. One cannot truly know Gyeongju’s charms without visiting its outlying districts. Gyeongju covers a vast 1323 sq km and would require several days to take it all in. There is also a great amusement park here called Gyeongju World. http://www.gyeongju. go.kr/english 

KOREAN FOLK VILLAGE : This beautiful folk village has a large collection of thatched and tiled traditional houses that take at least half a day to look around. Set around a quiet river are a temple, a market, a magistrate’s house with examples of punishments, storehouses, a bullock pulling a cart and all 228 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 229 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

Visit http://eng.jindo.go.kr/sub.php?pid=EN03020301 more for information. This is by no means a comprehensive list of things to do on Jeju-do but it does offer some starting points. For additional information, consult the Yong-san Library or consider traveling with an organized group. One of the primary sources for travel information within Korea is the USO, which offers a wide variety of trips in Seoul and throughout the country. Schedules are available from the Moyer Community Activities Center and Camp Kim USO. 

## PUBLICATIONS OFFERING SEOUL/KOREA TRAVEL ADVICE 

• The Seoul Selection is a weekly newsletter that has all of the current events happening in Seoul. Access it through their website at http://magazine. seoulselection.com • The Korea Herald has a travel section in its weekend issue featuring a thorough article and map of a different place each week. The Yongsan Library has back issues if you want to review them. www.koreaherald.com • Arirang Magazine, published by the American Women’s Club (AWC), has many good travel articles. In addition, AWC sponsors trips to places off the beaten track. Although these are only open to members, membership fee is W50,000 or W25,000 for military members. http://awckorea.com • Discovery is a magazine published by the Seoul International Women’s Association (SIWA) offering information on local activities. SIWA offers trips and social events to its members. www.siwapage.com • Korean Tourism Organization (KTO) is also an excellent source of infor-mation and assistance. Its main office is in downtown Seoul, Tel: 02-7299-497~499. A visit to the KTO is time well spent; you will come away with infor-mation on festivals, museums, dining, and just about anything else you may want to know about Korea. Visit http://english.visitkorea.or.kr/enu/index.kto for more information. Many other organizations in Seoul offer excellent tours. Check out the Eng-lish language newspapers in the Local Events column for details. 

Other helpful tourism websites: 

www.korea4expats.com Seoul For Expats www.lifeinkorea.com Life in Korea http://english.knps.or.kr Korean National Parks Authority http://english.seoul.go.kr Official Website for the City of Seoul www.korea.net Korean Culture and Information Service just a 90-minute ferry ride away. The island was once a POW camp during the Korean War and has subsequently become home to a thriving fishing and ship-building industry, along with first-class beaches and resorts. 

HONGDO ISLAND : Hongdo Island is located 115 km southwest of Mokpo Harbor and is composed of about 20 islands. The name Hongdo means “Red Island,” a name derived from the unusual reddish brown color that glows all around when the sun sets over the island. Because the entire island of Hon-gdo has been declared a Natural Monument, people are not allowed to enter areas other than the villages and designated tourist areas. You cannot remove anything from the island. Visitors that break the rules will be fined. Don’t miss the two-hour boat ride to see the rock formations surrounding the island. Al-though the tour is in Korean, the views and pictures speak for themselves. Directions: Take the train to Mokpo which is in southwestern Korea. From there, take the ferry to Hongdo Island. The only accommodations available are “yogwans,” but these are clean and pleasant for a night stay in good weather. 

JEJU ISLAND (JEJU-DO) : The largest of Korea’s islands, this popular vacation destination has mild weather year round. This volcanic island boasts sandy beaches, hiking trails and several theme parks and a very large, nice aquarium. Natural attractions include the Samsonghyol Caves, Hallasan National Park, several waterfalls and the volcanic scenery of Seongsan Ilchulbong Park (also known as “Sunrise Peak). Other things to do on the island include golf, horse-back riding, windsurfing, museums (check out the Trick Art Museum, the Seog-wipo Citrus Museum or many others), local restaurants (many of which feature “Jeju black pork” and fresh seafood caught nearby), nightlife, and shopping districts. Of course, don’t forget to pick up a few Hallabong oranges for snack-ing – Jeju Island is known for this large, deliciously sweet citrus fruit that is a cross between an orange and a tangerine. The flights to Jeju Island occur frequently and are quite short, making this island ideal for a quick getaway. View http://english.jeju.go.kr for more information and see a travel agent or the USO for booking assistance. 

Ullimsanbang House : This beautiful traditional Korean house is located at the base of Mt. Cheomchalsan and close to Ssangyesa Temple and features a vast area of landscape with flowers and trees. This house was once where the famous artist Heo Yu called home and is currently listed as local monu-ment #51. 

Admission: Adults W2,000; Youth (ages 13-18); W1,000; and Children (ages 7-12) W800 Hours: Tuesday to Sunday 9:00 am-6:00 pm, closed Mondays. 230 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 231 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

have plenty of time to make sure all details are in order and to ensure that you are getting the best deal possible. • Research, research, research. Once you have selected a destination, find out everything you can about which airlines are available, hotel promotions, and travel agents. You will find you can save hundreds of dollars by shopping 

around. 

• Talk with those who have traveled during their tours in Korea. Their expe-riences can often save you a lot of time, trouble, and money. • Don’t allow your travel agent/group tour promoter to wait until the last minute to provide you with your tickets, accommodations confirmation, etc. It’s not easy to get your military leave orders changed if a travel agent lets you down at the last minute. • Check with the airline yourself to view current fares and always ask about discount rates. Check with the international reservations center of the local hotels that give military discounts (Hilton, Hyatt, Sheraton, Ramada, and Inter-continental). You will often find that you can put your own package together for less than what some of the tour operators quote. • If it’s offered, always buy baggage insurance when traveling in Asia. If your luggage does get lost, you can buy enough personal items to hold you over until it finally shows up. Never check valuables in your luggage; always hand carry them. • Learn as much as possible about your intended destination and don’t pay for a lot of “optional” tours to places you don’t really want to see. Be aware of the fact that most of the airports in Asia have an airport tax, some of which have to be paid in the local currency. Always know what this is and put money aside to pay it. • Study the international currency rates published in the local papers be-fore going on your trip so that you will know what amount of local currency you can expect for your dollars/won. Try not to change too much money in airports or hotels because they typically have the worst rates around. • If you’re going on your own without the assistance of an English-speaking tour guide, definitely consider buying an English-Whatever-language-you-need dictionary or downloading one to your phone. Even if you can’t speak the language, being able to point at the appropriate words often helps. • Particularly in light of the current world situation, try to blend into a crowd and not be offensive in your manner or dress. Many Westerners un-intentionally offend people of Asian cultures by wearing “improper” clothing into temples and shrines. Know in advance what the customs are and dress 

# TRAVEL OUTSIDE OF KOREA 

After the cultural experiences and sites to enjoy in Korea, the biggest ad-venture everyone should take advantage of is travel to other countries. Here are a few tips to make the most of your travel. 1. English as an official language. Traveling to countries where English is prevalent allowed you to travel on your own with ease. From booking arrange-ments to exploring, countries where English is spoken are easier for your first travel experiences because you don’t have to have a tour guide or travel agent if you don’t want, allowing you to save money and spend your time doing the things you want for as long as you want. 2. Carry local currency and monitor your bank account. Many countries impose fees upon arrival that must be paid in local currencies. Additionally, transportation from the airport to your hotel, if not prepaid, will have to be paid. Not everywhere accepts credit cards so keeping local currency is helpful. ATM machines will allow you to pull money from your U.S. bank account. 3. Travel to more than one country per trip. This can improve the adventure while minimizing costs. 4. Roll with It! Whatever happens, remember to laugh and add it to the list of memories that you made with your family! 

## GENERAL TRAVEL TIPS 

Check that the area is not restricted by USFK due to terrorism, disease, etc. Below are some websites and general information to help you with your travel plans: • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory, www.cdc.gov • World Health Organization (WHO) Advisory, www.who.int/en • United States State Department Public Announcement, http://travel. state.gov/content/travel/english.html • Check with your travel agent on the visa/passport requirements for the country you are visiting; they vary from country to country. Leave ample time for processing these documents. • Always know the immunization requirements of the country/countries you’re going to visit. • Plan ahead. Dealing with travel agents or airlines in Korea is somewhat different than the experiences you may have had elsewhere, so you need to 232 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 233 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

have liver disease or compromised immune systems. • Drink only bottled or boiled water, or carbonated drinks in cans or bottles. Avoid tap water, fountain drinks, and ice cubes. Check to make sure that bot-tles for water are not being reused. Bottle caps should be new and unopened. • Motor vehicle crashes are a leading cause of injury to travelers, so walk and drive defensively. Avoid travel at night if possible and always use seat belts. • Protect yourself from insects by remaining in well-screened areas, using repellents (applied sparingly at four-hour intervals), and wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants. • Monkeys, dogs, cats, chicken, and ducks can be a source of serious dis-eases such as rabies, plague, and bird flu, so avoid contact with animals when-ever possible. • To prevent fungal and parasitic infections, keep feet clean and dry. Never go barefoot. 

Recommended Supplies and Equipment 

Make sure you pack: • A long-sleeved shirt and long pants to wear outside, whenever possible, to help prevent sunburn and illnesses carried by insects. • Insect repellent containing DEET (diethylmethyltoluamide), in 22% to 35% strength for adults and 6% to 10% for children, as well as a bed net im-pregnated with the insecticide permethrin. (Bed nets can be purchased in camping or military supply stores.) • Over-the-counter anti-diarrhea medicine to take if necessary, and iodine tablets and portable water filters to purify water if bottled water is not avail-able. • Prescription medications: make sure you have enough to last during your trip, as well as a copy of the prescription(s). 

## EMERGENCY OR URGENT HEALTH CAR WHILE TRAVELING 

TRICARE has contracted and partnered with International SOS (ISOS), a worldwide company, to establish a network of quality healthcare providers and hospitals throughout the Western Pacific to assist with urgent and emer-gency medical and dental care for Active Duty Service Members (ADSMs). By using the ISOS network, ADSMs will not incur out-of-pocket expenses and there will be no claims to file. It is a cashless and claimless service. This service is available to ADSMs who are TDY, deployed or simply on leave in Pacific areas where a United States Military Treatment Facility is unavailable. Active Duty family members enrolled in TRICARE Prime may use ISOS for accordingly. You will find that people are much nicer to you when you respect their culture and make an attempt, however small, to learn a few words of their language. • Remember that many things are different in Asia (voltage for appliances, driving on a different side of the road, etc.) and you need to prepare yourself and your children for these differences. The last thing you want is for your chil-dren to be offensive by telling people, even the waiter, that things are weird or gross. Living in Korea and having many of the conveniences of home can lull you into a false sense of security. • Travel light because you undoubtedly will find many treasures to pur-chase during your journey. Many veteran travelers travel with an empty light-weight bag folded into their luggage just so they’ll be able to get their pur-chases home safely. • Know the customs laws of each country you plan to travel in and the Korean laws as well. You can check with the embassy of your destination for current information on their laws and with the Customs Office on Yongsan for the Korean rules. • If you are flying Space A, always be prepared to pay for a commercial ticket back to Korea if the Space A flights suddenly are not available. Also, be prepared to pay for lodging if you are forced to stay in an area longer than an-ticipated. Refer to Transportation within the alphabetized section of this book for more information about Space A travel. 

## TRAVEL MEDICINE CLINIC 

The clinic staff provides a personal medical consultation to ensure an en-joyable and safe vacation for you. Call 737-1750 to schedule an appointment. Please bring shot records for each person traveling. It is best to schedule ap-pointments 4-6 weeks before traveling to allow adequate time for any neces-sary vaccinations to take effect. The Travel Medicine Clinic is located in building 5447 (also the Occupational Health Clinic), near Gate 6 (Commissary Gate). 

Healthy Travel Tips 

No matter where your travels may take you, be sure to observe the following: • Wash your hands often with soap and water. • Eat only thoroughly cooked food or fruits and vegetables you have peeled yourself. Remember: boil it, cook it, peel it, or forget it. Don’t eat food pur-chased from street vendors. • Never eat undercooked ground beef and poultry, raw eggs, or unpas-teurized dairy products. Raw shellfish is particularly dangerous to persons who 234 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 235 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

• Otherwise, expect to pay the host nation provider at the time of service. Then file a claim with TRICARE Service Center upon return from travel. For more information, please stop by the TRICARE Service Center located inside the Brian Allgood Army Community Hospital, Building 7005, Room 1150 or call 737-1433. Hours are 7:30 am to 4 pm Monday-Wednesday and Friday, 1 pm to 4 pm Thursday. 

# WHERE TO GO 

The following is a list of possible places to explore. Due to changing world conditions, always check with the embassy, USFK and www.asktheconsul.org to see if travel to your country of choice is recommended. Also, note that an International Driving Permit (IDP) may be required to operate a vehicle in your chosen destination and is only valid when used in conjunction with a valid United States driver’s license. IDPs may be obtained at AAA offices in the Unit-ed States or by mail via AAA (www.aaa.com/vacation/idpf.html) or through the National Automobile Club (www.thenac.com/idp_faqs.htm). 

## AUSTRALIA 

The “land down under” is beginning to enjoy a real surge in popularity from travelers from Korea. There are several package tours on the market. You can easily obtain your visa from the Australian Embassy in the Kyobo Build-ing downtown near the American Embassy or your can obtain a visa online through the Australian Government’s Department of Immigration and Citizen-ship Electronic Travel Authority website at https://www.eta.immi.gov.au/ETA/ etas.jsp. Qantas, Korean Air, and Asiana have direct flights to Sydney and many other cities. Sydney points of interest: Sydney Opera House; Harrys Cafe On Wheels, famous for its meat pies and hot dogs; the Taronga Zoo which you get to by taking a ferry ride; a cable car ride up a hill to one of the most spectacular views of Sydney Harbor; the Blue Mountains or just some relaxed shopping in the restored Victorian buildings or antique arcades that have become popular and unique shopping areas. Check out the Radisson Hotel Sydney; not only is it centrally located but also offers military rates, free hors d’oeuvres and best of all, the Subway runs under the hotel. A subway pass is the way to go if you’d rather go it alone. A Circle pass is good for unlimited one day travel with stops at most of the famous Sydney sights. The Radisson Hotel is only a five minute walk from the Australian Naval Base, which you can enter as long as you have emergency medical care only. ISOS can assist you in obtaining urgent medical or dental care, but you will be required to pay for the services up-front and file a claim through the region in which you’re enrolled for reimbursement. TRICARE Standard Active Duty family members as well as retirees and their family members are not eligible for this emergency travel benefit. To utilize these services in an emergency, members should call their near-est ISOS assistance center. It’s a good idea to visit the Tricare/ISOS website at http://www.tricare-overseas.com/ContactUs/default.htm online before you travel and record the phone number for the ISOS assistance center in the country in which you’ll be traveling. Collect calls are accepted. Note that when calling collect, it may be necessary to request an international operator. For civilians and family members not eligible for ISOS, it is a good idea to purchase international or travel medical insurance before going abroad. If you already have international insurance, check with your current insurance pro-vider before you travel to confirm coverage and procedures in case of emer-gency. 

## EMERGENCY CARE DEFINITION 

Care provided for sudden and unexpected onset of a medical or psychiatric condition or the acute exacerbation of a chronic condition that is threatening to life, limb or sight and requires immediate medical treatment. If you need emergency care as defined above: • Seek care from the nearest medical facility. • Dial the local number for ambulance service as provided by the American Embassy, military unit, or other source. • Have a local address and phone number available. Do not hang up the phone until directed to do so by the host nation operator. • When emergency treatment or hospitalization in a local civilian hospital is received, contact International SOS as soon as possible. 

## URGENT CARE DEFINITION 

Treatment for a medical or psychological condition that would cause undue discomfort to the patient or that may worsen if not treated within 24 hours. If you need urgent care in Pacific locations, International SOS can provide several valuable services. By calling them before receiving care, you can: • Find a qualified health care provider. • Avoid paying up front costs. • Avoid filing claims. 236 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 237 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

has to offer. Some of the more popular destinations include Beijing, Guang-zhou, Shanghai, Guilin, Xian and Hangzhou. The Dragon Hill Lodge, Moyer Rec, the USO and other Travel Services on or off post offer individual or group tours to many destinations in China for vary-ing lengths of time and prices. These trips are excellent value for the money with the USO and travel services arranging all visas, tours of your choice, and excellent four or five star hotel accommodations. A flight from Incheon Airport to Beijing is about two hours. Beijing has an endless list of places of interest, in-cluding the Great Wall, the Temple of Heaven, the Forbidden City, Tiananmen Square, Olympic Village and Water Cube, pearl and jade markets, acrobatic shows and of course, the pandas. Xian offers the Terra-cotta Army, Big Goose Pagoda, Xian Great Mosque, and Huaqing Hot Springs. Shanghai’s top attrac-tions include Shanghai Jade Buddga Temple, the Yuyuan Garden, and Xin Tian Di. Guilin is not to be missed with the Li River, Reed Flute Cave, Folded Brocade Hill and Fengyu Cave in Lipu County. 

## GUAM/SAIPAN 

If you’re looking for a tropical getaway, check out the islands of Guam or Saipan. Located off the coast of Japan in the Mariana Islands, Guam is a four and a half hour flight from Incheon International Airport and the short hop to Saipan is less than an hour from Guam. In addition to white sandy beaches and breathtaking views, Guam, a U.S. territory, is home to two military bases where you can pick up discount tickets for local activities. There are three shopping malls and a Hard Rock Cafe. For a more tranquil setting consider Saipan. This U.S. Commonwealth is smaller and does not have the hustle and bustle of Guam. Both Guam and Saipan have a variety of luxury hotels and recreational activities. A family-friendly resort found on both islands is the Pacific Islands Club (PIC), www.pacificislandsclub.com. It is an all-inclusive resort/water park, with lots for children to do! You can book a trip online or go through one of the on-post travel agencies. 

## HONG KONG 

Hong Kong is an amazing city with skyscrapers jutting out of the surrounding mountains and the bustling harbor down below. It’s truly a shopper’s paradise since imported goods enter Hong Kong duty free. Shop carefully and compare prices and qual-ity. Always deal with reputable dealers. Look for the Hong Kong Tourism Board symbol, as it normally indicates an established merchant with 

a military ID, and then you can walk on base straight down to the harbor. If you are traveling on a loose itinerary, try visiting a travel agency while in Sydney and check into their tours of the Gold Coast. They offer some won-derful specials for the Great Barrier Reef area. A tour might include travel to Cairns, a bus to Port Douglas and trekking through an exotic rain forest. You can board a train for an incredible single track train ride around the mountains to the town of Kuranda where there is a beautifully restored railway station, souvenir stands and for the brave at heart: bungee jumping. A trip to the Gold Coast would not be complete without a cruise out to the Great Barrier Reef where there is scuba diving, snorkeling, mini-submarine rides, helicopter rides and an underwater observatory. If you want to be pampered, try the exclusive resort on Haymen Island. Some other treats to try during your Australian visit are the delicious sponge cakes with strawberries and cream; Vegemite (a dark brown food paste made from brewers’ yeast extract with various vegetable and space additives, that Australian kids eat Vegemite like American kids eat Peanut Butter); and their Yummy Chocolate and “sweets.” If this sounds too good to be true, expe-rience it all for yourself. Call the Australian Embassy at 02-2003-01111 or visit one of the travel services on post to book a trip. 

## CAMBODIA 

Siem Reap and the Temples of Angkor Wat are fast becoming major desti-nations. Korean Air has a direct flight into Siem Reap, which makes this exotic locale much easier to reach! Although the city is modernizing at a fast pace, this still may not be a trip for children. Healthcare is not easily accessible and there is a lot of walking through old stone ruins. The temples date back to 800 A.D. and are mainly of Hindu origin with Buddhism influence in the later temples. Monks are walking around, incense is burning, people are praying, and children are selling native crafts. The land and culture surrounding the Angkor Wat Complex is equally as fascinating with rice paddies everywhere; traditional thatched roof housing (charming in a strange way, although many still have no electricity); people napping in hammocks on the roadside; skinny livestock, such as water buffalo, scattered around; and beautiful lotus ponds. 

## CHINA 

Americans and other foreign visitors are touring China in increasing num-bers to visit many of the wonderful ancient and historic sites this vast country 238 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 239 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

light. Vibrant colors abound in the garments worn by locals and the cooking spices mounded in bins in the markets. Visitors and locals alike are lured by the lively energy of the crowded bazaars, as your senses are indulged with sights, sounds, and scents that fill the air. This fascinating country is awe-inspiring, though first-time visitors may be surprised in other ways, as well. Poverty re-mains a harsh reality for many of India’s residents, and witnessing this can be jarring. Yet, regardless of what you experience during your travels around India, your perspective about the world will be forever changed. For more in-formation about India, visit http://www.indembassy.or.kr. 

## JAPAN 

Traveling to Japan from Korea is relatively inexpensive and easy if you plan your trip carefully. There are several ways of going to Japan: commercial air-lines, AMC flights from Osan and by ferry from Busan. Try to use the United States military facilities in Japan (particularly the New Sanno in Tokyo) as much as possible because Japan is the most expensive country in the world. The New Sanno Hotel has an extremely high occupancy rate, so make your reservations at least six months in advance by calling DSN: 229-7121/Internationally 011-81-33-440-7871 ext. 7121 or visiting www.thenewsanno.com. There is one other low cost military lodging option near the New Sanno– Hardy Barracks in Roppongi. The Hardy Barracks is a no-frills option to the New Sanno, but still close enough to take advantage of all the New Sanno has to offer. Con-tact Hardy Barracks at DSN 229-3270/Internationally 011-81-36-385-3270 or http://www.armymwrjapan.com/hardy. If you are using commercial transportation while in Japan, consider buying a Japan Rail Pass while you are still in Seoul; they aren’t available inside Japan. These passes allow unlimited travel on trains throughout the country and are a real bargain. You can purchase them from Global Travel near City Hall or other agencies in Seoul. There is so much to see and do in Japan that you will want maximum flexibility in getting around. It is also advisable to buy a tourist sub-way pass (you can get them at the New Sanno) for easy movement in Tokyo. Shopping in Japan can be a VERY expensive experience if you shop on the Japanese economy. Many Americans have found they get better value by shopping in the arcade at the New Sanno or at the bases located throughout Japan. The Japanese Embassy can be reached at 02-733-5626. 

TOKYO 

One of the largest cities in the world, Tokyo is the center for political, eco-nomic, and cultural activities in Japan. Attractions in Tokyo include: • Asakusa is a must see for anyone travelling to Tokyo. It provides a glimpse a good reputation. The Fleet Arcade shopping area is at Fenwick Pier, 1 Lung King St. Wan Chai. It is located on the Hong Kong island side of the city and can be easily reached from the Admiralty Subway Stop. The United States Navy Fleet Post Office (FPO) is located on the second floor of the Fleet Arcade. The FPO is a full-service United States Post Office. A commercial packaging facility is located next to the FPO; it makes mailing home your purchases very convenient! The hours of operation are Monday-Friday 10 am to 4 pm and 10 am to 6 pm when United States ships are in port. The FPO is closed on holidays and weekends. To use FPO services, identification is required. Payment is accepted in United States dollars or by personal check; no credit cards. Other points of interest include Bird Street, where literally thousands of birds are available for purchase; the Star Ferry, for a leisurely ride across the harbor; the tram up Victoria Peak, where you get a spectacular view of Hong Kong; Ocean Park, the largest oceanarium in the world; and a trip to Aberdeen fishing village. If time isn’t an issue, stroll through the Stanley Market while visiting the Hong Kong side of the island or a trip through the jade market in Kowloon. Upon arrival at the Hong Kong airport, pick up one of the free tourist travel kits available in the baggage claim area or download the free app offered by the Hong Kong Tourism Board. The kit contains an excellent map and a good little guide book. The Hong Kong subway can get you just about anywhere you want to go. Buy a tourist pass; it’s cheaper and you won’t have to wait in the long lines to pay for a ticket each time. If you are looking for a vacation to remind you of the United States. Check out Disneyland Hong Kong is a great option. With the least expensive prices of the Disney resorts in Asia, it is an affordable spot to treat your kids or treat yourself like a kid. 

## INDIA 

Stretching across the vast country of India is a culture unlike any other. Comprised of many languages, religions, traditions and beliefs, India is rich in diversity. These differences are also reflected in the country’s grand architec-ture. From the Taj Mahal and the Mahabodhi Temple to the Mysore Palace, the ancient Ajanta Caves and every historical monument and shrine in between, India exudes an air of artistic creativity and mystery. Simple beauty exists in the bamboo forests of Kanha National Park; a glimpse of a tiger while on sa-fari; renowned tea gardens boasting Darjeeling, Assam and other teas; and the silhouettes of men atop camels crossing a desert landscape in the moon-240 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 241 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

flections of Mt. Fuji; Hakone Shrine, said to have been founded in 757 A.D.; Owakudani and Kowakidani Valleys, where sulfurous fumes rise from crevices on the mountain side; and Mt. Koma, which commands a lovely view of sur-rounding scenery. 

Kyoto : This ancient city, which was deliberately spared damage during World War II because of its cultural significance, is like a huge museum. There are too many attractions to detail here, but some of the most notable are: • Nijo Castle, built in 1603 by Leyasu, the first Shogun, as his Kyoto resi-dence. Surrounded by double moats, the castle boasts numerous beautiful structures and gardens. Ninomaru Palace represents typical early 17th cen-tury Japanese architecture. An interesting feature of the palace is a wooden corridor called the “nightingale floor,” designed to warn off possible intruders, it squeaks whenever anyone walks on it. • Kiyomizu Temple, a 355-year-old wooden temple, is set in a traditional landscape and is constructed halfway up the side of a beautiful hill. • Ginkatu-ji, the silver pavilion temple, was built by Ashikaga Yoshimasa in 1482 as a retirement home. It has beautiful gardens and smaller surrounding temples. • Kinkakuji, known as the Temple of the Golden Pavilion, is one of the most famous sites in Kyoto and probably one of the most photogenic spots in all of Japan. Allow several days for Kyoto if you enjoy history! 

Nara The national capital of Japan during the 8th century, Nara is noted as the birthplace of Japanese art and literature. It is easily accessible by train from Kyoto and it is possible to stay in one hotel (possibly in Osaka, which is in the middle) and see both areas if you have a rail pass. Like Kyoto, Nara was spared as much destruction as possible in World War II because of its cultural heritage. Some of the most important attractions are: • Akishino-dera, a temple founded in 780 A.D. by Emperor Konin Kammu, is considered a national treasure and homes many important pieces of Buddhist art from the Kamakura and Heian periods. • Hokki-ji, among the many attractions found here, there is a three-story pagoda dating from 685 and is a fine example of 7th century Japanese archi-tecture. • Horyu-ji, the oldest and largest existing temple in Japan, was founded in 607 A.D. This temple is home to the world’s oldest surviving wooden struc-tures, allowing visitors to catch a glimpse of Japan as it existed long ago. 

OKINAWA : One of the four Ryukyu Islands, Okinawa is an easy destination for anyone wanting to use Space-A from Osan to Kadena. Call the Osan AMC into old Tokyo. Once you walk through the beautiful red Torii gate, Asakusa market stalls provide reasonably priced souvenirs and the Asakusa Jinja shrine has a nice pagoda. Great photo opportunities await. • The Marunouchi section, the hub of Tokyo’s commercial activities, is near Tokyo Station where you can take the bullet train to Kyoto and is where you will find the Imperial Palace. • The Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building Observatory in Shinjuku could be Tokyo’s best kept secret in Tokyo. It offers free views of the city from 202 meters above the ground. • Ginza and Nihonbashi are two of the busiest and most fashionable areas boasting many of the top ranking stores, restaurants, and theaters. On the weekend, the main street of Ginza is pedestrian only. • The Meiji Shrine with the Memorial Picture Gallery and the Empress’s tea house were built in honor of Emperor Meiji and his wife, Empress Shoken, is on the site of an old iris garden that the two were known to visit. Currently sitting on about 175 acres, the Shrine grounds include a treasure museum, Memorial Hall, and the National Stadium. • The Tokyo Skytree Tower, which opened in 2012, is a broadcasting, res-taurant, and observation tower in Sumida and offers a fantastic view. It is cur-rently the world’s tallest tower according to the Guinness Book of World Re-cords. • Ueno Park, in Taito, is another must see, filled with beautiful scenery, museums, and a zoo. • Tokyo National Museum, Japan’s oldest national museum established in 1872, boasts an extensive art collection and some of the oldest archaeological relics in the world. • Disneyland and Disney Sea, on the shores of Tokyo Bay, seven miles from the center of Tokyo, the $660 million entertainment complex of Disneyland dominates the landscape. Tokyo’s Disneyland is the largest of the Disney com-plexes covering 110 acres. Disney Sea is unique to Japan and is based on the seven seas and has a nautical exploration theme. 

OUT-OF-TOKYO EXCURSIONS 

Kamakura: Rich in history as being Japan’s first political center, this ancient capital city is also noted for its Daibutsu or Great Buddha, which stands 42.2 feet tall. Easily accesible by train on the Yokosuka Line of East JR (Japan Railway Co.) from Tokyo Central Station. 

Hakone : Famous for its hot springs, view of Mt. Fuji and many historic spots, Hakone boasts numerous museums, events, and festivals. Popular sight-seeing destinations include Lake Ashi (Lake Hakone), noted for its splendid re-242 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 243 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

shop keepers. Kuala Lumpur, the capital, contains many interesting attractions, including the Muzium Negara, the national museum which provides a fascinating insight into the culture and history of Malaysia. There are also beautiful, clean beach-es throughout the country and there are now special package tours for golfers interested in playing on the lush Malaysian courses. Eating and shopping are inexpensive with the best buy possibly being the beautiful Selangor pewter, produced just outside Kuala Lumpur. http://www.tourism.gov.my/en/us Johor Bahru, located across the Johor Strait from Singapore, is also anoth-er rapidly growing tourist location. Legoland Malaysia; Danga Bay, a tourist area with amazing seafood, a petting zoo, and carnival style rides; Hello Kitty Land; and the Arulmigu Sri Rajakaliamman Glass Temple, the nation’s first glass temple are just of the few of the things that this city has to offer in addition to being a bargain lover’s dreams. From shoes and purses to electronics and toys, the shocking difference between prices in Singapore and Malaysia will put this on your souvenir shopping agenda no matter where you are staying. You should consider this as an option if you want to see Singapore as hotels in this hidden treasure are less than half of the cost of hotels in Singapore. Taxis and public transport travel between Johor Bahru and Singapore daily but due to the more than 100,000 Malaysians that use the only bridge into Singapore daily you can save a lot of time by using the public transport system. If you are traveling with small children you are able to go to the front of the bus lines, but even without this advantage the trip takes less than 45 minutes and beats the traffic on the bridge by an hour or more during heavy traffic times. 

## NEPAL/TIBET 

These ancient countries in North-central Asia are still considered to be “ex-otic” destinations and are visited by few of the personnel stationed in Korea. Those who have gone come back with varying reports. Some cite the primitive living and traveling conditions while others talk about the fascinating cultures. Neither country has an embassy in Seoul, so you will have to do your own research online, at the Yongsan library, or find a good travel agent. Make sure any plans or itineraries are confirmed in writing before departure unless you are an Indiana Jones type of adventurer. 

## NEW ZEALAND 

This wonderfully scenic country is very affordable now that you live in Ko-rea. Make sure your tour incorporates both the North and South Islands since terminal for information. You will find the AMC terminal personnel much more helpful if you call at a time when they are not processing a flight. Ask when you call if this is the case and if so, when could you call back. Also the Osan Pas-senger Terminal Facebook page offers an abundance of information including flight schedules and updates. The climate of Okinawa is subtropical and an interesting change from Seoul. Shopping for local crafts and fine china is excellent. Be aware that Japa-nese taxis are expensive. Use base transportation whenever possible to get close to your destination and then shop or sight-see until you have too many packages to carry around. The most logical and inexpensive place to stay is Kadena Airbase, which has 24-hour billeting. Call DSN 632-1100/Internationally 011-81-98-962-1000 to reach the reservation desk. Another option is Camp Foster Westpac Lodge can be reached at DSN 645-2455/Internationally 011-81-6117-45-2455. For some family fun time try the Torii Beach Cabins at DSN 644-4659/Interna-tionally 011-81-611-744-4659. A secret of Okinawa is Okuma Resort located 50 miles North of Kadena Airbase. The DSN number for Okuma is 632-3102/ Internationally 011-82-98-962-3102 between 8:00 am-5:00 pm. There is also occasionally Navy BOQ space available; you can check with the Navy Billeting office in Building 4198 before 4 pm. 

## MACAU 

This tiny country on the tip of China is often a destination for tourists while they are in Hong Kong. Macau is easily accessible from Hong Kong by ferry or hydrofoil. The Portuguese heritage of Macau gives it its own special flavor. Go to Macau, if for nothing else, to eat the uniquely flavored food and drink the good, inexpensive wines. Gambling is also a big attraction here and huge casinos line the shore. Some of these casinos boast fabulous restaurants. Excellent, inexpensive places to eat are also easily found. For additional information, visit the Macau Govern-ment Tourist Office website: http://en.macautourism.gov.mo/index.php. 

## MALAYSIA 

Malaysian Airlines, working in conjunction with the country’s massive “Vis-it Malaysia” campaign, have made this country an inexpensive and marvelous place to visit. The Malaysians are a truly friendly people, anxious to please and eager to visit with foreigners. English is the dominant language here making it generally easy to communicate with everyone from the cab drivers to the 244 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 245 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

1865, and the Merlion, one of the most recognized landmarks has become known as the symbol of Singapore. • Singapore Botanic Gardens, Singapore’s first UNESCO World Heritage Site Nomination, is truly beautiful place. Filled with thousands of rare tropical plants and a separate orchid garden that is spectacular, it also stands to note that it is the only botanic garden in the world that is open 5 a.m. to midnight every day of the year and does not charge any entrance fees for the main gar-den. A small fee for the National Orchid Garden is worth it for the flower lover or photographer as these beauties, including 400 species and more than 2,000 hybrids, are truly magnificent. • Sentosa Island is worth spending the day visiting its many attractions. From a natural history museum and an aquarium to Universal Studios and Sky-line Luge Sentosa, this island whose name means “peace and tranquility” has more than just that to offer. Resorts here offer packages that include tickets to some of the most popular of these attractions. • Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines also offer very affordable cruise options, embarking from Singapore for many travel destinations throughout Asia if you want to use Singapore as your first stop in an adventure of a lifetime. 

## TAIPEI, TAIWAN 

One of the closest destinations from Korea, many people choose to tour Taiwan. Taipei is Taiwan’s largest city and also its capital. Costs have increased dramatically in recent years, but you can still get a fairly good tour package from Seoul. With recent politics concerning Taiwan’s desire to become inde-pendent of China and China’s reluctance to let go, you really need to check before booking a trip. If you are able to go, some of the things to see include the National Palace Museum; Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall; Taipei 101, this marvel ranked as the world’s tallest building (from its opening in 2004 until 2010); Wulai, a moun-tain village famous for the “commercialized” aboriginal village, waterfall, and hot springs; and Taroka Gorge. Although new department stores are popping up all the time, Taipei’s best shopping areas are still the small stores, bazaars, arcades and curio markets. Popular items from Taiwan are painting reproductions, pottery with its tradi-tional-styled design, other ceramic wares, furniture, jewelry made of coral and other semi-precious stones, marble products from the quarries in Hualien, and products made of Taiwan jade. Remember that the quality of this jade does not equal that of genuine antique jade. Also, consider dusty temple carvings, they are both “must see” destinations. The North Island offers world-class din-ing in Auckland, hot water beaches along the Pacific Coast Highway, and mud pools and geysers in Rotorua just to name a few. The South Island’s charm is endless, but some “must-do’s” worth mentioning includes six of New Zealand’s eight “Great Walks”; Stewart Island, one of the best spots to see the rare Kiwi Bird; and overnight cruises to take in the scenery or spot fur seals and bot-tlenose dolphins. Check out http://www.newzealand.com/int/ then call your travel agent to arrange for the things you are most interested to be included in your tour package the New Zealand Embassy Tourism section at 02-3210-1107~8 for more information. 

## SINGAPORE 

This small island country off the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula is rap-idly developing a reputation as the shopping destination in Asia. In addition to extensive duty-free shopping, there are also some interesting things to see and do. These include: • The Singapore Zoo, possibly one of the finest zoos in the world, was de-veloped on an “open” concept. The zoo has built a series of “natural” barri-ers so you see the animals much as you would if they were in the wild. They also offer other attractions such as “Breakfast with the Orangutans,” which includes photo opportunities while you hold a bald python; special shows in-cluding “Splash Safari” and “Elephants at Work & Play”; and if you are really looking to get up close and personal you can’t miss out on the elephant ride or the opportunity hand feed elephants, giraffes, white rhinoceros, kangaroos and more. If you are traveling with children or are an animal lover, the zoo is “the” attraction in Singapore. Adjacent to the zoo is the Night Safari and River Safari. Ride a tram or walk through a park to view nocturnal animals and enjoy exclusive experiences available at the Night Safari including dining opportu-nities or check out Asia’s first and only river-themed wildlife park and enjoy the Amazon River Quest boat ride. A multi-pass ticket will also include Jurong Bird Park, which has some of the largest free-flying aviaries in the world. The Waterfall Aviary alone houses over 600 birds and this park, Asia’s largest, has more than 5,000 birds across 400 species. These attractions make Singapore an animal lovers dream. Check out http://www.wrs.com.sg/ to start planning this can’t miss adventure. • Singapore river cruises can be one of the most breathtaking ways to take in the architecture and beauty of this great city. Among the sites that can be seen on the various cruises are Empress Place, an architectural treasure since 246 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 247 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

the most popular in the country, offering all the amenities you might desire – from first rate affordable lodging and restaurants to an assortment of water sports. 

Chiang Mai : is a very popular destination for families with children. While Bangkok is a busy metropolis with about 80 million people, Chiang Mai is just the opposite. Its reasonable cost and abundance of activities geared to the family makes for a very relaxed and enjoyable vacation. The Chiang Mai cul-tural center has evening dinner shows geared to family entertainment. A khan-toke and dance show is performed most nights with audience participation expected. If you don’t have kids check out the massage retreats in Chiang Mai where you can spend your vacation relaxing and learning the art of Thai mas-sage and getting massaged by your fellow students. 

Phuket : Being Thailand’s largest island, Phuket is famous for its beaches. There are many beaches to choose from on the island, but some are better than others so do some research beforehand. Patong seems to be the most famous, but other popular beaches include Karon and Kata. There are many watersport activities, and if you’d like some other water wonders check out two of the beautiful waterfalls this island offers, Ton Sai and Bang Pai. 

Korat : if it’s the Khmer culture you are after, then head about 260 km north of Bangkok to Korat where you will find several stunning examples of 12th century architecture. Plan to visit nearby Phimai, an amazing Khmer complex constructed on a man-made river islet. It is breathtaking in its beauty and from a distance, oddly futuristic to the eye. Its sanctuary tower is home to stunning Khmer artistry. The best buys in Thailand historically have been silk, rubies, and star sap-phires. For more information visit www.tourismthailand.org. Another great website is www.nancychandler.net which contains “Nancy Chandler’s map of Bangkok,” which is most helpful. 

## VIETNAM 

Travel services on-post and at the USO offer trips to cities throughout Viet-nam. There are many places to see from Hanoi in the north to Saigon in the south. 

Hanoi : A flight from Incheon Airport to the northernmost city of Hanoi is only about a four-hour trip and certainly worth taking. Hanoi is sure to be a hit with all members of your family, excavations at Hanoi Citadel, floating villages, military history museums, art museums, temples, pagodas, markets, and a myriad of other tourist venues are scattered in and around this historical city. Some places of interest in and around the city of Hanoi are: hand puppets, old coins, expensive porcelains, cloisonné, and rosewood fur-niture. During your shopping adventures be sure to visit a Taiwan Tea House. 

## THAILAND 

Thailand is an attractive tourist destination and has long been a favorite vacation destination of Americans. With its 800 year old history, vast cultural attractions, exotic beaches, islands, and national parks, Thailand offers some-thing for everyone. Not only are the Thai people very friendly and hospitable, but the country also offers an abundance of amenities from excellent food to inexpensive quality accommodations, making it an ideal vacation spot for military families. Great family package tours are offered by the many travel services avail-able on/off post. Booking in advance is very easy and reasonably priced. Many great deals can be found on the internet as well as with the travel companies in and around Seoul, check out various options and do some research if you plan to go it alone. Major tourism destinations in Thailand include: 

Bangkok : There is nothing quite like Bangkok! New buildings reach for the sky around the corner from ancient temples, many of which are home to enor-mous images of Buddha inlaid with gold and mother of pearl. Everything about the city seems exotic, especially the food. Points of interest include: • Floating Markets that demonstrate the art of buying and selling, as well as cooking and eating in small paddle boats on the canal. • Mae Sa Elephant Camp, located near the Floating Markets in Bangkok is a definite must for kids of all ages. This unique opportunity to watch elephants paint, take an elephant ride, and sometimes help with the elephant bath is something that shouldn’t be missed. • The Grand Palace and Wat Po (the temple of the reclining Buddha with inlaid mother of pearl soles) are a stone’s throw from one another. Along with beautiful architecture, they house some of the most revered and richly deco-rated images of Buddha. • The National Museum, on the grounds of the former Wang Na Palace, has the largest collection of Thai art, artifacts, and buildings tracing Thai History from 5600 B.C. to present day. • Thieves Market, as Nakhon Kasem is affectionately called, is a unique place to buy almost any type of exotic plant. • Chatuchak Weekend Market, the world’s largest weekend market, is a 30 acre outdoor market offering anything imaginable. 

Pattaya : This beach resort about 150 km outside of Bangkok and is one of 248 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 249 

> TRAVEL
> TRAVEL

amidst a cloud of incense. Visit the Reunification Palace, formerly the Indepen-dence Palace of the South Vietnamese president that was famously stormed by tanks in 1975 and signified the fall of South Vietnam. Visit the bustling col-orful markets and tour the many temples and museums of Saigon. For tour destinations and prices, visit one of the travel service offices or visit www. vietnamtourism.com. 

## TRAVEL SERVICES USO TOURS 

Location: USO at Camp Kim, Building 1224 Telephone: 724-7003/3301 Hours of Operation: M-F 8am-5pm, Sat 8am-5pm 

US Airline Alliance (Travel Packages) :Location: Dragon Hill Lodge, Building 4050 Telephone: 738-2222 ext 6800 Hours of Operation: M-Sat 10am-6pm, Sun and holidays 10am-2pm 

US Airline Alliance (Travel Packages) :Location: Moyer CAC, 2nd floor Telephone: 723-8790/2259, 723-8549/7834 Hours of Operation: M-Sat 10am-6pm, Sun and Holidays 10am-2pm 

Delta Airlines 754-1921 

Northwest Airlines 732-1700 United Airlines 757-1691 American Airlines 734-8820 

## AIRLINES 

The US Airline Alliance is the contracted on post travel agency for official and leisure travel, offering a full range of travel products. For official travel and emergency leave contact the passenger travel office 725-6173 located on the second floor of the Moyer Center (Bldg. 2259) on Main Post. Numbers for the airlines in this office are: Delta/Korean Air 723-8549 Northwest/Asiana 723-7834 United Airlines 723-8790 • Hoa Lo Prison, the infamous “Hanoi Hilton” where John McCain and other U.S. prisoners were held captive, was demolished in the 1990s but the gatehouse remains a museum that was used by both the French colonists and the North Vietnamese. • Old Quarter, with over a thousand years of history, this area of the city remains one of Vietnam’s most lively and unusual places. Visitors can explore the fascinating maze of back streets where anything can be purchased – from gravestones to silk pajamas. Street vendors sell some unusual eats and treats to tantalize the taste buds, as well as an endless supply of wares, such as wool clothes, cosmetics, gold and silver jewelry, silk cloths, and herbal medicines. • Thang Long Water Puppet Theater, believed to date back almost a thou-sand years, mua roi nuoc or water puppetry is one of the most authentic ex-pressions of Vietnamese culture. Performances were once held in villages us-ing rivers, lakes, or rice fields. Today they are staged in huge water filled tanks in theatres. Hiding behind the stage, the puppeteers stand waist deep in water and maneuver their wooden puppets to the music of a traditional Vietnamese orchestra. • Ha Long Bay, about a three hour drive from Hanoi, is worth the trip. Some tours offer a cruise aboard one of the many tourist junk boats (ships modeled after an ancient Chinese sailing vessel design) that sail the Halong Bay. It is a UNESCO World Heritage site with many magnificent pinnacles, caves, and grot-tos that have been carved by selective erosion out of the limestone and dolo-mite outcrops that surround the bay. Visit some of the many caves and grottos or simply enjoy swimming in the emerald warm waters of this breathtaking area. Along with the tourist junks, some lovely, traditionally made junks still sail the bay. Made from rough cotton and hand-sewn, the fan-shaped sails of the traditional junks are dipped in vegetable dye for protection and give them a unique dark ochre color. Legend has it that the many pinnacles, caves, and grottos were created by a gigantic dragon (Ha Long means descending dragon) that jumped into the bay thrashing its huge tail. In honor of this legendary beast many brightly painted Dragon Boats also roam the waters. 

Saigon (Ho Chi Minh City) : This vibrant southern metropolis seems to be in sharp contrast to the northern area of Hanoi. Saigon teems with energy, activity, and motion and everywhere you look seems to be the meeting of traditional and modern life. The emerging and modern skylines stand cheek to jowl with traditional temples and colonial buildings. Outside on streets young people zip around on motorcycles and chat on cell phones, while inside the quiet temple courtyards, the older more traditional people worship and pray 250 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 251 

## COINER, CAMP Located adjacent to Main Post USAG-Yongsan. 

## DAEGU (USAG) 

Daegu is one of the largest cities in Korea and home to Camps Henry, George and Walker as well as Camp Carroll (located in Waegwan, Chilgok-gun). Major tourist attractions include Mt. Biseul (Biseulsan) Provincial Park and Mt. Palgong (Palgongsan) Provincial Park. The azalea and purple Eulalie blossoms of Mt. Biseul Park offer exquisite views during the spring and fall months. Other nearby attractions include: Daegu National Museum, Donghwa Temple (Donghwasa) and the Daegu Medicine Market. 

Lodging 

Camp Walker Lodge Call  DSN  764-5536 DSN  Fax  764-5535 From the U.S.  011-82-54-475-6213 Fax from the U.S.  011-82-53-470-5535 Camp Carroll Lodge Call  DSN  765-7722 DSN  Fax:  765-8058 From the U.S.  011-82-54-970-7722 Fax from the U.S.  011-82-54-970-8058 

Golf 

Camp Walker: Driving range open daily, Hours 0530-1900, 764-4601 

Bowling 

Walker Bowling Center: Sun-Thurs 1130-2230, Fri-Sat 1130-0100, 764-4334 Carroll Bowling Center: Mon-Thurs 1100-1300 and 1600-2230, Fri 1100-1300 and 1600-0100, Sat 1500-0100, Sun 1500-2230, 765-8409 

Post Clubs 

Camp Walker Evergreen, 764-4060 Hilltop, 764-4985 Camp Henry Henry’s Place, 768-7300 Camp Carroll Hideaway Club, 765-8574 

Off Post Attractions 

Daegu National Museum was built to preserve and exhibit the unique cul-tural heritage of Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do province, featuring an Arche-

# INSTALLATIONS IN KOREA 

As there are over 50 places in Korea where service members are stationed, this is by no means a complete listing. For more information on what’s avail-able at the various locations visit www.mwrkorea.com. 

## CARROLL, CAMP See Daegu, USAG 

## CASEY, USAG (Camps Casey and Hovey) 

Directions Subway: Take Line 1 north, Soyosan direction. Get off at Bosan Station number 104 (not to be confused with Busan). USAG-Casey main gate is about 3 blocks from the train station. Alternatively, take Line 4 (Blue) from Sinyong-san Station 429 (close to Gate 14) heading north in the direction of Danggogae. Change to Line 1 (Purple) at Chang-dong (412), in the direction of Soyosan and exit at Bosan Station (104). Driving: Drive out of Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) and take a right. Get into the left hand lane and go over the Banpo Bridge staying in the left lane. At the light at the end of the bridge take a left onto the Olympic Expressway HWY 88. Continue to HWY 100 towards GURI. Stay on this highway (going through two toll booths) until you get to exit 14, Uijeongbu. Follow the ramp signs and make sure to stay under the Uijeongbu exit. Stay straight on this road until you reach a major fork in the road, then just follow traffic to the right. Continue thru Uijeongbu city making no sharp turns left or right! Once you come to a tall building with mirrored outside walls and a sign that says YANGJU with a big screen TV, take a right at the light onto MSR 3. Take this road all the way to USAG-Casey which will be on your right hand side. 

## CHINHAE NAVY BASE 

Chinhae (aka Jinhae) is on the southern tip of the Korean peninsula and is the site of the only U.S. Navy base in Korea as well as the headquarters for the Korean Navy. For more information see Travel– Southeast and Coastal Locations. 252 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 253 

Driving Range 

Hours of operation: Tue-Sun 11am-10pm, 754-6291 

Post Clubs 

USAG - Humphreys: Tommy D’s, 753-7532, Alaska Mining Co, 753-3101 

Macgregor’s Market, 753-7532 Camp Eagle:  Eagle’s Nest, 721-2277 

Post Attractions Laser Tag is a new attraction at Humphreys. The facility is located in Build-ing 1044 adjacent to Soldiers Park. Hours: Wed-Sun 11 am-7pm, Sat Sun 11am-2pm, 753-3013 

Splish ‘N’ Splash water park is located on post close to the bowling center and features waterslides and plenty of space to swim. The park opens in May, seven days a week from 11am-9pm. Directions Subway: Take Line 1(Purple) south in the Cheonan direction, get off at the Pyeongtaek station (P164). Take a taxi or Bus 20 to the main gate. Driving: Turn right out of the Commissary Gate 6, move to the left to go over the Banpo Bridge. Turn Left at light on to Highway 88 (Olympic Highway). Stay right, Exit to Highway 1 (you need to merge to the left so you take the soft curve NOT the hard right). Take Highway 1 to Exit 40. After toll booth, Turn left onto #38 (you will drive through many stoplights) Exit on# 45 direc-tion Paensong/Asan. Stay to the right through one stop light take right at ‘Y’ intersection (there is a sign with Camp Humphreys) at next light turn right (T intersection). Follow this road into Camp Humphreys Main Gate. ALTERNATE DRIVING ROUTE (Less traffic, a few more miles, can be faster in high traffic, more tolls) Turn right out of Commissary Gate 6, move to left to go over or under the Banpo Bridge. Continue through all the stop lights toward Seoul Arts Center; go through tunnel under Seoul Arts Center. There will be a toll booth at the end of the tunnel. Stay on this road and it will turn into 309. Continue on 309 until it turns into Highway 17. Exit on to Highway 17 in the direction of Pyeongtaek. Take Highway 17 to the end. Exit onto #38 direction Pyeongtaek/Anseong. Follow #38 to #45. Exit to #45 direction Paensong /Asan. Stay to the right through one stop light, stay to the right at the Y intersection (sign for Camp Humphreys). Turn right at next light (T intersection). Follow this road into Camp Humphreys Main Gate. 

## JACKSON, CAMP See USAG-Red Cloud/Area I. 

ology Gallery containing relics from the Neolithic Era to Korea’s Three King-dom’s period; an Art History Gallery focused on the Buddhist culture of Daegu; and the Traditional Folk Life Gallery, where visitors can see traditional Korean houses. 82-53-1330 Directions: At Daegu Train Station, take Bus No.349 or No.524. At Daegu Express Bus Terminal, take Bus No. 514 or No. 814. Get off at Daegu National Museum Hours: Mar-Oct: 9 am to 6 pm (7 pm on Sat, Sun, Holidays), Nov-Feb: 9 am to 5 pm Closed Jan 1, every Monday. Admission: Adult W400, Ages 19-24 W200, Under 18 and Over 65 are free. The first Sunday of the month admission is free for all. 

## EAGLE, CAMP See USAG-Humphreys. 

## GEORGE, CAMP See USAG-Daegu. 

## HENRY, CAMP See USAG-Daegu. 

## HOVEY, CAMP See USAG-Red Cloud/Area I. 

## HUMPHREYS (USAG) 

The facilities are undergoing vast changes to improve accommodations and services for U.S. military members and their families. Humphreys offers a unique range of activities: paintball, laser tag and swimming at the installation Splish ‘N’ Splash Water Park. 

Lodging 

Army Lodging Phone 011-82-31-690-7355 DSN (315) 753-7355 Fax 011-82-31-690-8389 Billeting Office: Bldg T247, 753-7355 Hours of Operation: Mon-Fri 8am-5pm, Sat 8am-noon 

Bowling 

Humphreys Bowling Center, Tue-Thu 4-10pm, Fri-Sat 11-1am, Sun 11am-10pm, 753-5722 Long Shot Bowling Center, Mon 5-10pm, Thu 3-10pm, Fri 5-10pm, Sat Sun 3-10pm, 721-3336 254 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 255 

Driving: Drive out of Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) and take a right. Get into the left hand lane and go over the Banpo Bridge; stay in the left lane. At the light at the end of the bridge take a left onto the Olympic Expressway HWY 88. Stay to the right and take the Route 1 South exit, this is a toll road. Stay to the LEFT as the road will split, go straight ahead in the center lanes. Continue straight until you get to exit 42. After the toll booth continue straight until you see a tire shop (on your right); this will be at a light. Take a LEFT. Drive straight ahead until you see a sign for OSAN AIR BASE where you will take a right up onto an overpass. This road takes you directly to the gate; if that gate is closed, turn around and go back to your first RIGHT and follow that to the alternate gate. 

## RED CLOUD (USAG)/AREA I 

The northern region of South Korea is flanked by sea and mountains. The land is full of natural attractions, including botanical gardens, beaches, rafting and skiing opportunities. Area I comprimises the area north of Seoul up to the DMZ. There are over 40 Army posts in this area. USAG-Red Cloud is located in Uijeongbu. For upcoming outdoor adventures, contact the USO or BOSS rep-resentative. 

Lodging 

USAG-Casey Army Lodging Phone: 011-82-31-8694247 DSN: 315-730-4247 Fax: 011-82-31-8694247 

Post Clubs 

USAG-Casey:  Gateway Club, 730-3400 

Redwood Steak House, 730-2195 

Warrior’s Club, 730-2195 Camp Castle:  Warrior’s Club, 730-3400 Camp Hovey:  Iron Triangle, 730-5167 USAG-Red Cloud:  CG’s Mess, 732-8797 

Mitchell’s, 732-8189 Camp Stanley:  Reggie’s, 732-5485 

Golf 

USAG-Casey Indianhead Golf Course, Tee times are 8am to 4pm, Restau-rant Hours are 6am to 8pm, 730-4885 USAG-Red Cloud Golf Course, Winter Hours are 8am-5pm, Summer hours are M-F 7am to dusk, Sat-Sun/Holidays 5:30am to dusk, 732-6843 

## K-16 

Also known as Seoul Air Base, this small post is located near the city of Songnam, across the Han River just outside of Seoul.  Home of the K-16 Com-munity Activities Center (Bldg #302): DSN 741-6030. 

Arts and Crafts Center – Hours: Wed-Mon: 1000-1900. DSN 741-6923 

Bowling Center – Hours: Mon-Wed: 1700-2200, Fri-Sat: 1000-2300, Sun: 1600-2200. DSN741-6240 

Fitness Center – Hours: Mon-Fri: 0600-2130, Sat-Sun & Holidays: 0800-2100. DSN 741-6328. 

Landing Zone Club – Hours: Tue-Thu: 1700-2400, Fri-Sat: 1700-0100. DSN: 741-6380. 

Library – Hours : Tue-Fri: 1100-2000, Sat-Sun: 1100-1900. DSN: 741-6694 

## LONG, CAMP See USAG-Humphreys 

## OSAN AIR BASE 

This Air Force Base is approximately 35 miles south of Seoul. The base is located adjacent to Songtan, not the town of Osan. The average travel time from Yongsan is about an hour one way depending on traffic conditions (on certain days, 3 hours is not unheard of). An alternative to driving is the bus out of Moyer CAC. Return tickets sell out quickly, so be prepared to catch a later bus if necessary. Maps, routes and schedules are available in Moyer Communi-ty Activities Center. A trip to Osan AB can be a wonderful day out. Shopping in the surrounding local community, Song-tan, can be cheaper for certain items such as sports apparel, purses and tailored suits. There are several restaurants scattered throughout the Air Base, including Chili’s, Burger King and Captain D’s. Osan has a Base Exchange (BX) that carries a wide selection of merchan-dise which is sometimes different from Yongsan. The Commissary at Osan also carries some different products from those sold in Yongsan. There are many places to shop and eat on the base and local economy. AAFES taxi stands are conveniently located at all the popular restaurants and gates. Directions Subway: Take Line 1 (Purple) south in the Cheonan direction, get off at the Songtan station (P161), which is a few blocks from the main gate or about a ₩3,000 taxi ride. Note: Make sure the subway train you board goes as far as Songtan Station! Some trains stop in the service yards where the cleaning crew board and start to work and the drivers change shifts, before the train heads back the way you came. 256 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 257 

## SUWON AIR BASE 

This small air base is located 17 miles north of Osan Air Base and serves primarily as a Republic of Korea Air Base. 

## WALKER, CAMP See Daegu 

## YONGSAN (USAG) 

Yongsan Garrison is located in the heart of Seoul, just north of the Han River, and adjacent to Itaewon. Despite its location in the capital city of over 11 million people, Yongsan is an oasis of calm seeming more like a city suburb than part of the city. 

Bowling 

USAG-Casey: Orion’s, Sun-Thu 11am-11pm, Fri-Sat 11am-noon, 730-457 Camp Hovey: Mon, Wed, Thu 4-10pm, Fri 5pm-midnight, Sat 1-11pm, Sun 1-10pm, 730-5167 USAG-Red Cloud: Sun-Thu 11am-11pm, Fri-Sat 11am-midnight, 732-6930 Camp Stanley: Sun-Thu 11am-10pm, Fri-Sat 11am-11pm, 732-5370 Directions Driving: From Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) turn right and move toward the center lane to cross the Banpo Bridge. At the traffic light at the end of the bridge turn left to merge onto the Olympic Expressway (Hwy 88). Stay on 88 and follow the signs for the 100 Expressway. There are two exits off Hwy 88; take the second exit in the direction of Guri. There are two toll booths along this route, expect to pay a total of about 2400won. Look for the Uijeongbu exit about 300 meters after passing through the second of two tunnels. Stay in the left lanes of the exit ramp and merge into city traffic, working your way over to the left lane. Follow the signs for Route 39 to a major intersection with two left turn lanes, and turn left at the light. Continue to follow Route 39 signs through one stoplight intersection and a major rock-drop. At the next light, a T inter-section near a very large highway overpass, follow the left turn lane. Take the first right turn, just prior to the underpass support, onto the entrance ramp to merge onto Route 39. Stay on this road as it becomes an overpass. The PX gate of Camp Red Cloud will be on your left. A left turn is not allowed at the traffic light so drive to the next light and make a U-turn. Drive back to the main gate and take a right at the light. 

## STANLEY, CAMP 

See USAG-Red Cloud/Area I for more information. 

Directions Driving: Drive out of Gate 6 (Commissary Gate) and take a right. Get into the left hand lane and go over the Banpo Bridge staying in the left lane. At the light at the end of the bridge take a left onto the Olympic Expressway HWY 88. Continue to HWY 100 towards GURI. Stay on this highway through the first toll booth, at the second toll booth area get all the way to the right and exit at BYOLLAE and follow it off. Stay straight on this road until you come to a “T”intersection/light, make a LEFT and follow the signs; Camp Stanley will be on your left. 258 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 259 

# INDEX A

A3 Visa  46-48, 62-63, 72, 88, 146-147 Acronyms  67-68 Adult Education  68 Air Pollution  44, 68-69 Alcohol and Substance Abuse Services/Resources  69 American Forces’ Spouses’ Club (AFSC)  4, 8, 14, 17-18, 80 American Red Cross  70-71 American Women’s Club (AWC)  11, 80-81, 229 Antiques  164-166, 180 Army Community Services (ACS)  30, 42, 50, 60-65, 71-72, 100, 153, Art  164-166 Arts & Crafts  72-73 Australia  235 Automobile (Vehicles)  42-43, 45, 49, 53-55, 64, 68, 104, 157-158, 233, 235 

B

Baby Items  73 Banking/Check Cashing  73-74 Barber Shops  74-75 Beauty  75 Black Market  75, 82, 136 Boarding and Grooming Services  125 Book Stores  167, 183, 224 Better Opportunity for Single Soldiers (BOSS)  75, 120, 158, 255 Bowling Center  75-76 Brian Allgood Community Hospital  21, 64, 70, 108-113, 118, 141, 152 Buses (Transportation)  57-59, 120, 128, 140-141, 147, 152-154, 176, 205-206 Business Cards  76 

# BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SELECTED RESOURCES 

There are countless books available on Korea, its culture, language, and tourist sites. The following is just a small listing of the sources available. Most of these titles are available on-line or at the PX. • Barnet, Beverlee. Camping in Korean National Parks (Seoul Selection Guide) .

Seoul, South Korea: Seoul Selection; 2012. • Breen, Michael. The Koreans: Who They Are, What They Want, Where Their Fu-ture Lies . 2nd Edition. New York, New York: St. Martin’s Press; 2004. • Crane, Paul. S. Korean Patterns (Korean Culture) . 4th Edition. Seoul, South Korea: The Royal Asiatic Society: 1978. • Fehrenbach, T.R. This Kind of War: The Classic Korean War History . 50th Anniver-sary Edition. Dulles, Virginia: Brassey’s; 1994. • Hoare, James. Korea – Culture Smart!: The Essential Guide to Culture and Cus-toms . 2nd Edition. London, Great Britain: Kuperard; 2012. • Vegdahl, Sonja and Hur, Ben. Culture Shock! Korea . 7th Edition. Marshall Caven-dish Publishing; 2012. • Kim, Hyung-Geun. Ask a Korean Dude: An Authoritative and Irreverent Guide to the Korea Experience . Seoul, South Korea: Seoul Selection; 2012. • King, Ross and Yeon, Jaehoon. Elementary Korean . 2nd Edition. North Clarendon, Vermont: Tuttle Co.; 2009. • Koehler, Robert. Seoul Selection Guides: KOREA . Seoul, South Korea: Seoul Selec-tion; 2012. • Koehler, Robert. Seoul Selection Guides: SEOUL . Seoul, South Korea: Seoul Selec-tion; 2012. • Whyte, Robert and Kim, Kyoung-Mi. Living in South Korea . Pro Lingua Associates; 2006. • Bartlett, Ray. South Korea (Insight Guides) . 10th Edition. Insight Guides; 2013. • Richmond, Simon. Lonely Planet Guide to Seoul . 7th Edition. Lonely Plant; 2013. • Richmond, Simon, Hornyak, Timothy, and Low, Shawn. Lonely Planet Korea . 9th Edition. Lonely Planet; 2013. • Kim, Minkyoung and Hilts-Park, Jonathan. Lonely Planet Korean Phrasebook . 5th Edition. Lonely Plant; 2012. • Nilsen, Robert. Moon: South Korea . 4th Edition. Avalon Travel Publishing; 2009. • Saccone, Richard. Having a Great Tour : the G.I. Guide to Korea. Weatherhill; 1998. • Shim, Elizabeth and Yoo, Allie. Seoul Sweet Seoul 2nd Edition (The Definitive Guide to Seoul, South Korea) . Small Planet Publishing; 2011. • Lee, O-Young and Holstein, John. Things Korean . North Clarendon, Vermont: Tut-tle Publishing USA; 1999. 260 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 261 

E

Educational & Developmental Intervention Services (EDIS)  82, 109 Eagle (Camp)  252-253 Embassy  15, 88 Enhanced Security Pedestrian Gates (ESPG)  89 Employment  8-9, 12, 43, 71, 89-91 Everland  214-215 Express Bus Terminal  79, 91, 153, 171, 176 

F

Festivals  206, 213-214, 219, 225-227 Fitness Centers  91-92 Flowers  52, 170-171, 177, 185 Force Protection/Demonstrations  92-93 Furniture Store  52, 73, 84, 167-168, 184 Furniture Support  44, 52-53, 63, 93, 98 

G

Gallery  76, 134, 168, 172, 184, 186-187 Ganghwado  224 Gasoline  94 Gas Grills and Propane  51, 94 Gates (Yongsan)  266 George (Camp)  251 Golf  51, 94-95, 221-222, 228, 243, 251, 255 Guam  237 Gyeongju  226 

H

Han River Boat Cruise  207 Henry (Camp)  251 Hiking  80-81, 218, 220, 225, 228 Home-Based Businesses  95-96 Home Birth  114 Home Repairs/Self-Help  51-53, 96 Homeschooling  48, 96-97, 142 

C

Cambodia  236 Carpets  76-77, 167-168 Carroll (Camp)  251 Casey (Camp)  21, 112, 142, 152, 154, 224, 250, 255-256 Celadon  168, 225 Cell Phones  48, 77-78, 89, 150 Cheonggye Stream  207, 213 Child Youth and School Services (CYSS)  65,78-79, 97, 103 Children’s Grand Park  214 China  236-237 Chinhae  227 Chinhae Naval Base  98, 141, 250 Christmas Trees  52, 79, 176 Claims  79-80 Clubs & Organizations  80-81 COEX Mall  181 Coiner (Camp)  19-21, 74, 92, 152, 188-189 Commissary (USAG Yongsan)  9, 62, 75, 81-82, 136, 152, 186 Commiskey’s CAC  82 Curtains/Mini-Blinds  51, 82 Customs Regulations  46, 56-57, 59, 82-83, 123, 126, 132, 163 

D

Daehan Life Insrance (DLI) 63 Building  207 DBIDS  44, 89 Deagu (USAG)  96, 118, 141, 155-156, 251-252 Delivery Service  81, 84, 188 Demilitarized Zone (DMZ)  21, 77, 85, 162, 222-223, 255 Dental Services  48, 64, 84-85, 111 Diseases  85 Dog Park  47, 86, 126 Dongdaemun  26, 167, 169, 171-172, 174-176, 214 Dragon Hill Lodge  7, 44, 47, 75, 80, 86, 97 Driver’s License  43, 64, 86-87 262 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 263 

L

Laundry Facilities  106 Legal Assistance Office  106-107 Library Services  10, 107, 121, 160 Lotte World  215 

M

Macau  242 Mail  42, 45, 134 Malaysia  242-243 Markets  175-178 Maternity Clothing  185-186 Medical Services  108-118, 122 Military Police  108 Mosquitoes  46, 85 Movie Theater  11, 119, 180-181, 207 Moyer Community Activities Center (MCAC)  104, 120, 152-153, 190 Museums, Palaces & World Heritage Sites  211-213 Music Clubs  207-208 Myeong-Dong  180 

N

Namdaemun  153, 171, 177, 187 Namsangol Traditional Folk Village  208 Namsan Park  210, 215-216 Nanta Cooking Theatre  208 National Museum of Korea  209 Navy Club  81, 190 Nepal  243 New Zealand  243-244 Newspapers  120-122 Noncombatant Evacuation Operations (NEO)  42, 45, 64, 121, 127-128 

O

Optical  118, 184, 186 Oriental Press  76, 122 Osan Air Base  10, 14-15, 59, 98, 120, 123, 142, 146-146, 152 Hong Do (Hong Island)  228 Hong Kong  237-238, 242 Hospital (Brian Allgood Community) 21, 64, 70, 108-113, 118, 141, 152 Hotels  86, 97-98, 148 Household Goods (JFTR) Weight Allowance  50, 98-99 Household Help  99 Housing  7, 9, 44-45, 47-48, 50-53, 63, 100-102, 127, 149-151, 161 Hovey (Camp)  255-256 Humphreys (USAG)  8-9, 21, 96, 115, 118, 120, 141-142, 152, 252-254 

I

Immunizations  45, 64-65, 103-104, 110, 230 Incheon  21, 224 Incheon International Airport  46, 56-58, 123, 125, 128, 154 Independence Hall of Korea  226 India  238-239 Infants  17, 50-51, 72-73, 111, 118 Insadong  165, 168, 195 Insurance  104 Itaewon  178-179 Internet Access  66, 104, 149-149 Internet Café  78, 82, 104, 107 

J

Jackson (Camp)  152 Japan  239-241 Jeju-Do (Jeju Island)  162, 220, 228-229 

K

K-16  66, 92, 104, 107, 138, 143, 148, 254 Korean Culture  35-37 Korean Folk Village  226-227 Korean Food  38-41 Korean Flag  105 Korean Language Class  11, 30, 62, 65, 71-72, 106 264 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 265 

Singapore  243-245 Sizing Charts  145-146, 169 Skiing  81, 162, 218, 220-222, 255 SOFA  46-48, 54, 62-63, 72, 75, 88, 90, 99, 146-147 Space Available Flights  9, 147-148 Stanley (Camp)  255-256 Subway  153-155 Suwon Air Base  257 Swimming  97, 148, 215, 222, 248, 252 

T

Taipei  245 Taiwan  245 Taxis  7, 53, 58-59, 128, 152-156 Telephones  66, 149-150 Television  150-151 Tennis  51, 80, 92, 94, 101, 120, 151, 222 Thailand  246-247 Theatres  151 Theme Parks, Parks & Zoos  214-220 Thrift Shop  151-152 Tibet  243 Toy Alley  177-178 Trains  155, 254 Transportation  152-156 Travel Medicine Clinic  232 Travel Services  249 Tricare  10, 64, 84-85, 111-113, 117-118, 156, 233-235 

U

Unaccompanied Baggage  50 United Service Organization (USO)  10, 57-58, 157, 222 

V

Vehicles  42-43, 45, 49, 53-55, 64, 68, 104, 157-158, 233, 235 Veterans Affairs  159 Veterinary Services  65, 123, 125, 128-129, 133 

P

Palace District  209 Palaces, Museums & World Heritage Sites  211-213 Parks, Theme Parks & Zoos  214-220 Passport  46-49, 56-57, 59-60, 63, 146-148, 160-161 Pets  47, 58, 86, 123-134 Plants  170-171 Pocheon Herb Island  224-225 Post Exchange (PX)  62, 185, 188 Postal Services  134 Prenatal Care  113-117 Preschools  140, 142-143 Produce  186-187 Public Restrooms  134-135 Public Transportation  153-156 Pyeongtaek  135 

R

Ration Card  44-45, 62, 82, 136 Ration Control  48, 75, 136 Red Cloud (USAG)  96, 118, 123, 152, 255-256 Religious Services and Activities  136-139 Royal Asiatic Society (RAS)  81, 205 R&R Bar & Grill  190 

S

Saipan  237 Schools  47-48, 65, 90, 103, 140-144 Scouts  8-9, 52, 79, 145 Self-Help  51-53, 96 Seoraksan National Park  225 Seoul Arts Center  209 Seoul City Bus Tour  205, 210 Seoul Grand Park  218-219 Seoul Tower  210, 216 Shuttle Bus  128, 152 Sinbuk Hot Spring  224-225 266 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 The Seoul Survivor 14-15 | 267 

# USAG-Yongsan Gates 

*Note: Gates with fingerprint access are open 24/7 to those on foot with an ID card. Each person who wants to enter must be in the computer system and have his or her own ID card. 

Gate 

# Gate Name Hours Drive or Walk Fingerprint Access 

1 Dragon Hill Lodge 24/7 Both 2 R&R Bar and Grill Closed 3 MARFOR-K 0500-2400 Daily Both 4 CPAC 0500-0900 M-F Drive 5 PX Gas Station 0600-2400 Daily Walk Yes 6 Commissary 24/7 Drive 7 TMP 24/7 Drive 8 Blackhawk Village 24/7 Walk Yes 9 Sobinggo 24/7 Drive 13 South Post Visitors’ Center 24/7 Both 14 Hospital 0600-0900 Daily 1400-1600 Both Yes 16 MP Station 0500-2100 M-F Drive 17 Camp Kim 24/7 Drive 18 Camp Coiner ?? Both Yes 19 Camp Coiner Visitor 0500-2400 Daily Both 20 Camp Coiner Hill 24/7 Walk Yes 21 Friendship House (Kimchi Pot Gate) 24/7 Walk Yes Video Rental  159-160 Vietnam  247-249 Visas  43, 46-48, 62-63, 72, 88, 90, 146-147, 160 Visitors to Korea  160-161 

W

Walker  98, 112, 123, 156, 251, 257 Water  161 War Memorial of Korea  210 Weather  161-162 World Heritage Sites, Palaces & Museums  211-213 

Y

Yeoju  168, 225-226 

Z

Zoos, Parks & Theme Parks  214-220 268 | The Seoul Survivor 14-15 

## Printed by Oriental Press Incheon Medical Tourism MEDICAL TOURISM 

# Why Incheon for Medical Tour? 

• Incheon, the third largest city in Korea, has played the role of the official gateway to 

Korea and the hub for northeastern Asia as the host city of internationally acclaimed Incheon International Airport and Port of Incheon. Songdo(Incheon) is designed as the first Free Economic Zone of Korea by the government. The recent decision of UN’S Green Climate Fund(GCF) selecting Songdo as its host city once again provided the opportunity fo incheon to grow further. 

ABOUT INCHEON LANDING OPERATION 

• Sep 19, 2014~ Oct 4,2014 

• Venues : In and around Incheon 

• Host : The Olympic Council of Asia (OCA) 

Excellent accessibility - near Incheon International Airport - useful transportation makes it possible to travel to all the major cities of Korea conveniently 

Premium Medical Service - JCI accredited hospital 

• Highly Accomplished Doctors 

In Korea, the standard of medical excellence is so stringent that only the top 0.5% of medical students can pass the rigorous exams and go on to become practicing professionals. When you come to Korea for your medical needs, you can be assured that you are in the most capable of hands. 

• Surprisingly Affordable Prices 

The cost of medical services in Korea is very low compared to those in the USA and Japan. For example, hemorrhoid surgery in the USA costs approximately 10.91 million won while for a fraction of the cost (roughly 1.27 million won) you can get the same. 

Tourism attraction’s only in Incheon - The Memorial Hall for Incheon Landing Operation - Ganghwa Tour (Temple, history tour) O n S e p t e m b e r 1 5 , 1950, during the Korean, U.S. Marines force made a surprise amphibious landing at the strategic port of Incheon, on the west coast of Korea. The location had been criticized as too risky, but United Nations (U.N.) Supreme Commander Douglas MacArthur insisted on carrying out the bold landing. Afterward, the American-led U.N. force was able to break North Korean supply lines and push inland to recapture Seoul. The landing at Inchon changed the course of the war. (Incheon in 1950, Resource : Wikipedia ) 

17th Asian Games Incheon 2014 Incheon Medical Tourism MEDICAL TOURISM 

JCI Certification Hospital Medical Institutions Certified by the Ministry of Health and Welfare Special Hospitals Designated by the Ministry of Health & Welfare Association for the Accreditation of Human Research Protection Program (AAHRPP) 

Joint Commission International : Hospitals certified by Joint Commission International (JCI), which is designated as a qualifying institution for hospitals around the world by the WHO 

Inha University Hospital 

This medical service system has been operating from the 14th of January, 2011, in accordance with Article 58 of the Medical Act in order to improve healthcare quality and patient safety. The Minister of Health and Welfare assesses hospitals and certifies them based on the following criteria: patient rights and safety, improvement of medical service quality by medical institutions, the process and achievement of medical services, organization/manpower management and operation, and patient satisfaction. Currently, 102 medical institutions across the nation are certified. 

Gachon University Gil Medical Center, The Catholic Univ. Of Korea Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, Incheon Sarang Hospital, Inha University Hospital, Hospital 21, Nanoori Hospital, Bupyeong Himchan Hospital, HanGil Medical Foundation, Hyundai Uvis Hospital, Baro Hospital, Na-Eun Hospital 

This system has been operating since the 31st of January, 2011, in accordance with Article 3-5 of the Medical Act. The Minister of Health and Welfare certifies hospitals which perform high-level medical service for specific areas of treatment or diseases. The hospitals must fulfill the following requirements: maintaining a specified patient composition ratio for specific diseases and areas of treatment and providing specialists who work exclusively in these areas of treatment. Ninety-nine special hospitals across the nation have been designated as such. 

Nanoori Hospital, DAIN Ear, Nose and Throat Hospital, Bupyeong Himchan Hospital , Seoul Women’s Hospital, HanGil Medical Foundation, Sungmin Hospital, Braddom Hospital 

This is the world’s most prestigious clinical test accreditation institution. The clinical research institution and its R&D team perform ethical and scientific research in order to protect the rights and welfare of the insured people who participate in studies. 

The Catholic Univ. Of Korea Incheon St. Mary's Hospital 

• In the era of 100,000 doctors in Korea, Incheon is doing its best to build a 

systematic infrastructure for treating foreign patients. It has developed medical tour packages that combine specialized medical service for cancer using world class technologies in various medical fields with cultural performances based on the Korean wave. Incheon Medical Tourism MEDICAL TOURISM 

Fields of Medical Treatment Specialized Fields Awards 

Sixteen treatment centers and thirty clinical divisions in operation 

Cancer Center, Heart Center, Brain Health Center, Spine Center, International Medical Center, Health Examination Center, Ann E.N.T Center, Dental Center, Special Center for Women, Emergency Medical Center for Incheon & West Sea Area, etc. 

Brain Health Center : The only JCI-certified brain examination center (expired in 2013) in Korea, which provides detailed examination of the cerebral nerves through 3.OT MRI and early discovery of dementia, stroke, Parkinson’s disease, and cerebral aneurysms and raises the complete recovery rate so that patients can enjoy a healthier life. 

International Healthcare Center : This medical center only for foreigners has been open since 2008, minimizing problems arising from linguistic and cultural differences. The medical service provided by an outstanding medical staff and based on cuttingedge medical devices is regarded as Korea’s finest. Incheon Medical Tourism 

> MEDICAL TOURISM

Fields of Medical Treatment Specialized Fields Specialized Medical Devices 

Operating 11 specialty centers and 33 treatment divisions 

Healthcare Center, Beauty Medical Center, Celioscope Center, Spine Center, Robot Operation Center, The Catholic Comprehensive Hospital For Advanced Cancer, Cerebral Nerve Center, Gastroenterologic Center, Cardiovascular Center, Joint Center, Breast/Thyroid Center, etc. Cutting-edge treatment/diagnostic devices including 4th generation Surgical DaVinci Robot, Navigator, Novalis, 640 Slice MDCT, Skyra MRI, PET-CT and more. 

Cerebral Infarctions / Cerebrovascular / Cerebral Tumor Treatment Celioscope and Robot Operation : Gynecological Cancer, Stomach Cancer, Colorectal Cancer, Rectal Cancer, Esophageal Cancer, Liver Cancer, Gallstones 

Cutting-edge Radiation Cancer Treatment : Has the largest number of medical devices, integrative/holistic medical treatment used with metastasis/recurring cancer Incheon Medical Tourism MEDICAL TOURISM 

Fields of Medical Treatment Introducing Medical Theme Park 

12 specialized centers and 35 treatment divisions in operation 

Health Promotion Center, Joint/Spine Center, Neuroscience Center, Endocrinology & Diabetes Center, Nephrology Center, Cardiovascular Center, Gastroenterology Center, Breast & Thyroid Center, Longevity Medical Center, Emergency Medical Center, etc. 

International St. Mary’s Hospital 

International St. Mary’s Hospital, the center of Medical Theme Park, provides medical services for recovery of patient’s body and mind; and a safe/easy delivery of the best medical services to all people to improve their quality of lives. 

Maris Stella 

Maris Stella Senior town, housing facilities, offers cutting-edge medical service and variety of wellness programs in order to promote our senior residents’ physical and psychological health, thus they can enjoy vibrant and abundant lives. 

Wellbeing Mall 

Our shopping complex is composed of outdoor theater, green house, wellbeing restaurant, indoor golf range and fitness center. It will make a present of medical treatment as well as cultural experience, relaxation and memorable moment to all people. 

International St. Mary’s Hospital B6-11F 1,000 Inpatient Beds Sanatorium Maris 1,320m 2, with a roof garden Maris Mall Shopping Mall, Outdoor Theatre Indoor Golf Range, Spa / Fitness Center, Gallery, Food Court Green House (Hydroponic Vegetable Farm) Maris Stella (Senior Centre) Incheon Medical Tourism MEDICAL TOURISM 

Fields of Medical Treatment Specialized Fields Specialized Medical Devices 

14 specialized centers and 34 treatment divisions in operation 

Cancer/Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, CyberKnife Center, Emergency Medicine Center, Healthcare Center, Diabetes and Obesity Center, etc. The latest medical devices such as the CyberKnife, Rapid Arc, PET-CT, 3D Angio CT, MDCT, and MRI SPEC-CT 

Cancer Center : Four cancer specialized centers (the CyberKnife Center, Cancer Center, Woman Cancer Center, and Lung Cancer Center) in operation, treating more than 2,500 cases of cancer (lymphomas, leukemia, lung cancer, breast cancer, etc.) 

Cardiovascular Center : Patients receive better and more accurate operations through the cutting-edge Angio device, the cardiovascular catheterization laboratory, and invasive and noninvasive test rooms such as the around-the-clock blood pressure and ECG room, echocardiography room, exercise test room, and head-up tilt table test room. 

Health Treatment Center : Recognized as a superior examination center and internationally certified under ISO 9001 standards. Customers can personalize their treatment by selecting from more than 100 examination items. Incheon Medical Tourism MEDICAL TOURISM 

Incheon International Airport Incheon Bridge and Yeongjong Bridge Incheon Port International Passenger Terminal 

Incheon International Airport, offering the world’s finest airport service, connects around 170 cities in 60 countries across the world. The surrounding infrastructure includes a medical center, shopping center, convention center, and more. Incheon International Airport is only 20 minutes away from Incheon Songdo International City via Incheon Bridge and only 30 minutes away from Cheongna International City via Incheon Bridge, putting the airport within close reach of important regions in Incheon. Incheon Port remains vital to connecting Korea with 10 areas in China (including Quinhuangdao, Yantai, Dalian, Shi Dao, Dandong, Wei Hai, Qingdao, Tianjin, Lianyungang). Passengers can take advantage of various services as they enjoy the unique comfort and thrill of staying in a hotel on the waves during their safe and speedy sea voyage. 

• Incheon is very accessible as a hub city with Incheon International Airport and 

Incheon Port and offers a comfortable residential environment and urban based facilities for foreigners to enjoy culture, education, and medical services. With the development of Songdo, Cheongna, and Yeongjong international cities, Incheon is comparable to any international business city. 

# Incheon’s Superior Accessibility 

• Travel time from major cities in Asia to Incheon International Airport  

> INCHEON AIRPORT SINGGAPORE SHANGHAI TOKYO HONG KONG 1hr 30min 60min 2hr 30min 5hr 30min
> www.icferry.or.kr Fare: 115,000 won and up

# Excursions 

Korea is a beautiful country, but 

travelers are often unaware of many 

of its treasures . Our guides, who are 

long -term residents and experts in 

many fields, will show you all that 

Korea has to offer. Each weekend, 

guided walking tours of Seoul, 

journeys to temples and historical 

sites, or visits to little known places 

are offered. 

# Lectures & More 

Twice each month, lectures are given 

by experts on a wide -range of Korea -

related topics. All lectures are in 

English and are followed by a Q&A 

session. In addition, once a month we 

organize a guided visit of part of the 

National Museum, and we run 

various study groups on literature, 

cooking, movies and such to help you 

expand your knowledge of Korea. 

# Books tore 

Looking for a book to read? The RAS 

Korea has published and sells many 

books about Korea. Furthermore, 

our extensive library is open for 

research and browsing. 

## Join Us 

www.raskb.com 

www.facebook.com/raskb 

royalasiatickorea@gmail.com 

Whether you are a diplomat or a member of the armed forces looking to le arn 

about Korea for your job, or a family member looking to meet new friends, the 

Royal Asiatic Society Korea can help you to enhance your stay in Korea. As a 

non -profit organization, we are uniquely situated to help people expand their 

knowledge of Korea while developing a network of pr ofessionals and friends. 

# The Royal Asiatic Society Korea Call (US) 1-888-687-3644 or 1-215-253-4471 www.adopt-abroad.com 

# We have representatives based in Korea, Japan, Europe, the Middle East & the USA. Please check our web site for listings of Waiting Children & adoption programs. We can assist you with adoption home studies, U.S. foster care adoptions, international adoption programs, post-placement & adoption counseling services. 

# Our agency was created specifically to assist U.S. families living overseas with their adoption needs. Adopt Abroad Inc. since 2003 helping the U.S. military with their adoption needs – worldwide! 

# Do You Know That YOU Can Adopt While Living Overseas? 

# Have you ever a child? considered Adopting  M5COINS mcoins1@gmail.com 

# Coin 

# Key tag 

# Lapel Pin 

# Pen 

# Cup 

# Hat 

# T-shirt 

# i-Phone case 

> GIFT SHOP

# Serving the Military and CoMMunity for More than 25 yearS… 

## We supply a vast variety of high quality promotional printing & metal products, and accessories for the US military and international community world-wide. Our Military Pride items include; Promotional & Challenge Coins, Lapel Pins, Memo Pads, Medals & Badges and all types of unique and imaginative items to introduce or support your image and presence. Send us your design, and specify the size, quantity and any other details you want included, to assist us in providing you with exactly what you want. We will then send you a cost estimate and timeline for completion. For more information: Cell 010-2519-2097 or E-mail mcoins1@gmail.com 

# You can contact us E-mail mcoins1@gmail.com 1

> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> 9
> 10
> 11
> 12
> 13
> 14
> 15

Vehicle processing Center Dental Clinic #3 (Children) Collier Field House Post Office/Education Center School Age & Youth Services Self Help Center Yongsan Lanes Bowling Center MPTF & Movie Theater PET Care Center Main Post Club / R&R Grill Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop Family Fun Park Trent Gym Shopette / Food Court Vet Clinic 

> 13
> KORAIL STATION K111 ICHON

Undesignated Undesignated 

> NOKSAPYONG SU BWAY STATION 629

Undesignated 44   

> p
> p
> 1491311121315
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 67
> 8
> 9
> 10 11
> 12
> 14
> 15
> 16
> 17

Vehicle Processing Center Main Post Club/R&R Grill Shoppette/Food Court Community Bank Vet Clinic Collier Field House Navy Federal Credit Union Dental Clinic #3 (Children) Family Fun Park Trent Gym School Age & Youth Services Self Help Center Post Office/Education Center MPTF & Movie Theater PET Care Center Yongsan Lanes Bowling Center Second Hand Rose Thrift Shop Map by John Nowell as of 10 May 2014 6  

> 5
> 4
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 12
> 11
> 10
> 9
> 8
> 7
> 17
> 16
> 15
> 14
> 13
> SUBWAY STATION 428 SAMGAKJI LINE 4 BLUE
> SUBWAY STATION 628 SAMGAKJI LINE 6 BROWN

Gachon Univ 

I

252 

IncheonNonhyeon Hogupo Wolgot Soraepogu Namdong Induspark 

Songdo Woninjae 

253 254 255 

> Choji

256 258 

Yeonsu 

259 

Gulpocheon Samsan Gymnasium Sangdong Bucheon City Hall Sinjungdong Chunui Bucheon Stadium Kkachiul 

K313 

Seoulforest 

240 239 238 

> Sanggal

Cheongmyeong Yeongtong Apgujeong rodeo Gangnam-Gu Office Seonjeongneung 214 212 211 751 752 753 754 755 756 757 758 

> Bojeong Guseong Singal Giheung

Guui (Gwangjin-gu Office) Gangbyeon (Dongseoul Bus Terminal) Jamsil (Songpa-gu Office) Samseong (Court & Public Prosecutor's Office) Seoul Nat‘l Univ. (Guro-gu Office) (Kyonggi Univ.) (Government Complex-Seoul) (Seoul Arts Center) (Donam) (Samseongyo) (Namdaemun Market) (Garwol) (National Museum of Korea) (Isu) (Rear Entrance to Seoul Children's Grand Park) (Presbyterian College & Theological Seminary) (Gangdong Community Center ) (Korea National Sport Univ.) (Eunhaengjeong) (Mokdong Stadium) (Sejong Center for the Performing Arts) (Tapgol Park) (Sinsa) (Myongji Univ.) (Seongsan) (Korea Univ. Hospital) (Jongam) (Dongduk Women's Univ.) (KIST) (Seoul Women's Univ.) (Seoul National Univ. of Science & Technology) (Intercity Bus Terminal) (Sejong Univ.) (Salpijae) (Sungkonghoe Univ.) (World Peace Gate) (Seongnam Court & Public Prosecutor's Office) (Chung-Ang Univ.) (Uncheon) (Korea Nazarene Univ.) (Soonchunhyang Univ.) (World Trade Center Seoul) Osan Univ. (Gwanak-gu Office) (Dongdaemun-gu Office) Mia (Seoul Cyber Univ.) (Seogang) (Sogang Univ.) Kwangwoon Univ. Gyeongin Nat'l Univ. of Education SERVING THE MILITARY. SUPPORTING THE FAMILIES. 

We serve the military and their families. It’s what we do. It’s who we are. That’s why we provide quality products and superior member service. With access to over 1 million ATMs worldwide, 24/7 live phone support, and convenient online and Mobile Banking,* we have the benefits of membership you deserve. 

Federally insured by NCUA. *Message and data rates may apply. Visit 

navyfederal.org for more information. App Store SM is a service mark of Apple, Inc. Android TM is a trademark of Google, Inc. Amazon, Kindle, Kindle Fire, the Amazon Kindle logo, and the Kindle Fire logo are trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. This app was not created or endorsed by Amazon. © 2014 Navy Federal NFCU 12923 (3-14) 

PROUD TO SERVE YOU AT: 

CAMP HUMPHREYS, CAMP CARROLL, OSAN AB, YONGSAN, CAMP CASEY, CAMP HENRY, AND KUNSAN AB 

navyfederal.org
