Title: Trump wants to end birthright citizenship. Where do other countries stand?

URL Source: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c983g6zpz28o

Published Time: 2025-02-10T01:51:11.829Z

Markdown Content:
27 June 2025

Luis Barrucho BBC World Service

Getty Images

The US gives automatic citizenship to anyone born in the country, but this principle is not the norm globally

President Donald Trump's executive order to end birthright citizenship has been allowed to proceed while lawsuits against it make their way through the courts.

A Supreme Court ruling on Friday has curbed the power of federal judges to block presidential orders, allowing for the birthright citizenship policy to start in 30 days.

For nearly 160 years, the 14th Amendment of the US Constitution has established the principle that anyone born in the country is a US citizen.

But as part of his crackdown on migration numbers, Trump is seeking to deny citizenship to children of migrants who are either in the country illegally or on temporary visas.

The move appears to have public backing. A January poll by Emerson College suggests many more Americans back Trump than oppose him on this.

But how does this compare to citizenship laws around the world?

Birthright citizenship worldwide
--------------------------------

Birthright citizenship, or jus soli (right of the soil), is not the norm globally.

The US is one of about 30 countries - mostly in the Americas - that grant automatic citizenship to anyone born within their borders.

In contrast, many countries in Asia, Europe, and parts of Africa adhere to the jus sanguinis (right of blood) principle, where children inherit their nationality from their parents, regardless of their birthplace.

Other countries have a combination of both principles, also granting citizenship to children of permanent residents.

John Skrentny, a sociology professor at the University of California, San Diego, believes that, though birthright citizenship or jus soli is common throughout the Americas, "each nation-state had its own unique road to it".

"For example, some involved slaves and former slaves, some did not. History is complicated," he says. In the US, the 14th Amendment was adopted to address the legal status of freed slaves.

However, Mr Skrentny argues that what almost all had in common was "building a nation-state from a former colony".

"They had to be strategic about whom to include and whom to exclude, and how to make the nation-state governable," he explains. "For many, birthright citizenship, based on being born in the territory, made for their state-building goals.

"For some, it encouraged immigration from Europe; for others, it ensured that indigenous populations and former slaves, and their children, would be included as full members, and not left stateless. It was a particular strategy for a particular time, and that time may have passed."

Shifting policies and growing restrictions
------------------------------------------

In recent years, several countries have revised their citizenship laws, tightening or revoking birthright citizenship due to concerns over immigration, national identity, and so-called "birth tourism" where people visit a country in order to give birth.

India, for example, once granted automatic citizenship to anyone born on its soil. But over time, concerns over illegal immigration, particularly from Bangladesh, led to restrictions.

Since December 2004, a child born in India is only a citizen if both parents are Indian, or if one parent is a citizen and the other is not considered an illegal migrant.

Many African nations, which historically followed jus soli under colonial-era legal systems, later abandoned it after gaining independence. Today, most require at least one parent to be a citizen or a permanent resident.

Citizenship is even more restrictive in most Asian countries, where it is primarily determined by descent, as seen in nations such as China, Malaysia, and Singapore.

Europe has also seen significant changes. Ireland was the last country in the region to allow unrestricted jus soli.

It abolished the policy after a June 2004 poll, when 79% of voters approved a constitutional amendment requiring at least one parent to be a citizen, permanent resident, or legal temporary resident.

The government said change was needed because foreign women were travelling to Ireland to give birth in order to get an EU passport for their babies.

Reuters

Rights groups had feared a constitutional court ruling in the Dominican Republic would strip tens of thousands of citizenship, mostly of Haitian descent

One of the most severe changes occurred in the Dominican Republic, where, in 2010, a constitutional amendment redefined citizenship to exclude children of undocumented migrants.

A 2013 Supreme Court ruling made this retroactive to 1929, stripping tens of thousands - mostly of Haitian descent - of their Dominican nationality. Rights groups warned that this could leave many stateless, as they did not have Haitian papers either.

The move was widely condemned by international humanitarian organisations and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.

As a result of the public outcry, the Dominican Republic passed a law in 2014 that established a system to grant citizenship to Dominican-born children of immigrants, particularly favouring those of Haitian descent.

Mr Skrentny sees the changes as part of a broader global trend. "We are now in an era of mass migration and easy transportation, even across oceans. Now, individuals also can be strategic about citizenship. That's why we are seeing this debate in the US now."

Legal challenges
----------------

Reuters

President Trump's executive order is already facing a Supreme Court legal challenge

Within hours of President Trump's order, various lawsuits were launched by Democratic-run states and cities, civil rights groups and individuals.

Three federal judges ruled against Trump, issuing nationwide injunctions to block the orders from taking effect.

Most legal scholars agree that President Trump cannot end birthright citizenship with an executive order.

In a win for President Trump, though, on 27 June, the Supreme Court ruled against nationwide injunctions.

In the majority opinion delivered by conservative Justice Amy Coney Barrett, the court said: "Universal injunctions likely exceed the equitable authority that Congress has given to federal courts."

Because of the ruling to limit injunctions, Trump's birthright citizenship order will be able to take effect 30 days after the court's opinion was filed, the court said.

It will apply to the 28 states that did not participate in the lawsuit.

The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the merits of the birthright citizenship order itself at some date in the future.

Most legal scholars believe it likely would be found unconstitutional.

Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote in her dissent that birthright citizenship is the "law of the land" and the order is "patently unconstitutional".

White House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt told reporters on Friday, though, the administration expects the Supreme Court to agree with it and uphold the order in October.
