Title: GPO-CRECB-1930-pt5-v72-13.pdf

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/71/crecb/1930/03/18/GPO-CRECB-1930-pt5-v72-13.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 09 Jan 2022 07:13:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 91

Markdown Content:
1930_  CONGRESSIONAL- RECORD-SENATE  5475 

5764. By Mr.  TARVER=  Petition  of J.  C.  Chambers and others, urging the passage of House bill  2562,  granting an  in-

crease of pension to Spanish-American War veterans; to the Committee on  Pensions. 

5765. By Mr. TEMPLE : Petition  of number of residents of Burgettstown, Washington  County,  Pa.,  in support of  Senate 

bill 476 and House bill 2562, providing for increased rates of pen s ion for  Spanish  War veterans; to the  Committee  on 

Pensions. 

5766. By  Mr.  THATCHER:  Petition  of Howard McDonald and others, of Jefferson  County,  Ky.,  supporting legislation for the relief of veterans of the  Spanish-American  War; to the Committee on  Pensions. 

5767. Also, petition signed by George J. Depner and other citizens of Louisville and Jefferson  County,  Ky.,  supporting Spanish-American War veterans' legislation; to the Committee on  Pensions. 

5768. By Mr.  UNDERHILL=  Petition  of citizens of  Win-

throp,  Mass.,  in behalf of legislation for the  Spanish  War veterans; to the  Committee  on  Pensions. 

5769. Also, petition of ex-service men of the soldiers' home in Massachusetts, urging the passage of House bill  3493,  grant-

ing full payment immediately of the soldiers' adjusted-service certificates; to the Committee on Ways and Means. 5770. By Mr.  VINCENT  of Michigan:  Petition  of residents of 

Saginaw  County,  Mich., urging more liberal pension legislation for veterans of the  Spanish-American  War; to the Committee on 

Pensions. 

5771. By Mr. WALKER:  Petition  of 126 tobacco growers of 

Central,  Ky.,  praying for early consideration of  Congress  for areduction of one-third of taxes now paid on tobacco; to the  Com-

mittee on Ways and Means. 5772. By Mr.  WINGO:  Petition  of citizens of Texarkana, Ark., in behalf of  Sena.te  bill 476 and House bill 2562, to increase pensions of Spanish-American War veterans; to the Committee on  Pensions. 

5773. By Mr.  WOOD:  Petition  of citizens residing at  Shelby, 

Ind., and vicinity, asking for the enactment of legislation  in-

creasing the rates of pension paid to the veterans of the  Spanish 

War period; to the Committee on  Pensions. 

5774. By Mr. WYANT:  Petition  of J. W.  Cochran,  New  Ken-

sington,  Pa.,  advocating passage of House bill 9232 and  Senate 

bill  3086  ; to the Committee on Labor. 5775.  Also,  petition of Mary McGee, president and  205  mem-

bers, Division No. 7, Ladies' Auxiliary of the Ancient  Order  of Hibernians of Monessen,  Pa.,  opposing passage of the  Capper-

Robsion bill ; to the Committee on Education. 

# SENATE -

TuEsnAY,  March  18,  1930 

(Legislative  dtf!l..  of  Mfmda,y,  Jarvuary  6,  1930) 

The  Senate  mef  at 11 o'clock a. m. in open executive session, on the expiration of the recess. Mr.  FESS.  Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk called the roll, and the following  Senators 

answered to their names: Allen George Kendrick .Schall Barkley Glass Keyes Sheppard Bingham Glenn La Follette Shortridge               

> Black Golf McCulloch Simmons Blaine Goldsborough McKellar Smoot Bl ea se Gould McMaster Steck
> Bor a h Greene McNary Steiwer

## ~~ ~ ~~ 0art  ~~dy  ~~~~~  ~~R~i'::           

> Brou ssa rd Harris Norbeck Swanson Capp er Harrison Norris Thomas, Idaho

## 8~~~':~~  ~!~~~as  ~a~e  ~~:!~uokia.                                  

> Copel and Hawes Overman Tydings Couze ns Hayden Patterson Vandenberg Cutting Hebert Phipps Wagner Dale Hefiin Pine Walsh, Mass. Dill Howell Pittman Walsh, Mont. Fess Johnson Ransdell Waterman Fl etcher Jones Robinson. Ind. Watson Frazi er Kean Robsion, Ky. Wheeler

Mr.  SHEPPARD.  The junior  Senator  from  Utah  [Mr.  KING] 

is necessarily -detained from the  Senate  by illness. I will let this announcement stand for the day. I also desire to announce the necessary absence of the Senator from Arkansas  [Mr.  ROBINSON]  and the  Senator  from Pennsyl-vania [l\1r. REED], who are delegates from the  United  States  to the London Naval Conference. Mr.  SCHALL.  My colleague [Mr.  SHIPSTEAD]  is unavoidably absent. I ask that this announcement may _stand for the day. Mr. McKELLAR. I wish to  announce  that my colleague the junior  Senator  from Tennessee [Mr.  BRoCK]  is necessarily de-tained from the  Senate  by illness. I ask that this announce-ment may stand for the day. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Eighty-four  Senators  having answered to their names, a quorum is present. The question is, 

Shall  the  Senate  advise and consent to the nomination of J.  Dun~ 

can Adams to be  United  States  marshal, western district of 

South  Carolina?  

> PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr. President, before I have anything to say with reference to the nomination before the  Senate,  I wish to speak on a personal matter. In this morning's Washington 

Post,  under the headline  "Pay  increase bill reported in  Senate," 

the writer of the article says :Senator  BLEASE,  of South Carolina, has threatened to block the bill unless Maj. Henry G. Pratt is removed a.s chief of police. Further on he says :Senate leaders are  disposed  to let the bill come up as soon  as  possible, providing  BLEASE  does not attempt to filibuster. 

Mr.  President, last night I went to the junior  Senator  from Kentucky  [Mr.  RoBSION]-I  wish  h~  were present-and told him to go ahead and present his bill, that I should not make any objection. With that understanding the  Senator  came into the 

Chamber  while I was speaking, as will be shown in the  RECORD 

at page  5431,  as follows: Mr.  BLEASE  obtained the floor. Mr.  ROBSION  of Kentucky. Will the Senator from South Carolina yield to enable me to present a report? Mr.  BLilASE.  I yield for that purpose. 

I knew what the purpose was. I made no objection to the bill. I have no objection to it now. If the  Senator  from  Ken-

tucky brings it up at any time it is all right with me. I simply make that statement because I do not care to have the report go out as made by the Washington  Post  that I did not have sense enough to know the purpose for which the  Senator  from Kentucky wanted me to yield, and that he was trying to put something over on me, which was not the case, because  he  and 

I thoroughly understood each other.  •

Mr.  ROBSION  of Kentucky. Mr.  President,  will the Senator yield? The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Does the  Senator  from  South 

Carolina  yield to the  Senator  from Kentucky? Mr.  BLEASE.  Certainly . . I did not know the  Senator  was present. Mr.  ROBSION  of  Kentucky.  I wish to say that the  Senator 

from  South  Carolina advised me on yesterday that he had no objection to the measure and urged me to present it. I brought 

it up, asking him to yield because I knew he was friendly to the proposal to bring up the measure at that time. It ce-rtainly does the  Senator  from  South  Carolina great injustice to have such a report go out.    

> CRIME IN THE

DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA 

Mr.  BLEASE . I thank the Senator. I ask in that connection to have inserted in the RECoRD in connection with these remarks a few clippings from the Washington  Post. 

The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered. The clippings referred to are as follows : [From the Washington Post, Sunday, March 16,  1930]                                                                                   

> MAN BADLY BilATEN IN AUTOMOBILE RIDE--CARRIED TO HOSPITAL AFTER
> MOTORIST FINDS HIM ON ROADSIDE-SAYS $200 Is M'ISSING
> Beaten severely in abrawl with four companions in an automobile at Georgia Avenue near the District line and robbed of $200, John By-
> roades, 42 years old, who gave Eighteenth Street NW., near Ontario Road, as his address, received serious injuries early to-day, according to third precinct pollee. -Attendants at Emergency Hospital declared the man was suffering from numerous hurts on the head, three fractured ribs, and possible internal injuries. He was taken

to the hospital by Grover Bell, of 2136 Pennsylvania A venue NW., who declared he was driving out the Wilson Boulevard in Arlington County and upon nearing Clarendon saw the man standing beside the road and waving to him. Mr. Bell said the man told him he had been beaten, robbed, and pitched out of an automobile.  Mr.                                                       

> Bell said he complied with the man's request to rush him to ahospital. Police quoted Byroades as declaring that he had been on adrinking party at an IStreet speak-easy, and that he left with aman named Magruder and another named Ward for anotorious roadhouse on the Baltimore Boulevard. Police said he told them

two strangers joined their  party  and that near Silver Spring they began fighting and that 5476  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-· SENATE  MARcH  is 

he was beaten into  semiconsciousness;  Pollee  said · he told them  · also 

that he remembered asking the men to drive him to the home of a half 

brother near Clarendon, and that they threw him from the car just before reaching that town. 

· Byroades claimed he was robbed of  $200  in  cash,  a watch, and atrinket. 

MAN  GIVEN  FIVE  YEARS  ON  BURGLARY  CHA.llGE 

Henry Ransom, colored, was sentenced by Justice  Peyton  Gordon  in 

District  Supreme  Court yesterday  to  -serve  five  years in prison on acharge -of  · housebreaking  and larceny. Ransom was convicted by a jury several days ago. He is alleged to 

ha..ve  entered the bedroom of a woman on E Street  NE., near Third 

Str:eet.  on January 11  last 1 and  at · the point of a pistol  to · have  forced her to hand over $116 which she had bidden under her pillow.  Assistant 

United  States  Attorneys  Walter  M.  Shea  and  James  R. Kirkland  ap-

peared for the Government. 

SENTENCES  PASSED  IN  RUM  VIOLATIONS--CREAMER  GIVEN  45  DAYS  AND 

FINED  $525-.0N  TRIO  011'  ClUBGES-0THERS  RJ:CJUVE  TERMS 

While 13 persons were arraigned in pollee court yesterday on  charges 

of violating the prohibition law,  a number of persons were aentenced, one  man-Percy  Creamer, 32  years  old, of  235  Four-and-one-half  Street 

SW.-being  sentenced to serve  41>  days in jail and  to  pay  fines  totaling 

$525  or serve  180  days more. Creamer was convicted by a jury  several days ago on  charges  of  pos-

session,  second-()ffense  possession, and nuisance. The  45-day  sentence was meted out on the nuisance count, while the other part of the  !'len-

tence  was _divided, $125 or  60  days on the possession charge  and  $400 

or  120  days on the second-offense conviction. Other sentences were: Joseph Towles, colored,  34  years old,  $400  or 

120  days ; Lawrence  0.  Rite, colored,  30  years  old,  $400  or  90  days, suspended and probation for 1 year  ; Roland  A.  Queen,  colored,  18  y~rs 

old,  $100  or  60  days, suspended; Joseph Alphonzo Wright, colored,  25 

years old,  $300  or  60  days, committed to jail; Joseph Francis Amity, 28  years  old,  $50  or  60  days, fine paid ; and Reginald Harrison, 19 years old,  $400  or  90  days, suspended. Caldwell William Bryant,  34  years  old,  pleaded  guilty  to a charge of  second-<Jtrense  possession and will be sentenced  next  Saturday. Charges  against  James Vernstein, 22 years old, of I Street  NW., 

near  Sixth  Street,  • were  dropped, Assistant  United  States  Attorney David Aiken Hart deciding  that  the evidence was not  su.tncient. 

Twelve  persons  pleaded not guilty to liquor  charges  and  demanded trial by jury, - as follows : Stephen  Jones, colored,  30  · years  old ; . Ernest Jones,  second-()tfense  possession; Fred Bryant  Cbeath _am,  ~olored,  27 years old; Ida Weitzman,  40  years old, possession,  second-()ffense  posses-sion, and nuisance ; Thomas  Stone,  col~red,  28 years old,  second-<Jtr:ense 

possession ; Millar Irving  Trazzore,  30  years  old,  and  George  ~I.J;ner  Bur-

rows, 25 years old ; Henry J ~mes  Carter, colored ; Estelle Thomas, colored, 25 years old  ; Oswald White, colored,  43  years old ; Carter Tatum,  col-

ored, 28 years oid:  and  Willis Oliver, colored,  40  years  old. 

EiGHT  ARE  CAPTURED IN  Frv:m  RuM  !Urns;  140  QQA~s  ALso  SEIZE  BY 

LETTER'Af.AN ' S  SQUAD  IN  NORTHWEST--BLUBOOAT  MADE  TARGET 

Five raids staged last night by  Sergt . Oscar J. Letterman and his squad resulted in the arrest of eight negroes  and  the confiscation of approximately  140  quarts of  assorted  liquors. _In the first raid, on K Street  near  Sixth  Street  NW., Hortense  Aeyers, 

33 years old, and William Aeyers, 37 years old, were charged  wit;h  sale and possession.  On  N Street  near Twenty-third  Street  NW., Anna Thomas,  30  years old,  and  Anderson Royston, 39 years old,  wer~  picked 

up  and  almost  70  quarts of liquor were  tali:en.  '

Others arrested by the squad, composed of Dectectives  James  Mostyn, Richard Cox, and F. A. Truscott, are: Maude  Coleman,  39 years old; Josh Williams,  33  years old; William Logan, 47 years old; and Daniel 

Clayton,  29 years old. Corn liquor has a reputation as being rather powerful  stutr,  but even after being bombarded with  six  half-gallon  jars  of it last night  Police-

man G. E. Perry , of the  sixth  precinct, carried on and got  his  man. 

Seeing  a negro leave an automobile in front of a building on H Street 

NW ., near North Capitol  Street,  and carrying a number of  suspicious-

looking packag es into the place,  Perry  started after him. Halfway up a flight  of  stairs  the  IIUlll  paused and  began  hurling the bottles. All of them struck, and all but one broke. When the  negro 

had exhausted his ammunition the policeman placed him under arrest nnd, retrieving the unbroken bottle, took his captive and evidence to the 

atation  house. There the man gave his name as Augustus Madison,  20  years old, of 26 De Fries  Street  NW. He was held on charges of transportation, illegal possession of liquor, destroying evidence,  assault.  and, when aknife was found in his possession, on the additional  eharge  of . carrying concealed deadly weapons. 

# ,

Herbert  Ross,  colored, of Twenty-fifth  Street,  near I NW., was  ar-

re .sted early last night at One-half and M Streets  SW.  by police o.f the fourth precinct and charged with transporting and possessing  one-

half gallon  of  liquor.  He- was later released on a bond of  $2,000. 

SJIABCil  RllDOUBLJllD  POR  BLACK  HANDERS-SHELBY  INCREASES  GUARD  AT 

SHOP  .AND  HOM»  OJ'  SACHS  AFrD.  Tlm.EATS,.-SUSPECTS  ARE  RE-

LEASED 

Convinced  that  the  i>erpetrator  ot the black-hand death threats  ~n 

the life  of  Frank  Sachs,  District auto repair shop proprietor,  "means 

business,"  Inspector William  Shelby  last night redoubled his  efl'orts  to arrest the blackhander, who, he believes, is an  out-()f-town  racketeer. A thorough  investigation  of every angle of the threats on Mr.  Sachs's 

life and the  shop  proprietor's thrilling experience Thursday when he was  "taken  for a ride,"  beaten, and robbed on the Defense Highway, has led Detective Lieut. Edward J.  Kelly  to believe that the thug  has 

been  hired  to  "do  away"  with  Mr.  Sachs  unless be disposed of his 

new  giass  repair department of his shop. 

As  a"n  extra precautionary measure, Inspector  Shelby  last night 

increa&ed  the guard on Mr.  Sachs's  shop at  609  K Street  NW. and also at Mr.  Sachs's  residence,  906  Emerson  Street  NW. The blackhander thus far has sent three warnings to Mr.  Sachs  to close his glass business. He has telephoned to him twice, the first time  leading  Mr.  Sachs  into his trap on the Defense Highway, when the racketeer threatened to kill Mr.  Sachs  unless  he took heed to the 

threats. 

The last telephone call was made Friday night, but Lieutenant Kelly is of the opinion that it was made by a practical  joker.  Mr. 

Sachs  did not report the Friday call until ' yesterday morning. With police escort he went to the designated place assigned by his caller, which was just over the District line, in Good Hope  district,  Md. When they arrived at the designated spot there was no one about. The telephone message to  Mr.  Sachs  was that he was wanted to  repair 

a car in the Good Hope Road. Detectives visited two garages near the spot, but the proprietors had no  knowledge  of any call  for  Mr.  Sachs's 

assistance. The black-hand notes, scrawled on plain paper bearing District  post-

IIlltrk;  will be turned over to a Federal handwriting  expert  Monday. The  handwr~ting  wlll be compared with that  of  several persons who were  que.tion  by detectives but later released. NEW  TRIAL  DENIED  PATROLMAN  SLAYER-JUSTIClll  GORDON  WILL  PASS 

SENTENCJI  ON  ALDRIDGE  MONDAY  MORNING--0VER.BUI.JJIS  TWO  PLEA .S 

Justice Peyton Gordon in criminal court yesterday overruled motions for a new trial and an arrest  of  judgment filed on behall of Alfred  Scott 

Aldridge, colored, convicted slayer of Policeman Harry J. McDonald. The justice announced that he would  pass · sentence on the man  Mon-

day. Aldridge was convicted  of.  first-degree murder, which automatically 

· carries  with  it the sentence of death in the electric chair.  Se ntence 

would have been passed  yesterday,  except  for the fact that it was after 12 o'clock when arguments on the motion had been conclud ed , and the ruling bad been made:  Under  District law a court can not  sit · after 12  r

o'clock on  Saturdays. 

McDonald was slain last summer when he attempted to arrest Aldridge and  his  brother, Albert Aldridge, for burglarizing a drug store in the northwest section. McDonald fatally wounded Albert Aldridge,  but  the other negro made his getaway, only to be apprehended shortly  after-

wards. Aldridge based his defense on contention that his broth er  had 

killed the policeman, although the pistol with which the police man was slain was found in his room. The pistol found in  Albert  Aldridge's  hand had not  be~!!  discharged. 

SMOKE  LAW  CASES  CONTINUED  1N  COURT--ASSISTANT  SCHOOL  SUPERIN-

TilNDENT  ONE  o:r  Two  FACING  VIOLATION  CHABGE--HE  PnoTEsTs 

ACTION 

Two  charges  of violating the smoke law were continued in police court yesterday when the defendants appeared before Judge  Ralph  E. Given. A charge against Jere J. Crane, first assistant superintendent of schools, w. as continued until Thursday to enable his counsel, Attorney Walter Johnson, opportunity to file a motion to quash the information.  _

A similar charge against David B. Karrick,  vice  presid e nt of the Fidelity  Storage  Co., 1819 G Street  NW., was continued until Tuesday. Mr. Crane was cited for alleged violation of the smoke law at  fu.e 

Wilson Normal  School,  Eleventh and Harvard  Streets  NW. The alleged violation  is  said to have occurred on February 28. Last Monday Mr. Crane was arraigned before Judge Given on the charge and declared that the warrant should have been served on the principal  of  the school. 

While  in  court  yesterday Mr. Crane declared that the principals of the District schools or the janitors have received complaints of excess smoke coming  from  the chimneys of their  respecti-ve  buildings and again re-iterated his  belief  that he should not be  held  responsible for the alleged 

violations. 

I1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE 5477 

CAn  RuM RAID  CAsE  GoES  ro  HIGH  coun'l'--A.PPELLATE  TRmuNAL  ro 

RULE  ON  INVASION  WHERE  NO  WARRANT  WAS  UsED--ERROR  WRIT Is 

GRANTED 

The  District  of Columbia Court  of  Appeals is to pass on the question whether prohibition agents and other  officers  of tlie law can enter abusiness establishment a. nd conduct a search  for whisky, This was evidenced yesterday when the court announced it had granted  a writ  of  error in the case of Enos Croce, operator  of  a

restaurant on H Street  NW., near Thirteenth  Street,  who was con-victed in police court last November and sentenced  by  Judge John P. McMahon to pay a fine of  $250  or serve  60  days in jail. Testimony was to the  effect  that a raiding squad entered the restau-rant and made  a complete search. There was no search warrant. The raiders claimed  that  they  found a small quantity  of  liquor in the kitchen, which  was  separated from the dining room by a partition and  a 

> doo~

·

Attorney George F. Lemm, who represented Croce,  filed  a motion to quash the information on  which  his  client  was  tried on the grounds that there had been no warrant and that the search and seizure was illegal under the Constitution. Judge McMahon, however, overruled the mo-tion, and it is on this that the appeal to the higher tribunal was taken. 

RUM  QUEIIN  IS  SENT  TO  JAIL  FOR  90  DAYS-APPEALS  COURT  REFUSBS 

AID TO  TEsSIE  RICHARDS  A.lrTER  SENTENCii>---$500  FINE  ALSO  LEVIED 

Tessie Richards, who, pollee say, is one of Washington's best-known speak-easy operators, and who is alleged to have declared she would stop selling  liquot·  only when she was sent to jail, was sentenced  bY 

Justice Peyton Gordon in District  Supreme  Court yesterday to serve  90 

days in jail and pay  a $500  fine on a charge  of  third~ffense  possession and to pay  a $500  fine  on another charge. At the same time it was announced that the Government had nolle-prossed  tWo  other charges against her. 

The  woman is now serving a 90-day  sentence imposed by Judge John 

P:  McMahon in pollee court following her conviction on  a charge  of 

second-offense  possession, and Justice Gordon stipulated that the  90-day 

sentence he meted out should run concurrently with the one she is 

sening. 

AttacMs  of  the  United  States  attorney's  office  state that the woman has operated  for  some time in the vicinity of Thireenth and C Streets 

NW. Padlock proceedings are pending against two of the places where she was arrested and charged with violating the prohibition law. Following her conviction in police court, the woman, through her attorney, Howard R. Stephenson, applied for a writ of error, but the District Court of Appeals refused to grant it and ordered that the sen-tence of the court be put into  eJfect. 

[From the Washington Post,  Sunday,  March 16, 1930] 

ROVER  TfES  UP  $2,000,000  BY  DRY  PADLOCKS-SIXTY-oNE  PIECES  OJ' 

REAL  ESTATE  IN  DISTRICT  INVOLVED  IN  PROCEEDINGs-EIGHTEEN 

PLACIIS  CLOSED  FOR  YEAR  PIIIRIODS-DISTRICT  ATTORNEY  TAKES  STilPS 

FOR  PREVENTION  OF  FUTURE  BONDS-MOST  0FF11!NDERS  ARE  SOON 

EVICTED--ONLY  Two  INSTANCEs  FoUND  OJI'  VIOLATING  CouaT 

INJUNCTIONS 

By Dunbar Hare Due to prohibition enforcement  efforts  in  the  District  of  Columbia 

during the past two years, 61 pieces of  real  estate, valued at approxi-mately  $2,000,000,  have been or still are involved in  liquor  padlock 

proceedings. 

Court injunctions  closing  premises for a year's time have been issued in 18 instances, and  in  12  United  States  Marshal  Edgar C.  Snyder  has attached locks and seals to the doors. In  six  instances property owners have convinced the court that they were not aware that the prohibition law was being violated in their buildings and have been permitted to make bonds of between  $500  and  $1,000.  The bonds are  effective  for 

the length  of  the injunction, which under the law must be one year. Possibility that any more property owners whose holdings are jeop-

ardized  by padlock will be admitted to bond  has  practically been re-

moved.  Early last fall  United  States  Attorney Leo A. Rover, cooperat-ing with the police department, compiled  a list  of every known place where liquor had been sold in the last two years and sent notices of these violations to the owners. To date  250  letters have been sent to tbe owners, and in practically every instance tenants who have been convicted of violating the prohibition laws have been evicted. 

LETTER  PART  OF  JCXHmiT 

Records of these places are now kept in Mr. Rover's  office,  and when padlock proceedings are instituted against any of them copies of the letter sent to the owner are  made  a part of the exhibit in the case. This system has just been begun, but is expected to be very productive of results in future. Proceedings are now pending against  43  pieces of property. Three of these date back to 1928, but Mr. Rover and Assistant  United  States 

Attorney Harold W.  Orcutt!  chief  of  the padlock department,  hope  to be able to dispose  o!  a large  numbe _r of cases within the next month or two. Due to the congested condition of the equity court calendar it has been  difficult  to sandwich the padlock cases in for final hearing. In a

number of instances, however, decrees pro confesso have been signed by the justices, while in  every  instance temporary injunctions, restraining the defendants from using the premises for violation of the prohibition law, are in  effect.  The  tempora-ry  orders, however, do not close the property against which it is directed. The decrees pro confesso are taken where there is no defense  offered 

by the defendants, and the only step necessary before the premises are padlocked is  a final order under the signature of  a judge. 

FOUR  MORE  ORDERS _, 

Both  M'r.  Rover and Mr.  Orcutt  expect to have at least four more  final 

orders signed during the pres e nt week. Then comes the padlock. 

Under  the final orders, where no bond is granted the owner, the prop-erty is closed for  a year and can not be used for any purpose, and  fix-

tures, furnitu .re, and other  equipment  ~n  not be moved. If  the  injunc· tion is ignored  contempt  of court proceedings are instituted. Padlock proceedings are brought under title 2 of  the  national prohi-bition act. Tenants and owners are made joint defendants. The own-ers are the principal  sufferers,  however, since in addition to losing the use of their property for  a year, when the final decree is signed, they are not relieved from the burden of paying taxes. ALL  BEGUN  BY  ROVER 

The 61 padlock suits mentioned have all been instituted since Mr. Rover took over the job of being  United  States  attorney on  April ··  3, 

1928. A few brought during the  r~gimes  of other  United  States  attor-neys are still pending, but due to the length of elapsed time and lack of  sufficient  evidence they probably will remain on the docket until the court is asked to dismiss them.  ·

Mr. Rover believes that in every instance where he has asked for apadlock injunction that he will get it when the case comes up for final bearing. 

" Captain  Orcutt  has  been very careful to get a preponderance of  e'Vi· 

dence of  Violations  of the law before he has moved to put the locks on 

a piece of  property,"  said Mr. Rover.  "In  this connection he has had the able assistance of Assistant  United  States  Attorney John B. Wil-liams and  Special  Treasury Department Attorneys C. M. Kiefer and Frank H. H. Nolte. 

ONLY  TWO  VIOLATIONS 

" While to some people 61 applications for padlocks in almost two years may not seem impressive, it is when it is considered that not  a ·

single one of them  has  been instituted as a bluff.  Every application has been filed with the serious intention of closing up the designated 

premises." 

In only two instances have injunctions-temporary or permanent-been violated, according to records. Frank  Shore  is under sentence  of 

one year following his conviction on  a charge of contempt of court in connection with the alleged violation of a temporary injunction placed on his tire shop at 1223 New York Avenue NW.  Since  then the  perma· 

nent injunction  has  been signed and the place is under lock and seal. 

Shore  has an appeal from the sentence pending in the District of Columbia Court of Appeals. Albert Schlossberg and  Paul  Schlossberg were convicted of contempt of court in connection with a final injunction covering the premises at 

1019  H Street  NE.,  and paid fines of  $500. 

GARAGES  ARm  CLOSED 

Notable among the recent padlocks  affixed  by the  United  States  at-torney was the closing of garages at  2101-2105  Fourteenth Street NW. and 1319 L Street  NW. The Government moved to close the property early last summer after the  arrest  of Herbert Glassman, operator of the two establishments, and 11 others on charges of conspiracy to violate the prohibition act. Glassman and the others are now unde.r indict-ment. The owner of the L Street  property was denied bond despite his pledge to see that the place was not used for the violation ot the dry law. Tessie Richards, who was sentenced yesterday on charges of violating the prohibition law is involved in two padlock proceedings. The Gov-ernment alleges she occupied and violated the law at 1313 C Street  NW. and 317 Thirteen-and-one-halt  Street  NW. Premises padlocked for a year  are  as follows : 1240  Twenty-second street NW., Raymond Carl Leimbaeh, tenant; 212 Ninth  Street · NW., Frank McCormack, tenant ; corner Totten Road and Fort Drive NE., James and Rosetta Anderson, tenants; 34 H Street  NW., Timothy J. Daly, tenant; 1742 L Street  NW., Harry Hartman, tenant; 2105 L

Street  NW., Frederick Williams, tenant; 2609 Wade Road  SE.,  John 

Samuel  Harley and Martha Harley, tenants; 1211  U Street  NW., Gay Paree Club, Robert Elmore Ray, tenant; 1223 New York Avenue NW., Frank  Shore,  tenant;  2101-2105  Fourteenth  Street  NW. and 1319 LStreet NW., Herbert  Glassman,  tenant; 1126  Seventh  Street  NW., Mike Kaplan, tenant. 5478  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN  ATE  MARCH  18  

> OWNlDRS G.l

1'11  BOND 

Premises  where owners have given bond are  1338  North Capitol  Street, 

1019  H Street  NE.,  1120  Eighteenth  Street  NW., 312 F Street  NE., 1123  Seventeenth  Street  NW. ,  and  908-910  Fourteenth  Street  NW. The Mades Hotel, at  300  Pennsylvania  .Avenue NW., former haunt  of 

Washington notables ; the '' Garden  of  Naples,"  at 423 Eleventh  Street 

NW.;  and  the  "A.  B.  C."  lunch  room.  at  600  D Street  NW., across the street  from  police court, are among the premises against which proceed-ings are now pending. 

· The estimate of the value  of  the  property  is  Mr. Rover's,  being  based  

> an

assessed valuations for taxes, statements made at the time of  final 

hearings, and in  ·some  cases on the value  of  the property  as  fixed  by conde mnation  juries . .  ·several  of  the pending suits involve property 

wanted  by the Government.  •·         

> "TwO FR1ENDS "ALLOWED TO ENTER AS WORKMEN

Fix  RAID  DAMAGIII 

Pictt{res  of a supposed gaming establishment in Ninth  Street,  near D

· Street,  were obtained by pollee photographers yesterday before the place even was ready to open  for  busin ess. Detective  Sergeants  Arthur  Feeley and Benjamin Kuehllng visited the establi s hment yesterday morning. It was the same place that was raided by  Sergt.  Oscar J. Letterman's squad Monday, when  an  the occupants made their escape before the  raiders  had battered down a14-inch concrete wan. A hidden bell in the  hallway  of  the establishment was  rung  by the police visitors  yesterday,  Suddenly  a man  peered through a small slot in the door. 

" Who's there?  " he  demanded.  ·

".A  couple  of  friends,"  said the detectives. The  heavy  oak door  which  led to a corridor was opened by a carpenter who was repairing the wreckage left by the raiders  on  their last visit. . Several  heavy  doors were opened which led to the alleged gaming  room, 

where a squad  of  carpenters was at work rearranging tables. The detectives reported the incident to Inspector William  Shelby,  who ordered photographs taken. The police photographers took  " shots  "

· from  every angle of  ·the  establishment while the carpenters looked on amused. 

·•  We're only  carpenters,"  one of the workers chirped.  " It sure would be a laugh  on the police if this place was to reopen as a restaurant."      

> STATION PICKPOCKETS .VICTIMIZED TWO WOMEN

Pickpockets operating In the  Union  and  Mount  Vernon  Stations  yes-

terday  robbed two women. 

Miss  Jane  Cotfrey,  of Landover,  Md.,  said  she was in the waiting room at the  Union  Station  when her pocketbook, containing  $3,  a railroad 

pass, and a signet ring, was stolen. A pocketbook containing about  $15 

was taken from Estelle R. Reme,  of  3601  Suitland  Road  SW.,  in the 

Mount  Vernon  Station.         

> STOREKEEPER SHOT IN DEFENDING CASH-MAx RmtKES WO~NDED TwiCE
> BY

Two  YOUNG  MEN  IN  HOLDuP--Coun  Is  .ABANDoNED 

Max  Reikes,  62-year:.Old  delicatesSen  proprietor,  of  l08  East Capitol 

Street,  is at Casualty Hospital in a serious condition from two  gunshot 

wounds,  received.  last night when he was shot twice  while  defending his money from  two- young white men. 

One bullet pierced his right  nrm  and . the other penetrated his left breast.  , . . 1

Dr. Louis Jimal,  sta1f  physician,  said  that Reikes's condition was critical. 

Mr.  Reikes  was  held up  shortly  before  10  o'clock.  Two men came in, 

loitered  about until customers had lett, and then threatened him  with 

· a revolver. They  rliled  the cash  register  of  about  $20  and  fled,  amindon-

. ing a small  coup~  in which they are  believed  to have ridden. The shots were fired when  Mr.  Reikes attempted to  balk  the robbers.. C. M.  Shipp,  13  First  street  NE., manager of a lunch room at 141 B

Street  SE.,  almost frustrated the holdup. He noticed the two men 

early  in the  night  and  when  they  aroused  his  suspicions,  he followed them. When they went into the store, he went in also, and bought 

· some meat for his dog.  As  be left he  heard  one of the men mutter 

"Watch  that  man." 

Mr.  Shipp  was forced to leave to  eall  .tor  hls  wife,  and with her  reo 

turned  past the store. They saw one  of  the men on the  curb . in front 

. and the other  in  the store. The man in  tlie  store ran out and joined his . companion as Mr.  Shipp  arrived,  and  ~e  pair  fled  out . towa:r_:d  East 

Capitol Street.. Both wore caps and light-gray overcoats.  Mr.  Shipp 

told pollee he trailed the men for more than  an  hour. 

Througb the  abandoned  car  police hope to learn the  identity  of the pair. The tags are being  traced.    

> WILD DASH IN

CAB  BBINGS  $150  FINB-JOHN  MeG.  WILLIAKS  -GOliiB  TO      

> ROCKVILLE .TAIL AS RJcSUI.lr OJI' ~H

1ames  McGill  Williams,  Newton  Street  near  Eighteenth . Sqeet  NE., 

was fined a total of  $150  in Montgomery  County  police  ~ourt . at  Bock-

vllle  yesterday by Judge Charles W. Woodward on charges of excessive 

speed  and  reckl~  driving. 

Mr. Williams was arrested Thursday night after a wild chase from near Bethesda to the  outskirts  of Rockville,  which  ended when his car turned  over  and  caught  fire. 

The  four  occupants,  Mr.  Williams,  Miss  Florence  Sa:rty,  Miss  Helen McKern, and John Edward Thomas, all of Washington, escaped with minor cuts and  bruises.  Mr. Williams failed to pay the  fine  yesterday and was remanded to the Rockville jail to begin  serving  150  days in lleu  of  the fine. [From the Eve .ning  Star,  WasbingtoJY,  D. C., Monday, March 17, 1930]     

> WOnxEn WHO SOUGHT POLICE

Am  IS  ROBBED  HOURS  LATER-OFFICER                

> STANDS GUARD AS FILLING STATION IS CLOSED FOR NIGHT--EMPLOYEE
> SLUGGED WllliiN PLACiil IS Rll:OPENED FOR BUSINESS To-DAY

Having dreaded work on  Sunday  ever  since  his :filling station was robbed a year ago,  Sidney  J".  Cartvriendt,  38,  an  employee of the  Stand-

ard  Oil  Co. at its station  at  Fifteenth  Street  and Pennsylvania Avenue 

SE .,  jokingly told a policeman  I.ast  night  th~t  he  might  need  protection. 

He  was  taken seriously, and when be locked the  safe  at  10  o'clock, 

stu11lng  currency, checks,  and  silver coins in a steel-guarded opening in the wall, a policeman stood at the door. A few minutes after 7 o'clock this morning Cartvrtendt was be. aten  un-

conscious by a mysterious assailant, who slugged him as he stood with his back to the  station  entrance, his head almost in the safe. While an 

air-compressor  pump operated noisily in a corner, drowning out the  noise, 

the intruder  rimed  the  safe  of  approximately  $350  and  fied. 

Cartvriendt regained consciousness in a few minutes. Rubbing alump  on · the left side of  his  head  with  one hand he pulled a telephone receiver  from  its hook with the other and called  "Police."  Policeman R. L. Eubanks,  of  the fifth precinct, responded and with Detective T. M. 

McVarry,  also  of  No. 5, questioned Cartvriendt at length. Cartvriendt later was  taken  to Casualty Hospital. Dr. J. D. Rogers of the hospital  sta11,  who performed  an  examination, said he recom-mended that Cartvriendt remain for observation, but that he insisted on 

returning  to his home.  Cartvriendt . was  advised  by  Doctor Rogers to stay in bed for 48 hours.    

> VICTlH SAW NO ONJl

"I  didn ' t see anything or  anybody,"  Cartvriendt  told the omcers.  "I 

got here a few minutes before 7, started the pump going, and opened the safe to start work. I hadn't even put change money in my pocket when somethJng socked me.  Next  thing I knew I was lying here  behind  the stove with a roaring pain in my head .., 

Nobody in the neighborhood saw  any  Jlctlvity  at  the  filling  station, and the officers were  unable  to establish  any  evidence as to the identity of the robber. Cartvriendt supposed his assailant entered at the door, his approach covered by the  noise  of  ·the  pump. He told the policemen be had not noticed anything unusual about the premises. 

"I  saw the same people I  usually  see, and there were no customers 1n 

the few minutes I ltnew  what was going  orr,"  he  said. 

The  filling  station is situated . about  ·a  block  from  the Pennsylvania A venue Bridge over the Potomac. It was robbed on a Sunday  about a year ago by a thief who entered the window and took  $506.  Cart-

vriendt said he had  dreaded  working on  Sunday  ever since.  " But I

was joking last night when I said I might need  protection,"  he  said. 

The station had not been guarded and the protection  afforded  last  night 

was the first.   

> NOBODY HANGING AROUND

Detectl"ve  McVarry  was at the precinct when the call was received 

last  night, asking that somebody be sent down. He. didn't know who 

answered  the  call,  and the precinct day  staff  did not know this morning who  visited  with  Ca.rtvriendt  while he put away about  $400  in currency nnd checks. But everything was orderly. 

"I  closed up at  10  o'clock,"  Cartvriendt said,  "and  locked the safe while the policeman  was  here. There was nobody hanging around the 

place." 

Cartvriendt, who resides  at  11  Park  Avenue, Hyattsville, Md., was not seriously burt. He  suffered  intense headache, but the scalp was not cut. He  has  been  employed . by the  Standard  Oil  Co. about three years. Most of the money was in checks, Cartvrlendt told the policemen, explaining that he had cashed several employees' checks with receipts of yesterday.  A preliminary  audi"t  revealed that the robber had left the 

sum  of $59.96, most  of  which was in checks .A survey  of  the premises by  McVarry,  Eubanks,  and Policeman W. E. 

Laux,  also  assigned to the case, developed nothing tangible to work on.             

> CBOWD CAPTUBIIS THIIATJIB BANDIT--PuBSU:m!S CONTINUJC CHASJC IN FACE
> OB VOLLEY 01' SHOTS FROM FUGITIVE

Ignoring a volley of pistol bullets a crowd  of  men  last  night  pursued 

and  captured  George B.  Mason,  colored.  of New York City, after he had snatched  a·  cash box containing  $476  from an employee of the Lincoln Theater, U between Thirteenth  and  Fourteenth  Streets. 1930  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN  ATE  5479                                                           

> Mason applied for work at the theater shortly after lQ o'clock last
> night. When an employee appeared with the cash box he snatched it
> and ran, police say. Anum~r ot: other employees and patrons gave chase, capturing the ma .n at Fourteenth and WStreets after he had fired three shots at them. Mason was beaten by the crowd .and then taken

to Freedmen's  Hos-                                                                                                                                                         

> pital for treatment by Acting Lieut. A. I. Bullock, Sergt. A. E. Miller, and Detective R. A. Williams, of the eighth precinct, who placed him under arrest. He was booked for investigation.
> OFFICER ARRESTS MAN DESPITE LIQUOR RAIN
> Braving astorm of "flying" liquor and large glass jars, Policeman G. E. Perry, of the sixth precinct, charged up astairway in ahome in the first block of HStreet to apprehend the thrower, Augustus Madison, colored. Then, with soak ed clothes which reeked of "corn "and agallon of
> "evidence" 'Ullder an arm, the officer led Madison to the station house to charge him with whisky possession and assault. The latter charge was placed opposite his name after ahalf-gallon jar filled with liquor struck Perry as be ascended the stairs .Judge Isaac R. Hitt in police court to-day gave Madison asuspended sentence of ayear in jail for assault, while the defendant asked for a
> jury trial in the "whisky case."
> SOUTH O.AROLINA POSTMASTERS

Mr. BLEASE. Mr.  President,  with reference to the South Carolina postmastership, about which I spoke last night, my friend, the chairman of the committee, the Senator from  Colo-

rado [Mr.  PHIPPS]--

Mr.  PHIPPS.  Mr. President, may we not reach that in its proper order on the calendar? Mr. BLEASE. I was just about to say that when we reach that nomination the Senator from Colorado will make a state-ment which will be perfectly satisfactory. _I want to make for the RECoRD just another short statement. I shall not detain the Senate long this morning. I made aspeech in the Senate on the 3d of January, 1929, in which Isaid: There bas been for some time much discussion  as  to the  sale  of post offices in my State. I have, when nominations were sent in, requested from an appointee an amdavit that he or she has not paid  or  promised to pay any amount to any person or persons for their influence or sup-port in  securing  said position, and unless such affidavit was filed with me I have declined to allow the party to be confirmed, save in one instance, at the home post office of the senior Senator from my State. I now have in my possession these affidavits, and if any  person  has been confirmed and there is any proof anywhere that be has com-mitted perjury in making these affidavits, any person knowing  of  the facts can prosecute and convict him for perjury in  South  Carolina. In the same remarks I said :I have no objection to Mr. Hoover kicking Tolbert out. Then I went on and made some other remarks in reference to Mr. Tolbert. Mr. President, I desire that my position in this matter shall not be misunderstood. I am not asking to name any person to any office or position in my State, but I do think that when the authorities decide on a nominee for any position, that I, as  a

Senator, am entitled to the courtesy of having it submitted to to me, and if I have any objections, let me present my reasons for the consideration of those making the appointment, and if they are substantial, let the person be not appointed. I do not desire to control the patronage in my State under aRepublican administration. I believe to the victor belongs the spoils; but when there are no victors, but those who claim to be victors after the battle has been won, I feel that the repre-sentatives from the State should at least have the opportunity to present their objections. I have the very distinguished honor of having been born and reared in a county in which not a vote was returned or appears on the official record as having been cast for  HerQert  Hoover  for:  President. That is my posi-tion, and I have no reason to change it. I have no desire to change it. I notice in the report submitted by the Senator from Iowa [Mr.  BRooKHART]  that in speaking of the  Charleston  Hotel aman testified that it was known as a kind of a bootlegging place. I have stopped at the old Charleston Hotel for  40  years. The first time I went to Charleston in my manhood I stopped there, and I have been stopping there from that day on. If I have good health, I expect to be there on the  lOth,  11th, 12th, and 13th of next month. I do not say that there is no whisky drank in that hotel, but I do  resent.  the imputation, whoever this wit-ness was, to the effect that the Charleston Hotel is a bootlegging joint. I have  never seen  ~ drink of whisky delivered in  that 

L:XXII--345 

hotel; I . have never seen a drop bought in it ; but I have seen some drunk in it. However, I do not want the impression to go out over the country from this report that if a gentleman 

goes  to Charleston with his wife he should not stop at the Charleston Hotel because it is a bootlegging joint. I have stopped there for these many years, and I have carried my wife there with me many times. I do not think there is a Senator in this  Chamber,  whatever his opinion of me may be, who would think that I would carry my wife into any but the best hotels in the country.  ·

Mr.  President,  without taking any further time of the  Sen -

ate, I want to call the attention of my brother Senators from the South to one fact, and then ii they desire to vote to con-firm  Cobb  they may do so, but I do not propose to do it. Iobjected to the confirmation last night because I did not pro-pose to let the report go back to my home that I had voted to confirm a negro for any office, I do not care what - office it may be. Just a few weeks ago there was a white woman in this town-! do not care if she  is  as low down as a snake, she was a white woman, and she bas two white children in school in this city-who was tried in this court by a negro jury.  As  an American citizen I protest against that.  It  does not make any difference where I come from, I think it is an outrage and adisgrace upon the Government that a white woman should be subjected to being tried by a set of niggers, I do not care how well educated or how rich they are or who they are. The Senate may confirm Cobb if they wanf to, but I want it 

understood  that there is one man from the South who stands upon this floor protesting against it. His confirmation would be an outrage, and it ought not to be allowed. The President of the  United  States, if he has the power, should instruct the courts here that they have enough white judges and they have 

· enough  white jurors here not to humiliate a white woman.  She 

ru r. y be low down, but she is a woman and she  is  the mother  of 

two little innocent children. To so humiliate her is an out-rage. Talk about anarchy! That will bring it. Of course, no such thing will ever be attempted in my State, but if it  

> wer~well,

there would be more niggers going out  of  windows than ever before went out of  any  courthouse in this country. J.  DUNCAN  ADAMS 

The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. The question  is,  Shall the Senate  advise  and consent to the nomination of J. Duncan Adams to be  United  States  marshal for the western  district  of South Carolina? Mr. BLEASE. I a sk that the nomination be carried over. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. The nomination will go over.   

> THOMAS D. THACHER

The Chief  Clet·k  read the nomination of Thomas D. Thacher to be Solicitor General of the  United  States. Mr.  OVERMAN.  Mr. President, I ask that the consideration of this nomination be temporarily postponed. Let it go over for the present. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. The nomination will go over.   

> EDGAB 0. GEDDIE

The Chief Clerk read the nomination of Edgar  C.  Geddie to be  United  States marshal for the eastern district of North Carolina. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi-nation is confirmed. CLINT W.  HAGER 

The Chief  Clerk  read the nomination of Clint W. Hager to be 

United  States attorney, northern  district  of Georgia. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi-nation is confirmed.  ARTHUR  .ARNOLD 

The Chief  Clerk  read the nomination of Arthur Arnold to be 

United  States attorney for the northern district of West Virginia. _The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi-nation is confirmed.  JAMES  A.  COBB 

The Chief Clerk read the nomination of James  A..  Cobb to be judge of the Municipal  Court  of the District of Columbia. The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi-nation is confirmed.  COAST  GUARD 

The Chief Clerk read the nomination of Edward M. Kent to be constructor in the  Coast  Guard.  -

The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi-nation  is- confirmed. 5480  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN  ATE  MARCH  18 

POST-oFFICE  NOMINATIONS  "It  has  been  the aspiration  of  Republican Presidents over many years The  Chief  Clerk proceeded to read the nominations of post- to build up sound Republican organization in the Southern  States  of  such masters. character as would commend itself to the citizens of those  States. 

Mr. PHIPPS. Mr. President, I ask first to recur to page 11  "This  aspiration has arisen out of no narrow sense of partisanship 

Qf  the calendar, and I ask that  Calendar  No.  3085,  being  the·  but from the conviction shared in equally by the leaders of all parties nomination of Foster P. Lee to be postmaster at Lamar,  S.  C.,  · that  the basis of sound government must rest upon strong 2-party which bas been unfavorably reported by the  committee,  be representation and organization; that the voice of all  States  in the rejected. councils of the  (}{)vernment  can be assured by no other means; that the The PRESIDENT pro tempore. The question is Will the welfare of. the Nation at large requires tlie breaking down of sec-Senate advise and consent to the nomination referred to by the tionalism in politics; that the public service can be assured only by Senator from Colorado. [Putting the question.] The noes have responsible organization. Furthermore, it has been the belief of these it, and the nomination is rejected. leaders, whose views I share, that the building up of such organizations Mr. PHIPPS.  On  the same page,  Calendar  No. 2845, I ask must in every conception of our foundations of local self-government 

that  the nomination of John  S.  l\IcCall  to be postmaster at evolve from those  States  themselves. Society Hill,  S.  C.,  be passed over witliout prejudice.  "Republican  leadership in the Border  States  and in Virginia and The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi- North Carolina has long since built up vigorous party organization which nation will be passed over. assures Republican representation in the Congress from those  States. 

Mr.  PIDPPS.  I also ask that Calendar No.  3008,  Wesley D.  "~n  other  States,_  including Alabama,  Arkansas,  Louisiana, Texas, and Banks to be postmaster at  St.  Matthews,  S.  C.,  may be passed Flonda, the  Republican  leadership has in recent times shown increasing over without prejudice. strength and is now rendering able and conscientious service in main-The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection the nomi- taining wholesome organization under whose advice the appointments to nation will be passed over. ' public office have steadily improved and commended themselves to the Mr. PHIPPS. Referring to the nomination of postmaster at citizens of those  States  with  Increased  confidence in the  party,  I highly 

· Alamo, Ga.,  Carlos  C.  Hartley, Calendar No. 2975, I ask that it  appr~ve  and welcome the movement of the leaders of Texas, Alabama, may be passed over without prejudice. Flonda, and other  States  to broaden the basis of party organization by 

· The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  'Without  objection the nomi- the establishment of advisory committees of the highest type of citizen-nation will be passed over. ' ship to deal with administrative questions  and  who will also cooperate 

Mr.  McKELLAR.  I ask, on page 11,  Calendar  No. 2938 that with independent Democrats. This movement, springing as it does from the nomination of Roberta J. Tatum  to  be postmaster at  Alamo,  within the  States  themselves, insures its strength, permanence, and Tenn., may be passed over without prejudice. constant improvement in public service. The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection the nomi- "Recent  exposures of abuse in recommendations for Federal  office 

nation will be passed over. ' particularly in some parts of the  States  of  South  Carolina., Georgia  and 

Mr. PHIPPS. Mr. President, I ask that all other nomina- Mississippi, under which some of the Federal departments,  main!;  the tions of postmasters be confirmed en bloc and that the  President'  Post  Office, were misled in appointments, obviously render it impossible be notified. for the old organizations in those  States  to command the confidence of The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, the nomi- the administration, although many members of these organizations are nations are confirmed en bloc. not subject to criticism. But such conditions are intolerable to public service, are repugnant to the ideals and purposes of the Republican     

> ARMY AND NAVY NOMINATIONS

Party,  are unjust to the people of the  South,  find  must be ended. The The  Chief  Clerk proceeded to  read  the nominations for Army and Navy. Mr. HALE. I ask that the nominations for the Army and Navy be confirmed en bloc and that the President be notified. the duty of reorganization so as to correct these conditions rests with the people of those  States,  and all  elrorts  to that end will receive the hearty cooperation of the administration.  It  these three  States  are unable to initiate such organization through the leadership of men who will command confidence and protect the public service, the  different 

Federal departments will be compelled to adopt other methods to secure advice as to the selection of Federal employees." The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection the nomi-nations are confirmed en bloc. The President will 'be notified of all confirmati-ons this day made. That completes the calendar.  

> FEDERAL

PATRONAGE  IN  SOUTHERN  STATES 

Mr.  FESS.  Mr. President, before we leave the executive ses-sion to go into legislative session I want to take one or two minutes with refe-rence to what was said by the Senator from South  Carolina  [Mr.  BLEAsE],  and also with reference to the report submitted by the patronage committee headed by the Senator from Iowa [Mr.  BROOKHART]. 

There has always been more or less confusion in patronage matters in the Southern States. That has never been more keenly understood than by the present administration . Three weeks after the present President was inaugurated the situation was called to his attention; and keenly recognizing the confu-sion existing, he issued a statement to the newspapers of the country in regard to patronage in the Southern States. The re-port submitted by the so-called patronage committee, which came to our  desks  on yesterday, involves four States--Georgia, South 

Carolina,  Mississippi, and Texas. In all of those States the references made in this report relate to matters taking place before the present administration came into power, and have nothing .to do with what the present administration is trying to accomplish. There have been committees set up in order  to 

minimize this confusion, and I had supposed that there was gen-eral satisfaction, as much as could be expected under the cir-cumstances. I know all Senators want to  deal  fairly in matters of this kind, and I have the statement which was made by the President three weeks after he was inaugurated on this subject. I do not want to take the time to read it myself, but I should like to have it read from the desk. The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, the clerk will read, as requested. Mr.  McKELLAR.  Mr. President, what is the  matter  the  Sen-

ator desires the clerk to read? Mr.  FESS.  It is a statement of the President in reference to southern patronage made about three weeks after he was inaugurated. The  Chief  qerk  read as follows: In reply to queries from the  ,press  upon organization questions In  the 

South  the President stated:  ·  

> MARCH 26, 1929.

Mr.  FESS.  Mr.  President, I simply wanted, in fairness to the administration, to have the statement of the President read which indicates that he has not been pleased with some  thing~ 

that have gone on in certain  States  under the direction of the local -Republican leaders, that he has taken decisive steps look-ing to a reorganization in the interest of better conditions in the public service, and that he does not approve but on the other hand, certainly condemns any efforts such  ~s  h~ve  been alleged to have been made to sell patronage. None of us would stand for a thing of that sort; I would condemn it as bitterly as language would permit me to do so; and I feel sure that the President feels the same way .Mr. McKELLAR.  Mr.  President, in reference to the matter that the Senator from  Ohio  [Mr. FEss] has just been talking about, I desire to say that I happen to be a member of the com-mittee that investigated the sale of patronage and kindred matters in the South. There were four  noteworthy- cases. There may have been more, but four were brought to the atten-tion of the committee after I became a member of it. . O?e  _:was  the rather celebrated case of Perry Howard, of Mis-

SISSippi,  who was found to be selling offices, and who was al-lowed by the Department of Justice to resign as an Assistant Attorney General of the  United  States.  That is all right. I do not know that it was necessary to fire him, though it might have been. However, I make no complaint about the manner of getting rid of him. The next case was that of J. D. E. Meyer, of South Carolina, a district attorney who apparently, according to the  evidence-

and he himself testified-was associated with the most vicious interests in South  Carolina  and was not  enforcing  the law. The President allowed him to resign. That is all right. I have no criticism at all to make of it. Indeed, I am glad that he re-signed, because I think it was very much for the improvement of the public service. However, there were two men in Texas who were just as clearly guilty.  One  of them  wa-s  a district attorney who according to the evidence, deliberately put before the grand  jury 

testimony that would exculpate a defendant. The defendant 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  REOORD~ENATE  5481 ·

was a notorious offender against the liquor laws and other laws. I believe that he not only was an  ·offender  but he has since become an absconder. Yet the district attorney, according  to• 

his own admission, either through stupidity or through  inten-

tion. himself provided the ways and means by  which  thi .s man could secure  immunity  even from indictment. I wrote  ·the  President a letter and  urged  him to dismiss this man.  He  ought to be dismissed. It is a shame that a man like J. D. Hartman,  district  attorney for one of the districts in Texas, should be in the Government service. I hope the President will have the matter examined into at once and  have 

him dismissed. I want to say that should his nomination ever come here I P.ropose to lay before the  Senate  the testimony of the man himself and the undisputed testimony of the  wit-

nesses, which will show his guilt, and I am quite sure the Senate will never  per:mit  him to be confirmed. Nor should he be longer retained as a holdover, as I have been informed is the plan of dealing with this case. 

:Mr.  NORRIS.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  indicate to us what he did in the way of putting up evidence? 

Mr.  McKELLAR.  Yes, Mr. President. Mr.  NORRIS.  This was the district atto .rney? 

Mr.  McKELLAR.  This was the district attorney. Mr.  NORRIS.  Was the man indicted? 

Mr.  McKELLAR. No; he has never been indicted. He is still holding the office of district attorney. Mr.  NORRIS.  I am referring to what the district attor-ney did. Mr. McKELLAR. I shall  be delighted to tell the  Senator. 

Mr.  NORRIS.  Did he have the man indicted? Mr. McKELLAR. No; he  secured  the necessary evidence, 

"phony  " or corrupt or dishonest evidence, that permitted the grand jury not to indict him ; and I will  explain  to the Senator just bow it was. In Texas they have an organization known as the Texas 

-Rangers  for the enforcement of laws on the border or near the border,  perhaps  all ove.r the  State--!  am not so sure about that-but their principal duties are on the border. These rangers caught an official of the Government, a man who was or had been connected with one of the departments--! think it was the Internal Revenue Department-selling stills to bootleggers. They caught the man. The defendant was named Hamilton, as I recall. They caught the man with the stills. The stills were in good condition. This official of the Government,  Ham-

ilton, was selling stills. He had been selling them. He sold these th .ree stills to a notorious bootlegger, whose name I have now forgotten. The district attorney heard all the proof, because it was called to his attention by these rangers, notably 

Captain  Baldwin, who bad charge of the rangers, and an honest man, as I believe.  .

The district attorney, after presenting the absolute proof of the man's guilt, then permitted the defendant to go before the grand jury, and permitted him to take three  "phony  " stills,  o~ 

stills that bad been absolutely destroyed so far as making liquor was concerned,  inStead  of the ones he had actually sold, and let him testify that those were the three stills, without ever asking  Captain  Baldwin, of the Rangers, whether they were the stills found on or sold by Hamilton or not. In other .words, the  district  attorney permitted this defendant, a notorious law violator himself, to take into the grand jury room three stills t hat were not in working order at all, but had been destroyed as stills. In other words, he just manufactured the evidence for the purpose of letting this man escape; and the district attorney w as present in the grand jury room at the time.  So  I say he is eit her so stupid that certainly he ought not to represent the Government, or he was criminal. I say that a man like that ba s no business representing the Government; and when the 

Members  of the Senate read the testimony they will reach the same conclusion. Th e other man-a man by the name of Roy Campbell,  col-

lector of internal revenue--according to his own evidence was as s ociated with a deputy, a  Captain  Walker, who was bringing liquor across the border, bringing it into the United  States  in Governme nt cars. Mr.  Campbell  helped him get  away  after 

he brought it in, and was captured by these rangers. He got away with Campbell's consent and is still a fugitive  ' from 

justice.  Mr.  Campbell  ought to be discharged by the  Presi-

dent in s tantly, and yet it is being claimed that he is to be reappointed. I hope Mr. Creager, the Republican national committeeman fr om Te xas, will recommend that these two men be discharged, and will select two good men to recommend to the President for the se two important places. If either or both is or are kept in office, or if either or both  is  or are nominated by the  Presi-

dent I am sure when the facts are presented to this body they will not be confirmed. Mr.  BROOKHART.  Mr. President--The PRESIDENT pro tempore. Does the  Senator  from  Ten-

nessee yield to the  Senator  from Iowa? 

Mr.  McKELLAR. In one moment. I did not intend to  bring  up this matter at this time; but I am delighted to know that the President feels as suggested in this statement what the  Senator  from  Ohio  has just read to the Senate. I am quite sure that when these matters are 

actually  called to the attention of the President he will take action. I do not know whether he actually looked at  my  letter or not; but when the matter is called to the attention of the President those two officials down in Texas ought to be  dis-

missed,  a.nd  dismissed at  once~ 

I now yield to the Senator from Iowa. Mr.  B-ROOKHART.  Mr.  President,  there is one other matter in reference to  Campbell  of which I think notice should be taken. He smuggled Mexicans across the border, and admits it, to work on his own ranch for his own  profit.  in violation Qf law. I had the Secretary of the Treasury himself investigate that matter, and his investigators so found and reported to me; but still  Campbell  bas not been dismissed. Mr. McKELLAR. They ought both to  be  dismissed. That is all I have to say about the matter. Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr.  President,  "by  their works,'' and not by their words , " shall ye know  them."  So  we will watch  Mr. 

Hoover and Mr. Walter F. Brown, supposed to be Postmaster General of the United States. I think I am the first one who brought this matter to the attention of the Senate. -It was called to my attention by a direct, straight . purchase.  A change was made in my State. Iwent to the young man, and I said,  " How came you to lose your  job?"  He said,  "So-and-so  paid  $300  for  it."  I said, 

" Do you know that to  be,  true?  " He said,  " Yes,  sir."  ·

I went to the young man who got the appointment, who was quite a friend of mine, and I asked him the direct question. He said,  "No;  I did not pay anything, but father  did."  I said, 

"Whom  did he pay it to?  " and he told me. I looked into some other matters then, and I was absolutely certain; and Icame to the  Senate  and  made  the  speech  that I did, to which nobody in the world paid any attention. The Postmaster  Gen-

eral ignored it. Mr.  BROOKHART.  Mr. President--

. The  PRESIDENT  . pro tempore.  Does  the  Senator  from 

South  Carolina  yield to the  Senatm;  from . Iowa? 

Mr.  BLEASE. Wait until I get through. The President of the United  States  ignored it, and the sale of patronage went right on in  South  Carolina  just the same; and it went on under the conditions stated by the man who is receiving the money, and every dollar of that money went into the treasury of the Republican National Committee. That statement  ha!:lJ  never been denied on this floor by any man ; and he still says to-day, and has an accounting which he says is correct-! do no-t know; I hold no brief for him-that that money did go into the hands of the Republican National Committee, and that he was told to make these collections; that it took money to run the party. I am not criticizing what is known  as  the Brookhart  commit-

tee, but I say the Brookhart committee have not gone into the evil here. They have skimmed over the ground. They have taken the words of a few people, but they have not gone to the very rock bottom of this thing ; and until they do that the President will be just as ignorant as he is now. What I want to do is to see  this  committee discharged-they ought to be-and this matter should be put in the bands of the Department of Justice; and every man-it does not make any difference to me who he is-who bas bribed an officer or a man who is not an officer to be appointed to office, ought to be put in the penitentiary; and every man who has received a dollar of that kind of money ought to be put in the penitentiary. I do not believe that the northern Republican  Party  wants the kind of government we have in  South  Carolina. It is astench in the nostrils of every decent white man in the State. There are men there to-day who say they are Republica ns who are no more Republicans than I am, and they dare not say it except to get office, and it is overlooked by some people,  be-

cause they are better than negroes like we had-prior to 1877-after the  Civil  War. · Wby do they dare not say it? Because their wives and daughters would be barred from decent society in South Carolina if they said they belonged to  the  Republic.an 

Party  as known in  South  Carolina  from 1861 to 1877. I know what I am talking about. I am not talking hearsay. I know what the Republican Party is  in  South Carolina. Iknow what it stands for-for graft, for corruption, for  dis-

honest government, for dishonorable disposition of patronage, and I proved it here yesterday and have more proof yet  it 

needed. 5482  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE:  MARcH  18 

STATE  01!'  RHODlll  ISLAND, 

OFFICE  OF  THE  SECRm'ARY  OF  STATE, 

Men went before the Brookhart committee and swore that they had paid money. Has anything been done about it? Two of them are  postmasters  to-day. Here is the proof in the  CoN- •

GRESSION  AL  RECORD.  Providence,  March  13,  1!130. 

I hereby certify the foregoing to be a true copy  of  the original 

(S.  79) resolution recommending to Congress the passage of legislation providing for a lightship southwest of Block Island, passed by the  gen-

eral  assembly  and approved by the governor on the 11th day  of  March,. A. D.  1930. 

I repeat, we will know Mr. Brown and Mr. Hoover, not by their words but by their works. I shall continue to expose graft in every form so long as I am a public servant. Be ye not deceived, God is not mocked; whatsoever a man  soweth, that shall he also reap. And that applies alike to a nation, a State, the Republican Party, and the so-called Democratic  P~rty,  as much as to the individuaL Mr. SHEPPARD. Mr. President, I desire to say that I have not yet had an opportunity to examine the details in  connec-

tion with the charges against  Mr.  Campbell  and Mr. Hartman. 

A number of excellent people have written me in their behalf. Since this report bas been published I have asked both  these 

gentlemen to give me a statement of their side of the matter. The PRESIDENT pro tempore. The  Senator  from  Utah  [Mr. 

SMOOT]  moves that the Senate return to the consideration of legislative business. The motion was agreed to.   

> CLAIMS ARISING

FROM  EXPLOSION  AT LAKE  DENMARK,  N. J. The  VICE  PRESIDENT laid before the Senate a communica-tion from the Comptroller General of the  United  States,  sub-

mitting, pursuant to the act of March  2,  1927 ( 44  Stat., pt. 3, 

1800),  entitled  "An  act to provide a method for compensating persons who  suffered  property damage or personal injury due to the explosion at the naval ammunition depot, Lake Denmark, N. J., july  10,  1926,"  a second supplemental report, with  hi~ 

.recommendations, of the claims transmitted to the Comptroller General's office by the Secretary of the Navy, covering the property damage, death, or personal injury as required by the provisions of the act, which, with the accompanying papers, was referred to the  Committee  on  Claims. 

PETITIONS  AND  MEMORIALS 

Mr.  'V ATERMAN presented petitions of sundry citizens of the State of Colorado, praying for the  f)assage  of legislation granting increased pensions to  v-eterans  of the war with Spain, which were ordered to lie on the table: Mr.  CAPPER  presented  a petition of  sundry  citizens of  Kan-

sas  City,  Mo., and Kans., praying for the passage of legislation granting increased pensions to veterans of the war with Spain, which was ordered to lie on the table. Mr. DILL presented a petition of sundry citizens of the State of Washington, praying for the  passage  of the so-called Smoot bill, being the bill (  S.  1468) to amend the food and drugs act of June  30,  1906,  by extending its provisions to tobacco and  to-

bacco products, which  was  referred to the  Committee  on  Agri-

culture and Forestry. He also presented petitions numerously signed by sundry  citi-

zens  of the State of Washington, praying for the passage of legislation granting increased pensions to  Civil  War veterans and veterans of the war with Spain, which were ordered to lie on the table. Mr. HEBERT presented the following resolution of the  G-en-

eral Assembly of the State of Rhode Island, which was referred to the  Committee  on Commerce: 

STATE  OF  RHODE  ISLAND, 

IN GENERAL  ASSEMBLY,     

> Jattuary se8sion, A. D. 1!130.

Resolution recommending to Congress the passage of legislation  provid-

ing for a lightship southwest of Block Island Whereas the hazards of navigation have caused many wrecks and strandings on the southwest side of Block Island ; and Whereas there is a necessity for adequate fog signals and additional lighting facilities on the southwest side of Block Island to safeguard shipping : Therefore be 1t  

> Resolved,

That the General Assembly of the  State  of Rhode Island hereby urges the establishment  of  a properly equipped lightship by the 

United  States  Bureau of Lighthouses at a point  approxiin~itely  2 miles south-southwest of Black Rock  Spar  Buoy as an aid to navigation for the many vessels navigating in these waters; and be it further  

> Resolved,

That a copy of this resolution be transmitted by the  secre-

tary of state to the  United  States  Commissioner of Lighthouses, and that copies be also transmitted by the secretary of state to the  Senators 

and Representatives of Rhode Island in the Congress  of  the  United 

States. 

In  testimony- whereof I have hereunto set my hand and  affixed  the seal of the  State  aforesaid this 13th day of March, A. D.  1930. 

[SEAL.]  ERNEST  L.  SPRAGUJII,   

> Secreta1y of State.

:Mr.  HEBERT  also presented a resolution of the  Council  of the Town of Warwick, R. I., which was referred to the  Committee 

on the Library and ordered to be printed in the  RECORD,  as fol-lows: .Whereas the 11th day of  October,  1779, is the date in American  his-

tory of the hero .ic death of Brig. Gen. Casimir Pulaski, who died from wounds received on  October  9, 1779, at the siege of  Savannah,  Ga. ;and Whereas the  States  of Indiana, Wisconsin, Michigan,  Ohio,  South 

Carolina, Pennsylvania, New York, Minnesota, . Maryland, New Jersey, Illinois, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Nebraska, Massachusetts, Georgia,  Missouri,  and other  States  of  the  Union,  and the  United  States 

Congress have by legislative enactment designated  October  11, 1929, to be General Pulaski's memorial day; and Whereas it is fitting that the recurring anniversary  of  this day be commemorated with suitable patriotic and public exercises in observing and commemorating the death  of  this great American hero of  the ·Revo-

lutionary War: Therefore be it              

> Res{)lved by the OounciZ of the Town of WanDie" and State of Rhode
> Island.,

That the council and town of Warwick and  State  of Rhode Island respectfully memorialize the  United  States  Congress to enact legislation which provides for the  effective  carrying out of the provisions of the said  bill.  whereby the President  of  the  United  States would be authorized and directed to issue a proclamation calling upon  officials  of the Government to display the  flag  of the  United  States  on all govern-mental buildings on  October  11  of  each year and inviting the people of the  United  States  to observe the day in schools and churches or other suitable places with appropriate ceremonies in commemoration of the death  of  Gen. Casimir Pulaski. 

SEC.  2. The clerk of the town of Warwick and  State  of Rhode Island is hereby directed to transmit a copy of this resolution to Hon.  GEORGH 

S.  GRAHAM,  Member of Congress and chairman of the Judiciary  Com-

mittee, Washington, D. C., and to each of the  United  States  Senators 

and Representatives in Congress from the  State  of Rhode Island. Passed by the Town Council of Warwick, R. I., March 11,  1930. 

Attest: 

S.  K. M.  ROBERTSON,  Toton  OZerk. 

Mr. HEBERT also presented a resolution of the  Council  of the Town of West Warwick, R. I., which was referred to the Committee on the Library and ordered to be printed in the RECoRD, as follows : 

WEST  WARWICK, R. 1.,  March  6,  1IJ30. 

Hon. FELIX HEBERT,      

> Senate Ohambm-, Wasllmgton, D. 0.
> DEAR

SIR:  At a meeting of the Town Council  of  the Town of West Warwick, holden in and for said town on the 4th day of  March.  A.  D. 

1930,  the following resolution was adopted :

" Whereas the 11th day of October, 1779, is the date in American history of the heroic death of Brig. Gen. Casimir Pulaski, who died from wounds received on  October  9, 1779, at the siege of Savannah, Ga.; and 

" Whereas the  States  of Indiana, Wisconsin, Michigan,  Ohio,  South 

Carolina, Pennsylvania, New York, Minnesota,  M;aryland,  New Jersey, Illinois, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, Nebraska, Massachusetts, Georgia, Missouri, and other  States  of the  Union,  and the  United 

States  Congress, · have by legislative enactment designated  October  11,  _

1929, to be General Pulaski's memorial day; and 

"Whereas  it is fitting that the recurring anniversary of this day be commemorated with suitable patriotic and public exercises in observing 

and  commemorating the death of this great American hero of the Revolutionary War: Therefore be it             

> uResolved by the Town Oouncf.l of the Town of West Warwick ana

the  State  of  Rhode  Island,  That the Town Council of the town of West Warwick and  State  of Rhode Island respectfully  memorialize  the 

United  States  Congress to enact legislation which provide for the effec-tive carrying out of the provisions of the said bill, whereby the  Presi-

dent of the  United  States  would be authorized and directed to issue aproclamation calllng upon officials of the Government to display the flag of the  United  States  on all governmental buildings on  October  11 

of each year and inviting the people of the  United  States  to observe the day in schools and churches or other suitable places, with appro-priate ceremonies in  commemoration  of the death of Gen. Casimir 

Pulaski. CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-- SENATE ~ 5483 

"SEC.  2.- The.  cletk  of_.  the town of West Warwick and  State  of  Rhode-

Island is hereby directed to transmit a copy of this resolution to Hon. 

GEORGE  S.  GRAHAM,  Member of Congress and chairman  of  the . Judiciary Committee, , Washington, D. C., and to  each  of  the tJnited  States  Sena-

tors and Representatives in  Congress  from the.  State  of Rhode Island." Respectfully yours,             

> JOSEPH GENDRON,
> Town Clerk ot the Town of West Warwick.
> BEPO&TB' OF THE CLAIMS COMMITI'EE

Mr.  CAPPER,  from the Committee  on  Claims, to which was referred the bill  (S.  1407)  for the. relief of William Zeiss, administrator of William B.  Reaney,  survivor of  Thomas-

Reaney and  Samuel  Archbold, reported it with an amendment and submitted a report (No. 274) thereon. 

Mr.  STEPHENS,  from the Committee on  Claims,  to which was referr ed the bill ( S.  2873) to carry into  effect  the  finding 

of the  Court  of  Claims  in the claim of Elizabeth B. Eddy,  re-

ported it with an amendment and  submitted · a report  (No. 275) thereon.       

> WILLIAM B. WILSON AND WILLIAM 8. V.ARE

Mr.  SHORTRIDGE,  from the Committee on Privileges  and 

Election s, reported the following resolution ( S.  Res. 239), which was  refened  to the Committee to Audit and  Control  tne  Con-

tingent  Expenses  of the  Senate  : 

> Resolved,

That the  Secretary  of the  Senate  hereby is  authorized  and directed to pay out of the appropriation  for  expenses of inquiries and investigations, contingent fund of the  Senate,  fiscal  year  1929, to William B.  Wilson  and William  S.  Vare,  $25,000  each in full  settle-

ment of an claims and de mands of any and eve.ry  kind'  whatsoever on account of the.ir contest for a seat in the United  States  Senate  resulting 

from  the election held  in  the  State  of Pennsylvania: in 192&,  inclUding 

fees and expenses of counsel and  salaries  of clerks and  ail  oti1er 

employees.     

> REPORT OF THE DISTRICT CO'!-fMITTEE

1\.Ir.  BLAINE,  from  the  Committee  on the District of  Colum-

bia, to which was referred the bill  (S.  3558) to amend section 8

of the act making  appropriations  to provide  fer  the  expenses  of the government of the District of  Columbia  for the fiscal year ending June  30,  1914, and  for  other  p-urposes,  approved  March 

4 ,.  1913, reported it without amendment and submitted a report (No. 276) thereon.    

> REPORT OF POSTAL NOMINATIONS

Mr.  PHIPPS,  as in open  executive  ses sion, from the  Commit-

tee on  Post  Offices  and  Post  Roads, reported sundry post-office nominations, which were placed on the Executive  Calendar.     

> BILLS AND J()INT RESOLUTION INTRODUCED

Bills and a joint resolution  were  introduced, read the first time, and, by unanimous consent, the second time, and  re-

ferred as follows : By Mr.  GOFF: 

A bill  (S.  3942) granting an increase of pension to Lucinda  M. 

Hanna (with accompanying  papers);  to the Committee on Pen sions. 

By  Mr.  McKEI,LAR:  .A bill  (S.  3943) granting a pension to Roe  Simerly  (with  ac-

companying papers) ; to the Committee on Pensions. By  Mr.  HALE: .A • bill ( S.  3944) granting an increase of pension to Mary Mahoney (with accompanying papers); to the Committee on Pensions. By 1\Ir.  LA  FOLLETTE (for Mr.  SHIPSTEAD): 

- A bill ( S.  3945) to grant a right of way or easement over lands of the  United  States  within the  upper  Mississippi  River Wild Life and Fish Refuge to the Wabasha-Nelson Bridge  Co.,. 

a s signee of the Wabasha Bridge Committee, for the construction of a bridge from Wabasha,  Minn.,  to Nelson, Wis., as authorized by the act of  Uarch  10,  1928, as amended  December · 13, 1929 ; to the Committee on Commerce. By  1\Ir.  JONES: 

A bill  (S.  3946) fixing time for reimbursement  of · the United 

States  for money advanced for acquisition of water  rigllts  for Indian lands within the Oroville-Tonasket irrigation district under act of May 18,  1916,.  and supplemental acts, and for other purposes  ; to the Committee on Indian Affairs. By Mr.  HAWES: 

A bill  (S.  3947) granting a pen..qon  to  Sarah  L.  Mosbarger 

(with accompanying papers) ;

A bill  (S.  3948) granting a pension to Lillie Wootan (with 

accompanying  papers) ; and 

A bill ( S.  3949) granting an increase of  pension  to  Ollie  P ~

Stallings {with accompanying papers) ; tO>  the  Committee  on Pensions. 

By  Mr.  ALLEN:' 

A bill  (S.  3950)  authorizing  the establishment of a migratory-bird refuge in  the  Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton  County,  Kans.;  to ~

the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry. By  Mr.  RANSDELL: 

A bill (  S.  3951) for the relief of Walter  Harrell  Allen ; to  the -

Committee on Naval Affairs. 

By  Mr~  BRATTON: 

A bill ( S.  3952) granting an  increase  of pension to Laurin Larsson ; to the Committee on Pen sions. By  Mr-.  PITTMAN: A bill ( S".  3953) granting a pension to Patton D.  Moreland~ 

to the Committee on Pensions. 

By Mr.  COPELAND  (by request) :A joint resolution  (S.  J. Res.  154]  recogruzmg Lieut. John 

Fitch  as the inventor of  the  world's  first  succ e ssful  steamboat and the first person to apply  successfully · steam  power  to the 

purposes.  of navigation and recommending the teaching in public schools and other institutions of learning, maintained within the boundaries of the  United  States  of  America  and its Terr-i-tories, that Lieut. John Fitch was the inventor of the first  sue 

cessful steamboat, and that he first successfully applied  steam 

power  to the  purposes  of navigation; to the Committee on 

Commerce.     

> .AMENDMENTSl TO THE TARIFF BILL

Mr.  METCALF  submitted amendments intended to be  pro-

posed by him to House bill 2667, the tariff revision  bill,  which 

were ordered to lie on the  table  and to be printed, as follows : 

(Sec.  501.)  On  page 398, after line 9, insert the following paragraph: 

" In all proce edings instituted under this section  an  American  manu-

facturer, produc e r, or wholesaler, or a representative of an A.me.rican labor organization or labor association shall have the right to  appear, .

to offer  mride.nce,  cross~xamine  witnesses,  and  to be  heard  as a party in interest under such rules as the Unite.d  States  Customs Court and the United  States  Court of Customs and Patent Appeals may  prescribe}' 

On  page 399,  line  3, after the word  "to, " strike out  " the  consignee,. 

or his agent or attorney, or filed by the consignee, or his agent or attorney, with the collector, by whom the same shall be forthwith  for-

warded to the United  States  Customs Court,'' and insert the following: 

"Each  of the parties in  interest,  or  his agent  or  attorney,  or  filed by any party in interest, or his agent or attorn ey, with the collector, and a copy mailed to each of tbe other  parties  in interest, or his agent  or 

· attorney.  Upon  receipt  of  any such application the collector shall forthwith forward the same to the United  States  Customs Court ..And on page  399~  line 25, strike out  " e.ither  " and  insert  " any  "

before the word  "party." 

(Sec.  515.)  On  page  410,  line 25, afte.r the period after tbe word  

> '~law,"

strike out  "such  determination," and on page 411, line 1, insert the following :

" In all proceedings instituted under this section an .American  manu-

facturer,  producer-,  oT  wholesaler,  or a representative · of an American labor  organization  or labor association shall have the right to appear, to offer  evidence,  cross-examine witnesses, and to be heard  as  a party 

in interest under such rules as the  United  States  Customs  Court  and the Unit ed  States  Court of Customs and Patent Appeals may prescribe. The determination of the court  "

On  page 411, line 12 , strike out the word  " filed  " and insert  " filed by any party in  interest." 

And on page 411, at the end of line  14 ·,  insert the following sentence:  

> ·~If

the issue is such  that  the  pa-rty  dete.ndant  can  not ·,  in the  absence-

of samples, adequately answer the  protestant's  case, upon demand there-for samples of the imported  merchandise  - shall  be produced or the protest dismissed." 

Mr.  HAYDEN  submitted amendments intended to  be  proposed !by him to- House bill 2667, the  tariff  revision  bill,  which  were 

ordered to lie on the table and to be printed. as  fo-llows-: 

(Par.  1409.)  On  page 198,  line  2, strike out the figure  "30"  and insert in lieu thereof the  figure  " 20," ' so that the clause in lin es 2 and 3 will read,  " Wrapping paper not specially pr6vided for,  20  per ce.nt ad valorem ... 

(Par.  1501.  (a))  On  page  201,  line 7, strike out the figure  "40"  and ins e rt in lieu thereof the figure  " 30,  '' so that, as amended, tbe  suO-

p-aragraph will read: 

"PAB.  1501.  (a) Yarn,  silvers,  rovings-,  wick, rope, cord, cloth,  tape, 

and  tub1ng,  of asbestos, or of asb tos and any other spinnable fiber, with or without wire, and an  manufuactu:res  of any of  the  foregoing, 

30  per cent ad  valorem." 

Mr.  COPELAND  submitted an amendment intended to be  pro-

posed by him to  House  bill  2667,  the  tariff  revision bill, which 

was  ordered  to  lie on the table and to be printed, as follows: 

Paragraph  317, on page  70,  after line 16, insert the  fomnvi.ng  lan- ,guage: 

"All  wire  fencing  and  all  wire  netting,  whether- galvanized or not,  1

composed  of  wires - smaller than  0.08  and not  small-er  than  0.03  of 1 ' 

> I.

# 5484  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  ~-lARCH  18 inch in  diameter,  nine-sixteenths  of 1 cent per square foot:  Provided, 

That all wire fencing and all wire netting, whether galvanized or not, of a mesh  1¥.,  inches or greater, composed of wire of a diameter  not greater than four and one-half one-hundredths of 1 inch and not smaller than  0.03  of 1 inch, shall be subject to a duty of five-sixteenths 

of  1 cent per square  foot." 

Mr.  HOWELL  submitted an amendment intended to be  pro-

posed by him to House bill 2667, the tariff revision bill, whicl1 was ordered to lie on the table and to be printed, as follows: 

(Par.  707.)  On  page 126, line  8,  after the word  "than,"  to strike out the figure  "7"  and insert in lieu thereof  "5¥.,,"  so as to read: 

uprovided,  That fresh or sour  .milk  containing more than  51h  per cent of butterfat shall be dutiable as  cream,  and fresh or sour cream  con-

taining more than 45 per ce:at  of  butterfat shall be dutiable as butter, and skimmed milk containing more than 1 per cent ot butterfat  shall  be dutiable as whole  milk." 

l\lr.  THOMAS  of Oklahoma submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by him to House bill 2667, the  tariff  revision bill, which was ordered to  lie  on the table and to be printed, as follows: 

On  page  35,  after line 2, insert the following :..  PAR.  99. (a) Crude petroleum and fuel petroleum, $1 per barrel or 42 gallons. 

"(b)  Petroleum products: Kerosene, benzine, naphtha, gasoline,  par-

affin,  paraffin  oil, and all other distillates, derivatives, or refined  prod-

ucts of petroleum,  50  per cent ad valorem . The ad valorem rate pro-vided in this subparagraph shall be based upon the  American  selling price (as defined in subdivision (f), as amended, of. section  402,  Title 

IV) of any similar competitive artic le manufactured or produc ed in the 

United  States. If there is no similar competitive article manufactured 

or  produced in the  United  States, then the ad valorem rate shall be 

based  upon the  United  States value, as defined in subdivision (d), as 

amended,  of section 402, Title IV. For the purposes of this  subpara-

graph any petroleum product provided for herein shall be considered similar to  or  competitive with any imported petroleum product which accomplishes results substantially equal to those accomplished by the domestic product when used in substantially the same manner : Pro-

vided,  That all funds deriv ed from the  taritrs  upon petroleum and the r efined products of petroleum as provided by this  paragraph  shall be 

covered  into a special fund  for  app ropriati on, a nd expenditure by the Secretary of Agriculture under the Federal highway aid act and the amendments thereto and the rules and regulations made thereunder :

.Ana  pro vi aect  further,  That the  United  States  Taritr  Commission is her eby authorized and directed to make an inv e stigation of the entire 

petroleum  industry, to prepare and file a report of such investigation, and to prepare and submit recommendations as in this act provided, to the end that the tariff rates provided in this paragraph may be  in-

creased or decreased , as the facts  de~lopcd  may warrant and  justify." 

On  page  265 strike out lines 3 to 6, inclusive, being paragraph 1734.        

> ADDRESS BY BENATOBi FLETCHER 0THE FARM-LOAN SYSTEM

M:r.  WAGNER.  1\Ir.  President, I ask leave to have  printed 

in the  RECORD  a very interesting address delivered by the senior Senator from Florida  [1\Ir.  FLETCHER],  broadcast at the in-stance of the National Grange on the 15th in stant, upon the farm-loan system. There being no objection, the address was ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows: 

THE  FAR?>f  LoA~  SYSTEM-ITS  HISTORY,  ACCOMPLISHMENTS,  AND  NEEDS 

> HISTORY

· In April, 1912, a movement  was  launched by the Southern  Commer-

cial Congress at Nashvill e, Tenn ., to devise and establish a dependable plan of agricultural finance, whereby the real farmers of the country could obtain financial accommodation on terms as  ·to  interest and time they could meet. The idea was the farmer's a sset, his land and  im-

provements, was not acceptable as sec urity to banking and financial agencies, particularly in view of the fact that he required  .more  time and  a lower rate of interest than obtained in commercial transactions. What he required was a different, separate system, by which his capital needs could be supplied at low rates of interest, with amortization features. 'With this end in view there was created the  American  commission, composed of two members  from  each State, named by the governors, resp ec tively, to study the whole  subje.ct  of rural credits in this country and to become acquainted with the plans and practices in the  ·older 

countries of Europe. Congress likewise took action and provided for a commission  of nine, to be appointed by the  Pre  ident,  called  the  United  States  commission, to cooperate with the American commission. Accordingly, in March, 1913, President  WHson  appointed that commission, and  $25,000  was appropriated for its use. I was made chairman of both  commissions. 

It is with some pride that I can  say  this is one commission that made its report within the time allowed it, and  aftet•  spending three months investigating the subject in Europe, asked  for  no extension of time or additional appropriation, but returned a substantial portion of the appropriation to the Treasury. The reports of the commission speak for themselves and will be found as Senate Documents Nos. 214 (nearly  1,000  pages), 261, and 380, Sixty-third Congress.  ·

I introduced the first bill, and it was ref erred to the Committee on Banking and Currency,  of  which I was not then a member. A subcommittee, with Senator Hollis as chairman, was appointed, and extended hearings were held. Certain  amendments  to the bill were favored, and instead of reporting my bill with amendments, Senator Hollis introduced the bill with the amendments, and it became known as the Hollis bill. It carried the essential principles and plan of the original  })ill  and pa s sed the  Se nate 

that way. At the instance of the chairman, I was made  a member  of  the  Com-

mittee on Banking and Cur rency in order that I might serve as one of the  conferees  when the House and Senate were brought together. Finally, the farm loan act was enacted July 11, 1916. I venture to  ~Y  that no act of Congress of  siiDUar  importance ever went into full operation with so few amendments. In fact, I recall no amendment of consequence being  olfered  until the amendment creating the Federal intermediate credit banks was enacted March 4,  1923  .In the meantime, the system was established most successfully and functioned most efficiently and efficaciously. More than a billion dollars were made available for real farmers at 5 to  5lh  per cent intere  t,  the princip.al b eing payable at 1 per cent p er annum, with the right at the end of five years to pay any or all the principal if desired .   

> TWO KINDS OF BANKS

The act provided for the Federal land banks to be established, one tn each of 12 districts. Loans were limited to  $10,000  to each borrower. The Farm Loan Board was to be composed of five members-the  Sec-

retary of the Treasury, who was to be  11  member and chairman ex officio, and  .four  members appointed by the President, not more than two of whom should be from one political party. This board was vested with supervisory power over the whole system. The original capital stock in the Federal land banks was subscri bed by the Government,  $9,000,000,  and that has been substantially returned by the banks. Joint-stock land banks were provided for. These were to be created by individuals and conducted for private profit without limitation as to loans to one borrower. 'l'he foundation upon which rested the Federal land banks was the National Farm Loan Associations. These were to be cooperative in character, and it was intended they should  for.m  a nucleus for cooperative effort in th e various communities where they were formed. Each borrower had to subscribe for stock to the amount of 5 per cent of his loan at  $5  per share, which stock was to be held as collateral security until the loan was paid, at which time it had  tp  be accepted at par on final  payment,  in meantime receiving dividends. Neither of these institutions was really a "bank"  in any commercial or true sense. They received no deposits. They did no banking  busi-

n ess. They were agencies for making and securing loans. They were given certain designations  and  functions, usually at the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury, for the  puq>ose  of exempting their bonds from all taxation . It was necessary to do this in order to have the bonds sell at as low rate of interest as possible, and the law provid es that the banks could not charge the borrowers more than they paid as interest on the bonds, plus an amount not to exceed 1 per  ceqt  to cover  adminish·ation  expenses. These expenses have been ordinarily met by one-half of 1 per cent, and as the business increases the rate ought to be reduced. Neither of the banks could charge the borrower exceeding 6 per cent interest on his loan and there were to be no  com-

missions or other fees. No loan by Federal land bank or joint-stock land bank shall exceed 

50  per cent of the value of the land mortgaged  a!ld  20  per cent of the value of the permanent, insured improvements thereon. No national farm-loan association, Federal land bank, or joint-stock land bank shall go into voluntary liquidation without the written  con-

sent of the Federal Farm Loan Board. Provision is made for  appointment  of receivers under certain  condi-

tions for farm-loan associations and joint -stock land banks by the Farm Loan Board, but the  Supreme  Court decided in Wheeler against Howard Greene, receiver, November 4, 1929, that such receiver has power to collect the assets of the bank, but the liability of stockholders is no part of the assets-but rather a liability to creditors, which the creditors may be left to enforce by bill in equity,  and  the  recelve1·  has no power to enforce the liability by levy of assessment  again st  the stockholders. 

There  was an attack on the farm loan act early in its hi story , but the  Supreme  Court of the United  States  sustained its constitutionality 

and  its  validity · in every provision. There was a plain reason for omitting the grant of power to receivers under this act to  "enforce  the individual liability of the  stockholders ," --

# 1930  -coNGRESSIONAL  RECORD-- - SENATE  ~ 5485 

as the court points out in the Wheeler case. It is entirely concei-vable that it was not intended originally, since there  is  not the same need as in the case of national banks,  "that  the stockholder's liability  should 

be  summat •ily  disposed of behind his back in  Washington." 

A few  years  ago agents of the Treasury took charge of the books and records of six joint-stock land banks in  di1rerent  parts of the country the same hour of the same day. That was a blow which  would  have destroyed completely any system of commercial banks. It was a ter-

rible assault on joint-stock land banks generally. The framers of the law did not intend to place in the bands of an oppressive or  unsympa-

thetic Farm  U>an  Board the power to demolish these banks at will and involve their stockholders in summary assessments arbitrarily imposed. The Federal Government has  assumed  no obligation  whatever · to pro-tect stockholders in these  banks  from financial  loss.  -

The supervisory duties and powers of the  Federal  Farm  Loan Board in resp e ct to these banks may be likened to those of the Comptroller of the Currency with respect to national banks. There is no obligation resting on the Government to take care of the stockholders in a national bank.    

> SUCCESS OF THE SYSTEM

The success of the system depends upon the wisdom and  efficiency  of its administration. The law is sound; its efficiency depends on its administration. Necessarily wide discretion, extensive latitude, had to be given the Federal Farm Loan Board, which was charged with the  gui<fance,  direc-

tion,  and supervision of the system. The net mortgage loans of the Federal land banks on September  30, 

1929, amounted to  $1,202,490,482.78. 

The net mortgage loans of the joint-stock land banks, the same date, amounted to $592,743,765. -Receiverships  have  been instituted under the act for three joint-stock land banks, the outstanding liabilities of which, according to their books, exceed  $70,000,000--tbe  Kansas City Joint  Stock  Land Bank, of Kansas City, Mo.; the Bankers Joint Stock Land Bank,  of 'Milwaukee,  Wis.; and the  Ohio  Joint Stock Land Bank, of Cincinnati, Ohio, with  beadqua1·ters 

now at Indianapolis, Ind. 

There  are 12 Federal land banks, each liable primarily for borids issued by it and -also for interest and principal of bonds issued by other banks, as set forth in section 21 of the  act. 

There are 48 joint-stock land banks, including three in receivership and one in process of liquidation. There are  4,660  National Farm Loan  A.ssociation&--none  in  receiver·  

> shi~

-The bonds of  each  of the 12 Federal land banks sell for the same price a11d bear the same rate of interest, so that the borrowers enjoy the same terms throughout the country. The bond market has been depressed, but the last  salP.  of farm-loan bonds was at par, bearing  4lh  per cent interest. There is nothing wrong with the system. There are  Ulllimited  possibilities for its development and growth.  

> It

may be made of infinite help to real home-building farmers and immeasurable benefit to agriculture.   

> INTERMEDIATE CREDIT BANKS

By the amendment approved March 4, 1923, a •plan  for short-term credit was added to the system, embraced in the provisions for  inter-

mediate credit banks. 

A number of amendments to the original act were included in that legislation. The membership of the Farm Loan Board was increased from five to 

seven. 

II1  my judgment, this was  a mistake.  

> It

simply increases the burderis on the borrowers by adding materially to the overhead  expensel!l. 

I have proposed that the membership of the board be restored to five, and, in order to secure the very best material, I suggest the salary of the five be each  $12,000  per annum instead of  $10,000,  as now. The method of  electing  directors  of the  Federal  land banks  was 

changed (see sec.  304),  so as to practically give control of each board of directors to the Farm Loan Board. The  limit  of loan to each borrower was raised from  $10,00Q  to  $25,000. 

Originally it was thought advisable to take care of the needs  of  what might be called the small or modest farmer who could get  accommoda-

tions elsewhere, if at all, only on exorbitant terms. The  design  was to encourage the average man engaged in farming to acquire, improve, and make permanent his home. That coUI1try  il!l  safe and prosperous in 

which every citizen  can  live under his own vine and fig tree. 

One  reason for creating the joint-stock  lalld  banks  was  to provide ameans for the accommodation of large operators-owning real estate 1n excess of  $20,000  in value, with extensive permanent improvements. Thes e were producers and farmers on a large scale and facilities for their capital requirements and need should be included in the general scheme to help agriculture. It was well, however, to revise the limit of the Federal land bank loan to each borrower. The amoUI1t of loans by the intermediate credit banks  bas  approached a half billion dollars. The Federal  lalld  banks and the joint-stock  laDd  banks derive their -

funds  for making  loans  from the  sale  of their bonds, respectively, secured by mortgage on real estate. The intermediate credit banks derive their fUI1ds for making loans--aside from  $27,000,000  furnished by the Treasury toward the capital-from the sale of their short-term debentures, with a maturity of not more than five years, but they are usually issued  for  terms varying 

from · 3 to 12 months; and they may charge interest at the rate allowed by the  "law  of the  State  in which such  corporation  is  located." 

. All these banks are authorized to act as  "fiscal  agents"  of the 

United  States Government. The Government itself is not liable on any obliga. tion of any of the banks. The responsibility of the Government 

is similar to that respecting national banks. The intermediate credit banks have made loans to 85 farmers'  cooper-

ative marketing associaticms, having a membership of more than 

1,250,000  individuals, since they were created. They may issue debentures to the extent of ten times their paid-in capital and surplus, -giving them a potential lending power of  approxi-

mately  $600,0~0,000.  'The Secretary of the Treasury subscribed, under the law, for -the capital of the 12 intermediate credit banks  $5,000,000  each, but only 

$30,000,000  of this has been paid in, leaving  $30,000,000  in the  Treas-

ury  subject  to  call  by the directors of the banks. Loans are not made to individual  farmers  directly. The debentures are exempt from all taxes. All these banks, comprising the entire farm-loan system, are examined and supervised by the Federal Farm Loan Board. They are permanent Institutions and have been of vast benefit and have rendered real service to the agricultural interests of the  country ·. 

> NEEDS

The needs of the farm-loan system may be  summed  up in a few words :Changed conditions may call for some minor changes in the law  from 

time to time. The institutions are permanent and sound. . Their  efficacy  has  been demonstrated. 

All  that is required is conscientious, intelligent, capable, and faithful administration. There is no real obstacle in the way of  that  inherent in the system.   

> If it

should not be provided, the  fault  will be found in playing politics with the operations, indulging in favoritism or patronage, or a deliberate 

purpose to - cripple and eventually destroy the system by those in control. Such a course is at present inconceivable. Just public indignation  would  be invited thereby, with resulting  con-

sequences too serious to contemplate. The problem, therefore, is one of administration. In every case where the borrower can go on and only  requires  a rea-

sonable extension of time to enable him to save his home and make good his obligation, the extension ought to be granted. It  is  a mistake to 

resort to foreclosure in strict accordance with the terms of the mortgage when it is in the power  of  the bank to encourage and indulge the  bor-

rower both for his and the bank's protection. We do not wish, and would certainly avoid, anything like the  experi-

ence under the Mahratta farming system in Bombay, when one-eighth of the entire  agricultural  population was sold out of bouse  ami  home in a little more than a decade. From  1880  to  1890,  850,000  heads of families were sold out of  1,911,000  acres of land, causing much of the distress we read about in India. Death, unavoidable adverse circumstances,  abwdonment,  or other like cause, will bring about the taking over of mortgaged lands and perhaps some losses.  -

Looseness of management, neglect or  ind.i!Ierence,  would  weaken  secur-

ity and eventually shake public confidence ln the safety and soundness of the bonds.  

> In

the interest of all this must not happen. These bonds are based upon the permanent  aDd  sure foundation of  

> all

our wealth. They must be maintained as  secure  and safe as they are valid. At _the same  time,  and especially when loans on  farm  property are being curtailed by financial institutions, the facilities of the farm loan system  should  be  afforded  as generously and liberally as reasonable - security and safety will permit.     

> HEARINGS BEFORE THE I.JBRARY COMMITI'EEl

Mr.  FESS  submitted the following resolution ( S.  Res. 238), which was referred to the  Committee  to Audit and  Control  the 

Contingent  Expenses  of the  Senate  :

Resolved,  That the Committee on the Library, or any subcommittee thereof, hereby is authorized  during  the Seventy-first Congress to send for persons, books, and papers, to administer oaths, and to employ a stenographer, at a cost not exceeding 25 cents per  100  words, to report such hearings as may be had in  connection  with any subject which may be before said committee, the expenses thereof to be paid from  the · con-

tingent fund of the  Senate;  and that the committee, or any subcommit-

tee  thereat,  may sit durin .g the sessions or recesses of the Senate. 5486  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE ·  MARCH  18 ;        

> DRAINAGE .AREAS OF FLORIDA (S. DOC. NO. 115)

Mr.  FLETCHER.  Mr. President, a letter from the  Chief  of Engineers has come to the Committee on  ~ommerce,  ~n.  pur-suance of a resolution adopted by that comm1ttee, submtttmg areview of reports on the  Caloosa.hatchee  River and Lake  Okee-

chobee drainage areas, Florida. I ask unanimous consent to have it printed as a Senate document with an illustration, and referred to the Committee on  Commerce. 

There being no objection, leave was granted.    

> MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE

A message from the House of Representatives by Mr.  Chaffee, 

one of its clerks, announced that the House had passed the fol-lowing joint resolutions of the Senate: .

S.  J. Res.17. Joint resolution authorizing the Secretary of War to receive for instruction at the  United  States  Military Academy at West  Point,  Bey Mario Arosemena, a citizen of 

Panama;  and s. J. Res.  30.  Joint resolution authorizing the use of tribal moneys belonging to the Fort Berthold Indians of North Dakota for certain purposes. The message also announced that the House had passed the bill  (S.  3579) authorizing a per capita payment  to  the Shoshone and Arapahoe Indians, with amendments, in which it requested the concurrence of the Senate. The message further announced that the House had passed the following bills, in which it requested the concurrence of the Senate: H. R. 8.  An  act to amend an act entitled  "An  act for prevent-ing the manufacture, sale, or transportation of adulterated or misbranded or poisonous or deleterious foods, drugs, medicines, and liquors, and for regulating traffic therein, and for other 

purposes,"  approved June  30,  1906,  as  amende~;  .H. R. 699.  An  act  to  prevent fraud, deceptwn, or rmproper practice in connection with business before the  United  States 

Patent  Office, and for other purposes ; H. R.  4810.  An  act to add certain lands to the Helena National Fore st in the State of Montana; 

## n. R. 6121. An act to  authorize  the maintenance of central warehouses in national parks and national monuments and  au-

thorizing appropriations for the purchase of supplies and  mate-

rials to be kept in said warehouses; H. R.  6130.  An  act to exempt the  Custer  National Forest from the operation of the forest homestead law, and for other pur-poses; H. R. 6591.  An  act authorizing the Secretary of War to grant to the town of Winthrop, Mass., a perpetual right of way over such land of the Fort Banks Military Reservation as is  necessary 

for the purpose of  wid"€ning  Revere Street to a width of  50  feet ;H. R.  6809.  An act to exempt from cancellation certain desert-land entrie s in Riverside  County,  Calif.  ;H. R. 6848. An act allowing the rank, pay, and allowances of a colonel, l\fedical  Corps,  United  States Army, or of a captain, Medical  Corps,  United  States Navy, to any  medic~l  officer below such rank a signed to duty as physician to the Wh1te House; H. R. 7391. An act that the Secretary of the Navy is author-ized in his discretion, upon request from the Governor of the 

Stat~  of North  Carolina,  to deliver to such governor as  cu&todian 

for such  Sta t e,  the silver service presented to the  United  States for the  U.  S.  S.  North  Carolina  (now  the  U.  S.  S.  Ohm·Zotte,  but out of commission) ; H. R.  7701.  An act to authorize fraternal and benevolent  cor-

porations heretofore created by special act of  Congress  to divide and separate the insurance activities  from  the fraternal activities by an act of it s supreme legislative body, subject  to  the  appro-yal 

of the superintendent of insurance of the District of  Columbia  ;H. R. 8578. An act to sell the present post-office site and build-ing at  Dover,  Del. ; H. R. 9183. An act to provide for the exercise of sole and exclus iv e jurisdiction by the  United  States  over the Hawaii National Park in the Te rritory of Hawaii, and for other pur-poses; H. R.  9306.  An act to authorize per capita payments to the Indians of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation,  S.  Dak. ;H. R. 9324.  An  act to dedicate for street purposes a portion of the old post-office site at Wichita, Kans. ;  

> H. R.

9325. An act to authorize the  United  States Veterans' Bureau to pave the road running north and south immediately ea st of and adj a cent to Hospital No.  90,  at  Muskogee,  Okla., and to authorize the use of  $4,950  of funds appropriated for hospital purpo ses, and for other  purposes  ;H. R. 9439. An act to extend the times for commencing and completing the con st ruction of a bridge across the Kanawha River between Hend e rson and  Point  Pleasant, W.  Va.; 

> \

H. R. 9562. An act  to  authorize an appropriation for purchas- 1

ing  20  acres for addition to the Hot Springs Reserve on the  Sho- .shone or Wind River Indian Reservation, Wyo. ; H. R. 9628. An act granting the consent of  Congress  to  the  ,

State  of Arkansas, through its  State  highway department, to 

construct, maintain, and operate a free  highway bridge across 

St.  Francis River at or near Lake  City,  .Ark., on  State  Highway No. 18; H. R. 9989. An act granting the consent of  Congress  to the 

State  of Minnesota, Le  Sueur  County  and Sibley  County,  in the 

State  of Minnesota, to construct, maintain, and operate a bridge across the  Minnesota  River at or near Henderson, Minn. ; H. R.  19076.  An . act to amend sections 476, 482, and 4934 of the Revised Statutes; sections 1 and 14 of the trade-mark act of February  20,  1905,  as amended ; and section 1 (b) of the trade-mark act of March 19,  1920,  and for other purposes ; and H. R.10171. An act providing for the erection at  Clinton, 

Sampson  County,  N.  C.,  of a monument in commemoration of William Rufus King, former Vice President of the  United  States.       

> SHOSHONE AND ARAPAHOE INDIAN PE& CAPITA PAYMENTS

The  VICE  PRESIDENT  laid before the Senate the amend-ments of the House of Representatives to the bill  {S.  3579) authorizing per capita payments to the Shoshone and Arapahoe Indians which were, on page 1, line 5, to strike out the word 

" reaso~able  " and insert  " a " ; on page 1, line 6, to strike out the word  "payments  " and insert  "payment  of  $25"  ; and to amend the title so as to read: "Authorizing a per capita pay-ment to the Shoshone and .Arapahoe  Indians." 

Mr. KENDRICK. Mr. President, I wish to say that the purpose of the amendments is merely to limit the amount of the per capita payment. I move that the Senate concur in the amendments of the House of Representatives. The motion was agreed to.   

> HOUSE BILLS REFERRED

The following bills were severally read twice by their titles and referred as indicated below: H. R. 8. An act to amend an act entitled  "An  act for prevent-ing the manufacture, sale, or transportation of adulterated or misbranded or poisonous or deleterious foods, drugs, medicines, and liquors, and for regulating traffic therein, and for  oth~r 

purposes,"  approved June  30,  1906,  as amended; to the  Commit-

tee on Agriculture and Forestry. H. R. 699.  An  act to prevent fraud, deception, or improper practice in connection with business before the  United  States 

Patent  Office,  ~nd  for other purposes; and H. R.  10076.  An act to amend  sect:tons  476, 482, and 4934 of the Revised Statutes; sections 1 and 14 of the trade-mark act of February  20,  1905,  as amended; and section 1 (b) of the  trade-

·mark  act of March 19,  1920,  and for other purposes ; to the  Com-

mittee on Patents. H. R. 4810. An act to add certain lands to the Helena National Forest in the  State  of Montana ;H. R. 6121.  An  ct to authorize the maintenance of central warehouses in national parks and national monuments and  au-

thol-izing  appropriations for the purchase of supplies and ma-terials to be kept in said warehouses ;H. R.  6130.  An act to exempt the Custer National Forest from the operation of the forest homestead law, and for other purposes; H. R.  6809.  An act to exempt from cancellation certain  desert-

land entries in Riverside  County,  Calif.  ; and H. R. 9183. An act to provide for the exercise of sole and exclusive jurisdiction by the  United  States over the Hawaii Na-tional Park in the Territory of Hawaii, and for other  purposes; 

to the Committee on Public Lands and  Surveys. 

H. R. 6591. An act authotizing the Secretary of War to grant to the town of Winthrop,  1\Iass.,  a perpetual right of way over such land of the Fort Banks  :Military  Reservation as is neces-sary for the purpose of widening Revere Street to a width of  50 

feet; and  •

H. R. 6848. An act allowing the rank, pay, and allowances of acolonel, Medical  Corps,  United  Sta,tes  Army, or of a captain, Medical  Corps,  United  States Navy, to any medical officer below such rank assigned to duty as physician to the White House; to the  Committee  on Military  Affairs. 

H. R. 7391. An act that the Secretary of the Navy is author-ized in his discretion, upon r equest from the Governor of the 

State  of North  Carolina,  to deliver to such governor as custodian for such  State  the silver service presented to the  United  States 

for the  U.  S.  S.  North  aarolim .a  (now the  U.  S.  S.  Oharlotte,  but out of commission) ; to the Committee on Naval  Affairs. 

H. R. 7701. An act to authorize fraternal and benevolent cor-porations heretofor e created by special act of Cong ress to  div~d.e  

> ~nd

separate the insurance activities from the fraternal  actiVl-1930  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN  ATE . 5487 

ties by an act of its supreme legislative body, subject to the approval of the superintendent of insurance of the District of 

Columbia  ; to the  Cammittee  on the District of Columbia. H. R. 8578. An act to sell the present post-office site and  build-

ing at Dover, Del. ; and 

· H. R. 9324. An act to dedicate for street purposes a portion of the old post-office site at Wichita, Kans. ; to the  Committee 

on Public Buildings and Grounds. H. R.  9306.  An act to authorize per capit .a  payment~  to the Indians of the  Pine  Ridge Indian Reservation,  S.  Dak. ; and H. R. 9562. An act to authorize an appropriation for  pur-

chasing  20  acres for addition to the Hot Springs Reserve on the Shoshone or Wind River Indian Reservation, Wyo. ; to the  Com-

mit t ee on Indian  Affairs. 

H. R. 9325.  An  act to authorize the  United  States Veterans' Bureau to pave the road  running  north and south immediately east of and adjacent to Hospital No.  90,  at Muskogee,  Okla., 

and to authorize the use of  $4,950  of funds appropriated for hospital purposes, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finan ce. H. R. 9439.  An  act to extend the times for commencing and completing the construction of a bridge across the Kanawha Riv er between Henderson and  Point  Pleasant, W.Va.; H. R. 9628. An act granting the consent of  Congress  to the State of Arkan s as, through its  Sta,te  highway department, to construct, maintain, and operate a free highway bridge  acrpss 

St. Francis River at or near Lake  City,  Ark., on State Highway No. 18; and  ·

H. R. 9989. An act granting the consent of  Congress  to the State of Minnesota, Le Sueur  County  and Sibley  County,  in the State of Minnesota, to construct, maintain, and operate a bridge across the Minnesota River at or near Henderson, Minn. ; to the Committee on Commerce. H.  R.10171.  An act providing for the erection at Clinton, Sampson  County,  N.  C.,  of a monument in commemoration of William Rufus King, former Vice President of the  United 

States; to the Committee on the Library.       

> MESS.AGE FROM THE HOUS~ENROLLED JOINT RESOLUTIONS SIGNED

A message from the House of Representatives by Mr.  Hal-

tigan, one of its clerks, announced that the Speaker had  affixed 

his signature to the following enrolled joint resolutions, and they were signed by the  Vice  President :

S.  J. Res. 17. Joint resolution authorizing the Secretary of War to receive for instruction at the  United  States  :Military 

Academy at  ·west  Point  Bey Mario Arosemena, a citizen of 

Panama;  and 

S.  J. Res.  30.  Joint resolution authorizing the use of tribal moneys belonging to the Fort Berthold Indians of North Dakota for certain purposes.    

> REVISION OF THE T.ARIFF

The Senate resumed the consideration of the bill (H. R. 2667) to provide revenue, to regulate commerce with foreign countries, to encourage the industries of the  United  States, to protect American labor, and for other purposes. Mr.  CUTTING  obtained the floor. Mr.  FESS.  Mr. President, will the Senator yield? Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. 

Mr.  FESS.  I ask unanimous consent that after the address of the Senator from New Mexico no Senator shall be permitted to talk longer than  20  minutes or more than once on the pending amendment. Mr. LA  FOLLETTE.  I object. The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore.  Objection  is made. Mr. LA  FOLLETTE.  Mr. President, I ask the Senator from New  M~xico  if he will yield to me to suggest the absence of aquorum. Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. Mr. LA  FOLLE'ITE.  I suggest the absence of  a quorum. The PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll. The  Ohief  Clerk called the roll, and the following Senators answered to their names :Allen Dill Ba rkley Fess Bingham Fletcher Bl ack Frazier Blaine George Blease Glass Borah Glenn Bratton  Goff            

> Brookhart Goldsborough Broussard Gould Capper Greene Caraway Grundy Connally Hale Copeland Harris Couzens Harrison Cut t ing Hastings Dnle Hatfield Rawes Hayden Hebert
> Hetun
> Howell Johnson Jones Kean Kendrick Keyes La Follette McCulloch McKellar McMaster McNary Metcalf
> Moses
> Norbeck Norris

# ~a:i1e                     

> Overman Patterson
> Phipps
> Pine
> Pittman
> Ransdell Robinson Ind. Robsion, Ky.
> Schall
> Sheppard
> Shortridge
> Simmons
> Smoot
> Steck Swanson Tydings Walsh, Mont.
> Steiwer Thomas, Idaho Vandenberg Waterman
> Stephens Thomas ,Okla. Wagner Watson
> Sullivan Trammell Walsh, Ma ss. Whe eler

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr.  FEss  in the chair). Eighty-four Senators have answered to their names. A quorum is 

present. The Senator from New Mexico will proceed.  

> 1\fr.

CUTTING.  Mr. President, the de bate last night, inter-

esting · and valuable as it was in many respects, took us, I think, rather far from the fundamental features of the question at issue. I do not think it will do any harm, before discussing the pending amendments in detail, to consider the question of censorship in general. What is censorship? By what right do we enforce it? In what respect is it good policy to enforce it? At the risk of seeming academic, I should like first to  pre-

sent to the Senate of the  United  States President William Allan Neilson, of  Smith  College. In introducing him and allowing him to  speak  for  himself, 

I should say, first, that Pre s ident Neilson, an old-fashioned Scotch Presbyterian, almost a Victorian in his general attitude toward the arts, has been a professor of English literature at Bryn  Mawr,  at Harvard, and at Columbia. I had the honor to be initiated into  Victolian  literature as a student by  Pro-

fessor Neilson, a good many years ago. There is no question whatever that Professor Neilson is thoroughly familiar with every one of the volumes which last night adorned the desk of the senior Senator from Indiana 

[Mr.  WATSON].  There is no new discovery connected with those volumes. Most of them have been known by every  well-iil-

formed man for a great many  years.  The few new ones have been  sufficiently  advertised by the senior Senator from  Utah  in the last few weeks. Professor Neilson is undoubtedly familiar with them. Secondly, I want to emphasize the fact that Professor Neilson is president of a young women's college; that of all men in the country he would be most interested in avoiding anything  tend-

ing toward the corruption of youth. The only excuse which has been advanced for this  measure--which  concededly is a nuisance measure, which concededly is calculated to keep out of the  coun-

try much matter which intelligent men wish to read and feel they ought to read-the only excuse for such a measure is that it may in some mysterious way corrupt the morals of the younger generation. I am going to emphasize that point later on in the course of my remarks, and I am going to point out to the Senate that, so far as I know, every educator in the  United 

States  is against the present system of customs censorship. I am  now  going to read from an article of President Neilson, published in the January Atlantic  Monthly.  I am not going to read the whole article, though it is a short one. There are certain matters in it which seems to me basic and fundamental in any discussion of censorship.  ·

President Neilson begins by saying that probably all of us who are interested in this subject are not so far apart as we might imagine if we listen to nothing except the diatribes on either side. He continues: In spite of recent tendencies in legislation and public opinion we still assume, remembering  the  confessions  of faith on which  the  Republic was founded, that we believe in human liberty. The majority still holds, theoretically at least, that for  the  highest development of an individual or a community a large degree  of  freedom is necessary. Most of us would also agree that, 1n particular questions of the restriction  of                                                            

> liberty, the burden of proof is on him who would restrict. Yet it is also agreed that for the preservation of liberty itself certain restrictions are necessary. '!'he nuisance of the radio in the apartm ent house or at the open window is an obvious instance of this, since the right to make anoise may conflict with the right to enjoy quiet.

After  stating that general point of view, Professor Neilson makes a distinction between censorship applied for the welfare of the adolescent and general censorship for the adult. He states, what we all believe, of course, that certain measures are  neces-

sary to protect the highly impressionable youth of the country at a certain age. He continues: But I should urge the weighing of two considerations in this  connec-                                                                                                     

> tion. First, keeping an undesirable book out of the hands of ayoung boy or girl is an affair requiring much tact, and persuasion is usually better than compulsion or threats of punishment. Otherwi se we simply add the ettraction of forbidden fruit and challenge the child to outwit us. Secondly, the attempt to save our children from what we regard as dangerous knowledge is likely in our times to be a locking of the stable door after the steed is stolen. It is my impression that most freshmen (of both sexes) come to college t<Hiay already familiar to the point of
> losing interest with many of the facts and ideas which anxious parents

are  terror  stricken lest they acquire. And not only are they familiar with them, but they seem to have acquired  a kind of immunity which leaves them quite as fresh and unspoiled as  their  ignorantly innocent  

> -I

# 5488  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN  ATE  1\!ARCH .  18 

parents were at their age. The policy of  "Hush,  hush!"  is seldom 

effective  and  may, indeed, produce precisely the opposite result to that intended. In turning from the question of the adolescent to the question of the adult, Professor Neilson again  makes  certain distinctions. He says: The adult has a right to be protected against the display of offensive 

print  or pictures where he can not avoid them. The covers of books and magazines, and still more, posters, are a fair subject for police control, since it is practically impossible not to have them thrust upon one's notice. That, of course, is on the same theory as the theory of the radio in the open window or in the apartment house, which he took up in the first place. Professor Neilson continues: Most detached observers would think it self-evident that the various agencies chosen by the law for the exercise of a difficult and delicate function could hardly have been more unfortunately selected. They would suppose it is the business of the post office to carry mail and that officials chosen for this purpose have no inherent fitness as judges of art or morals ; that it is the business of the customs officer to collect revenue and prevent smuggling, not pass on the value of  Voltaire  or Rabelais ; that a policeman's duty makes demand on his courage, judg-ment, and loyalty, but ought not to be enlarged to include literary or 

d1·amatic  criticism. In  these  suppositions most people would agree, and it is hardly worth while to insist on them. After discussing the absurdities which have been involved in the customs censorship and which most of us believe are inherent in any such system of censorship, Professor Neilson said: Thes e absurdities in the administration of censorship serve only to strengthen the independent thinker's resentment against the essence of the practice.  -The  saving of a man's soul, which one must presume is the object of a censorship, is, after all, a man's own affair, and is not to be achieved by external compulsion or guardianship. It is of a man's free will that he buys a ticket for a play or borrows a book from the library. If he wants to pander to the lower side of his nature, no censor will prevent him. I should like to point out to the  Senate  that this is a far more advanced position that I or, so far as I know, any other Member of the  Senate  has taken with regard to censorship, because  Pro-

fessor Neilson's view that the reading . of a book is a matter for the individual himself to consider would of itself bar out not only censorship by customs, not only censorship by the post office, but the  State  laws which prevail in practically every  State 

of the  Union  against literature of this kind. We are not,  of 

course, concerned with  State  laws. The position which I have taken is that the  States  are in the last analysis far safer judges of what should be established in 

theil'  own communities than the Federal Government can be. In considering censorship from the Federal point of view Ido not  tl}.ink  it is necessary for us to go as far as this  pro-

found . and intelligent educator of youth has gone in his article. 

One  more quotation from Professor Neilson and I shall con-tinue  ~long  other lines :There are doubtless other principles involved in this difficult matter, and I shall be glad if this attempt to draw out those most obvious  pro-

vokes a more capable analyst to complete the task. In doing so-Mr. President, I think this is the most important sentence of the article--In doing so he must find the ground for depriving the adult citizen of  the  privilege of choosing his own books and his own plays and  pic-

tures; he must find a method of selecting censors wise enough to suppress only what is really demoralizing, without stifling progress and experiment; and he must hit upon a device which will prevent ban-ning a book or play from advertising it. Those are the three fundamental things which every  Sen-

ator bas to decide for himself before voting on any of the pend-ing amendments: First. What right have we to interfere with the adult citizen at all as to what he is going to read? 

Second.  How can we pick men wise enough to decide that for the average American citizen? Third. How can we do it without reacting on ourselves and encouraging the circulation of the very books which censorship is intended to restrict? Mr. President, I want to apologize for attempting to  sum-

marize or comment on this admirable article of President  Neil-

son, and I ask unanimous consent that the article as a whole be incorporated in the  RECORD  at this point in my remarks. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Without  objectio~  it is so ordered. The article is as follows : [From the Atlantic Monthly, Janua.ry, 1930] THE  THEORY  OF  CENSORSHIP 

By William Allan Neilson 

> I

The question of literary and dramatic censorship is not at the moment merely an annoying perplexity in the life of a single city, but is an  ilisue 

which concerns the whole country. Its emergence is frequently regarded as a particular instance of an antiliberal tendency appearing in a great variety of forms throughout the Nation, and it is highly important that, despite its difficulty, we should seek to see clearly what principles are implied in the suppression of books and other forms of expression and whether these are in harmony with common sense and the  ideas  which lie at the basis of our social structure.  

> In

spite of recent tendencies in legislation and public opinion, we still assume, remembering the confessions of faith on which the Republic was founded, that we believe in human liberty. The majority still holds, theoretically at least, that for the highest development of an individual or a community a large degree of freedom is necessary. Most of us would also agree that in particular questions of the restriction of liberty the  but·den  of proof is on him who would restrict. Yet it is also agreed that for the preservation of liberty itself certain restrictions are  neces-

sary. The nuisance of the radio in the apartment house or at the open window is an obvious instance of this, since the right to make a noise may conflict with the right to enjoy quiet. The problem,  then,  is not one to be solved by a simple statement of general principles, but by  a

consideration of how and when the principles, once agreed upon, apply. I believe that on many matters concerned with censorship there is alarger degree of unanimity than is generally supposed, but that a lack of explicitness has confused the public mind and unnecessarily multiplied antagonisms. The prescent paper aims not at making a novel  contri-

bution but at extricating from the confusion the accepted truths, in the hope that the remaining points of  difference  may be seen more clearly and perhaps brought nearer to reconciliation. 

> II

To  begin  with, we ought to know whether in applying censorship we are considering the welfare of the adolescent or the  arlult.  No one  dis-

putes the necessity of different measures in dealing with the mature and with the immature, since, apart from a few extremists, all our edu-cational measures take for granted that the young must be guarded from risks that may inflict injury before experience bas been acquired and before reason bas been developed to the point where the significance of the risks can be appreciated. So, in the case of certain types of literature, plays, and pictures, it is justifiable and probably necessary to seek to prevent the young from being exposed to them while their imaginations are highly impressionable and their self-control is  unde-

veloped. The exercise of measures for this end is a matter mainly for parents and teachers rather than for the police, since what books can be put into the hands of boys or girls or what plays they should be taken to see is largely an individual matter dependent less upon mere age than upon degree of development and m' anner of upbringing. For adolescents who are beyond the control of parents or teachers, the question is more  diffi-

cult. Even in the days before the eighteenth amendment we enforced laws against sales of liquor to minors, and I suppose similar laws could be made in connection with sales of books and admission to plays. But I should urge the weighing of two considerations in  th.is  connection. First, keeping an undesirable book out of the hands of a young boy or girl is an affair requiring much tact, and persuasion is usually better than compulsion or threats of punishment. Otherwise we simply add the attraction of forbidden fruit and challenge the child to outwit us. Secondly, the attempt to save our children from what we regard as dangerous knowledge is likely in our times to be a locking of the stable door after the steed is stolen. It is my impression that most freshmen (of both sexes) come to college to-day already familiar to th e point of losing interest with many of the facts and ideas which anxious parents are terror stricken lest they acquire. And not only are they familiar with them, but they seem to have acquired a kind of immunity which leaves them quite as fresh and unspoiled as their ignorantly innocent parents were at their age. The policy of  "Hush,  hush!"  is seldom effective and may, indeed, produce precisely the opposite result to that intended. 

> In

When we turn from the protection of adolescents to the problem  of  the adult a quite different point of view is imposed, though certain prohibi-tions still seem to be justifiable. The adult has  a right to be protected against the display of offensive print or pictures where he can not avoid them.  · The covers of books and magazines and, still more, posters are a fair subject for police control, since it is practically impossible not to have them thrust upon one's notice. Nor is the risk of poor judgment in selecting those to be suppressed an important one.  One  can not honestly pretend that even a mistakenly  rigorous  policy in such matters would deprive the world of either truth or beauty to a noticeable degree. • I

# 1930  .CONGRESSIONAL  - RECORD~SEN A_ TE 

The principle embodied ln the  pure  tood law might also be invoked with regard to  " blurbs  " and other advertising matter intended to  mis-

lead the purchaser of books or theater tickets. The worst of such tend sometimes to exaggerate,  ·sometimes  to hide, the wickedness of the  vol-

ume or the play or picture;  btJt  in any case the law which already seeks to enforce honesty  in  advertising  might  well be carried . farther into the field. The opposition to the activity of the censor, however, has not been roused by attempts to save the sensibilities of the public from the  out-

rages of the poster or the jacket. It bas been due to the feeling that some branch of the Government-post  office,  customs  official,  police, or mayor-has sought to save us without  onr  consent from what is  con-

sidered a demoralizing  book or  play.  The  resentment · is due to what seems to many an  officious  intrusion, an interference with the  responsi-

bility of the .adult individual for his own moral welfare. The case of the opposition has been strengthened by a number of considerations which, while not of the essence of the question, have made the censorship .fatuous as well as annoying. Most detached  observ-

ers would think it self-evident that the various agencies chosen by the law for the exercise of a difficult  and delicate function could hardly have been more unfortunately selected. They would suppose that it is the business of the post  office  to carry mail, and that officials chosen for this purpose have no inherent fitness as  judges  of art or morals; that it is the business of the customs  officer  to collect revenue and  pre-

vent smuggling, not to pass on the value of Voltaire or Rabela .is; that a policeman's duty makes demands on his courage, judgment, and  loy-

alty, but ought not to be enlarged to include literary or dramatic  criti-

cism. In these suppositions most people would agree, and it is hardly worth while to insist on them. Again, the  effect  of attempted suppression bas not been such as to 

raise  the prestige of the censors. It is now manifest that no  adver-

tisement is so  effective  in giving a book a nation-wide sale as its  pro-

hibition in a large city. Thus though it may be argued that since any 

irocb  prohibition ought to be a  reflection  of a dominant public opinion, censorship ought to be in the bands of local  go~ern.IJ,lents.  exercise of it by a local government stimulates  its  sale outside and does not prevent surreptitious importation on ,a large scale. The statutes of Massachusetts, where the question  under  discussion 

is  being most violently  debated · at the moment, contribute another  ar~ 

ment to the opposition's case,  ·since  they make legal the condemnation of a book on the basis of de tached passag es. Time was when the  Co, m-

monwealtb was proud of its reputation  of  leadership in scholarship; but there is no greater sin  in  the decalogue of scholarship than that of the 

ignoring  of the context. Yet when a modest attempt was made to amend the statute the legislature voted to continue a practice in the highest degree unscholarly, unjust, and dishonest. The absurdities of the customs censorship have been most  effectfvely 

exposed  by  Senator  CUTTING , of New  Mexico,  in a recent debate, and he succeeded in inducing the Senate to relieve our revenue  ofl\cers  from an impossible duty as f. ar as concerned the morality of literary works. He was less successful in connection with works supposedly seditious; and apparently it will still be possible for the question whether  profes-

sors of government and economics can obtain copies of the works of Karl Marx or of Lenin for examination in their classrooms to be settled on the wharves of New York. These .absurdities in the administration of censorship serve only to strengthen the independent thinker's resentment against the essence of the practice. The saving  o.f  a man's soul, which one  must  presume is the object  of  the censorship, is, after all, a man's own  affair  and is not to be achieved by external compulsion or guardianship. It  !s  of aman's free will that he buys ,a ticket for a play or borrows a book  from the library. If he wants to pander to the  lower  side of his  .nature,  no censor will prevent him. . '

Such  arguments sometimes lead defenders of the  censprship  to  abando~ 

the strictly moral issue and seek a basis for suppressi on on esthetic grounds. But it is clear that these give no firmer footing. The whole question of standards in art is dragged in, and it  becomes  evident that the result of decisions on the ground of good or bad art could only  be 

the leg alizing of the timid and  conventional,  and the blocking of all progress by the suppression of innovation  and  experiment. The fact that my personal taste is offended does not give me the  rig~t  to  inter~ 

fere with my neighbor's choice  of  reading or of plays unless he insists o'n reading aloud in my presence or forcing me to the theater. A variant of the es thetic argument is that which advocates  prohibi-

ti on of a production because it deals with disease. The pathological, we are told, is no fit subject for art. But no one really believes in a prin-

ciple that would prohibit Hamlet, Lear, .and Macbeth because all three interest us in madness. 

> IV

There are doubtless other ' principles involved in this . difficult  matter, and I shall be glad  if  this attempt to draw out those most obvious  pro-

vokes a more capable analyst to complete the task. In doing so  he  -must 

find the ground for depriving the adult  citizen  of the privilege of  choos· 

ing his own books and his . own plays  .and  pictures, he must  find,  amethod of selecting censors wise enough to suppress  oniy  what is  really 

demoralizing without  stifliilg  progress and experiment, and he  must  hit upon a device  which · will prevent banning a book or play from  adver-

tising it. And, lest he think that it is safer to err on the side of  sup-

pression  :than  on the side of  freedmn,  let him remember that it is through freedom  ~nd  not through  compulsion  that  the _ human spirit gains in power  and  reach. 

"Under  what precise set of  conditions,"  writes  Sir  Walter Raleigh of the novels of Fielding,  "and  exactly by what persons be is to be read is a question  that need trouble no one long. Books are written to be 

read by those who  can  understand them ; their possible  effect  on those who can not is a matter  o.f  medical rather than of literary interest. 

Some  literary critics, it is true, with a taste for subdued tones in  ari; 

have  .found  some of  Fielding's  loudest notes too strident for enfeebled ears, but not to the great musician can the whole range of the orchestra, not to the great painter can the strongest contrast of colors profitably be denied.'' Mr. CUTTING. Mr. President, we have heard a great deal about censorship. We have heard some of it on the floor  of 

the Senate. We have beard a great deal of it from the papers throughout the country. For a moment I should like to empha-size a little the third point made by Professor Neilson, namely, that the a. ttempt to suppress individual books simply promotes their circulation and re putation. 

Thi"s  is nothing new. It started in the ancient Athenian  com-

munity when an attempt was made to suppress the talking of Socrates. It was then for the first time that he acquired agreat reputation among  Athenian ·youth. When the great and respectable citizens of that time condemned him to death for contumacy, then again his reputation was increased a hundred-fold  and  his teachings have gone on from that time to  this: 

I should like to remind the Senate of what Tacitus said about a very obscure Roman writer named Verjinto. Verjinto, Iimagine, in Roman times was equivalent to some of the minor authors whom we have beard denounced  yest~rday  by the Senator from  Utah  [Mr.  SMOOT]  and whose books were  formedy 

placed on the desk of the Senator from Indiana [Mr. WATSON]. .At any rate, when Nero, that mighty Empero .r, came to the Roman throne he decided that the works  of  Verjinto were too immoral for the people of the empire to read. He prohibited them.  Said  Tacitus :

so · long as the  possession  of those writings was attended by danger, they were eagerly sought and read; when there was no longer any 

difficulty  in securing  them,  they  ·felf  into oblivion. I pelieve .  that · is an epitome of the history of censorship from the days  of  Nero to the present time. I hope the Senate will not carry . out a policy which so lamentably  failed  in the days of the  Cresars. 

Is there any  anaJogy,  I wonder Mr. President, between what happened to Verjinto in the time of Nero and what is liable to happen to the works of D. H. Lawrence of the present time? The late Mr. Lawrence, a man whose reputation is world-wide 

in many wayst one of the leading authors of the present day, published a book recently which has been reviewed in all the 

leading  magazines of the country as well as the leading  maga"' 

zines of England. It is a book which I personally do not admire. I find it rather dull. When a constituent-an editor and literary man,  who · could make nothing but good use out of such a book or any other book-attempted to import it, I pleaded with the Secretary of the Treasury  fm·  his right to import it, not for its general  cir-

culation. I mentioned the fact that  i had appealed for a book of that kind in the Senate when I made my speech in  Octob er 

last. . I purposely omitted the name  of  the book, for fear that it might corrupt the morals, I will not say of the  Members...  of the United States Senate, but perhaps of the general public who read the  CoNGRESSIONAL  RECORD. I referred to the matter only to show the kind of foolish letters which can be written by so cultured and intelligent a man as the Secretary of the Treasury undoubtedly is when his writings are inspired by bureaucratic clerks such as those in the Bureau of Customs. But what happened? The  Senator  from  Utah  [Mr.  SMOOT] 

gave out an interview to the United Press saying that the book, which I had never mentioned, was Lady Chatterley's Lover, by D. H. Lawrence; that it was one of the books which I was trying to bring into the United States; that I had mention ed it in my remarks; and that he was entlrely opposed to its intro-duction. I think the  Senate  will remember that he made very much  · the  same  statement yesterday afternoon, and in fact went so far, after I denied mentioning the book, as to say :I remember  perfectly well-! do not know whether it is in the printed speech of the  Senator  . or  ~ot-?-e  referred to Lady Chatterley. Mr. President, I am not in the habit of referring to things on the floor of the  Senate  and then removing them from my printed speeches. I have only done it  on~e,  3J!d  I think  I know why the 5490  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARCH  18 

Senator  from  Utah  believes that I am in the habit of doing it. 

-During  those remarks in  October  the  Senator  from  Utah  during an interruption told me that the man who was censoring the literature of the world in behalf of the customs censor was aman named J. D. Nevius. I had never before heard of Mr. Nevius. I accepted the  Senator's  word as being  100  per cent corr ect, and later in my speech referred to Mr. Nevius as the individual who was doing this censorship. After going back to my  office  a gentleman called on me and said that the  Senator  from  Utah  and he both thought that it was unwise to mention the name of Mr. Nevius, because it might hurt his retention in his present position, and if I had no objection he would like to withdraw the name from the 

Rmo&o.  I stated that as the  Senator  from  Utah  had been the one who originally introduced it in the  RECORD  I ·  had no objec-tion to his withdrawing it and it was accordingly withdrawn, both in his introduction of the name and in my subsequent reference to it. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico yield to the  Senator  from  Utah? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  Certainly. 1\Ir.  SMOOT.  I will say to the  Senator  that this is the first intimation I have had of such a thing. Nobody asked me to withdraw the name. This information is entirely new to me. Mr.  CUTTING.  The  Senator  will at least acknowledge that the name of  Mr.  Nevius  was  withdrawn from his remarks as well as from my own, he having been the first one to mention the name. Mr.  SMOOT.  It was done by some one else and not by me or by  my  authority. Mr.  CUTTING.  I merely mention that matter because that is the only time I have ever corrected or altered or expurgated any remarks I made on the floor of the  Senate.  So  far as Lady Chatterley's Lover is concerned, I did not mention  it, 

and until the present occasion  ·I  have not mentioned it on the floor of the  Senate. 

1\lr.  SMOOT.  The  Senator  would not take Lady Chatterley's Lover now and read any extracts from it to the  Senate,  would he? Mr.  CUTTING.  I will get to that later on when I reach the subject of indecent literature. Mr.  WATSON.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield for aquestion? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from  New  Mex-ico yield to the  Senator  from Indiana? Mr.  CUTTING.  Yes; if it is a question .and not entirely irrelevant to the subject I am discussing. Mr.  WATSON.  I understood the  Senator  to say that he had written a letter to the Commissioner of Customs advising  that ·

the man who imported the book shouid have a right to have it admitted? Mr.  CUTTING . Oh,  no; I said nothing of the sort. 

Mr.  WATSON.  I was wondering if the  Senator  had a copy of that letter, and if he would be willing to adduce it. Mr.  CUTTING.  Yes; I have copies of a number of letters, and, if it seems to be material  dming  the course of the discussion, I shall introduce them into the REOORD; but they are  so  v ery remote  from  the subject which I am discussing that I should really prefer not to take them up at this time. If 

the  S enato r from Indiana later on thinks that it is material to the dis cussion, I shall be  very  glad to go into that matter very thoroughly, but I am trying to make this debate, so far as Ican, relevant to the issues which we are discussing in the 

Senate. 

All the discussion,  Mr.  President, of the books which were introdu c ed yes terday,  anq  which were submitted to the  Sena-

tors, is entirely apart from the merits of the case as a whole. This i not a question  Qf  indecent literature; it is a question of freedom of speech and freedom of thought, and I am going to try, so far as I can, to limit it to that main principle. However, so long as we are on the question of this book, which the  Sena-

tor from  Utah  evidently considers a vile and loathesome book, I want to say that, if that book is calculated to contaminate the 

Ameri can  public, the blame for circulating  its  na,me  among the people of t he United  States  rests firmly on the  Senator  from Utah, becau e he is the first one who mentioned  it,  because his inter-views in the press have brought it to the attention literally of millions of American citizens who would otherwise  ~ever  have h eard of the book, and because the reference of the  Senator 

from  Utah  to it has induced the publication of an American edi-tion, which is circulated widely all over the country. When Igot  back  to New Mexico I found that book circulating among the students of the State university. Mr.  SMOOT.  1\Ir. President, will the  Se~ator  yieldi 

The · VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico yield to the  Senator  from  Utah? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. Mr.  SMOOT.  If  my amendment shall be adopted no more copies of that book will come into the  United  States;  it will put a stop to that. Mr.  CUTTING~  Oh,  no, Mr. President; the principles  em-

bodied in the  Senator's  amendment have already been in the 

tariff  act since  1890.  Anything that would apply to a book like Lady Chatterley's Lover has already been the law since  1890. 

The  Senator  surely knows that. He must have studied the subject a little more than to say w hat he said just now. The provisions of the present law have been tested, they have been proved to be futile; and the  reason  why I am attempting to repeal them is that they have proved their inefficacy for 40 years. Mr.  SMOOT.  My amendment would strengthen the law of 

1890  and the law of 1892. I will say to the  Senator  that if my 

amendment were adopted there would be no more Lady  Chat-

terley's Lover and other such rotten stuff come into the country. Mr.  CUTTING.  I must differ with the  Senator.  It seems to me the amendment which the  Senator  introduced yesterday on the floor of the  Senate  weakens the law of  1892;  it does not strengthen it. It allows the Secretary of the Treasury, at his discretion, to admit some of these books which previously he had no authority whatever to admit. These books, if they are obscene and indecent, have been prohibited entry since  1890, 

while the  Senator's  amendment provides that, at the discretion of the  Secretary  of the Treasury, he may for noncommercial purposes and in certain peculiar circumstances allow them to be imported.  So  the  Senator's  amendment will not stop . Lady Chatterley's Lover from coming in. The  Senator's  amendment and the publicity which he has given to this  book  will make it a classic. That is what he has done; he has made this book a classic. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That ought to suit the  Senator. 

Mr. CUTTING. It does not suit me at all. I have no use for the book; I did not refer to it, for fear of introducing it to the American people. The  Senator  from  Utah  is the one who is 

responsible for any evil which this book may do, either now or in the future. The truth of the matter is, Mr. President, when people are told,  "Here  is a book which you must not  read,"  if they think that . they have a right to read it an awful temptation is put in their way. That is exactly what the  Senator  from  Utah  has done with regard to this particular book. 

Our  children to-day are reading books in the schools which at the time they were published might have seemed just as in-decent as the books to which the  Senator  from  Utah  has been referring. The  Senator,  of course, is familiar with the works of  Shakespeare.  The first page of King Lear is grossly in-decent ; the love making of Hamlet and  Ophelia  is coarse and obscene; in Romeo and Juliet the remarks of Mercutio and the nurse are extremely improper ; yet all three of those plays were compulsory reading in school when I went to school agood many years ago at the age of 15. There is no reason to think, after the publicity which the  Senator  has given to this book, that a hundred years from now Lady Chatterley's Lover may not be compulsory reading, perhaps in the kindergarten classes. [Laughter.] Mr. President, before I get through with this particular phase of the subject I want to r emind you that too many of us are apt to think that when we want to. stop something, when we want to prevent something from going on which we think is wrong, the best thing to do is to enact a law against it. In most cases, Mr. President, that is not so. The passage of  a law does not necessarily abolish the  evil  which the law is meant to correct ; in many cases it has just the opposite effect. While Iknow that if it were in our power we would all like to prevent much of the kind of material which the  Senator  from Indiana had on his desk yesterday, we might also remember the words of Emerson when he said: Every suppressed or expunged word reverberates through the eart hfrom side to side. Mr. President, the former vote on the amendment which Isubmitted in  October  was  taken  after very thorough and v er yfull discussion, and after a complete and sane deliberation which lasted the better part of two days. I do not wan t to re-iterate or rehearse the arguments which were then made ; th ey are all in the RECORD. We all want to get on  ns  far  as  possible and as quickly as possible with the tariff bill. Why reverse our action? What arguments have been pre-sented to the Senate which were not presented in  October?  Acertain  ~umbe~  of  bo~ks  haye  been presented, it is true,  fo'r '1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5491 

private  circulation  among the Senators. · Is there any Member of the Senate who did not realize when he voted in October that there were indecent books in the world  ; that there were at least as many indecent books  as  reposed on that desk last evening; and did anyone suppose,  'rating  the personnel of the Customs Service at the lowest possible point, that when the Customs Service went about publishing a black list of 739 books they could not find at least 15 or  20  which really were  indecent! 

Yet that is all that could have been proved if those books had circulated among all Members of the Senate, and that  is  all that could have been proved if  the.  Senator from  Utah  had carried out his original proposal, to have  an  executive session and  read  those books in toto.  ·

By the way,  Mr.  President,  the Customs  Court  itself has now decided that the only excuse for excluding a book from this country is on a consideration of its contents as a whole, not on the consideration of certain pages of the book, earmarked by the customs officials, with red pencil  m~rks  under every improper and indecent  word  and sentence, with the margin marked so that one can easily skip from one obscenity to another, like Eliza crossing the ice. That  is  not the test. The test is whether the book as a whole is or is not a book which will offend the standards of decency. 

Mr.  President, there are  certain  things that have happened 

since  we discussed this matter in October, and they are all things which make the stand the Senate then took seem more correct even than it seemed then to be. The purpose of my amendment was to  a,  large extent the taking away from the inefficient and ignorant employees of the 

Customs  Service the authority to decide in such cases. At that time I had a good deal to say against the decisions which had been made by the courts up to that date, so  t.ha,t  under even the 

ordinary  processes of law, which would leave a case to a jury, it might have been decided in a very unfair way, or  what · Iconsidered to be an unfair way.  Since  that time  there · have been two admirable decisions made by the courts. The first one was decided on October 31, 192'9, by the  United  States 

Customs Court, second division, in the case of  Peabody  Book 

Shop  against The  United  States. The decision was made by 

Chief  Justice Fischer, some of whose decisions I severely criti-cized in  October.  I am glad to say that this decision is an admirable statement of the fundamental questions involved in censorship. It is a stepping-stone toward the goal which we all strive for, the goal of freedom of thought. We do not deem it necessary-

Says  Chief Justice Fischer, in part-to enter into a lengthy discussion of the books entitled  "Daphnis  

> and Chloe"-

Tbat is the great book of Longus, whose exclusion by the Customs  Service  I criticized in October-                                                                                                                                            

> Satyrs and Sunlight and The London Aphrodite, for it is .sufficient to say that acareful reading of the works satisfies us that they are not obscene and are n()t of the class of publications which Congress
> ordained should not be allowed to enter into this country. There are passages in the books in question which, publlshed separately and alone, would be considered indecent and their distribution and importa-
> tion prohibited, but aliterary work can not be called obscene if here and there may be found some expression which is obscene. If abook can be condemned because of the existence of occasional indecent lan-
> guage, Shakespeare's works would be prohibited. Books must be con· ·
> sidered in their entirety, and, if they have literary merit and are clearly not published with an object to parade obscenity and attract readers with debased minds, they are not of the class which Congress intended to exclude.

Further on in the opinion he says :The  testimony  of leading men in the literary world  was  introduced in the trial of this case, and while views of the witnesses are regarded by us as interesting and possibly  an  aid to our  conclusion,  they can not control this court in determining the character of the book. I refer to that  because  this is one of the  first  cases in which the testimony of literary men or psychological experts was allowed in any case of this kind. The books in qu estion-Continues  Chief  Justice Fischer-                                                         

> are the productiond of eminent literati. They can be found in public libraries and the libraries of universities where they are used in the study of classics. While it iS true that there Rill afew passages in the books which might be considered obscene if published alone, the whole work is not obscene, and we must judge each book as a whole.

That is  a very important decision, Mr. President. I do not know that the debate in the Senate had  anything  to do with 

the reversal of some of the opinions expressed by Judge Fisher in previous cases; but I do say that, whether it had or not, this opinion  is  one which will be quoted in the future on matters of this kind. The second case to which I wish to refer is the opinion of the 

United  States Circuit  Court  of Appeals, written by Judge Augustus N. Hand, in the case of Mrs. Mary Ware Dennett. Mrs. Dennett, as most Senators are aware, had published a book dealing with certain anatomical and physiological processes which was almost identical with a pamphlet distributed by the 

United  States  Public Health Service; yet, by an outrageous con-spiracy, working a complete injustice on the defendant, Mrs. Dennett was haled into court and convicted under the obscenity statute. Judge Hand, in his opinion, says :                                                

> It [the statute] must not be construed to interfere with serious in-
> struction regarding sex matters unless the terms it is conveyed in are clearly indecent. •••The defendant's discussion •••is writ-ten with sincerity of feeling and with an idealization of the marriage relation and sex emotion.

I take it as a layman that the implication, at least, in that sentence is that whatever is done with obvious honesty of  in-

tention and decency of  pm·pose  can not be held to be depraved. The opinion continues:                                                                                                                                 

> It can hardly be said that because of the risk of arousing sex impulses there should be no instruction of the young in sex matters, and that the risk of imparting instruction outweighs the disadvantages of leaving th em to grope about in mystery and morbid curiosity, and requiring them to secure such information as they may be able to obtain from ill-
> informed and often foul-minded companions rather than from intelligent and high-minded sources. The old theory that information about sex matters should be left to chance has greatly changed ;and while there is still adifference of opinion as to just the kind of instruction that should be given, -it 1s commonly thought in these days that much was lacking in the old mystery and reticence. This is evident from all the current literature on the subject.
> If

that opinion  stands~  Mr.  President, it is again a monument to the increased intelligence and increased liberality of our Federal courts. I have said that the decisions made by the  courts  in the last · few months have been an enormous improvement on the deci-sions made before, and I want to give you now the other side of the picture. The actions of the customs inspectors and  cus· 

toms clerks have been  far  worse than anything even imagined in the past. It would seem as if the customs clerks and the inspectors at the ports had banded themselves together in order to show bow utterly ridiculous the present system is. In the very week after the decision which I read you a while ago in the  Peabody  Book  Store  case  had  been rendered, the same inspector barred George Moore's  Story  Teller's Holiday-a book which I also saw last night on the desk of the  Senator 

from Indiana [Mr.  WATSON]  ; I can not imagine why. There is nothing in the book which could possibly damage the morals of any human being, and yet it was barred by the deputy customs collector and mail examiner at Baltimore. The  Senator  from  Utah  [Mr.  SMooT]  yesterday, in speaking on this general subject, allowed to go into the  RECORD  a sentence which I think will become in its time almost as great a classic as his favorite work, Lady Chatterley's Lover. Here it is--Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield? Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield to the Senator. Mr.  SMOOT.  I resent the statement the Senator bas just made that Lady Chatterley's Lover is my favorite work. Mr. CUTTING. Then I withdraw the remark. I thought it must be, because the  Senator  bas been reading it, apparently, since the Christmas holidays. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I will say to the  Senator  that I have not read it. I did not mark these books. They were so disgusting, so dirty and vile that the reading of one page was enough for me. Mr. CUTTING. Ah, yes, Mr. President; but the courts of the 

United  States  say that the reading of one page is not sufficient, and that the book must be read as a whole. I am sure that between  Christmas  and the present time the  Senator  must have had occasion to  read  the book from cover to cover. I know that he has been quoting it to Senators. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I have not read it and I have not quoted it. ;Not only that, but I would not read the  stuff.   

> Mr. CUTTING.

Has not the Senator been reading it aloud to 

Senators  on the  fioor  of the  Senate? 

Mr.  SMOOT.  No; I have 'not. Mr. CUTTING. Then I have been misinform:ed. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  The Senator judges me by himself, I suppose. 5492  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SEN ATE  MARCH  18 Mr.  CUTTING.  No, Mr. President; I have not been reading the book. I read it, as I said, on one occasion to decide on one particular matter. I have not read most of the books which were on the desk of the Senator from Indiana. I am not  in-

tere ste d in literature of that kind. The Senator from Utah, who has been filling the press of the  counh·y  with his experiences in 

these realms of art, must, I thought, be interested in them; but if he is not, I am glad to withdraw the charge that that is his favorite reading matter. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I wi sh the Senator would withdraw it. The statement he made was uncalled for, and was not the fact. Mr.  CUTTING.  I started to quote from the Senator from 

Utah.  I am sure be will not object to this quotation, because he bas allowed it to go into the RECORD:  

> If

a customs inspector-

Said  the Senator yesterday afternoon-at the port of New York, with his knowledge of the world, regards on  

> his

own initiative a book as obscene it is about the nearest approach to a jury trial that can be had. Mr. President, I lived in New  York  a good many years. The 

"knowledge  of the world  " which is requisite to ehable a man 

to hold the office of customs inspector at the port is exactly the knowledge which  it  takes to get from your home on the Bowery to  the ·l pier  on the Hudson river, and then to open travelers' trunks, remove the contents from the trunks, and, after thoroughly confusing it, to replace it in such order as may be possible under the circumstances. That is the  " knowledge of the world  " which is prevalent among the customs inspectors at the port of New York; and that is the  "knowledge  of the  world"  which presumably entitles them to judge the literature of the ages. I deplore--The Senator went on-the contemptuous references to the personnel  of  the Customs  Service 

which ran through the debate in the Committee of the Whole. Many of th e members of this personnel are veterans of the service, tried and true. I know from personal contact that many are men of education, legal training, and broad information. Now let us see about this deputy customs collector in  Balti-

more. According to the Baltimore  Sun-

George w. Hill, deputy customs collector and mail examiner, came into the limelight at a trial in the Customs Court here in December, 1928, when be testified he did not make a practice of reading much, and wa s unable to answer questions as to whether Chaucer, Fielding ,Beaumont, Fletcher, or any of the Elizabethan writers were still living. This is the gentleman under whose decision the works of Francois Rabelais were recently seized. 

1\fr.  SMOOT.  Mr . President--

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr. FEss in the chair). Does the Senator from New  Mexico  yield to the Senator from  Utah? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I do. 

1\fr.  SMOOT.  Before ever those books are finally prevented from coming in, they are always  sent · to the office  ~ere  in Washington. They are finally passed on here in Washmgton; not by the man who takes the book out of the package or out of the  nands  of the person coming in. 

1\ir.  CUTTING.  Oh,  yes,  I understand that, l\Ir. President; I am going to deal with that in a little while. .The books which were seized, according to the Baltunore 

Sun , were  the property of Mr . Douglas H. Gordon,  1009  North Charle Street, an attorney, and a graduate of the Harvard Law 

School.  Mr.  Gordon took the books to  Paris  with him to have them rebound.  He · bad purchased them in this country. The Senators will understand that it was when they were returned 

wiMl  the new binding on them that they were taken, under the provisions of the tariff act of  192'"2.  I read from the  Balti-

more  Sun:  

> It

is the first seizure in this country of the French edition of these works,  1\Ir.  Gordon said, which are found in every important library in the world. The French edition is not published in this country, he said. In addition to th e 14 Fr e nch editions of the work, the Library of Congress has 7 in Engli sh, Mr. Gordon said. The Harvard  Uni-

versity library bas 56 editions in French, the oldest (recently acquir e d) of 1558 and the l ates t a 1920  edition.  Prince~on  University has aspecial collection of Rabelais. The Enoch  Pratt  Free Library has 13 of llab cl ais's work on index. I am sure the ' Senator from Maryland will have no objection to my quoting from a letter written to him by the gentleman in question. Mr. TYDINGS. Not at all. 

Mr.  CUTTING.  He makes the same  statements,  on the whole, that are found in the Baltimore  Sun.  He writes: The Harvard Library has 56 editions of Rabelais in French, the earliest printed in 1558 and the latest print ed in  1920;  this count is of separate editio ns and does not reckon duplicate copies; there are also 11 editions in English, printed from 1694 to 1921. The Andover Theological Seminary Library has two editions, one in 

French  (1835) and one in English (1849). The Library of Congress has 14 complete works of Rabelais in French and 7 in English ; and bas 15 single works in French and 8 in English.  '

The Johns Hopkins  Libmry  has 7 editions of the works of Rabelais in French and 4 in English. The  Princeton  Library has a special collection of the works  of 

Rabelais. The Enoch  Pratt  Free Library, of Baltimore, contains 13 author  en-

tries from Rabelais, some of them, how ever, being merely excerpts from his works.  

> It

would be possible to continue this list indefinitely, as no library 

of  any importance is lacking in copies of this great classic. In each library there are also many critical  and  scholarly works dealing with Rabelais's life and writings. I shall quote only one accessible criticism of Rabelais's position in the history of literature. This is the critical estimate appearing in the article on French Literature in the Encyclopedia Britannica, eleventh edition, at page 124-which is r eprinted in the recent fourteenth  edi-

tion-written by George Saintsbury, the leading English critic of French literature.  Professor  Saintsbury says: 

"Among  these [novelists and romantic writers of the sixteenth  cen-

tury] there can be no doubt of the precedence in  every · sense of the word, of Francois Rabelais (c.  1490-1553),  the one French writer (or with Moliere, one of the two), whom critics the least inclined to  ap-

preciate the characteristics of French literature have agreed to place among the few greatest of the world. With an immense erudition  rep-

resenting almost the whole of the knowledge of his time, with an  untir-

ing faculty of invention, with the judgment of a philosopher, and the common sense of a man of the world, with an observation that let no characteristic of the time pass unobserved, and with a tenfold portion of the special Gallic gift of good-humored satire, Rabelais united aheight of speculation and depth of insight and a vein of poetical imagination rarely found in any writer." Mr. Pr esident, the Senator from  Utah  has said-and, of course, he is absolutely correct-that after the deputy collectors 

· at  the different ports have passed on the literature, the books are then sent up to Washington for the deputy commi ss ioner to pass on. The deputy commissioner who pas es ou those works, according to an article obviously inspired by the Bureau of 

Customs  which appeared in the press recently, is  MT.  J D. Nevius. His assistant, Mr. Corridon, and himself go over the works together. 

If there is any doubt as to the correctness of the decision of the local man at the port, the  ma,tter  is taken up with the Commissioner of Customs, and later, in exceptional cases, with Mr. Seymour Lowman, the  Assistant  Secretary of the Treasury. While all those officials are undoubtedly very estimable  gen-

tlemen, I do not believe there is a Member of the Senate who knows them who would ask for the opinion of any one of them on a work of literature or who would allow  any  of them, or all of them put together, to dictate the contents of his library or the quality of the books which he should be allowed to read. 

'The  proof of that is in the black list which I commented on to the Senate in October. There are on that list 739 books, many of them  books  of the most innocent description. I admit that among the 739 probably those authorities have stumbled here and there on books which actually are improper and indecent and which no doubt ought to be excluded. I am not going to comment any further on that particular phase of the matter.  One  of the greatest living critics has  de-

clared Rabelais's book the most extraordinary book ever written by anyone. It is a book which has been read for  400  years by people of all classes and ages and conditions.  So  far as I know it has never corrupted a single human being. Moreover, Mr. President, the works of Rabelai are published in this country. They can be purchased at any book store.  One 

does not have to depend on the European editions, as Mr. Gordon un fortunately did ; at least, he depended on a Euro-

pean binding, and lost his books in consequence. There are plenty of editions published all over this country.  So  there  are 

of Bocaccio another author who has been read considerably by the youth  df  this country, as well as all other countries in the world. There may be people whose downfall and degeneration in life have  been  due to reading Bocaccio, but I confess I do not know who th ey are . .Mr. President, let me quote again from the Senator from 

Utah.  He said: 1930  CONGRESSIONAL·  RECORD-SENATE  '5493                  

> So fl(lr as the customs 1s concerned, standard textbookil of medicine and surgery for the pr:ofession have not been banned.

If that is true, I am rather at a loss to  understand  this article from the  Baltinwre  Sun  of Sunday morning, March  16,  which 

is  fairly illustrative of the complicated methods and processes which are necessary to solve these great problems at the ports. I should like to  read  a part of this article. Baltimore customs agents, it was revealed yesterday, are a resourceful crew. I hope the Senator from Maryland will realize that I am not reflecting on his State in any way.  So  many of the cases happen to come from his State because they are well reported by the Baltimore Sun, and because Baltimore is close to Washington, and we get the facts about them. Mr. TYDINGS. Mr. President, will the Senator yield? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. 

Mr.  TYDINGS. Part of it is because of the desire on behalf of a great many Maryland people to get these books. That is the  reason  why so many of them come to Baltimore. 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I appreciate that. The article reads: Baltimore  custom-s  agents, it was revealed  yesterday,  are a resourceful crew.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

> Having seized a medical book and having bad it pronounced obscene
> 1n the proper manner by authorities at Washington, bayjng notified its owner and promised to return it for him to publisher in London, the question of how to get it out of the country arose.
> The postal authorities will not accept for postage any book pro-
> nounced obscene by customs officials. An express company was sug-
> gested, but, it was said, some difficulty having been experienced by the company in aprevious handling of barred published matter, it refused to accept it. PHYSICIAN NOTIFIED The book, ordered by a professor in aBaltimore med-ical school, deals with medical matters. As soon as it was seized the physician was noti·
> fled. He was acquainted by the customs officials of the various laws and rules of censorship covering the handling of such obscene matter as
> the book was alleged to contain. ·
> Finally, to get the book out of the country in alegal manner, ar-
> rangements and the necessary papers were made out to have the volume shipp ed ttom Baltimore as parcel freight aboard a vessel bound direct
> from Baltimore to London.
> NO RECORD OF RETURN
> The captain could carry the tome as parcel freight, but the professor to whom the book was consigned said ye. sterday latest information from London disclosed that there is no record that the book has ever reached London.
> It cost the importer agood portion of three days' time and $8.25, besides the cost of the book, to have it returned. It was purchased, he said, after advertisements sent out with scientific publications had been received here by him.

So  much for the  Uberty  of the medical profession. A prominent professor told me the other day that his specialty in life is the study of the Restoration Dramatists. He is writing a final and authoritative book on the subject of the Restoration Dramatists. 

·There  is one of the most celebrated dramatists whose works he has not been able to procure. They are not published in 

this country in full, though many of _the more unseemly  ex-

tracts have been published many times. The works, as a whole, were published only a few years ago, and he has been unable to import them from England. They are the works of Rochester, one of the most famous of politicians, statesmen, writers,  ~nd  dramatists of the restoration period. This professor is hampered in his scientific investigations because he is unable to get the works of Rochester into this country. Yet Senators . will remember that the original black list of the Customs Service made a distinction between the classics published in English and the  books  in another language, which, according to them, were improper for circulation in this country. Not long ago I received a letter from  ~ bookshop in New York which said: For the  first  time in  our  experience we have been  notified  that the New York customs bureau is holding a book addressed to us because                  

> it is obscene, and we would like to know if there is no redress from this ridiculous idea of some customs official.

The books in question are by  · Daniel  Defoe, entitled  " Moll Flanders  " and  " Roxanna."  Both of these works, as Senators undoubtedly know, have been published in a great many Ameri-can editions. They are not unusual books. They are books which are read in school in the discussion of English literature of that time. Yet the foreign editions can not be imported into this country on account of the decision,  first,  of one of these inspectors at the port, whose  "knowledge  of the  world"  tells him that the book should be kept out, and again by the final decision of these gentlemen in the  Customs  Bureau here in 

Washington. Mr. President, I am devoting  too·  much time to the question of these books alleged to be indecent. As I have said before that is not the really serious part of the legislation which is  bemg 

proposed  now. Those indecent books which we saw last night, 

which  we see no more  to-day,  and on which perhaps  our  eyes 

will never fall again are a red herring drawn across the trail of this discussion. Yet before I conclude that phase of the matter I would like to remind the Senate that a gre .at many Senators last night agreed that  "these  books"  were bad, that 

" these  books"  could be compared with the importation of opium 

or  some deadly poison. /I ask in all candor, before dropping this part of the  subjec~ 

when the Senator says  "these  books,'' which books does be mean? There was a motley collection last night on the desk of the Senator from Indiana. Many of them, I agree with the Senator from  Utah,  were  thoroughly indecent and improper books. If I were a censor and if the Senator from  Utah  were acensor we should agree in keeping a good many of them  out.  Imay add that neither the Senator from  Utah  nor myself is acensor; that the Senate of the  United  States as a whole is not acensor; that the agents of the Treasury Department ought not to be censors in the way in which they have interpreted their duties in the past. But in addition to the books which the Senator from  Utah 

and I would agree  .are · improper literature, there were a number of other books on the desk of the Senator from Indiana which I should consider unfit for general circulation, but which are entirely proper to be read by scientists, specialists, authors, editors, and people of generally well-matured minds. There was another lot of books on the  Senator'il  desk which are perfectly proper to be read by anyone and which have been read continuously by school children for  400  or  500  years with-out any damage to their  morals  or to the morals of the  com-

munities in which they live.  Tllzit  is why I do not think we can talk about  "these  " books. It depends on the individual book about which we are talking. 

1\Ir.  President, we have denounced foreign books for a long time. I do not think the foreign countries have very much on us in the way of indecent literature. From a railway  book-

stall in Chicago, before taking the Capital Limited to come here the other day, I purchased these important works, which I now exhibit to the Senate :Joy Stories, published in New York  City,  I think, though it does not give the name of the publisher. Paris Nights, published in Philadelphia, Pa. Hot Dog, published in Cleveland,  Ohio. 

Hot Lines for Flaming Youth, Detroit, Mich. Jim Jam Gems, from  St.  Paul,  Minn. 

Whiz Bang, from Robbinsdale, Minn. 

Unlike  the Senator from Indiana [Mr.  WATSON]  I am not going to circulate these books among the Members of the  Senate. 

I think  that  the standards of the Senate ought to be main-tained. I do not think any risk should be run of corruption of the morals Qf the Members of this honorable body. I think 

their  morals  are quite as important as the morals of those who sit in the galleries and are listening to my remarks, because, after all, if we corrupt the legislative body of the country, that 

c<lrruption,  it  seems  to me, will, sooner or later, seep out all over the country in channels of contamination. If any Senator wants to see any of this literature, be can communicate with me, and, upon giving  a,  certificate of good moral character, Ishall consider showing it to him. [Laughter.] I want to state further that these  a,re  the January numbers and I am sure Senators can obtain them, if they insist on it, at the  rail-

way booksta,Ils, and, if they do so, it is at their own risk and not mine. No doubt by now the February and March numbers of  these  magazines  are also available. I have looked  th~ough 

them casually and I consider them far more indecent in every way than any of the literature  ac~umnlated  last night on the desk of the Senator from Indiana. Here [exhibiting] is a book which is contained in the  Con-

gressional Library. It was published in 1888 by Vizetelly, who was the publisher of Zola's works, which the British Govern-ment attempted to ban on the ground of obscenity. Vizetelly's attorney published, this book to show that if Zola's works shou ld be excluded, the works of all the English classics should be excluded.  This  is a book consisting of extracts from all the leading English authors, beginning with  Shakespeare.  It does not include the indecencies of Chaucer and Skelton and the 

pre-Shakespearian  authors, but, starting with Shakespeare , it goes through the list. It  is  the condensed indecency of the English  authors. ·5494  .CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARCH - 18 This book has been  in  the Congressional  Library  so long, it .has been fingered so often by so many people, that the original 

.copy is going to pieces, and one is not allowed now to read it in its original form, but any citizen of the  United  States who wishes to have it can get a photostatic copy by paying for it. Here [exhibiting] is one, and I now assure the Senator from 

Utah  that there is a great deal of matter in it of exactly the same kind as the matter which was submitted last night. Also, it is just in extracts. The whole of the works are not included.  

> It

is just little bits here and there from the English classics. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President, will the Senator yield? The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from New 

Mexico  yield to the Senator from  Utah? 

M-r.  CUTTING.  I yield. Mr.  SMOOT.  The statement made by the Senator now does not conform with the statement made by officials of the  Con-

gressional Library. I took that matter up with them. All of these rotten books are kept in one place, and no one sees them unless there is some special action taken by the officials of the Congressional Library. That is what I am told. Mr.  CUTTING.  My information was different in that respect. Mr.  SMOOT.  I have not tried to get any of them, but I want to say to the Senator that that is what they tell me, that that  

> is

the practice of the Congressional Library. Mr.  CUTTING.  Will the  Senator  tell me with whom he consulted in the library in that respect? Mr.  SMOOT.  The Senator can consult with anybody he wants to there. .

Mr.  CUTTING.  Will the Senator tell me from whom he got his information? Mr.  SMOOT.  I got it from officials of the Library. That is sufficient. Mr.  CUTTING.  I do not mind stating  that  my information came from Doctor Putnam, the Director of the Library, who said in the first place that the Library prided itself on having the most complete collection of indecent English literature in the world that all adults are admitted to the place where the books are 'kept, but that there was some one sitting there to see that they did not make any improper use of the books while they were there. [Laughter.] 

:Mr.  SMOOT.  That place is not in the reading room. Mr.  CUTTING.  No; but no one has ever been excluded who is apparently a normal adult. There is nothing indecent about this book which I have displayed except what indecency there may be in the actual classics which are on every one's  book-

shelves and which have been read for generations and centuries. For a legal purpose these matters were concentrated in this vol-ume, but the book can be obtained. I know a good many citizens who have gone over to the Congressional Library and obtained copies of it. Mr.  SMOOT.  I suppose it is along the same line as the books displayed in the  Chamber  yesterday, is it? Is it as rotten as the  words  used in Lady Chatterley's Lover? 

· Mr.  CUTTING.  The same words are used, and the same words are used, of course, in Shakespeare that are  use<l  in these books. Mr.  SMOOT.  Not at all. Mr.  CUTTING.  I think I can prove to the contrary. Mr.  SMOOT.  The Senator has never read the book that he wanted to be permitted to come in here if be makes that state-ment now . There can not be  viler  language, there can not be words put together so vile and rotten as in those books. Mr.  CUTTING.  The subject can not be discussed in detail here; but, if the Senator will come to see me at any  tiJ?e, 

I thi nk I can show him in Shakespeare all of the  matte'l:s  which 

were contained in the extracts which had been pointed out in the books on the desk of the Senator from Indiana. Mr.  SMOOT.  I have read Shakespeare, and there is no more comparison between what is in Shakespeare  afid  what is in the books for which the Senator  is  speaking now than there is between heaven and hell. Mr.  CUTTING.  I am not making the comparison. I am speaking only of words.  ·

Mr.  COUZENS.  Mr.  President, will the Senator from New Mexico yield? The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from New Mexico yield to the Senator from Michigan? Mr.  CU'l'TING.  I yield. 

1\Ir.  COUZENS.  I would be much interested to have the Senator tell me the difference between hell  and  heaven. I have not been able to get any definition of it. Mr.  SMOOT.  This is not the proper place; but I should be glad to give the Senator the first lesson to-morrow at his office. Mr.  QOUZENS.  Why is not this now the proper place to tell us the difference between heaven and hell? Mr.  SMOOT.  That subject is not to be discussed at  tlle 

present time .Mr.  CUTTING.  Here, Mr. President, is a book list [exhibit-ing] published by reputable people with an address in New York. I happen to note on the list a number of books which are barred by the censorship :Aphrodite, by Pierre Louys. Aristophanes. The Confessions of Jean Jacques Rousseau, translated from the French by Edmund Wilson. The Fortunes and Misfortunes of the Famous  Moll  Flanders, 

by Daniel De Foe. The Golden Ass of Lucius Apuleius, translated by William Aldington. The Lives of  Fa,ir  and  Gallan:t  Ladies, by the Seigneur de Brantome; and a book which I saw for the first time last night on the desk of the Senator from Indiana, The Merry Order  ot 

St. Bridget. All of these  bdoks·  are for sale by a reputable bookstore in New York. As for the books which are not for sale at reputable book stores, they are printed privately; they are bootlegged; they are printed in this country just the same as abroad. I have here a list of books printed for what we might call the literary bootlegging trade. I think it includes all the  boob  to which the Senator from Indiana and the Senator from  Utah  have  re-

ferred, and practically all of the books that I saw on the  Sena· 

tor's desk last night.  They  are being bought and sold  at • ex-travagant prices. I will say that I do not think they are doing half as much harm as the bookstall magazines which I . spoke 

about  a moment ago, because those magazines, in the first place, can be bought by anyone, and  can  be bought for 25 cents apiece, whereas the bootleg Lady Chatterley's Lover sells for $25. The magazines to which I have referred are much more available. There is no difficulty in obtaining them.  

> It

is the old question of censorship, Mr. President. We can not force people not to read something they want to read. If 

human beings think they have a right to read something, the presence of statutes is not going to interfere with them. We can pass all the laws we want, and the thing will remain the same.  ~

Here [displaying] is a book by Mr. D. H. Lawrence, pub-lished in this country in  1930.  It is entitled  " Pornography and 

Obscenity."  This is an explanation of the author's motives in 

Writing  Lady  Chatterley's  Lover. It is not very long. It shows at least that the author, whether  con-ector  incorrect, bad a very sincere attitude in the work he was doing. It can be read in  20 

minutes, and I commend it to the Senator from Utah. It may fill some of the hours which have previously been tilled by Lady Chatterley's Lover. [Laughter.] Mr.  SMOOT.  I will say again to the Senator that I have not taken  10  minutes on Lady Chatterley's Lover, outside of just looking at its opening pages. The Senator has referred to it now twice, and I protest against it. Anything that the Senator will recommend me to read after the speech he has made to-day I would hesitate even to think of reading. [Laughter.] Ithink that it is most damnable to undertake to read such stuff. Mr.  CUTTING.  I am very sorry, Mr. President. I was just going to refer to the Bible. I hope that my reference to it will not prevent the Senator from  Utah  from reading it in the future. Mr.  SMOOT.  I expected the Senator to refer to the Bible. Mr.  CUTTING.  Then, the Senator is not disappointed. Mr.  SMOOT.  Let me suggest to the Senator that if he will read the Bible altogether, he will never stand on this floor de-fending any such rotten stuff as he appears to be defending. Mr.  CUTTING.  0 Mr. President, that is just th e point. Anyone who will read the Bible altogether will be entirely in favor of the Bible, but  anyone  who will read selected passages from the  Old  Testament will realize that they  coQld  be  mis-

construed and could be considered in exactly the same class as the literature which the Senator is so insistent shall be exeluded. The point is that books have to be read as a whole. Mr.  SMOOT.  I deny it with all the force at my command. That  book  there [indicating] has not anything in it but the rottenest kind of stuff that can be thought of by a human being. There is not one elevating thought in it.  '

Mr.  CUTTING.  If the Senator has only spent  10  minutes on the book I can not see how he can tell whether or not there is anything elevating in it. Mr.  SMOOT.  I could tell from the very beginning of the book ; that is enough to indicate what the book  is  ; it is enough to indicate that it  is  written by a man with a diseased mind and a soul so black that he would even  obscw'e  the darkness of hell. [Laughter.] Nobody would write a book like that unless his heart was just as rotten and as black as it possibly could be. "1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5495 

Mr.  GLASS.  Mr.  President--·

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico yield to the Senator from Virginia? 

· Mr.  CUTTING;  I yield. Mr.  GLASS.  That being so, why does the  Senator  from  Utah 

calmly stand there and permit one of his associates to peruse that book? [Laughter.] Mr. WHEELER.  Mr.  President--. THe  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the  Senator  from New ' Mexico yield to the  Senator  from Montana? Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. Mr. WHEELER. In view of the denunciation of the  Senator 

from  Utah  of some of these books, I want to ask him if he has read some of the essays of Brigham Young and whether  or  not some of Brigham Young's essays would be permitted to come into this country under the pending amendment? Mr.  SMOOT.  If any of them could properly come under the provisions of this amendment, they ought never to come in. 

Mr.  WHEELER. I can show the  Senator  some that would 

come  under the provisions of the amendment, and  S:)me  that would be stopped ; I can show him some extracts which, in my judgment, are almost as bad-I  would  not say they are as bad, because I can  not conceive of anything being as bad as some of these books are; but there are extracts that would come under the 

ban  of the amendment if they were taken alone; there are ' also statements which would bring the essays or discourses  under 

the provision pronibiting literature which would be calculated to stir  up  insurrection. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I have no objection--Mr. WHEELER. Let me call the  Senator's  attention to the fact that the Government lived all through the time when this literature was coming in here. I am not  complaining  about it, because when those essays  came  in here  th~y  did  n0t  revolu-

tionize this Government, notwithstanding the fact tliat,  if  one will read them and take them  seriously  I say to the  Senator 

he will discover that they might have  been  ·construed  as tending to stir up rebellion. Yet, Mr.  President,  we have lived through it all, and this country is big enough and intelligent ·enough to live through the years. I can not conceive why  the · Senator 

should become so excited under the circumstances. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  In so far as the safety of our country is  con-

cerned, I am not worried about the  Senator  from New Mexico or the  Senator  from Montana reading these books.  ·

Mr. WHEELER. Let me interrupt the  Senator  long enough to say that the only portion of any of these books that I ever read was what the  Senator  read to me yesterday. Mr.  SMOOT.  The  Senator  from  Utah  did not read anything to the  Senator  from Montana yesterday. 

Mr.  WHEELER. The  Senator  read me a part of one  yester-

day, and that is the only portion of any of these books that Ihave ever read. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That is not what I h~ve  in mind. I say that the judgment of the  Senator  from Montana and the judgment of the  Senator  from New Mexico are so mature that perhaps 

· this  rotten  stuff  would not  affect  them, but what about the boys and girls when it falls into their hands, as it does? Mr. WHEELER. What about the boys and girls who read 

"the  works of Brigham Young?  ·

Mr.  SMOOT.  If there is any literature he ever wrote or put into circulation which would fall under the ban of this  amend-

ment;  it ought to be banned, and I would have no objection to it being banned. Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr.  President,  I should like to say in response to what the  Senator  from Montana just suggested that I believe the Mormon  Church,  more than  ·almost  a"Dy  sect in the country, ought to be in favor of free speech and free thought. Those men, sincere, toiling, persecuted, fought the  United  States  Gov-

ernment and were persecuted by the Government for years. I honor them for their opinions, but those opinions are not ours, and I can not conceive how anyone interested in that church and familiar with its history could adopt the kind of intolerant attitude which we have seen here from the Senator from  Utah.  I am entirely in favor of the circulation of all the opinions of Brigham Young or of any of the other elders of the Mormon  Church. 

Mr. WHEELER. Mr. President, I should like to say that Iwould not cast  refle.ctions  upon the Mormon  Chu"rch,  because I believe, as the  Senator  from New Mexico does, that the Mormon 

Church  has some very fine men in it, but I feel that those  con-

nected with it, as is the  Senator  from  Utah,  ought to be the last ones to stand upon this floor and become intolerant. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President--

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the Senator  frcm  New Mexico yield to the  Senator  from  Utah? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. 

LXXII--346 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I want  to · say to the  Senator  from New Mexico that I am proud of  ,the  record of the Mormon people. I know they are as honest as any people who ever lived in all the world. 

· Mr.  CUTTING.  I quite agree with the  Senator. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I know they are as industrious as any people in all the world; I know that the men and the women of the Mormon  Church  are virtuous, and, if I should lose  my  virtue, the first thing I would do would be to leave the Mormon  Church. 

Mr.  CUTTING.  Before the  Senator  sits down I wonder if he will  answer  a question. I quote from  the  remarks made last evening by the Senator from  South  Carolina  [Mr.  BLEASE],  as follows:                                                     

> Mr. Presiden tIsay the Senator from Utah is correct. If aman comes into this country and says, "damn America," he ought to be hanged for it; it is treason. -If he comes into this country and says he thinks the President of the United States ought to be assassinated, he ought to be hanged.

Is  the · position the  Senator  from  Utah  takes the same as that announced by the  Senator  from  South  Carolina'! 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That is the position  taken  by the  Senator 

from  South  Carolina. Mr.  CUTTING.  Yes; but the  Senator  from  South  Carolina 

says,  "the  Senator  from  Utah  is  correct."  •

Mr:  SMOOT.  There is nothing in  the  amendment which Iam proposing that would justify such statement or any such reference.  · ·· 

Mr.  CUTTING.  The reference was made by the  S~nator 

from  South  Carolina to the attitude of the  Senator  from  Utab, .

and that is the only reason I asked the question. Mr.  SMOOT.  I imagine the  Senator  knows my attitude sufficiently well without even asking me the question.  ·

Mr.  _CUTTING.  Of  course, those statements referred to by the  Senator  from Montana were made by the elders of the Mormon  Church.  "

Mr.  SMOOT.  I do not know to what the  Senator  from 

Montana  referred.  I prffiume  he bad reference to polygamy; but I do not know. Mr. WHEELER. No; I had no reference to polygamy in any way, shape, or form. I have in my . hand, however,  extracts 

from discourses by Brigham Young, not mentioning polygamy, but containing statements with reference to our Government.  

> It

was  stated  at the time, let me say to the  Senator,  that the Mormons were being persecuted by some people in this country. The reason I called them to the  Senator's  attention was,  know-

ing, as the  Senator  knows, what the Mormon  Church  went through, knowing how it has been persecuted, and knowing of what he himself has been through, it seems to me that the 

Senator  would be more tolerant in some of his views  tlian 

be apparently is. I want to say to the  Senator  that,  while not many of them live in my State, I happen to know a great many of the people who belong to his church, and I agree with the  Senator  that they  are  as honest and  high-dass  people as ever lived in the 

United  States  of America, but, nevertheless, one can take  ex-

cerpts from discourses of Brigham Young which, if the  Sen-

ator should put through a provision  similar  to that which he seeks to put through, would never be permitted to come into this country, and under such a provisiOn  they could not have come in at the time they were written.  Mind  you, they were printed in England, and if it had been attempted to bring them in they would have  been  prohibited. Mr.  SMOOT.  They were printed here, I will say to tbe 

Senator. 

Mr. WHEELER. No.  Some  of them might have been, but many of them were printed in England. Mr.  SMOOT.  They were not delivered in England, so they might as well have been printed here. 

Mr.  WHEELER. I will say that they were printed in  Eng-

land and shipped here. Mr.  SMOOT.  I doubt that they were shipped here. They would have been printed here. I want to say to the  Senator 

that at that time Johnston's army was coming to  Utah  to  de-

stroy a 'Yhole  people on the basis of an absolute lie, that the ..... 

court records had been destroyed, and Judge Drummond was telling the  United  States  Government falsehoOds  as · to what the  Mormon  Church  had done to the court out there. Not only that,  Senator,  but my father and my mother were  driven  from their homes in  Salt  Lake  City.  Every home owner in  Salt 

Lake  City  was  p_ repared  to burn  down  his house if Johnston's army should come there. Mr. WHEELER.  Of  course, all that was  because  of the  in-

tolerance on the part of some people in the  United  States of America, and that is what I complain about-that  m~ny  honest 

·and  since!.e  people use  the  laws that are placed upon the stat-5496  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE:  M.ARCH  '18 ute books of the  United  States  for the  purpo~  of  persec~ting 

innocent people. I repeat to the  Senator  because of the  perse-

cution which these people went through, he belonging to the Mormon  Church,  ought  to  be extremely tolerant and extremely careful that no laws shall be placed upon the statute books that might be used to oppress people in a similar fashion. Mr.  SMOOT.  I wish to say to the  Senator  that I dg.  not think it is any oppression to keep vile literature from the boys and girls of this country. 

Mr.  WHEELER.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  from New Mexico yield to me there? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico yield further to the  Senator  from  Montana~  .a-

Mr.  CUTTING.  I ·  will yield in just a moment if the  Sen-

ator will pardon me. The  Senator  -from  Utah,  while he has been talking entirely about indecent books, has written in his amendment a prohibition, newly introduced in this kind of 

legislation.  against  books  urging treason or insurrection. Mr . . SMOOT.  I am perfectly willing to eliminate that part of the amendment. I had  alrea<Jy  stated to the  Senator  from Virginia and to the  Senator  from Montana that  that  provision would go out. The words on that subject in the amendment are taken literally f. rom the act governing  the  Post  Office  De-partment.  ·

I am · going to ask the  Senate  to take out the words. I know that they could be  used  politically if somebody desired to use them i that  way.  I am not willing to go even that far in this case; and, as I say, I am going to ask  the  Senate  to  take · those 

-words out of this amendment. Mr.  CUTTING.  I am very happy to hear the  Senator  say that. This is the first time I have had that information. If I

had  bad it earlier, I should not have commented on that par-ticular  phase  of the matter, because the questions which the 

Senator  from  South  Carolina  raised were questions dealing en-tirely with these treasonable and  insuiTectionary  passages of the amendment. Mr. WHEELER. Mr. President, I was going to say to the 

Senator  that all through the speeches and discourses of Brigham 

Young.:..._tbere  is not any secret about it-we can find statements 

which  .might be interpreted by some as calculated to  stir  up 

insurrection. 

I simply quote this :Do I believe that  the  United  States  will be divided?  ·Yes,  I do; and  r                 

> the prayers of all the saints throughout the world should be to that
> effect (p. 13 of his discounses).

That is only one illustration. Again, be says: Who would be afraid of a poor, miserable soldjer-a man thaL  get~  $8 a month for killing people, and a miserable butcher at  that--one  of the poorest  curses  in creation? Mean as the Americans are, they will not many of them hire for soldiers-let - them come on or stay and wiggle ; it is all right. We are the saints of God. Mr.  SMOOT.  They did come and stay, Mr. President. They came there, and not a single, solitary one of them was harmed _in any way, shape, or form. The only thing that came from it was that they shot up a town or two while drunk. They came over from  Cedar  Fort,  where they were located, and the people never gave them a cause for such action. But  what  was back of this? The people there were threat-ened with extinction. They were threatened with being driven out again as they had been driven out of Nauvoo. They bad traveled  2,000  miles  through  a wilderness. Hundreds and  hllll· 

dreds of them died from cold and hunger. Mr.  WHEELER.  I agree with the Senator entirely with reference to that. I agree that they were persecuted, and Iagree with the  Senator  that they went  through  a great deal, and they suffered everything under the sun; but that does not alter the fact that whatever the provocation was, however great the provocation was,  if  there had been a law of  this  kind upon the statute books it could have been used to send these men to the penitentiary at hard labor for  10  years or for 5years, whichever it is. Would the Senator stand upon the  floor  of  this  body  under those circumstances and  ask  that a law be enacted upon the statute books of the  United  States which would have sent  his 

forbears to the penitentiary, knowing the suffering and the mis e ry ' they went through? Would he stand here now and ask that we place a law upon the statute books that would have sent these men-his forbears who  suffered  this  persecu-

tion-to the penitentiary for  10  years, or upon the rock pile at bard Ia boT? It is inconceivaQle to me  'that  the  Senator 

should do that. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  No, Mr. President. Mr.  WHEELER.  The  oni.y_  reason why I called . attention 

to it was because I could not understand the  Senator-s  attitude with reference to  this  matter. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President, the amendment I offered had no provision such as the  Senator  refers to. Mr.  WHEELER.  0 Mr.  President--Mr.  SMOOT.  Wait a minute; I will tell the  Senator  th~ 

fact about the matter. I know it did not. The  Senator  from Montana [Mr. WALSH]  offered ·  that amendment  tq  my amend-ment, and I accepted it. The  Senator  from Montana  this  ·

morning, in speaking of it, I am quite sure, feels that we should not carry this out; and I know  why  the  Senator  from Montana put that provision there. He copied it word for word from the act with reference to the Postal  Service. 

Mr.  BRATTON.  Mr.  President, may I ask the  Senator  aquestion there? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mex-ico yield to his colleague? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  Yes. .Mr.  BRATTON.  Do I ·understand  the  Senator  from  Ut8..b  to say that the act with reference to mailing  obscene  matter includes the same language that is .contained in  th ·e  pending 

amendment  with reference to treasonable or insurrectionary matter? Mr.  SMOOT.  Let me read it to the  Senator.  It  is  section 344: Every letter, writing. circular, postal card,  pi£!ture,  print,  engrav·                                   

> ing, photograph, newspaper, pamphlet, book, or other publication, matter or thing, of any kind containing any matter advocating or
> urging treason, insurrection, or forcible resistance to any law of the
> United States is hereby declared to be nonmailable.

That is the exact wording that the  Senator  from  Montana used ; and it is in the postal act, as I stated.  ·

Mr. BARKLEY.  Mr.  President--Mr.  SMOOT:  To my amendment the  Senator  from Montana offered that amendment last night; and that amendment, as  1

stated to the  Senator,  I am going to ask to have amended by striking out those words.  ·

Mr. BARKLEY. Mr. President-- .The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mex-ico yield to the  Senator  from Kentucky? Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield to the  Senator  from Kentucky. Mr . . BARKLEY. I notice that the language of the amend-ment adopted in Committee of the Whole, for the author  hip  of 

which  the  Senator  from New  Mexico  is  entitled to the credit, provides that the importation of all indecent and obscene prints, paintings, lithographs, engravings, drawings, post cards, trans-parencies, photographs, photographic plates, advertisements, in-struments, and other articles of an immoral nature is prohib-ited. The word  " book  " does not appear in that list. Is  the 

word  "book  " omitted by oversight or by intention? Mr.  CUTTING.  It was omitted by intention. As I explained to the  Senate  at the time, I felt that a customs  official or almost anyone else could comparatively easily detect the difference between an indecent picture and a decent one. As to a book, it is necessary, as the courts have declared, to read the entire book through, and I did not feel that the customs clerks would .be able to give the time or have the training or experience to judge of a work of  ·literature  of any kind. Mr.  BARKLEY.  If the  Senator  will yield further, this whole subject seems to me to divide itself into two classes.  One  is the importation and dissemination of literature ordinarily de sig-nated  r.. ; of a liberal natur.e,  advocating  -certqin  political prin-ciples with  which  many of us might not agree but which  ' we 

would not seek to suppress,  beeause,  as I think  Jefferson once said-not in this language but in effect-if be could not mount a goods  box and outargue somebody who was  opposing  him on a principle of government he would let him have  his  way, and probably he should have his way. I draw a very clear distinc-tion between literature of that sort and literature that is  im-

moral and indecent and obscene. I have in my hand a compilation  of the laws of all the 

States  on the subject, and practically all of them make it un-lawful, and punishable by fine  t....l d imprisonment, to print or circulate or publish or in any way to assist in the sale or dis-tribution of obscene, indecent, and immoral literature, books or pamphlets of any sort, showing that the effort of our  State 

legislatures has been to protect  their  people against the circu-lation of ordinarily obscene and indecent literature or books or pamphlets that may parade under the term of  "literature"  but whose obvious design is to scatter obscenity and vulgarity among the people. That is the  thing  that bothers me on this whole proposition. I am not afraid to admit to the light of publicity and dis-1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-.SENATE  5497 

cussion any principle of government, any economic theory of any man or woman who may disagree with the existing  condi· 

tions, because I am not one of those who believe in the status quo, whatever may  ~ our point at the time we may discuss it. I am frank to say to the  Senator,  however, that I do not like to vote to admit into this country vulgar, obscene, and immoral literature, books or pamphlets, whatever may be their form, when the legislatures of all the States have sought to protect 

their  people against that very thing. The argument has been made that in view of the acts of the legislatures  seeking  to protect their people against this sort of thing it  is  unnecessary for the  Congress  to pass a Federal statute to protect the people against the same sort of literature, if it  can  be called literature.  On  the contrary, it strikes me that it is the duty of the  United  States Government to  under-

take to protect the  States  in the enforcement of their own laws, and not make it possible for  larger  quantities of this  objection-

able, immoral stuff to come into the country, where it will place a still greater burden upon the local officers to  pruteet  them-

selves against  the  dissemination of that sort of books. 

· I hav.e  talked to the Senator a time or two privately about the possibility of segregating or  separating  these two  classes 

of books and pamphlets, so that we may allow any  progressive 

and liberal literature that comes in  here  to be circulated, but at the same time prevent the circulation of this immoral, indecent, and obscene so-called literature about which  we  have  been 

talking. Has the Senator been able to work out any . such division, so that those of us who are troubled about the immoral side of it may at the same time suffer no compunctions of  con-

science on the  liberal  side? Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr. President, I take it from the statement made a few minutes ago by the Senator from  Utah  [Mr.  SMOOT] 

that he is willing to eliminate from the amendment the radical and seditious side of it. That, of course, will make the  dis-

tinction of which the Senator speaks. I appreciate the point of view of the Senator. I had that digest printed as a public document because I thought it was important; and I want to call the Senator's attention, first, that the customs  cen9Irship  goes considerably beyond the point that the Senator was advocating-the protection of the States by the Federal Government. In many  States  where, for instance,  medi-

cal books are permitted to be circulated, the customs censorship will keep them out. The customs censorship is uniform for the whole country,  regardless  of what the actual State law may happen to be. It is not only helping the States to carry out their laws but it is also imposing on the  States  certain laws of which the  States  may not approve. Mr. BARKLEY.  Of  course, if there are those who object to censorship altogether as a matter of principle, they would object to the enactment of State laws on the subject,  because  in the States they provide no expert tribunal where the decency or the indecency of the book is to be pas  ·ed  on. The only tribunal before which that question can be raised is the grand jury, or some committing magistrate, and then the matter has to be tried before a jury on an indictment or information in a crimi-

nal prosecution, and the jury has to  pass  on the question whether it  is  a violation of the law. I do not imagine that the members of the average jury could be regarded as  experts  on that question; and I am  won- 

> deri~

how we  can  abandon altogether the efforts to protect the people against this sort of literature on the ground that all censorship is objectionable. If it is objectionable, it is no less objectionable because it  happens  to be invoked by the States than by the  Federal  Government. Mr.  NORRIS.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield? The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Does the Senator from New Mexico yield to the  Senator  from Nebraska? Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield to the Senator. 

Mr.  NORRIS.  The suggestion made by my friend from  Ken-

tucky [Mr.  BARKLEY]  raises  a point in my mind; and I am wondering if it does not raise the same point in the minds of other  Senators.  He seems to go on the theory that the method provided by the proposed amendment  th~t  would prevent the importation of  these , books is a better method of  r~aching  the facts than to try them before a jury, as they must be tried in the States. I have just the opposite idea in my mind.  One  of the reasons why I tllink  we should not impose the duty on clerks of keeping out literature but should provide a criminal offense for  bring-

ing it in is just because the Federal Government does not have the same machinery the  State  has by which a man can be  in-

dicted and then tried before a court and a jury. · That procedure is denied, and it is one af the reasons why I do not like it. Mr. BARKLEY. Mr. President, I agree with the Senator. I never liked the idea of some clerk in a bureau passing on questions of this sort, and  th3t  was  on_ e of the objections raised in October to this censorship. I understand that a different 

method is to be pursued, that if the collector, upon investigation and examination of the  so-called  literature, thinks it is obscene and immoral, then he is to report to  .the  United  States district attorney, and a proceeding in court will be instituted to deter-mine  wh~ther  it is obscene or not. That is the method adopted in the  States. 

Mr.  NORRIS.  I think that is a much better method than to let it be submitted to a clerk. Mr. BARKLEY. In all  the  States, practically, if anybody is 

arrested  and charged with a violation of the  State  laws on the subject, of course, the book, or pamphlet, or whatever it is ' is taken to the local prosecuting attorney, and he must pass' on whether it is prima facie in violation of the law  and  if he thinks it is, he takes the matter before some court  and  insti-

tutes  a prosecution.  I"  think that method on the part of the Federal Government would be much better than to leave it to some clerk. Mr.  NORRIS.  I misunderstood the Senator. I thought he favored having a clerk pass on the literature in preference to the other method, and that is the reason why I interposed. Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr. President, if the Senator from Kentucky wants my point of view on the question, it is entirely in  agree-

ment with that stated by the Senator from Nebraska. I would rather trust a jury in a State than I would an irresponsible customs clerk, every time. Mr. BARKLEY. Mr. President, the point I am making is that somebody in a preliminary way must start a proceeding, and in a State  the prosecuting attorney does so. In a Federal _Government proceeding, under  this  new amendment, as I under-stand it, the complaining officer at the port would lay the matter before the  United  States  district attorney, and then the proceeding would go along somewhat similar to that in the 

States.  Am I correct about that? Mr.  CUTTING.  I think so. I should like to discuss  the 

amendment later on. I want to call the attention of the Senator, however, to the fact that the educators of the country, who certainly have at heart the interests of the youth as much as any man in this 

Chamber  could possibly have, have been equally opposed to the customs censorship with regard to one t: ype of literature. That is not, of course, a conclusive argument, and I do not put it to the Senator as such, but I just want to remind him of it. Mr. BARKLEY. I am wondering whether these educators .who are agitated over this have taken it on themselves to seek a repeal of  State  laws on the subject. Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr. President, I try to keep as far as  pos-

sible away from the State laws, because we really have nothing to do about them, and that is a matter for the States to discuss. Mr. BARKLEY. The same principle, it seems to me, is  in-

volved. If it is wrong in principle for a State  I.egislature to try to protect the youth of the  State  against the circulation of im- ·

moral literature, I do not see that the effort of the  United  States 

to keep it from getting into a State, where the State law has to be invoked, is very much opposed to the principle which the 

State  has itself adopted. Mr.  CUTTING.  That is true in one sense.  Of  course, the 

States  can provide much more adequate1y for the conditions existing in the  States  than the Federal  Goyernment  can provide for the entire country. Mr.  FESS.  Mr. President, will the Senator yield? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  '1  yield. Mr.  FESS.  I would like to say to the Senator from Kentucky that the dominating purpose  of  the educators is not against censoring as a principle so much as this particular agency of censoring at the ports. There is a criticism as to the qualifica-tions of those who do the censoring. Mr.  CUTTING.  Of  course, that is the only particular  fea-

ture we have before us. Mr. BARKLEY. I did not understand that the position of the educators, to whom reference has been made, is that they favor the circulation of indecent or immoral literature. I cer-

tainly  should hate to think that of the educators of the  United 

States,  or of any  State.  They do object to the particular method by which this so-called censorship is applied, but not to the principle of undertaking to protect the people against circula-tion of indecent and obscene  literature. ·

Mr.  FESS.  The educators, as a rule, make a sharp distinc-tion between the censoring of political matters or political  opin-

ions and of moral or immoral matters. Mr. BARKLEY. That  is  the very distinction I have been seeking to draw out, and it is one that has worried me  con-

siderably. I am not afraid to turn the white light of publicity and of open discussion upon any political theory anybody advocates. 5498  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARCH  18 .

Mr.  FESS.  The educators are chiefly moved by the possibility of the distortion of the youth by immoral literature. That is the main thing. 

Mr.  BORAH.  Mr.  President,  is anybody objecting to  censor· 

ship properly administered? Does not the whole thing resolve itself into what kind of censorship .we want? I do  not  under~ 

stand that anybody wants a certain class of literature-such as that which has been circulated around here for the last two or three days-circulated indiscriminately, but there is a wide difference of opinion as to whether a customs officer is the proper one to pass upon the literature which should come into 

## ·a.  country. Mr . . BARKLEY. I agree with the  Senator. 

Mr.  OBTTING.  Mr. President, may I have a word? I want first to address myself to the  Senator  from Ohio, who referred to the fact that the educators were opposing only the political and not the moral censorship. I have here a letter from  Prof. 

Horace B. English, of Antioch College, whom perhaps the 

Senator  may know--Mr.  FESS.  I know him very well. 

Mr.  CUTTING.  He states: Your exposure  of  the stupidities  of  censorship in the proposed  tariff                                                       

> bill is agreat public service. Itrust you will persist in the present
> session.
> The press carries the announcement that Senator SMOOT is reading up on smut and will demand asecret ·session of the Senate in which to read the objection~ble passages. Ihope you will force him out into the open and make him read the passages in open session.

Refen'ing,  of course,  not  to the political end but to the other 

end  of the debate :I have yet to talk with an intelligent person who does not agree with your stand. I have hundreds of letters of the same kind from educators all over the country. Mr. BARKLEY. Mr. President, did the professor from Antioch apply for tickets for the gallery when he also insisted that the 

Senator  from  Utah  read those passages in the open? Mr.  CUTTING.  I do not know. Mr. WHEELER. Mr. President, I also would like to call attention to Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, president of Columbia 

University,  who is quoted as  saying~                                                     

> It was most refreshing to read Senator CUTTING'S words....of com-mon sense, of broad-minded liberalism, and of understanding of funda-mental -principles of civil liberty. How even asingle Senator could dare to vote to put some unknown official or group of officials in aWashington department in supervision of what we shall read is beyond my belief.

Not only  have  many of the educators of the - country, but likewise many of the leading bishops of the country, like Bishop 

McConnell,  of the Methodist  Church,  spoken on this subject. Bishop  McConnell  said :I wish to express my appreciation of Senator  CUTTING's  stand against the proposal to take the censorship of literature away from the courts and to put it in the hands of customs officials. No more inap-propriate and inadequate dealing with censorship could be conceived than that of putting it in the hands of men selected primarily for other purposes. Yet, we are told practically  that  it  we  stand here upon the floor of the  Senate  and oppose this sort of thing, we are indi-cating a desire to put this kind of literature into the homes, amo-ng the children and the families  of  the  United  States.  Does anybody think that Bishop  McCOnnell,  of the Methodist  Church, 

wants to put that sort of literature into the hands of the chil- 

> dren

of this country? Does anybody stand upon this floor and suggest that I would want to put such literature into the hands of the children of this country, when I have six of my own  'l 

It is perfectly silly and perfectly preposterous. Yet  Senators 

stand on the floor and make impassioned speeches in favor of this sort of thing because of the fact that they apparently think it appeals to the unintelligent back home. Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr. President, I should like to continue without interruption for a short while, if agreeable to  Senators. 

We have discussed the  State  laws at some length, and I think that is an important matter. If there is going to be any  cen~ 

sorship, the  States  seem to me the proper authorities to super-vise it, and I do not believe that the Federal Government ought to adopt regulations which will go beyond the regulations adopted by the  States. 

I am very grateful for the interruptions,  especially  those of the  Senator  from Montana.  Of  course, it is not the purpose of any Member of the  Senate  to do anything which will in any way injure the work of the educators and the families in 

protecting the youth of the country. That might as  _well  ~

.said at the start. A great many questions of detail, a great ,

many differences of opinion as to detail, have arisen in the  ·

Senate,  and no doubt there are as many varieties of opinion on all these questions as there are  Senato.rs. 

Before we leave that subject, I should like to call to the attention of the  Senate  an investigation made by the Bureau of  Social  Hygiene of New York  City  a few years ago. The work in question was done by Dr.  Catherine  Bement Davis, who was for a long time superintendent of the  State  Woman's .Reformatory and afterwards commissioner of correction in 

New York  State,  one of the leading criminologists of the country.  She  got out a questionnaire in an effort to discover whether there is anything in the theory that books, on the whole, have been of any harm to the youth of the country. Agreat many questionnaires were sent out, and  1,200  answers were received. The questions were  as  to how the early in-formation about sex matters was received. 

Out  of  1,200  answers, only 72 mentioned  any  books in  con· 

nection with their reports.  Of  the books mentioned which were alleged as having any influence on the lives of these different people in all occupations and all classes of life, not one of  the 

books on the customs black list was included. The  boolis  from which these children claimed to have received their first  infor~ 

mation as to sex matters were in the following order .: First, the Bible ; second, the dictionary ; third, the encyclopedia ; fourth, the novels of Dickens; fifth,  Shakespeare;  and so on down the  line ~ I think that is an interesting list in  that  it shows the practical results which could possibly be  accom~ 

plished by excluding-if it were possible to exclude, which it obviously is not-all these books  which  the customs censors have attempted to exclude. 

Some  of these books  whlch  we read and think highly decent have, as I said before when the subject came up, been  ex~ 

eluded, censored,  arid  suppressed at different stages of the ' world's history. No doubt the books which we value most highly will at some future stage be censored as improper for the reading of youth. 

It  may well be that some of the books to which  we  now object, which we now consider immoral, will meet the changed stand-ard of another generation. These are things which no man 

in the  Senate  has foresight enough to predict. I came across a curious instance of it the other day.  _I  have been too busy in the last few years to do much reading in the 1 classics, yet I ran across a set of the Latin classics in my library the other day. It is a set of the Latin authors in about  150  or 

'160  volumes. I thought I would pick out one of the works of ,Lucretius, and in looking over the volumes I was surprised to find that Lucretius was not included. .From our point of view to-day Lucretius is probably the most solemn, the most austere, the most moral of all the Roman authors. In looking for the reason why be had been left out .of this collection I took up the preface and I found that  this  set of classics was published in  Paris  in the early nineteenth  cen~ 

tury and wa dedicated to King Louis  XVIII,  a monarch whose moral reputation was hardly of the highest, though it did not say so in the preface of the edition. It did state  that  the King of France refused to allow this edition of the classics to be dedicated to him unless they excluded the works of Lucretius. He allowed to be included the authors, mind you, whom some of us might consider improper. The works of Martial and Juvenal and Petronius, and so on, are all included, but when 

it  came to Lucretius the great King of France decided that he could not go so far as that, that Lucretius must be excluded or he was not going to allow his name to be used in the issuing .of a set o-f the classic authors which might possibly corrupt or contaminate the people of France of that day. 

Of  course, the reason  was  that Lucretius in  ·the  course of  his _

poem denies the existence of the gods. That shows an entirely different attitude toward the . whole subject of censorship in the space of a century. We would not conceive of censoring a book from that point  of · view. The .moral is that it does not make much  difference  on what ground we censor a book.  If  we have a censorship and if we have individuals authorized to decide what the people of the  country _

shall read, it does not make a great deal of  difference  whether they exclude them on one ground or another. Thought has ceased to be free, and its expression has equally ceased to be free. At different stages in the world's history books have been censored for different reasons-for blasphemy, the reason for which Louis XVIII refused to patronize the work of Lucretius; for  indecency,  the alleged reason for our present customs  censor~ 

ship and post-office regulations; and at another of the stages 

of  the world's history for sedition, and that stage, it appears to me, is the stage which we are now entering. Yet whatever grounds are given for  th~  exclusion of the works of literature, 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  R~OORD-SENATE _ 5499 

the fundamental fact remains the same-that censorship  has 

been in all ages and will always continue to be a tool of  tyranny. 

For that reason I can not entirely make the distinction  which 

so many Senators have made between censorship of one kind and censorship of another. The customs clerks have so com-pletely shown their incompetency that I think the power which they have exercised should be removed from them. But,  Mr.  President, the most important part of this section, the most important part of the whole discussion, is  contained 

in the words which have been added to the  tariff  bill for the first time in the present proposed draft, and those words are 

"containing  any matter advocating or  urging-treason,  insurrec-

tion,"  and so forth. The fight against the censorship of political opinion has been one of the main fights in American history. It started before the Government of the  United  States  itself. It has been almost the thread on which all other parts of . American  history  have been strung. It started the first division between the parties. 

It has come up repeatedly in one form or another. The sedition and alien acts were the chief bone of contention during the Presidency of John  Adams.  Those who proposed  the 

sedition acts based their attitude on their old English common law which dealt with prosecution for what was called seditious libel. Seditious libel was  "to  publish orally or otherwise any word or document with an intention to  bring  into hatred or contempt and to excite disaffection against the King and the Government and the Constitution of the  United  Kingdom as by law  established,  OJ  to excite British subjects to attempt, other-wise than by  lawful  means, the alteration of any matter in church or state by law established, or to promote feelings  Qf  ill 

will or hostility between different  classes." 

Stephen, in  his  digest of criminal law, declares seditious libel 

to be the intentional publication, without lawful excuse  or  justi-

fication,  of written blame of any public man or of the law or of any institution established by the law. 

Under  the English common law there  was  no need to  prove 

any  inte11tion  on the part of the defendant to produce disaffec-tion or  excite  insurrection. It was enough if he intended to publish the blame,  because"  it was unlawful for him merely to find fault with his masters and  betters." 

That is the old English law which the Federalist Party, under 

John  Adams, attempted to  introdu<!e  into the American system. I am not going into this matter in any detail because  Sen-

ators are aware of the tremendous political upheavals which resulted from that attempt to  translate  the English sedition laws into the  United  States  system. It was argued and has been on the whole successfully maintained that sedition had no place in a Government  of  this kind  because  our  Government represented the people themselves, and that when the funda-mental crime involved is the finding fault with our masters and betters, we can not do  that  where we ourselves are the people criticized. In 1805 it was decided in Pennsylvania in the case of the Republic against Dennie that, in the opinion of the judge-The enlightened advoeates  of  representative government pride them-selves in the  reflection  that the more deeply their system is examined, the more fully will the judgments of honest men be satisfied that it is the most conducive to the safety and happiness of a free  peo-ple.  • * * It is true it may not be easy in  every  instance to draw the exact distinguishing line. To the jury it belongs peculiarly to decide on the intent and object of the writing  • * • leaning to the favorable side where the criminal intent is not clearly and evidently ascertained  • • * If the publication was honestly meant to  infot·m  the public mind, and warn them against the supposed dangers in society, though the subject may have been treated  errone- 

> ously

* * * the jury should acquit the defendant.  • • •                

> It is no infraction of the law to publish temperate investigations of the nature and form of government.

Dennie had been indicted for treason  and  the net effect  Of  the decision was that there is no such thing as verbal treason. 

A little  later  in the history of the country the  first  attempt was made to establish a post-office censorship. It was  ~n  con-

nection with the attempt to stop the publkation of abolitionist literature in the Southern  States.  President Jackson sent amessage to  Congress  making the following recommendation: I would, therefore, call the special  attentlo~  of  Congress to the sub-ject and respectfully suggest the propriety of passing such law  as                     

> will prohibit, under severe penalties, the circulation in the Southern
> States through the malls of incendiary publications intended to instigate slaves to insurrection.

I ask Senators to remember the extremely  inflamed  public opinion  at  the time on this subject. It was something of which we have hardly had an example in the  country  since. 

Mr.  BORAH.  Mr.  President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico 

yield  to  the Senator from Idaho? Mr.  CUTTING.  I ·  yield. Mr.  BORAH.  Has the  Senator  John  C.  Calhoun's  report on that proposition? Mr.  CUTTING.  I have not the report, but I have his speech in the Senate, and I was just going to quote it. If the Senator has the report I would much prefer to quote from it. 

Mr.  BORAH.  I do not  have  it with me. I had it a short time  ag-o.  It is rather instructive on this point. Mr.  CUTTING.  I was just going to quote from Senator John 

0.  Calhoun,  because  he, of all men in the  United  States  Senate 

at that time, was most completely opposed to the idea of  allow-

ing abolition literature to be  circulated  in the  South.  He was the chairman of the committee to whom the  Senate  referred the matter. In his speech he says, in referring to President  Jaclison's 

message: This was clearly unconstitutional, for it  not  only recommended the prohibition of publications, and circulation of incendiary papers  (abridg-                                            

> ing the freedom of the press), but it recommended also the in1Uction of severe penalties, which powers were expressly prohibited by the Consti-
> tution. On no other principle could this ever be defended, than that it was simply abstaining from aviolation of _the laws of the States.

Acting on that assumption,  Senator  Calhoun prepared another 

measure  merely carrying out the laws of the  States  by Federal action through the post office; but even that measure, Mr. Presi-dent, was strenuously opposed  by  other Senators then in the Senate. Mr.  Clay  said :The President's message  • • • had met with general  disap-                    

> probation ;that it was unconstitutional; and if not so, that it contained aprinciple of amost dangerous and alarming character.

Daniel Webster also spoke on this subject. He said that-He was afraid that they [the Senate] were in some danger of  takuig                                                                                                            

> astep in this matter, that they might hereafter have cause to regret, by its being contended that whatever in this bill applies to publications touching slavery applies to any other publications that the States might think proper to prohibit; and Congress might, under this exam-
> ple, be called upon to pass laws to suppress the circulation of political, religious, or any other description or pnbllea.tions which produced excitement in the States. •••
> •••Was this bill in accordance with the general force and temper of the Constitution and its amendments? It was not in accord-ance with that provision of the instrument under which the freedom of
> speech and of the press was secured.

Mr.  FESS.  Mr. President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Does the Senator from New Mex-ico yield to the Senator from  Ohio? 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. 

Mr.  FESS.  The weight of that opinion might have to be somewhat discounted, as the Senator knows, because of the feud between the President and what was called the "great 

triumvirate"  of Webster,  Clay,  and  Calhoun. 

Mr.  CUTTING.  I appreciate that, Mr. President, but I am trying to give an historical account of the matter.  Of  course, the bill was defeated. 

Mr.  FESS.  The  Senator  will recall that those three  com-

bined and ultimately secured a censure of the President; so that  while  the debate presents  an  idea, it should be somewhat discounted because of the bitter feeling existing at that time. Mr.  CUTTING.  The point I was trying to bring out  par-

ticularly was that these three Senators, of a very conservative point of view, on the whole, including John  C.  Calhoun,  whose prejudices and general opinions were upon the other side  _of 

the question, yet did not think the President's recommendation was constitutional.  ·

In another connection, a few years before, Daniel Webster, that great conservative, du .ring the War of  1812-and  I think this quotatioll has considerable bearing on the question which the  Senate  is considering at the present time-had spoken as follows: Important as I deem it to discuss, on all proper occasions, the policy of the  measures  at present pursued, it  is  still more important to maintain the right  · of  such  discussion,  in  its  full and just extent.                       

> Sentiments lately sprung up, and now growing fashionable, make it necessary to be explicit on this point. The more Iperceive adis-
> position

to check  the  freedom  of inquiry by extravagant and uncon-stitutional  pretenses, ' the  firmer  shall be the tone in which I shall                        

> assert and the freer the manner in which Ishall exercise it. 1t is the ancient and undoubted prerogative of this people to canvass public

# 5500  CONGRESSIONAL _ RECDRD-SEN ATE  MARCH  18 - - -measures and the  merits  of public men. It  is  a ''-homebred  right; ...  a

fireside  -privilege.  "It  has ever been enjoyed in every house, cottage, and cabin in the Nation. It is not to be drawn into controversy. It 1s as undoubted as the  right  of breathing the  air  or  walking  on the earth. Belonging to private  Hfe  as a right, it belongs to pub _lic life as a duty ; and it is the last duty which  those  whose  representative 

I am shall find me to abandon.  Aiming  at  all  times to be courteous and temperate in its use, except when the right  itself  shall be ques-tioned, I shall then carry it to its extent. I shall  then place myself upon the extreme boundary of my right, and bid defiance to any arm that would move me from my ground. This high constitutional  priv-

ilege I shall r defend and exercise within this House and without 

this  House, and in all places, in time of war, in time of  peace,  and at all times.  Living  I shall assert it,  dy-tng  I shall assert it ; and should I leave no other inheritance to my children, by the blessing of God, I will leave them the inheritance of free principles and the example of a manly, independent, and constitutional defense of them. 

Mr~  BORAH. Mr. President--The  PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr.  ROBSION  of Kentucky in the chair). Does the Senator from New  Mexico  yield  to  the Sena-tor from Idaho? Mr.  CUTTING.  I yield. Mr.  BORAH.  Will the Senator give me the occasion  ·of  the address from which he has just quoted? Mr.  CUTTING.  It was delivered during the War of 1812 and is found in the Annals of Congress,  ThirteenQI  Session, volume 1,  page  944.  - _ .Mr.  BORAH.  I do not desire to divert the Senator from the course of his argument, but I should like to ask the  S.enator 

from Ohio what was the observation be made a few moments ago as to the discrediting of Webster's views? _

Mr.  FESS.  Not Webster, but Calhoun.  Calhoun  had been 

Vice  President  ahd  as  Vice  President was the Presiding Officer of this body. He was called upon to cast the deciding vote  on· 

the confirmation of Mr.  :Martin  Van  Buren, who had been appointed by the  President  as minister to London_  Calhoun 

cast the deciding vote and had  Van  Buren recalled, although be had already gone to London.  Calhoun  then resigned as  Vice 

President to be elected Senator. He came to the Senate and became the strongest opponent of President Jackson throughout the session. He it was who joined Webster and  Clay  in their opposition to the President, and ultimately secured a censure of the President, not on this matter, but because of the removal of funds from the various State  banks.  I say that his opinion against Jackson would have to be somewhat discounted because of the bitterness existing. Mr.  BORAH.  That is true, but in the light of subsequent history his constitutional position on this question was the cor-rect position.  -

Mr.  FESS.  I agree to that. Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr.  President,  in addition to the postal censorship, opposed at that time by these eminent Senators, but afterwards established, there has been an extreme exten-sion of the police power throughout the country. It 1s summed up by  :Mr.  Leon Whipple, in his Story of Civil  Ll'berty  in the United States, as follows: Three interpretations of police power complete the machinery of suppression : First, its extension to cover words or acts  which 

might  haYe  'a  tende~cy  to produce mental states from which  overt 

dang ers might spring; second, the justification of  ~e  preventive measures to keep persons from uttering words or performing  acts 

with this dangerous tendency; third, the recognition by tbe  courts 

of the right of the executive officials to issue regulations which have far-reaching effects. All three of those extensions . are involved in the principles with which we are dealing in the  present'  section of the tariff bill.  

> It

begins- /

Says Mr.  Whipple-

by enforcing things that are good for the body and ends by enforcing things  that  are not  good  for the soul. It works by tbe quaint, but dangerous analogy, that quarantine prevents  smallpox,  therefore, censorship will prevent bolshevism. Have we not heard that argument used in  this  Chamber, on various bccasions, during  the  last few months?  

> It

proceeds-Continues Mr. Whipple--from preserving the peace to preserving the  statu,s  quo. This force for safety soon tr ansla tes safety into  "law  and  order,"  and  this  lnto 

" the established  ord e r."  It changes health lnto comfort, and comfort into peace of mind, which  means  no  agitation,  no  breaks,  no  tampering 

with things as they are. That, - Mr.  President, is in brief the history of the various kinds of interference with the freedom of the American citizen which have been so prevalent in recent years. It is the history 

of the injunction  process  ; !t is the  history  of the extension  of 

the power of contempt of court.  · ·

The punishment -for contempt of court outside of the  presence ·

of the court is  ·apparently  an invention of the twentieth  century, 

so  far  1lS  United  States courts are concerned. At least, Mr. Whipple says: Recently  (1900-1914)  in Colorado,  Ohio,  and New York, editors have been punished for contempt of court, which consisted of criticism published in their newspapers, and  not  in the presence of the court ;and, therefore, having no direct tendency to disturb its orderly  pro-

ceedings. The  subject  of contempt of court  is -a large subject in  itself~ 

and I am not going into it at the present time. I have had, as 

some Senators know, a good deal of experience along tho e lines. However, I should like to quote from a dissenting opinion  of 

Mr_  Justice Harlan in the Patterson case, where he says: I go.  further and hold that the privilege of  free  speech and of  free 

press  belonging  to every citizen  o.f  the United States, constitute the essential parts of every man's liberty, and are protected against viola-tion by that clause of the fourteenth amendment forbidding the  States 

to  deprive  a citizen of his liberty without due process of law. Mr. Henry Schofield, in an article entitled  " Freedom of the 

Press,"  in the  ~ proceedings  of the American Sociological  AssO._ 

ciation, at the time commenting on  th!i:  Patterson case, said: The judge-made law of contempt  of  court for publications censuring judges is simply intolerable in a land of equality where judges are no more  important  to the universe than executives and legislators. These things may seem to some Senators to be carrying us rather far  afield;  and yet are not all these different attacks on the freedom of the individual converging? And is not this new law prohibiting the importation  of  so-called  insurrection~ .

ary and treasonable literature just part of this process? 

It is hard to take up a newspaper or a magazine without finding  'in  it  some·  article recommending censorship in some new _form-Federal censorship of the films, for example. To those who think the idea plausible-for, indeed, niany of the films 

exhibited  in the  United  States would be none the worse for alittle supervision-may I say that a move to censor the 

" movies  " will inevitably lead to the censorship of the 

"talkies,"  and after getting to that point the censorship of the radio will be a foregone conclusion, and if there is any difference in principle between censoring the radio and  cen-

soring the press, I find it hard to distinguish between them. Mr. President, it is not any  bugbeat·  to suggest that a gen-

eral censorship of the press will be advocated in the future if 

the kind of process which is going on now continues to go  ~:m. 

The State of Minnesota in 1925 passed a law, which is now before the courts, containing the following provision : 

> Any

person who, as an individual, or as a member or  emploxee  of a firm, or association or organization, or as an officer, director, member, or employee of a corporation, sha -ll be engaged in the business  o:( 

regularly or  cu~tomarlly  producing, publishing, or circulating, having in possession, selling or giving away,  

> (a)

an obscene, lewd, and lascivious newspaper, magazine, or  other 

periodical,  or  _

(b) a malicious, scandalous, and defamatory newspaper, magazine, 

or  other periodical, is guilty of a nuisance, and all persons guilty at such  n$ance  may  be enjo,ined, as hereinafter provided. This does not  refer  to the suppression or confiscation of in-dividual numbers of a paper which may be considered objection-able. It prevents the publication of such paper in the  future  as a nuisance. Whether or not the law is constitutional is  som· e-

thing which, of course, we have no right to pass upon. The ca ebas been taken up and is now on appeal; and I have a copy of a very  able brief filed in the case. What I am talking ab out is not the constitutionality but the policy or the lack of policy of this kind of violation of what we have always considered to be the fundamental rights of the press of the country, the funda-mental rights of  free  speech and free thought. That is what  we 

are supporting-the ancient liberties of the individual, guaran-teed or at least  ·so  we thought, by the Constitution of our 

cour{try,  guaranteed by the policies laid down by the founders of the country, by the fathers of our Government, by the leaders of the  various  politica-l parties up to the present day. This move  is  just one move; but if we accept the amendment now for the  first  time introduced into tariff legislation, we are driving one more nail into the coffin of American liberties, and it will not  b~  long before we shall be called upon to drive 

> anothe~.

# 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SEN ATE  5501: 

I was glad to hear the  Senator  from  Utah · [Mr.  SMOOT]  say ashort while ago that he was going to recommend that that new clause, those new words in the law, should be stricken out. I

hope he will prevail upon the  Senate  to do so. As I have said, 

I object to this censorship by customs inspectors and  custom ·s 

clerks, whether those words be or be not stricken from the law. But at least we have been existing under the conditions of the law of  1890  during the last  40  years. We shall at least be doing nothing new even if the  Senate  should not decide-as it decided rightly, I believe, in October-to do away with the objectionable and  foolish  system under which we have been living. A word or two more, Mr. President, and I am done. I have taken entirely too much of the time of the  Senate;  but before closing I should like to quote once again from the  Senator 

from  Utah,  because the words which I am going to quote are words which I think reflect on a great many of the Members of this body : I have been saddened-

Said  the  Senator-                                                                                                            

> by the disclosure of laxity of views developed during the debate. Ihave been dis1:ressed that in the Senate of the United States so few voices were raised in debate against aproposal to abolish the prohibition of the importation of obscene books. Ican not refrain
> from expr essing the opinion that some of the views expressed in that debate, while possibly only the views of the individual speakers, can not fail to react upon the Senate as awhole and lower it in the estimation of that very large part of our citizenry whose esteem we value most, but which it would appear from the debate are included by some Senators in the "unthinking class."

Mr. President, I regret being censured for laxity of views by the  S-enator  from  Utah  ; but as 1 read  over the list of the Senators who voted with me on that amendment I think Ican express some pride in having the same degree of  "laxity 

of views  " shared by the senior  Senator  from Idaho (Mr. 

BoRAH],  the Senators from Nebraska, Wisconsin, Iowa, and the  Dakotas,  and all the rest of the  Senators  who voted with me on this side of the aisle, and men like my colleague, the senior  Senator  from New Mexico [Mr.  BRATTON],  the junior 

-Senator  from Georgia [Mr. GEORGE], the Senators from Mon-tana,  and  many others on the other side of the aisle. I want to call to the  atte:r;1tion  of the  Senator  from  Utah  the fact that the  " laxity of views  " which we all share, according to him ,is likewise shared by the  560  educators of the  United  States 

who sent to the  Senate  a petition asking to have them sustain the position which they took in October. Is there anyone in the  United  States  who is more interested in the preservation of the welfare of youth than these edu-cators? Next to the family, they have more influence on the  

> develop~ent

of the younger generation of this country  than 

anyone else; and in many respects one might say they have more influence than the family, beeause these educators are the dominating influence over the young men and women of the 

United  States  at their most impressionable period. The adoles-cent period is one in which suggestions and impressions are far more dangerous than in the period of childhood ; and during that stage I am sure that these teachers and educators have afar more direct and powerful influence on the young men and women of the country than even the family. If these men are wrong, if their idea of the best thing to do for the youth of America is wrong, then the  Senate  of the  United  States  is con-fronted with a very much more important problem than that  of 

any clause in a tariff bill. How can the youth of the country be guided in the proper channels by men of this kind-28 uni-versity and college presidents, 18 deans and heads of depart-ments, 26 clergymen and teachers of religion, 23 leading libra-rians,  30  judges, lawyers, and professors of law,  100  scientists and teachers of science, over  100  professors  of  liberal arts, and so on.  Are  these men radicals? Would anyone accuse Dr. Nicholas  Murray  Butler-quoted a short time ago by the 

Senator  from Montana-of being a radical? I have here a letter from President Lowell, of Harvard, who writes to say :I hear t ily sympathize with your  efforts  to take out of the tariff pro-visions preventing the importation of seditious literature from abroad. I do not think any  Sem~tor  would consider A. Lawrence Lowell a radical or a friend of sedition, treason, or insurrection. The  Senator  from Montana quoted from Bishop McConnell, of the Methodist  Church,  who had previously been president of DePauw  University,  another  one of the great teachers of the country. I have here a letter from Dr. Henry  S.  Coffin,  probably the most prominent Presbyterian minister in the city of New York, and now head of the  Union  Theological Seminary. He writes :Let me congratulate yon on the stand  yon  are  taking . against the inclusion in the  tariff  bill of the proviso giving customs officials the right to censor foreign literature. This is manifestly a duty which does not belong to them and for which they are not fitted. This should be left where it belongs, in the courts. I am sure I voice the opinion of  raany  thoughtful men, both in the ministry and in the membership of the various Christian c. hurches,  when                                                         

> Isay that Ifeel it would be amost unwise curtailment of the liberty of the press. Lft the courts decide if abook is obscene or seditious, and refnse to allow it to be sold; but ·do not let us have customs officials constitute themselves judges as to what may or may not be
> imported into this country.

I have a letter from Doctor Niebuhr, also Qf the  Union .

Theological Seminary, taking the same point of view. I should like to commend you most  heartily-

He says-for your efforts in trying to prevent unlettered customs officials from becoming censors  of  the literature which American people shall be per-mitted to read. The efforts of the opposition to make it appear that your stand would result in a flood  of obscene literature beclouds the issue.  Such  important matters of judgment should be left in the bands of our courts and not to the routine of customs officials. And yet with such views expressed by the leading clergy-men  f}.nd  the leading educators of the country-for I have quoted here merely men who have not signed the general petition which 

I presented-with such views expressed by our leading edu-cators and moral and intellectual leaders, it is alleged that the adoption of the amendment agreed to by the  Senate  in  October 

last will  tend  to injure the youth of the country  I If that is so, let us look into our educational institutions, let us see if 

we can not get a new type of man who will not take the point of view which the  educat(}rs  now take. If all these men are wrong, then  what  a terrible prospect opens up before the coming generation of American manhood and womanhood. Mr. President, this whole matter of censorship rests on a false basis. As Mr.  Asweli.  the assistant editor of the Forum, says: The fundamental trouble with censorship is that it is based on an assumption that general human nature is \veak, frail, and easily de-luded, but that  certain  individuals do not share this common weakness and can, therefore, act as censors for the  rest  of mankind. When this assumption is examined critically it  breaks  down in both of  its 

> particulars.

Prof. John Dewey, the leading philosopher of the Nation,  says 

this:  '                                              

> It is ridicUlous that the foreign literature that comes to the American Nation shoul-d be subject to restrictions imposed by a group of officials
> whose business is concerned with economic affairs. If the American people submits to this imposition, it is aproof that it bas lost its love of liberty and self-government.

Mr. President, I do not believe that the American people has as yet lost its love of liberty and self-government. If the  Sen-

ators are in agreement with the intellectual and moral leaders of thought of this Nation, they  will  again vote, as they did in 

·October,  against any restriction by customs officials on freedom of speech or of thought. Mr.  SMOOT.  1\Ir.  President, I send to the desk the following amendment, as a substitute for the one that is now pending. 

I will make an explanation of it in just a moment. Mr. MoKELLAR. Let the amendment be reported. 

Mr.  LA FOLLETTE. I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr. RoBSION of Kentucky in the chair). The clerk will call the rolL The  Chief  Clerk  called the roll, and the following  Senators 

answered to their names :Allen George Kendrick  Schall                                                                        

> Barkley Gla ss Keyes Sh eppard
> Bingham Glenn La Follette Shortridge Black Gofl' McCulloch Simmons
> Blaine Goldsborough McKellar Smoot
> Blease Gould McMa st E> "Steck
> Borah Greene McNary Steiwer Bratton Grundy Metcalf Stephens Brookhart Hale Moses Sullivan
> Broussard Harris Norbeck Swanson
> Capper Harrison Norris Thomas, Idaho Caraway Hastings Nye Thomas, Okla. Connally Hatfield Oddie Trammell Copeland Hawes Overman Tydings Couzens Hayden Patterson Vandenberg Cutting Hebert Phipps Wagner
> Dale Heflin Pine Walsh, Mass.
> Dill Howell Pittman Walsh, Mont.
> Fess Johnson Ransdell Waterman Fletcher Jones Robinson, Ind Watson
> Frazier Kean Robsion, Ky. Wbeeler

The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Eighty-four  Senators  have  an-

swered to their names. A quorum is present. 5502  CONGRES~IONAL  RECORD-SENA _TE  MARCH · 18 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President. I desire to withdraw the amend-ment I last offered, and I send to the desk the following amend-ment and ask for its adoption. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  If there is no objection, the amendment formerly offered will be withdrawn. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President, in explanation of the amendment I want to say to the  Senate  that the following changes  are 

made: In line 5, page 1, I strike out the words  " containing any matter advocating or urging treason, insurrection, or forcible resistance to any law of the  United  States  or,"  so that it will read: All persons  are  prohibited from importing into the  United  States  from any foreign country any book,  pamphlet,  paper, writing, advertisement, circular, print, picture, or drawing containing any threat to take the life of or inflict bodily harm upon any person in the  United  States-

And  so forth. 

On  page 2, line 19, I strike out the words  "under  the customs 

laws"  and insert the words  "as  hereinafter provided." It 

means the same, but the latter 1s the language used in all legis-lation.  On  page 3 I strike out lines 3  to  6,  inclusive, reading: Any person who shall import any book or other matter, the entry of which is by this section prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of not more than  $5,000  or by imprisonment at hard labor for not more than    

> 10 years, or both.

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  If there is no objection, the .amendment will be modified by striking out the words indicated by the Senator from  Utah.  

> Mr.

TRAMMELL.  Mr. President, I would like to  ask · the 

Senator from  Utah  a question. I want to get the purport of the amendment. As I gather it, the substance of it is that it strikes out the paragraph which deals with the question of literature advocating or urging treason, or insurrection, or forcible resistance to any law of the  United  States. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That is correct. M.r.  TRAMMELL.  Of  course, the Senator has control of his own amendment, but I am a little surprised at anyone who advocates a prohibition against this character of literature being brought into this  eonntry  yielding to the extent of  per-

mitting seditious literature to be brought into the  United  States 

and allowing this country to become the dumping ground for that character of literature which may _be brought here from some foreign country. The  United  States  would be a regular cloacina for the communists and others from beyond our borders who desire to encourage and inculcate into the minds of their foreign friends who have preceded them to this country, and also of Americans, their ideas of government, the ideas of the communists, or other such ideas. This would permit them to bring that literature here absolutely without any restriction whatever. I had hoped that the amendment, as far as its main features were concerned, would remain as it was in the beginning.  As  it was originally worded, it provided that sedi-tious  literature--that  is, statements advocating the overthrow of the American Government by force--and obscene literature could be stopped at the port when it was attempted to bring it 

into the  United  States. 

We have heard a good deal in the discussion about freedom of the press and freedom of speech. There is no greater adherent than myself to the policy of freedom of the press and freedom of speech. These policies have been the very bulwark upon which our country has succeeded and prospered and grown and maintained its high standard of ideals and purposes down through the ages and which, too, have brought us to this happy hour in the life of Qur Nation. But, my friends, freedom of the 

press and freedom of speech do not  mea,n  a license to destroy our Government, nor do they mean a license to destroy our homes and blight the  future  of the youth of the land. Never since the days of our patriotic forefathers has freedom of speech and the press been carried to such unreasonable extent. I may be an old fogy, as some would be wont to say, when I recall my youthful days, when my good father and my sweet - and devoted mother barred from the home and from our fireside obscene literature, barred  from  its sacred precincts seditious literature against our Government, and  inste~d, 

instilled  into the mind and the heart of the youth of that home a love of our country, a loyalty to its institutions, adevotion to its flag, and a respect and appreciation for the high ideals of citizenship and private conduct. I may be wrong, my friends, when I still revere, in all sincerity, the teachings which I received from my God-loving and country-loving parents during those days. I may be wrong, but I am not when I still believe that those devoted parents were doing not only what they believed to be the best for those whom they would rear to high ideals and lofty  purposes,  and  ~

unfaltering devotion to their Nation, but that which ' I now know and have always believed was for the best. Yet some would have  brought  into this country any character of seditious literature, any character of obscene literature, to be carried into the home, to be absorbed and read by those of tender age in the country, and would cloak this behind the excuse that it is in the interest of freedom of the press and freedom of speech.  A good many things might be done under different characters of excuses and cloaks. 

On  the Question of freedom of religion, freedom of thou ght during the early days of the Roman Empire people were allowed to kill their offspring at birth. This wicked and cruel custom was modified a little later, and that murderous privilege was not granted until . the offspring was at least 3 years of age. In India, under the cloak of religion, the offspring of the people may be fed to crocodiles. Yet, with our ideals and our standards in this country, certainly not even under the pretext of  religions  freedom would the 

American  citizen, for one moment, sanction or tolerate the practice of feeding children to crocodiles, permitting the young baby at its . mother's breast to be snatched from her bosom and fed to crocodiles. Yet those heathens of India call this religious freedom. The communists and anarchists are attempting to prey on this country. That might be minimized by some.  Some  might rise here and in the interest of  so-called  freedom of speech plead in behalf of the communists that they be allowed to come here and carry on their devilish teachings with perfect immunity, and this not only among the adults of the land but that they should be allowed to come with perfect freedom into our schools and there teach the overthrow and the destruction by force of our .American form of government, that they might there teach atheism and all kinds of evils contrary to our American ideals. In this country we have felt that our ideals are along correct lines. Certainly under the wise policies of the Nation our Re-public has prospered and succeeded and preserved the most wonderful citizenship on the globe.  So  far as I am concerned, I would try to perpetuate it against any and all corrupting influences. 

Some  might say that communistic literature is not a corrupt-ing influence. The whole idea is contrary to our American form of government. If it serves its purpose. and its intended object, it will ultimately have a corrupting influence. At times it is the small spark that grows into the consuming and de-structive flame. It is said that the Roman  Senator  Oato  never made a speech in the Roman  Senate  but what he concluded by saying  "Carthage  must be destroyed." At first but little atten-tion was paid to his  charge  and utterance against Carthage, but eventually the flames were fanned, and  Carthage  was destroyed. 

Of  course, I am very happy to say that the great majority of our people give no heed to efforts of that destructive character, but there are some who do. The pending measure is an attempt to place a ban upon not only seditious but obscene literature. I hope the American people will know through the press of the country that the object of the provision we  are  now considering is solely for the purpose of placing a ban upon seditious litera-ture and upon obscene literature coming into the  United  States 

from a foreign country. I do not believe a very large majority of the people of the country believe in permitting it to come into the  United  States. 

Of  course, we have to have  the  machinery for passing upon the question of it being barred. We have to have the machinery for the purpose of passing upon the administration of any law or for the purpose of inaugurating any policy under our system of government. The  Senate  and the House of Representatives constitute a part of the machinery for formulating legislative policies and enacting them into law. We have to select certain officers to enforce any law which places a ban upon certain kinds of literature, reading matter, which I think a very large majority of the American people feel is not best for the main-tenance of the perpetuity of our free institutions and for the preservation of the high ideals which have sustained and guided this Nation through the ages past. If we have the law, we have to provide some machinery for its enforcement. We may criti-cize the machinery proposed, as some people criticize the courts. They have a right to do that if they wish. However, I have not seen anyone here who has become very solicitous in regard to the confiscation, for instance, of any other character of property that might be attempted to be im-ported into this country under our customs laws. Already under 

our  laws, if there is any fraud connected with the importation of any article or commodity-it might not contain any seditious matter; it might not contain any obscene matter-but if there is fraud connected with its attempted importation, the customs officials have the  pght  to confiscate it, and it is confiscated ac-1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5503 

cording to a certain system through the medium of certain machinery. 

Some  object to such or a similar provision in this connection. Enforcement is a very sacred thing to them when it comes to this obscene and seditious garbage-literature that advocates the overthrow of our Government ; that would pull down, if the sentiment could be inspired, our flag and destroy our  institu-

tions; literature that is obscene, that could not fail to have a bad influence upon those of tender years, the boys and girls who are to be the citizens of to-morrow.  ·so  anxious are some to have this character of foreign literature dumped in  our  midst that they tell us that it should not be governed by the  opera-

tion of the machinery to which we do  :t;lOW  subject fraudulent conduct in connection with other imports. They  insist ' we will have to set up some other system for enforcing the law. I do not think the rank and file-the great masses  .of  our people--are worrying about the fact that they are not going to get to read some seditious or obscene literature coming from abroad. I do not think that the great majority of our people are distressed over the fact that they may be barred from  ob-

taining for the purpose of reading some obscene literature from some foreign land. We might  have  some highbrows who think it would be a great pity to deprive them of that privilege. Of course, if we could make an exception for them, we could let them have it; but we have to do that which we think will bring about the greatest good for the greatest number. I have never paid very much attention to the  highbroWs  any-

way.  Some  of them are all right, some of them are all wrong. I do not know where they have done anything of greater  mo-

ment than has the average citizen in this country, except to set themselves up as critics and standards by which they would have everybody else judged. They may be and are  some-

times useful in their way, but when they delve, for instance, into the field of commerce, away from their educational  institu-

tions, nine times out of ten they are fa1iures. Now and then we see some of them who make an advent into the public affairs of the country, and occasionally we see one that  is  a success; but where we see one that is a success in other than their chosen fields, we  -see  nine who are failures. But when they speak about obscene literature or when they speak about seditious literature, according to some Senators the Members of the  United  States Senate should go under their desks and very meekly hand out to them just what they advocate and want. I am not any more in favor of passing over to them what they wish on this  ques-

tion than I would be upon any other question of policy. I do not become at all disturbed on account of some extracts that may be read from some of these educators-these  high-

brows in the educational field. It resolves itself, in my mind, down to the practical, common-sense proposition as to whether or not we desire to ban from this country obscene and seditious literature of a foreign brand that would p_ romote, if it could carry out its purpose, the overthrow and the destruction of our Government and its institutions ; whether or not we desire to ban from our shores and from our homes obscene literature. There is no man on the face of the earth who can say that such literature will do the youth of our land any good. Shall we ban that in the interest of our land and in the interest of our homes and our future citizenship  1 That is the burning question 

of · the hour. I think it was Henry W. Grady, one of the greatest orators we have ever had in the  S.outh  or in America, who said upon one occasion that he came to Washington and that he was overcome with his great admiration and reve .rence for the Government which was represented here in Washington as it was evidenced by the magnificent  Capitol  and by the beautifully planned city and all that indicated the strength of the American Government. He felt that he lived in a wonderful land, and that probably here in this city was centered the great strength of this great Republic of ours.  ·

But he said he returned to Georgia, his native State, and shortly afterwards he was riding through the rural section of a certain part of his State and came to the home of one of his country friends, who cordially invited him to spend the night. He  said  he slept that night in that humble home, set in acircle of trees, surrounded by broad fields ripening unto the harvest. The father and the mother, inspired by high ideals, and  with 

well-trained children, sat there around the family fireside, and when the bed hour came they  announced  that they would have family prayers. He said next day, as he was returning to the city of Atlanta, he meditated over his reflections upon the  Na-

tional  Capital,  its splendor and its wonders, and then he began to think about that humble home, and he said that he was  in-

spired and thrilled by the thought that not in those structures yonder in the National  Capital,  nor in the great wealth that was represented there, was the strength of the Nation, but the strength of the Nation, its perpetuity, and its future, rested  in 

that bumble home and the thousands and millicns of other sim1-lar homes found throughout this Republic. My friends, so far as I am concerned, I plead and beg for the preservation of the home, for the security and protection  ot 

our Government against seditious literature and also against ob cene literature. I am pleading for America for Americans. I beg that our land of liberty, of  freedorp,  of immortal forefathers, of cher-ished traditions, of patriotic, lovely, and noble womanhood, and a true and loyal manhood may live on and on forever in the perpetuity of her institutions and under the inspiration of the high ideals and standards of the fathers of the Nation,  whieh 

has been preserved by each succeeding generation until  this 

good hour. _Let no enemy within or without, no foe, American or for-eign, in any wise undermine the principles and the standard which have sustained our Republic. Keep unstained and  un-

sullied that flag, which  every  t. rue American honors and  cher-

ishes in peace and  s~nds  ready to bravely and  courageo~sly 

follow in war. 

It is the insidious and undercover enemy that must be .watched, lest he surprises you as the thief in the night. I have read that-In storied Venice, down whose rippling streets The stars go hurrying and the white moon beats,                                                                                                                                                                         

> Stuod the great bell t{)wer, fronting seas and skies, Facing the ages, drawing all men's eyes,
> It marked the hours for Venice-all men said, Time shall not reach to bow that lofty head, Time that shall mark all else with ruin, must Forbear to make that shaft confess its dust.
> Yet all the while, in secret without sound, The fat worms gnawed its timbers underground, The twisted worm, whose epoch is an hour, Caverned its way into the mighty tower, And suddenly it swayed, it shook, it broke,
> .And fell in darkening thunder at one stroke. The tall shaft with an angle on the crown,
> Fell ruining-a thousand years went down. And so I fear, my country, not the hand That shall burl might and whirlwind on the land. Ifear not Titan traitors that shall rise To stride like Brocken shadows on the skies ;Ifear the vermin that shall undermine Senate and school and citadel and shrine; The worm of fraud, the fatted worm of ease, And all the crawling progeny of these; ·
> Ifear the vermin that shall honeycomb the towers And walls of state in unsuspecting hours.

Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr. President, some time ago I read an ex-tract from a book. I now wish to say where that book came from, as some people have been so kind as to say that it was not in the libraries in Washington. I shall not mention the name of the book, because I do not care to give it the advertise-ment. . On the inside of it I find the inscription,  " Fiction Lovers' Library. Books must be returned and renewed every two weeks. Washington, D.  C." 

A stamp is also on it  " Fiction Lovers' Library, Washington, D.  C.  Books must be returned  every  two weeks ; renewed if 

necessary." 

Also another stamp on that side [indicating] and two stamps on the back of the book. That book was obtained by a young lady from a Washington library. I wish it were possible for every Member of the Senate  

> to

read page 52 of it. I would not want any woman to read it, even though she were the lowest scrapings this side of Hades. 

l\Ir,  President, I am proud to see that the  Senator  from New 

Mexico  has not had any indorsement of his position from my 

State.  I find on my desk, taken from the  RECORD  of the  Seventy-

fu·st  Congress,  second  session, the  speech  of the Hon.  BRONSON 

CuTTING,  of New  Mexico,  in the Senate of the  United  States. 

In that a petition is sent out of the National Popular  Govern-

ment League, Washington, D.  C.,  March 6,  1930.  There are signers to that petition from Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Delaware, District of  Columbia,  Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota,  Mis-

souri, Nebraska, Nevada, New  H anps hire,  New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North  Carolina,  North Dakota,  Ohio,  Okla~ 

homa, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas,  Utah,  Vermont, Virginia, Washingt(}n, West 

y"irginia,  Wisconsin, and  Wyo!lling. 5504  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARon  18 The name of the  State  of  South  Carolina  does not  app~.  Iam glad that  South  Carolina  stands on this question,  as  she does on the question of divorce, single and alone, in the galaxy of  States  which make up  ~s  great American Nation. I am proud to know that when I go back to my home there will not be one single man or woman meet me at  the  gateway and say 

I signed the petition to let come into this Nation dirty, filthy literature that will bring into the minds and hearts of the 

little  boys and girls of this country, who, to-morrow, will be the manhood and womanhood of the ' country, such dirty, filthy trash as is attempted to be brought in here against the morals of the people and against the Government of the  country.  

> I

understand, Mr. President, that the  Senator  from New Mexico asked the Senator from  Utah  if he indorsed what the 

Senator  from South  Carolina  said. I want to say to the Senator from New  Mexico  that no man need indor e what  I say. I am iesponsible for what I say in the Senate; I am responsible for what I say outside of the Senate; and so long as I represent the people of my  State  I shall never stand here, claiming to be their representative, and ask for the admission of dirty, 

filthy  trash  to  be put into the homes of this country, as the Senator from New Mexico appears to be doing. I am proud to stand here  a.S  a representative of the  State  which was the mother of secession, which stood for manhood and for freedom, which stood, and  to-day  stands, above all  States  of this  Union 

for the protection of the virtue of womanhood, because that State authorizes no divorce from the bonds of matrimony, and which  stands,  above all, on the  decis:on  that whenever any man, whether he be white or black, puts his hand upon a woman against  her  will and her consent, the punishment therefor shall be death; and, if necessary, the technicalities of the law will be thrust aside, and that sentence will be immediately put into execution. That is where stands this representative of a people who backs what he says and what he does upon this floor. I

am responsible to them and to them only and not to the Senator from New Mexico or anybody else. Whenever South  Carolina  does  not like that kind of  repre-

sentation, she has the opportunity, which will be presented to her within a short time, to change that representation; and, so help me God, whenever her manhood and her womanhood say that they do not want that kind of representation, they must get somebody else.  

> I

love womanhood . Destroy, Mr. President, the honesty of aman, take  fiom  him his  reputat':<>n  as an honest man, and you damn him forever. Take from a woman her virtue and you damn her forever. Take from a goverri.ment  the purity of its womanhood, of its motherhood, and sooner or later that govern-ment will be destroyed. A woman who marries for a title, a woman who marries for money without the sanction of her heart in love, is no better, Mr. President, than the woman who temporarily sells her body for money to buy  food  and clothing. I do not care who she is nor to what society she belongs nor what company she keeps,  

> if

she sells her  body  for a title or if she sells her  body  for money she is not as good as the poor creature who, from hunger or nakedness, sells her  body  that her human wants may be met.  

> I

represent, as I believe, that State which has the purest American blood in this  Union;  it has fewer foreigners in it, and   

> I~ank

God for that ; it has a purer  type  of womanhood and manhood; and as their representative I would be ashamed to go home if I voted to let that kind of trash [indicating] be brought in this country or to allow any man to take any action which would jeopardize the President of these  United  States. 

I do not have any use for Herbert Hoover; everybody knows 

what  I think about him; but he is  the  President of the  United 

States, and if a man in my presence this afternoon were to curse him for a certain thing I would slap him, if he were the best friend I had, not on account of Herbert Hoover but because be is President. If I should meet him on the street to-night or to-morrow, I would raise my hat to him, not to Herbert Hoover, but I would  rai~e  my hat to the President of the great 

United  States  of America. We owe a duty to protect him; we owe a duty to protect the President and the Vice President ; we 

owe  a duty to protect all the officials of this Nation; and we can not do it by slippy, sloppy, pussyfooting, and gumshoeing around. We have got to meet that kind of action with  man-

hood, and the sooner the Senate and the House of Representa-tives  realize  it,  t~  better it will be for this great American Nation which we repre ent. I am an American, and for America for Americans, and for aclean administration of American ideals. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  Mr. President, I wish to offer  an  amend-ment to the pending amendment, namely, on page 1, line 5, after the word  " drawing  " I wish to insert the words  " containing any matter advocating or urging treason,  insurrec;t;ion,  ' or  forci-

ble resistance to any law of the  United  States."  Those  are the words which have been stricken out of tbe amendment, . and I

am merely moving to reinsert them. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The amendment will lie on the . table. 

Mr.  WHEELER.  Mr. President, I want to call the attention of the Senator from South  Carolina  [1\lr.  BLEASE]  to the fact that  Prof.  Josiah  Morse,  of the University of South Carolina, is quoted as having stated that-Practically  all  of our faculty would agree, of course, that  such        

> censorship is adangerous and un-American thing.
> I

want to say, Mr. President, that I am  in thorough accord with the views expressed by Professor  ~orse. 

Mr. BARKLEY.  Mr.  President, I did not get the first part  ot 

the quotation. What does it refer to? Mr.  WHEELER.  It refers, as I understand, to the amend-ment that was offered by the Senator from  Utah  [l\fr.  SMOOT], 

or similar ones that were offered here before, Professor Morse taking the position that he  was  entirely in sympathy with the views expressed by the  Senator  from New Mexico [Mr. 

> CU'ITING].

Mr.  BARKLEY. I wonder if those views of the professor could be interpreted as extending his objection to any  regulation 

of immoral . and indecent literature circulated among the people. Mr.  WHEELER.  I do not think so. While I have only seen this, I take it  tht;l.t  his view was that he objected to censorship 

by _the  Customs  Bureau.  ·

Mr . BARKLEY. That problem is somewhat eliminated  here 

now, it seems to me. Mr.  WHEELER.  Yes; exactly. Mr. BARKLEY . So  that that is more or less of an academic question. Mr. WHEELER. But I was calling attention to it  in · view of the statements made by the Senator from  South  Carolina 

[Mr.  BLEASE]. 

Mr. BARKLEY . The practical matter we are up against, or  

> will

be in a very few moments, I suppose, is the amendment which has just been offered by the Senator from Louisiana  [Mr. 

BROussARD]. I should like to get the Senator's reaction .on this phase of the matter, because I have great respect  for · the  Sen-

ator from Montana, and sympathize with many of his views on these subjects. 

· We  have on our Federal statute books laws preventing the admission into the  Unit~d  States  of aliens who advocate the violation of our laws; and we authorize the Federal Government to deport aliens who advocate the violation of our laws, which 

is not  as  serious as a charge of treason. How can we reconcile our refusal to admit or our deportation of aliens who advocate merely the violation of the law with the free admission of literature that advocates the same thing that they advocate while here? Mr. WHEELER.  Of  course, in the first place, we have upon the statute books of the  United  States the sedition law. Any-body can be prosecuted in the  United  States  to-day  for spread-ing seditious literature. I want to say to the Senator that that law was put upon the statute books in time of war, and in my humble judgment it ought to be repealed. It has not any place upon the statute books. Mr. BARKLEY.  Of  course,  that law applies not only to aliens, but to citizens of the  United  States  who advocate treason. Mr. WHEELER. Exactly. Mr . BARKLEY. I am trying to find out whether we are not liable to be led into an inconsistency here about insidious lit-erature that may not square with our statutes dealing with persons who by word of mouth do the same thing that it  is ·

proposed to allow to be done by the written word. Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr. President, will the Senator permit an interruption? Mr. WHEELER. I yield. Mr. BLEASE. I do not know who this Josiah Morse is. If 

he is a professor in the University of South Oarolina, I must admit that I am more ignorant than I thought I was. I have never heard of any man in my State by that name. It may be that  ther~  is such a man ; I do not say there is not ; but if he is a professor in the University of South Carolina, and if he  

> will

express publicly that he is in favor of putting in circula-tion in this country such books as the Senator from  Utah 

showed upon this floor and such books as I have in my desk, I will guarantee the  Senator  from Montana that he will not be a professor in that university 30 days. I will see that he is put out. . Mr. WHEELER.  Of  course, I have not any doubt but that the Senator from South  Carolina  would have the power to  put ! 

him out. 

Mr.  BLEASE.  I surely  have. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5505 

Mr. WHEELER. I am not disputing the power of the  Sen-

ator to do that; but I do not think the statement he has made with reference to the professor is exacty fair, because I do not think this statement can be understood to mean that this pro-fessor favors the kind of literature that the  Senator  from  Utah 

has been passing around the  Senate  in the last few days. Mr.  BLEASE.  I will find out in  10  days whether he agrees to it or not. If he does, he will quit drawing  South  Carolina 

money. Mr. WHEELER. The  Senator  can find out in one day if 

he wants to. 

Mr.  BLEASE.  I am going to find out in  10  days. Mr. McKELLAR. Mr. President-- · ·

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the . senator from Montana yield to the  Senator  from Tennessee? 

Mr.  WHEELER. I yield. 

Mr.  McKELLAR. In the amendment of the  Senator  from Louisiana [Mr. BnoussARD]-which is, of course, exactly the same language that was cut out  by · the  Senator  from  Utah  ashort time  ag(}--1  find this :Containing any matter advocating or urging  treason,  insurrection, or forcible resistance to any law of the  United  States. Suppose the people of Mexico organize, for example--of course, they are not going to do it, but suppose they  d(}-und  send over tons of literature preaching insurrection on the part of the American people down on the border. Is it possible that the 

Senator  thinks we ought to permit that to be done by those peo-ple when we do not allow our own citizens to do it? Mr. WHEELER. Let me say to the  Senator  from Tennessee that I am not from the  South,  and I never lived in the  South--

Mr. McKELLAR. Let us change the illustration, then. Mr. WHEELER. Just a moment; I will  take  the time to answer the question. If, however, I had been raised and lived in the  South,  and if I had gone through what they went through in the days of reconstruction, it seems to me I would be ex-tremely tolerant with reference to these matters. It must be recalled that we went through civil  strife,  and that this Government  of  ours lived through it; and we have grown great and prosperous, partly due to the fact that we have been tolerant toward the views of other people. I see, standing upon this floor now,  Senators  who are ad-vocating laws which have been the curse of every European nation; and in my humble judgment laws of this character have done more to overturn various governments than any other kind of laws that have been placed upon the statute books of those nations. Mr. McKELLAR. Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield? Mr. WHEELER. Just a moment. With reference to Mexico, assume, for instance, that Mexico did start to send a lot of literature over into this country. How many people does the  Senator  from Tennessee feel would be influenced in the slightest degree? Mr. McKELLAR. No one ever knows. Mr. WHEELER.  So  far  as I am concerned. I am not fear-ful that a people as prosperous as the people. in this country are, where the workingmen receive the highest wages, where they have the automobiles that they have, and so on, are going to succumb to any propaganda of any kind or character from any class of citizens on the face of the earth. Mr.  BRATTON.  Mr. President--Mr. McKELLAR. Just one moment, if the  Senator  please. Then, as I understand the Senator, he  sees  no objection what-

soever  to the people in Mexico, or the people in  Canada,  or the people of any other country, for that matter-Russia, for instance, or any other country--sending tons of literature over here urging treason, urging insurrection, and urging forcible resistance to our laws? Do I so understand the  Senator? 

Mr. WHEELER. Let me say to the  Senator  from  'J•ennessee 

that this Government of ours has lasted all through these years without that sort of a law upon the statute books, and we did not have any sedition law upon the statute books of the United States until the war, and it was enacted during that period of time, and it was much abused by prosecuting attorneys, judges, and others. 

Somebody  has said-and I am not applying it, and I want the 

Senator  to understand that I do not apply it to him-that patri-

, otism is the last refuge of a scoundrel. I find, Mr. President, in many instances that it is the corrupt influences in this country that  are  hiding behind the  cloak  of patriotism, wrapping them-selves in the American flag, denouncing everybody who seeks in 

any way to criticize them as unpatriotic. Mr. McKELLAR. Mr. President--Mr. WHEELER. This matter recalls very clearly to my mind the campaign that was carried on some years ago in the North-west, when they told about how the farmers out in  ·North 

Dakota all believed in free love, and they stirred to a frenzy agreat many  of  the people of that  State  because of the fact that they found in one of the libraries a book by some woman relat-ing to that subject. Now, who was it that stirred up that feeling? Why, it was  the  v~ry  men who were practicing, if you please, the very sort of thmg that they were condemning for the farmers and saying that the farmers believed in.  

> I

recall in my own  State,  for instance, where the editor of one of the papers was constantly saying,  " Why, if you elect this man Governor of Montana you are going to have free love the same as they had over in North  Dakota,"  and my answer to' him was,  "If  they had had free love in North Dakota as this editor would have you believe, he would have been  th~  first one to move to North  Dakota." 

Mr. McKELLAR. Mr. President, I do not know and I do not care anything about free love in North Dakota. 'Mr . WHEELER. I know the  Senator  does not. Mr. McKELLAR. It is a matter of utter unconcern to me; but I do want to say that there was in this amendment-! do not know why it was put in here, but it was put in here on yesterday, I believe by the distinguished colleague of the  Sena~ 

tor from Montana [Mr. W ALSH]-a  provision in these words :Containing any matter advocating or urging treason, insurrection, or forcible resistance to any law of the  United  States. Mr. WHEELER. The Senator does my colleague a great in-justice by saying that he had those words inserted. Mr. McKELLAR. Well, whoever did, some  Senator  did it, and it was in this amendment, and it ought to remain there; and I thank the . senator from Louisiana [Mr. BRoussARD] for haviJ:ig moved to put it back there. We must have a vote as to 

whether  we are going to let it stay there or not, for this reason if the  Senator  will  pardon  me a moment-- 'Mr. WHEELER. I would  prefer  that the  Senator  make his speech in his own time. Mr. McKELLAR. I am not going to make a speech ; but Ithink the Senator ought to permit me to say this, after having made the statement he made about me. I will under no circumstances vote for any measure that .would  excuse  in any foreigner what we do not excuse at home.  

> If

an American were to be guilty of these acts, he would be guilty under the law ; and so, if a foreigner is guilty of these acts, he should be guilty under our law, and be prosecuted for it.  So  far as I am concerned, if we have to sit here for one week, we are going to have a vote on the amendment of the 

Senator  from Louisiana. 

Mr.  WHEELER. Mr. President, the Senator speaks of areference that I made to him. I do not recall what the refer-ence was. Mr. MoKELLAR. It was something to the effect that a man who pretended to be patriotic was a scoundrel. Mr. WHEELER.  Oh,  no, Mr. President! Mr.  McKELLAR . I know the  Senator  said that did not apply to me, and I accepted his statement about it, because Iknow the  Senator  did not mean anything like that; but Ihave no doubt that the newspapers will take a great deal of pleasure in publishing it, and the  Senator  ought not to have said it. But, however that may be, that is immaterial. Iwant to say to the  Senator  from Montana that he is on the wrong side of this question. We ought not to treat foreign people in any  diiferent  way, when it comes to violating our laws, than we treat our own people; and under no circum-stances ought we to permit these words to be striken out; for any one, whether he is a foreigner or whether he is an Amer-ican, who advocates or urges treason, who advocates or urges insurrection, who advocates or urges forcible resistance to the law of the  United  States;  ought to be put in jail. Mr. WHEELER. Well, as I pointed out a moment ago, there is already upon the statute books to-day a law prohibit· ing that very thing. There is no question about that in the mind .of any body. If there is, I would like to have him call   

> it to

my attention. Mr. HEFLIN rose. Mr. WHEELER. I can  not see why all this heat about taking out that provision, when there are ample laws on the statute  book~  at the present time relating to it. 

Mr. HEFLIN. Mr. President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does  the  Senator  from Montana yield to the Senator from Alabama? Mr. WHEELER. I yield: Mr. HEFLIN. Why has the able Senator from Montana any objection to repeating it in tbis particular provision? Mr. WHEELER. Principally because of the fact that I am against the intolerance that is constantly put forward here on the  floor  of the  Senate.  I think we are going entirely too far. I do not see any  reason  for it. I said to the Senator a while 

# \5506  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARCH  18 ago  that  this  GDvernment  of  ours  has grown great, and I can not conceive of any  literature  being the cause of the overthrow of this Government. I called  attention this morning,.  when  the Senator from  Utah 

had the  floor,  to the fact that had this  la.w  been upon the statute books at the time when Brigham  Young,  for instance, was locating his colony out in  Utah,  he could have been  prosecuted 

and sent to the penitentiary because of the statements he issued at that time. Mr. McKELLAR. Mr. President--

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the Senator from Montana yield to the Senator from  T~nnessee?  .Mr. WHEELER. No. Yet we lived through that expenence. We lived through the  Civil  War. Let me ask the  Senator  from  Tennessee and the Senator from Alabama if they do not think that if we had had this kind of alaw upon the statute books during and aft er the  Civil  War their people would have been subjected to persecution? Mr. McKELLAR  Oh,  no ~ Mr. President. Mr.  WHEELER  All you have to do is to go back in the 

:trages  of history to the reconstruction  period.  Read of the atti-tude of Thad Stevens and the so-called radicals of that day. What would they have done if there had been a law upon the statute books like this that could have been used against the people of the South? 

Mr.  McKELLAR.  Mr.  President, will the Senator yield? Mr. WHEELER. No; I refuse to yield at the  present  time. I have a great deal of sympathy with the southerners for the things they went through  ·in  the  reconstruction  days, and Ican not belp  recalling  to mind what  ·would  have  happened  to them if there had been laws upon the statute books permitting the authorities to send them to the penitentiary for 10 years for  some  statement they  mtgbt  have uttered upon which some-body could have put a construction that would indicate that they we re guilty of  insurrection  or treason. Mr.  BRATTON.  Mr. President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  S~nator  from Montana yield to the Senator from New Mexico? M.r.  WHEELER  I yield. Mr.  BRATTON.  I want to  advert  to a statement made by the Senator from Tennessee a few moments ago. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the Senator yield for that purpose? Mr. HEFLIN. Mr. President, I want to suggest that if 

Senators are going to yield continually and hold the  floor,  Ishall have to ask that the rule be  invoked,  because there are others of us who want to  discuss  this matter before a vote is taken. Mr.  WHEELER.  I suggest-The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The Senator  can  yield only  for  aquestion. 

Mr.  WHEELER. I suggest to the Senator from Alabama that there has been a considerable length of time in which be could have gotten the  floor,  and he will have plenty of time in the future. r have occupied the  floor  but a . very few  minutes  thus far, and I will say to  the  Senator  that  I propose to occupy it 

just as long as I see :fit to. Mr.  HEFLIN;  I have no  objection  to the  Senator  occupying the  floor,  because I think he is going to increase  our  majority. Mr.  WHEELER.  It does not make any  difference  to me whether I increase the majority or  whether  I decrease it. Ihave no doubt about what the Senator is going to do, and I am not :finding fault with him because of his position. Mr.  BRATTON.  I wanted to submit a question. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Under  the  rule,  a Senator  may yield only for a question. If the Senator yields for anything else he will lose the :floor. Mr. WHEELER. I yield for a question. 

Mr.  BRATTON.  I put it in the forni of a question. Did 

the  Senator from Montana  ever  in his experience  here  know of the Senator from Alabama invoking such a rigid interpretation of the rules as he now seeks to invoke against his colleagues? 

Mr.  WHEELER.  I never did, when he had the  floor  himself .Mr.  BRATTON.  No; and the Senator never will. Mr. HEFLIN rose. Mr. WHEELER. I refuse to yield. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The Senator declines to  yield~ 

Mr.  HEFLIN. I rise to a point of order. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The Senator will state it. Mr. HEFLIN. The Senator from New Mexico, who is the author of this proposition, and those who - have sympathized with him, have had the whole day. 

Mr.  WHEELER.  That is not a point of order, Mr. President. The  VICE  PRESIDENT~  That is not a question of  order 

under the rules. 

Mr.  HEFLIN.  It is before the Senate just the same. [Laughter.] The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The Senator from Montana. 

Mr.  WHEELER. Mr. President, .I object to the Senator  from 

Alabama constantly interrupting my chain  of  thought with his facetious remarks. [Laughter.] I want to say that upon its face this amendment appears  per-

fectly harmless. No one ordinarily would say that be could object to a law of this kind being placed upon the statute books. I appreciate how easy it is, and I appreciate that it is the easy thing for a politician to appeal to the prejudices and the pa sions 

of the American people , but I for one refuse to stand on this 

floor  and appeal to the passions or the prejudices of the  Amer· 

ican people when it comes to a matter of this  kind. 

I want to call the Senator's attention to the opinions  of 

some of the best men of this country.  I.  particularly want to call his attention, as I did this morning, to what Bishop .Francis J.  McConnell.  of the Methodist  Church,  says. Let me say to the Senator and to fbe  Seuate  that he is one of the  out-

standing characters, one of the greatest thinkers of the  Meth-

odist  Church  of this Nation. He said: I wish to express  my  appreciation  of  Senator  CUTTTNG's  stand 

against the proposal to  take  the - censors-hlp  of literature away from the courts and to put it in  th e bands  of customs officials. No more inap. propriate  and  inadequate  dealing  with censorship could be conceived than that of putting it in tbe bands  of  men selected  primarily · for othet purposes. I likewise desire to call attention to a reference to Henry Sloane  Coffin,  a Presbyterian,  of New York  City.  He said: I am  5Ul'e  I voice the opinion of many thoughtful men, both in the ministry and in the membership of the various Christian churches, when I say that I feel it would be a most unwise curtailment of the liberty of the press. Let the courts decide  if  a book is ob cene or  sedi-

tious and refuse to allow it to be sold, but do not let us have customs officials constitute themselves judges as to what may or may not  be . 

imported into  this  country. I likewise desire to call  attention  to the Rev. Robert  John-

ston, of Washington, D.  C.,  who said: I regard the censorship  of  books as a very  dangerous experiment and one which is likely to introduce a new and  terTible  tyranny into our  American  life.  • • • I question  if  we can  shut  away  from 

people in our day the simple  facts  of  human nature.  • • • Such  abook as --- should be prevented  from  entering into general  circu-

lation, but it should not be made the  excuse  for  a new Vols tead Act on literature.  • • • The attempt to remove all danger  from  life  1s 

one which increases the danger and adds sin to sin. I desire to read also from Rev. Remsen B.  Ogilby,  p1·esident 

Trinity  College, Connecticut : 'I wish to assure Senator CuTTING ot the  backing  of  the  faculty  ot 

Trinity College. I read this morning  from  Nicholas  Murray Butler. Here  is 

a statement of a group of faculty members of Harvard  Uni· 

versity: We are strongly opposed to section  305,  paragraph (a), in the  pend· 

ing  tarllf.  bill.  • • • Experience has shown that  customs  inspec-

tors and appraisers of merchandise are  ill  equipped to pass judgment upon the character  of  such publications.  • • • We- believe that apolitical censorship  or  this kind by administrative  officials  at the customhouses is unsound in principle and likely to prove oppressive in practice. I desire to read also from a statement of Dr.  0.  0.  Norris, professor of education at Michigan State Normal College,  as 

follows:. A man, institution,  or  nation that bas recourse to censorship reveals by that  very  action a felt weakness in  hls  or its  own  position.  • • •

Censorship  is- an unconscious revelation of weakness on the part  of  the censor and a fear that other people are as weak as be  is.  • • •

I iikewise desire to quote from  Prof.  Avery: L.  Carlson,  of the Texas Christian University :I think it would be  very  unfortunate  for our Government to set up a censorship on imported books. When  our  library authorities excluded  

> cer-tain

books and  magazines  from the library at the  State  University of , '

Iowa, when I was  a student there, the news dealers reaped a harvest. 

• • To exclude a book from this country  • • • would  imme-

diately  create  a demand for that  book.  It would doubtless be reprinted here and sold by the thousands.  • • • Our  citizens  are as capable of judging what they shall read and what their children shall read as any Government  ofli.cer,  be he a customs omcial or  a United  States 

Senator. ... 

# 1930  CONGRESSIONAL- RECORD-SENATE  5507 ·

Prof. John Dewey, of Columbia University, said: I am  doubly indebted to  Senator  CUTTING for  leading  legislative action intended to prevent customs censorship  of  foreign - literature.  _First,  Iam indebted as a citlzeri who is interested in  cM<:king  the present movement toward  censorship  and otber meddling with freedom of thought and speech in the  United  States..  As a teacher and a member of the faculty of Columbia University I am interested, in the  second 

place, that scholars shall  be-in  a position to receive the printed material that they need in their  researches  without  suffering  from the inter-ference of officials who are certainly wholly incapable of determining what books and  periodicals  students should or should not receive. I quote  fro~  Dr. W. B. Bizzell, president -of  Oklahoma  Un1-

versity: I believe that  Senator  CUTTING's fight is worthy of the support of all citizens who are opposed to arbitrary restrictions on the admission of literary classics from abroad. I have had several editions of classics destroyed by customs officials, which probably can never be  replaced. 

A group of faculty members of Cornell University are quoted as saying: We are opposed to the provision that requires customs  oftlcials,  ill 

qualified for that duty, to rule upon the obscenity of books or pamphlets which it is sought to import ...  and that without  effective  appeal or redress. We favor leaving thls  question  to the Federal Government through its postal law and to the several States. Prof. William P.  ?tlontague,  of Barnard College, said: In common with all other educators with whom I have talked, Iam heartily in favor of  Senator  CuTTING'S  efforts  to remove from the discretion of customs  officials  their power of censoring allegedly obscene 

literature. 

Mr. Edward  C.  Aswell, editor of The Forum, said: The fundamental trouble with censorship is that it is  based  on an assumption that general human nature is weak, frail, and easily deluded, but that certain individuals do not share  this  common  weakness  and can thel'efore act as censors for the rest of mankind. When this  asmJmp-

tion is examined  critically,  it breaks down in both of its  partieulars. 

Moreover, as  a practical matter, censorship is silly and always tends to defeat its own purposes. 

· I think this sums up  as  briefly as possible my feeling about censor-ship. I disapprove of it in theory, and its folly in practice is too evi-dent to need elaboration. Then I desire to quote from William Allen White. I know that many people would say that William Allen White is not agood citizen, but many of us will have to disagree with that, because I think, notwithstanding the fact  th'at  I disagree with him in politics, that he is an outstanding character in America. He is the editor of the Emporia Gazette, in Emporia, Kans.: I have written to our two Senators asking them to stand  by  the Cutting amendment. No form of censorship would be quite so bad as that proposed by Senator  SMOOT,  which would make baggage in-spectors on the dock censors of our foreign literature. Mr. TRAMMELL. Mr. President, may I interrupt the Sena-tor? The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from Mon-tana yield to the Senator from Florida? Mr. WHEELER. I yield. 

Mr.  TRAMMELL. With regard to the comment of the gen-tleman from whom the Senator just read--Mr. WHEELER. William Allen White? Mr. TRAMMELL. Yes. He shows an ignorance of the  Cus-

toms Service of the country. They have experts there to 

examine  everything that comes in. For instance, if tobacco comes in,  they  have tobacco  experts  to  examine  it. Mr. WHEELER. Let me say to the  Senator  from Florida that I happen to know William Allen White, and I think prob-ably he has been abroad and come  back  as many times as has the  Senator  from Florida, and that he knows as much about the customs officials as does the  Senator  from Florida. Mr. TRAMMELL. I have never been abroad. If that is aqualification indicating intelligence and enlightenment, then most of the American  peqple  are without either. 

Mr.  WHEELER. It is an indication that perhaps he may know something about the customs practices. Mr. TRAMMELL. I will say that he shows in that asser-tion that he knows nothing - about the Customs Service, because they have special inspectors to carry on the  different  lines that require special knowledge and experience, and they likewise do that in connection with censorship. -Mr. WHEELER. I think it shows that William Allen White knows something about the customs, because of the fact that if he was bringing in a book, or if somebody was coming from abroad and had  ~ book, it would be examined by the man who examined his baggage on the  dock. ·  If  the  Senator had  ever 

come into port with books, in his baggage, he would know that that is true. Ellery  sedgwick,  editor of the Atlantic Monthly, said: 

Senator  CU'l'TING'S  vigorous and  sensible  speech on the censorship commanded  my  admiration. Beneath an  the  pother  of the discussion the welfare of literature  haB  been  well-nigh forgotten. Instead of _

fortifying  American  ideals.  the censorship is  primarily  useful as a

gigantic  advertisement  to the  publisher  of the banned book. -Here is one of the highbrows, I presume, to whom the Sena-tor from Florida referred.  Maxwell  E. Perkins, editor  Scrib-

ner's Magazine, said :I have followed Senator  CuT.ftKG's  light  against censorship with sympathy and admiration. He  is  contending for  the  most important of all social  principles,  and the most American, that of  frei!dom  of the mind. And he is doing it ln a most  distinguished  way. The Southwest Review,  Dallas,  Tex.: The editors of the  Southwest  Review are enthusiastically in sym-pathy with the plan to liberalize censorship. We believe that we speak for  all  Texas  writers. The National Community Center Association: The  issue  is  not an issue of  obscenity  but rather who shall  dedde 

what is  obacenity.  Every  thinking  p~son  is against any system that will put into the  hands  of  customs  officials power to censor the  reading 

of citizens of a free  country  " • ",  Certainly the vast majority of those engaged in teaching or in  social  service  regard  the proposal to put into the hands of  customs -clerks  this  power as a most futile measure.  

> It

will serve to lower rather than to uphold standards, and it makes of us the laughingstock of the  world; 

Mr. President, I have not read from  any  Bolshevik. I have not quoted anybody who wants to destroy the home. I have not quoted from anybody who wants to destroy this Government of ours. I have quoted from the most eminent educators, from some of the most eminent Presbyterian, Methodist, and  Episco-

palian ministers in the  United  States.  Likewise I have quoted from the leading magazine editors of the  United  States.  Yet when we mention these things . there are those on the . floor of the  Senate  who think they are more patriotic than anybody else and who immediately  rise  to denounce those of us who have taken the opposite view, and who say that it is our desire that this Government of ours shall be destroyed and our homes shall be destroyed. I want to say that I have as much interest in preserving the home as any man on the floor of the  Senate.  I have as much desire to preserve the youth and protect the youth of this coun-try as any man in the  Senate,  because I have a family and, like most fathers, I cherish my children as much as any man here or elsewhere. If I thought they were going to be  desh·oyed  if this censorship were not provided, I would not be standing here for one moment talking as I am. I am doing it because of the fact of  my  firm conviction that this is only one of many laws that some are seeking to have enacted to bring about tyrannical conditions in this country. I think that those who read the signs of the times, those who have  read  their history, can not help but see the trend in this country of a little oligarchy who control the wealth of the Nation to set up and place upon the statute books of the  United  States  laws for the purpose of suppressing and punishing every man who has an independent thought or an  ,

independent idea.  : 

> ~Ir.

President, of course it looks harmless upon its face. ·Laws like the one now proposed always look harmless upon their face, and yet, as some have pointed out, it is not the law that does the harm but the interpretation placed upon it.  1

Mr. McKELLAR.  Mr.  President,  will the  Senator  yield? The PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr.  ALLEN  in the chair). Does the Senator from Montana yield to the Senator from Ten-nessee? Mr. WHEELER. I yield. 

Mr.  McKELLAR. Does the  Senator  really believe that any one of the ministers or the professors or the educators  or  the philanthropists and others from whom he has read ever  saw 

in their lives the kind of books that have  been  exhibited here in the last day or two? Does the  Senator  believe that if any 

of  those gentlemen saw these books actually with their own eyes they would take any such position as the Senator has indicated? 

Mr.  WHEELER.  Why, of course I do. I say to the  Senator 

from Tennessee that I have only seen one of the books that was called to my attention by the Senator from Utah. I de-plore the language. I think it is base. I think it is filthy. Ithink it is rotten. But, Mr. President, because of the fact that one Senator picks out half a dozen books for the purpose of inflaming the minds of Senators it does not make me willing 5508  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARoH  18 

to place upon the  statute  books a .law wblcb can be used  ·tor 

the purpose of  tyrannizing  the people  of  the cotmtry. Let me call attention  again,  as has been done previously, that it was the abuse of the alien and sedition laws during the Adams administration that wrecked that  adminfstratlon.  Let me call attention to the fact  further  that  one of the things that helped to wreck the Democratic  Party  was the abuse by 

# I some of those who bad to do with the sedition laws upon the  

> 1

statute books during the Wllson  administration,  the extent to which they went, the extent to which they tried to use those 

# ! laws to persecute honest  citizens.  . - ·

It was  Mr.  Gregory, the Attorney General during the Wilson  

> 1

administration, who was at all times extremely careful lest  

> 1

those laws be used to  suppress  the right of  :free  speech in the 

1United  States.  He will always be glorified because of the  posi 4

tion he took in the matter. Yet if Senators upon this side  of 

: the  Chamber  will remember,  A.  Mitchell  Palmer  was denounced 

; from one end of the country to the other, not by Bolsheviks 

· but by the judges, by the most distinguished lawyers in the  

> 1

country, because of his attitude and  because·  of his interpreta-tion and abuse of that law. We ought to remember  thf!t  it Is the abuse of these laws, the abuse of power, which makes the enactment of such laws dangerous to the country. 

Oh,  ·yes,  it is all right to stand here and make impassioned speeches in the name of the home, in the name of the :fireside.  

> It

is all right to do that. It is the easy thing to do. It is the thing that will not be misunderstood. But who is there on the  :O.oor  of the  Senate  that thinks Bishop McConnell is in favor of destroying the home? Who is there that thinks that William Allen White wants to destroy the home, the  fireside, 

that he  wants  to put this literature in the hands of the children of the  United  States?  Who  1s  there that thinks the  editor  of 

Scribner's  Magazine wants to destroy the home or wants to destroy his country? Who is there, Mr. President,  thf!t  thinks 

that Nicholas Murray Butler, that one-time  conservative  Repub-

lican, wants to destroy the youth  of  the  }.and  and the home or wants to destroy his Government? Is there anyone in this body that thinks the Rev.  Henry  Sloan  

> Coffin,

the Presbyterian preacher in New York  City,  wants to do anything of the sort, or that  the  faculty of Harvard  University 

or the faculty of Cornell  University  or  the president of  Okla-

homa  University  want to destroy this Government of ours? Is there anyone so base that be  fee]g  that Mr. Carlton, of the Texas 

Christian  University;  wants to destroy this Government of ours? There are thousands of others among the educators, among the ministers, among the editors of the country, who have gone on record in no unmistakable terms with reference to  this  matter. Mr.  McKELLAR.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield? The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from  Mon-

tana yield to the Senator from Tennessee? 

Mr.  WHEELER.  I yield. Mr.  McKELLAR.  The amendment merely proposes to exclude obscene books. I am  just  wondering if any  Senator  who has 

· ·read  the books exhibited here yesterday-and I make it the most general question in the world-if any Senator who bas any children, boys or  glr1s,  would be willing to put those  books  in the hands of his children. Mr.  WHEELER.  Why, of course not. Mr. McKELLAR. Then why would the Senator be willing to 

· let them go into the hands of other people's children? 

-Mr.  WHEELER. I do not want to see them go into the hands of anyone's children, and I would not permit them to go into the 

· hands of anyone's children if I could prevent it. However, I do not wish to try to  regulate  every man's family ;I do not wish to try to regulate every family in the  United 

States  and set myself up as a dictator, and say they shall be raised in accordance with the way my family is raised ; and Iwish to say, Mr. President, so far as my children are concerned, I believe that they are as clean-minded and as honest-minded as are any. I do not believe that they have ever  read  these books, and, so far as I am concerned, I know that I have never read them  I I never saw them and never saw passages from them, until the  Senator  from  Utah  called my attention to them. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President--The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the  Senator  from  Mon• 

· tana yield to the  Senator  from  Utah? · 

> Mr.

WHEELER.  I yield. Mr.  SMOOT.  The words to which the  Senator  from Montana 

, is objecting now are the very words that are  used  in the act  

> I

relating to the post office and governing the transportation of  

> I

the mails; and they apply  to-day.  ·

Mr.  WHEELER.  Mr.  President, I said to the  Senator  a mo- 

> r

ment ago that there are upon the  statute  books at the present  

> I

time laws which deal with the matter; so I can not see the reason for all this  talk  and for  Senators  wrapping the American 

flag  around them when we  already  have laws  up~m  the  ~tatute 

books which  ·proliibit  the · distribution  of  ·Slicb  matter through 

the  mails. 

Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr. President--The  PRESIDING  OFFICER..  Does the Senator from Mon .. tana yield to the Senator from South Carolina? 

Mr.  WHEELER.  I yield. Mr.  BLEASE.  If the Senator will permit me, I understood  

> him

to quote from Nicholas  Murray  Butler a while ago? Mr.  WHEELER.  Yes. 

Mr.  BLEASE.  Is it not a faet  that  Nicholas Murray Butler  

> 1s

not  only  favoring a repeal of the eighteenth amendment to the Constitution but that he  is  openly encouraging its violation? Mr.  WHEELER.  If be is  doing  so,  I do not  know  it. 

Mr.  BLEASE.  He has so stated. 

Mr.  WHEELER.  Mr.  President, I am not the spokesman for Nicholas  Murray  Butler~  I have never met the gentleman; I do not know  him  except  as  one of the outstanding Republicans who, it was reported, deserted  them  in the  last  campaign and came over and supported the  Democratic  candidate. That, at least, is my understanding ; I do not know it to be a fact. Mr.  BLEASE.  I am  surprised  that my good friend, being such an able lawyer, would put a witness upon the stand without knowing  his  character. Mr. WHEELER. I think that Mr. Butler's character should not be  attacked  by the Senator from South Carolina. I think it is the privilege of any man in the  United  States to advocate the repeal of any law upon  the  statute books and to  advocate 

the repeal of any provision of the Constitution of the  United 

States.  Mr. President, if we have come to that stage of  in-

tolerance where no man can advocate the repeal of a law  upon the statute books or the repeal of a provision of the Constitution of the  United  States without being condemned and his charac-ter assailed, then, I say, we have come to a pretty pass. 

Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield for aquestion? Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President--The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the  Senator  from  Mon-

tana yield, and,  if  so, to whom?  ·

Mr. WHEELER. I yield to the  Senator  from South  Carolina. 

Mr.  BLEASEl.  It is not  a,  question of Nicholas Murray Butler advocating the repeal of the eighteenth amendment, but is aquestion of his holding himself up as a great educator and yet advocating the open violation of the law of the  United  States, 

no matter what law it may be, whether it is against petit larceny or murder. Mr.  WHEELER.  .Mr. President, I think that is a very  unfair 

insinuation regarding Nicholas  Murray  Butler. I should desire to see the proof before I would condemn  Mr.  Butler for  advocat-

ing the violation of any law, whether that against theft, or the prohibition law, or the eighteenth amendment. I do not believe be has ever done so, and I shall not believe it  until 

I see unmistablable proof of the fact. Mr.  BLEASE.  I do not believe everything I see in the  news-

papers either, because I know some of thein are  aWful  liars. However, I have never seen that  Mr .. Butler  has  denied that charge, and I have never heard of his denying it. Mr. WHEELER. I hope the  Senator  from  South  Carolina 

will not bold Mr. Butler responsible  fqr  everything that the newspapers may publish about him _ any more than be would want to be held liable for everything the newspapers may publish about  himself.  · 

> Mr.

BLEASE.  If I were to be, I should have been in  a bad  

> fix

a long time ago. [Laughter.]  ·

Mr.  WHEELER.  I am unwilling to give customs inspectors such power, and I say it is dangerous in many instances even  

> to

put the  authority  in the hands of the district attorneys to 

say what is and what is not a violation of the law. 

So,  Mr. President, I hope that the amendment suggested by the  Senator  from Louisiana will not be adopted. Mr. HEFLIN.  Mr.  President, I must express my surprise at the turn the debate in the  Senate  has · taken. If I bad heard some of these speeches made in some foreign parliaments _ Iwould not have been surprised. If this Government should  be-

come embroiled in war with  a neighboring  nation, · and when the time for a settlement came we should write the provisions that we wanted put in the instrument of settlement, and among them we should say that no person, a  Gitizen  of the other nation, shall ever come over  here  and advocate or by means of his literature sent over here advocate insurrection in the United  States,  or the use of physical force and violence  against  the laws of the 

United  States,  or in such manner advocate treason against the Government of the  United  States,  why  before this Government would permit those three provisions to be stricken from the terms of settlement to be entered into between the nations we would go to war  again.  There is  not · a Senator  here who will  

> <Uspu~

!!lY  ~teme!!t  O!!  _that  proposition. The  ~th  is  the-re 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5509 

would be no settlement if the other nation proposed to reserve the right to come here and preach insurrection, physical force and violence against our laws, and the right to advocate treason against the Government of the United States. We would go to war again before we would agree to such a thing. Yet we hear Senators standing on this floor solemnly asking this law-making body, the  la~t  stronghold of liberty in the Union, to strike these three provisions out of an American measure ; to abandon its power and its right to protect and preserve free institutions in America. Mr. President, I can not understand the mental operation of any American Senator who wants that language stricken out of the pending amendment. My God, the idea of saying that foreigners who write this vile literature, the perverted minds that bring forth this filthy stuff and put it on the printed page, should have the right to send it into the U.nited  Sta~es 

to be circulated among the people of our country 1s somethmg I can not understand . The  idea  of anybody standing here and asking that they may be permitted to continue to enjoy that privilege is beyond my comprehension. Mr. President, every Senator here ought to be so inspired with love of liberty-American liberty-as to be enthusiastically willing to do anything within his power to protect and preserve it. I said last night that I could not understand the attitude of the man who would stop at the border line of the country alittle peach-tree bush because of the presence of parasites which if brought into the  United  States, would  affect  injuriosly 

the  p~ach  orchards of my country, and then permit this  devili&h 

foreign literature, vile and corrupt, to come in here  t'O  poison the little plants of the American household-the boys and girls in the American home. Mr. President, again I express my amazement, my utter amazement, at the position of the Senators who want to strike this language out.                             

> Oh !if there be, on this earthly sphere, A boon, an olfering Heaven holds dear, 'Tis the last libation liberty draws From the heart that bleeds and breaks in her cause !

What is the  Congress  doing, Mr. President, to preserve American liberty? Let me tell you. We have  growit  careless and indifferent along many lines, so much that we have come to be on some important questions the laxest Nation on earth. The literature, the vilest that can be found anywhere, is coming here in abundance and is being circulated; and what do we see? We see the evil and the devilish fruits of it. We have communism rampant in the Republic ; we have  communis-

tic doctrines being preached on every hand. I have seen some specimens of communistic literature in the United  States  too vile to go into the American home. Are we not ready to get together and stop it? Aliens, by the hundreds of  thousands~ 

brought in in violation of our immigration laws,  infest  the land. What are they doing? They are invading our industrial  estab-

lishments and taking the places of American men and women. They are telling the captains of industry that they will work for half price. They are stealing the birthright of Americans. And what aFe we doing to stop it? I introduced  a joint  reso-

lution the other day providing for their deportation, for sending them back to the countries whence they came. Pass my  resolu-

tion and you will solve that problem.  Shall  we do that?  Or 

shall we say,  " Oh,  no; let them come and let  them  stay." 

'' Do not be afraid They can not hurt this Government-it is too big and  strong." 

0 Mr. President, it is our duty to be watchful always. The time to treat cancer is in its incipient stage. The time to stop aleak in the levee down in the Mississippi Valley is as soon as you discover the leak. Are you going to stand  off  and say, 

"Why,  look at that mighty dam built yonder. That dike will stand forever. That little leak is not going to do any harm. Why, that dike is 2 or 3 miles long. It is  50  or  100  feet wide. A little  leak  can do no  harm." 

They used to say that; but the leak would spread. It went deeper and  d~per,  until finally they saw the river raging through the place where the innocent  loolting  and harmless  look-

ing little leak appeared and flooding all the valley below,  destroy-

ing not only property but human life. I want us to stop this leak in the American levee  to-day.  Let us build the dike on the border line between us and foreign countries so compact and strong that none of this filthy  litera-

ture can come here. Mr. President, we seize the foreigner at the border line when he fails to show that our laws permit him to be here. If he is smuggled in we seize him and put him out. Are you going to say that it is alright to take a human being, who maybe is 

Jleeing  from persecution somewhere, seeking a refuge in another 

land,  and seize him, and bodily hurl him back  acros~  the border line, and at same time permit a book filled with danger and poison to our American institutions to come in here and  circu-

late through the country, get into the libraries, and into the 

· home of our  people? 

If we stop these foreigners at the border line that we believe will be hurtful and dangerous to our civilization, that we know will come in here and take places that belong to patriotic Ameri-can men and women-if we will do that and put them out of the country, as we should, will we permit to come in the  lite.ra-

ture written by people with vile minds,  written  by people who have designs on our Government, people who want to  over-

throw free institutions, who want to set up the rule of  com-

munism here in the United  States?  Or  are we afraid that somebody will think we are fanatical and just fold our arms and let these books continue to come in? We ought not to do it. We must not do that. We have a solemn duty to perform here to-day.  ·

The Senator from Montana [Mr.  WHEELER]  has read from various college professors. I know a great many of them, and they are very fine men. I know some of them that are not so very fine.  One  in particular that I have very little respect for is Nicholas  Murr3:y,  the butler of Columbia University. [Laughter.] When the  Senator  quoted Nicholas to me he had just about exhausted his list and finished the job. The idea of bringing old Nicholas Murray Butler into a debate in this body !-this old fellow who has  <;hallenged  the eighteenth amendment and the Volstead Act and stands up and openly advocates the violation of  both.  He is not  lQyal  to the  Con-

stitution. He believes in social equality and teaches a school that admits both negroes and whites on equal  teriDS. 

The  Senator  read a few statements from preachers, and from a Methodist bishop somewhere. Mr. President, I dare say that  

> if

I could bring those gentlemen to this  Capitol,  and  take  them out here in the President's room, and show them the  books 

that the  Senator  from Utah had on this floor yesterday, and let them read the indecent and  immoral.  passages contained in them, and then ask them,  " Do you  ask  us to continue to let such  litera-

ture come in?  " practically every authority that has been cited here  to-day  would hold up his hands in holy horror and say, 

" No!  Shut  them out!  "

Mr. President, the reason that so many governments back of us have perished is because people whose duty it was to  pro-

tect them grew careless and indifferent. They reached that dangerous time in their growth and development where those in authority, as some here seem to feel, felt that  "it  does not make any  difference  whether we do our duty or not this  Gov-

ernment will stand forever." Why, Mr. President, the people of Rome in the high tide of her power had that feeling. They thought their government would live forever. But, Mr. President, evil from within, mingled with evil from without, wrought her undoing; and Rome, the city of the  Cresars  fell down among her beautiful hills and died. Let us profit by her example and by the example of other governments that fell because those intrusted to safe-guard and protect them were not true to their trust. Again I say, that I can not understand how Senators will stand in this body and vote to pass a law and appropriate money to keep out horses and mules and cattle coming in from foreign 

countries  with the foot-and-mouth disease, and not vote for this amendment. We think so much of the horses and mules and cattle of the United  States  that we spend money, we enact laws, to stop such horses, mules, and cattle at the border line. We will not let them come in ; but when it comes to bringing in vile literature, something on the printed page, something that some vile wretch has written maybe to stir up insurrection in the United  States,  maybe to p_ reach treason through the land, maybe to bring about the overthrow of our Government, they say, 

"Why,  you are going to be very narrow-minded and very  in-

tolerant if you should stop that book at the border line. Let it come in. And they do more to protect horses, mules, and cattle from the foot-and-mouth disease than they do to protect the children of the American home. That is the situation. There is no escape from it. As I said last night, we have passed in this tariff bill item after item protecting  American  labor and American manufacturers against the cheap labor of foreign countries. We have sought to  pro-

tect the home market for the American farmer and  manufac-

turer. We stop this product at the border line and say,  "You 

can not come over here, because you are going to injure the army of wage earners yonder. You  are  going to hurt the  manufac-

turing business of the United States. You are going to take away from them and the farmer the home market.  Stop! -" 

And we stop it at the border line. But the attitude of some seems to be: Bring in your vile book, with  its  pages covered with poison, beautifully bound, to be carried around amongst the young  me~  and the young women of the country to poison 5510  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN ATE.  MARoH  18  

> .

# .their minds and make Bolshevists out of them, to  plant  certain dangerous European ideas in their heads, to root out American ideals; and what do you do? You do that, and in time you have a people who care nothing for your country. You have amultitude of dangerous  "is~s  " here, stalking around in the temple of  Uberty,  deadly  e-vils  to this Government of the western world. Mr. President, we seize the alien who is brought in by one of these hired agents who makes money slipping people into the 

United  States-and  they have them. They have organizations gotten up for the purpose of  smuggling  people into the  United 

States. It has been a lucrative husiness.  One  of them was arrested in Germany a few months ago. He was charging so much a head to bring people into the  United  States  and land them far in the interior. Why, we have become the dumping ground for the criminal refuse and the  unfit  hordes of foreign countries.  l\Iy  resolution will put an end to it. You seize that fellow at the border ; you stop him and the fellow he is bring-ing in, and properly so. You stop them both; you arrest them. But in the case of a vile book that is coming in here, bristling with its poison, with its dangers to free institutions, you say, 

"That  is  an  right.  Permit  it to come  in." 

But let me show you : " Listen : It preaches insurrection. It 

is deadly to our American Government. Listen. It advocates force and violence against your  lawful  authority. It preaches treason against this, the greatest Government in all the world.  

> It

attacks the American Constitution. It assails the .American 

flag.  Would you permit that to come  in?"  .And  they say,  "Yes; 

let it come  in." 

You are right in stopping the smugglers. You are right in deporting the alien who has no right to be here. You are right in keeping out agricultural products that have parasites on them that would  SJ)read  through the  United  States  and injure the American crops. That is all right and proper; but you do nothing to protect the farmer's home. You do nothing to pro-tect the farmer's sons and daughters from poison literature. You do nothing to prevent the army  of  evildoers from roaming the country, spreading their poisonous doctrine against the 

finest  people in the freest and greatest Government in all the world.  0 Mr. President, what are we coming to? I have read some of this vile communistic  literature.  It is being preached around now. That that I have seen is a devilish 

doctrine.  One  of the dangerous and  shameful  things they teach is that the dead line pertaining to social and marriage relations between the white and the  black  races should be abolished. 

Race  pride  and pu'rity and the protection of the great white race is absolutely essential to the preservation of the Ameri-can Republic. God .Almighty had a purpose in making the white man superior to every other race under the sun. Mr. WHEELER.  Mr.  President, will the  Senator  yield? Mr. HEFLIN. I will. 

M.'r.  WHEELER. Is not the  Senator  mistaken?  Was  not that the doctrine of the Republican  Party  during the days of re-construction? If I recall  correctly,  that was the doctrine preached by Thaddeus Stevens and  Charles  Sumner  and some other leaders of the Republican  Party. 

Mr.  HEFLIN. It is true that a few of the leaders at that time did advocate social equality; but what I am speaking about now, and what I particularly had in mind, was the devilis hdoctrine of the communists who have invaded the  South.  In North  Carolina  not long ago one of them made a speech at  Char-

lotte, and he said that they must wipe out the line between the white and black races in all things and have social equality-a dangerous and a damnable doctrine. Mr. Lincoln said in his debate with Douglas in 1859 at Charleston, Ill. :I am opposed to making voters or jurors  of  negroes. I am opposed to marriage between  negroes  and whites. He said further :                               

> As long as the two races remain together there must be the position of the superior and the inferior, a.Ild I, as much as anyone else, favor the white race occupying the superior place.

Mr. President, I understand that just this morning the Senate 

confirmed  the  appointment  of a negro judge for the  Dish·ict  of 

Columbia  named  Cobb.  I opposed his appointment before, when he was appointed by  Mr.  Coolidge,  and  to-day  the junior Senator from South  Carolina  [Mr.  B.LEABE],  when he made his objection, said,  "I  ask that the nomination go  over,"  and the Senator from New  Hampsllire,  the President pro tempore, replied,  "The 

nomination goes  over,"  which meant it would not be acted on to-day. I have learned since that time that the nomination was put through later in the  morning.  I, as well as  four  or  five other Senators near me on  thls  side, were  opposed  to his  confirmation. 

I voted against it before, and I would vote against it now. Mr.  WHEELER.  Mr. President, I was not here, and I do not know anything about the judge about whom the Senator is talk-ing. Was he a judge Qf a Federal court? 

Mr.  HEFLIN. The negro judge named  Cobb,  here in Wash-ington. Mr. WHEELER. .Appointed as a judge here in the police court? 

Mr.  HEFLIN. He was  first  appointed by President  Coolidge, 

and his term  expired  last night. Mr. WHEELER. By whom was he appointed? 

Mr.  HEFLIN. He was reappointed by Mr. Hoover. I am told that  President  Wilson  appointed  a negro judge here while he was in the White House. I was not in the  Senate 

then. My understanding was that that negro was to try only negroes. If this negro is to be judge in the District of  Colum- 

> bia~

he must  confine  his jurisdiction to the  negroe~.  ju st as was done under the Wilson appointment, as I understand it. Now, getting back to this communistic doctrine; they have communistic literature, and I have heard of some of  them  say-ing in their speeches,  " Down with the Government and to hell with the Government of the  United  States." 

Mr.  President,  that is not  "liberty  " ; that is  "license"  of adangerous and deadly character. I want a citizen always to have a right to criticize his Government. I want him to have the right to say wherein it is going wrong, and wherein it should be restrained, where its conduct should be changed, and all that, but whenever one of these flannel-mouthed foreigners gets into this country and stands on his soap box and curses the flag and damns the Republic he ought to be dealt with severely-he ought to be deported; he ought to be gotten out of this country. Whenever they attempt to get into this country literature which preaches sedition or  treason,  we ought to stop it at the border line, and destroy it, and put heavy punishment  upon  the person who seeks to bring it in. We are talking about  the  most vital thing that affects the life of the Republic at this moment. What is going to be our policy regarding the literature that our children shall read in the years to come? What will be our policy of protection to the youth of the  United  States  in the matter of the literature they must read?  Shall  we declare that nothing but good and whole orne literature shall come in, or shall we permit a for-eign  influence--and  it is at work here to-day-to bring that literature into  this  country and spread it with its evil influence over this Nation of ours? 

Oh , these alien intluences are busy. They are busy around this  Capitol  to-day. I charge that they are  exceedingly  busy.   

> ~"h ey

do not want any restriction upon this poison foreign literature. I plead for my country against them and all that they  rep-

resent in the foreign lands. I want only wholesome literatul'e to come in. If this deadly  stuff  is not here, the people can not read it. It it is here, some of them are going to read it. There are a good many  " sm!J.rt  alecks  " around who suggest this  risqu~  literature.  .A  boy gets hold of it and reads it, and he tells a boy friend and he reads it, and the first thing we know they are quoting it to the girls, and its devilish work has been begun, and God only knows to what extent its poison will spread. I am not trying to put a fence around the American citizen. I want him to have his full rights in  e ve r~  particular. He is going to have them as long as I am a member of this body. But I do want to say to the  writers  and the printers of this devilish, filthy  literature,  "You  can not make a dumping ground of my country for this indecent and immoral  literature."  As the able Senator from Florida [Mr.  TRAMMELL]  said to-day, 

"We  are not going to furnish you a market for that literature .We are not going to l et you bring it here and spread it  through 

the homes of the Nation, carrying a poisonous doctrine which aims at the overthrow of our free institutions in the  United 

States." 

.1\Ir.  President, it is my duty to stand for my country first. Iregret very much that the  Senator ·from  Utah  has intimated that he is willing to have this language stricken out. I agree with the  Senator  from  Tennessee  that we must have a vote on that language. We are going to put it back in the amendment. The Senator from  Montana  tells us that it  is  already in the law, and I ask him, then, what objection he has to repeating it in this measure?  

> Mr.

President, we can not repeat too often the statement that this  Government  must be protected at any cost against the vile poison of anybody in any foreign land. Mr. BARKLEY. Mr. President,  will  the Senator yield? 

Mr.  HEFLIN. I yield. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5511 y -

Mr.  BARKLEY. Merely in the interest of accuracy, it prob-ably ought to be s tat ed that the present law carries no provision aga in st the  admis s ion  of treaso n able or seditious literature. It 

is limited to o bs cene, imm oral, and vu l gar literature. Mr. HEFLIN. I th ank the  Sen a tor  for that suggestion. More the re ason f o-r putting it in this, because the law we have is not  suffic ient  to rea ch this par t icular offense. Mr. BA R KLEY. If the  Sen at or  will yield further, we have a ve ry dr as tic provision preven t ing the sending of such literature throu gh th e mail s. 

Mr.  H EF LIN . . After  lt  ge ts here. Mr . B AR KLEY. Yes ; but there is in the present law no pro visi on p rev enting it s im p ort a tion into the country. 

1\Ir.  H EFL I N. 1\Ir. Pre sident, that is a strong point. Here in th e U nit ed  States  we realize how da ngerous  and  deadly su ch literature is , and  we  place pains and penalties against its cir-cu lat ion throu gh the Unit ed  States  mails. Here we are solemnly consider ing permitting this stuff to come from other countries into our country where it can be circulated. If we 

ha ve  a la w ag a in st its circulation in the United  States,  why sh ould we not pre vent it ever entering the United  States? 

Mr.  TRAMMELL.  1\Ir.  President, will the  Senator  yield? 

l\fr.  HEFLIN. I yield. 

Mr.  TRAMJ\.1ELL.  There is nothing about that, I think, that is a stonishing from the viewpoint of some. It merely gives a pref e rence to the forei gn literature, and it gives an exemption to the foreigner to criticize and to advocate the overthrow of the American Government, and publish whatever seditious and obscene literature he wants to. In other words, it just gives a preference to the foreigners. American people who might write some obscene book, or might be guilty o-f some seditious utter-an ce, if they want to send it through the mail, can not do it, but a foreigner can bring it in freely.  Some  want them to have the  dght  to do that.  ~

l\lr.  HEFLIN. Precisely.  As  the  Senator  from Florida says, 

we  punish the man here who writes such stuff and seeks to send it through the mail, but the man just over the bo-rder, 15 feet beyond the man who is prevented on this side of the border, can write such literature and send it in freely, as the  Senator 

· sa ys, unless we do something to prevent its coming in. Why not complete the job and stop it at the border line and keep it out? That is what I am pleading for. I would keep this poison literature out of my  counh·y  as I would seek to keep poison out of a well. I love the American Republic. I want to see it live forever. The way to preserve it is to protect it all the way along its journey by those who are sent here  t6  be guardians of its sacred rights and interests. The people back home expect  us 

to do whatever is necessary to protect their rights and interests. 

1\Ir.  President, I want to see the  Senate  settle this important matter right here to-day.  

> Mr.

TRAMMELL. Mr. President, will the  Senator  yield again? Mr. HEFLIN. I yield. Mr . TRA1\£MELL.  In view of the  Senator's  comment in regard to Nicholas Murray Butler, I just want to ask him if 

be thinks he is qualified to pass on this question because he has not taken a trip abroad as Doctor White had? He referred to 

· Doctor White having taken a trip abroad,  ail.d  inferred that because he had, be was much better qualified than an  American 

who had never taken a trip abroad . Ninety-nine per cent of all the Americans in this country have never taken a trip abroad, and they are the people who have to bear the brunt of the battle during peace times and during war times . Iwant to know if he is qualified as well as Doctor White is. Mr. HEFLIN. The  Senator  is right. I imagine old Nicholas ha s been over a number of times. I have observed this, too, I want to say to my friend the 

Senator  from Florida, that a great  many of those who do go abroad frequently become imbued with European ideas and with European ideals, and they come back here and uncon-sciously begin to spread them around in the  United  States. 

As for  me,  I would rather accept the sound, common-sense view on real Americanism as I find it in the merchant at the crossroads store, in the village and town, of the farmer in his field, in the  South  or East or West, or almost any patriotic American who bas never had his foot  off  of American soiL Iwould rather take his judgment  and  count on him to protect and preserve the American home and the American Government than I would  these fellows who are gallivanting across the ocean every summer into foreign lands and coming back with strange, dangerous, and exceedingly liberal ideas to tell us bow to run the Government of the  United  States. 

LXXII - -347 Mr. TRAMMELL. Mr. President, it just occurred to me that George Washington, of whom we have heard a great deal, never had to go to Europe. Mr. HEFLIN. But he scared a lot of fellows half to death who came here from Europe. I su gg est to so me of the se high brows who are so fond of this European lite r ature, who oppose American ideals and insti tu-tions, that they go over to Eu r ope, and God sp eed th em on along journey. Let them go there and stay just as long a s they choose. We will not mi ss them, neither will we mourn them. [Laughter.] -

Mr.  Presiden t,  I think that I have said about all that I ca re to say up on this subject. It has been di sc us s ed very thorou ghly before, but the ath e istic societies and the communistic societies and the other un-American societies have be en busy in oppo-s ition to  this  am e ndm ent. We have consumed a gre a t deal of time on this provision, and I am going to demand a roll call on it. I wan t to hear the  Senator's  voice, and I wa nt to see his name in the  REC ORD  who will vote solemnly to s trike out of this amendment the words  " insurr e ction  and  treason."  Let him brand himself if he chooses. I shall not do that. I plead for the boys and girls who can not hear me to-day. I pl e ad for the ri g hts and interests of tho se back in the homes in the  States  of this  Union.  I plead for the God-fea ring men and women of the Unit ed  States.  I plead for the common masses of the common people of my country. I plead for my Government, for its preservation.  Senators,  we can not go too far in protec t ing our Government again st this evil. The Bible  teaches  U%1  to abstain from every appearance of evil. Mr. President, when they bring this poisonous literature in we know what it means. We have already seen it.  The 

anarchist, Czolgolz, who murdered McKinley, had read this kind of literature. He said be had. He bad read literature that defiled his mind and urged him to the dastardly deed of  strik-

ing  down  one of the kindliest Americans  that  ever walked this earth, a great American President, who was murdered by the offs pring of this anarchistic and communistic doctrine in the United  States.  Let us be true to those who sent us here and protect the boys and girls of America from the inde c ent, obscene, and immoral literature of foreign countries. Mr.  TYDINGS.  1\Ir. President, in the consideration of this proposition it would be most unfortunate for the  Senate  to lose its sense of proportion and be swept off its feet by prejudice, international hatreds or antipathies, or other elements in that category. I have listened to the earnest and, I am  sure, sincere remarks of the  Senator  from Alabama [Mr.  HEFLIN].  I be-

lieve he feels intensely about this matter, and it is not with asense of taking issue in a personal sense with him that I rise to comment upon some of the statements he bas made. I believe that historians  300  years  :trom  now will say that 

the  Congress  of the United  States  was one of the most  bm·ba-

rous law-making bodies in the history of all mankind. It is true that we appropriate millions of do1lars for child welfare. It is true that we appropriate millions of dollars to prevent the spread of the hoof-and-mouth disease.  At  the same time in 

this very  Chamber  we have voted to poison the alcohol which unfortunates may drink, giving them the death penalty for  vio-

lating a sacrosanct law. My God, governmental murder in the 

_name  of righteousness! Where is the Christianity or the Juda-ism or the Buddhism or any other semblance of real religion in a _ government that would take the life of its citizens for no greater crime than imbibing a glass containing an alcoholic beverage? I have heard it  said  that the Roman Empire declined because 

it tried to standardize everything throughout its confines. Ihave heard it said that the Roman Empire declined  because  it was corrupt. I have heard it  said  that the Roman Empire declined because the people grew prosperous and thought no more of the institutions  . of  government. In fact, we can at-

bibute  the  cause  of th-e decline of the Roman Empire to any situation which may come to mind . .It seems to have declined from every imaginary fault which the world has ever known. Let that be as it may. For  myself,  I do not want to  be  saved by legislation, poor sinner that I am. I do not want  Senators  to try to save me and to personally conduct me to heaven. I want to do that myself. I hope I am  no weakling. I do not want to come to  Sena t ors 

and ask what books I may read. If I want to read any  par-

ticular boo-k I want to read it, and I am not afraid I will go to bell and damnation 5 minutes or  10  minutes or  10  years after I have read it. How do we make an athlete? We teach him to lift heavy loads and, by tackling that resistance, we build up his  museles 

and make him a premier among men of prowess. How do we 5512  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MAROH  18 train the oarsman on the river? He pulls long hours against the current, building the muscles in his arms, making them strong by the resistance they offer. How do we train the runner? We take him out on the track and there he jogs for hours at a time, strengthening the muscles in his legs and in his body and improving the capacity of his lungs. It is only by that sort of contact, bearing the burden, that we build strong, physical and self-reliant men. Yet we are attempting to build strong mental men by taking away from them everything that will make them self-reliant. Senators, there is no logic in that procedure. If sin could be completely abolished by legislative enactment, we would be a

natif)n  of morons, because there would be nothing to develop the individuality and the spirit of resistance in each of us. Every man in this  Chamber  who has achieved anything of moral char-acter has done it because he has engendered within himself the ability to resist.  

> I

do not want to be a good man simply because the law for-bids me to do some untoward thing. I want to save myself. What good is any kind of salvation if it is achieved only at the point of the bayonet or threat of the prison bars? Let us go to the greatest lawgiver of all time, Jesus  Christ.  Did he attempt to build a moral grandeur by force? No! He sought to incul-cate into the hearts and minds of mankind truths which wou.ld enable them, through teaching and application, to resist the temptation of this short journey we call life. I do not think it is either fitting or kind, nor is it tolerant nor is it fair to belittle the inhabitants of other  naeons.  I believe that  ma~y  of these nations have a culture which we could well emulate.  They'  have produced great writers and great painters. They have given to the world  masters  in the field of music and architecture, science and medicine, philosophy, and what not. I regret to say that our record in the  United  States of 

Amer:ca,  great as it has been in material prosperity, is  ·away 

down the scale in  many  respects when we compare our spiritual and artistic achievements with the achievements of many for-eign countries. 

ThTee  yeaTs  ago I was one of those so-called foolish people who went abroad. I went to Russia, not for the purpose of having a good time, because one can not have a good time there, but to examine the experiments of Bolshevism without the propaganda that is apt to be inserted in it by partisans who may write about Russia. I did not like hundreds of things Isaw there, and one of the things I did not like was that the circulation of any kind of literature, if circulated on a wide scale, I would say to the Senator from California [Mr.  SHORT- 

> RIDGE],

which sought to change the present form of Russian government was considered a capital offense. Russia did not want  anything • about democracy coming into that country. 

l\1r.  SHORTRIDGE. • Mr. President, will the Senator yield? The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Does the Senator yield to the Senator from California? 

1\lr.  TYDINGS. I yield. 

1\Ir.  SHORTRIDGE. Since the Senator is making an argu-mentum ad hominem and does me the honor to refer to me, may I ask him whether he believes in enacting a law excluding 

· and making impossible the introduction into our country of deadly drugs, deadly narcotics, such as opium? Mr. TYDINGS. No, not completely. But that is not com-parable. Mr. SHORTRIDGE. I had been led to think that the Sen-ator, thoughtful, observant, well informed, agreed with me and many others that it is wise to keep out, if we can, and prevent the introduction into our country of deadly narcotics wh ich, used ignorantly and excessively, bring about moral, physical, and mental ruin to our people. Mr.  TYDINGS.  Did the Senator interrupt me for a question or does be want to go along on that subject? I have answered his question. Mr. SHORTRIDGE. It was immediately a question I de-

sired  to ask. If I may ask him again, though perhaps he has already made answer, I inquire whether he is opposed to the introduction of such narcotics? He has answered, as Iunderstand, that he is not opposed completely to introduction of these deadly poisons. 

1\fr.  TYDINGS. The medical profession needs some of them in cases, does it not? Will the  Senator  permit me to . ask him a que s tion? Mr. SHORTRIDGE. The Senator may do so. 

l\Ir.  TYDINGS. We all admit  that  of course opium is the most vile and pernicious form of narcotic.  Science  has shown that tobacco contains a great deal of a drug kindred to opium, which  is  nicotine, and that even coffee contains caffein. Is the 

Senator  contending that we should eliminate tobacco and coffee from use by the American people, and either way will he give his answer? Mr. SHORTRIDGE. I have too great and profound respect for the Senator from Maryland to think that he considers there is any parallel or relation between the two propositions. Mr.  TYDINGS.  Neither is their between books and opium. The Senator does concede that while the very, very pernicious thing, the ultimate in perniciousness, might be excluded, there are other things  which  might be  said  to be mildly injurious physically, but he would not want to go to the extent of eliminating them entirely. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  Does the Senator desire me to make answer to that observation? Mr. TYDINGS. The Senator said so. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  There is no parallel whatever as  be-

tween the articles mentioned and the deadly narcotic, the thing denounced by the pure food law.  

> Mr.

TYDINGS. There is no parallel  betwe~n:  the deadly narcotic opium and the books that are reclining on the Sen-ator's desk, because I can read those books one hundred times and they will not affect me in the least, but I can not take opium one hundred times because it would affect me. Mr. SHORTRIDGE. I make cheerful public admission that nothing of that character  could  affect the Senator from Mary-land, he being immune from any such thing physicially, mor-ally, and mentally. Mr. TYDINGS. I admit that I am not in a class with the Senator from California, who comes to  Congress  and asks for a law in order that he may be saved. I have said that I want to save myself, that I do not want  Congress  to save me. The Senator, however, on the other hand, wants  Congress  to save 

him. 

Mr. SHORTRIDGE.  On  the contrary, I feel quite competent to take care of myself, but I reecho the words of the eloquent Senator from Alabama; I am thinking of others not .of myself. [Laughter.] Mr. TYDINGS.  So  am I thinking of others. I know we are  al1 

our  brother's keeper. I dislike to use the illustration I arrJ 

about to use, for by doing so it may be assumed that,  becaus(l 

in the past I have shown a distaste for a certain  recentl1 

adopted amendment which has been incorporated into our Constitution, I want to enter upon that type of argument. May I say sincerely that I do not want to do that? But I appeal to the logic of any man in this  Chamber  as to the absolute hypocrisy of barring from the mails literature because it may contaminate the minds of some one , on the one hand, and poisoning alcohol so that it will kill the man who drinks it,  on 

the other hand. Talk about saving your fellow men! At this very session of  Congress  a majority of this body, almost with unanimity, will vote to insert a provision into the law that all alcohol made in this country shall be  in  accordance with a certain formula, when everyone knows that if that alcohol shall be drunk the verdict will be death. The idea of saving our fellow men, that we are our brother's keeper, when right in this very session of  Congress  we shall vote to poison alcohol, so that if 

anybody drinks it, illegal and crime though it be, he shall suffer either blindness or death! Who will stand with me to save my fellow man on that contention? Will the Senator from Alabama do it? Will the Senator from California do it? That is life and death. I still have a chance if I read an im-moral book, but will Senators join hands with me in saving human life? No; they will vote again to poison the alcohol so that anyone who may break the law may suffer the death penalty. My God, we have called foreigners a lot of illiterates and degenerates, but we ourselves commit murder in the name of governmental honor on the floor of the  Senate.  Oh,  let us sa..ve where life is at stake, and not where a transitory excur-sion into some book may contaminate a few of our brain cells. In the city of Washington I to-day obtained the police sta-tistics showing the arrests for drunkenness of persons under 21 years of age in this  Capital  City  of the  United  States. Before prohibition, in 1917,113 persons under 21 years of age were ar-rested by the police for drunkenness, and in 1927, 422 persons under  Z1  years of age were arrested in the  Capital  of our country, and 13 of those were under  the  age of 17 years. There was a time when we went out to save humanity, and what a mess we made of it! I do not want to dwell on that particular subject now, because I do not want the wet angle to get mixed up in the censorship angle, but what a mess we made of saving our fellow man with so-called righteous legislation !Rome, my friends, did not fall because of corruption. I will tell you why all governments  fail.  It is because the men who are elected to the seats of power in a moment of cowardice 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  lillCORD-SENATE  5513 

surrender the philosophy which has made their countries great. The pressure of the mob behind them ; the fear of losing their 

seats--Saps  their manhood, perchance, and in a moment of  weak~ 

ness or indecision the harm is done, and the philosophy of the nation  is _changed. 

We  coiQ.e  to Congress  ·now  where we  once  went to  God.  We once went to church to get our religion ; we once used to think that moral advancement and progress were the result of  teach~ 

ing. Now, we take the club and beat it into the man, and,  per~ 

chance, if we make him good with a bayonet's point at his back we say,  "Look,  no  longer  does he  sin,"  little realizing that the show of righteousness is  n<ilt  worth a continental, because 

it is involuntary and not voluntary. 

As  I have said heretofore--and I shall conclude my remarks with the statement-it is but another evidence of the tendency to substitute man's plan for God's plan ; to substitute a code of laws for the teaching of the Holy Bible. If I may rely upon the statement of  St.  Paul  again to prove my point, may Icall attention to those priceless words he uttered when he said :          

> If righteousness comes by law, then Christ 1s dead in vain.

Make  men good by law! Think of all the things they do; destroy them all if you can, and you will have the greatest 

race  of ninnies and nincompoops that ever made up the  popula~ 

tion of any country on the face of the earth. I, for one, do not want to be saved except through  my  own efforts. I want mental freedom to think and to form my own conclusions, and if in the game of life I have not the moral courage or the stamina to run 

the race, then I ask not for the reward. We are pulling down the whole top of our civilization and culture to help a few fellows who may be down below-God pity them-but in order to save those few we are pulling down the whole structure of American philosophy, culture, learning, and civilization. Think of the men who brought this country into being; imagine them as ghosts sitting here in this  Chamber.  They fought for the right of local self-government, and after they had framed the Constitution in a few essential elements, they said all power not given to the  Congress  is reserved-to whom? To the  States 

and the people thereof. They had  looke1  into the history of every government which had preceded theirs ; they were not idle thinkers ; they were students, and under their philosophy of government we have expanded  ·into  a mighty and great Nation.  ·But  now, rich and prosperous, forgetful of their principles and the turmoil and the sacrifice and the struggle which they endured, we wish to 

# turn  it all upside down and take all the power away from the people and the States, so that every time a farmer wants to p1ow a furrow he will have to write to the Secretary of  Agri~ 

culture for a permit. There may be some definition which, carefully worded, should be inserted in this measure. There may be a type of book, the extreme  " opium  " type of book that ought to be excluded, and  

> if

a definition which can be constructively applied shall be ()ffered I will vote for it; but this thing of taking every little ,bit of ill-assorted language, taking one paragraph out of abook where the truth may be told, and condemning a fine work 

because,  perchance, of a sentence or a word or  ~ paragraph or a page is wrong, and we will never develop any mentality worth anything so long as we pursue that course. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  Mr. President, will the Senator permit me an interruption? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from Maryland yield to the Senator from  California? 

Mr. TYDINGS. I yield. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  The Senator believes in free speech, I assume. Mr. TYDINGS. Yes. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  The  Senato~  believes in a free press? Mr. TYDINGS. Yes. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  Does the Senator think that  free  speech gives full freedom to utter any word that the speaker may desire to  ~tter  or free press gives full freedom to publish anything one may desire to publish? Mr.  TYDINGS.  Free speech gives me the  ·right  to say  prac~ 

tically anything I want to say. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  Does not the Senator recognize that there is such a thing as slander? Mr. TYDINGS. Yes. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  And  such  a thing as libel? 

Mr. TYDINGS. Yes. .

Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  And  that, the .refore,  · there are limita-tions to the  right  of free speech  '1  

> Mr.

TYDINGS. No. 

Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  And  limitations to the right of a free 

press? Mr.  TYDINGS.  There are no limitations on the right of free 

speech.  What the Senator  is  referring to  is  the punishment for a violation of the right of  tree  speech, which is an entirely different thing. 

Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  We  have not now under the law  abs~ 

lute and unrestrained freedom of speech, have we? Mr. TYDINGS. Yes; we have.  Under  the law I can say any-thing I wish to say that comes into  my  mind. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  But the Senator is answerable for it if 

it is violative of the law. Mr. TYDINGS. The reason I do not use words which would not be pleasant or fitting in this  Chambe .r  is  because I have no inclination to  use  them. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  Precisely. Mr. TYDINGS. It is not because I am afraid to use them or because the Government says I can not use them. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  But the point I wish to develop and as to which I wish to get the Senator's view  is  this: We have the right of free speech and the right of free publication, but is  it 

not a wise provision of our laws that those rights are limited 

by  the law? Mr. TYDINGS.  As  I have said to the Senator, they are not limited.  One  is only punished if he violates the privilege. Now, may I say to those who take issue with me upon this amendment that if they would go with me this minute  ov.er 

to a newstand, we will say the newstand at the  Union  Station-and I have not been there for two or three months except to buy a newspaper-! would be almost willing to  pledge  my word that they could find displayed upon that newstand first of all a magazine showing a perfectly naked woman; secondly, that they could find a character of story which, though  perhaps 

not written so charmingly or as delightfully as some of the stories which have been on  the  Senator's desk, is written for the masses of the people, is founded on sex, and has hardly any limitations if the reader has any imagination whatsoever.  No~ 

body crusades  against  that condition. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  Mr.  President, does the Senator approve of that? Mr. TYDINGS. No, I do not; but I say, let  us  clean out our own house. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  One  evil does not justify another. Mr. TYDINGS.  Oh,  yes, I understand that; but I would much rather clean out this evil, which has fifty times the circulation and the vogue as the evil which is occuping our attention at this moment. But who rises here to eradicate that evil which is fifty times more pernicious and which is perpetrated for the masses of the people? Anyone who has read Rabelais can see that the average man would understand him with difficulty. I do not claim to be a brilliant scholar. I have tried to wade through some of the pages of it in the past, and I think a great deal of it is the driest reading I ever put my mind to. There is no life in it. The words themselves are unusual words wherever one can be  used. 

I should like to give a copy of Rabelais to some man upon the st .reet and ask him to read  10  pages of it and tell me what it means. I venture to say there is not one in a thousand that we would stop upon the sidewalk who could say what the philosophy of Rabelais was. Yet that is the kind of book we are rying to keep away from the masses-a book which 99 per cent of the people would drop after they had read the first three lines, because there is no life or essence in the thing at all. Yet we have upon our own newsstands, in comparison with that, hundreds, thousands, millions of magazines  every  year to which we close our eyes and howl about the foreign importations coming into America. Why, it is ridiculous I

Mr. President, I want to conclude by repeating that nothing  

> will

undermine the foundations of this Republic like a loss of  

> f....

ith in the individual man. The minute the Government has to take care of individuals who make up its population, you need not worry  about  the future of your Republic ; its doom is  sealed. 

I have faith in the ability of the average American  to  with-stand the temptations of life.  ·I  know he is self-reliant enough not to succumb to such influences as are mentioned here. Therefore I rise in support of the amendment of the  Senator 

from New Mexico, because I have faith in the  people  of America, because I believe that more harm will be done by the exclusion of the classics than by the admission of a few books that only a small percentage of onr population will ever read, and because if we achieve governmental and civic righteousness in  America 

as a result of legislation and force it is my sincere and :firm belief that the end of this Government is in sight. The parallel is, let us close every church from now on, and make the Ten Commandments statutory propositions. Let us 

define  punishment for  ~ach  of them, even . including the  injunc~ 5514  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARCH  18 

tion to  love  your  neJghbor  as yourself. _ Let us do away with all godly teach.ings, call out the Army, and make righteousness compulsory. That is what we are doing in this bill. For my part, I want to get to heaven in my own way; and I am glad to say that I do not have to ask the Members of the  United  States Senate to show me the way, because I believe none, or at least few, of them know more about it than Imy s elf know. Mr.  BLACK.  Mr. President, I desire to suggest an  amend~ 

ment to the amendment offered by the Senator from Louisiana, if it is in order. If it .is not in order, I wish to suggest it to him and ask if he will incorporate it. The PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr.  VANDENBERG  in the chair). The  Chair  would have to rule that the amendment is not in order. Mr.  BLACK.  I desire to suggest to the Senator from Louisi-ana that on line 6 the line be made to read as follows :            

> Containing any matter advocating or urging treason or insurrection against the United States.

That does not change the effect that the Senator ,intended by the amendment he had. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  Mr. President, the Senator from Georgia has spoken to me about this. I thought the wording of the amendment as proposed means the same thing, but there seems t6 be a doubt in the Senator's mind about it. Inasmuch as that is the intention, I should have no objection to revi s ing my amendment in that way. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the  Ohair  understand that the Senator modifies his amendment? Mr.  BROUSSARD.  I do. Mr.  COPELAND.  Mr.  President, I desire to give notice of my intention to move a reconsideration of the action taken yes-terday on paragraph 1545, relating to sponges, and paragraph 1554, relating to umbrellas. Having given that notice, how long do I have before I must make the motion? The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The motion having been en-tered, it can be taken up at any time before the bill is passed. Mr.  COPELAND.  I thank the  Ohair .

The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on the perfected amendment submitted by the Senator  from  Louisiana [Mr. 

' BRoussARD] to the amendment submitted by the Senator from 

Utah  [Mr. SMOOT]. Mr. HEFLIN. I ask to have the amendment stated as it would read with the amendment of the Senator from Louisiana. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The clerk will state the amend-ment as modified. The  CHIEF  CLERK.  The Senator from Louisiana now modifies his amendment so as to reinstate in the - amendment of the Senator from  Utah  the  foUowing  words: Containing any matter advocating or urging treason or insurrection against the United States, or forcible resistance to any law of the United States,  or. 

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on agreeing to the amendment of the Senator from Louisiana [Mr. BROussARD], as modified, to the amendment of the Senator from  Utah. 

Mr. WALSH of Montana. Mr. President, I am very sure that our good, patriotic friends are borrowing a lot of trouble out this matter. The law already, it seems to me, makes ample pro-vision for the conditions to which this amendment is addressed. Section 4 of the Criminal  Code,  title 18,  of  the  United  States 

Code,  provides :Whoever incites, sets on foot, assists, or engages in  any  rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United States or the laws thereof,  or  gives aid  or  comfort thereto, shall be imprisoned not more than  10  years, or fined not more than  $10,000,  or both ; and shall, more-over, be  incapable  of holding any  office  under the United States. Any person who incites any rebellion or insurrection against the  United  States becomes amenable to this; and if one intro-duces into the  United  States matter urging treason or insurrec-tion against the  United  States, he falls foul of this particular statute. Accordingly,  Mr.  President, the case is very much better taken care of in my mind by a provision making that criminal, and punishing that by heavy penalty, than by the pro-cedure that is provided for by this amendment. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  Mr. President, is it not equally true that we have laws against the circulation of obscene literature in the  United  States? Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. We have a statute prohibiting the passage of it through the mails. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  To my mind, it seems that the two cases are similar. I wish to call the Senator's attention to the fact that he has read a statute  whiG}l  applies to the territQry of the .

United  States, but this deals with the importation of literature which advocates or urges treason, and that is quite a different thing. If there is no necessity for a law against the importation of anything which advocates or ur ges treason, insurrection, or forcible resistance, then there would be no necessity for any of this amendment at all relating to ot her features of it. 

1\Ir.  WALSH  of Montana . The Senator ought to bear in mind that there is a law against the passage of obscene matter through the mails, but that is all. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  Yes. 

Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. The person may carry the books in, and there is no law to prohibit him from doing it. We are  pro-

viding here against the  inb·oduction  of it in that way, because there is not any Federal law that will reach it after it gets into the  United  St ates. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  Inasmuch as I offered the amendment, may I be permitted to say this: I do not know that there is any necessity for any law at all other than  th~t  suggested by the amendment of the Senator from New Mexico [Mr.  CU'ITING]  ; but when this amendment was offered, and then on the  floor  to-day the provision under discussion now was withdrawn, it seemed to me that it was an invitation for anyone to send to this country the sort of litera-ture referred to by the amendment I have offered. Inasmuch as there is no law with reference to the importa-tion of that literature any more than there is with reference to the importation of other matters contained in the Smoot amendment as modified by the amendment of the Senator from Montana [Mr. WALSH], it seemed to me necessary that we should put back these words  wb.ich  the Senator from  Utah 

withdrew. I hope the Senate will not appear in the light of having offered an amendment believed to be necessary, and then withdrawn, which might result in the belief that we are inviting such literature. Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. Mr. President, I hoped that Ishould be able to bring to an end the interminable discussion of this matter upon so small an issue as is now presented. It 

is perfectly clear that one who introduces into the  United 

States matter of this kind that is actually treasonable in character, or urges treason or insurrection, incites treason or  in~urrection  falls foul of this criminal statute, with aheavy penalty. In that situation of affairs, so long as there is some objection-and I have the objection myself, which I shall presently state-against incorporating this other pro-vision in the bill, I can not for the life of me see why anybody should prolong this debate for the purpose of keeping it in. 

Mr . BROUSSARD.  I merely want to ask the Senator if he will be kind enough to show the necessity for adopting the other parts of the amendment and leaving this out-the difference in the law. Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. I tried to tell the Senator. There is no law making it a crime against the  United  States to offer for sale, for instance, or to have in one's possession, any of this obscene matter, so long as it does not pass through the mails. If the owner passes it through the mails, then he commits a crime against the Federal law; but, except for that, so long as he holds it in his own possession he may go to the dock and load up a dray with all of these obscene books and literature, and he may take that literature to any  booksto-re  

> in

the city of New York, and it may be  ·put  upon the shelves and sold, and there is no Federal law to prohibit him so long as he does not put it through the mails. Therefore we need this statute with respect to the obscene literature, but we do not need it with respect to the literature that urges treason or insurrection against the  United  States. Mr.  BROUSSARD.  Does not that indicate that we should legislate with reference to the sale and distribution of this matter otherwise than through the mail, rather than to adopt this amendment? Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. No; it does not, because we have no power to legislate with respect to that except ns to its passage in interstate commerce or through the mails.  So  long as it remains, for instance, in the  State  of New York we can do nothing with it from the Federal point of view.  So  we can not legislate upon that, but we can legislate with respect to literature or books which urge treason or insurrection against the  United  States, and we have done that.  

> Mr.

HASTINGS.  Mr. President, will the Senator yield? Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. In just a moment. The statute reads as follows : Whoever incites, sets on foot, assists, or engages in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United  States  or the laws thereof, or gives aid  or  comfort thereto, shall be imprisoned not more than  10  years, or fined not more than  $10,000,  or both. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENAT:m  5515 

Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  And  the  Senator  would reason that the introduction of such  types  of literature would fall within that section? Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. That is, if a person attempts to incite insurrection or treason against the  United  States--

Mr. SHORTRIDGE. He would violate that section? Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. He would violate this section of the statute.  So  we have taken care of that situation by a penal statute. I yield to the  Senator  from Delaware. Mr.  HASTINGS.  Mr. President, I want to inquire of the 

Senator  from Montana  if  it would not be necessary, before  any-

one could be prosecuted under the act, to have the book actually in his hands in this country. It is the purpose of the amend-ment to prohibit a book  f1·om  entering the  United  States.  Of course, if the book is shipped in by somebody in a foreign country, it would be rather  difficult  for this Government to prosecute that person. Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. Yes ; but somebody in this  coun-

try must get it. Mr.  HASTINGS.  It is the  purpose  of the amendment  to 

prohibit them from getting it, is it not? Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. Exactly. Mr.  HASTINGS.  It would necessitate this Government finding out that they had it, and prosecuting them after that, 

in order for this statute to apply. Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. Exactly, so that if the inspector had an opportunity, under the proposed law, to learn of the character of the book, he would likewise have an opportunity to learn of the character of the consignee, and the consignee would be subject to indictment under the provisions of this act. 

Mr.  HASTINGS.  But under this amendment the inspector does not make any inspection of the books at all . They all come in without any inspection, and he has no obligation to learn the character of the book and tell it  to  anybody, as Iunderstand it .Mr.  WALSH  'of Montana. He has the character of the book - in the manifest, and be is required to inspect all books, in  or-

der to ascertain whether any of them contain any obscene literature,  of  to make such inspection as will enable him to determine that fact, and, of course, that would enable him to determine the character of the other books. However, that is 

straining a point. I must confess  t.Qat  I do not like that provision of this  meas -

ure. Of course, it is like the case of obscene literature. If all literature that came in were perfectly plainly urging treason against the  United  States,  or insurrection, and there could  be -

no  doubt about it, we would want to exclude that literature. But the trouble about the matter is that there are all grada-tions of literature, some of which one person would construe as really inciting to treason or insurrection in the  United 

States,  and other persons would conclude that it did not have that tendency. That is where the difficulty comes in with astatute of that kind. I am prejudiced against it because of the outrageous  con-

struction that was given by many of the courts of this country to what was known as the espionage law, passed during the war. That act provided that-Whoever, when the  United  States  is at war, shall willfully make or convey false reports or  false  statements with intent to interfere with the operation or success of the military or naval forces of the  United 

States  or to promote the success of its enemies, and whoever, when the 

United  States  is at war, shall  willfully  cause  or attempt to cause insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or refusal of duty,  in  the military or naval forces of the  United  States,  or shall willfully obstruct the recruiting or enlistment  service  of the  United  States, to the injury of the service of the  United  States, shall be punished by a fine of not more than  $10,000  or imprisonment for not more than  20  years, or both. 

In the application of that statute, in the hysteria which attended the war and followed in the years immediately after the war, persons were convicted of all manner of offenses, which, to the ordinary mind, did not fall under the condemna-tion of the statute at all. A commentator  upo~  the subject said, I think, with  substan-

tial accuracy : 

> It

became criminal to advocate heavier taxation instead of bond issues , to state that conscription was unconstitutional, though the Supreme Court had not yet held it  valid,  to say that the sinking of merchant vessels was  legal.  to urge that a referendum should have  pre-

ceded our declaration of war, to say that war was contrary to the teachings of Christ. Men have been punished for criticizing the Red Cross and the Young Men's  Christian  .Association. • • • It was  in -

no way necessary  that  these  expressions  of opinion should be  addressed -

to soldiers or men on the point of enlisting or being -drafted.  Most 

judges held it enough if the words might conceivably reach such men. The document before me, which I have read with some considerable care, goes on to instance convictions in support of such constructions as these to which  I have referred. Indeed, they were so remarkable in character that in  practi-

cally all of the so-called espionage cases which  cal'Jle  before the 

Supreme  Court  in later years the eminent judges of that court, so well beloved by the people of the  United  States-Justices Holmes and Brandeis--uniformly dissented from the conclu-sioils  arriv~d  at. 

In  the  case of Abrams against the  United  States,  reported in 

Two hundred and fiftieth  United  States  Reports, is found the dissenting opinion of Justice Holmes, in which Justice Brandeis concurred, and in that case the venerable Justice said :In this case sentences of  20  years imprisonment have been imposed for the publishing of two leaflets that I believe the defendants had as much right to publish as the Government has to  publ.igh  the Constitution of the  United  States  now vainly invoked by them. Even if I am  techni-

cally wrong, and enough can be squeezed from these poor and puny anonymities to  turn  the color of legal litmus paper ; I will  add,  even  if 

what I think the necessary intent were shown; the most nominal  punish-

ment seems to me all that possibly could be inflicted, unless the defend-ants are to be made to  suffer,  not for what the indictment alleges, but for the creed that they avow-a creed that I believe to be the creed of ignorance and immaturity when honestly held, as I see no reason to doubt that it was held here; but which, although made the subject of examination at the trial, no one has a right even to consider in dealing with the charges before the court. That is the comment of two Justices of the  Supreme  Court  of the  United  States  concerning what was done under this act, which we thought at the time we enacted it was simply necessary to prevent people from actually obstructing by force or by  im-

mediate persuasion the operation of the draft act .Mr. President, I think there is a well-grounded reason for apprehension that matter will be excluded under a provision of this character, which simply argues for a change in the Government of some kind. Reference was made to the well-known comment of Thomas Jefferson in his inaugural address, in which he said:  

> If

there be any who would dissolve our  Union  or change  our  republi-

can form of government, let them  stand  as testimony of the truth that error may be tolerated when reason is  left  free to combat it. Of course, everybody realizes that when Thomas Jefferson thus  spoke  he had in mind the so-called alien and sedition laws, and the law to which I have referred here is sometimes spoken of as the sedition law. Reference has been made  t0:.day  to seditious pamphlets being excluded. What was the sedition law, the counterpart of the alien law passed during  the  Adams administration? It  pro· 

vided: That if any person shall write,  pl'int,  utter, or publish, or shall cause or procure to be written, printed, uttered, or published, or shall know• ingly and willlngly assist or aid in writing, printing, uttering, or  pu~ 

lishing any false, scandalous, and malicious  writing  or writings  against 

the Government of the  United  States,  or either House of the  Congres~ 

of the  United  States, or the President of the  United  States,  with intent to defame the said Government or either House of the said Congress, or the said President, or to bring them, or either of them, into contempt or disrepute ; or to excite against them, or either or any of them, the hatred of the good people of the  United  States, or to stir up sedition within the  United  States,  or to  excite  any unlawful combinations therein, for opposing or  resi.sting  any law of the  United  States, or any act of the 

President  of the  United  States,  done in  I!ursuance  of any such  law._ 

or of the powers in him vested by the Constitution of the  United 

States, or to resist, oppose, or defeat any such law or act, or to aid, encourage, or abet any hostile designs of any foreign nation against the 

United  States,  their people, or Government, then such person, being thereof convicted before any  court  of the  United  States  having  jurisdlc-

tion thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding  $2,000,  and by imprisonment not exceeding two years. In other words, it was made a crime  to  speak disparagingly of the Government of the  United  States,  or of the President of the  United  States.  That was the sedition law which provoked the antagonism of Thomas Jefferson. Moreover, Mr. President, there was another provision not 

unlike  that which it  is  proposed to incorporate in this measure which provided: That if any persons  shall  rmlawtully  combine or conspire together with intent to oppose any measure or measures of the Government of the  United  States,  which  are  or shall be directed by proper authority, or to  impede  the operation of any law  of  the  United  States, or to 5516  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENA _TE  MARCH  18 intimidate or prevent any person holding a place or  office  in or under the  GQvernment  of the  United  States from undertaking, performing, or executing his trust or duty ; and if any person or persons, with intent as aforesaid, shall counsel, advise, or attempt to procure any insurrection, riot, unlawful assembly, or  combin~tion-

In other words, the first paragraph of the sedition law was not unlike this provision here, which condemned a pamphlet intended to incite insurrection against the  United  States. 

What was the result? It  was  not that that act had been utilized against people who were actually urging insurrection against the  United  States  or rebellion against its authority, but it was abused and made the instrument for the oppression of people who were simply objecting to the administration and who were desirous of having it supplanted by an administration whose views were more in conformity with their own. What I apprehend is that this provision will be utilized by people with peculiar ideas about our  own  Government to ex-clude material which is perfectly outside the domain of urging treason or insurrection against the  United  States. Inasmuch as the case is taken care of by the penal statutes to which I have  referred,  I trust the amendment now offered will not be accepted, but that the amendment will be adopted substantially as offered by the Senator from  Utah. 

Mr.  McCULLOCH.  Mr.  President, will the Senator yield to me? Mr.  WALSH  of  Montana.  I yield. Mr.  McCULLOCH.  Is the Senator from Montana under the impression that the amendment of the Senator from  Utah  still contains the criminal provision? Mr.  WALSH  of  Montana.  No, it does not. Mr.  McCULLOCH.  How can the remarks of the Senator from Montana, then, be pertinent to the pend .ing amendment, the remarks going entirely to the criminal feature? Mr. WALSH of Montana. The Senator has misapprehended me. I have called attention to a separate statute now in existence making criminal the incitement of treason or  insur-

rection. Mr.  McCULLOCH.  But the Senator contends that the amendment of the Senator from  Utah,  if it is amended as the Senator from Louisiana has suggested, might result in  oppres-

sion of the nature that would result from the operation of the statute to which he has referred, which could not at all happen under the pending amendment. It only means, I submit to the Senator from Montana, an additional  safeguard.  We are attempting to stop seditious literature at the border, and there can be no oppression of the nature the Senator from Montana has suggested with the criminal feature of this amendment eliminated. 

Mr.  WALSH of Montana. The Senator has not been attending to what I said.  I called attention to the fact that, at the present time, the introduction of materials falling within the amendment proposed by the Senator from Louisiana, is made a criminal offense. Mr.  McCULLOCH.  That is so. It is made a ' criminal offense, but there can be no oppression resulting from the amendment of the Senator from  Utah,  he having stricken out the criminal provisions, if the amendment of the Senator from Louisiana is included. Mr. WALSH of Montana. I have endeavored to show how that oppression  cmlld  occur. Evidently I have not satisfied the Senator from  Ohio? 

Mr.  McCULLOCH.  The Senator from Montana has not at all satisfied me on the question. Mr.  WATSON.  Mr. President, may we not have a vote? The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on the  amend-

ment of the Senator from Louisiana to the amendment of the Senator from  Utah. 

tor from Illinois [Mr.  DENEEN],  with whom I have a general pair, then voted as I expect  to vote now. I vote  "yea." 

Mr. LA FOLLETTE (when Mr.  SHIPSTEAD's  name was called). The senior Senator from Minnesota [Mr.  SHIPSTEA.D] 

is paired with  the  junior  Senator  from Tennessee [Mr.  BROCK]. 

If the senior Senator from Minnesota were  present.  he would 

vote"  nay." 

Mr.  SIMMONS  (when his name  was  called). I have a gen-eral pair with the senior Senator from Massachusetts [Mr.  GIL-

LETT]. That pair, as I understand it, stands upon the  amend· 

ment now pending, but not upon the main amendment.  There-

fore I shall have to observe the pair, but if I could vote I would vote for the pending amendment to the amendment.  ·

Mr.  WATSON  (when his name was called). I have  a general pair with  the  senior Senator from South  Carolina  [Mr.  SMITH] 

which I transfer to the Senator from lllinois [Mr. DENEEN],  and 

vote  "yea." 

The roll call was concluded. Mr.  BLEASE  (after having voted in the affirmative). I have a pair with the Senator from  Connecticut  [Mr. WALCOTT], but I understand he would vote as I have voted, and therefore I let my vote stand. Mr. HAYDEN. The senior Senator from Arizona [Mr.  AsH·  

> UBST]

is unavoidably absent. If  present,  he would vote  "nay." 

Mr.  FESS.  I desire to announce the following general pairs: The Senator from Pennsylvania [Mr. REED] with the Senator from Arkansas [Mr.  RoBINSON]  ;The Senator from New Jersey [Mr.  BAmn]  with the Senator from Arkansas [Mr.  CA.&A.WAY]; 

The Senator fr(}m Maine [Mr. GoULD] with the Senator from 

Utah  [Mr. KING] ; and The Senator from Vermont [Mr.  GREENE]  with the . senior Senator from Mississippi [Mr.  HARRISON]. 

The result was announced-yeas 54, nays 24, as follows: Allen Barkley Bjngham Black Blease            

> Broussard
> Capper Connally Couzens Dale Fess Fletcher
> Glass
> Glenn Blaine Borah Bratton Brookhart
> Copeland
> Cutting
> YEAS-54
> Golf Golusborough Grundy Hale Harris
> IIastin,gs
> ITatfield
> Hebert
> Heflin
> Kean Keyes McCulloch McKellar McMaster McNary Metcalf Moses
> Oddie
> Overman
> Patterson Phipps .
> Pine
> Ransdell Robinson. Ind. Robsion, Ky. Sheppard Shortridge Smoot
> NAYS-24
> Dill Jones Frazier Kendrick George La Follette Hayden Norbeck Howell Norris
> Johnson Nye.
> NOT VOTING-18

## ~!~~st  g~~l~t  ~~!            

> Brock Greene Robinson. Ark. Caraway Harrison Shipstead Deneen Hawes Simmons Steck Steiwer Stephens Sullivan Swanson Thomas, Idaho Townsend Trammell Vandenberg Walsh, Mass. Waterman Watson Pittman Schall Tydings Wagner Walsh, Mont. Wheeler Smith Thomas, Okl~.
> Walcott

So  Mr. BRoussARD's amendment to  Mr.  SMooT's  amendment, as modified, was agreed to. Mr. BRATTON. Mr. President, I desire to offer an amend-ment to the amendment. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The amendment will be stated. The  CHIEF  CLERK.  On  page 3 of the amendment of the Sena-tor from  Utah,  line 19, after the period, insert :                                 

> Upon adjudication that such book or matter thus seized is not of the character the entry of which is by this section prohibited, it shall not be excluded from entry under the provisions of this section.

Mr.  WATSON.  May the amendment be reported? M'r.  CUTTING.  Mr.  Presiden~  will the Senator from New The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The amendment will be  re·  Mexico yield to me? ported for the information of the Senate. Mr. BRATTON. I yield. The  CHIEF  CLERK.  On  page 1 of the amendment of  the  Mr.  CUTTING.  In connection with the vote just taken I ask 

Senator from  Utah,  in line 5, after the word  "drawing,"  insert permission to have inserted in the  RECORD  the vote on a  similar 

the words  "containing  any matter advocating or urging provision taken on October 11 last, which will be found  pub-

treason or insurrection against the  United  States,  or forcible lished at page 4472 of the  CoNGRESSIONAL  RECORD of that date. 

resistance  to the laws of the  United  States,  or."  The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Is there objection to the re-Mr.  BORAH.  Mr. President, I do not desire to take any quest of the  Senator  from New Mexico? time to discuss the matter in case we are ready  t(}  vote. If Mr. BLACK. Mr. President, will the  Senator  from New there is to be further discussion, I shall want to say Mexico  yield ·  to me? something. Mr.  BRATTON.  I should  prefer  not to do so at this time. Mr.  WATSON.  Let us have the yeas and nays. Mr.  BLACK.  Then I shall have to object to this matter The yeas and nays were ordered, and the Chief  Clerk  pro- going in until I have had an opportunity to make my statement. ceeded to call the roll. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Does the Senator from New  Mex-

Mr.  OVERMAN  (when his name was called).  When  the vote ico yield to the Senator  fr:om  Alabama for the purpose of  mak· 

was taken on this question in  Committee  of the Whole the  Sena- _ ing a statement? 

I1930  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN  ATE 5517 

Mr.  BRATTON. With the indulgence of the Senator, I should like to obtain a disposal of the pending amendment to the amendment of the Senator from  Utah. 

Mr.  BLACK.  That is all right  if  I may:  be allowed to place my remarks ' immediately  after  the vote which has just been 

placed  in the RECORD at the request of  the  Senator from New Mexico. 

l\fr.  BRATTON.  Very  well; I yield to the Senator from Alabama . .The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Without objection, the request of the junior Senator from New  Mexico  [Mr.  CuTTINo]  is  granted. 

The vote referred to is as follows : The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The  clerk  will  call  the  roll.        

> The Chief Clerk proceeded to call the roll.

Mr.  WAGNER  (when Mr.  CoPELAND's  name  was  called). My colleague [Mr. CoPELAND] is necessarily detained from  the  Senate by illness in  his                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

> family. Mr. JONES (when his name was called). The senior Senator from
> Virginia [Mr. SWANSON] is compe!led to be absent, and Ipromised to take care of him on this vote. Ido not know · bow he would vote it
> present, and therefore Iwithhold my vote. It Iwere at liberty to vote, I would vote "nay."
> Mr. FRAZIER (when Mr. Nn's name was called). My colleague [Mr. NYE] is paired on this question with the junior Senator-from New Jersey [Mr. KEAN]. If my colleague were present and permitted to vote, ·be would vote "'yea," and Iunderstand that the Senator from New Jersey
> · would vote "nay."
> Mr. SIMMONS (when his name was called). ·I transfer my pair with
> the junior Senator from Ohio [Mr. Burton] to tbe senior Senator from New York [Mr. CoPELAND] and vote "yea."
> Mr. HASTINGS (when Mr. TOWNSEND'S name was called). My col-
> league [Mr. ToWNSEND] is paired with the senior Senator from Missis-
> sippi [Mr. HARRISON).
> Mr. ,WALSH of Massachusetts (when his name was called). On this question Ihave apair with the junior Senator from Rhode Island [Mr.
> HEBERT]. Itransfer that pair-to the senior Senator from Arizona [Mr.
> AsHURST] and vote "yea."
> The roll call was concluded. Mr. FESS. Idesire to announce the following general pairs: The Senator from New Jersey [Mr. Edge] with the Senator from Georgia [Mr. HARRIS] ;and Tbe Senator from Connecticut [Mr. BINGHAM] with the -Senator from Virginia [Mr. GLASs].
> Mr. SHEPPARD. Idesire to announce that _the Senator from Virginia
> [Mr. GLASS], tbe Senator from Mississippi [Mr. STEPHENS], and the
> Senator from Wyoming [Mr. KENDRICK] are necessarily detained from the Senate on official business. ·
> Mr. ROBINSO.Y of Indiana (after having voted in the nega~ve).
> Mr. President, Ihave had throughout the session a general pair with
> the junior Senator from Mississippi [Mr. STEPHENS], and Iam not clear whether that pair continues or not. Assuming it does I transfer the pair

to the junior  Senator  from Maine [Mr.  GOUL-D]  and allow my vote to stand. The result was announced-yeas 38, nays 36, as follows :                                                                                                               

> Yeas-38: Messrs. Black, Blaine, Borah, Bratton, Brookhart, Broussard, Caraway, Connally, Couzens, Cutting, Dill, Fletcher, Frazier, George, Gillett, Glenn, Hawes, Hayden, Howell, Johnson, King, La Follette, McKellar, McMaster, Norris, Pine, Pittman, Ransdell, Robinson of Ax-
> kansas, Simmons, Steck, Thomas of Oklahoma, Tydings, Wagner, Wal-
> cott, Walsh of Massachusetts, Walsh of Montana, and Wbeeler. Nays-36: Messrs. Allen, Barkley, Blease, Brock, Capper, Deneen, Fess, Gotr, Goldsborough, Greene, Hale, Hastings, Hatfield,. Hefiin,
> Keyes, McNary, Metcalf, Moses, Oddie, Overman, Patterson, Phipps,
> Reed, Robinson of Indiana, Sackett, Schall, Sheppard, Shortridge, Smith,
> Smoot, Steiwer, Thomas of Idaho, Trammell, Vandenberg, Warren, and Watson. Not voting-21: Messrs. Ashurst, Bingham, Burton, Copeland, Dale, Edge, Glass, Gould, Harris, Harrison, Hebert, Jones, Kean, Kendrick, Norbeck, Nye, Shipstead, Stephens, Swanson, Townsend, and Waterman.
> So Mr. CuTTING's amendment was agreed to.

Mr.  BLACK.  Mr. President, the statement has just been made that the vote which was placed in the  RrooRD  was upon a matter  similar  to the amendment upon which we just voted. That is correct in so far as similarity in  the  amendment as it 

t:J:en  appeared is concerned. The situation, however, is entirely different, and there  is  no inconsistency whatever in having voted one way upon the amendment  i.n  the conditions under  which  it 

was offered at that time and having voted another way in the conditions under which it is offered to-day,  for  the reason Ishall state. I stated at that time my  inherent  objection to having  books 

censored by a clerk of the Secretary of the Treasury. That ob-jection I still have. I insisted upon that objection last night. 

If  there had been offered the same amendment to-day which the  Sc;-uator  from  Utah  [Mr.  SMOOT]  offered last night, I should not only have voted against it but I should have spoken  against 

i.t.  But the proposal upon which we have just voted  i.s  entirely different  ·and  distinct. In the first place, the political offenses set forth are narrowed. They are specifically limited now to 

urging treason or insurrection against the  United  States or forcible resistance to any law of the  United  States.  No  one 

would contend that the commission of either of those three offenses would not be a violation of law to-day. No one would contend that an attempt to commit either of those offenses would not be a violation of law. It not only would be a violation of law, but it should be a violation of law. The objection I had to the original proposal was not with reference to the definition but it was on account of the fact that a clerk in the Treasury Department was left with the  discre-

tion to determine what came within the definition, the man whose property was taken from him being deprived of a trial in a court of law. Mr.  BORAH.  Mr. President, is it not true yet that the clerk passes upon it? Mr.  BLACK.  It  is  not. It is true  to  this extent that in instituting the proceeding the clerk passes upon it.  Some  one must pass upon whether a proceeding shall be instituted. Some one must pass upon  ·whether  or not a proceeding  will be  insti-

tuted for violation of the prohibition law, whether or not aproceeding will be  instituted  for committing burglary or any other  crime.  In the amendment, however, as it was offered heretofore it was necessary to appeal from the action of the clerk before one could obtain the benefit of the law and of trial by a tribunal. Mr.  BORAH.  In case the clerk stops the  book,  what will be the procedure now? Mr.  BLACK.  Under  the procedure now proposed the matter is referred to  · the  court for action. The book  i.s  seized  and  a

report is made to the district attorney for a charge to 'be  pre-

ferred  in  court, and there can be a trial by jury. That  i.s  the difference, and it is a distinct and  vital  difference. Now, when a man is charged with violating the prohibition law-take that as an example-some one prefers the charge. It is preferred either by indictment or by an  affidavit  and  war-

rant of  arrest.  The deputy sheriff does not pass upon the case. 

If  he  should, it would be contrary to our constitutional  prin-

ciples. That was the basis of the opposition I had to a clerk under the Treasury Department of the United States acting as a censor. to  determine  what could and what could not be read by the people of the United States. Now, when we narrow this  clause  down to the three distinct provisions, first, urging . treason ; second, urging rebellion or insurrection against the  United  States; third, urging forcible resistance, and at the same time the matter is carried to the  

> cou~t!

where it should be carried  in - the first place, I do not 

anticrpate  the consequences which followed under the old alien and sedition law. Therefore it seems  to  me, Mr. President, that the Senator 

from  New Mexico [Mr. CuTTING] has won  a distinct  and  de-

cided victory. It seems to me that the Senator from New Mexico has contributed greatly to the subject under discussion. We have, as a result of his efforts, at  the  present time an amendment offered by the Senator from  Utah  [Mr.  SMooT] 

which  i.s  entirely separate and distinct and different from the proposed law  as  originally insisted upon by the Senator from 

Utah. 

Due  to  the  efforts of the Senator from New Mexico, under this amendment, as now framed, instead of having books  cen-

sored by  a clerk in the Treasury Department, that clerk merely passes upon the question as a deputy sheriff  'does  in other cases of the violation of the law, and a proceeding  is then instituted before a legal tribunal where the man who owns the book  -has 

the  right to have  a trial by jury. I congratulate the Senator from New Mexico upon having brought about this great improvement in the system. I do not mean that there may not be  a difference of opinion as to whether or not  with  reference  to  the three items referred  to  this power should be given to a court. It is my judgment, since we have 

prop..ibited  treason under the law,  since  we have prohibited rebellion under the law, and since we have prohibited forcible resistance under the law, that certainly it would be very  incon-

sistent to vote against an amendment which merely  includes  in the list of the proscribed publications those which urge the 

citizens  of the country to violate the very laws which to-day are written upon the statute books. Mr. SHORTRIDGE. Mr. President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Does the Senator from Alabama yield to the Senator from  California? 

Mr.  BLACK.  I yield to the  Senator. 

·Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  I think there should be a clear  under-

standing  as  to  the  procedure under the present law. The 5518  CONGRESSIONAL  REOORD· -SENATE  ~lARCH  18 

·customs  official seiz'es a given book, holding it to be condemned by the law and not to be admitted under the law. If the im-porter claims the right to have the book entered, he may take the matter before a division of the  Customs  Court.  If the judge or judges condemn the book,  an  appeal lies to the  Customs 

Court  of Appeals and Patents. If that appellate tribunal affirms the ruling of the division, then the book is excluded. That, Iunderstand, is the procedure under  existing  law. Under the suggested amendment, if the customs officer seizes a book, the ca se is turned over to the district attorney of the district, who institutes proceedings in the district court for the confiscation and destruction of the book. In such  proceedings  any party in interest may demand a jury to determine the facts in issue, and an appeal or right of review is given as in ordinary actions or suits. .But, in any event, whichever procedure shall be made the law, the book in question will remain in custody until a final decision. Is that not a correct statement of the two kinds of procedure? Mr.  BLACK.  That is substantially correct. l\fr. SHORTRIDGE. Wherein is it not  accurate? 

Mr.  BLACK.  I am not sure as to absolute accuracy with reference to the first so-called trial  before · the appeal is taken, and I desire to say now in order that there may be no mis-understanding--l\Ir. SHORTRIDGE. Mr. Pr esident, will the Senator from Alabama permit  m~r-- ·

l\Ir.  BLACK.  I wish first to say this : If this clause of the so-called Smoot amendment, as it now exists, shall be stricken out  and  the old method is restored, I shall then vote for the amendment of the Senator from New  Mexico,  and vote to strike out not only the clause which has just been inserted but shall vote to strike all of it out, because I do not believe in the prin-ciple of permitting a customs inspector to act as censor of books for the people of this Nation. l\Ir. SHORTRIDGE. Mr. President, I merely wish to ob-

sen·e,  if the Senator will indulge me, that a question had  arisen 

among certain Sen a tors as to what became of the book  pending 

the proceedings. I wish it to be made perfectly clear to all that the book remains in custodia legis until final d"sposition of the case. Mr.  BLACK.  The  Senator  is correct in that, just as in the case of prohibitive liquor it remains in possession of  tlle  officer until the case is tried. I have simply made these remarks,  Mr.  President, in order that it might not appear that the vote taken on. this  arp.end-

ment was a change on the part of those who  hnd  originally voted against  a:  provision striking out the same clause. 

Mr.  CUTTING.  Mr.  President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Does the  Senator  from Alabama yield to the  Senator  from New Mexico? Mr.  BLACK.  I yield. .Mr.  CUTTING..  I should like to take this opportunity of saying that nothing should allow the Senator to believe that Ihad not given him full credit for believing thoroughly in his position on this  as  on all other matters in connection with the bill.  Of  course, I realize  the  question as it comes up now is not precisely as it came up before. Mr.  BLACK.  I understand. I simply suggested that in order that the record might be absolutely  clear,  and because, furthermore, I had wanted an opportunity to give credit where credit is due for a great improvement in the law which will  re-

sult if the amendment offered by the  Senator  from  Utah  shall be adopted. That credit, in my judgment, goes directly to the Senator from  New  Mexico for  the · great fight he has made in the interest of the cause which he has espoused. In my judg-ment, it is a forward step and one which can well be  consid-

ered a progressive step. Mr. McKELLAR. Mr. President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does  the  Senator  from Alabama yield to the  Senator  from  Tenne.'5see? 

Mr.  McKELLAR.  I merely wish to make a statement. Mr.  BLACK.  I yield the floor. Mr. MoKELLAR. Mr. President, I merely desire to make abrief statement. I was one of those who voted in favor of the amendment of the Senator from New Mexico when it was  pre-

viously under consideration. In addition to what has been so well set forth by the  Senator  from Alabama, the amendment is wholly different from the other amendment and the facts are wholly different. Either consideration would justify the vote that has just been cast in favor of this amendment. In so  far 

as consistency is concerned, it is not worth a thrip with me. Iam quite sure, in view of the amendment and of the facts, that I have made no mistake in the vote I have just cast. I am  en-

tirely satisfied with it. If anyone  thinks  it is inconsistent, let him think so; it is no matter of mine. I would a thousand times rather be charged with inconsistency than to be charged with being afraid to put foreigners who . would bring into the United  States  material advocating or urging treason,  advo-

cating or urging insurrection,  or · advocating or urging forcible resistance to the laws of the United States upon the exact plane of American citizens. I think that foreigners ought to be so treated. I hav~  so voted, and I have no apology to make for it however many votes may be put in the REcoRD concerning this question. Mr. BRATTON. Mr. President, if disposition can be made of the pending amendment, I have one to follow. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The amendment offered by the  Sen-

ator from New Mexico will be stated .The  LEGISLATIVE  CLERK.  On  page 3 of the amendment in line 19, after the  period,  it is proposed to insert: '                                

> Upon adjudication that such book or matter thus seized is not of the character the entry of which is by this section prohibited, it shall not be excluded from entry under the provisions of this section.

The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The question is on  agreeing  to the amendment offered by the  Senator  from New Mexico to the 

amendmt:>nt  offered by the  Senator  from  Utah .. 

Mr.  JOHNSON.  Mr. President, may I inquire of my friend from  New  1.\Iexico is not that the obvious consequence? Mr.  BRATTON.  I fear not.  Other  provisions of a general nature in the law may counter with such provisions in this section. The amendment is intended to complete the section, and to set up a completed machinery so far as  dealing  with books of this character  which  are imported are concerned. 

Mr.  JOHNSON.  I have not the slightest objection to the amendment to the amendment, but it seems to me that if there is a determination that the book does not come within the pur-view of the section it follows as a matter, of course, that it can come in. Mr.  BRATTON.  The section, however, provides for  confisca-

t ion. It may not give the right to take it out of the hands of the customs collector once he has acquired possession of it, and the amendment  me-rely  provides,  wllen  the question has been adjudicated that the book or material does not fall under the ban of this particular secti on, it shall not thereafter  be  ex-cluded on account of this section. Mr.  SMOOT.  l\lr. President, I do not think the amendment is  nt:>cessary,  but I see no objection to having it go in. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by the  Senator  from New Mexico to the amendment offered by the  Senator  from Utah. The amendment to the amendment was agreed to. 

Mr.  BRATTON.  I send forward another amendment. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The amendment to the amendment will be stated. The  LEGISLATIVE  CLERK.  On  page 3 of the amendment of the 

Senator  from Utah, line  10,  after the word  "provided,"  insert asemicolon and the following :                 

> And no protest shall be taken to the United States Customs Court from the decision of the collector.

The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The question is on agreeing to the amendment. 1\Ir.  McKELLAR.  Who offered that amendment? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The Senator from New Mexico [Mr. 

> BRAT.OON].

1\lr . .  SMOOT.  May I ask the  Senator  a question? I have just seen the wording of the amendment.  As  I understand, the effect of the amendment will be to leave it up to the district courts entirely. Is not that the object of it? 

1\Ir.  BRA'l."'TON.  Mr. President, we are providing in this amendment a complete system in relation to the particular kinds of books and material specified ; that is, that when the collector seizes them he shall certify the question to  the  United  States 

attorney. The United  . States  attorney shall institute the  pro-

ceedings in the United States court; and during the time the matter is being determined by the court the owner or importer shall not have the right to appeal to the  Com·t  of  Customs 

Appeals. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President, this amendment changes the whole theory of the bill. I hope it will not be agreed to. Mr. WALSH of 1.\Iontana.  0 Mr. President, I am sure the 

Senator  from  Utah  has the wrong idea about that. In my esti-mation, the amendment now offered is really not necessary; but it is only offered by the  Senator  from New Mexico to  "make 

assurance doubly  sure."  I am satisfied that we are providing here another system for the determination of these matters; and that would necessarily exclude a review of  any  supposed decision of the collector by the  Court  of  Customs  Appeals. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5519 

This is only a declaration of what I am sure  is  already  im-

. plied in the provision. I am sure it does not change the declara-tion in any degree  whlltever.  -

Mr.  SMOOT.  Let me read the wording of it. Mr.  BRATTON.  Mr. President, let me state my position. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The  Senator  from New Mexico de-

dines  to yield at this time . .

Mr.  BRATTON. We are providing, by the amendment  pro-

posed by the  Senator  from  Utah,  that when books or matertal of the specified class arrive at the port of entry, and the customs collector seizes them, he certifies the question to the  United 

States  district attorney. That sets the judicial machinery in motion. We have provided that the question at issue may be determined either by the court or a jury upon the demand of either party, with the right of appeaL We have further  pro-

vided that if the court determines in that proceeding that  th~ 

book or material does not come within the ban of the statute, it shall not thereafter be excluded under this particular section. 

So  we have provided a complete machinery as to books or  ma-

terial of this particular class; but other provisions in the bill authorize an importer to appeal to the  Court  of  Customs  Ap-

peals when his rna terial is seized. I am not sure that  this  special provision abrogates or  elimi-

nates by implication the general language in the bill. If not, in a case  of this character the customs collector could certify the question to the  United  States  district attorney; he could initiate the proceedings as the amendment provides, and at the same time the importer under the general law could appeal to the  Court  of Customs Appeals, thus setting the general  ma-

chinery in motion.  Thus,  we would have two proceedings  go-

ing on contemporaneously--one under tb.e special amendment and the other under the general law. This amendment simply  provides  that where the question is certified by the collector to the district attorney, the importer 

· shall  not have the right to appeal to the  Court  of  Customs 

Appeals. In other words, it makes the machinery set up in 

· this  amendment exclusive so  far  as dealing with books or material of this class is concerned.  .

The  Senator  from  Utah  would not want such an anomalous condition as two separate proceedings going on at the same time involving the same question. Mr. PITTMAN. Mr. President, may I ask the  Senator  aquestion? The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New  Mex-

ico yield to the  Senator  from Nevada? Mr.  BRATI'ON.  I yield to the Senator. Mr.  PITT.?t1AN.  We will assume that a book of the character that is prohibited in this act is seized by a customs  inspector 

in New York, and he notifies the  United  States  attorney of having seized the book, and the importer appeals to the  Customs 

Court,  and the  Customs  Court  orders that the book be released. In that kind of a conflict, what is the customs officer going to do? 

Under  the law as it  exists  to-day  it is his duty to turn the book over to the importer.  Unless  we do state emphatically that while these proceedings  are  going on with  regard  to this book, as provided, the importer  shall  be divested of his right of appeal, he can appeal under the existing law  and  the  Customs 

Court  could release the book and the holder of it would have to turn it loose. Mr.  BRATTON.  And perchance the  Court  of  Customs  Ap-

peals might decide one way and the  United  States  court might decide the other way. Mr.  WALSH  of Montana and Mr.  TRAMMELL  addressed the 

Chair. 

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico yield ; and if so, to whom? Mr.  BRATTON.  I yield  first  to the  Senator  from Montana. Mr.  WALSH  of Montana. Mr. President, because of such acondition which would result I am perfectly satisfied that the court would hold that this is the exclusive remedy and accord-ingly it does no harm at an to declare in the act that  it  is exclusive. Mr.  BRATTON.  Precisely;  and  I am  surprised  that the 

-Senator  from  Utah  should raise any question about it. Mr.  TRAMMELL  and  Mr.  SMOOT  addressed the Chair. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  from New Mexico yield ; and if so, to whom? Mr. BRATTON. I yield first to the  Senator  from Florida. Mr. TRAMMELL. Mr. President, I think the two recourses 

· should  be optional for the importer; either one or the other.  

> If

he sees fit to follow the course of  procedure  for taking appeals through the customs officials, I think that should be 

optional.  Of  course, this amendment now seeks to make exclu-sive the court procedure. I think, as stated by the  Senator 

from Montana,  that  would be  exclusive  anyway; but if that is the purpose of the legislation, I see no reason why the  Sena-

tor's amendment should not be adopted. I just  want  to ask, however, if the  Senator  does not think the importer should have the option of either course? 

Mr.  BRATTON.  No; because this . amendment, as it now stands, makes it mandatory upon the collector to certify the question to the district attorney. Therefore, that ma chinery must be set in motion ; and  unless this amendment is adopted, if the court should hold that the remedy here provided is not exclusive of general law, there  might  be a conflict as I have stated. 

Mr.  TRAMMELL.  Mr. President--The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the  Senator  yield further? Mr. BRATTON. I yield. Mr.  TRAMMELL.  I appreciate . that the  Senator's  position is correct; but it seems to me it would be better from my viewpoint, as I look at the matter, to amend it so that he would have the option of proceeding in either way. 

Of  course, we have a difference of opinion about this; but I

consider the machinery through the customs officials far better and that it will be more satisfactory to the importers and to the people of the country than to have it assigned to courts scattered hither and thither throughout the country, with no uniform rule and no trained people upon the court to puss upon these questions.  So  I think the importer ought to have the option of selecting either method of procedure. Mr.  SWANSON.  Mr. President-- .

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Does the Senator from New Mexico yield to the  Senator  from  Virginia? 

Mr. BRATTON. I do. Mr.  SWANSON.  1 think the amendment offered by the  Sen-

ator from New Mexico is very important if we do not want  to 

have conflicting jurisdiction; but it seems to me it could be very easily accomplished on page 3, after line 15, by inserting " . which court alone shall have jurisdiction of such  matter." 

The  Senator's  amendment does that, in effect. Mr. BRATTON. That.is the sole effect of the amendment. Mr.  SWANSON.  That is the effect of it, but it could be accomplished very simply in  this  way. Then it would read:                                                           

> Upon the seizure of such book or matter the collector shall transmit
> information thereof to the district attorney of the district in which is
> situated the office at wbich such seizure has taken place, who shall insti-
> tute proceedings in the district rourt for the forfeiture, confiscation, and destruction of the book or matter seized, which court alone shall
> ·have jurisdiction of such matter.

Perhaps the amendment does that anyhow ; but I think it is important to put that in. Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President--Mr. BRATTON. I yield to the  Senator  from  Utah. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I still can not see why the protest should not be taken first to the  Court  of  Customs  Appeals. Mr. BRATTON. Because we are providing a speeial  system through which to deal with the books  specified  in this  amend-

ment. That system should be exclusive. It is complete. It 

invests jurisdiction in the  United  States  courts, with the right of a jury trial and the right of review.  

> If

the Government calls  that  machinery into play, certainly the  Senator  from  Utah  would not  want  the importer to appeal to the  Court  of  Customs  Appeals and perhaps have conflicting judgments rendered. one holding that the material is not to be excluded and directing the collector to return it to the importer, 

and  the other holding that it should be confiscated and  de-

stroyed. What would the collector do, let me ask the  Senator 

froin  Utah,  if this amendment is not adopted, and an importer should appeal to the Court of  Customs  Appeals, and that court should hold that his book or material was admissible and direct the collector to admit it, and at the same time, through the procedure prescribed in this amendment, the  United  States  dis-

trict court, or let us say the  Supreme  Court  of the  United  States 

on  appeal,  should hold that the book did fall within the ban of the statute, and direct the collector to destroy it? Mr.  SMOOT.  Who would take the appeal in that case? Mr.  BRATTON.  The Government would take the appeal. Mr.  SMOOT.  The Government, as I understood the  Senator, 

through the  Customs  Court,  had decided that it was admissible. Who is going to take the appeal, now, to a superior court? Mr.  BRATTON.  Mr. President, I am constrained to believe that the  Senator  does not understand the situation. In the one case, under the amendment, the Government initiates the pro-ceeding.  That  is, under the  Senator's  amendment the Govern-ment initiates the proceeding by the collector certifying the question to the  United  States  attorney. Let us suppose that the  United  States  court  holds against the importer, and he appeals to the  Supreme  Court; or let us  sup-552.0  CONGRESSIONAL ~ RECORD-SENATE  MARon  18 pose that the  United  States district court holds in  filvor  of the importer, and the Government takes an appeal to the Supreme 

Court  of the  United  States.  Suppose,  in either event, that the Supreme  Court  of the  United  States  should render a final judg-ment that the book was indecent and immoral and direct the collector to destroy it. Let us suppose that at the same time the importer has appealed to the  Court  of . Customs  Appeals, and that court holds with him and directs the collector to return the book.  · What is the collector going to do? Which judgment will he obey and which  will  he disregard? 

Mr . SMOOT.  It seems to me that 90 per cent of all the cases that will arise, if they went to the  United  States  Customs 

Court,  would be settled there--yes, more than  90  per cent of the cases. 

Mr.  BRATTON. But we have undertaken here to set up an exclusive method of dealing with books and material of this 

class and character. We discussed that question at length last evening and to-day-that as to this particular class of material we have legislated completely, giving the right of jury trial, the right of appeal, and providing that it shall be determined by the  United  States  court instead of the  Customs  Court. 

Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  M.r. President, I have risen so often, and the statement has been made so many times clearly, that I should not add a word; but, manifestly, if we adopt this amendment, impliedly it is a repeal of the existing law as to procedure in the courts.  Of  course,  the  julisdictio:q  will then be exclusively in the  United  States  district court and not in the 

Customs  Court. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That is what I say. Mr.  SHORTRIDGE.  There is no harm,  then,  in putting this in. It is surplusage; it is unnecessary;  bu.t  put it in. Mr. BRATTON. That may be true by necessary implica-tion; but the amendment I have  offered  accomplishes it ex-pressly-the very thing we all desire. Mr.  SMOOT.  Let the amendment go into the bill. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by the  Senator  from New Mexico to the amendment of the  Senator  from  Utah. 

The amendment to the amendment was agreed to. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The question now is upon  agree-

ing to the amendment of the  Senator  from  Utah  as amended. Mr.  SIMMONS.  Mr.  President, before the vote is taken, Iwish to say that I am going to vote for the amendment offered by the Senator from  Utah  because it removes the objection I had to this provision before. My objections  are  the  same  as those expressed by the junior  Senator  from  Alabama  [Mr. 

BLACK]  with regard to the matter.  ~

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The question is on agreeing to the amendment as amended. The amendment as amended was agreed to. The amendment made in Committee of the Whole as amended was concurred in, and it is as follows : In lieu of the matter  inserted  in the amendment made in the Commit-tee of the Whole as a substitute for subdivision (a) of section  305, 

beginning on page 286, line  10,  insert  the  following :      

> "SI!IC. 305. IMMORAL ARTICLES-IMPORTATION PROHIBITED

"(a)  Prohibition of importation: All persons are prohibited from importing into the  United  States from any foreign country any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, advertisement,  circular,  print, picture, or drawing containing any matter advocating or urging treason or in-surrection against the  United  States  or forcible resistance to any law of the  United  States, or containing any threat to take tbe life of or 

inflict  bodily harm upon any person in  the  United  States., or any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, writing, advertisement, circular, print, picture, 

drawing,  or  other  representation, figure, or image on or of paper or other material, or any cast, instrument, or other article which is obscene or immoral, or any drug or medicine or any article whatever for  the  prevention of conception or for causing unlawful abortion, or any lottery ticket, or any printed paper that may be used as a lottery ticket, or any advertisement of ' any lottery. No such articles, whether imported separately or contained in packages with other goods entitled to entry, shall be admitted to entry; and all  such  articles and, unless  

> it

appears to the satisfaction of the collector that the obscene or other prohibited articles contained in the package were inclosed therein with-out the knowledge or consent of the importer, owner, agent, or  con-

signee, the entire contents of the package in which such articles are contained, shall be  subjeet  to seizure and forfeiture as hereinafter pro-vided:  Provided,  That the drugs hereinbefore mentioned, when imported  

> in

bulk and not put up for any of the purposes hereinbefore specified. ,are excepted from the operation of this subdivision:  Provided  further, 

That the Secretary of the  Treasury  may, in his discretion, admit the so-called classics or books of recognized and established literary or scientific merit, but may, in his discretion, admit such classics or books only when imported for noncommercial purposes. 

> I

"Upon  the appearance of any such book or matter at any  customs 

office  the same shall be seized and held by the collector to await  the ·

judgment of the district court as hereinafter  -provided,  and no protest shall be taken to the  United  States Customs Court from the decision of  the  collector.  Upon  the seizure of such book or matter the collector shall transmit information  thereof  to  the  district attorney of tbe  district 

in which is situated the  office  at  whi~h  such seizure bas taken place, wbo shall institute proceedings in the district court for  the  forfeiture, confiscation, and destruction of tbe book or matter seized.  Upon  the 

adjudication that such book or matter thus seized is of  the  character the entry of wbicb is by this section prohibited, it shall be ordered destroyed and  shall  be -destroyed.  Upon  adjudication that such book or matter thus seized is not of the character the entry of which is by 

this  section prohibited, it  shall  not be excluded from entry under the provisions of this section. 

" In any such proceeding any party in interest may upon demand have 

the  facts at issue determined by a jury, and any party may have an appeal or the right of review as in the case of ordinary actions or  suits." 

The next amendment on which a separate vote was reserved was on page 379, line 4,  "Entry  of  merchandise." 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President, the amendment on page 379, subsection (h) was concurred in, and now I wish to take up on page  380,  paragraph 484 (j),  "Release  of merchandise." I send an amendment to the desk. The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  The clerk will report the amend-ment offered by the  Senator  from  Utah. 

The  LmrsLATIVE  CLEB.K.  On  page  380,  the  Senator  from  Utah 

proposes to strike out lines 14 to 25, inclusive, and to insert in lieu thereof the following : (j) Release of  merchandise  : Merchandise  shall be released from customs custody only to or upon the order of the carrier by whom  the 

merchandise is brought to  the  ·port  at which entry  is  made, except that merchandise in a bonded warehouse shall be released  from  customs custody only to or upon the order of the proprietor of the warehouse. The coUector shall return to the person making entry the  bill-of  lading (if any is produced)  with  a notation thereon to the  effect  that entry for such merchandise has been made. The collector shall not be liable to any person in respect of the delivery of  merchandise  released from 

customs  custody in accordance with the  provisions  of this section. Where a recovery is bad in any suit or proceeding against a collector on account of the release of merchandise from  customs  custody, in the performance of his  official  duty, and  the · court certifies that there was probable  cau.se  for such release by the collector, or that he acted under the  directions  of  the  Secretary of the Treasury, or other proper  officer 

of the Government, no execution  shall  issue  against such collector, but the amount so recovered shall, upon final judgment, be paid out of moneys appropriated from the Treasury for that purpose. Mr . SMOOT.  Mr. President, the purposes of this amendment are as follows : First. It permits the release of merchandise from customs custody upon the order of the carrier. the bill in its present form requiring release only to the carrier; second, in order that the collector may have proof that entry has been made, it per-mits the collector to retain the documents, other than the bill of lading, upon which entry has been made; and, third, it provides 

that  where a recovery is had against a collector on account of release of merchandise from customs custody, in the perform-ance of his official duty, and the court certifies that there was probable cause for his action or that he acted under official direction, no execution shall issue against the collector, but 

the  amount recovered shall be paid out of money appropriated from the Treasury. The  third  provision is substantially the law with respect to the liability of collectors of internal revenue. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The question is on agreeing to the amendment to the amendment made as in Committee of the Whole. The amendment to the  amendment  was agreed to. The amendment made as in Committee of the Whole as amended was concurred in. The next amendment on which a separate vote was reserved was, on page 427, paragraph 526,  "merchandise  bearing  trade-

marks." 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President, I understand the  Senator  from Georgia is interested in this  ~ paragraph,  as well as other Sena-tors. 

Mr.  GEORGE.  Mr. President, it will be recalled that when this paragraph was before the  Senate  as in  Committee  of the Whole it was debated at some considerable length, and I believe that I had more to say than almost anyone else in opposition to it. The amendment was adopted, however, and now the matter which was referred to in the debate has been brought to the attention of the chairman of the  Committee  on Finance, to wit, the effect of this amendment upon existing treaties. 1930  CONGRESS! ON AL  RECORD-SEN ATE  I ·5521 

I have looked into the matter with some care, and I believe the proper course to pursue is to allow the amendment to be concurred in and go to conference, so  that  the conferees may make any adjustment that may be necessary and in harmony with existing treaties. Mr.  NORRIS.  Mr. President, may I inquire of the Senator whether he is talking about the amendment on page 429 or the amendment on page 428? Mr.  GEORGE. _ On  page 428, particularly with reference to the amendment in lines 14 and 15, and subdivision (b) on the same page. 

Mr.  NORRIS.  What is the subject, trade-marks? 

.Mr.  GEORGE.  Registered trade-marks and plltent notices. Mr.  FLETCHER.  Mr. President, I have not examined this particular subject, but I recall in  1916  I was a member of ajoint international high  commission  which held a session in Buenos Aires for about two weeks, and there the foundation was laid for a convention of South American countries with reference to trade-marks and patents. I do not think it had anything to do with copyrights, but it had to do with  trade-

marks and . patents. Following that conference, some conven-tions were entered into between the United States and certain South American countries, perhaps all Pan American countries. Among other things, at the time it was urged that whenever there was a patent issued in the United States or a trade-mark registered here, if it was recorded in one of our South American neighbor Republics, it would have the force and effect there it had here, and whenever any of those countries issued a trade-mark or a patent, and it was recorded or registered here, it would become effective, but not before. Those were some of the  unde:r;Iying  thoughts at the time, and I know there was some 

ag1·eement  made and  some · conventions entered into. I was wondering whether this would have any bearing on them. . Mr.  SMOOT.  No effect at all. This is an entirely different question. Mr.  GEORGE.  This is a somewhat different question. Mr. FLETCHER. - Mr. President, if those conventions are in effect, and if they provide that our laws do not apply until the patents or tra.de-marks are recorded or registered, and vice versa, that  therr  laws would not apply to our patents until they were registered, it seems to me this might have a bearing. Mr.  SMOOT.  It has no bearing at all upon the validity of  

> a~te~

.Mr. FLETCHER. No; not on the validity, but on the effect of the patent, the protection of the patent or the lack of pro: tection. Mr.  GEORGE.  Mr. President, I wish to make an additional observation. There are articles made abroad which are not produced in this country at all.  Obviously,  there could be no possible reason for prohibiting their entry, although  under  atrade-mark, or bearing a patent designation, and I direct the Senator's attention to the fact that even if the provision,  espe-

cially in paragraph (b) can be retained in conference, in view of our existing  treaties,  there ought to be exceptions from the trade-mark and patent notice provision of any article produced abroad which is not produced at all in the  United  States.  Cer-

tainly that feature of it ought to be cared for. 

I think the Senator is quite right in asking that the amend-ment made as in Committee of the Whole be concurred in in 

order  that it  may  go to conference.  · · ' · 

The PRESIDING  OFFICER  (Mr.  FEss  in the chair). The question is on concurring in the amendment made  as  in  Com-

mittee of the Whole.  ·

The amendment was concurred in. The next amendment on which a reservation was made was, on page 429, line 12,  " Wild mammals and  birds." 

Mr. McNARY. Mr. President, the junior Senator from  Con-

necticut [Mr.  WALCOTT]  is interested in this provision, and he left in my possession a memorandum concerning  it.  I ask the Senator from  Utah  whether he desires to have the matter taken up to-night? Mr.  SMOOT.  I had intended to do so. I will say to the Senator that the amendment was offered by the senior Senator from South Dakota [Mr.  NoRBECK].  He saw me yesterday and asked me to allow the amendment as agreed to as in Committee of the Whole to go to conference, and have the conferees ta :ke up the dispute between the House and the Senate. Mr. McNARY. That conforms to the view of the Senator from Connecticut. Mr.  NORRIS.  Mr. President, I want to inquire whether the arrangements made are  satisfactory  to the senior Senator from South Dakota [Mr.  NoRBECK],  who at the present moment does not happen to be in the  Chamber.  I know he is interested in 

this amendment. Mr.  FESS.  I am doing  now · just  what the  Senator  from South Dakota asked me to do. Mr. MoNARY. I had that in  ·mind.  Both of the  Senators  are now absent. I understand that the Senator from  Utah  is will-ing to conform to the views of the Senator from South Dakota and the Senator from Connecticut. Mr.  NORRIS.  Then we can do it -now. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  . In the preceding paragraph there were two amendments which should have been concurred in. Mr.  SMOOT.  It  was- understood  that both amendments should be concurred in. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  · Without objection, the amend-ments are concurred in .Mr. McNARY. Mr. President, at this point I should like to have inserted in the RECoRD a memorandum which was handed to me by the  Senator  from Connecticut [Mr.  WALCO'IT]. 

The · PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Without objection, it is so 

ordered. The memorandum is as follows :   

> MEMORANDUM ON PARAGRAPH 527

Paragraph 527, regulating the  importation  of certain birds from foreign countries, was included in the  tariff  act with the approval  of  the Customs Service and the Treasury Department. It was struck out by the Finance Committee apparently under a misapprehension that it 

referred only to birds protected by foreign laws, whereas it was intended to correct a troublesome situation arising under the regulations  of  the Department  of  State,  Customs Service, and the Department of Agricul-ture. The amendment restoring the paragraph was adopted by the Com-mittee of the Whole on March 4 (CoNGR:msSIONAL  RECORD,  March 4, p. 4686). Certain birds and mammals are now given special protection by some foreign  countries.  Under  the consular regulations  of  the  State  Depart-ment (par. 721 u u 6), consuls are required to warn persons intending to ship  any  such animals or birds that the necessary authorization should be obtained before the consignment is forwarded, in order to avoid delay or misunderstanding on arrival at the port of entry. The Biological Survey in the Department  of  Agriculture, which issues per-mits for foreign birds  is  frequently subjected to criticism by con-servationists and lovers of wild life for issuing permits for such con-signments, and  officers  of the customs are likewise criticized for not finding some way to prevent the entry of species which are specially protected so that the United States may not be made  a dumping ground for birds or game illegally captured elsewhere. Section 527 is intended to clarify the present situation and strengthen the efforts of  United 

States consuls and customs  officers  to prevent smuggling  of  such ship-ments by providing a definite method of procedure in all such cases. The disposition of goods is similar to that provided for the disposition of plumage  of  wild birds, and affords a simple and satisfactory method of disposal by  officers  of the customs. Subsection 2 was included in the amendment to except  birds  and ani-mals entered for scientific purposes only. It is  fair  to assume that 

rare species collected for a public museum have been obtained under proper authorization and  need  not be detained at the port of entry when unaccompanied by a consular certificate until such certificate can be obtained. Subsection 3 is intended to relieve a situation which has existed for some time under the plumage section of the act by which sportsmen returning from Canada with game  birds  are  required either to pluck their birds, or furnish a bond for the destruction of the plumage in 

order to comply with the provisions of the plumage clause, before bringing them across the border.  ·

Under paragraph 527 this requirement is eliminated and furthermore the paragraph is worded so that it will not apply to animals or birds brought in for scientific purposes. Mr.  SMOOT.  I now ask that the amendment made as in Committee of the Whole be concurred in. 

The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Without objection the amend-ment will be concurred in. There are at the bottom of the page two amendments that should be concurred in. Mr.  SMOOT.  Yes. The  PRESIDING- OFFICER.  Without objection they will be concurred in. 

Mr.  HOWELL.  Mr.  President,  I offer the amendment which I send to the desk. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Before the Senator from Nebraska offers his amendment the clerk will report the next amendment reserved. The  LEGISlATIVE  CLERK.  On  page 447, paragraph 584, line 4, opium. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The amendment offered by the Senator from Nebraska will be stated. The  LEGISLATIVE  CLERK.  Amend  the amendment on page 447. following the word  " rem  " in line 12, as follows: 

StrikE!  out the words  " or other executive or warrant  officer  of the vessel nor the owner  ..  and insert in lieu thereof the following :  " nor ;5522  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE . 1\iARCH  18 any of the officers  (including  licensed  and unlicensed officers and petty ottice rs) nor the owner of the  vessel,"  thus causing the  original  amend-me nt to read as follows:  "Except  that the master or owner of the vessel used by any  per ~ on  as a commcm  carrier  in the transaction of busine ss as such common carrier shall  not;  be liable to such penalty and the vessel shall not be held subject to the  lie~  if it appears to the .satisfaction of the court that neither the master  nor  any of the officers (including licensed and unlicensed officers and petty officers) nor the owner of the vessel knew, and could  not.- by the exercise of the highest degree of care and diligence, have known that such smoking opium,  or       

> opium prepared for smoking was on board."

Mr.  McNARY.  Mr. President, will the Senator have any ob-jection to a unanimous-consent agreement to limit debate on the proposal? 

Mr.  HOWELL. I would not like to limit debate. I think probably it will not take any  time  whatever, though. 

1\lr.  ' SMOOT.  I rather think the amendment is all right. Iwould like to ask the junior Senator from Oregon [Mr.  STEIWEB] 

if he has studied it and whether there is any objection to it. Mr.  STElWER.  Mr.  President,  ,if  my colleague will yield--1\fr. McNARY. I yield. 

Mr.  STEIWER. I will say that I have not had time to make a very full examination of the amendment, but my impression is that it is unobjectionable.  So  f{!r  as I am personally con-cerned I am disposed to accept it. Mr.  COPELAND.  Mr. President, will the Senator yield? The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from Oregon yield to the Senator from New York? Mr. McNARY. I yield. 

Mr.  COPELAND.  I want to be sure  ab<>ut  this  matte ·r.  It is 

the opium amendment, is it not? Mr.  SMOOT.  It is. Mr.  COPELAND.  If the amendment proposed should be adopted, what would be the procedure, then, if opium were found on a ship? 

Mr.  HOWELL. There is no attempt to change the amendment which was adopted in  Committee  of the Whole, except to clarify the designation of the officers on the vessel. I want to say that the Treasury Department stated that the designation of the officers on the vessel would seem rather indefinite. The Treas-ury suggested, therefore, that the phrase  " neither the master nor any of the officers, including  licensed  and unlicensed officers and petty officers, nor the owner of the  vessel,"  be used in lieu of the officers now designated in the provision. 

Mr.  COPELAND.  Will the Senator be good enough to tell me this? Suppose there were some opium discovered on a ship? Mr. McNARY. 1\fr. President, I have the floor. I am anxious to find out if we can enter into a unanimous-consent  agreement 

to limit debate if the amendment is not to be accepted. I do not want to interfere with the discussion of the senior Senator from New York, but if we could get that understanding it would probably expedite the consideration of the amendment. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from Oregon submit the request? Mr. MoNARY. If I may have the attention of the  Senator 

from  Utah,  may I ask if he has agreed upon the acceptance of the amendment proposed by the Senator from Nebraska? Mr.  SMOOT.  I see no objection to it. l\Ir.  COPELAND.  1\Ir.  President, will the  Senator  yield? The  PRESIDI~G  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from Oregon yield to the Senator from New York? Mr. McNARY. I yield. The first amendment suggested placed upon the owner of the  

> co~on

carrier an  ~bsolute  liability, but provided no way by wh1ch the  <;>wner  might  exc:ulpate  himself from that liabili t y. I ~bought  It was un-Amencan and unfair. It was de bated qmte at length and after two days' debate and a vote had the Senator from Arkansas  [Mr:  RoBINSoN]  and I agreed  upo~ 

the amendment which was then adopted in Committee of the Whole. That amendment agreed to still left upon the owner the responsibility, with a penalty of $25 an ounce, unless the owner could prove to the satisfaction of the court that neither the owner nor the master nor any warrant officer knew or could by the exercise of the highest degree of care have known of the presence of opium on board ship. To that language and the use of the words  " warrant offi-

cers"  there is some objection, as I understand the  Senator  

> fro~

Nebraska, and the customs service proposed, in order to 

clarify  the language, that words be added which will have adefinite meaning, that the amendment as adopted in Committee of the Whole be amended by the use of the words contained in the amendment offered by the Senator from Nebra s ka. I see no objection to the amendment proposed by the Senator from Nebraska. It places a little greater burden upon the owner because it is not only necessary, under the amendment proposed just now by the Senator from Nebraska, that the owner shall exculpate himself by proving that he did not know but he must prove that the master did not know and he  must 

proTe that none of the officers had knowledge nor could they have known by the exercise of diligence. It does place upon the owner a very severe burden.  So  far as I am concerned Iam willing that that burden should be placed there  beca~se 

I felt that a law-abiding owner, exercising full care in the selection of his master and in the selection of his licensed and unlicensed officers, will be able to protect himself. Mr.  COPELAND.  Mr. President--The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from Oregon yield to the Senator from New York? Mr.  McNARY.  I yield. Mr.  COPELAND.  Under  the paragraph as amended a ship traveling around the world might stop in New York and while in the  b,arbor  it might be discovered that there was opium aboard. The peace officer or whoever is involved in the matter finding out  ab<>ut  it,  the Treasury officials or customs officers, would not be able to find the sailor or . employee of the ship  who 

brought the opium. In that event the owner or master would be haled into court. Is that correct? Mr. STEIWER. The procedure suggested by the amendment would be a libeling of the ship by the  Customs  Service  and the owner would be held to the extent of $25 an ounce. Mr.  COPELAND.  Would the ship be held? 

Mr.  STEIWER. Yes; the ship would be held and the owner would be held until the obligation was discharged. Mr.  COPELAND.  The ship would be kept in the harbor until then? Mr. STEIWER.  Oh,  no;  .the  settled practice in maritime  

> aff~rs

is to bond the ship. I do not think the Customs Service would hold the ship. The shipowners are constantly meeting with some kind of action in rem against their vessels growin gout of collisions and actions by members of the crew. Th ey are all prepared  o~  20  minutes' notice to furnish bond. 

Mr.  COPELAND.  And  the  burdep,  of proof would be on the  

> owne~

or  tb,e  master? Mr. STEIWER. It would. Mr.  COPELAND.  Is that quite fair? Mr. STEIWER. I am not perfectly sure, but it is a thing that I consented to  at  the time the amendment was pr e par ed in conjunction with the Senator from Arkansas [1\lr.  RoBIN SON ]. 

He thought the burden ought to be upon the master. Op ium is so devastating and the difficulty of its exclusion is  so  gr ea t  that 

I consented that with respect  .to  this particular matter the 

burde!!  might be upon the owner, feeling that the courts would 

Mr.  COPELAND. I am very anxious to have made clear ex-actly what is the responsibility of the owners of the vessel and those who operate the ship. No one here can possibly be more bi t ter about opium and its harmful effects than I am; but I

have seen so much of the smuggling of opium that I do not want to put innocent owners and operators and officers of a ship in hazard of the law by any vote of mine. That is the way I feel about it, but I want  to understand exactly what  the  amendment, up on which we are about to vote, proposes and what the  sig-

nificance of it is. That is all. I simply want to be informed. .. be just and that an honest man would be protected. 

Mr.  STEIWER.  Mr. President, will my  c9ll~gue  yield? Mr.  :MoNARY.  Certainly, Mr. STEIWER. I shall endeavor in just a word to answer th e que s tion propounded by the Senator from New York.  Under 

exi s ting law, the owner of a common carrier has no liability at all. The entire liability is upon the master of the ship.  rr'he 

e..'ti s ting  law has not been satisfactory from the standpoint of the exclusion of this drug from our country by reason of the fact that the master was usually financially irresponsible or partially so. The fines of $25 an ounce have not been collected except to a very small extent. Therefore it has been felt that  the.r~ 

should be a responsibility  o~  some  k:ipd  upon  tbe  ownet~ - · ··: 

Mr.  COPELAND.  May  I ask the Senator from  U ta h if th e re 

is  any protest from the shipowners about the mat t er? Mr.  SMOOT.  Since  th~  a,mendment  was agreed to in Com-mittee of the Whole?  ·

Mr.  COPELAND.  Yes. Mr.  SMOOT.  I have not received a letter. 

:Mr.  COPELAND. Anyway, the matter would be in con-ference?  - ·

Mr.  SMOOT.  Yes. 

Mr. COPELAND.  So  if they  ha,ve.  a grievance it can be thrashed out there? 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Yes. Mr.  KEAN.  · MI:.  President,  :wtn  the .Senator yield? 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE . 5523 

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the  Senator  from  Oregon 

yield to the Senator from New Jersey? Mr. McNARY. I yield. Mr.  KEAN.  How  fl:!,r  does thls go in regard to the railroad; for instance, railroads in  Canada?  Who is responsible in the case of a railroad  from  Canada  or a railroad  from  Mexico? Mr.  HOWELL.  Mr. President--Mr. McNARY. I yield to the Senator from Nebraska. Mr.  HOWELL.  The owner is protected either  )Vl:!,Y,  to  this 

extent: If he can show the Secretary of the Treasury that he is not to blame, the Secretary can remit the entire fine. Mr. KEAN. But in the case of the railroad? Mr.  HOWELL.  If the Secretary refuses to do it, the owner can go to court. In other words, he now has two chances, while previously he had but one chance. He could go to the Secretary of the Treasury and  l:!,ppeal  to his conscience under the circumstances. This provision is that if the Secretary  re-

fuses to give relief, then the owner can go to  court,  and not until the court has decided can be be held. Mr. BLEASE.  Mr.  President, if the Senator will permit me, I should like to ask a question. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from  Oregon 

yield to the Senator  from  North  Carolina? 

Mr. McNARY .. I yield. 

Mr.  BLEASE. What does the word  " court"  mean?  Of 

course, I know what  "court"  ordinarily means, but does it mean a court and jury, or merely a judge? Mr.  HOWELL.  It means a court-- ·Mr.  BLEASE.  Does it mean that the question  is  left in the discretion of the judge? Mr.  HOWELL.  I should assume that is true, but I am not an attorney. Mr. BLEASE. If the Senator from  Oregon  will permit me amoment further, I do not like this amendment, and I do not like the provision in the shape in which it now is or as last voted on by the Senate, because I believe it is going to open the gateway to more opium than has ever flooded the country. I think it is an invitation to shipowners to bring opium in ; I think it is a wide-open invitation to opium dealers to bring it here, and when it comes here there will not be anything done with it. That is exactly what I believe the effect of the lan-guage proposed is going to prove to be. However, I am going to leave it without delaying the Senate to the members of the conference committee, and I hope that they will make no mis-take, because the Senator from  Utah  has made a great fight, a s uccessful fight, on the question of obscene books, and the next meanest and lowest down thing we have to deal with is opium. Ibelieve the Senator from  Utah  will try to see that its admis-sion into this country is properly safeguarded.  ·

Mr.  SMOOT.  I think opium is one of the greatest curses that  afllict  the world.  ·

The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on agreeing to the amendment proposed by the Senator from Nebraska  [Mr. 

HowELL] to the amendment made as in Committee of the Whole. The amendment to the  a.I\lendment  was agreed to. The amendment as amended was concurred in. Mr.  SMOOT  obtained the floor. Mr.  SIMMONS.  Mr. President--The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Does the Senator from  Utah 

yield to the Senator from North Carolina? Mr.  SMOOT.  I yield. Mr.  SIMMONS.  I desire to ask the Senator from  Utah  if he 

will  not permit me to call up an amendm e nt which I desire to offer in connection with paragraph 1552, on page 239, line 15? The Senate, upon my motion, eliminated from that paragraph the words,  " cigarette books, cigarette-book covers, cigarette pa per in all forms, except cork  paper."  There was a duty'  of  60 

per cent imposed on those articles in paragraph 1552. The words which I have quoted were by a vote of the Senate stricken ou t of the paragraph. It was then moved that the articles be pl a ced upon the free list. The Senator from  Utah  announced that th ey might go upon the free list, and the whole matter go to conference. There was a vi va voce vote, but in the con-fu sion, ve r y few Senators being in the  Chamber,  the motion to pu t the articles on the free list was lost. Now, Mr. President, I wi sh to ask for a reconsideration of that vote. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Is there objection to the re-que st for a reconsideration of  the · vote? 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. P. resident, let me  tell  the Senator the situation as my book shows it to be. The  '¥Jlrds  " cigarette books, cigarette-book covers, cigarette paper in all forms except cork  paper"  were eliminated from paragraph 1552, on page 239, but there was no action taken as to where the item should go. I understand  th~  Senator  now wants, instead of having the  articles  fall  under the tissue-paper paragraph, which no doubt is where it would  fal.l,  in view of the action of the Senate--Mr.  SIMMONS.  I think  so: 

Mr.  SMOOT.  The  Senator  wants to put the articles upon the free list. I will say to the Senator that I have no objection to that, with the understanding, of course, that the amendment will go to conference for consideration. Mr.  SIMMONS.  Of  course, I understand that it will  neces-

sarily go to conference. Mr.  FLETCHER.  The situation is-The  PRESIDENT  pro tempore. Is there objection to the motion to reconsider  1 The  Chair  hears none. Mr.  FLETCHER.  Mr.  President,  the Senator does not want his amendment reconsidered. Mr.  SIMMONS.  I do not desire my amendment that  pre-

vailed to be reconsidered, but the amendment to put the articles on the free list I wish to have considered. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The  Chair  is trying to get the question before the Senate. If there is objection to a reconsid-eration, it will not be before the Senate. 

Mr . FLE'.rCHER.  What the Senator from North  Carolina 

wants is not that this item be reconsidered, because his motion was agreed to, and it was stricken from the bill ; but he moved then to place the articles upon the free list, and that was the question which either was not passed upon or was passed on adversely. Mr.  SIMMONS.  That is what I want reconsidered. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The  Ohair  understands that the motion to put these articles on the free list was rejected and now the Senator from North Carolina wants that action  recon· 

sidered. 

Mr.  SIMMONS . That is correct. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Is there objection to a re-

consideration of the vote whereby the amendment to place the articles on the free list was rejected? The  Ohair  hears none. Now, the amendment is before the Senate, and the clerk will report it for the information of the Senate. The  LmrBLATIVE  CLERK.  The Senator  from  North Carolina proposes, on page 253, after line 5, to insert :             

> PAR. 1649. Cigarette books, cigarette-book covers, and cigarette paper in all forms, except cork paper.

Mr.  SIMMONS.  My understanding is that the Senator from 

Utah  accepts that amendment, with the understanding that the whole question goes to conference? 

Mr. ·  SMOOT.  I would not want it to be numbered paragraph 1649.  Citrons  and citron peel are covered by paragraph 1649, so I suggest that the amendment come in between lines 7 and 8, and then we  will  fix the numbers, because they will have to be changed afterwards anyway. Mr.  SIMMONS.  Of  course. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I have . no - objection to that. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on agreeing to the amendment.  ·

The amendment was agreed to. Mr.  SIMMONS.  Now, Mr. President, if the Senator from 

Utah  will pardon me further, I am bringing these matters up 

because- I can not stay here this evening, and I am not sure Iwill be able to be here to-morrow. The Senator will recall that I have spoken to him about an amendment on page 120, line 7. I wish to ins e rt, after the words  "ad  valorem,"  in line 7,  the 

words  "bamboo  stems suitable for rug poles,  and." 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That would make them carry 45 per cent ad valorem. Mr.  SIMMONS.  Yes. While bamboo, the raw material, is on the free list, manufactures of bamboo are dutiable at 45 per cent ad valorem. These stems are nothing in the world exc e pt an offshoot of the bamboo, and they are brought  into  thi s coun· 

try in long poles, simply sawed in two, and made available for the purpo s es of rug poles. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Will the  Senator - send bis amendment to the desk? It is not here. 

Mr.  SIMMONS.  Very  well. Mr. President, the raw material is upon the free list, but this offshoot of the raw material, after it is manufactured, is put upon the dutiable list. The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The amendment will be stated. The  LEGisLATIVE  CLERK.  On  page 120, line 7, after the words 

"ad  valorem,"  it is proposed to insert  "bamboo  stems sui t able for rug poles,  and." 

Mr.  SMOOT.  May I ask the Senator to change the position of the amendment? Let it come between line s 9 and 10,  be-

cause we have above that,  "all  articles not specially provided for, wholly or partly manufactured of rattan, bamboo, osier, or willow, 45 per cent ad  valorem." 

Mr.  SIMMONS.  I am willing if it will accomplish the  pur-

pose I ba ve in view. 5524  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  MARCH  18 

Mr.  SMOOT.  I think it will  be  better to put it in the place Mr. McNARY. Mr. President, I am curious to know the  sub-

I have indicated. ject which the Senate is discussing now in the matter of the Mr.  SIM:l\IONS.  I do not object. I put it at the place I countervailing duty. I can not understand how it arises. have  indi~ated  because it was suggested to  ·me  that it was Mr.  SMOOT.  On  page 189, the countervailing duty on pulp necessary in order to accomplish the object I bad in view. and pulpboard was stricken out, with all of the other counter-l\lr.  SMOOT.  Let  the amendment come in on page  120,  vailing duties. Now the action of the  Senate  is to restore the line 9, after the words  " ad valorem.'' It does not fit in well countervailing duty upon pulp and pulpboard. in line 7. Mr. McNARY. It does not  affect  lumber in any way what-

1\fr.  SIMMONS.  Very well, I have no objection, if it will soever? .accomplish the same purpose. Mr.  SMOOT.  None whatever; just pulp and pulpboard. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Then instead of in line 7, after the words Mr. MoNARY. Very well. It does not affect the action which 

"ad  valorem,"  insert the amendment in line 9, after the words was taken by the Senate last night . with regard to rough-hewn -

"ad  valorem."  lumber? The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on agreeing Mr.  SMOOT.  Not at all. to the amendment offered by the Senator from .North Carolina. l\1r. SHEPPARD.  Mr.  President, the countervailing duty on The amendment was agreed to. lumber was restored only as to one kind of lumber. 

Mr.  COPELAND.  l\1r. President, may I ask the Senator Mr. McNARY. That is true-the rough-hewn lumber. from  Utah  what will be the procedure when we shall have Mr.  SHEPPARD.  It was stated at the time, however, that completed the reserved amendments? the Senator from Arizona [Mr. HAYDEN] would not be pre-Mr.  SMOOT.  What I should like to do, I will say to the eluded from offering an amendment extending the  countervail-

Senator-and I can only say what I should like to do-would ing duty to the other kind of lumber before we finish the bill. be to consider and dispose of the oil and lumber items. Then  Mr.  SMOOT.  Whenever we reach the schedule; that is  

> I'

shall ask unanimous consent that the Senate take up the bill understood. for individual amendment, schedule by schedule, beginning Mr.  THOMAS  of Oklahoma. Mr. President, a parliamentary with Schedule 1, and complete that schedule so that no more inquiry. amendments may be offered to it; and then to take up  ScheQ.- The  PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The Senator will state it. ules 2, 3, and 4, and so forth, until the bill shall be finally Mr.  THOMAS  of Oklahoma. Have the reserved amendments completed.  Such  an agreement will give every Senator notice been concluded? ahead that the schedules are to be considered in order and they The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  All but the one dealing with may be prepared at that time to take them up. Portland cement. That is the only one remaining. 

Mr.  COPELAND.  If I may continue my inquiry, if an Mr.  THOMAS  of Oklahoma.  Carrying  out the suggested wish article is now on the free list and it shall be desired to put of the chairman of the committee, I desire to state that I shall  

> it

into one of the preceding schedules on the dutiable list, not ask unanimous consent, because that would require the should we wait until we reach the free list? presence of a quorum; but I will state that I am ready on my 

1\Ir.  SMOOT.  It will be necessary to wait until the free  list  amendment on oil, and I shall be ready at 11 o'clock to-morrow is reached, and if action shall then be taken striking an article to present the matter to the Senate. from the free list, immediate action will be taken to put it 1n Mr.  BROOKHART.  Mr.  President, I have to be away to-the proper schedule in which it would fall in the dutiable list. morrow.  Will  my amendment be reached  to-morrow? 

Mr.  McKELLAR.  Mr.  President, we have done a pretty good Mr.  SMOOT.  I doubt it very much, because oil and lumber day's work to-day, and I am wondering if we can not take  a will be taken up, and I think they will take quite a while. recess until 11 o'clock in the morning?  Mr.  COPELAND.  Mr. President, may I ask the Senator from 

Utah  whether we can not meet at 12 o'clock to-morrow? Mr.  SMOOT.  I am going to make such a motion in a very Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President, I am going to ask the  Senate 

few moments, as soon as we get through with several small to recess now, and I want to meet at 11 o'clock. Notice was items. . given that oil would be taken up to-morrow. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The  Ohair  will advise the Mr. McNARY. Mr. President, I want this understood. The Senator from  Utah  that, on page 189, there is an amendment Senator from Oklahoma made the statement that he wanted to which has not been acted upon. It is in paragraph  1402,  be- take up oil to-morrow. There has been no agreement at all ginning in line 7, relating to a countervailing duty. on that? 

Mr.  SMOOT.  That is a . duty on paper board and pulp.  Mr.  SMOOT.  None whatever. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Yes. The  Ohair  is advised Mr. McNARY. That rests entirely within the decision of the that the amendment has not been acted upon. body. l\Ir.  SMOOT.  That is true. I think the amendment should Mr.  SMOOT.  Within the decision ' of the Senate. be disagreed to. Mr. PITTMAN. Mr. President, I desire to state that I think Mr. McKELLAR. It bas not been acted upon as yet. .the Senator from Oregon [Mr. McNARY] is entirely right.  Under 

1\Ir.  SMOOT.  The provision referred to is in the exact word- the rules any Senator may rise, and, if be is .recognized, offer ing that we have already agreed to restore as affecting coaL an amendment to the text of the House bill, unless there is aThe PRESIDING  OFFICER.  Coal  and lumber. unanimous-consent agreement providing some other method. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  The lumber provision was a little different In the first place, I want to say that I do not believe it is than this. This is the exact wording as the similar provision good practice, if a Senator has an amendment to the mineral affecting coal. It applies, perhaps, only to  Canada.  Whatever schedule, to wait until we reach the free list, because if it is action we took on coal we ought to take on this item, and I ask adopted it has to go in the body of the bill. We have it just that the Senate disagree to the committee amendment.  · •the  wrong way. If we adopt an amendment to the mineral Mr. BLAINE. I want to ask the Senator from  Utah  what schedule, and the mineral is on the free list, it ought auto-Senator is primarily interested in this item? matically to go  off  the  fr~e  list; because, whether it is  off  the 

l\Ir.  SMOOT.  The Senator from Maine  [Mr.  HALE].  free list or not, the courts will construe that it is off the free Mr. BLAINE. He is not present? list. Mr.  SMOOT.  No; but I am quite sure that what I suggest is I have several amendments to offer. They properly should be  

> in

accordance with his desires. offered as a part of the different schedules that are existing. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The  question  is on concurring Mr.  SMOOT.  Certainly. 

in the amendment made as in  Committee  of the Whole. Mr.  PITI'MAN.  If tl1ey are adopted, I do not have to pay Mr.  SMOOT.  I want the committee amendment nonconcurred any attention at all to the free list.  

> in.

Mr.  SMOOT.  I will ask that it be stricken from the free list. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question  is  on  concuning  Mr.  • PITTMAN.  If it is not stricken out, the court would in the amendment made as in  Committee  of the Whole. strike it out anyway. A prior action could not govern a subse-The amendment was nonconcurred in. quent action ; but I just want to say that I certainly shall 

Mr.  COPELAND.  Mr. President, I should like to ask the have to object, when we are considering different schedules, not to be able to say we propose anything, and have to wait 

Senator  if the countervailing duty on lumber was restored? until we get to the free list. I can not do it. Mr.  SMOOT.  I think it is as the House passed it.  , Mr.  SMOOT.  So  far as the free list is concerned, I will see Mr.  GOFF.  We. restored it on coal, and then we restored it that the Senate acts upon removing from the free list all items on lumber, as I understood, right afterwards by a viva voce that are taken from the free list, and put upon the dutiable vote. list. I do not want a bill carrying an item on th dutiable Mr.  SMOOT.  The reason I had doubt about it was because it list and  also  putting it upon the free list. was not exactly in the wording of the coal  p.rovision.  M:r.  PITTMAN.  It would be very complex and foolish, but 

:Mr.  McKELLAR.  One  put it in the hands of the President the court would undoubtedly hold that the item automatically and the other left it to the law. went  off  the free list. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE  5525 

Mr.  FLETCHER.  The point  is  this: The  Senator  from 

Utah,  in answer to the  Senator  from New York, said that when we were taking up the schedules, if it was  a question of trans-fering  an  article from the free list to the dutiable list, we had to wait until we reached the free list. I think that practice 

is wrong. I agree with the  Senator  from Nevada, that while we are dealing with the schedules, if we propose to put a duty on an article that is now on the free list, then is the time to do it, and not wait until we get to the free list. The free list can be taken  care  of when we get to it. 

Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr. President, let us not discuss that question to-night. We can discuss it when we reach it.   

> FLOOD OF

1927 BELOW  ARKANSAS  RIVER 

Mr.  RANSDELL.  Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have inserted in the  RECORD,  and  referred to the Committee on Commerce,  a very interesting study of the effect of the 

flood  of  1927,  by Mr. J. P. Kemper, an eminent civil engineer of my  State. 

There being no objection, the matter was referred to the Committee on Commerce and ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows : 

A STUDY  OF  THE EFFECT  OF  THE  FLOOD  OF  1927  BELOW  THE  ARKANSAS    

> RIVER WITH SUGGESTIONS

As  TO  MEANS  OF  RELI]llF,  BY J.  P.  KEMPER, C. E., NEW  ORLEANS,  LA. 

Under  the adopted project of flood control contained in the Jones-Reid Flood Control Act,  S.  3740,  known as the plan of the Army Engi-neers, fuse plugs are provided at Cypress Creek below the mouth of the Arkansas River into the Boeuf Basin and below the mouth of the Red River, into the Atchafalaya Basin. These fuse plugs  are  prearranged weak places in the levee, designed to fail and create crevasses into these basins before  thi!  levees protecting other areas become  thr e atened. 

AI though very expensive, the project will not lessen the frequency of destructive floods, because, naturally, the fuse-plug levees, being  neither ·

larger nor stronger than heretofore, will break just as often  as  the levees broke in the past, about once in four years average. The project simply makes it positive that the breaks will not be into the Yazoo, Pontchartrnin, or Lafourche Basins, but will be into the Boeuf and Atchafalaya Basins. While a guide levee is proposed to prevent the 

flood  waters from entering the upper end of the Tensas Basin, the enormously increased volume of backwater which would result from acrevasse into the Boeuf Basin will attack the Tensas Basin from the lo wer  end,  backing far up into it with great destruction. The people of the Boeuf, the lower Tensas, and the Atchafalaya Ba s ins (numbering about  200,000)  who are threatened with  Wing  thus 

sacrificed  are combating this project, with a view to having it changed or modified into an agency of benefit to them instead of destruction. The matter now seems to be hopelessly tied up in the courts, pending further flood-control legislation which is inevitable, if the work is to go forward. There is much uncertainty as to what should be done. All of  the 

constituted authorities bad backed  "levees  only"  for more than  200 

Years.  There was really but little available data to which to turn in attempting to devise new plans. Not only was the acquiring of data which might be adverse to the  "levees  only  " theory neglected but  It 

was actually condemned by those in authority as being an unnecessary expense. Fortunately, there is a fairly compl e te record of  flood  stages for many years back and a less complete record extending back a hun-dred years or more. There are meager data on flood stages even back to the beginning of levee construction, more than  200  years ago. There 

is also a limited but very valuable record of discharge observations made by the Mississippi River  Commission · since its creation in 1879 and also discharge records compiled by that commission  from  available records before that time. These records will be relied on in the preparation of the following study.   

> METHOD OF PROCEDURE

This study will be particularly concerned  with  the flood that arrived In 1927 at the basin lying north of the south bank levee of the Arkansas River near its mouth. It  will  be attempted herein to measure the vol-ume and intensity of this  flood  and  to see  It- it can not be taken care of by a less destructive and expensive method than that embodied in the adopted project of the Army engineers. There are gage stations on the Mississippi River at or near Helena, Ark., which is above the mouth of the White River ; on the White River at Clarendon, Ark., and on the Arkansas River at Little Rock, Ark. With the exception of an area of less than  4.000  square miles below these gage stations, the entire  run-off  of the Mississippi  Valley  above Arkansas City (a million square miles or more) must pass these gage stations. By gaging the .fl.ood at these several stations and adding in the slight  run-otr  from the  4,000  square miles referred to above, the volume that arrived at Arkansas City, or would have arrived had the levees held, is determined. By gaging the  flood  at Arkansas City up to the date of the Mounds Landing crevasse (April 21) and allowing for the maximum discharge there after that date,  It  can  be determined how much of that flood could have been safely carried down the  Missis-

sippi River below Arkansas City. The difference between these two amounts measures the volume of water for which provision must be made in order to take care of a flood  of the magnitude of that of 1927. The period during which the  flood  will be measured has been selected as beginning on April  10  at  Arkansas  City and ending on May  22,  cover-

ing 43 days. 

It is estimated that it will require three days for the flood to travel 

from  Helena or Clarendon to Arkansas City and four days from Little Rock. The discharge observation at Little Rock therefore extends from April 6 to May 18, at Helena and Clarendon from April 7 to May 19.  

> TABLE

1.-Bhowing  gages  ana  discharges  from  April  7 to May 19 at 

Hele-na,  Ark.,  srn  miles  below  CUtiro  a?td  12Z  miles  above  Chicot,  Ark  .• 

which  is the gage  station  tor  Arkansas  City.  Zero  of  gage,  1.t,1.81  teet 

abo1:e  mean  Gulf  level;  flood  stage,  # feet 1Date, 1927 Apr. 7 _________  -------------- _----------------------------------.Apr.  g___  -------------------------------------------------------Apr. 9 ___  ---------------------- -- ---------------------------- -- -Apr.  10 _____  --------- ______  ------------------- _____  ----- _______  _

.Apr. 1L  ______  ----------------------------------------------- __  _Apr. 12 ______________________  ----- __ __ ____ _____________________  _

Apr. 13  ______  ------ ____________________________________________  _

Apr.  14 __________________________________  ------ _____  ------------Apr. 15 _____________________  ------- _____  --------- _---------- ___  _

Apr. 16 ___________________________________________  --------------Apr. 17--------------------------------- _---------------------- _.Apr. 18 _____________ ___ _______ ___  ----- __ _______ _----- ____  ------ _

Apr. 19 ___________________________________________________  ------Apr. 2() _______ _ ----- ___________________________________________  _

Apr. 2L  ___  ---------------- ____  --------- _____  --------- ____ _____  _

Apr  22  ____  ------------------- __________  --------- ______________  _

Apr. 23  ________________________________________________________  _

.Apr. 24  _________  --------------- ____________  -------------- _____  _Apr.  25  _________  --------- ________________ _____________________  _

Apr. 26  ___  --------------- __  ------ ___  ------------ ___  --------- __  _

Apr.  Z7  ___  ---------------------- __________________ ___ _________  _

Apr. 28  ___  --------------------------------------------- __  ----- ~

.Apr. 29  ________  ------------ ____________________  --~- ___________  _Apr.  30  _ ____ ___ ______________  ------------- ____________________  _May 1 __  --------------------------------------------------- ___  _May 2 _____  --------------------------- _________ _-------- ______  _May 3______  --------------- ___________________________________  _

May  4 __  ----------------------------------------------------- --May 5__  ----------------------------- ___________  -•-------- _____  _

May 6__  -------------------------------------------------------May 7 __ -------------------------------------------------------May 8 _______________________  _.  ___________________  ----- ---------·

May 9__  ----------------------------- ______  ..  __________________  _

May  10  ________ ------ _----------- _____________________________  _

May 11_ -------------- _____  -------- ---- _______________________  _

May 12  ___  -------------------------------------------~---------

May 13  ___  ------------------------------------------------- ___  _May 14  ____  ------ __  ---------------------------------- __  ------ __ 

May 15  ____  ------------------ ___  _:  _------ _______ _______ _______ __

May 16  ___  --------------------------------------------------- __ 

May 17  ___  ---------------------------------------------·----- __  _

May 18  _____  ----- --- ------ _---------------- _____  --- ----- -- ____  _

May 19  ___  ---------------------------------------------------- _

Average  _____  --------------------- _____  ------------------

Gage 

> 50.5
> 50.5
> 50.8

51.0 

51.1 51.8 52.2 52.5 

> 53.0
> 53.6 53.7 53.9 54.2 54.5 55.2

55.9 56.2 56.4 56.6 56.7 56.7  

> 56 . 7
> 56.6
> 56.2 55.8

55.3 

> 54.9
> 54.5
> 54.0
> 53.5
> 53.2

52.7 52.1 51 . 6 

> 50.9
> 50.1

49.3 48.6 

48.0 

47.4 46.9 46.5 46.2 Discharge  

> in

second-feet 1,  257,000 

1,378,000 

1,  362,000 

1,366,  000 

> 1, 3U,OOO

1,  280,000  

> 1,

292,000  

> 1,

348,000  

> l,

363,000  

> 1,

400,000 

1,  410,000 

1,  411,000  

> 1,

408,000    

> 1, 444, ()()() 1,

481,000  

> 1,

52.1,  ()()() I,  631,000 

1, 632,000 1,  634,000 

1,  698,000 

1,681, ()()() 1,  522,000      

> 1, 756, ()()() 1, 702, ()()() 1, 709, ()()()

1,630,  ()()() 

1,630,  ()()() 1,  607,  ()()() 1, 586,000 1,  560,000  

> 1, 538, ()()()

1,  515,000 

1,490,  000 

1,463,000 

1,445,  ()()() 1,  420,  ()()() 1, 395 , ()()() 1,  370,000 

1,348,  000 

1,  325,000 

1,303,  000  

> 1,

Z78,000 

1,  255,000 

52. 74 1,  470,  000  

> 1

The discharge observations recorded here were those taken in  19Z7  at  Friars  Point 

between April 7 and May 3, supplemented by records of other years and some  inter-

polations. The average discharge for the  43  days was  1,470,000  second-feet, at an  aver-

age  gage height of 52.  7~.  

> TABLE

2.-Bhowing  gages  ana  discharges  (rom  April  6 to May 181 at Little Rock,  Ark.,  on  t11e  Arkansas  River,  rt5  miles  above  mouth. 

Zero of gage  m .06  teet above  mean  Gulf  level;  flood  stage,  23  teet 

Date,  1927 Discharge Gage in  second· 

feet .Apr. 6---------------------------------------------------------- 17. 5 94,000 

Apr. 7---------------------------------------------------------- 17.4 93,  000 

Apr. 8---------------------------------------------------------- 16.4  70,000 

Apr. 9---------------------------------------------------------- 15. 5 64,000 

Apr.  10--------------------------------------------------------- 16.4 78,000 Apr.  1L------------------------------------------------------ 18. 8 100,000 

Apr. 12--------------------------------------------------------- 19.0  102,000 

Apr. 13--------------------------------------------------------- 19.  4 105,000 

Apr. 14 ____ ------------------------------------------- -------- 21. 4 155,  000 

Apr. 15------------------------------------------------------- 24.6  293,000 

Apr. 16-------------------------------------------------------- 26. 9 350,000 

Apr. 17-------------------------------------------------------- 29. 2 590,000 

Apr. 18-------------------------------------------------------- 30.  2 617,  000 

Apr.19--------------------------------------------------------- 31.0  718,000 

Apr.  20-------------------------------------------------------- 33.  0 825,000 

Apr. 21---------------------------------------------------- =--- 32.8  813,000 

Apr. 22--------------------------------------------------------- 32. 6 735,000 

Apr. 23--------------------------------------------------------- 32.0  659,000 

Apr. 24--------------------------------------------------------- 31.0  613,000 

Apr. 25--------------------------------------------------------- 30.4  600,000 

Apr. 26--------------------------------------------------------- 29.6  670,000  

> 1

The discharge observations recorded herein are those taken in 1927 between Apr, 16 and 24, supplemented by the observations of 1929 and other years with some  ·in-

"terpolations. The average  discharge  for the  43  days  was  250,000  second-feet  at  an 

average  gage  height of  21.1L 5526  CONGRESSIONAL  .RECORD-SENATE  ~lARCH  18 

TABLE  2. -Showing  gages  an-d  di-scharges  from  A.pr ·i ~ 6 to  May  18 at  TABLE  4.-Showing  gages a. nd  di-scharges  f~·atn  A.prit  10  to  May  22  at Lit tle Rock,  Ark.,  etc.-Continued  A.rkcmsas  City,  etc.-Continued  ,

Date, 1927 Discharge Gage in  second-

feet  Date, 1927 Discharge Gage in  second-

feet 

Apr.  27  -- --------------~----------------------------------------- 28 . 9  350,000  Apr.  15 . ~~-~  _____  "--

# ~~  ~-=i ==~~=~=~~~~~~:j~~~~~~~~~~=~~~~~:~~:~~~=~~~:~~~=:=~~=~=  i!  mmill:  i~:~j  i=:  ~~~~::  __  ~==~~  ~~==~~-~===:=~~-~-l-l:_::m~~:l:-ll May 3 ..  ------------------------------------------------------- 19.0  100,000  Apr.  21:  ..  --------------- ----- ---------------------------------May 4 ..•  ------------------------------- "-- -------------------- 16. 5 70,  000  Apr. 22 .....  _________________________  ------ ----- ---------------May 5--------------------------------------------------------- 14.5  ps,ooo  Apr. 23________ .. 

# ~:~  ~=  ====== ==================================================  ~i:  g ~:::  1~~:  ~t--~  ---~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~=============== == ========== May 8 ..  __ ----------------------------------------------------- 13.  0 52,  000  Apr. 26. _. -----------------------------------------------------May 9 ...  ---------------------------------- __________  ---------- 13. 4 54,  000  Apr. 27 ____ ---------------------------- --- ---------------------May  10.  __  -------------------------------- ____  ------------- ____  14.  0 60,  000  Apr. 28.  _ ------------------------------------------------------May 11. __ ----------------------------------------------------- 16. 5 71,  000  Apr. 29. __  -----------------------------------------------------

JI.1ay  12. __ . _______  ---------------- ________  --------------------- 17.  0 80,  000  Apr.  30  _______________________  ------------------------------ __  __ 

:r-.1:ay  13. __ ----------------------------------------------------- 16 . 5 70,  000  l\1ay  1------------------------.------------ ____  ------ - ---------

JI.1ay  14  ...  ______  ---------- _____  -------------------------------- 15. 8 68,  000  May 2.--------------------------------------------------------

:1\fay  15. _. ----------------------------------------------------- 14. 4 60,  000  May 3. _ -------------------------------------------------------May 16. __  ----------------------------- ____  -------------------- 12. 9 58,  000  May 4. _ -------------------------------------------------------

May 17 _..  ----------------------------------- --- --------------- 11. 5 57,  000  May 5. _ -------------------------------------------------------

1\fay  18 ..  ------------------------------------------------------ 10.9  50,  OJ)  May 6------------------------------------

# T~;:;,;;~  ;,,:~;.-~~~;:;:~~;;-,j;:;::;;~.~ ... :;.%_  1~~  I~~f  !li:  ::~i-~:-~=~-=~-:li~:--i=~=~---~~i~l;;~~;;;  ;;;=;;~~=i;; of  gage  140.02  ove  mean  G-ulf  l evel May 13  ____  ·------------------- ------- -------------------------Date, 1927 Apr. 7 ___  --------- ~---- -------------------- ..  ____ --------------Apr.  8 ·---- --------------------- --------------------------------Apr. 9 .. ..  _---------- _________  ------------ ________  ...  _________  __ 

Apt.  10 ....  ---- ------------------------- - --.-------- ____  .•  ____  __ 

Apr. 11. _ •.  _. ----------------------------------- - ____________  __ 

# !~~:  i~=  =======  ========  =========  ====~  =====  =====  ==  ==  ====  =======  =Apr. 14  ..••••.  ____ _--------------------------------------------May 14. _ ..  ________  ------------- _------------------------------Discharge May 15. _.  -----------------------------------------------------

Gage in second- May 16 ... _----------------------------------------------------feet May 17. _.  ---------------------------------------'--------------

JI.1:ay  18. __ --------------------------------------------------- __ 

May  19'.  _. ______ . ________________  ------------ - ---- ___________  __ 

May  20  .. .. -------------------------------------------------- .. 

May 21. ___ ---------------------------- ______  ------------------

May 22 ..  ______________  ----------------------------------------

Average  __________  . ____  .~  ____  ------------- _______________  _

2 Mounds Landing crevasse. 56.4 57.1 57.5 

58.0 

58.6 59.3 

60.4 

51.4 

54.6 

53.9 

53.1 

52.9 52.7 52.3 51.9 51.6 51.3 

50.8 

50.5 

50.2 

49.6 49.3 

49.0 

48.7 48.5 

48.3 

47.9 47.6 

47.3 

47.1 

46.8 46.5 46.3 

46.0 

45.8 45.7 45.4 45.2 1,  540,000 

1,  603,000 

1,  610,000 

1,  615,000 

1,  628,000 

1,  712,000 

1,  824,000 

1.  674,000 

1,  534,000 

1,  500,000 

1,  460,000 

1,  450,000 

1,  440,000 

1,  4.20,000 

1,400,  000 

1,  385,000 

1,  370,000 

1,  345,000 

1,  330,000 

1,  315,000 

1,285,  000 

1,  270,000 

1,  255,000 

1,  240,000 

1,  230,000 

1,  220,000 

1,  200,000 

1,  135,000 

1,170,  000 

1,  155,000 

1,  140,000 

1,  125,000 

1,  115,000 

1,  100,000 

1,090,  000 

1,  085,000 

l,  070,000 

1,  060,000 

53.  1 1,  362,  000 

Apr. 15 . .. __ . ______  ------------------------ ------------ - --·.  ---Apr. 16 ... ------------------------------- ..  --------------------28.5 28.5 28.6 28.6 28.6 28.7 28.8 

29.0 

29.8 

30.41 

31.3 32.8 36.8 

40.1 

42.2 43.  o· 

43.3 43.2 42.7 

42.0 

41.2 

40.3 

39.3 38.3 37.3 36.4 35.4 34.5 33 . 6 32.8 32.3 31.7 31.1 

30.7 

30.3 

30.0 

29.6 29.5 

29.0 

28.8 28.3 28.6 28.5 

100,000 

100.000 

103,000 

103,000 

103,000 

105,000 

108,  CO) 

151,000 

160,000 

166,000 

175,000 

188 .000 

2&'),1}00 

360,000 

390,000 

425,000 

440,000 

435,000 

TABLE  5.-The  dischG!rges  in  tMs  table  are  in  thou.sana  second-feet 

Apr. 17 .. __ ------- - ---------------------------------------- ----Apr. 18. ___ ------------------------- _______  ------------------ -. Apr. 19  ...............  __________ ------------------------------ .. Apr.  20 .....  --------- : ___________ . _.  __  ....  ____  ..............  -- .. Apr. 21.  .............  _______________________________  . _______  " __  _Apr. 22 ..  ----------------------------- _.  ----------------- ______  _Apr. 23  ...  _. _________  ...  ____  ..  _. _______ . ____ .. _. ________ ......  __ 

Apr. 24 _.___ . _ .......  ___ . __  ..  __  ..  __  ..  ____  .. __ .... ....... _. ___ .. _. Apr . 25  .......  ______  • _____  ..  ________  .•  ___ . ______  • ____  . _____  ..... Apr. 26  .....  ___ ------ .....  ------- - ..  ---- ......  -- .. ----- ...  ---- --Apr. 27  __  ..  ____  . _______________________________________________  .Apr . 28. __ --------------------------------- ________  ------------

Apr . 29 ___ . ------------------------------------ ~-- -------------

Apr . 30.  _______ ---------- __  ---------------------- _____________  .May 1.---------------- -----~---------------------------- ____  __ 

May 2. _ ------------------------------- __  ----------------------

May 3. -------------------------------- ______  ----------------~-

1.1:ay  4.  _ -------------------------------- --- --------------------

# ~!~  ~=  ==========~===== :: = ==  =====  =======  ====~  =====  ====  ========== May 7 ..  -------------------------------------------------------May  8.--------------------------------------------------------

May 9 ..  -------------------------------------------------------May  10.  _------------ ..  ________  . _____  .•  _______  . _______________ _May 11  ..•  --------------------------------------------------- .. 

May 12 ....  --------------------------------- ·-------------------

May 13. _..  -------------'~------ --------------------------------May 14. __________________________  : ___________________________ _May 15  ..•.  ----------------------------------------------- ____  _May 16  . ..  _----------------------------------------------------

May 17. __  -----------------------------------------------------

May 18. _.  ------- ·-- -------------------------------------- ____  __ 

May 19 ....  ------------------------------------------------ __  __ 

Average ....  ____  ---- .•  __  .•  ____  . ____  .----....  ___ ._  .....  ___ _ 33.6 . 400,000 

380,000 

370,000 

350,000 

315,000 

# ~i:::  I240,000 

215,000 

190,000 

180,000 

160,000 

155,000 

142,000 

138,  000 

133,000 

128,000 

125,000 

110,000 

105,000 

102,000 

100,000 

98,000 

99,000 

98,000 

204,000 

1 The discharge ob servatio ns recorded herein are those taken in 1927 between Apr. 17 and 23, supplemented by the observations of 1929 and other years with some interpolations. The ave rage discharge for the  43  days  was  20<1,000  second-feet, at an average gage height or 33.59. 

TABLE  4.-STw tcing  gages  and  discharges  fron~  April  10  to May  22 1 at 

Arkansas  City  on  the  Mississippi  Rivmo,  1,.'!7  tniles  below  Oairo.  Z e ro 

of  gag e 96 .1 5 feet above  mean  G-ulf  level 

Da t e, 1927 Discharge Gage in  second-

feet Apr.  10-------------------------------------------------------- 55.0  1,  446,000 

Apr. n _____ . _ ------------------------------------------------- 55. 2 1, 483,  000 

Apr. 12-------------------------------------------------------- 55.4 1,  485.000 

Apr. 13.------------------------------------------------------- 55.6 1,  490,000 

Apr. 14 ....  ___  ------------~--- _________________  --------- --- ____ 55.  8- 1,  501,  000 

I The discharge observations recorded here are those taken in 1927 at Ohicot, Ark., between  April10  and  20,  supplemented by the observations or other  years  with some interpolations.  '!'he  Mound's Landing  crevasse,  almost opposite Arkansas City occurred on Apr. 21 and the observations were discontinued. The gage immediately began to fall and continued to  fall  throughout the flood. The a verge  discharge  for  the 

43  days  was  1,362,000 second-feet  at  an  average gage height of  53.06. 

Total Dis- Dis- Dis- to  ar- LeftAr- 8 dl Left  Went 

Date, Dis- charge charge charge rive  kansas  tore storage out charge  basin  City  above Iabove through 1927 Little Clar- un- the Ar- the  Ar· Helena Rock end on gaged above down ere-the Ar- river  kansas  kansas vasses 

kansas 

--- -- -- ---Apr.  10  .....  1, 257  94  100  20  ],  471 1, 446 25 ------- --------Apr.  11  .....  1, 378  93  100  20  1, 591 1,483  108  ------- ------- ... Apr. 12  .. ·...  1,362  70  103  20  1, 555 1,485  70  ------- ---------Apr. 13  .....  1, 366 64  103  20  1, 553  1,490  63 ------- --------Apr. 14  .... . 1, 374 78  103  20  1, 575 1,  501  74 ------- --------Apr . 15  .....  1,  280  100  105  20  1,505  1,  540  ------- 35 --------Apr. 16  .... . 1, 292  102  108  20  1, 522 1,  603  ------- 81 --------Apr. 17  _____  1,  348  105  151  20  1,624 1,  610  14 ------- --------Apr. 18  .....  1,363 155  160  20  1,698 1, 615 83 ------- --------Apr. 19  .... . 1,400  293 166  20  1,879 1, 628 251 -- ----- --------Apr.  20  .....  1,  410  350  175  20  1, 955 1, 712  243  ------- --------Apr. 21.  ....  1, 411  590  188  20  2,  209  1, 824 385 ------- --------Apr. 22  .....  1,408  617  285  20  2,330  1,  674  ------- 750  1,403 

Apr. 23  .....  1,444  718  360  20  2,542  1,534  ------- 700  I,  708 

Apr.  24  .....  1,  481  825  390  20  2, 716  1,500  ------- 175 1, 391 Apr. 25  .....  1, 523 813 425  20  2, 781  1,460  ------- 200  1, 521 Apr. 28  .....  1, 631 735  440  20  2,826  1,450  ------- 50  1,426 Apr. 27  __ ___  1,632 659 435  20  2, 746  1,440  ------- 50  1, 356 Apr. 28  .....  1,634 613  400  20  2,667  1,420  ------- 100  1,347 Apr. 29 ..  ___ 1,698  600  380  20  2,698  1,400  ------- 100  1,393 Apr.  30 .....  1, 631  570  370  20  2,641 1,385 --- ---- 75 1, 331 May L .....  1,522  350  350  10  2, 232  1,370  ------- 75 937 May 2......  1, 756  300  315  10  2, 381 1,345 ---- --- 125 1,161 May 3......  1,  702  27 5 285  10  2,272  1,330  --- ---- 75  1,017 

May  4......  I,  709  230  261  10  2,  210  I, 315 -- ----- 75  970 

May  5......  1,630  175  240  10  2,055  1, 285 ------- 150  920 

May6  ......  1,630  160  215  10  2,  015  1,270  ------- 75  820 

May 7......  1,  607  100  190  10  1,  907  1,255 ------- 75 727 Mays  ______  1,586  70  180 · 10  1,846 1,  240  --- ---- 75  681 May9  ______  1,  560  58  160  10  1, 788 1,  230  ------- 50  608 

May  10 .....  1,  538  54 155  10  1, 757 1,  220  ------- 50  587 May 11.  ....  1, 515  50  142  10  1,  '9'17  1,  200  ------- 100  617 May 12 .....  1.490  52 138  10  1,  690  1,185 ------- 7b  580 

May 13 .....  1,  468  54 133  10  1,  665  1,170  ------- 75  570 

May 14 ___ __  1,  445  60  128  10  1,643 1,155 ---- --- 50  538 May 15 .....  1,420  71 125  10  1, 626  1,140  ---- --- 75  51\l 

May 16  _____  1,  395  80  110  10  1, 595 1,125 ------- 75 545 May 17 .....  1,  370  70  105  10  1,555 1,115 ------- 50  490 

May 18 .....  1,348 68  102  10  1, 528  1,100  ------- 75  503 

May 19 .....  1,325  60  100  10  1,495  1,090  ------- 50  455 May  20 .....  1,303  58 98  10  1,469  1,  085  ------- 25  409 

May2L  ....  I, 278 57 99  IO  I,444  1,070  ------- 75  449 

May22 _____ 1, 255  50  98  10  1, 413  1,060  ------- 50  403 

1------- ------ ------ ---:----- ---63,22{)  10,746  8,176  640  83,387 58,555 1,316 3,916 27,432 Table 5 is compiled by adding the  discharges  at Helena, Little Rock, Clarendon, and that of the  4,000  square miles of ungaged area and deducting therefrom the discharge at Arkansas City.  Up  to April 21, the  day  of  the Mound's Landing crevasse, the difference  was  stored 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SEN  ATE 5527 

above the mouth of the Arkansas; after that date it went out through crevasses, taking the stored water with it. The  run-oft:  from the  4,000  square miles of ungaged area was  ascer-

tained by taking the rainfall at various stations throughout that area during the 43-day period. It was found to  average ~ a third of an inch 

a day during April and half that much during May, a  run-otr  of about 56 per cent was allowed, amounting to  20,000  second-feet during April and  10,000  during May. From Table 5 we learn that between April  10  and April 21, when the levees began to break in the vicinity of the mouth of the Arkansas, about  40,000,000  acre-feet of water arrived there from upstream, of which about  38,000,000  went down the river past Arkansas City and about  2,000,000  went into storage in the basin above the mouth of the Arkansas. The table further shows that between April 21 and May 22  there 

arrived in the vicinity of the mouth of the Arkansas  fr8m  upstream about  127,000,000  acre-feet of water, while about  79,000,000  went down the river past Arkansas City and about  54,500,000  went out through crevasses.  Of  tbis l ast amount about  8,000,000  was drawn from storage in the basin above the mouth of the Arkansas. A study of table 5 will further disclose that had the river carried between April 21 and May 7 its maximum of  1,950,000  second-feet  · at 

a gage height of 62.5 feet, as proposed in  tfie  present adopted project of the Army Engineers, there would have been only about  16 ,000,000 

acre-feet of water to arrive at the mouth of the Arkansas in the  flood 

of 1927 which could not have been carried safely down the river pa st Arkansas City. Th e fact that  54,500,000  acre-feet actually went out through  cre-

vasses when the surplus was only  16,000,000  above what the levees are now being constructed to take care of shows the enormous unneces-sary destructiveness of water running through crevasses until the river returns to its banks, be the crevasses accidental, as were those in 1927, or designed as a fuse plug, as proposed in the adopted project. The  flood  of 1927 was the greatest  flood  to  arrive  at the mouth of the Arkansas River of wbich there is any record. There have been many greater  floods  to reach Cairo. In recent years the  floods  of both 1912 and 1913 exceeded in volume of uischarge the  flood  of 1927 at Cairo. 

It was the intense but brief  flood  out of the Arkansas Riv er , which far exceeded any previous  flood  E!Ver  recorded there, supplemented by asimilar flood out of the White Ri -ver, wbich made the 1927  flood 

supreme at the mouth of the Arkansas River. Existing records warrant the conclusion that the interval of fre-quency of such a flood as that of 1927 at the mouth of the Arkansas River is not less than  50  years.  

> It

bas been shown herein that the 1927 flood contained only 

16,000,000  acre-feet of water in excess of what the present adopted levee system will, when completed, be able to safe ly carry in he Mississippi River, below the mouth of the Arkansas River. The only sound engineering basis upon which to found a flood  project is to add a reasonable margin to the greatest known flood and then provide to take care of it. Following th at principle, it would be sound engin ee ring to  provide  to take care of a surplus flood at the mouth of the Arkansas River 25 per cent greater than that of 1927. Tbis would amount to  20,000,000  acre-feet. The main problem of the lower river, therefore, is to determine what to do with  20,000,000  acre-feet more water at the mouth of the Arkansas River than the Mississippi River below that point  c.an  safely take care of.  

> It

is impossible, with the limited available data, to work out in the office,  off-hand,  the best project to solve this problem. An attempt to hurriedly do that is what led to the collapse of the  J~dwin  plan. There are too many contingencies, due to collateral problems which are 

being  urged and which in justice should receive adequate consideration. Certain fundamentals, however, stand out in bold relief as being almo st axiomatic.  One  is that it is not necessary to wreak such  enor-·

mous destruction as will result from the plan of the Army Engineers in the Boeuf and Atchafalaya Basins, in order to take care of  20,000,000 

acre-feet of water at the mouth of the Arkansas River. Another is  that  if this  20,000,000-acre  feet of water can be held back above the mouth of the Arkansas River, it will reduce the problem at the mouth of the Red River in practically the same proportion and greatly simplify the problem of the Atchafalaya Basin. Another is that, on its own face, the project at Cairo, by means of the Birds Point to New Madrid by-pass, does not afford adequate protection to Cairo and  enviwns  and must be supplemented by some system of retarding whereby the flood peaks at Cairo will be flattened out. Another is that the great system of locks and dams on the  Ohio  River does not provide the necessary water during dry weather to maintain navigation and must be supplemented by a storage system which  will 

hold back flood peaks, the water to be released later when needed.  All 

wat er held back on the  Ohio  River and tributaries during flood relieves the situation at Cairo and in turn at the mouth of the Arkansas River and all points below. 

LXXII--348 

Another is that the problem of the Illinois River with its very gentle slope is largely a backwater problem from the Mississippi River above the Missouri River and together with the problem of  the  Mississippi River in that vicinity must be solved by storing the flood peaks which are above a reasonable levee height. Another is that, unless water is stored during floods on the upper Missouri River and tributaries . to aid summer flow, the channel im-provement now being carried on up to Kansas City and  Sioux  City will turn out even worse than has the Ohio River navigation project. Besides, water is needed there badly for irrigation. Another is, that the  St.  Francis, the White, the Arkansas, the Red, and the Yazoo, together with their tributaries, have problems of  flood 

control, irrigation, and navigation, all of which involve retarding flood waters, which retarding would contribute to the absorption of the 

20,000,000  acre-feet of surplus flood water at the mouth of the Arkansas 

Riv-er.  ·

All of these problems deserve consideration and shou ld be solved in the order of their merit and feasibility. Long before their solution is completed the  20,000,000  surp lus acre-feet of water at the mouth of the Arkansas River will have disappeared. 

All  premises considered, the conclusion is apparent that it would be a great economic error to resort to a floodway  through the Boeuf  ot• 

Tensas Basin to get relief from a maximum of  20,000,000  acre-feet  of 

surplus flood water when the desired end can be accomplished simply by the carrying out of worthy and urgent projects farther up stream. The thing to do now is to immediately bring all the levees up to the new grade and section under the plan of the  Army  engineers, which grade is 3 feet above the 1914 Mississippi River Commission  grade. 

This shou ld include the area selected for the Cypress Creek fuze-plug diversion,  othet·wise  the flood control act can not be complied with wherein it provides that the Boeuf Basin area shall have the  same 

protection as is  afforded  the adjacent areas, pending the completion  of 

the project. Tbis additional 3 feet of levee height will materially increase  t_ he 

interval of frequency of crevasses in the Tensas and Boeuf  Basi~s. 

While the levees are being raised, wbich will probably require two more years, the work of holding back floods above the mouth of the Arkansas River can be gotten under way. Every drop of water added to that being held back will increase the interval between destructive  floods. 

No delay will result from stopping work on the Boeuf Basin  flood  way because it would require as long to construct the  flood  way as to  pt·ovide 

to hold back the  20,000,000  acre-feet of surplus flood water above the mouth of the Arkansas River. J.  P.  KEMPER,  Civil  E11gineer.   

> NEW ORLEANS, LA.
> RECESS

:Mr.  SMOOT.  I move that the Senate take a rece ss until  to~ 

morrow morning at 11 o'clock. The PRESIDING  OFFICER.  The question is on the motion of the Senator from Utah. The motion was agreed to; and (at 7 o'clock and 35 minutes p. m.) the Senate took a recess until to-morrow, Wednesday, 

Murch  19,  1930,  at 11 o'clock a. m. 

CONFIRMATIONS 

Exe cutive nominations  con{irrned  by the Senate  March,  18  (legis~ 

lative day of  January  6),  1930 

UNITED STATES  ATrO&NEYS 

Clint  W. Hager, northern district of Georgia. Arthur Arnold, northern district of West  Virginia. 

UNITED  STATES  MARSHAL 

Edgar  C.  Geddie, eastern district of North Carolina. JUDGE, MUNICIPAL  CoURT,  DISTRICT  oF  CoLUMBIA 

James  A.  Cobb.  CoAsT  GuARD Edward M. Kent to be constructor. 

APPOINTMENTS  IN THE  ARMY 

Henry  Charles  Whitehead to be assistant to the Quartermaster General, with rank of brigadier general. MEDICAL  CORPS 

To be first 

Junius Penny Smith. Harry George Armstrong. 

Matthew  Corell  Pugsley. 

Charles  Clyde  Grace. Cleveland Rex Steward. 

lieutenants 

William A. Dains Woolgar. Joseph Steinberg. Karl Rosenius Lundeberg. Arthur Herman  Corliss. 

Jona th an Milton Rigdon. 5528  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE      

> APPOINTMENTS, BY TRANSFER, IN THE ARMY

Second  Lieut. Edward Murphy Markham, jr., to  Corps  of Engineers. Maj. Gordon Bennett Welch to  Ordnance  Department. 

Second  Lieut.  Carroll  Huston Prunty to  Cavalry.    

> PRoMOTIONS IN THE ARMY

Augustine  Joseph Zerbee to be major, Field Artillery. 

Andrew  Ed Forsyth to be captain, Cavalry. David Goodwin Barr to be captain, Infantry. Mark  ffistand  Doty to be captain, Field Artillery. 

Charles  Peter Prime to be captain,  Air  Corps. 

Joris Bliss Rasbach to be first lieutenant, Field Artillery. Herman Lester Darnstaedt to be first lieutenant,  Infantl'y. 

Leonard  Marion  Johnson to be first lieutenant, Field  Artillery. 

Chester  Archibald Rowland to be first lieutenant,  Corps  of Engineers. John Sterling Taylor to be first lieutenant, Infantry. Luther Remi Moore to be major, Medical  Corps. 

Carl  Randolph Mitchell to be major, Medical  Corps. 

Michael  Gerard Healy to be major, Medical  Corps. 

Dean  McLaughlin  Walker to be captain, Medical  Corps.    

> PROMOTIONS IN THE NAVY

Walton R.  Sexton  to be rear admiral. 

> POSTMASTERS
> ALABAMA

Nelson  C.  Fuller, Centerville. 

Clarence  E.  Combs,  Fairfax. John B. Daughtry, Hartford. William P. Tartt, Livingston. Florrie  Vinson,  Louisville. Lucy Downing, Moulton. Robert  A.  Tuck,  Oneonta. 

James B. Washington, Tuskegee Institute . . James  A.  Anderson, University. 

> .AIUZONA

Donald  Mcintyre,  Yuma. 

> ARKANSAS

Edwin E. Blackmon, Augusta. 

Charles  A.  Kelley, Searcy. 

> OOLORADO

Robert L. Wilkinson, Burlington. Frank L. Dodge, Denver. 

Chal'les  Lawton, Fort Logan. Kiah  C.  Brown, Merino. 

Samuel  Coen,  Walden. 

> CONNECTICUT

Samuel  H. Kellogg, Colchester. Edna M. Jenkins, Middlefield. Samuel E. Louden, Riverside. 

> FLORIDA

Charles  W. Pierce, Boynton. 

Cecilia  E. Kilbourn, Carrabelle. Grace M. Mashburn,  Caryville: 

Rexford D. L. Graves, Daytona Beach. Ellsworth Morgan, Eau Gallie. Louis  C.  Lynch,  Gainesville. 

William  C.  Johnson, Jensen. George  0.  Jacobs, Lake  City. 

Agnes M. Moremen,  Maitland. 

Edna L. Goss, Mulberry. 

Oren  L. Elliott,  Ojus. 

Goldie B. Helm,  Oneco. 

Pearl E. Graham,  Orange  City. 

Orville  L. Bogue,  Oxford. 

Joseph B. Bower, Rockledge. Jennie J. Wilbar, Salerno. 

Orrell  W. Prevatt, Seville. 

Charles  M. Loy, Stuart. Mary L. Woodmansee, Valparaiso. Frank W. Rodenberg,  Vero  Beach. HAWAII J. Frank Woolley, Honolulu. 

> IDAHO

Elsie  M.  Renfrew, Potlatch .. 

> ILLINOIS

Hamil E.  Veach,  Clayton. 

Charles  L.  Smith,  Cutler. 

George M.  Clark,  Galesburg. John R.  Mcintire,  Grand  Chain. 

Jacob H. Maher, Hull. William E. Erfert, jr., Lansing. 

Arthur  J. Mollman, Millstadt. Polona H. Callaway, Tallula. 

Anna  J. Black, Thornton. INDIANA Lee G. Corder, Merom. Ernest  C.  Purdue, Newburgh. Levert E. Binns, New Richmond. 

Cyrus  V.  Norman,  Sheridan. 

William H.  Ammon,  Swayzee. Bernice  M.  Beeks,  Urbana. 

> IOWA

Walter H. Lake, Bedford. Elda B. Sparks, Buffalo  Center. 

Edna B . • Wylie, Derby. 

Vellas  L. Gilje, Elkader. Raymond W. Rhoades, Glenwood. Eva Keith, Goldfield. Leonidas L. Greenwalt, Hastings. Inga E. Cheely, Hornick. John R. Barker, Indianola. George McNeish, jr., Kanawha. John Harden, Linden. 

William · C.  McCurdy,  Massena. Eugene E. Heldridge, Milford. Thomas F. Fawcett,  Ocheyedan. 

Bruce E. Harlow,  Onawa. 

Augustus  A.  Bauman, Mount Vernon. Danel  0.  Clark,  Ogden. 

Frerich  0.  Christoffers, Palmer. 

Otto  J. Warneke, Readlyn. Edith J. Delong, Truro. Ross G. Hauser,  Union. 

Leonard G. Kelley, Wall Lake. Inez I. Gano, Washta. Henry  C.  Ficke, Wheatland .Mabel I. Driggs, Bern. 

Vaclav  Sajner, Bison. 

> KANSAS

Charles  A. Godding, Burns. Jacob W. Wright, Elk  City. 

Daniel  0.  Anderson,  Everest. 

John F. Heston, Goodland. William l\l. Parham, Logan. Marion W. Covey, Miltonvale. Loyd J. Cobun, Sabetha. George P. Plotner, Scandia. Bruce Griffith, Wichita. 

> KENTUCKY

Anna  M. Seaton, Buechel. Halliday M. Ricketts, Covington. Ben D. Herndon, Danville. Aubrey Cossar, Louisville. Anna D. Shelman, Pewee Valley. Mary K. Diersing, Shively. 

> MAINE

Harvard M. Armstrong,  Cape  Cottage. 

Clayton  R. Hamlin,  Unity. 

> MARYLAND

Charles  G. Tedrick,  Clear  Spring. Joseph  S.  Haas, Mount  Rainier. 

Granville S. Cropper, Ocean  City. 

> MASSACHUSETTS

George L. Minott, Gardner. Harlan  S.  Cummings,  Lynn. Hazen M. Emery, Merrimac. Perez H. Phinney, Monument Beach. Neil R. Mahoney, North Billerica. 

Otis  E. Hager, North Dana. Annie B. Ellis, Sheffield. Arthur J. Fairgrieve, Tewksbury. John W. Keith, Warren. 

> MICHIGAN

Isaac Hurst,  Akron. 

Edwin L. Fox, Athens. Percy W. Totten, Brooklyn. Herman Buby, Brown  City. 

George G. Geniesse, Escanaba. 

Olin  M. Thrasher, Mount Morris. Wesley J. Morrison, Mount Pleasant. Lydia A. McElhinney,  Snover, 

Willard L.  Olaver,  Zeeland. 

# MARCH  18 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SEN ATE 

> MISSISSIPPI

Henry L. Rhodes, Ackerman. Reid R. Williams, Arcola. Frankie M.  Storm,  Benoit. Jesse E. Patridge, Duck Hill. Thomas A.  Chapman,  Friar Point. Florence Brady, Lula. John  C.  Bowen, Senatobia. William  E.  Mitchell,  Stewart. 

> MISSOURI

John  Rohrer,  Bourbon. William  C.  Christeson,  Dixon. Leland G. Riley, Eagleville. Herold D.  Condray,  Ellsinore. · 

Charles  F. Boon, Greentop. 

Clyde  E. Jennings, Hollister. Earle W. Phillips, Henrietta. George  S.  Brown, Hornersville. James A.  Coder,  Lewistown. Morris W. Ledbette'r, Marble Hill. Guy Ridings, Middletown. Gustav  C.  Ran, Pacific. 

Clarence  B. Robinson,  South  West  City. 

John J.  Schaper,  Warrenton. 

Oscar  F.  Schulte,  Washington. 

> MONTANA

Leanore K.  C.  Roderick, Outlook. J . Dean Ringer,  Omaha. 

Alice Ward,  Primrose. 

> NEBRASKA

Frank A. Millhouse,  Sumner. 

Elsie B. Thompson, Wynot. NEW  HA:M:PSHffiE 

Charles  S.  Hutchins, Charlestown. Frederick R. Jennings, Gorham. 

Carrie  B. Ware, Hancock. Fred W.  Colton,  Hinsdale. 

Charles  Myers, Jaffrey. James E.  Collins,  Lisbon.  

> NEW JERSEY

Ralph G.  Collins,  Barnegat. Victor R. Bell,  Closter. 

Ada B. Nafew, Eatontown. 

Chester  A. Burt, Helmetta. John D.  Seals,  Kenvil. Loretta  Conrow,  Oceanport. David  C.  Bush, Oakland. Jesse W. English, Wenonah. NEW  YORK 

John  Common,  Andover. William W. Hendryx, Avoca. Mary H. Dunn, Bellmore. 

Otis  G. Fuller,  Central  Square. 

Norman  S.  Taylor,  Clayville. 

Howard  McClellan,  Greenwich. Lena  M.  Johnson, Interlaken. Guy L.  Stone,  Luzerne. Floyd B. Webb, Mannsville. 

McKenzie  B.  Stewart,  Mooers. David  C.  Gilmour, Morristown. Jay B. Purcell,  Ovid. 

Owen  J. Griffith, Remsen. John E. Widger,  Smyrna. 

Daniel H. DeLair, Tupper Lake. Emil G. Schumacher, Valley  Stream. 

William R.  Crawford,  Warsaw.  

> NORTH DAK<Yl'A

Katherine Medelman,  Crary. 

M.  Evelyn Peavy, Egeland. William  C.  Forman, jr.,  H~nkinson. 

Lawrence D. Larsen, Kindred. Eldor G.  Sagehorn,  Stanton. 

Elmer H. Myhra, Wahpeton. 

> OHIO

Ethel H.  Somerville,  Adena. Laurence H. Maechtel, Berea. 

Charles  H. Murlin,  Celina. 

Horace B. Ramey, Centerburg. Emanuel H.  Ulmer,  Chatfield. 

Walter H.  Scheu,  Dover.  

> L~ura

L. Nash, East  Canton. 

Marvin P. Devore, East  Columbus. 

Charles  E. John, Elida. 

Orin  Breckenridge, Grove  City. 

Rosa  M.  Fouts,  McConnelsville. 

Harry F. Mikesell, New Madison. Robert D. Weedy,  Shawnee. 

Hugh  C.  Bell,  Utica. 

> OKLAHOMA

Eugene J. Blossom, Atoka. Thomas H. W. McDowell, Blackwell. George N. Davina,  Colony. 

William I. Fisher,  Cordell. 

Dallas M. Rose, Davis. 

Coral  B. Waldie, Deer  Creek. 

William J. Krebs, Kaw. 

Charles  L. Bell, Lindsay. Bernie A.  Cockrell,  Tonkawa. Joseph Hunt, jr., Vinita. Etta B. Henderson, Wayne. Logan  G ~ Hysmith,  Wilburton. 

> OREGON

Charles  W. Halderman, Astoria. Logan E. Anderson, Cove. Richard  E.  Tozier, Helix. Harry El. Jones, Jefferson. Henry W. Tohl Nehalem. Leon W.  Lunde)!,  Weston. 

Ollie  L. Gillespie, Willamina. Lyman H.  Shorey,  Woodburn. 

> PENNSYLVANIA

Jay  E. Brumbaugh, Altoona. 

Samuel  M. Lambie, Ambridge. Ella  C.  Brannon,  Centerville. 

Lena M.  Cole,  Coal  Center. 

Lawrence L.  Steiger,  Mercersburg. James L. Porter, Midland. Edwin  S.  L.  Soule,  Newport. James Hewett, Pen  Argyl. 

John A.  Van  Orsdal e, Russell. Margaret B. Hill, Saltsburg. James J. Neil,  Sligo. 

Heler1  P. Howell, West Alexander.  

> BRODE ISLAND

Ralph H.  Chapman,  Esmond.  

> SOUTH CAROLINA

Lucy  C.  Vance, Allendale. 

John  A. Wood, Spartanburg. 

> TENNESSEE

Laura W. Malone, Alexandria. William D. Howser,  Clarksville. 

Joe R. Taylor, Etowah. 

Charles  F. Perkins, Jacksboro. Terrell  1\!clllwain,  Parsons. 

Charles  E.  Pennington, Sweetwater. Clarence Walters, Alice. Dibrel G. Melton, Allen. John F. Furlow, Alvord. 

> TEXAS

Fred P. Ingerson, Barstow. John H. Atterbury, Benjamin. 

Oscar  Hunt,  Canyon. 

Joseph  C.  Makin,  Chilton. 

Dave  C.  Dodge,  Claude. 

Benjamin F. Robey,  Coleman. 

Clarence V. Rattan,  Cooper. 

Oria  H.  Sieber,  Crosbyton. 

Simon  J. Enochs, Georgetown. 

Charles  L. Long, Graham. Robert Dempster, Hitchcock. Alfred M. Finger, Hondo. Elroy L.  McCord,  Katy. Herman H. Duncan, Kaufman. Emil Gold, Kerrville. Don Parker, Liberty. 

Maggie  R. Hopkins, Lone  Oak. 

John H.  Sharimtt,  Lu eders. Asa McGregor, Milano. John E. McAllister, Mirando  City. 

Charles  L. Wiebusch, Riesel. Warner W. McNaron, Rotan. Willie E. Penick, Rule. 

Ora  L. Griggs, Sanatorium. 

# 5529 5530  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 

Maggie  Exum, Shamrock. 

1\Iorus  B. Howard,  SweetWater. 

Lillian Procter, Teague. Walter M. Hudson, Weatherford. Emanuel T. Teller, Westhoff. Peter J. Sherman, Whitney. Leeander M. Gilbreath, Winnsboro. Tom Hargrove, Woodsboro. William B. Lee, Wortham. UTAH Lionel L. Peterson, Fairview. John W. Guild, Kamas. VIRGINIA Harry Fulwiler, Buchanan. Robert B. Rouzie, Tappahannock. Bruce L. Showalter, Weyers  Cave. 

WASHINGTON 

Wills Swank,  Cheney. 

Franz  S.  Drummond, Gig Harbor. Ralph L. Philbrick, Hoquiam. 

Chl'istopher  C.  Van  Leuven, Molson. Noel D. Tower, Morton. Michael J. Murphy,  Oakville. 

Gustav  A.  Weber,  Odessa. 

Joseph E. McManamon, Othello. Walter Sommers, Prosser. William Busch, Raymond. Thomas Harries, Renton. Golda R. Moore, Roy. Juanita Morris,  St.  John. David M. Donnelly,  Sedro  Woolley. William I. Leech, Steilacoom. Wilson Howe, Tenino. Arthur B. Foley, Wilbur. WEST  VIRGINIA 

Harry E. Engle, Fairmont. Rosa H. Brown, Institute. 

Charles  T. Kelly, Terra Alta. 

B. Hampton Gray, Welch. 

WISCONSIN 

Edward W. Guth, Adell. Lester B. West, Barron. Royal  C.  Taylor, Boyceville. Dell L. Amerpohl, Brodhead. Benjamin F. Querhammer, Cazenovia. Lewis T. Larson, Danbury. Clarence L. J ordalen, Deerfield. 

Charles  H. Prouty, Genoa  City. 

Alexander  C.  Magnus, Glen Flora. 

Charles  P. Peterson, Glenwood  City. 

Kate  C.  Conrad,  Hammond. 

Clem  G. Walter, Kendall Mamie B. Johnson, Kennan: John P. Fitzgerald, Mellen. 

Around  J. Amundson, New Auburn. 

Verner  A. Nelson,  Ogema. 

David E. Lamon, Three Lakes. Christian R. Mau, West Salem .

REJECTION 

Executive  nomination  reject ed  lnJ  the  Senate  March  18  (legis-

lative  day  of Monday,  January  6),  1930 

> POSTMASTER

Fo ste r P. Lee to be postmaster at Lamar,  S.  C. 

# HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES  

> TuEsDAY,

## March 18,  1930 

The House met at 12 o'clock noon. The  Chaplain,  Rev. James Shera Montgomery, D. D., offered the following prayer :Thou hast not hidden Thy face from us,  0 Lord. Again this day is our day. What shall our part be? May our contribution to it be direct, wise, and unselfish, for we know by experience that any other course leads toward weakness and failure. With willing minds and generous hearts send us forth to do our duty. Merciful God, increase the power of our faith, that we may maintain a supreme allegiance to Thee  as  our guide. Do Thou enable us to exemplify that faith in all  our  dally opportunities. Whatever sacrifices it may involve or losses it may  incur,  0

bless us with personal satisfaction and with that peace which let the world go by. In the name of Jesus. Amen. The Journal of the proceedings of yesterday was read and approved.     

> PERMISSION TO ADDRESS THE

HOUSE 

Mr.  HA. WLEY.  Mr. Speak e r, I ask unanimous consent on Thursday,  March  20,  after the remarks by the gentleman from Louisiana  [Mr.  MoNTET], that I be permitted to address the House for  30  minutes on the subject of the  United  States  Steel 

Corporation tax refund for the years 1918, 1919, and 1920. The  SPEAKER.  The gentleman from Oregon [Mr. HAWLEY] asks unanimous consent, at the conclusion of the address of the gentleman from Louisiana [Mr. MoNTET], that he be permitted to address the House for  30  minutes. Is there objection? Mr.  RAYBURN.  Reserving the right to object-which, of course, I do not intend to do-I call the attention of the majority members of the Committee on Interstate and Foreign  Commerce 

to the fact that we have a very important bill pending here. To-day we have special orders which  will  consume about two hours and a half. Thursday, when we will be able to go on with this bill again, we will have about two hours and a half of special orders, and if we are to reach a final vote in considera-tion of the bus bill it would appear that somebody should look after the time of the committee. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the  gen-

tleman from  Oregon? 

There was no objection. Mr . .GARNER. Mr.  Speaker,  in view of the fact that Ibrought on this controversy, I would like to ask unanimous  con-

sent that I b ~ permitted to address the House for  one--half  the 

time requested by the gentleman from  Oregon. 

The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gen-tleman from Texas? There was no objection. Mr. GARNER. May I take this occasion, Mr. Speaker., to request the chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means [Mr. HAWLEY] to produce the minutes of the joint committee meeting settling the matter when we considered this joint return? Iwould li ke to have them in the  Chamber  to-day if possible. Th e SPEAKER.  The  Chair  observes that the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER]  already has  30  minutes to address the House. Mr. GARNER. I intended to speak on another subject.  how-

ever. The  Chair  will recall I had already received permission to address the House on that day. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the gentleman from T exas [Mr.  GARNER]  making two speeches on that day? [Laughter.] There was no objection.   

> OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS

Mr.  SANDERS  of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to extend my remarks in the  RECORD  by inserting aspeech which I made over the radio with respect to our public schools.  1

The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the  gen-

tleman from Texas? Th e re was no objection. Mr.  SANDERS  of Texas. Mr. Speaker, under the permission given by the House, I insert the following speech, which was delivered by me over the radio on the 17th instant :Ladies and ge ntlem en, I am to speak to you on the Robsi on-Capper school bill, so called because it was introduced in the House of Re pre-sentatives by Congres sma n RoBSION  of Kentucky and in the  Senate  by                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> Sen ato rCAPPER~ of Kansas. My £ub ject suggests to me two statements, one from .Jesus, the other from King Solomon: "Y eshall know the truth and the truth shall make you free ";"Where there is no vision,
> the people perish." Some proposed legislative matters move slo'Yly.
> The educational bill is one of them. It might be interesting to you to know something about the history of this proposed legislation. Abill of this character, but not the same bill, was introduced in the
> Se nate on October 10, 1918, by Senator Hoke Smith, of Georgia, nnd
> was numbered S. 4987. On January 28, 1919, Congressman Horace
> Towner, of Iowa, introduced the same bill in the House, and was num-bered H. R. 14238. On December 5, 1918, the Senate Committee on Education and Labor held hearings on the Smith bill. After Congr ess-man Towner introduced the bill in the House it was widely known as the Smith-Towner bill, deriving its name, of course, from its auth'JrS.
> In .July, 1919, joint hearings were held on these two bills by the Com-mittee on Education and Labor on the part of the Senate and the Committee on Education of the House. Later this bill was r evised and introduced in ·the Senate by Senator Thomas Sterling, of South
> Dakota, and was numbered S. 1252. The same bill was introduced in

# 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5531 

the House by Congressman Horace Towner on April 11, 1921, and was numbered H. R. 7. This bill was known as the Sterllng-Towner bill and bearings were held on it in May, 1921. Practically the same bill was introduced in the House on December 17, 1923, by Congressman  

> REED

of New York and was numbered H. R. 3923. A companion bill was introduced at the same session of Congress in the Senate by  Senator 

Sterling,  numbered  S.  1337. In January, 1924, the  Senate  Committee on Education and Labor held hearings on this bill and the House Com-mittee on Education also held hearings on it during the same month. The Robsion-Capper bill, which I am discussing, was introduced at the present session of Congress by the gentlemen mentioned. Hearings have not been held  0}1  this bill at the present session of Congress nor 

is  it necessary. The committees considering the bills have the power to report the bills based on past hearings. However, that is  a matter for the committees to determine. The great multitude of people who are for this legislation  are  wondering why some action of some kind is not taken, and some of them do not know where to  fix  the respon-silibity.  ·

The responsibility is clearly with the administration. The Presi-dent of the  United  States  is a Republican, and that party has a majority of about  100  in the Honse and about 15 in the  Senate,  and it has amajority on the Committee of Education and Labor in the  Senate  and of the Committee on Education of the House. They have the power, and clearly the responsibility is theirs. If they  act.  they should be given due credit. If they refuse to act, they can not escape the blame. The leaders can put this legislation on their program to carry through at this session of Congress, or they can leave it  off  their program. I predict the latter course. This bill provides in part: 

"That  there is established at the seat of government an executive department, to be known as the department of public education, to aid and encourage the public schools and promote the public educational facilities of the Nation, so that all of the people of the several  States 

and Territories without regard to race, creed, or color shall have larger educational opportunities and thereby abolish illiteracy, make more general the  diffusion  of knowledge, and provide for the general welfare, but without impairment of or the infringement upon the laws, the rights, duties,  a:uthority,  or responsibilities of the several  States,  Terri-tories, and the citizens thereof with respect not only to the public educational agencies and institutions, but likewise as  to  the private educational institutions and agencies in the several  States  and Terri-

tories." 

This bill is opposed by some because they say it is an interference with  State  rights. The part of the bill which I have just quoted clearly dispels that contention. I believe  ln  State  rights and I would not support any measure of this kind that I thought would deprive the several  States  and Territories of educational control. It is needless  tcr 

argue this question, because the bill itself is so plain on that point that the  wayfaring  man is amply cared for. Then, again, it is  conte::J.ded  by some who are opposed to the bill that this is a function that does not belong to the Federal Government. If 

the Federal Government bas no legitimate rights to participate in  edu· 

cational matters not in conflict with the rights of the  States,  then Con-gress ought to be consistent and repeal several laws now on the statute books. In support of this, I call your attention to the fact that the Continental Congress in 1785 passed a land grant act, which said act provided that lot 16 in every township of the Northwest Territory be set aside for the maintenance of public schools. The preamble to the ordinance of 1787 contains the following declaration :

"Religion,  morality, and knowledge being ever necessary to good gov-ernment and the happiness of mankind. schools and the means of education shall be forever encouraged." Congress provided, soon after the adoption of the Federal Constitu-tion in 1789, that each new  State  admitted into the  Union  should set aside a portion of its land  fOr  school  pur{X)ses.  In 1862, under the first Morrill Act, land-grant colleges were established from the proceeds of the sale of public lands. In 1867 Congress passed an act creating adepartment of education, but in 1869 it was reduced to a bureau, and education was never represented by one in the  Pres:dent's  Cabinet. Iwill speak about this bureau later on. In 1887 annual appropliations for the land-grant colleges were in-creased under the Hatch Act. In  1890,  $50,000  was appropriated . annually to each  State  and Territory for further maintenance of the land-grant colleges under the second Morrill Act. Further additional maintenance for  these  institutions was provided by the Adams Act . in 

1906. 

Appropriations for the land-grant colleges were increased by the Nelson amendment to the Morrill Act. The  Smith-Lever  Act of 1914 provided  $4,500,000  annually for cooperative agricultural extension work. The Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 created the Federal Board for Vocational Education. The activities of this board is in conjunction with like activities of the various  States  on a 50-50  basis. The Bureau of Education, which I mentioned as having come into existence in 1869, is still with us and is hovered in the Department of the  In· 

terior.  Secretary  of the Interior Wilbur has changed the name from 

"bureau"  to  "office."  I am sure that this simple change of name will result in great good to the school  ~t  Podunk. Now, since 1869 we have had a Bureau of Education. If the Federal  G<>vernment  has no right or authority to act in educational matters, when the rights of the  State  are not interfered with; then we have no right to maintain a Bureau of Education. The witnesses who testified before the com-mittees against this legislation, where they expressed themselves on the subject, were strong for the bureau but against educational representa-tion in the  Presid~t's  Cabinet. If the Federal Government bas a right to exert any activities along educational lines, it certainly ought to do its best because of the very great importance of education. Is the Bureau of Education sufficient to meet the requirements of this  day  and age? Let's call in the witnesses. Dr. Uel W. Lamkin, president North-west Missouri Teachers' College, Maryville, Mo., testified:  "Speaking 

from the standpoint of one who has been connected  with  the Government, I believe that this bill is sound because it will promote economy and efficiency in the organization and administration of the department of  

> t~is

Government. 

" I think that Doctor Keith has better stated than I can  state the reasons why the grouping of these several  agencies  into one separate, independent executive department would add to their efficiency. It  is 

not a new department for the Government ; it is merely the taking of these several agencies from other departments and putting them in a department which represents-we may consider it from the stand-point of money, capacity, annual expenditures, number of people affected, or general results to the Nation as a whole--this department which would represent directly the biggest industry of America-the education of her children. May I ask you to consider the duplication of  effort  in  40  departments and  40  bureaus,  40  sections,  40  divisions, which have to do with education. There can not help but be duplica-tion of  effort  and waste of public money in gathering and tabulating statistics and in the employment of clerks to do so. I want to get into the record this statement; that from both the standpoint of aformer superintendent of public schools, from the standpoint of a former employee of the Federal Government in charge of a board or in  Charge 

of a bureau, rather; from the standpoint of the president of a teachers' college in Missouri ; from the standpoint of an American citizen, Iwant to say that no bureau can have the force and  effect  in  furthering 

any public policy that a Cabinet officer can have or that a separate department can  have." 

The duplication of work and waste of money, under the present system, as mentioned by Doctor Lamkin, can not be successfully refuted. In 1921 the Commissioner of Education, in his re.port, stated: 

"I  am  of the opinion that the department [of the Interior] should seriously consider the question as to the advisability of continuing the Bureau of Education on the present basis of wholly inadequate support. The need for a national governmental agency to perform the functions expected of this bureau is imperative and unquestioned. The  efforts  to mee.t the need, however, are largely nullified by the legislative restric-tions and financial limitations by which the bureau is at present handi-capped. In my judgment it would be better for the Federal Government to  withdrq.w  from this field  <>f  activity entirely unless provision is to be made for It on a more liberal basis, and the policy definitely adopted of attempting to render in an effective and authoritative way the kinds of constructive service which the people and the educators themselves demand. It is futile to continue this organization on the present penu-rious basis and to expect returns that will justify the  outlay." 

In his report in 1925, he stated :

" Those responsible for school administration in the  United  States 

are in great need of assistance in certain important fields. At the present time adequate provision is direly needed for study in the fields of curriculum, organization, school finance, buildings and construction, teacher training, and secondary  education." 

. For almost eight years Dr. J. L. McBrien was in the Bureau of Edu-cation, and in his testimony before the c<>mmittee at the hearings testi-fied as to duplication in the service as it is now, and also to waste and extravagance. Doctor McBrien is in position to know what he is talk-ing about and that under the  pres~nt  system we have duplication and waste of money, time, and  effort  bas not been denied by any witness. Dr.  S.  P.  Capen, chancellor of the University of  Buffalo,  N. Y., testi-fied before the committee, and because of his intimate knowledge, Iquote from his testimony :

" I was myself a Government servant for five years and a little more, a member of the Bureau of Education; and at the latter end of that service I was appointed by the  Secretary  of the Interior to represent the department in an  effort  to find out what duplications there were in the various portions of the different Government bureaus and depart-ments in this particular field. Unfortunately, I resigned before the investigation was completed; but at that time there were some  40 

officers of the Government functioning one way or another in the educational field, nearly every one of them dealing in some fashion with the educational machinery of the  States;  and the amount of confusion 

that  is introduced into the operations of the school systems and the other educational  agenclel'l  by  this  system of requests from Washington is something that one does not appreciate until he lives in it. It is 

also  patent that these several divisions of the Government that deal with education have no relation whatsoever with one another and are, for the most Part.  eaeh  ignorant  of  the other's business. We want to 5532  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 see that enterprise brought together  so  that what the Government  does  

> in

education will at least represent a unified point of view and a unified 

policy." 

This  witness testified to the inadequacy of the Bureau of Education, and that we are forced to depend upon educational foundations for 

research  and investigation on the major problems, and that education is one of the greatest activities  of  the Nation, comparable with agriculture, labor, and commerce. This witness further testified:  "The  reason abureau chief does not answer the purpose is in the matter of interna-tional relations.  • • Since  the  leading  nations of the world have secretaries of education, the United  States  should also  have  a secretary 

ol  education  for international  relations." 

In this connection I call attention to the fact that 72 nations have representation among the cabinet officers, and I now give  the  names of those nations as shown by the Statesman's Yearbook for 1929 :             

> NATIONS ACCORDING EDUCATION PRIMARY RECOGNITION BY INCLUDING A.
> MINISTER OF EDUCATION AMONG THE CABINET OFFICERS

British Empire : Great Britain, president of the board of education; Northern Ireland, mini.ster  of  education; the Irish Free  State,  minister for education ; Malta, minister for public instruction  ; India and  depend-

encies, education, health, and land; Union of  South  Africa,  minister  of the interior; Bombay Presidency,  minister  of education; Federated Malay  States,  director of education; New  South  Wales, minister for  edu-

cation; Victoria, minister of public  instruction;  Queensland, secretary for public instruction;  South  Australia, commissioner of public works and education: Western Australia, chief  secretary  and minister for edu-cation; Tasmania, attorney general  and  minister of education; New Zealand,  minister  of education, Canada ; Alberta, minister of educa-tion ; British Columbia, minister of education ; Manitoba,  minister  of education ; Ontario, minister of education; Saskatchewan, premier,  presi-

dent of council, minister of education. Afghanistan, minister of education. Austria,  minister  of  education. Argentina, minister  of  public instruction. 

· Belgium ·, ·  minister  of education. Bolivia, minister of education and  agri<!ulture. 

Brazil, secretary  of  justice, interior, and public instruction. Bulgaria, minister of education. China, minister of education. Cuba, secretary of  pu~lic  instruction. Chile,  Ininister  of public instruction. Costa Rica, secretary of education. Colombia, minister of public instruction. Czechoslovakia, minister of education. Denmark,  minister  of public instruction. 

Dominican  Republic,  minister  of justice and public instruction. Egypt, minister of education. Finland, minister of education. 

France,  minister  of public instruction and of fine arts. Guatemala,  Ininister  of public instruction. Germany: Baden, minister of religion and education; Bavaria,  min-

iste .r of education ; Hesse, minister of  education  ; Prussia, minister  of 

education. Greece, minister of education. Hungary, minister of public instruction. Honduras, minister  of  instruction. Italy, minister of public instruction. Japan, minister of education. Latvia, minister of education. Mesopotamia, minister of  ·education. 

Morocco, grand vizier's delegate for public instruction. Netherlands, minister of instruction, science, and arts. Norway, minister for education and ecclesiastical  affairs. 

Nicaragua, minister of instruction. Paraguay, minister of worship and public instruction. Peru,  minister  of worship and instruction. Persia,  minister  of education. Poland, minister of education. Portugal, minister of instruction. Russia,  minister  of education. Rumania, minister of education. 

Serb,  Croat, and  Slovene  State,  minister of education. 

Salvador,  minister of foreign relation, justice,  .and  instruction. 

Siam,  minister of education. 

Spain,  minister of public instruction. 

Sweden,  minister  of education and ecclesiastical  affairs. 

Turkey, minister of education. 

Uruguay,  minister  of  industry  and edncation. Harold W. Foght, president Northern Normal  Industrial  School, 

Aberdeen,  S.  Dak., served in the Bureau of Education under Doctor Claxton, and made this statement before the committee: 

"The  health of the American  farmer  is not what it ought to be. It 

could be improved greatly through intelligent teaching in hygiene and the like in schools. In otber  words,  then, the American  rural  school is behind the city school  of  America  to-day.  I did not  realize  this  some years ago as I do now. I have  -spent  35 years in rural education in one form or another. I began as a rural teacher, went into a State  college, helped to train the teachers there, was called to the Bureau of Education as one  of  the specialists in rural education.  One  of  the first things done 

to  me was to send me abroad to make a study of other great  en-

lightened countries on the Continent of Europe. I made a special study of the rural schools  of  Denmark, and I know why it is that Denmark, adisrupted and bankrupt nation after its war against Prussia and Austria in 1864, can to-day truly boast of being the most scientifically organized agricultural nation on the face of the earth. It came about through reorganization. The school men, the philosophers, the preachers, and others got together and they said:  • We must reorganize the schools in such a way that every man,  W{)man,  and child may get the right kind of education,' and it was so in a g~neration  and a half. We have not done the same in the United  States.  I have directed surveys, or taken part in surveys, in 13  American  States.  I just  returned  from Japan ashort time ago, where I was  honored  by being permitted to lend or direct a survey of the  rural  and agricultural schools of the Empire ; and I say to you gentlemen the  rural  schools of Japan, an old nation which bas had what we would call a westernized educational system for only 53 years,  has  a better and more complete system  of  rural schools than we have; and so it is with certain others; and why is  it?" 

To those who are bothered about  " standardization.,  I wish to can especial attention to the sound  argument  made before the committee by Hon.  S.  M. N. Marrs,  State  superintendent of public instruction of  my 

own  State,  Texas. He said: 

"And  I want to call your attention also to this fact, gentlemen, which I believe has not been mentioned by any person I have heard discuss this question, either for or against this measure. The nations of the world, whether justly or unjustly, look upon the American people as believing in the dollar. They look upon us as a commercial people. Let us 

examine  the organization of our Government and see whether or not this Nation has given recognition to the spiritual and the cultural. I

· wonder  il  we would not have to admit that material interest in  every 

act of the Government  has  been placed above the spiritual and the cul-tural interest. We have a Secretary  of Agriculture, and I believe in that department. It is promotional, but the  Secretary  of Agriculture has never attempted to standardize the method of raising cotton in the 

South  ; he  has  never undertaken to standardize the method of  raising 

wheat in the West; but through that  great  department information has been disseminated in the agricultural sections and the localities have been stimulated until the country is more prosperous on account of the workings of that department.  And  so  may I say of commerce and labor. What is the department of the Government recognized by the world as standing for the cultural and the spiritual among our people?  * • • 

> It

would produce a psychological  effect  upon the Nation to dignify the subject  of  education in this  manner." 

I wish also to call attention to one statement made by Hon. John W. Cowles, grand commander of  the  Supreme  Council of  Scottish  Rite of Freemasonry:  "The  claim is made by prophecy that the resultant end 

will  be federalizing education and interference with  State  rights." 

We have other departments with Cabinet chiefs-for instance,  Com-

merce and Agriculture.  One  State  raises hogs, another cattle, and another sheep.  One  State  is best adapted to cotton, another to wheat, and another to corn or tobacco. The chief industry of one  State  may be mining, of another manufacturing, of another commerce ; but all the 

States  should be equally interested in the right education of the future voters and rulers of the country. This legislation is favored and indorsed by the following organizations: National Education Association, with  200,000  members. National Congress of Parents and Teachers, with 1,134,714 members. Forty-four  Stat~  organizations,  one district organization, one terri-torial organization, of the National Lea .gue of Women Voters. The International  CouncU  of  Religious  Education. National Woman's Christian Temperance Union, with  600,000  members. National Federation  of  Business and Professional Women's Clubs, with  55,000  members. National Women's Trade-Union League. American  Library  Association, with  10,056  members. 

Federal  Council of the Churches of Christ in America. American Home Economics Association, with  9,000  members. 

. American  Nurses'  Association, with  75,000  members. 

Service  Star  Legion (Inc.). Women's Homeopathic Medical  Fraternity. 

Woman's Missionary Council, Methodist Episcopal Church,  South, 

with  350,000  members. Educational Press Association  of  America, with 55 members. National Council,  Junior  Order  of  United  American Mechanics, with 

342,000  members. Osteopathic Women's National  Ass.ociation,  with  1,000  members. American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association, with  17,000 

members,. 

National  Kindergarten  Association, with  3,000  members. 

Woman's  Raief  Corps, with  222,000  members. American Vocational Association, with  3,000  members. 

National  Federation _ot  Music -Clubs. 

# -1930  QONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5533 

National Board of the  Young ·  Women's Christian Association, with 

600,000  members. General Grand Chapter, Order of the Eastern  Star,  with  2,000,000 

members. National Council of Jewish Women. 

Supreme  Council, Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, southern jurisdiction, with  300,000  members. American Association of University Women, with 33,513 members. General Federation of Women's Clubs, with over  2,000,000  members. National Committee for a Department of Education, with  100 

members. American Federation of Labor, with 3,321,526 members. American Federation of Teachers, with  10,000  members. These organization represent a total of near  29,000,000  people who  are 

1n favor of a department of education. Education is one of our greatest problems; it is essential to the life of a republic. Universal  suffrage  without universal education is but a reef of rocks in front of the ship of state. No community, county, state, or nation  can  be great unless its individual citizenship is great in thought, pure in concept, and righteous in living. 

Thomas · Jefferson  said : " Those who expect to remain free and  ig-

norant in a state of civilization expect that which has never happened and never will  happen." 

"Education  is the chief defense of  nations,"  declared Edmund Burke. 

"In  proportion as the structure of government gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion be enlightened." (George Washington.) 

" Self-government can succeed only through an instructed electorate. The more complex the problems of the Nation become the greater is the need for more and more advanced instruction.'' (Herbert Hoover.) In 1923 President Coolidge said:  "I  do not favor the making of appropriations from the National Treasury to be expended directly on local education, but I do consider it a fundamental requirement of national  activity,  which unaccompanied by allied subjects of welfare is worthy of a separate department and a place in the Cabinet.'' I come from a State  which bas always ardently believed in education. Texans are the only people in the history of the world who solemnly declared in their declaration of independence that the failure of the government to provide for the education of the children was a ground for revolution. With marvelous wisdom, born of trained minds, they declared it to be  an  axiom that unless a people are educated and  en-

lightened it  is  idle to expect the continuance of liberty or the capacity for selt-government, and they concluded their declaration by stating  "that 

being conscious of the rectitude of their own intentions they fearlessly committed the issues to the  Supreme  Arbiter of the destiny of  nations." 

The people of Texas in 1836 boldly made their demand for popular education in the face of an invading foe which was vastly superior in numbers to her own citizenship and sent forth her statesmen from her counsel chambers to enforce that demand on the field of battle.  Presi-

dent Lamar in his first message to the Texas Republic said :  

> "If

we desire to establish a republican form of government on abroad and enduring basis, it will become necessary for us to provide a system  of  education. A cultivated mind is the guardian genius of democracy, and when guided and controlled by reason is the noblest attribute of man. It is the only dictator that freemen acknowledge and the only security that  freemen  desire." 

_ According to the census  of  1920,  out of 82,739,315 persons  10  years 

of  age and over  4,931,905  were illiterate. It has been estimated that the annual economic loss in the United  States  due to illiteracy is $825,-

000,000.  The appalling sum of  $3,000,045,000  has been estimated as the loss resulting from preventable disease and death. The five  States 

rl\nklng  highest in education show an average of $695 per capita in savings, while the five low est average only $89. The cost  of  ignorance outweighs the cost of education. 

" Our  Government  is  a stake of such inestimable value as to demand our constant and watchful attention for its  preservation."  (James Buchanan.) 

"The  public happiness is the true object of legislation and can be secured by the masses of mankind, thems elves awakened to a knowledge and care of their own  interests."  (Bancroft.) 

"The  information of the  pe~ple  at large alone can make them  safe, 

as they are the sole depository of our religious and political  freedom." 

(Thomas Jefferson.) 

"Patriotism  consists of some very practical things. It is patriotic to learn what the facts of our national life are and to face them with candor.'' (Woodrow Wilson.) 

"To  preserve, to inform, and to perpetuate the sources, and direct in their most  effective  channels the streams which contribute to the public weal is the purpose for which government was instituted." (John Quincy Adams.) The Democratic platform of 1928 stated: 

"We  believe,  with  Jefferson and other founders of the Republic, that ignorance is  tile  enemy of freedom; and that each  State,  being responsible for the intellectual and moral qualifications of its citizens and for the expenditure of the moneys collected by taxation for the support of its  

> scho~,

shall use its sovereign  rlght  in all matters pertaining to  educa-

tion. The Federal Government should  offer  to the States such counsel, advice, results of research, and aid as may be available through the Federal agencies for the general improvement of our schools, in view  of 

our national needs.'' 

On  this vital and important issue the Republican platform of 1928 is as silent as the grave. But in 1924 the Republicans said in their platform: 

"The  welfare activities of the Government connected with the various departments are already numerous and important, but lack the coordina-tion which is essential to  effective  action. To meet these needs we  ap-

prove the recommendation for the creation of a Cabinet post of education and relief.'' The fact that the Republicans, advocating a Cabinet  post of  educa-

tion in 1924 ., abandoned it in 1928, in their platform, shows that they do not intend to permit this proposed legislation to come to a vote in 

this Congress. Federal encouragement of education was strongly emphasized by Washington, Madison, Jefferson, Adams, and Monroe. In fact,  Jeffer-

son considered the establishment of a department of education during his administration. Among other things, be said: 

" I do most anxiously wish to see education given to all so that  tbPy 

may read  and  understand what  is  going on in the world and keep  their 

part of it going on right.'' This bill proposes to take the chief educational activities of the Federal Government as they are now and consolidate them into one administrative unit. It does not create another office nor a single educational activity for the Government. And in doing this it will be 

n:ore  economical, because it will dispense with duplication. It not only means economy but increased efficiency. This proposed legislation is the result of thought and deliberation of men and women who have the interest of the country at heart and who, in public and iu private life, stand for the highest ideals-men and women who have made a careful study of the needs of education in the United  States  with a view of just what cooperation might be  properly  used by the Federal  Govern-

plent,  without duplication of work, which means waste of money, as we have it now. It does not permit any interference with the complete autonomy of the  States  in the administration and control of their schools ; and not a witness before the committee, testifying for the bill, failed to state that be was against Federal control, if the question was asked him.  ~ 

> It

simply provides for a more efficient participation of the  Federal 

Government by coordinating its present educational activities and  ex-

tending the scope of its scientific research and investigations. The  im-

portance of public education merits and the advancement of education justifies this bill. The Departments of Agriculture, of Commerce, and of Labor are promotional under the general welfare of the Constitution, and a department of education would be in the same class. The  Sec-

retary of Agriculture does not dictate to the farmer how he shall farm or what and how much he shall plant. The Departments of Commerce and Labor conduct investigations and their activities contribute to the general welfare of the people, as also the Department of Agriculture.  

> If

the Department of Agriculture, which I am strongly for, assists the people in raising better hogs and cattle and producing more on the farms, then I ask are not the children of this country of more value than cattle and bogs? Was not Edgar A. Guest right when he said?-The wealth of the world isn't silver or gold, 

Or  the diamonds and rubies its caverns may bold, 

Or  the trees in its woods or the power in its  pools  ;The wealth of the world is to-day in its schools. For nothing bas value which lies in our ken Without the high thinking of women and men. When you have added the dollars and measured the ore, Take stock of the children that play at your door, For the wealth of the world which on paper you pen, Is as dirt by your feet without God-fearing men. And the strength of our nation lies not in its guns But deep in the minds of its daughters and sons. 

Strip  men of their manhood, and silver and gold Are nothing but metals, hard, bitter, and cold. Take honor from women and all things turn black, The world to the dark, dismal  ages  goes back, For the gold was all here and the forests here then Awaiting the day when the world would have men. The wealth of the world isn't found in its streams,  

> It

lies in its people and all of their dreams. Imagine this world with its gold if you can, Without the high thinking and courage of man. You can sum its resources again and again, But the wealth of the world is its women and men.    

> ADDRESS BY ROSCOE POUND

Mr.  STOBBS.  Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent  to 

extend my remarks by inserting in the  RECORD  an address  de· 

livered by Dean  Pound,  of the Harvard Law School, and a mem-ber of the Commission on Law Observance, at the  tEnth  anni-

versary dinner of the bar association of this city? 5534  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 

Mr.  UNDERHILL. Mr.  Speaker,  I want the House to under-

stand  that this is not the dean of the Harvard Law  School,  but a member of the President's Law Observance Commission. 'There is a distinction. _ The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Massachusetts? There was no objection. 

Mr.  STOBBS.  Mr.  Speaker,  under the leave to extend my  re-

marks in the  RE-CORD,  I include the following address delivered nt the tenth anniversary dinner of the Federal Bar Association at the Mayflower Hotel, February 22,  1930,  by Roscoe Pound, dean of the Harvard Law  School  and member of the President's 

Commission  on Law Observance and Enforcement:   

> WASHINGTON'S BIRTHDAY MEMORIAL

We are accustomed to thinking of George Washington as he is  repre-

sented to us in statues and portraits. We think  of  the  imposing  com-

mander in  chief,  of the dignified President of the Constitutional  Con-

vention,  of the ceremonious first  President  of  the  United  States,  con-

ducting something very like a court, from which the democratic  move-

ment of the beginnings of our polity reacted so vigorously. The statues and portraits do not represent Washington, the pioneer. They do not show us the man who surveyed Lord Fairfax's domain, familiar with the wilderness, a believer in the  developm1:>nt  of the  un· 

s ett led domain to the west of the fringe .of civilization along the coast. They do n,ot show us the man who had learned from the Indians the possibilities of a less formal and more individual fighting as against the formal drill and disciplined movements of the regular armies of the eighteenth century Europe. For let us not forget that Washington was a pioneer in fact and largely in spirit. Largely in  spi~it,  I say, because his strong but restrained personality had other elements which held back the characteristic behavior of the pioneer. He might be called a type of the right-wing pioneer as Andrew Jackson is a type of the left-wing pioneer . Thus it is not inappropriate on Washington's birthday to think for a few moments on the pioneer  spirit  in  Americ:n 

institutions and American law. Much has been said of late as to a supposed breakdown of law and order in this country,  as  to a passing of old-time standards of an orderly society, a relaxation of  standards  of individual behavior, an enfeebling of the old-time agencies of social control, the home,  house-

hold discipline, the  chni·ch,  the discipline of religious organization, and 

·the  neighborhood.  the discipline of the feelings of one's neighbors as to what is done and what is not done. 

That  there is much confusion in current thinking on moral questions, that even the best and most conscientious of our citizens are at times bewildered by the problems of regulation of conduct and adjustment of relations presented by the life of to-day,  goe..'3  without saying. I am not here to argue some one cause or to set going propaganda for some one supposed remedy. But I would suggest one cause of difficulty in law observance and law enforcement in this country-and those are things in which George Washington thoroughly  belit:.-ed  and in respect of which. a serious  breakdown  would have given him the deepest  eon-

cern. I would suggest that one cause of difficulty is that our institu-tions, our polity, our laws, and our whole attitude toward them have a background of pioneer life. They were fashioned by pioneers  to 

the needs of a pioneer society. Their whole spirit is that of the pioneer. We have been brought up to look  u{>Qn  them through the eyes of the pioneers. Hence they work awkwardly in the urban industrial society 

of  to-day. It is not that there has been decadence in the moral fiber of the people. It is rather that what were virtues in pioneers and in pioneer societies are no longer virtues in the residents of crowded urban centers and in industrial societies. I need  not say that the picture of an ideal human society as drawn by the pl.oneer is not exactly the picture of an ideal human society for a world  of  aerial navigation and motor transport and radio and wireless telegraphy and electricity and  steam. 

This will be brought out better if we lo ok into the distinguishing characteristics of the pioneer and particularly his distinguishing virtues as he saw them. A successon of acute foreign observers saw the pioneer and his works from the  early  nineteenth  century  down  J;o  the present century and have given us their impressions derived from  diverse  points of view. Mrs.-Trollope, Dickens, De Tocqueville, Lord Bryce, and Kipling saw him from their several standpoints, and, with allowance for those  stand-

points, saw much the  ~arne  outstanding characteristics. What has stood out in every portrait  of  the pioneer  is  self-reliance and independence, impatience of  restraint.  restlessness, and a disposition ever to be on the move; versatility, .a suspicion of specialization, and  a.  firm belief in the ability of anyone to do anything; dislike of form, impatience of ceremony, and disposition to take short cuts; a disregard of the  ameni-

ties of life and preference for rough, blunt , outspoken manner and conduct of Degotiations ; and a bent for  politics,  a zest for individual 

· oarticipation  in public  affairs,  and a tendency to bring all things into the political arena, to make law politics and politics law. There were good reasons behind each of these  characteristics  of the 

pi;Jneer.  They were born  of  his struggle with new conditions of  llfe  In 

_the New World and they  served  to adapt  him  to tlie needs of that life .He had  to  be self-reliant. There was no policeman around the corner to whom he might ' appeal for protection. There was no minutely organized bureau or set of bureaus at hand to see that his food was pure, that the medicines he was able to procure at  rare  intervals were wholesome, that the measures he u ed were standard, or that the investments he made were safe. He could not !all 

back  on a benevolent governmental paternalism or solicitous  govern-

mental maternalism to see that he did only what was good for him. Very likely the conditions of pioneer life developed this self-reliance and independence to excess.  "The  unthinking sons of the  sagebrush,"  says 

Owen  Wister, ''ill tolerate anything that makes for discipline, good order, and obedience, and the man who lets another command him they 

despise."  This is the very spirit of the pioneer in the exaggerated form it  takes  at the last stand on the frontier. But this spirit  i.s  anything but a virtue in the  life  of an urban community where discipline, good order, and obedience are imperative to enable the complex economic order to 

function  effectively. 

Again, restlessness was a virtue  in pioneer America. It drove the most vigorous elements of the population to the fringes of civilization in quest of new areas to be opened, new resources of nature to be  devel-

oped, new commonwealths to be founded. It was behind the successive waves of westward  expansion  that took our people across the continent in the first century of our national  eXistence.  But when  this  restless-

ness takes the form of a continual and heavy turnover of  labor  in indu st ry, it is le ss a virtue. 

When  it takes th e form of continual legislative experimentation at the expense of stability it is less a virtue in a highly organized  eco-

nomic  order. When it takes the form of mental restlessness-physical restlessness being inhibitea by the disappearance of frontiers open to the adventurous--this mental restlessness is likely to interfere with the long-range calculations of modern economic and industrial enterprise and ceases to be wholly a virtue. Again, it was necessary that the pioneer be versatile. He had to be versatile or get  off  the earth. He must be equal to anything that  was 

to be done or it must remain undone. There was no t e lephone at his side, no garage  around  the corner, no trolley line down the road, no bus line past his door,  tio  directory on his shelf giving the names and addresses of  100  specialized services at hand waiting to respond to his call. He must be  prepared  for all emergencies and must meet them himself. It is no wonder that be had faith in the  efficacy  of individual 

effort.  It is no wonder that he looked down on specialists and was supremely conildent that any honest  citizen  was competent to any task . 

> It

is no wonder that he believed in lay judges, in herb doctors, in fervent and eloquent self-called preachers, and in volunteer generals. Even Bull Run and  Shiloh  did not wholly  bre:tk  his faith in the latter. His faith in apprentice-trained physicians, patent medicines, and  quack 

healers died hard before the coming of modern science. His faith in apprentice-trained lawyers and judges elected on popularity or instinct is still with us, albeit it has  suffered  some rude  shocks  under the  con-

ditions of administering justice in the great city of twentieth century .America. Nor is it strange that the pioneer  should  dislike form and be  impa-

tient of ceremonial. In the New World such things seemed to have no place. They stood in the way of the  s{>Qntaneous  free self-assertion which was the motive force of pioneer life. The Colonials bad Vivid 

examples  of how the formal drill and rigid military ceremonial of European armies stood in the  way  of efficiency on the battle fields of America. No wonder that for a time we undervalued these things. Taylor was probably our last general to lead in the field in civilian attire, and Grant the last to command armies in the uniform of a private. More and more we have had to be learning that in a crowded urban  society 

form and ceremonial may save time and advance the dispatch  of  business instead of wasting and retarding. Disregard of the amenities bad caused closely akin to aversion to form and contempt for ceremonial. The pioneer was too near to nature to appreciate the conventional artificialities which smooth the path of life in a crowded society. His neighbors were not jostling him in  ele-

vators or rubbing elbows in busses and trolley cars or dodging him in the subways during rush hours or blocking his path on the sidewalks as he went to his work. There was no long procession of vehicles in front and behind and no counter procession on the other side of the way as he drove his team along the road. Politeness and conventional manifestations of good will, which obviate 

friction  and keep order in apartment houses and office buildings  and 

at the myriad points of contact in a modern city. had no serious  role  

> in

pioneer life. They seemed traditions from the  Old  World. We have been having to learn their value in the  different  social order of the present. We are having to learn the waste involved in undignified, unceremonious, forensic conduct in a busy court. We are  having  to learn that wranglings  of  counsel. however interesting as a spectacle, wben the pioneer found  his  theater in the courtroom, are obstacles to efficient administration of justice in the twentieth century. We are having to learn that more can be done and done better in the pomp 

> I

# i930  CONG RESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5535                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> and ceremony of acourt at Westminster than in the offhand, easy-going, unrestrained atmosphere of the pioneer tribunal. Most of all, however, the pioneer delighted in politics. There was no theat er at hand. There were no movies around the corner. There was no radio in the house. But he could discuss politics with his neighbor.
> He could go to rallies; he could take part in caucnses. He could find his recreation in adevoted interest in public affiairs. They were rela-tively simple. lie could know or learn all about the relatively short list of candidates. The qu estions at issue were not toQ41omplex to be
> the subject of reasonable debate between him and his neighbor. .We have been wont to deplore the relative lack of interest in politics on the part of the city dweller of to-day. But he has other recreations-
> the pictures, the radio, his automobile, the baseball game, the football game. Moreover, he can know but little of most of the long list of candidates, and the questions at issue are frequently so intricate and so specialized that he must judge them by instinct or traditional prejudices
> ot· simply follow his leader. In the city of to-day the devotion to poli-tics that made the pioneer apillar of the Commonwealth is likely rather to give us acaterpillar of the Commonwealth. In law and administration the pioneer's tendency to put everything into politics is especially ill adapted to the conditions of to-day. Admin-istration has come to be asort of social engineering. It is agetting done of the things which must be done through legal or governmental machinery in ahighly organ~zed economic order. It is agetting them done with aminimum of friction and waste. Politics, as the pioneer played the game, is not an art of getting things done. It is abattle of opposing organizations .Any good citizen was competent to do well enough the relatively few and simple things there were to be done. There was plenty of time to fight out how they should be done and, what was more interesting, who shou ld do them. This conception first showed its weakness on the military side in the War of 1812 and again in the Ci vil War. Probably the Spanish-American War was the last we shall carry on with the ploneer methods of the beginning of our polity. To-day the pioneer conception is showing its weakness in ageneral want of coopera-tion on the part of administrative agencies, in ineff ectiveness of law-making and inefficiency of administrati on of justice, in ageneral ill
> adaption of the law-making and law -enforcing administrative t•egime
> of the pioneer to the tasks confronting legislation and adjudication and administration in twentitkh century America. .Just now it is fashionable to be "disillusioned." But Istill have aVictorian faith in the American people. Ihave faith in their inventive-ness and adaptability. Ihave faith in their ability to redraw our tra-ditional picture to the life of to-day. Adaptability is an inherited pioneer virtue, and it is one which we may cherish. As Washington learned to adapt the drill and discipline of the professional soldiers of Europe to the conditions of warfare in the New World, so we must learn to adapt the id eas and ideals we have brought down from ·pioneer America to the exigencies of aworld in which the pioneering has be en done and the task is to build cooperatively upon the pioneer foundations .

PERMISSION  TO  ADDRESS  THE  HOUSE 

Mr . FISH. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to address the House this afternoon for  10  minutes, after the completion of the remarks by the gentleman from Pennsy l vania [Mr. BRUMM]. The  SPEAKER.  The gentleman from New York  [1\Ir.  FrsH] asks unanimous consent that he be permitted to address the House for  10  minutes following the remarks of the gentleman from Pennsylvania  [Mr.  BRUMM]. Is there objection? 

1\Ir.  CRA.i\iTON.  Mr. Speaker, reserving the right to object, will the gentleman from New York [Mr.  FISH]  join with that request a request that we have a night session to-night for the purpose of considering legislation now pending before the House? 

1\fr.  TILSON.  Mr.  Speaker, we have over three hours of special orders to-day before we can go on with  unfinished  busi-ness. I think we have ;reached the limit. 

Mr.  O'CONNOR  of Oklahoma. Does the gentleman know when the last bus will leave? Mr.  TILSON.  I do not know. They may be  aU  out of exist -ence by that time, as far as I know. 1 object to any further addresses to-day. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from New York [Mr.  FisH]? 

Mr.  TILSON.  I object, Mr.  Speaker. 

Mr.  SCHAFER  of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that I may be permitted to address the House for 15 minutes after the completion of the business on the Speaker's table on next Tuesday. The  SPEAKER.  The gentleman from Wisconsin [Mr.  ScHA- 

> FER]

asks unanimous consent that at the conclusion of the address of the gentleman from Pennsy l vania [Mr . WATSON]  on Tuesday,  March  25, he may address the House for 15 minutes. Is  tbere  objection? There was no objection. 

PER  CAPITA  PAYMENT TO  SHOSHONE  AND  ARAPAHOE  INDIANS Mr.  CRAMTON.  Mr.  Speaker, I ask unanimous  cOnsent  to vacate the proceedings whereby the vote on the passage of the bill  (S.  3579) authorizing a per capita payment to the Shoshone and Arapahoe Indians was reconsidered and laid on the table, for the purpose of amending the title to conform to the act. The Clerk read the title of the bill. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gen-tleman from Michigan [Mr.  CRAMTON]? 

There was no objection .Mr.  CRAMTON . . Mr. Speaker, I offer an amendment to the title of the bill. The  SPEAKER . The gentleman from Michigan offers an amendment to the title of the bill, which the Clerk will report. The Clerk read as follows : Amend the title so as to read  "Authorizing  a per capita payment to the Shoshone and Arapahoe  Indians." 

The  SPEAKER.  Without objection, the amendnient to the title will be agreed to, and the vote  by  which the bill was passed will be reconsidered and laid on the table. There was no objection. 

INTERNATIONAL  FUR  TRADE  EXHffii'TION  AND  CONGRESS 

Mr.  FISH.  l\fr.  Speaker,  I ask unanimous consent to take from the Speak e r's table House  J.oint  Resolution  205,  to provide for the expen ses of participation by the  United  States  in the International Fur Trade Exhibition and Congress to be held in Germany in  1930,  and concur in the  Senate  amendments. The  SPEAKER.  The gentleman from New Ycrk asks unani-mous consent to take from the Speaker's table House  Joint 

Resolution  205  and concur in the  Senate  amendments. The Clerk read  the  title of the resolution. The Cle rk  read · the  Senate  amendments, as follows:  

> Page

2, line 3, strike out  " the de legates in  attending"  and insert                       

> "pat ·ticipation by the United States in."
> Page 2, line 5, aft er "els ewhere," insert "but not including expenses or salal'ies of delegates, for."

The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from New York? 

1\Ir.  GARNER.  Mr . Speaker, reserving the right to object, did this resolution come from  the  Committee on Foreign  Affail·s? 

l\lr.  FISH.  Yes; it was reported by the Foreign Affairs  Com-

mittee, and I have the approval of the Foreign  Affairs  Com-

mittee  in making this motion. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection? There was no objection. The  Senate  am e ndments were  agreed  to. 

RULES  OF  THE  HOUSE 

The  SPEAKER.  Under the order of the House the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska  [Mr . HowARD]  for 45 minutes. [Applause.] 

1\Ir.  -HOWARD.  Mr.  Speaker, since the dawn of the initial day of attempt to establish parliamentary government two schools of thought have contended for the  ·supremacy,  and in the present day the two schools are still in conflict.  One  school holds tenaciously to the claim that officials in control of aparliamentary body are, and of right ought to be, instruments through which the pleasure of the reigning monarch, or the ad-ministration in control of the ' realm, must be worked upon every piece of legislation considered by the body. This first school may be fairly designated as the conservative, or arbitrary school, in contrast with the second school, fairly designated as the liberal school. This second, or liberal school, holds fast to the doctrine that the officials in control of a parliamentary body are, and of right ought to be, nothing more nor less than in-struments through which the will of the membership must always prevail. Instantly I take my place as student in  and 

defender of this second school, regarding it  as  peculiarly the American school, in which every one of the foremost fathers of the Republic was a preceptor. I come th1s morning to speak upon a serious subject, and my utterances may-if my colleagues shall fail to be very patient with me-possibly lead to an erroneous conclus ion as to the real object of my present  speaking.  For the first  time · in all my service here I may in this hour ask  permission  to follow the lines of preparation, rather than to speak with that measure of spontaneity most becoming to one who has  been  granted th egracious privilege of addressing these walls and these ears. Perhaps my average colleague is more familiar with my im-petuous side than with my side of repose, and if now I shall resort to reading, then let me plead -pardon on the base of fear that my intensity of thought regarding the subject in hand might lead to intemperate sentences should I speak extempo- _ 

raneously. 5536  CONGRESSIONAL  -RECORD-HOUSE  MARon  18 Please, may no colleague of mine in  this  presence misinterpret my motive in my words of this morning. Let me instantly meet and defeat the argument of any who shall  say  that I am at-tempting to detract from the grandeur and the glory of  this 

House of Representatives, or that I am giving preference to the initial worthwhileness of any other legislative body in the world-not excepting the  United  States Senate.  :My  object is not to debase this House of Representatives but rather to direct attention to its own shameful mistreatment of itself. Sages have said, and their sayings are true, that this House was in-tended to be a forum in which the soul of the American people, speaking through the lips of chosen representatives, could be heard-a forum in which every representative might have oppor-tunity to express the views of his home people with reference to any pending legislative problem. Happy the wish that this design of the fathers might be the fact as of to-day, but in the garish light of the record in recent years one is  impelled  and compelled to the conclusion that our House of Representatives 

has  become everything else than a deliberative body. To whom shall we ascribe the blame for this  shameful  fact? Shall one stand here and speak as a partisan, declaring that the blame belongs to one particular partisan political organiza-tion? In the glaring light of fact I dare not-and shall not. The unhappy transforming of this House from its original state as a deliberative body into its present state as a body in which deliberation finds small place has been due to no one political partisan organization but to a linking and a welding of influ-ences in the two great  political  parties, influences preferring that this House shall become the plaything of  official  masters rather than the handmaid of its membership. Perhaps I should, before proceeding further, select a text around and upon which to cluster in words my own estimate of a very unhappy situation in the legislative  aft'airs  of our Republic. And so I shall select a text, taking it from the very first verse of the very first chapter in the Book of Fact, reading as follows: The liberal rules of debate in the  Unlted  States  Senate  constitute to-day the last and only governmental bulwark between the average .American citizen and those powerful predatory interests which so often seek and so often receive permission to  spoliate  the average citizen by aid of laws enacted by the Congress. 

Very  proud is the boast of the average American citizen that under our system of government nothing can take a way from him the sacred right of free speech. Let one who shall care-les sl y utter that proud boast serve for a day or for a session as a Member  of this House of Representatives, and thereafter his voice will be small,  ~ery  ~mall,  when voicing that proud boast, if indeed not  thereafter  hushed to perpetual and shameful silence. The  United  States Senate is to-day the only national  forum 

wherein the right of free  speech  remains uncontrolled, and wherein the right of each individual  Member  to  offer  amend-ments to pending legislation is preserved in its entirety. No man, and particularly no American citizen, can find words to properly estimate the importance of free  speech  and the  right 

to  offer  amendments in a legislative body. Without the safe-guard of this sacred right the representatives of the people in any legislative  body  are wholly unable to  express  in  speech, 

or in written amendment to pending legislation, the views of their home people regarding such legislation. To-day in the  United  States Senate every Member has the inalienable right to  ·offer  amendments to any pending bilL He 

may  seek by amendment to add something to the bill, or to take something from it, and his right to be heard with reference to any amendment, or to any question of governmental policy is unchallenged. Will any one of my colleagues here present, speaking in capacity  as  an individual Member of this House, be 

heard  to  say  that any such sacred right is preserved to him in this  body'l  I pause for reply. Silence reigns, and it is humiliat-ing silence. For the sake of comparison, let us now turn to the considera-tion of a tariff  bill in this House, and then to the consideration given to a tariff bill in the  United  States Senate. When the 

tariff  bill now being considered by the Senate was before this House did any Member have opportunity to fairly analyze the bill  'l  Did any nonmember of a powerful committee have oppor-tunity to rise in his place on the floor and  offer  an  amendment to change any schedule in the  bill?  The individual membership of this House had absolutely nothing to say as to what the bill should contain, or as to what should be excluded from it. The 

·people  in our home districts were interested in the bill,  and 

yet we had no opportunity to speak  their  desires with reference to any of its provisions. Did we discover some particular feature of the  bill  which we felt must be harmful to our  hom~  people, and did  we  then cast a vote against that particular  feature?  No; and  for  the ample reason that we were compelled, under the workings of the gag 'rules of this House, to vote for the bill as a whole, or against the bill as a whole. I recall that immediately prior to the passage of that  tarift 

bill under the gag  rules  of this House many Members denounced the bill as distressingly unfavorable to their home people. For reasons far beyond my ability to understand, those protesting Members  s~  they would vote for the bill, admittedly hurtful to their constituents, believing that the Senate, working under its liberal rules, would enact wholesome amendments and send the bill back to .the House with such amendments. Their prophecies in this regard have been in part fulfilled. The Senate has splen-didly amended the bill in several directions, and some day--God and GRUNDY know when-it will come back to the House, carry-ing some good  amendments--a'Ild  some perhaps not so good. This one object lesson, showing the  different  manner in which the two Houses have handled the  tariff  legislation, ought to be 

sufficient  to sustain my contention as stated in the text upon which I am here basing my remarks.  Shall  it be construed as challenging the honesty, the patriotism, or the ability of the Members of this House when I assert that it has ceased to be adeliberative  body,  and has become a body in which three men control the doings of the House as absolutely as an American schoolboy controls his own marbles? I have no such thought in mind. Indeed, it is my firm conviction that the membership of 

this House in this hour will suffer not at all in comparison with the membership of any  preceding  House. Measured by the true 

ya.rUsticks  of probity, patriotism, and ability, this present mem-bership  is  instantly the equal of any predecessor since this great legislative body first became the speaking soul of the American people in a legislative way. I look about me here and discover colleagues magnificent in point of patriotic fervor, common honesty, and ability, supinely submitting to the sway and control of  three  official  Members who are empowered by the House gag rules to allow legislation to live or to make it die, just as the triune will of the three shall decree. Many magnificent statesmen, sent here as servants of and spokesmen for their home people, are as  helples~  as little children in  effort  to accomplish legislation not favored by that trinity of control. The average American citizen loves to behold the President of the  United  States as the most  powerful  man in the world, and  particularly  with reference to governmental matters in our Republic.  Our  President does have vast power. By the aid of his veto he may put to death any piece of legislation which may have been enacted by the two Houses of the  Congress,  but by asufficient vote the two Houses may make that same piece of legislation live again, and may make it the law of the land despite the veto. But there is here in Washington, holding membership in this House, one man far more powerful than the President of the 

United  States with reference to  affairs  of government, and particularly with reference to legislative matters. That one man who possesses more power than the President of the 

United  States is our princely colleague, the gentleman from New York,  Mr.  SNELL, chairman of the gag rules committee of this House. How vast is his power? Why, it is so far-reaching that he can choke to death any piece of legislation which may originate here, or which may come over from the Senate, before ever it can get a chance  -for  consideration on the floor of the House. I can not believe that any one Member of this House, no matter how charming his personality, should be vested with such vast power. While always applauding the personality of that powerful ma .n, never am I able to pridefully observe his exercise of power. 

Often  when observing his murderous treatment of legislation for the country's weal, or when beholding him promoting legis-lation for the country's woe, I find myself recalling a long-ago encounter between a magnificent President of the  United  States and a powerful money lord: In that encounter the mighty power exercised by the money lord in matters of Government was re-cited, and at the close of the recital the  Chief  Executive of that day looked the  man  of money straight in the eye and said some short words to him. And often now I am wishing that but for a moment I might have a tithe of the courage displayed by Andrew Jackson when he spoke to Nicholas Biddle. In that moment I would look  BERTRAND  SNELL  squarely in the eye, and my Quaker lips would paraphrase the speech of Andrew Jackson long enough to make them say : ·               

> Chairman SNELL~ the power which, under the House gag rules you
> exe-rcise, is too damned much power.

If time would now permit I would like to direct attention to many good things accomplished by the aid of the liberal rules of the  United  States  Senate-good things which this House of '1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  I 5537 

Representatives should have accomplished; but, hindered by its own gage rules, could not. For instance, the Norris  "limping 

duck"  resolution has been, by aid of liberal rules, pushed through the Senate several times. It is my sincere judgment that if that lame-duck resolution might come to a vote in this House right now it would receive the votes of a large majority of our membership. But it does not come to a vote. Why? Because 3 men in this House, by aid of the gag rules, are more powerful than the other 432 Members. Long ago the House should have been the originator of legislation to do away with the lame-duck ses ions, but it remained for the Senate, under its liberal rules, to take the initiative. To-day there is reposing in a pigeonhole in the House Rules  Committee  a resolution requesting consideration of the Norris lame-duck resolution 

which  came over from the Senate . months ago. I refer to House Resolution No. 177. Just why this resolution was consigned to the  Rules  Committee cemetery I do not know, for, indeed, the resolution did not ask for Rules  Committee  action until after action by the  Committee  on Election of the President and Vice 

President. 

I have expressed belief that this limping-duck  1·esolution  is favorably regarded by a large majority of the Members of this House. If that be true, then why does not that majority senti-ment make a demand that the resolution be brought before the House Simply because, as every Member knows, in order to drag a measure from a hostile committee a petition to that end must be signed by 218  :Members  of the House. Such a petition can not be carried about and presented for signatures. It  !9-USt 

lie on the  Clerk's  desk and may only be signed by  Mem'bers 

when they go to the desk and ask permlssion to sign it.  · No such gag rule was ever invented by any other legislative body in any country claiming even a semblance of parliamentary gov-ernment.  Since  that particular gag rule was invented, no petition to compel a hostile committee to report a bill has ever  

> receiv~d

218 signatures. At this moment there is lying upon the  Clerk's  desk a petition in behalf of consideration of a bill to carry quick relief to the disabled soldiers of the World War, and particularly the ex-service men now victims of tuberculosis. This petition, in a cause almost holy, is languishing and dying for lack of 218 signatures, although it must be true that the heart of this House would run quickly to the rescue of the fast-fading tuberculars were it not impeded by fear of the disfavor of the operators of our gag rules. The infamy of our House gag rules  system·  runs even to the length of compelling the House to spit in the face of the Oonsti-tution of the United States. That Constitution commands the 

Congress  to pass a reapportionment bill every  10  years, and yet, by aid of the gag rules, the controllers of the House prevented action, and I now sadly recall the fact that it was the liberal rule of debate in the Senate which compelled the House to observe belated loyalty to that Constitution which each Member here had so solemnly sworn to support and defend. Ever since I began study of the science of government-in which  study  I am still in the primary class-! have believed it was the mission of the House to conduct investigations such as have now seemingly been given over wholly to the  Senate. 

This House should have begun investigation of the predatory oil interests years ago, and yet never a move was made in that direction. The country had  never  been permitted to peer be-neath the lid of Teapot Dome and behold the seething mass of corruption therein, nor had the country's nose ever been sick-ened by the foul etnuvia arising therefrom had the lifting of that lid been left to our House of Representatives. That lid was lifted alone by the  crowb~r  of the rule of  liberal  debate in the Senate. 

Once  upon a time this House did attempt to impeach aDaugherty.  l\Iy  love for this House forbids further mention. But the liberal rules of the  Senate  came into action. The Sen-ate proposed to investigate Daugherty and did investigate him. 

One  faithful and intrepid Senator, by aid of the liberal rules, forced a roll-call vote  ~m  a motion to investigate Daugherty, and then that Senator, m order to prevent a packed  investigat-

ing committee, proposed that the committee should be selected by the Senate as a whole and not by an individual  1\Iember. 

The country now knows the result. The most startling dis-closures were made, finally resulting in the trial of Daugherty  ·

and Miller. The penitentiary  won  Miller. Daugherty escaped by the narrow margin of one  vote. 

It was the liberal rules of the Senate that made possible an investigation of the oil leases. By aid of the liberal Senate rules a few Senators forced a roll-call vote on the resolution for investigation. The roll call in a legislative body has been well said by Senator  KoRRis  to be the guardian angel of pro-gressive government. In this particular case the roll call brought unwilling votes in sufficient number to pass the reso-lution. The result was the uncovering  of  some of the most shameful official proceedings in our Nation's history. Members of a President's  Cabinet  were found to have been engaged in bartering the natural resources of the country for a money price. Property thus stolen, in value beyond a billion dollars, has now been restored to the Government. All this because the liberal rules of the Senate enabled a few Members of that body, honest and brave, to successfully insist upon an investigation. Hindered by the gag rules in this House, such a victory for the right could not have been accomplished here. The oil investigation is but a sample of other investigations by the Senate, some of which are now under way. Almost 

eY'ery  day the headlines in the newspapers announce new and startling disclosures made by . the Federal Trade Commission, always as a result of a Senate resolution giving directions for the investigation of Power Trust. For more than two years the Federal Trade  Commission  has been carrying on this in-vestigation, made possible only by a few Senators who made use of the liberal rules of the Senate for that. purpose. The country has been startled by the disclosures of the mighty power of the greatest combination of moneyed men and cor-porations ever joined together by the ingenuity of the human mind. The watered stocks of public utilities, the political control, the propaganda methods of Power Trust to mold and control public sentiment-reaching even into our public and private schools and universities, our churches, our lodges-robbing the people by stealing their own money,  and · then  deceiving them by spreading propaganda with money which Power Trust had wrongfully taken in the form of unjust charges for public-utility service all over the land.  All  this has been exposed because the liberal rules enabled the Senate to act-perhaps not a majority of the Senate, perhaps just a little coterie of  Sena-

tors-but under the liberal Senate rules  "that  small number of Senators had the power to force action. I have given only a few instances of the guardianship of the interests of the common herd in our country by a few Senators, their best weapon in their fight for the masses being the liberal rules under which that  body  is working. These instances clearly show what this wonderful House of Representatives might accomplish in that direction if only we could get out from under a control of legislation here by a system of gag rules which has bound this House to the chariot wheels of three drivers,  splen-

did in their  personalities,  but as ruthless as Geronimos in their roughriding over the fair rights and prerogatives of the indi-vidual membership. Mr. Speaker, it can not be that advisedly any foe or friend has listed me as peering through covetous eyes toward a seat in the United States Senate. First place I yield to none in expression of the proud privilege which is mine-the pTivilege of serving in this ancient and honorable body, along with this present galaxy of the noble and the true. Collectively we con-stitute a legislative nobility never marred,  save  only when it sleeps supinely and obeys truculently a system of gag rules con-stituting the one and only shame of the United States House of Representatives. May the God of our fathers give wings to the hour in which this House shall dethrone the unworthy monarch of gag rule and adopt as its own at least a measure of the liberal rules of debate which now make the United States  Senate  the last steadfast bulwark between the common herd in America and those mighty predatory interests which so often seek and so often receive special governmental favors, by aid of which the:v are enabled to e:rtract unearned tribute from the citizenry  o~f 

the Republic. [Applause.] Mr.  ALLGOOD.  Will the gentleman yield for a question? l\Ir.  HOWARD.  · Oh,  yes. Mr.  ALLGOOD.  The gentleman referred to the tariff meas-ure and the procedure which was followed, but the gentleman failed to state that in writing the tariff bill in the House the minority members of the Ways and Means  Committee  were excluded altogether. Mr.  HOWARD.  The gentleman is absolutely right. I have but one plea to make for my failure in that direction, and that was, if my colleague will permit, to carry out in good faith the intention I had in mind to make my little address this morning absolutely devoid of anything in the nature of the partisan. But what the gentleman says is absolutely true, and it is shamefully true. Yet I did not think it best to inject any-thing of a partisan nature into my remarks this morning. Mr.  ALLGOOD.  Will the gentleman  yield  again? Mr.  HOWARD.  Certainly. 

Mr.  ALLGOOD.  The gentleman has pointed out the facts in the case, and pointed them out well. What is the gentleman's suggestion as to the  t1·eatment  or cure? 

# ••

# 5538  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 Mr. HOWARD.  Oh,  the suggestion is instant. It is to give the individual Member of this House a right to speak the sen-timent of his home people on this  floor  and to liberalize the rule of debate. For instance, here comes a man, sitting in front of me, Mr.  TIMBERLAKE,  of Colorado, representing a people who are engag ed more largely than the people of any other district in the  United  States in the production of sugar beets. Did he have an opp ort unity to rise on this floor-as an individual Member and as a nonmember of an important committee-and offer an amendment to raise the rate  of  tariff on beet sugar? Why, no. Here I come from an exclusively agricultural country. Did I

have  an  opportunity to offer an amendment to increase any manner of tariff rate on the agricultural products of my par-ticular country? No; not at all. The gentleman is absolutely right. The gentleman asks my remedy. There is only one remedy, and that is to give us  a liberal rule of debate and de throne this gag  rule  under which we have triune control. I will say to the gentleman, and I will say to all of my col-leagues that I would prefer at this moment to have my Speaker 

sitting  'up there and absolutely controlling the debate of this Hon se saying who should speak and who should not, than to hav e the  pl'esent  system under which I, as an individual Mem-ber am compelled to beg time from a brother Member, who is my' equal in every respect, if he can be. I do not believe in it.  

> I

look up to authority. I believe in authority, but I do not be-lieve in making one Member of this House more important than his fellows because he is in control of a committee ; and I do not believe in giving him more influence on the  floor  of this House and more opportunity for influence than the humblest individual Member on the floor. It is not right; it is  d~mnable 

and destructive of the rights of the individual Member. Mr.  ALLGOOD.  Will the gentleman yield again? Mr.  HOWARD.  Surely. Mr.  ALLGOOD.  Then the House Members, by their own action, have reduced their own authority to less than that of the  Membe'rs  of the Senate? M.r.  HOWARD.  Oh,  the fault lies alone with the Members of the House. I told the gentleman and I told the Honse that I

did not attribute this hideous fault to any  particular  political organization. I do not, because I recall that some  Members  of my own political organization were heartily in favor of these infamous gag rules. These  evil  gag rules were invented and manufactured by the linking and welding of  influences  in the two great political  pal'ties,  those influences desiring that this House shall become a plaything in the hands of a trinity of managers, rather than the handmaid of the  membership  of the House. I believe that is true, and I believe it can not be gain-said.  

> If

I have made any statement in my little talk of this morn-

ing  that is not in harmony with the facts, I would humbly make amends in any way I can. I have tried to avoid any mis-statements, and I hope I have. Mr. GREEN. Will the gentleman yield? Mr.  HOWARD.  Yes. Mr. GREEN. Is it not also a fact that under the  rules,  as the gentleman has so ably mentioned them, it is  almost  impossible to offer an amendment or to get an amendment accepted on the floor? It is all cut and dried in the committee, and when  !1 

proposition is brought before the House we have little chance to express ourselves or to amend. I detest any such rule and believe it not for the interest of expressive  ~nd  representative legislation. The House rules should be amended to permit  floor 

discussion and possible amendment. I commend my colleague from Nebraska for his plea for the restoration of the rights of 

the.  respective Members of the House. 

Mr.  HOWARD.  That is absolutely  true,  as stated by the gen-tleman from Florida, with reference to the tariff bill. It is not altogether  true  with reference to other legislation, exc e pt some-times when this powerful chairman of  om·  Rules Committee brings in  a,  piece of legislation, hurls it on the floor here like aflash of lightning out of a clear sky, and gives us no time in which to consid er it and no opportunity to offer amendments. Sometimes we do have a chance to offer a little amendment, but not very often. I remember I offered one the other day, and 

it was a good one, too, although it did kill the bill. [Laughter 

" and applause.] Mr. Speaker, always desiring to work the welfare and the pleasure of my majority floor leader, I heard him say a little while ago that he is terribly pressed for time, and could not yield any more time. I notice I have about 15 minutes left. Ireally feel I might use this for the good of my country, but my love for my majority :floor leader bids me now to yield that 15 minutes to him to be disposed of as he may desire. [Laugh-ter and applause.] 

AMERICA  IN  A WORLD  AGE The  SPEAKER  pro tempore (1\Ir. HoLADAY).  Under  the  s~ 

cial order of the House the gentleman from New Jersey  [M.I._  

> EATON]

is recognized for  30  minutes.  

> Mr.

EATON  of New Jersey. I wish it were possible, Mr. Speaker, for me to take the time at this stage of the  proceed-

ings to make an attempt, at least, to assuage the  glief  which shadows the mind of our distinguished friend from Nebraska over the depraved and enslaved condition of the Members of this 

House. I notice that the gloom which enshrouds his usually cheerful soul is lightened somewhat by his affection and admi-ration for the conditions obtaining in the  United  States Senate. and if, in the providence of God, the grateful people in his State should transfer him to that exalted body, his problems would be solved, although we would miss him badly here. My purpose in addressing the House is to urge upon  Con-

gress and the country the imperative necessity for sane, coura-geous, and adequate attention to the new position among the family of nations in which our country finds itself to-day, and to outline some of the responsibilities which this new place of power and influence lays upon us as individuals and as aNation.  

> It

must be self-evident to every thoughtful mind that we are living in an intellectual, spiritual, and social climate radically unlike that of any period within the experience of the present generation. In common with all other peoples we find our-selves in what may be described as a World Age. The outstand-ing haracteristics of this new world age have rapidly taken shape since the World War. Although we are still in the gray dawn of the new day, it is possible to determine in outline, at least, the most important of these characteristics. We face, first of all, the fact that in this new age every section and nation of the world is in complete and continuous contact with all other sections and nations, and we are just beginning to evaluate the central significance of this condition. We live in a cosmic climate. No movement of any kind-social, political, economic-can take form in any quarter of the globe without  becoming  immediately the common possession of, and affecting for good or ill the common consciousness of mankind. Local facts and forces remain as of old, bot their relationships are constantly becoming universalized. For a century and a half our country has been floating down the ever widening and deepening  strea.rQ.  of a distinctively na-tional development. We have been mainly concerned with the problems of an American  culture  and an American prosperity. We had a new continent to explore, exploit, and organize. We had to create for  ourseJ,_ves  new constitutions, new institutions, and new social instrumentalities. We seemed to be self-con-tained and to a degree  had  to be self-centered. The World War changed all this, as it changed the status of every other race and country. That  titil.nic  struggle contained within itself the death throes of an outworn age and the birth pangs of a new era for all mankind. To-day, in common with all other peoples, we find ourselves adrift upon an uncharted sea of universal change and contrast, upon whose far shores we hope to find room and scope for  a,  civilization spacious and genial enough to meet the utmost needs of human progress.  Ours  is the largest ship. It  carrie:],  we believe, the most precious cargo. Even if we would we can not turn back to the safe anchorage of our home port. Like all the others, we must make the hazardous voyage. We are beset and bafHed by strange new tides and cur-rents. We must steer by new stars. Whether we will or not, necessity is upon us to face these new world conditions. The price for our national safety and progress as for all other nations is the abandonment of parochialism and provincialism in thought and method.  Unless  we learn to think in world terms we can not think our problems through at all.  

> It

is this vast and devastating break-up of old ideas, ideals, and relationships, which account s in large measure for the mental and moral unrest which  afflicts  all societies at the present time. Everywhere discontent, cynicism, petulance, and instabil-ity are common expr ession s of the  social  temper. Discont en tamong the rich because they are rich. Discontent among the poor because they are poor. Everyone seems to  \Vant  something that he has not got and his desire usually  ends  in getting some-thing that he does not want. The substitution of amusement for happiness and molecular motion for intellectual tolerance and spiritual serenity satisfies no one. The delusion that stat-ute law can successfully displace the authority of conscience and reasoned jud gmen t gets disappointing re s ults. Hysterical attention to the business of others leaves little time and  less 

inclination for the indi vi dual to attend to his own responsi-bilities. The mote in his neighbor's eye distracts attention from the beam in his own eye.  One  of our most popular spiritual excitem en ts consists in shocked contemplation of the faults and . )

# CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5539 

failures of others. Even statesmanship at times waxes great by the stern  eA"POSure  of the total depravity of corporate and individual taxpayers. Amidst this universal strife of tongues and clash of wills and interests we can not remind ourselves too often that behind the shifting shadows of human failure and fraility in every age stand the eternal verities of truth and justice unshaken and unshakable. Through all the changes and chances of history mankind has advanced slowly but surely toward the golden day when all men shall enjoy full participation in all the good things of life-spiritual, intellectual, material. Perhaps the most pregnant and significant shift in the em-phasis of thought in this new world age is the placing of humanity above material things as the chief concern in the social process. No longer do we conceive of business or politics as an end in themselves. They have value and meaning simply as a service to mankind, to men, women, and children. I would place this as the proudest achievement of the civilizing process. While as yet  we  only discern the vast revolutionary implica-tions of this idea, it is evident that it contains within itself potentialities which must eventually reconstruct all society. In 

this twentieth century man will not only achieve a new domin-ion over the forces and resources of nature, but he will learn to use this dominion for the liberation of all classes in all sections from many of the burdens which have cramped, degraded, and held back the individual in his development. Another important factor in the intellectual and spiritual cli-mate of the new age is the consciousness of political power which manifests itself among the masses of men in all coun-tries. This has been named a demand for self-determination. Whatever name  we  give it in its practical results it is - disturb-ing every organized political society in the world. It is modify-i'ng the permanent institutions of countries like the  United 

States and Great Britain, Germany, and Italy. And it is act-ing like a powerful ferment rapidly dissolving and reassembling the materials of society in nations like  China  and India. This new world age is preeminently an economic age. For the first time in history every civilized society is focusing its main attention upon one common problem. That problem is how to eliminate and gradually abolish economic poverty. This su-preme central idea or objective controls political policies in all countries. It is rapidly modifying the social thinking of all societies. As it moves irresistibly forward to take possession of the citadel of men's minds everywhere, it creates confusion and loss. But at the same time upon the wreckage of social machineries which it destroys, it is building up a new,  whole-

some, humane, and progressive type of civilization. The determination to eliminate and finally abolish economic poverty throughout the world is no longer a Utopian  dream. 

Science has placed in the hands of men everywhere the scepter of full dominion over the forces and resources of nature. There  

> is

.qo  doubt that the production of enough of every commodity needed to sustain a wholesome physical and spiritual existence for the entire race is already far within the power of organized industry and agriculture to achieve.  Our  chief problem now is how to create a sufficient buying power to absorb our  mas$ 

production. There are two main plans for the accomplishment of this purpose claiming the attention of the world.  One  is the Russian idea-known as communism ; the other is the American idea, which for want of a better name we may call cooperative individualism-the Russians call it capitalism. 

One  of these plans will surely rule the world. In practice they will profoundly modify each other, but in essence they are mutually exclusive. There is not room enough in the world for both. In its economic structure the world must eventually become all Russian or all American. The communistic leaders of Russia have no illusions on this point. They are at war with every society in the world,  in-

cluding the peasant class in Russia itself. At this very moment they have moved their New World headquarters to New York and are at work in the United States enlisting the aid of self-styled liberals, who have nothing else to do ; staging strikes and parades ; ruhbing  salt into every social sore ; and fomenting every antisocial poison among the alien minded in our large  

> citi~

-The Russian communists  hf;!ve  newspapers in New York and elsewhere financed from Moscow. They have throughout the 

United  States organizations for purposes of social agitation led and financed from  Moscow,  bearing names as similar as pos-sible to the honored names of American labor groups. They have here an active political party, and here, as everywhere else, they are the very incarnation of hate, suspicion, lawless-ness, and violence. This determination of the Russian communists to destroy all existing social, economic, and  politic~!  institutions in the whole world is entirely logical. Their communistic society as set up in Russia  can  not  permanently  do business with or even live at peace with any existing society or nation. Normal men in the rest of the world believe in God. The communists propose to abolish God by uprooting all religion. The world has a common standard of morals covering the essentials of human conduct. 

Communism  has no morals. Its whole philosophy is repugnant to every normal idea or ideal cherished by the world through the long centuries. Now, what has the American plan of life to offer as its reason to be? How has it handled the problem of poverty? What kind of men and women has it produced? What is its program for the future? How does America compare with the rest of the world in all that makes life for the masses of men bearable and worth while? Let us admit at once that we are still far from the millennium. We still have grave inequalities and injustices in  our  social structure.  Our  very progress has created immense new difficulties and disturbing problems and will continue to do so. But we are on the way toward better things, and we have already done more toward the lessening of general economic proverty than any society that ever existed. Even at this time of business uncertainty and stress, our economic worst is better than the economic best of any country in the world with the possible exception of  Canada.  And in this fact lies one of our most 

baffling  problems. How has this been accomplished?  Certainly  not by any dic-tatorship of the proletariat-not by any class war-not by bloody revolution-not by the enthronement of hate as the cardinal virtue. We have reached our present level of happiness and pros-perity, imperfect as it may be, by adherence to our American ideals of individual effort; individual private ownership of property; free cooperation among all interests for their mutnai good ; a free political Government alert to guard the riglits of all, to preserve the sanctity of the home, to furnish education for all, to insure every man the right to work and worship in his own way. There can be no question that in this economic age America leads the world in progress toward freedom from poverty. With 6 per cent of the world's population, we have in use  60 

per cent of the world's telephones  and  78 per cent of the world's automobiles. We use practically as much electric power as the rest of the world put together.  Over  20,000,000  of our homes are wired for electricity.  Over  50,000,000  of our people have on deposit in the savings institutions of our country around  $30,000,000,000.  Seventy-five million policyholders ..are paying premiums on around  $100,000,000,000  of life insurance guaranteed by cash reserves great enough to pay the  ~ation's 

debt. In the State of New Jersey a million and  a quarter of our citizens have a billion and a quarter dollars invested in building and loan associations alone. At least a quarter of our people engaged in gainful occupations own securities in the industrial securities of the country. Last year the people of this country saved in Christmas funds over  $600,000,000. 

The enormous purchasing power of the  4.-merican  people has been made possible by the highest wage level in the world. And this wage level is paid out of the high production of labor. And the high production of labor is made possible by full understanding and cooperation between employer and employee ; by good management, good machinery, and the use of cheap and abundant power.  

> It

has long been a commonplace of patriotic orato .ry that America is the hope of the world. I believe that this is the truth, but not in the old accepted sense. We used to think that America was the hope of the world because men could. come here and  find  a better job with better pay and better living conditions than they had known in the lands of their birth. To-day America is the hope of the world, because by American methods under our American system of government, and the American-minded conduct of our industries, we have demon-strated that poverty can be eliminated. We are still far from complete success in this magnificent demonstration, but we are far enough along to prove that we are on the right track and headed in the right direction. This is what we have at stake. This is the responsibility that rests upon every citizen and upon all our  governments--

National, State, and municipal. We must not fail our own people. We must not pluck from the sky this one star of  hope· 

for the struggling sons of men in other lands who, because we have done what we have, take heart and courage to strive for the same results in their own place and under their own peculiar conditions. We are now entering upon  a national political campaign. No party has any right to the confidence of the  people  which 5540  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 

can not come  be f ore  them with a workable plan to aid, so far as Governmen t can, the masses of our citizens to hold their pres e nt economic status and make further progress toward freedom from the curse of poverty. This is the supreme issue in this campaign, in v olving as it does the happiness and security of all, regardle s of breed, creed, or class. The American people  are  tired of mere partisan ballyhoo. They know that this is essentially an economic. age.  O~r 

problem is mainly an economic problem.  And  there 1s no  par~ 

sanship in the multiplication table.  Wbat  the average  A~en 

can citizen wants is a chance to earn an honest wage  sufficient 

to care for his family and himself according to American  stand-

ards of living. He wants to be free from the fear of losing his job  and  to have a surplus against old age and illness.  

> It

has been well s aid that our people are striving for a four-

fold prosperity-the prosperity of productive capacity, the prosperity of purchasing power widely  distribut~d,  the  pros-

perity of security of life and property, the prospenty of  leisure 

for full enjoyment of life more abundant. we have an almost infinite number and variety of agencies of a private and social nature working to conserve and upbuild the pricele s fabric of our American civilization. The church, the school, the home, great public-minded organizations like the American Federation of Labor, and various voluntary  coopera-

tive bodies. Th ese constitute a noble and reassuring expression of our ge nius for self-government and free cooperation for common ends. When we enter the realm of politics the prospect is not so in s piring. The political mind is still far behind the economic mind in vision, courage, and constructive force. We have a two-party system of government. At least, we have had a two-party system, and in spite of the tendency to create blocs and cliques and sectional interests the skeleton of our two-party system still stands. We are now entering upon a gre3,t  national political  cam-

paign, in which  ~e  citiz~nship  must. choose which  o~  ~~e  two major parties w1ll be mtrusted  with  the  responSibillty  of carrying on our Government, so far as the legislative branch is concerned. What is the program of the Democratic  Party? 

I gladly recognize the honorable history of the Democratic 

Party.  It is our oldest political organization. It  has  had great men among its leaders. It counts within its ranks numbers of our noblest and  be st  citizens. But the program  ofl'ered  by its leaders for solving the vast and complicated problems of our national life at the present time seems absolutely frivolous and intellectually barren, with no really constructive idea: Judging from the daily outgivings of its official leaders, the Democratic policy in this campaign consists-for the present, at least-of these absurd negatives: First.  Our  country, as a whole, is in a state bordering upon economic ruin, which sad condition has been brought about by Republican wickedness and inefficiency in office, and especially by that supreme iniquity, the Republican  tarifl'. 

And this  in  face of the  fact  that the Republican  tarifl'  is the sole governmental wall of safety between the starveling wage levels of the rest of the world and our American economic fabric, which is keyed to an American standard of living.  

> It

seems useless to point out that our national income has 

trebled  since  1909-reaching  the enormous total of  $90,000,000,-

000  a year  ago--that  seven-eighths of the national income goes to the masses who earn less than  $5,000  a year; that we have now, in spite of temporary depression  ~nd  unemployment, the widest distribution of wealth and the  highest  level of comfort ever achieved by any society since time began. 

Second.  To quote the chaste and  restrained  language of the Houston platform, the official leadership  o~  the  J?e~ocr~tic 

Party  professes to believe that the whole  official  ~dm1~1strabon 

under Republican rule has become saturated  With  dishonesty 

and the watchword of the day should be,  "Turn  the rascals  out." 

Which reminds one of the signs in  front  of a city store:  "Do 

not go elsewhere to be  cheated~ome  in  here."  [Laughter.] And third President Hoover, his advisers, and the party he leads are  hdpelessly  incompetent  I!Dd  his administration  during 

its first year has done absolutely nothing-or if it has done anything, it has done the wrong thing in the wrong way. Again 

in the language of the Houston platform-This is the appeal  ot  the Democratic  Party  to the people of the - country. Gentlemen, I say that for any political party to come before the American people with so puerile and feeble a program  con-

stitutes a national calamity, and I can not understand why, with the brains and character and quality and history that lie back of the great Democratic  Party  in this country, its intellectual processes should have frazzled out to such a series of  meaning-

less negatives. Mrs.  NORTON.  Will the gentleman yield? Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. I will be pleased to yield to my friend from my home  State. 

Mrs.  NORTON.  What does the gentleman think of the  pres-

ent senatorial .fight in his own party on the other side of the 

Capitol? 

Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. I do not know just the particular fight. They have so many over there, which one does the gentlewoman mean? Mrs.  NORTON.  Suppose  the gentleman tells us about the Pennsylvania fight. What does the gentleman think of that? Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. I do not live in Pennsylvania, Mrs.  NoRTON.  I have troubles enough in New Jersey. Mr.  ALLGOOD.  Will the gentleman now yield to  me? 

Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. No; I yield to the fairer  sex, 

but not to  mere  men. [Laughter and applause.] Mrs.  NORTON.  I thank the gentleman. Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. Now, what is the Republican answer to  all  this? I wish I could take flight and wing myself into the seventh heaven of satisfaction over all  our  proposals, but I can not. I have lived long enough to know that human nature is  ·pretty 

frail no matter what its political label may be, but on the whole I think at the present time we Republicans have a program that is worthy of the attention and confidence of the American  peo-

ple; but, ladies and gentlemen, I am equally convinced that we have got to get rid of the intellectual graveclothes that have wrapped themselves around us in both parties and face the new, 

tremendous,  challenging realities of this  world  age if we are going to serve the American  p~ople  as political  parties  ought to serve. [Applause.] In all my campaigns, as the lady from New Jersey [Mrs. 

NoRTON]  well knows, I refrain  enti-rely  from personal criticism of Democrats, whatever I may think of their political program, because my belief  is  that when you scratch the surface and get under  theSe  political  difl'erences  you .find both Democrats and Republicans to be Americans  first  of  aU,  and it is American-minded people we must put on guard. 

Under  the leadership of our great President the Republican 

Party  has now in actual operation a constructive, practical policy for helping the American people to solve the vital  · and 

difficult problems that confront them in  this  world age. This policy begins with  f1·ank  recognition of the fact that our chief domestic economic problems are vitally related to world  eco-

nomic conditions and  forces.  We have an excess productive ca-pacity in both industry and agriculture of around 25 per cent. We must find foreign markets to absorb this excess at profit-able prices. Foreign  peoples  can not buy our excess products unless they are prosperous. In facing this world problem the basic Republican principle is that world peace is the foundation of world prosperity. The Kellogg peace pact  and  the movement for international  dis-

armament are practical applications of this principle under Re-publican leadership. The Republican  Party  stands, as it always has, for a tariff 

to protect both agriculture and industry, and we do not believe in the coalition doctrine that the way to aid agriculture is to 

injure industry. The Republican policy, under Mr. Hoover's leadership, seeks to enlist all resour c es of science and research and the best brains of labor, .finance, industry, agriculture, education, and religion to cooperate with Go vernment in safeguarding and  ad-

vancing the best interests of the whole country. The Republican  Party  is acting upon the conviction that there must be developed a new world standard of economic comfort for the masses of men, and that thi s, in the long run, must be the American standard. Either the rest of the world is coming up to our level or we must sink down to theirs. We can neither live nor die unto ourselves. We can not forever remain an island of prosperity in an ocean of adversity.  Our  problem  is  to keep our present American standard and go on to better things. While these are general considerations, they are as practical in their effects upon human life as are the  efl'ects  of climate upon fruits and plants. 

Our  country stands to-day face to face with the most search-

in.,.  test in our whole history. We have the brains and character 

an°d  money and machinery to meet this test. We need only the vision and united constructive leadership of the best men and women in all partie s to hold all that we have achieved and to go on to more glorious triumphs over poverty and distress, not only here but throughout the world. [Applause.] Mr.  ALLGOOD.  Now will the gentleman yield? Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. I will  ·yield  to the gentleman. Mr ..  ALLGOOD.  I want to ask the gentleman this question: When this  country  is confronted with a common foe, like  com· '1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5541 

muni sm, does not the gentleman believe that the Democratic 

.Party  will  stand  fast with the Republican  Party  and  oppose  it? 

Mr.  EATON  of New Jersey. Yes; that is exactly what Ithink and what I want-the Democratic and Republican  Parties 

to fo rget the secondary graveclothes conditions which separate them and get together in the interest of all the people of our common country and of all the world. [Applause.] JUDGE HENRY  B.  ANDERSON 

Th e SPEAKER  pro tempore (Mr.  AcKERMAN).  Under the order of the House, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr.  FISHER]  for  10  minutes. Mr. FISHER. Mr. Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, in the brief statement made by the gentleman from New York  [Mr. 

LAGUARDIA] on Wednesday last, on page  5105  of the CoNGRES-

SIONAL  REcORD,  and the charges made in House Resolution 184 against Judge Harry B. Anderson, district judge for the western district of Tennessee, it is evident that they are based on anonymous letters and from unreliable sources. 

It is understood by everyone that the present administration, particularly through the Attorney General,  is  making active ef-for ts to enforce all laws. In the enforcement of laws the in-tegri ty of the presiding judge and the cooperation of the officers of th e courts are vital to the  sul!ces sful  pro s ecution of violators of the Jaws. The Federal judges are selected with great care after investigations have been made by the Department of Jus-tice. These judges, as a rule, have the respect and confidence of our people,  and  before char ges of misconduct are made a most careful investigation should be made to see that there is sound proof available and that the origin is not in the antagonistic spirit, arising from a ho s tile personal feeling or from  viola~ors 

of the law who have been in court and given  deserved  puni sh-

ment. It is well known that there has been friction between the United States district attorn ey and Judge Anderson and that there have been activities from the same group which unsu ccess-fully assaulted the judge to prevent his confirmation in 1925. The spirit in which the judge meets these charges is shown in this telegram :

MEMPHIS,  TENN.,  Ma-rch  15,  1930. 

Hon.  HUBERT  F.  FISHER, 

Howte  ot  Representati v es.: 

Pl e ase say for me to chairman of the House Judiciary Committee that I earnestly request the appointment of an impartial committee to meet in Memphis tc inv e sti g ate the charges that have been preferred against me. After this committee has heard the sworn testimony of wit-nesse s in refutation of the anonymous communications against me, I am confident of being absolutely vindicated.  

> HARRY

B.  ANDERSON. 

Judge Anderson is a native of Michigan, but his family early in his life moved to Memphis. His father was for many years one of the outstanding business men of our city. He and his son, the judge, are Republicans. I have known Judge Anderson for 25 years. His college education was  followed  by the study of law at one of our great universities, and one of his teachers is now a member of the United States Supreme Court. He and his family have an enviable place in the social life of our city. He was at one time president of the Tennessee Bar Association, and because of his combining business experiences with the law he was elected president of our chamber of com-merce. In 1917, upon the declaration of war, notwithstanding the fact that he had a family, with four children, he enlisted in the Army and was sent to France, where he served with distinction and was promoted to the rank of lleutenant colonel. In 1925 he was nominated for district judge and soon there was an attempt made to block his confirmation. This opposition was repre-sented by the late W. F. Zumbrum, the attorney for the Ku-Klux Klan who made efforts for two weeks to prove a lot of hazy charges, but finally abandoned the attempt and he was imme-diately confirmed. His record as a iudg~  since 1925 has been approved by the lawyers who practice in his court . The  Circuit Court of  Ap-

peals of the Sixth Judicial Circuit rarely reverse his decisions. When these charges were rnade against Judge Anderson Iasked Albert G. Riley, a lawyer of Memphis, Tenn., who was familiar with these charges, to write me a statement setting forth an explanation, which he did :Your letter of March 13 just came in, and I appreciate it, as well as the inclosures. I knew that you would become active in  the  matter at once. Most of the facts you already know  i!  you can recall them. I think I went over each charge with you  last  fall.  Since  that time, however, the Department of Justice sent down a corps of investigators, and . Harcy 

King advises me that at times there were as many as nine investigators here. They audited, checked, and investigated each bankruptcy case for the last  10  years. They did not confine their investigation to the records but went out into the body of the county and interviewed pur-

chasers  of stock, attempting to make them exhibit to them the canceled checks. They did everything in their power to dig up corruption, whether they had any basis to  ~ork  on or not. King advises me that Cage told him that he was going to put the whole bunch in the peni-tentiary.  As  a result of it all they learned that C. H . Elllotte  h11d 

been delinquent in making his settlements and by an order of Judge Anderson required him to close up his cases and account for his money. Phillips filed a motion to remove Elliotte as trustee in one case. Acheck given to the Government for income tax was returned by the bank for insufficient funds. At this time the estate bad be en administered, all checks issued, and there was nothing further to be done in the case except to obtain the trustee's vouchers. Elliotte stated that it was an error on the part  of  the bank, but paid the check to the Government.  

> It

appears now that these investigators also investigated the entire records of the district court, covering all of the court's jurisdiction and every case. 

Of  course, we do not know what specific charges have been made to the Department of Justice, except tho se that are obtained through the La Guardia resolution and the newspapers. Harry Anderson's record is an op en book, and ev e ry act that may have been investigated and 

unfavorably  reported upon can be  fully  and frankly explained. It se e ms almost ridiculous to criticize the judge 's conduct in regard to narcotic cases. That is one class of law violation that he thoroughly despised a nd impos ed the most severe penalties for. The commissioner usually fixed the bail bond in the sum of  $10,000 

and it is my opinion that those with knowledge would testify that the judge 's handling of this class of law violation has greatly reduced the amount of narcotics that have been illegally handled in the dis-trict. Ev e ryone knows that narcotic violators thoroughly fear the cour t .  Until  specific instances ar e brought up one can not explain the resolution in regard to the amount of bail fixed when persons fail ed to  a ppear  and defaulted. You may be sure that whatever the judge did in any particular case was done wholly within the law  nnd 

his own conception of justice in the particular case. .The resolution in regard to probation is likewise most unjust. I

know  of several cases, and I am sure other persons in authority know of doze ns of cases, in which the judge probated defendants that have caus ed such defendants to make a new start on the road to redemption. In my opinion he has used the probation statute wisely and for the purposes for which it was made a Federal statute. Certainly th e re is no charge of corruption in this respect, and if any errors have been made they are no  more  than any human being would make when he had hundreds and thousands of problems to correctly solve. This charge almost seems to be  baseless, · and I can not imagine what is in mind. Certainly there bas been no criticism in this district by lawyers or laymen in regard to such conduct. As to bail bonds : When a bail bond is defaulted the law vests in the judge complete discretion as to what should be done under the cir-cumstances, and in every case, upon an understanding of the facts, it will be shown that Judge Anderson followed the dictates of his mind and conscience. In regard to the American bank : The bank was thought to be per-fectly solvent and had enjoyed an enviable reputation for many years under Mr. Harry Cohen as a strong, sturdy, and well-managed bank. It 

is true that Judge Anderson's father had a loan at that bank ; just as he had loans at the Bank of Commerce  and  the  Union  and Planters, which latter banks were designated depositories for Federal funds. No one understands why the judge should be criticized  for  the loan of money made at the bank by his father. It is true that the bank failed, to the amazement  of  the entire community and to the amazement of Mr .Cohen himself. There is no information in regard to any loss to bankrupt estates, as insinuated by the resolution. Every depository is required to put up a statutory bond, and there has not been any loss in the .district to bankruptcy estates by bank failures. Any charge that may have been made as to favoritism can be  thor-

oughly explained, and it is entirely  a creature of imagination, born of personal enmity. Doubtless the judge may be called upon to  make  clear a few particular incidents. There just is no foundation in fact for any such charge, and those that know the facts know that he is thoroughly impartial in the conduct of his court among all defendants and the members of the bar.  Some  of his good friends have bad their clients receive pretty severe treatment, just because the client deserved it. There is a newspaper charge about padding vouchers. You will note that it is  a single instance, involving a very small amount  of  money. I do not know the facts in connection with the incident and have re-frained from going into it at this time so as not to worry anyone with details until a specific charge is made. The judge has paid out of his own pocket hundreds of dollars in conducting  his  judicial duties, just because he has not been able to meet expenses in New York, Cincinnati, and other points on  $10  a day, living as a Federal judge should live. There is some charge about the court messenger 's monthly pay. There is absolutely no basis in fact for it, and all facts must come from this negro messenger, who would not hesitate to say anything to serve  his 5542  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 purpose in connection with it. I hear that be is a former felon and the judge had to  discharge  him. We all know that negroes drawing their pay once a month are always out of funds before the end of the month. He was constantly in debt to the judge. He even bought a cauple  of aut om obiles that the judge helped  hinl  out on. No doubt the messenger and the judge had a running account and at every pay day the negro bad to and did make payments to the judge. I understand that be re ceived his check from the judge's secretary or  from  the  marshal,  just as it was issued by the marshal. This character of charge based on adischarged negro's statement is vicious, and I have no doubt but the real facts will show just about the way I have given them. You will recall that I told you that the judge's record in his decisions has been remarkably sound. In all the cases on appeal I think he bas been reversed four or five times, and in some of those reversals his dcci ion bas only  beel).  modified. I know that the judges think highly of him personally and for his district court decisions. Judge Anderson has been meting out justice in a broad, fine way, and no one, neither laymen or lawyers, have really made any criticism of his decisions. He is broad, human, and has an uncanny ability to get a quick insight into litigated questions. Particularly is he quick to understand the guilt or _ innocence of defendants in a criminal case, and he then acts according to his judgment and his conscience. He has banded out justice, tem-pered with mercy, and in this administration I know of my own knowl-edge that two confirmed and notorious bootleggers have not reengaged in the business, owing to the punishment the judge imposed. Judge Anderson may have made errors, as I have stated, but no one except a palpably biased enemy would attach any evil doing or  corrup-

tion to his acts.  

> It

would be a fine thing if at the proper time you could speak to the resolution on the  floor,  because you know the judge, and you may be assured that he has done no corrupt thing, nothing that the Senate would impeach him for, and I believe that if it should go to findings  of 

articles of impeachment by the House that they would be boiled down to one  or  two matters,  but  the judge could easily explain them and they would fade away as the mist.  U the committee should make a personal . investigation of the charges prior to the findings of articles it is my 

caQdid  judgment that no articles would be found. Cordially yours,  

> ALBERT

G. RILEY. The  Memphis  Post, No. 1, of the American Legion, adopted the following resolution to show their attitude toward this assault: LEGION  BACKS  .ANDERSON-ADO~S  RESOLUTION  INDORSING  PUBLIC  AND    

> PRIV ATl!l LIFE OF JUDGE

Unqualified  indorsement of both the public and private life of Judge Anderson, coupled with an expression of confidence in his character a. nd ability, were carried in the resolutions which were unanimously adopted by  Memphis  Post,  No. 1, American Legion, Thursday night. The document reads :

" Whereas the public press has carried news articles from  Washing-

ton, D. C., stating that certain charges will be made against Judge . Harry B. Anderson, judge  of  the  United  States  District  Court  for the Western District of Tennessee; and 

" Whereas  Judge Harry B. Anderson is a member of Memphis Post, No. 1, of the American  Legion,  and  is  an ex-soldier with an enviable war record; and 

" Whereas it has been our observation that Judge Anderson  has  con-

ducted himself beyond reproach both in private and public life, and in the conduct of his court be has always tempered justice with mercy where justified ; and 

" Whereas by reason of his  record,  both in public and private  official 

life , he has endeared himself to us and is a credit to the American Legion, to his profession, to the city of Memphis, and  State  of Tennessee; and 

"Whereas  we have utmost confidence in his integrity and character, both as a judge and  as  a citizen : Therefore be it  

> ''Resolved

by  Memphis  Post,  No.  1,  of  tl'e  American  Legian,  That we hereby express our sincere confidence in the unimpeachable character 

and  integrity of Judge Harry B. Anderson, judge of the  United  States 

District Court for the Western District ot Tennessee; be it further   

> 11 Resolved

by  the  Memphis  Post, No. 1, of the  American  Legion,  That a copy of these resolutions be forwarded to Judge Harry B. Anderson, and a copy  of the newspapers published in Memphis, Tenn. ; be it further   

> uResolved,

That a copy of this resolution be spread upon the minutes 

of  this organization." The Commercial Appeal of Memphis had on its editorial page on March 13 the following splendid review of Judge .Anderson's work on the Federal bench :     

> GOOD CITIZEN AND AGOOD ;ruDGE

Judge  Harry  Anderson enjoys the respect and confidence of this com-munity. He bas  as  many friends  as  any man in Memphis. He bas never been guilty of an unkind or ungenerous act. He never harmed a human being.  

> His

every impulse is to be charitable and generous. He carried to the bench a compassion  for  human frailty and asympathy for  the · weakness of his  fellow  man. He is a human judge who has never assumed the  role  of infallible justice. He realizes that he is liable to error, and has been careful to see that his errors were on the side of mercy. 

A Federal judge possesses arbitrary powers. Instead of being  arbi· 

trarily tyrannical, he has  been  arbitrarily merciful.  

> It

may be out of line with judicial authority to consid er the poor and destitute family in determining the penalty for a half-pint  o.ffende1·, 

but  Jud ge And ers on has looked beyond the prisoner at the bar to the consequence of long-term imprisonment on the innoc en t and unofl'ending.  

> If

this be judicial error, he is guilty, and the public applauds him for it. Perhaps there are irregularities in the  different - departments  of  the court, but it can not be said that Judge Anderson has failed to maintain the dignity  of  the court and the respect and confidence of the public. We know him as a splendid citizen and a good judge. It  will  be difficult to convince any unprejudiced individual to the  contra1·y. 

Mr. LAGUARDIA.  Mr.  Speaker, I crave the indulgence of the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr.  BAcHARAcH],  who is to be recognized next. I ask unanimous consent that I may address the House for five minutes. Mr. PARKER. I shall have to object to that. I have a bill that I want to get up and conclude to-day. Mr.  LAGUARDIA.  Will the gentleman let me have three minutes? Mr. PARKER. I will not object to three minutes. 

Mr.  L-AGUARDIA.  Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that I may address the House for three minutes. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the re-quest of the gentleman from New York? There was no objection. Mr.  LAGUARDIA.  Mr. Speaker and gentlemen, the gentle-man from Tenne  see  makes a most temperate defense of his friend, Judge Anderson. I admire him for it. I am sure the gentleman from Tennessee can not classify me as one of his enemies, because I know nothing of the political situation in Memphis. But the various apologies and explanations made by the gentleman from Tennessee would indicate that Judge Ander-son would welcome an investigation. All I have done to date is to take the information which has been coming to me for the past 10 months. I have been waiting patiently for the Department of Justice to act. I introduced aresolution asking the Department of Justice to submit all of the information it has to the Committee on the Judiciary. As the gentleman from Tennessee stated, these rumors, this gossip, if you please, has been going on for six months. It is in the interest of the Federal courts that when there are such charges and such accusations we should proceed with a thorough in-vestigation .

If the judge is absolutely innocent, as the gentleman from Tennessee suggests, I would be the first to say that no further action is necessary. If he is guilty, I shall do all within my power to carry out my constitutional duty as a Member of this House. I am one who does not believe in the infallibility of Federal judges. When I have information concerning the misconduct of any judge, I am going to bring it to the attention of the House and the country.  

> T.AX REFUNDS

The  SPEAKER  pro tempore. Under the special order, the 

Chair  recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey [Mr.  BACHA-

llACH]  for 20 minutes. 

Mr.  BACHARACH.  Mr.  Speaker and gentlemen of the House, on Friday last the gentleman from Texas arose in this House and in his usual likable manner and without any too great regard for the facts proceeded to castigate the Treasury Department and the Republican members of the joint com-mittee on taxation on the subject of tax refunds in general but with particular reference to the refund of  $33,000,000  to _the United States Steel Corporation. Before I proceed further I want to  direct  your attention and the attention of the country to the membership of this joint committee. Now, who are the  great  men and from what States do they come who represent the Democratic  Party  on that com-mittee? Why, the gentleman from Texas  [Mr.  GARNER],  whose State pays  1%  per cent of the Federal corporation tax; the 

Senator  from Mississippi [Mr.  HARRISON]  and the gentleman 

from  Mississippi  [Mr.  CoLLIER],  whose State pays 0.1 of 1per cent of the  corporation  tax; and the  Senator  from North Carolina [Mr.  SIMMONS],  whose State pays  Ph  per  cent of the corporation tax. t930  CONGRESSION .A.L  RECORD-HOUSE  5543 

I have observed  that  when  the  Democratic  Party  looks  for apresidential candidate it goes to the  States  of New Jersey, New 

York,  Ohio,  and West Virginia, not to the  State  of Texas, not to the  State  of  North  Carolina,  not to the  State  of  Mississippi, 

where in the last election there were less votes cast in all of the 

eight  congressional districts combined  than  were cast in my own congressional district. Tbe great  State  of New  York,  the largest taxpaying  State  in the  Union,  with  a representation of 22 Democratic Members in the House and 2 United  States  SeiY 

ators, bas no representation  en  this  joint committee. Of course, we Members of the House who have been  here  for some time know that the gentleman from Texas  [M. r.  GABNER] 

bas a particular antipathy for the. Secretary of the Treasury and for any recommendation that comes from bim or  his  de-

partment.  As  a result of this, his dislike even for the name of  "Andy"  has become so fixed in his consciousness that he actually refuses to listen in on the nightly broadcast of  "Amos 

'n'  .Andy."  [Laughter.] In the course of his .remarks the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER]  stressed the faet that  during  the hearing on the matter of this refund to the  Steel  Corporation  there  was only .one Republican member of  the  joint  committee  present, and to emphasize this  his  colleague from Mississippi [Mr.  CoLLIER] 

interrupted him to make this observation : Mr. COLLIER. The Joint Committee on Internal Revenue is composed of five Members of the House and five Members of the  Senate,  and it is empowered to scrutinize these  refunds.  I want to ask the gentleman                                                                                           

> if he does not recall that during the entire time of the hearings there was not present a single member on the majority side of the other body, and during at least 85 or 90 per cent of the hearings--which were held to pass on arefund of $33,000,000 to the greatest taxpayer in the
> United States-there was only one member of the majority present, and now, as aboast to ourselves, Iwould like the RECORD to show that the gentleman from Texas and myself were present during the entire hear-ings. Am Inot right in my statement?

To which the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER]  replied : The gentleman is correct. Now, what are the facts and circumstances  surrounding  that particular meeting of the joint committee? On Wednesday, March 5,  not  on  Saturday,  March 8, as stated by the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER],  the chairman  b-y  personal letter to each member of the committee called for a meeting of the com-mittee on Tuesday, March 11, and at the same time transmitted to each member of the committee a preliminary report on the 

Steel  Ce.'s  case, prepared by Mr. Parker,  chief  of  staff.  The committee members  therefore  had  six  days prior to the meeting in which to go over the record and acquaint themselves with the facts.  

> If

the gentleman from Texas did not give any attention to the letter from the chairman and the report which accompanied it until the 8th of March, apparently he has  been  a little lax in his duties, for the letter and report were delivered to his office by special messenger on the 5th. 

Of  course, I do not need to  remind  the Members  of  the House that on  SatQrday,  March 8, the country received the sad news of the death of one of its  most  distinguished citizens, the  former ,

Chief  Justice and President of the  United  States,  William Howard Taft. .So that when  the  joint committee met in the office of  Chair-

man  HAWLEY  at 10 o'clock on Tuesday, March 11, within a dis-

tance of about  500  feet the body of the former President and late 

Chief  Justice of the  United  States,  was resting in the rotunda of the  Capitol,.  in order that the people, of whom he was so greatly beloved, might have  a last opportunity to view his body and pay their  respect~ 

The House and  Senate  adjourned on  Monday  until Wednesday as a mark of respect, and as a further tribute, the President ordered the several departments closed at noon and practically all business in the city was suspended at the hour of the funeral. I am not certain, but I think  that I am safe in saying that the joint committee was the only committee of the  Congress.  that was in  session·  on  that  day. The gentleman from Mississippi  [:Mr.  CoLLIER}  mentioned the fact that there was not a single member of the majority side of the joint committee from the other body present at the meeting on March 11, and I merely want to call  your  atten-

tion to the fact that  Senator  SMoOT  and  Senator  WATSON  were members of the funeral party on the part of the  Senate,  and,  of course,  Senator  REED  is in Europe and could not be present.. Imight also state that both  the  gentleman from Texas  [Mr.  

> GARNER]

and the gentleman from Mississippi [Mr.  Coi..LI:Im] 

were members of the funeral committee on - the  part  of the House  · 

> IL

When we met  on · that day I suggested'  to the chairman that it would be proper for the committee  to  adjourn its meeting out of respect to the memory of Mr. Taft, but he stated that he thought the meeting would last only a very short time, and for that  reason  we should go on with it. I told  him  that so far as I was personally concerned, under the circumstances, I would not remain at the meeting for more than an hour, and the  gen-

tleman from Massachusetts [Mr.  TREADWAY]  also stated  that  he would leave before 11 o'clock. When it was time for  me  to leave I stated to  the  chairman that I approved of the refund, and he could so  record  me. Senator  HA.B.BISON  stated to the chairman that  Senator  SIMMONS  could not be present on  account  of  his 

state of health, but had given bim authority to cast his vote. On the following day, March 12, the joint committee met again, and at that meeting there were present the chairman [Mr. 

HAWLEY],  the  gentleman  :frem  Massachusetts [Mr.  TREADWAY], 

the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  G.ARNEB.],  and the gentleman from Mississippi [Mr.  CoLLIER].  I was out of the city because of  a previous engagement and could not attend. The Senators   

> ~on

the committee, of  course,  were very much taken  up- with the 

tariff  bill  a,nd  could not be present.  

> It

is true that I was not present at that meeting, because I had asked the chairman of the committee to excuse me. It was necessary for  me--and  it is frequently necessary, having a dis-

trict within three hours and a half of Washington-to be occa-sionally at home to consult with my constituents.  Of  course,  if 

I were situated as are the gentleman  f:ro~  Mississippi and the gentleman from Texas, with a constituency at a great  distance 

from the city of  Washingto~  I realize it would be quite  difficult 

for me to visit my district as often as I do. It is true, as Isay, that they did meet with the committee on that day. It is also  true  that I did ask  the  chairman of the committee to excuse me. Now, although much has been made by the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER}  about the absence of the  Republican  mem-bers of the committee when this refund was  agr:eed  upon, there is really nothing in that to be concerned about, and there was absolutely no reason why  the~e  should have been any prolonged discussion on the subject. What are the facts about this refund to the  United  States 

Steel  Corporation?  If I may have it, I want the close attention of the Members of the House. This refund covers the years 1918, 1919, and  1920.  Most of you will remember that in 1928 we made a refund covering the year 1917 to this same corporation. The same state of facts that were considered for the year 1917 were involved in  the 

settlement for the years 1918 to  1920,  inclusive, covered by this refund.  

> A

very intensive audit by  the  Internal  Revenue Bureau covering this  return  has been going on for the past six years, and the result of that audit has been under investigation by the committee's  chief  of staff,  with  five additional experts  for  the past 35 days. This same staff had previously investigated the 1917  refund  for six weeks; moreover, it so happens that the chief of  our  staff had previously studied the amortization claims of the  taxpayer,  and the report on this  examination  covered  216 

printed pages of a former select  Senate  committee  report. It was of no surprise to these experts nor to the members of the joint committee that there would be a refund of  these  pro-portions due to the  Steel  Co.  for the years 1918 to 1920.  As 

a matter of fact, Mr. Parker, the chief of staff, in his letter to the chairman of the joint committee, transmitting his  prelimi-

nary  report,  stated as  follows:·                                                      

> It will be recalled that the ·joint committee met in December, 1928, to consider a refund to this same corporation for the taxable year 1917 in the total sum, includiBg interest. of $25,856,361.14. At that time a refund for the years 1918 to 1920 was predicted which was of the approximate magnitude of the refund now in fact proposed.

So  you will see that as far back as December, 1928,  the  joint 

· committee  had  notice- from its chief expert that there would probably be a considerable refund due the  Steel  Co.  on the same state  of  facts for the years 1918 to 1920, and it is worthy of note to point out to  yeu  that  the  two- amounts so  closely  approximate _each other .The  J"oint  Committee  on Internal Revenue Taxation was created under the act . of 1926 for the purpose of investigating all refunds allowed to  taxpayers  by the Treasury Department. Mr. Parker, the chief of staff of the committee's experts was formerly the chief investigator for  the  select committee  ~f  the Senate, headed by  Senator  CouzENs,  of Michigan,  which  made avery  thorough  investigation of the Internal Revenue Bureau and its  ~ethods  of making refunds, and so forth.  Of  course, Mr . Parker is supposed to be neutral in rendering his reports, 5544  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 but from my knowledge  of  his work and his previous  experi-

ence I would hazard the  gue~s  that if he had any bias what-soever in the matter, it would not be on the side of the  Steel  Co. 

The able minority leader did not state all the facts which are necessary in properly considering the subject which was before the joint committee, with the result that a very imperfect picture of the true situation has been placed before the House by the remarks of the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER].  

> It

seems fitting therefore to supply some of the most important facts which were omitted from the discussion on Friday. In the first place, consider the refund to the United  States  Steel 

Corporation. This corporation is composed of approximately 195 corporations which report and pay their taxes as a unit.  

> If

the refund of  $33,000,000  had been returned to each corpo-ration, we would have an average refund per corporation of only  $170,000,  a sum which would cause no comment.  

> It

is also absolutely essential in considering this refund to keep in mind the magnitude of the taxes paid by this group of corporations. For the three years 1918, 1919, and  1920,  which 

a1:e  the years for which the refund is made, the  Steel  Corpora-

tion paid the enormous sum of $333,359,986 in taxes.  Of  this amount $21,555,358 is now being refunded, leaving a final net tax collected of  $311,804,628.  Thus it can be seen that the tax adjustment  is  less than 7 per cent. It is true that in addition to the  $21,000,000  of principal refunded there is also paid to the corporation  $12,000,000  in interest. As to the interest, two facts should be noted : First, the Government has had the use of the money for  10  years, and, second, the  Steel  Corporation will be taxable on this interest in its  1930  return and will pay a tax thereon of approximately a million and a half dollars. The original tax reported by the  Steel  Corporation for the years 1918, 1919, and  1920  amounted to  $303,936,509.  The final tax collected is nearly  $8,000,000  more than this original figure.  

> If

it were not for the fact that additional assessments of some 

$29,000,000  were made and paid by the corporation, the Govern-ment would now be collecting  $8,000,000  from the corporation instead of refunding  $21,000,000. 

The policy of the  Steel  Corporation  was to pay all additional assessments, regardless of their inaccuracy. In  fac~  in making these particular additional assessments the department knew that they were using tentative  figures,  but considered the assess-ments necessary to protect the inte .rests of the Government. In view of the fact that it has taken years for the courts to even partly define our complicated income tax act, it does not seem at all surprising that adjustments of 7 per cent will  be 

necessary, as in this case. In fact, it will be noted from the refund report now being considered by the joint committee that tax adjustments are sometimes necessary to the extent of  80  per cent of the original amount returned. When the magnitude of the tax paid by the corporation is kept in mind, together with the numerous changes put on the interpretation of the law by the courts and the fact that tenta-tive and inaccurate additional taxes have been assessed and paid, I can see no reason for suspecting that the refund to the 

Steel  Corporation is not entirely just and proper. The second subject discussed by the gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GA.RNER.]  was in regard to tax refunds in general. The first thing he worries about is the large amount of refunds to persons in Pennsylvania. He forgets that refunds are bound to be somewhat proportionate to the amount of tax paid. The 

State  of Pennsylvania in 1927 paid about  10  per cent of the total corporation tax, and that does not include the tax of the 

Steel  Corporation, which has its main office in New York. The 

States  of Pennsylvania and New York together pay about  40 

per cent of the  tot~l  corporation tax. The  State  of Texas, as Istated previously, pays only  1¥2  per cent of the total corporation tax. It is perfectly obvious that the larger amount of refunds will go to those  States  that pay a big tax, not to those who pay a small tax. I read in a newspaper, after Mr.  G.A..&NER's  speech, in reply to an inquiry whether there had been refunds in certain  States 

like the  States  of  Texalt  and  Oklahoma,  it was stated that there was no oil company in the  State  of Texas to which a refund was made. I want to call your special attention  to  that, for Inote in this year's .report on refunds that the  United  North &

South  Oil  Co.,  of Luling, Tex., received a refund of  $293,604, 

which represented a reduction of almost 88 per cent of the total tax assessed. Relatively, which looks worse, an 88 per cent reduction to the  Texas  concern or a 7 per cent reduction to the  United  States  Steel  Corporation?  Of  course, I do not make any criticism of this 88 per cent reduction,  because  I have confidence in the department and in the  staff  of our joint com-mittee. I know also that I voice the sentiment of the  gentle-

man from Texas that he has confidence, too, in their integrity. The gentleman from Texas [Mr.  GARNER]  also worries about arefund to the Baldwin  Loc~mqtive  Wor~  because it  cove!~  the years 1912 to 1922. He seems to think that the years 1912 to 1917, at least, should be barred on account of the statute of limitations. Yet he must know that  Congress  itself is respon-sible for this situation, for by enacting section 252 of the revenue act of 1921, under certain circumstances all income-tax years are made subject to correction regardless of the statute of limitations. In conclusion, I must confess that any general criticism of the refund situation seems out of place at this time. The re-port on refunds for the whole calendar year 1929 is in the hands of the  J"  oint Committee on Taxation and is summed up by Mr. Parker, chief of its staff, as follows: 1. The rate of overassessment ha .s decreased 58  per  cent for the calendar year 1929, over the rate for the preceding 7-month period. 2. No serious question can be raised as to the propriety of the allowances consummated. 3. The department has cooperated in every way with the  staff  and is making a review of two cases where certain questions were raised.  

> In

view of the fact that the staff of the committee has not been afraid to offer constructive criticisms of the department in the past, I give great weight to the statements made by  1\Ir. 

P ABKEB,  and am convinced that the general situation in regard to tax refunds is satisfactory. [Applause.] The  SPEAKER  pro tempore (Mr.  ACKERMAN).  The time of the gentleman from New Jersey has expired.  Under  the special order the  Chair  recognizes the gentleman from Texas [Mr. GARNER]. Mr. GARNER.  Mr.  Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to 

proceed for  20  .minutes. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the re-quest of the gentleman from Texas? There was no objection. Mr. GARNER. Mr. Speaker, I expected to get some informa-tion from the gentleman from New Jersey  [Mr.  B.ACH...A.RA.CH]. 

That is the reason I asked for a little time, in order to make reply. But outside of the demonstration of the fact that he has the same idea concerning the Southern  States,  especially Missis-sippi and Texas, as Pennsylvanians  have  about the Western States-that is to say, that they are somewhat backward and should have no voice on committees-! have received from his address no information on the question of the refund of taxes. Evidently the gentleman from New Jersey has had a con-sultation with  Uncle  Andy and Brother  Ogden.  The written portion of his address sounds as though it might have been prepared in the  T~easury  Department. I do not say so direct, but the language  rn  the part that he read runs along just as the language used by the Secretary of the Treasury in his reply appearing in Sunday's papers. I can only infer it from that circumstance, that it is the language used by the Secretary of the Treasury in his reply. Mr.  BACHARACH.  Mr. Speaker,  will  the gentleman yield there? Mr. GARNER.  Certainly. 

Mr.  BACHARACH.  So  far as I am personally concerned, or so far as I know, I have not been to the Treasury Department or consulted them. Mr. GARNER. Then you must have a very apt clerk. I con-gratulate you on having a good clerk. [Laughter.] Gentlemen of the House, nothing that the gentleman from New Jersey can say and nothing that the Treasury Department can say takes away the outstanding facts concerning this tax refund ; and the chief fact is that one taxpayer of this Nation, the United  States  Steel  Corporation, gets a refund over aperiod of four years of  $98,000,000.  Th~t  is the most efficient corporation in the world-the United  States  Steel  Corporation. It does not take away from the fact that last Saturday the Treasury Department sent the  Steel  Corporation a check more than one hundred thousand times greater than the average taxpayer of the United  Sta .tes  pays. Think of it! With over 

2,000,000  taxpayers.  From over  1,800,000  returns of  taxpayers 

the Government collected  $2,000,000  less than they refunded to one single taxpayer-the United  States  Steel  Corporation. 

Mr.  BACHARACH.  It did not include the amount paid by the  United  States  Steel  Corporation  in additional taxes. Mr.  GARNER. · If you go back a year ago, you will find that I showed the reduction of their first rendition. They got a final reduction in that first rendition of more than  $32,000,000.  The return was frankly made. Nobody coerced them into making it. They ought to have good bookkeepers. Do you suppose that that vast corporation, composed of about  190  subsidiary cor-porations under one head, was not able to make an accurate report? I do  not  want to criticize the gentleman from New Jersey 

[Mr.  BACHARACH]  with  !ef~ence  tQ his duties on that commit-'1930  ~ CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-. HOUSE  5545 

tee, and the only reference made to it was when my  frien ·d 

from Mississippi [Mr.  CoLLIER]  referred to it only for one  pur-

pose, and that was with  referen~e  to the joint committee,  con-

trolled · by  six Republicans  ~s  agamst four Democrats, that  t;hey 

did not look into these matters and never intended to look mto these matters.  

> It

was all a formality. There was no occasion for the  gentle-

man from New Jersey not to remain in Atlantic  City.  It would have been the same if he had been here and if the gentleman from Massachuse t ts had been here. Mr.  HAWLEY  knew he could dep e nd on his vote and on  Mr.  TREADWAYB  vote.  So  you both left your proxies with him. I venture the assertion that before we met you never read the report. Mr.  BACHARACH.  In your statement of last Friday  con-

cerning the Ways and Means  Committee  you said you had received the report. Mr. GARNER. I made the statement I received it on the 8th, and I received it on the 5th. I made that mistake. Did you read this report in full? Mr.  BACHARACH.  I read it pretty much in full. 

Mr.  GARNER. Yes; you read it pretty much in full! [Laughter.] It was not necessary, I repeat, for you to be there, because it was a mere formality, for Mr.  HAWLEY  knew you were going to  0.  K. this transaction.  Only  one Republican on that committee failed last year to report this, and that man, a

Senator,  is in Europe now. He declined last year to vote to approve it. Everybody knew you were going to approve it. You merely made a gesture; that was all. It makes no  difference  what they send down here or what  Uncle  Andy tells you to do, you will do it. But I will say that the gentleman  from  New Jersey 

[Mr.  BAcHARACH]  is not quite as obedient a child as the other two Me mbers. [Laughter.] 

Mr.  BACHARACH.  I thank the gentleman for that. 

Mr.  GARNER. I was surprised when my genial friend took  

> it

upon himself to answer for the Treasury Department to-day. I notified my bombastic friend from Massachusetts  [Mr.  TREAD-

WA Y] [laughter]  th~t  I was going to talk about this  ID;attter, 

and I expected him to reply ; because, as I understand 1t, you look upon him as your leader in all taxation matters on your side of the House. I have  drawn  the inference from what I

ilave  heard that the Republican organization looks upon the ge ntleman from Massachu s etts [Mr.  TREADWAY]  in that way. The fact that he cut an intestine some weeks ago might keep him off the  floor  for some time. I would think you would keep him off th e floor  in view of the fact that he ruined the administration's version of the loss of the election in the second Ma s sachusetts district. [Laughter.]  ·

Mr.  Speaker,  this is not the only case. Let me show you what the Treasury Department is doing. I requested the chairman of the committee to permit the secretary of the joint committee to send me a list of these abatements and refunds as they came in. I have received a statement from Mr. Parker, and among other things is an abatement made on the 14th of l\Iarch, to John D. R o ckefeller, of New  York,  $356,378.32, refund for taxes 

paid  in 1917. Heret ofore I have not  called  anything to  · your  attention except corporations, where there was some difficulty in arriving at th e amortization, or interlocking companies. But now we hav e one individual taxpayer. And it has taken  10  or 12 years to find out  what":Mr.  Ro ckefeller owed the Government. I wonder bow much they amortized the old man in making this calculation;  $356,000  from the 1917 taxes. That old fellow permitted Uncle Andy Mellon to keep that for 12 years without giving it up. Gentlemen, do you know how much money that is? I understand he has quit giving away dimes and is giving away Buffalo nickels now. That is more Buffalo nickels than he could give away  ln  the balance of his life if he lived a hundred y ea rs. That is over  7,000,000  Buffalo nickels that you are  giv-

ing back to Deacon Rockefeller at one time. Uncle Andy had to take care of Pennsylvania. The  Pennsyl-

vania Rapid Transit  Co.,  Philadelphia, Pa., was allowed 

$1,721,000,  on the 14th of this month. I told you Pennsylvania was the main  State. 

But that is not all. It shows you the trend of the  Treasury 

Department. Not later than yesterday you will recall having read in the  newspap er  that the Treasury Department  has 

begub  to promote education. The article in the newspaper is head ed thus :       

> LO NGWORTH heads list of patrons of new venture.

I wondered what that venture was, because I love to keep up with what Nick is going to  do~  so interesting is he. I discover that it is the promotion of grand opera in the city of  Wash-

ington, and I find  aSsociated  with him  Uncle  Andy Mellon, Mr. BAcoN, of New York, and  Mr.  BLOOM.  So  the  firm  would  be,~ 

I understand It, in order to have strength  tn  the middle,  "Long-

worth, Mellon,  Bacon  & Bloom."  [Laughter and applause.] Now, how are they going to promote it? It just shows you the tendency of the Treasury Department. They have nothing in their minds except wealth and the exemption of wealth from taxation, so far as they can. Grand opera! Educational! 

Secretary  Mellon, 74 years old, is going to be educated.  And 

in order to encourage that education he is going to exempt  every-

one purchasing a ticket from paying the tax on the same. When Mr.  LoNGWORTH  puts his name on the guaranty and they lose  $10,000  by virtue of this venture, Mr. Mellon tells him in 

advance,  " I am going to  permit  you to deduct that from your income tax because you are promoting education in this  country."  [Laughter.] God knows you and Andy need it. [Laughter.] Education! Who is to be educated?  Uncle  Andy, Brother Ogden,  Sir  Nicholas, and Mr. BLOOM. [Laughter.] Ah, sir, it 

would be something to laugh at if it did not tend to show how anxious the Treasury Department is to cater to wealth at the expense of the people. Are you going to give me a deduction for the ticket I buy to the spoken drama or Shakespearean play to get education? Nothing is said about that. Four or five thousand people perhaps attend grand opera. They will be all the way from 21 years to 75 years old; and  Uncle  Andy. In order to encourage that particular class of education the  Treas-

ury Department issues a notice to the public and to the world, 

" Buy tickets; underwrite the enterprise, and we will give you a deduction on your income  tax." 

Mr.  SCHAFER  of Wisconsin. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. GARNER. I yield. Mr.  SCHAFER  of Wisconsin. Is the gentleman going to con-sider reading out of the party the gentleman from New York [Mr. BLOOM] becau se he has taken part in the transaction? 

Mr.  GARNER.  Oh,  no; we are glad we have one Member who can get in. We Members over here are too poor. We look on the gentleman from New York [Mr. BLOOM] with a degree of pride that he was included in this great and noble venture. This morning I also got a notice of another  refund  that might be interesting to you  gentlemen-$2,542,304.59  to the Eastman Kodak Co. Now, gentlemen, I am contending for two things.  One  ls that 

if I were the Secretary of the Treasury I would insist that one of the cases involving various and  sundry  questions be taken to the Supreme  COurt  of the United  States.  I would  insist  that one of the refunds be taken to the  United  States  Supreme  Court to determine some of  , these questions. That is my first proposition. My second proposition is that in view of the stupendous amount refunded, in view of the fact that  Mr.  Mellon, since he has been the  Secretary  of the Treasury, has given back nearly 

$3,000,000,000  to the American taxpayers, I woUld say to the 

Congress  of the  United  States:  " There has been a lot of  criti-

cism in and out of  Congress  about my action in this matter. The doors are open.  Send  a committee from the House and 

Senate,  or elsewhere, so long as they are official and  respon-

sible, and investigate my books and see whether I am  conduct-

ing this office as it should be  conducted." 

Is there anything you are afraid of? Are  you  afraid  to trust these men to come up and look at it? There has not been any investigation by the House of Representatives, whose duty it is under the Constitution to raise this revenue and to initiate revenue bill s. They have not had a single look-in in  10  years.  

> If

the  Secretary  of the Treasury is so anxious about it , as he seems to be in the newspapers and through his spoke s man on the  floor  of the House, he would undoubtedly say to the House of Representatives:  " I welcome you with open arms.  Come  and look in. We are clean. We are running this as it should be run. We are proud of it.'' Instead of that, he closes the doors and says,  "No  man  can 

come and look in for  himself." 

That is what I complain  of,  and it is wrong in principle. The Speaker of this Hou se and his Republican organization ou g ht to get together and think  &eriously  about making an inve s tigation of the Treasury Department, with a view of giving the people of this  country  renewed confidence in it. Why, five or six years ago, if I had made the same kind of aspeech I made the other  day,  Uncle  Andy  · would  have paid no attention to it; but he went so far on  Sunday  as to let them quote him. Maybe the old fellow is getting old. He can not be 

getting  thin-skinned, because it would take a long time to scrape the hard shell off of him. But he is evidently getting weak. Maybe Brother  Ogden  is urging him along. Whenever you get a combination between Mellon and  Mills  you have two great combinations, made up of the very capable, far- 

> ~ea,ching,

and  far~sighted  in~llect  of the Secretary of the  Tx~-5546  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-. HOUSE  MARCH  18 

ury and that wonderful capacity of the Undersecretary of the 

Tr e asury  of  making white look black and yellow look red. Do you not remember that two years ago, or maybe it was three, Mr. Mills came on the floor of the House and told you they had to have  $160,000,000  at once to buy all the liquor in the  United  States,  in order to properly enforce prohibition, and he had Bi shop  Cannon  at his right hand? - The  SPEAKER  pro tempore. The time of the gentleman from Texas has expired. Mr.  GARNER.  Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to proceed for three additional minutes. The  SPEAKER  pro tempore: Without objection, it is so ordered. There was no objection. Mr. GARNER. After he had presented the facts I -went on the floor of the House, if you will remember, and cried  "Thief." 

The proposition had the approval of the Treasury Department and the approval of Mr. Mellon. We had a hearing on that bill.  

> It

was backed by the Anti-Saloon League ; it was backed by every organization in this country for temperance, so far as Iknow, and by those against the eighteenth amendment. Before 

· we  got through with that hearing the bill was withdrawn. The very first question I asked these two gentlemen when I had the pleasure of meeting them in their offices when I came back at the next session was,  " What are you going to do about the , liquor  bill?"  And they said,  "We  are not going to do anything more about it. We are  through." 

Then you remember that when we started to settle the alien-

property  business Mr. Mills told you how beautifully it could  

> be

done. He introduced a bill and was going to settle it at the expense of  $280,000,000  of the American people's money. The plan was to issue bonds, pay American claimants, take the I.  0.  U.  of Germany, and then the whole thing could easily be settled, just as long as the people paid the bill. I again cried 

"Thief."  When I did it on that occasion I drew the attention of the gentleman from New York, Mr. Mills, to the fact that he was personally interested in an item of approximately  $240,000 

out of this money, and that it was not right for him to appear in advocacy of the bill. 

So  he withdrew from any further participation in that propo-sition. Mr. Mills is one of the greatest artists this country has ever known when it comes to making things look feasible and making things look right. You know, he can even make many well-meaning Republicans believe he is right. It is a fact that he caught me two or three times. He is honest looking; he is honest talking; and I am confident he is absolutely honest in what he believes. That kind of a man, you know, is dangerous, especially when he has the backing of a man like  Uncle  Andy. I call on you,  Mr.  Speaker, to take under consideration, you and your steering committee, the advisability of selecting acommittee, made up of the best men we have here, to  investi-

gate the Treasury Department. I ask you to give them ample power and ample funds; give them a competent lawyer, acompetent accountant, and a competent engineer, all of whom are necessary in making an investigation of these things. Let them make this investigation and come back and report to this House; and if they can conscientiously report that the Treasury 

Department  has been run honestly, efficiently, and impartially for the last  10  years, it will be the most glorious fact we could possibly find. I would be as happy a man as there is in the Nation. I wa,nt  the people of this country to have confidence in both the executive and legislative branches of the  Govern-

ment; but you are losing it in the House of Representatives because the joint committee is  appr<YVing  these things without any knowledge of them. I protest against it and I will  con-

tinue to protest against it as long as I am  ab-le  to stand on the floor of the House and can get the opportunity to do so. [Applause.]  COAL 

The  SPEAKER  pro tempore.  Under  the special order of the House the  Chair  recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. BRUMM] for 45 minutes. Mr.  BRUMM.  Mr. Speaker, at the outset may I ask the usual courtesy requested by Members who have reserved time, and that is that I be not interrupted until I finish  the main part of my remarks. Mr. Speaker  a,nd  Members of the House, before I address  my-

self to the real purpose of my remarks this afternoon, may Ipremise them with the statement that I do not rise before you to-day as a partisan. I do not for the time being care to be associated with any particular economic thought as affected by political or geographical lines. I should rather that I may address the  Members  of this  House  as one who is seriously interested in my own home State and in particular the  dis-

trict which I have the honor to represent, its industries, and the welfare of the people. I shall endeavor to lay before you in all candor and fairness a most  serious  situation, through a course of contemporary events, which strikes at one of the most basic industries of the land,  striking  at its very  existence,  and which is a blow to the dignity and to the self-respect of  every  laborer engag ed in this industry and consequently to every laborer wherever found. For the last few weeks,  Mr.  Speaker, there  was  exhibited in this city a most powerful moving picture demonstrating the cause of the fall of the German Empire. It portrayed most graphically that the war lords of Germany, in their desire to win the war had inflicted willful and unjust punishment and death upon a simple Russian  peasant.  ·

The wiser heads of  Germany  recognized, then, that they were taking the soul out of the German Government and that its days were numbered.  As  they prophesied, so did the proud imperial power of the great German nation topple and fall in  ·

the way of all empires. 

So,  Mr . Speaker, we, as Americans of this present day, 1n the light of our history, know that our people as a whole have learned through the vicissitudes of  a terrible  Civil  War and the most bitter experience that the welfare of our great Nation, its prosperity and its permanence, are dependent upon the  in-

dissoluble unity, economic as well as political, of its seve ral 

varts.  No political unit, however small, is too little to demand the highest consideration and justice from the rest, and no section or part or parts can willfully, either by legislation  or 

otherwise, inflict a wrong upon even the smallest without  shat-

tering the stability of the whole fabric and, if persisted in, the end will be but a matter of time. This is the lesson of  150  years ; and,  believing as I do, that you accept it as a self-evident verity, I have the conviction that 

the  honorable, patriotic Members of this House will receive with fair consideration a most just cause, and I hope and cherish the thought that I may  make  it, in a sense, your own. Mr. Speaker, I have thus addressed you for this reason. For a few years back it seems that both branches of the Congress, whether consciously or unconsciously, are aligned along  sec-

tional lines, and, while we regret it, prejudice seems often  to  

> re~lace

rea son, and personalities which may be applied as well to a State as to people, often have taken the place of sound  argu-

ment. 

As  I read almost daily these persistent references,  innuen-

does, and sometimes direct charges, particularly in yonder 

Chamber,  against my own fair State and its officers, and Iponder on what I know to be the shortcomings of some others I am impelled irresistibly to recall the famous answer of  th~ 

Savior when the Pharisees tried to enmesh him in the temple by asking him to pass sentence on an immoral woman who had been caught in an illicit act. To their great surprise he  said, 

in effect, if this woman has broken the law, by the law shall she be punished, and let him who is without sin cast the first st one  ·

and, Mr.  Speaker,  while the rains descended and the  floo~ 

came, you know very well there were no stones cast that day. Criticism, Mr. Speaker, is always very easy and awfully  cheap 

and invariably is the weapon of demagogues and iconoclasts, but broad-minded, constructive statesmanship is a task for philosophers, and while prejudice and  jealousy  are but the emanations of shallow minds, broad-minded charity and justice are the very essence of statesmanship. Towers, Mr..  Speaker,  are measured by their shadows, and great States,  like  great men, are measured by their slanderers. I veritably believe that if the sons of my State should care to retaliate in kind, they could crush their detractors like I might crush an eggshell in the hollow of this hand. 

So,  Mr. Speaker, for the reason that I come from the great State of Pennsylvania, the history of which makes it fill so potential a niche in the establishment and in the maintenance of this great Nation, I hope I shall not be met at the threshold, as two of our legally constituted representatives were, by  sec-

tional prejudice, but that the cause which I humbly espouse may be received upon its merits and treated with fairness. Mr.  Speaker,  at the close of the eighteenth century or the  be-

ginning of the nineteenth, when an old pioneer of the Blue Mountains of Penn sylvania, in attempting to rid his fields of trees, had ignited a stump and discovered that after the wood had burned the black stones, as he thought, which surrounded the roots, burned with a bright glow and with excessive heat, and he had transmitted his  discovery  to his friends and  neigh-

bors, he had then taken the first step in establishing what,  per- 

> haps,

is the most basic industry of the  United  States. We can hardly conceive of any  industry  that does not utilize fnel at some time or in some shape, and coal, for over a hundred years, has been recognized as the almost univer sal fuel not only for manufacturing but for domestic purposes, at least in the congested sections. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5547 

The building up of this great industry, particulal'ly  confin:ed  to the . Pennsylvania anthracite, that was discovered in the to the mountains of eastern Pennsylvania, had attracted thou- mountains of Siberia. sands upon thousands of people from all over the  United  States  As  ill luck would have it, just at the time when our owners, and even  from  Europe, and notwithstanding the cosmopolitan our miners, and the public had realized that they had to move make-up, from them has grown a citizenry which compares to restore their industry, and had formed an organization and more than favorably with the labor of any industrial section entered into covenants which will insure peace between the throughout the world. No braver people, more industrious, employer and the employed for a long term, and at least mini-more patriotic ever trod the soil of  ~erica  than the miners mize the possibility of long strikes and lockouts, and when the from the mountains of Pennsylvania. [Applause.] operators themselves had renovated their entire plants, installed When the integrity of this  Union  was at stake, the first de- new machinery,  resizeu  their coal, cleansed it, and minimized fenders to rally to Lincoln's call were the miners from Schuyl- the slate or refuse, and had produced an article for domestic kill County, and with all due respect to the patriotic State of purposes which will challenge comparison anywhere, suddenly Massachusetts, and notwithstanding what historians have said over in  Russi-a  the sleeping giant that Napoleon spoke of had not and may continue to repeat, I say  her~  that the first volunteers only awakened, but had indeed  become  rampant, and seemed to to reach the  United  States  Capital  at the call of Abraham Lin- have become mad for money; and the great soviet innovation, coln were the coal crackers from my home town [applause], unable to meet her economic needs because of her untenable and for want of better accommodations they marched up the government and inefficient industrial system, commenced to west stairway of this  Capitol  and bivouacked on the stony :floor mine coal with not only convict labor but enforced labor, work-of yon Rotunda. [Applause.] They sealed their patriotism ing for 17 cents a day, and at an actual loss to the Government with their blood on many a gory battle field of the South, and this product was shipped as ballast into American ports, so that from  what  I have learned here and elsewhere, I believe my last year soviet coal, produced unde .r those conditions, was sold southern brothers had no more respect for any  Union  soldier in the city of Philadelphia in my own  State  for less than $5 a than they had for the boys from Pennsylvania. ton, when the cheapest that we could offer it for from my own In every emergency they have stood up, and in the danky town,  98  miles away, was  $10  a ton. fields of Flanders, nigh the battle fields of Chateau-Thierry, the  On  the very best of authority these soviets are simply wild Argonne, Belleau Wood, and on the Marne, where the rows of to get their hands on ready money to extend, if possible, their whitened crosses mark their place, no greater numbers or untenable  regime. 

prouder achievements, mark the toll of our honored dead, than  So,  my friends, I discovered when I came to Washington in the hallowed glory that enshrouds forever the memory of these April last upon my reelection, that in January, 1929, 164 tons noble sons of  Penn.  [Applause.] of anthracite coal had been imported into this country from the The e are the people that I represent; these are they whom I soviet; that in the next month it had jumped to over  17,000 

ask  tills  House to have consideration for. Politics, notwith- tons, and the following month-March-fell back to  890  tons. standing, I ask for fair and just treatment and I have faith In April it was 2,289 tons and in May none; in June, 14,753 enough in the  Members  of this House to believe that I shall tons, and in July,  11,000  tons. In  August  it was  4,000  tons and in a sense receive it. in September  11,000,  in October  11,000  again, and then jumped 

Until  a few years ago the great anthracite mining industry in November of last year to 26,621 tons, and in December went grew up by leaps and bounds. It was in its very nature a back to 13,816 tons, and in January of this year to  10,975 

natural monopoly being confined to a limited area, and while we tons, which are the last statistics that the Department of  Com-

had many industrial troubles, which was perfectly natural merce has on hand for that particular product.  So  it does not throu gh conditions that might arise in any other locality simi- matter what your ideas of economics are, this is a situation larly situated and not confined to that particular region and which interests us all. I tried to get a hearing before the Com-while labor was highly paid, according to the views of out- mittee on Ways and Means last April. I called upon the chair-Biders, when the character of their employment is understood, man and he told me that it was entirely too late, as it might they receive nothing exorbitant and, in fact, not near enough open up all of the various  schedules,  but that I could file aconsidering the hazards of their employment, to say nothing of brief. I did so, and finally was given an opportunity before  M

the short life of the average miner. executive session of the committee in which to present my  re-

I might take Members of this House to my home town and quest for an amendment to the schedule on coal, permitting aintroduce them to men of my own age with whom I went to tariff on anthracite coa -l. school who would appear to be years my senior through  the  Mr. McKEOWN.  Mr.  Speaker, will the gentleman yield? almost universal contraction of miners' asthma which is the Mr.  BRUMM.  Yes. gradually filling up of the lungs with the fine silt which fills Mr. McKEOWN. What is the total output of anthracite coal every crack and cranny of the mine, so that at the age of 45 or in the  United  States? 

50  they apparently look old and decrepit. Mr.  BRUMM.  Seventy-seven million tons. Then again the employment is peculiar and uncertain. The Mr. GARBER of Oklahoma. Is the gentleman able to state mines are not operated like a factory ; they do not work every the number of tons imported during 1929? working day, they have been accustomed to operate until a Mr.  BRUMM.  From all places? certain amount is produced and stored and then they shut down  Mr.  GARBER  of Oklahoma. Yes; from all  sources. 

and  wait · until there is a new demand. These interruptions,  Mr.  BRUMM.  In January, 1929, 48,343 tons; in February, however, do not seem  t()  drive labor away but they seem con- 54,389 tons; in March, 29,414 tons; in April, 36,768 tons; in tented with the conditions there. The result is that we have May,  28,640  tons; in June,  25,601  tons; in July, 33,417 tons; in 

been proverbially one of the most prosperous regions in the August, 24,835 tons; in September,  30,583  tons; October, 29,359 country.  Until  1925 and 1926 such a thing as advertising tons; in November, 44,425 tons; in December,  49,206  tons; and anthracite coal, except by the retailers, was almost unheard of. in January,  1930,  50,311  tons. Anthracite coal sold itself and needed very little advertisement. Mr.  PALMER.  Mr.  Chairman,  will the gentleman yield? But in 1925 and 1926 through the most natural causes a great Mr.  BRUMM.  Yes. strike was brought about and they were shut down for about Mr.  PALMER.  What rate of duty is sufficient to protect our six months. industry against cheap-labor soviet coal?  ·

During this time the consumers unfortunately were compelled Mr.  BRUMM.  I should think about four dollars or four to resort to substitutes. In the past they were able to get back dollars and a half a ton, possibly five dollars a ton,  specific 

these markets, but  American  inventive genius had in the mean- duty, depending upon freight rates. Most of the soviet coal time perfected bituminous burners, oil burners, and bad bore no freight at all, so that we would have to make allowance cheapened fuel gas so that this suspension afforded a glorious for that. When I found that in the wisdom of the Ways and opportunity for the promoters of substitutes to introduce these  Means  Committee I could not get any solution to this proposi· new furnaces, so that for the first time in the history of the tion, I immediately called upon Senator REED, from  Pennsyl-

industry anthracite coal had real competitors. vania, who was our only representative in the Senate at that But as the old adage has it,  "It  never  rams  but it  pours."  time, and who I have no doubt held his seat only by the grace At this most inopportune time a peculiar coincidence took place. of God and the oversight of some of his friends over  there. 

I remember very distinctly when I graduated from the  Uni- For that reason, possibly needless for me to state, it would be versity of Pennsylvania, at the request of my professor, I impossible to have coal added to any schedule in our sister body. submitted a thesis on anthracite coal. The prejudice against my beloved State, without which perhaps I remember looking up my data in the Geological  Surrey  and you and I would not be sitting here to-day, was so great that the reports of the bureaus, and I found that the only place in neither coal nor anything  else  that emanated  fro~  Pennsylvania the wide world where anthracite coal was produced was in the had a day in court. eastern Pennsylvania district. This was a generally accepted 

1

Mr.  SCHAFER  of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, will the gentleman fact. However, wi _thin the last few years I have learned of a yield? coal that is almost identical, at least for practical purposes,  l\!r.  BRUMM.  Yes. 5548  CONGRESSIONAL  R. EOORD-HOUSE  ~fARCH  18 

1\Ir.  SCHAFER  of  Wisconsin. With reference to prejudice, Imay frankly state to  the  gentleman that there has been a great deal of prejudice created in Wisconsin against Pennsylvania, particularly with reference to alleged violation of corrupt  prac--

tices acts, when as a matter of fact those demagogues and  hypo-

elites from my  State, . who were supported by the La Follette Progressive Republican  Club  of Milwaukee  County,  denounced Pennsylvania, when they did not even claim violation of the 

specific  laws, but large expenditures. The ele ction campaigns in their behalf flagrantly violated the corrupt practices acts of our own State in many instances. In the 1928 primary election in Wisconsin the La Follette Progressive Republican  Club  of Milwaukee  County  received from Richard H. Lee, a master  lobbyist  from New York, thousands of dollars in clear violation of the Wisconsin corrupt practices acts. In the  1926  primary campaign about  $10,000  was expended without complying with the Wisconsin corrupt practices acts for full-page beer advertisements in be half of the nomination of a candidate supported by the La Foll e tte Progressive Republican 

Club  of Milwaukee  County,  which candidate has had much to say about alleged violations of election laws and large election campaign expenditures in Pennsylvania, but who has been silent about Mr. Lee and the beer advertisements [applau se] in his behalf. Mr.  BRUMM.  The kettle often calls the pot black.  So,  Mr. Speaker, when the tariff bill returns to this House I hope that Imay have the assistance of a large portion of the House in in-flu encing those in charge to permit an amendment to give us some relief. I suppose the parliamentary situation will make it difficult, if at all possible, to put an amendment onto the bill, but I shall certainly use every possible means in my power to have a tariff levied on all importations of anthracite coal, which should be about $4 a ton. That would certainly keep out the soviet coal, and would apply to any  antht·acite  from other countries, and I am sure we are all interested in preventing the importation of this product from a country which my friend from Pennsylvania calls the Godless country of Russia. Mr. Speaker, this is not a sectional question.  Perhaps  every State in the  Union  inhibits competition of convict labor with that of free American citizens. It is an insult to every free laborer who earns his bread by the sweat of his brow. It is a blot on civilization. It  is  in-human to the Russian convicts and enforced laborers them-selves. What? The  United  States of America, with its proud ideals, cognizant of the  sacr.ifj.ces  of  t~e  fathers, are they to consent to the sale here of a .commodity  produced by slaves? 

It is incomprehensible that any American should stoop to handle a product which he knows emanates in that  way. 

Siberia ! The time-honored scene of the arch tragedies of the world, the very synonym of everything that is unnatural and inhuman. Its gl ens and its caves, its mountains and its snows which form its grim visag e, if given the tongues of men would' unfold a tale that would make  America's  blood run cold. Are we to compete with that?  Siberia,  where in our mind's eye, through the imagery of Tolstoi, we can still hear the crack of the driver's whip, we can still see that long line of God-forsaken creatures, we can still see the dead and  dying,  miserable victims of inhumanity to man. Mr. Speaker, there is not a Member of this House who  can 

stand up in this body or elsewhere and publicly say that he is willing to stand for that sort of thing. Justice demands that something be done here. Morality abhors it, and expediency, so characteristic of the American mind, will find a way, or the law of retribution will surely visit those who are responsible. Mr.  Speaker,  the Federal law already prohibits convict-ma.de products from coming into the land , but it does not stop It; and subterfuges will constantly be used, and the products of convict labor will continue to flow to our shores. The only practical way I can conceive of is  a tariff which will absolutely bar these products from Siberia. After  all,  we are Americans first, and I have faith enough to believe that no  Member  of this House will willingly stand for injustice, wherever the injury arises. In the interest of our people, in the interest of civilization, to maintain our self-respe ct before the world, something must be done to prevent acontinuation of this malpractice. It is my earnest hope, there-fore, that at the proper time the membership of this House will join .with me not only  i~  J?rotectin~  a ~ea~  indu~try.  ~nd 

protecting the labor engaged m It but will  assiSt  m mamtamrng 

the dignity and self-respect of the great masses of our coun-try, who, after all, are the bone and sinew of this great land and  who  when compared with  others,  by their matchless ex-ample  h~  ve dignified honest toil. This is my hope. This is the hope of the laboring masses of America ; and, Mr. Speaker, I ask for your help and cooperation. [Applause.] Mr. Speaker, how much time have I remaining? The  SPEAKER  pro tempore. Three minutes. 

Mr.  BRUMM.  I ·am  through, and I simply wanted to call the attention of the House to this message which I have  re-

ceived from the Rev. John IIundiak, pastor of the Ukrainian Orthodox  Church  of  St.  George, of Minersville,  Pa.,  concerning a dispatch which he had received from Ru ss ia, exemplifying what I have said about that wonderful land of the soviets. I read:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

> Recent press dispatches from Kharkow, the capital of the Ukrainian
> Soviet Socialistic Republic, report that the so viet government bas arrested Archbishop Vasil Lipkovsky, retired metropolitan, and five bishops of the Ukrainian Orthodox Autocephalic Church .They an•
> to be tried, together with Vladimir Checkhovsky, president of the
> Supreme Council of the same chm·ch; Prof. Serge Efremoff, an eminent
> Ukrainian scientist; Andrew Nikovsli:y, amember of the Ukrainian
> Acade my of Sciences, and twoscore other Ukrainian scientists and church leaders. The charges of counter-revolutionary activities on which those ar-
> rested are to be tried are absolutely fictitious, since none of them are in any way connected with any political or revolutionary movements .The penalty awaiting those innocent leaders of the spiritual and
> scien t ific life of Ukraine is either adeath sentence or long term imprisonment in the unspeakable soviet prisons or an exile into Siberia or on Solovetsky Island. The Soviet Government has also ordered the Supreme Council of the Ukrainian Orthodox Autocephallc Church in Ki eff to disband nnd has decreed that that church be dissolved and outlawed. The Ukrain-ian churc hedifices, among them one that was built by Vladlmit· the Great in th eeleventh century, are being either destroyed or converte dinto atheistic clubs, granaries, and storage houses. Reli gion in general is being suppressed by the Godless soviet regime, and the ·Ukrainian Orthodox Autocephalic Church is receiving the full brunt of tbjs destructive antireligious mania of the soviet imperialists. Its bishops, priests, and lay members have been subjected to horrible persecutions in the last 10 years. Many hav~ been executed, and even now many of them are imprisoned. The Church of Ukraine has never
> suffered so much even in times of th einvasions of the Tartat·s and
> the Turks. The martyrdom of the Ukrainian Christians can be com-par ed only to the martyrdom of the early Christian Church in the times of Diocletian and Nero. We are heartbroken that there seems to be no power on earth which can stop this terrorism being p erpe-trated by the unspeakable and vile communistic enemies of religion.
> In this dark hour when our mother church and religion in general is
> being crucified we, the members of St. George's Ukrainian Orthodox
> Church, of Minersville, Pa., appea l

to you as  our  Representative in the                                                                                            

> United States Congress to ask the Government of the United States
> and Senator WILLIAM E. BORAH to int ercede, if possible, on behalf of the Ukrainian Orthodox Autocepbalic Church and its martyred metro-politan, bishops, priests, and lay members, and all other suffering
> Ukrainians.
> We would sincerely appreciate any step that you might take in this matter. We feel that any publicity given to this protest will tend, at least temporarily, to alleviate the untold sufferings of our mother church and of our brethren under the soviet misrule. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of St. George, of Minersville, Pa., by Rev. JOHN HUNDIAK,

Pastor.   

> NICHOLAS SALICK,

President.   

> LEo SHMORHUN,

Vice  President.   

> JoHN TonrcK,

Secretary, 

J,1}5  Front  fJtn~,  Mi nersville,  Pa.                 

> TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS IN INTERSTATE AND FOREIGN COM -
> MERCE BY MOTOR CARRIERS OPERATING ON THE PUELIC HIGHWAYS

Mr. PARKER.  1\Ir.  Speaker, I move that the House resolve itself into the Committee of the Whole House on the  state  of the 

Union  for the further consideration of the bill H. R.  10288. 

The  SPEAKER  pro tempore. The gentleman from New ' York moves that the House resolve itself into the  Committee  of the Whole House on the state of the  Union  for the further con-sideration of the bill H. R.  10288.  The question is on agreeing to that motion. The question was taken ; and the Speaker pro tempore an-nounced that the ayes appeared to have it. 

:M .r.  RANKIN.  Mr.  Speaker, I call for a division. The SPEAKER pro tempore. A divis ion is demanded. The House divided ; and there were-ayes  60,  noes  10. 

Mr. RANKIN. Mr.  Speaker,  I object to the vote on the ground that there is no quorum present, and I make the point of order that there is no quorum present. The  SPEAKER  pro tempore. The  C huir  will count. [After counting.]  One  hundred and twenty-two  Members  are pres-ent ; not a quorum. The  Clerk  will call the roll. Those in favor of the motion of the gentleman from New York [l\lr. 

pARKER]  will, when their names are called, answer  " yea  " ;those opposed will answer  "nay." 1930  CONGRESSIONAL- RECORD-HOUSE  5549 

The question was taken ; and  ~ere  were--yeas  308,  nays 16, not voting  104,  as follows: Ack e rman Adkins Aldri ch All en Andre se nArentz 

Aswell 

Ayres 

Bacharach B ac hmann Baird Barbour Black Bl a ckburn Bland Bloom Bobn Bolton 

BOwman 

Box Brand, Ga. Brand , Ohio 

Brigham 

Browning Brumm Buchanan Burdick Burtness Busby Butler Byrns Cable Campbell, Iowa Campbell,  Pa. 

Canfield Carter,  Cali!. 

Carter, Wyo. Celler Chalm e rs Chindblom 

Chl'istgau 

Christopherson Clague Clancy Clark, Md. Clark, N.C. Coc hran, Mo. Cole Collier Colton Connolly Coo ke Coo per,  Obio 

Cooper, Tenn. Cooper , Wis. Corning Cox Coyle Craddock Crail Cramton Crisp Cross Cr o sser Culkin Dallinger Darrow Dav e nport Davis Dempsey Denison Dowell Doxey Dunbar Dyer Eaton, Colo. Eaton, N.J. Abernethy Allgood Almon Arnold Andrew AufderHe.ide Bacon Bankhead Beck Beedy Beers Bell Boylan Britten Browne Brunner Buckbee Carl ey Cartwright Chase Clarke, N. Y. Cochran,  Pa. 

Connery 

Crowther Cullen Curry De Priest DeRouen 

Dickinson 

Diclfstelp 

[Roll No. 14] 

YEA8-308 

Elliott Ellis 

Enf?lebright 

Esli ck Estep Est e rly Evans, Calif. Ev an s , Mont. Fenn Finley Fish Fisher Fitzg e rald 

Rt;ratrick 

Foss Fr ee Fr e eman French Gambrill Garber,  Okla. 

Garber,  Va. 

Garner 

Gifford 

Glover Golder Goldsborough Goodwin Granfield Green Greenwood Gregory Guyer Hadley Hale Hall, Ill. 

Hall, Ind. Hall, Miss .Hall, N.  Dak. 

Halsey Hancock Hardy Hare Hartley Hastings Haugen Hawley Hess Hi c key Hill, Wash. Hoch 

Hoffman 

Hogg Holaday Hooper Hope Hopkins Howard Hudson Hull, Morton D. Hull, William E. Hull, Wis. Irwin 

Jeffers 

Jenkins Johnson, Ind. Johnson, Nebr. Johnson,  Okla. 

Johnson, Tex. 

Johnston,  Mo. Jonas, N.C. Jon e s,  Tex. 

Kading Kelly Kemp Kerr Ketcham Kiefner Kincheloe Kinzer Knutson Kopp Korell Kurtz Kvale Lambertson Lampert La ngley Lankford, Ga. Lankford,  Va. 

Lea,  Calif. 

Leavitt Le e ch Lehlbach Letts Linthicum Lozier Luce Ludlow McClintock,  Ohio 

McDuffie McFadden McKeown McLaughlin McLeod McReynolds 

McSwain 

Maas 

# ~~~~~~d 

Mapes Martin Mead Menges .Merritt Michener Miller Milligan Montague Montet M()oney Moore, Ky. Moore,  Ohio 

Moore,  Va. 

Morehead Morgan Murphy 

1,elson,  Me. Nelson, Mo. Newhall Niedringhaus Nolan Norton O' Connell, R. I. O'Connor, La. O'Connor, N.Y. O' Connor,  Okla. 

Oliver,  Ala. Palm er Palmisano Parker Patterson Peavey Perkins Pittenger Porter Prall Pr .att, Ruth Pritchard Purnell Quin Ragon Rainey, Henry T. Ram e y, Frank M. 

NAY8-16 

Briggs  Garrett Cannon Hill, Ala. Collins Huddleston Fulmer Larsen 

NOT  VOTING-104 

Ramseyer Rams peck Ransley Rayburn Re e.ce Re e d, N.Y. Reid, Ill. 

Robinson Rogers Rowbottom Ruthe r ford 

Sanders,  N. Y. 

Sanders,  Tex. 

Sandlin 

Schafer,  Wis. 

Schneider 

Sears 

Se "' er 

sefberling 

Selvig 

Shaff e r,  Va. 

Short,  Mo. 

Shott,  W.  Va. 

Shreve 

Simmons 

Simms 

Sinclair 

Sloan 

Smith,  Idaho 

Smith,  W.Va. 

Snell 

Sparks 

Speaks 

Sproul,  Ill. 

Stafford 

Stalker 

Stobbs 

Stone 

Strong,  Kans. 

Strong,  Pa. 

Sommers,  Wash. 

Sumners,  Tex. 

Swanson 

Taber Tarver Taylor, Tenn. Temple Thompson Thurston Tilson Timberlake Tinkham Tucker Turpin Vincent, Mich. 

Vinson,  Ga. Wainwright Warren Wason Welch,  Call!. 

Welsh,  Pa. 

Whitehead Whitley Whittington Wigglesworth Williams, Tex. Williamson Wilson Wingo Wol!enden Wolverton, N. J. Wolverton,  W.Va. 

Wood 

Woodruff 

Woodrum Wright Wyant McMillan Oldfield Patman Rankin Dominick Kahn  Sirovich 

Doughto'n Kearns  Snow 

Douglas,  Ariz.  Kendall, Ky.  Somers,  N.Y. Douglass, Mass. Kendall,  Pa.  Spearing__ 

Doutrich Kiess  SprouL  Kans. 

Doyle  Kunz  Steagall 

Drane LaGuardia  Stedman 

Drewry Lanham  Stevenson 

Driver Lee, Tex.  Sullivan,  N.Y. Edwards Lindsay  Sullivan,  Pa. 

Frear McClintic , Okla.  Swick 

Fuller McCormack.  Mass_  Swing 

Gasque McCormick, Ill. Taylor, Colo. Gavagan Manlove Thatcher Gibson Micha e lson Treadway Graham Mouser  Underhill 

Griffin  Nelson, Wis.  Underwood 

Hammer  O'Connell,  N.Y.  Vestal 

~~~~t~~ IX!l.  g~~~r  N.Y.  ;~~:~ 

Hull,  '?renn.  Parks Watson Igoe  Pou  White James Pratt, Harcourt J.  Wurzbach 

Johnson,  Ill. Quayle Yates Johnson,  S.Dak.  Romju e Yon Johnson, Wash.  Sabath  Zihlm.an 

So  the motion was agreed to. The  Clerk  anno'unced  the following pairs: Until further notice:  ·

Mr. Graham of Pennsylvania with Mr. Drane. 

Mr.  Treadway  with  Mr. Hammer. Mr. Watson wi th Mr. Hull of T e nnessee. Mr. Gibson with Mr.  St evenson. 

Mr.  Frear  with Mr. Cull e n. Mr.  Swing  with Mr. Bankhead. 

# ~~:  ~~h~efsiJ:  ~·h  ~~ ~ ~abwen. 

Mr.  Ve stal  with  !r.  O'Conn e ll  of  New York. 

Mr.  Wurzb a ch with Mr. Dominick. Mr. K e arns with Mr.  Spearing. 

Mr. Manlove with Mr. Quayle. Mr. Kiess with Mr . Doughton. Mr. Yates with Mr. Boylan. Mr. Watres with Mr. Romjue. 

M11.  Harcourt J. Pratt with Mr. Brunner. 

Mr.  Bacon with Mr. Drewry. Mr. Mouser . with Mr. Ga s que. Mr. Andrew with Mr. Taylor of Colorado. Mr.  Swick  wi t h Mr. Igoe. Mr. White with Mr. Gr i ffin. 

Air.  Johnson of Washington with Mr. Douglass of  Massachusetts. 

Mr. Curry with Mr. Connery. 

Mr.  ChasQ  with Mr. Auf d er Heide. Mr. Nelson of Wisc()nsin with Mr. Lee of  Texas. 

Mr.  Beck  with · Mr. Parks. Mr. Thatcher with Mr. D e Rouen. Mr.  Crowther · with Mr. Bell. Mr. Johnson of Illinois with Mr. McClintic of Oklahoma. 

Mr . Underhill  with Mr. McCormack  o!  Massachusetts. Mr. Houston  with  Mr. Cartwright. Mr. Dickinson with Mr.  Pou. 

Mr. LaGuardia with Mr.  Sabath. 

Mr. Kendall  o!  Pennsylvania with Mr. Driver. Mr. Johnson of  South  Dakota with Mr. Edwards. Mr. Zihlman with Mr. Fuller. Mr. Walker with Mr.  SteagaU. 

Mr. Buckbee with Mr. Yon. Mr.  Sullivan  of Pennsylvania with Mr.  Somers  of  New York. 

Mr.  James with Mr. Gavagan. Mrs. McCormick of Illinois with Mr.  Sirovich. 

Mr.  Sproul  of Kansas with Mr.  Underwood. 

Mr. Browne with Mr. Ktmz. 

Mr.  Clarke  of  New York with Mr. Lanham. Mr. Cochran of Pennsylvania with  Mr.  De Priest. The result of the vote was announced as above recorded. Accordingly the House resolved itself into the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the Union for the further con-sideration of the bill (H. R.  10288)  to regulate the transporta-tion of persons in interstate and foreign commerce by motor carriers operating on the public highways, with Mr. LEHLBACH in the chair.  •

The  Clerk  read the title of the bill. The  CHAIRMAN.  When the committee rose at its last session there was pending an amendment offered by the . gentleman from Michigan [Mr. MAPES]. The gentleman from New York [Mr. P A.RKER]  was seeking to make arrangement for the limitation of debate. Mr. PARKER. I ask that the pending amendment may be reported to the House. The  Cler _k read the Mapes amendment,  a,s  follows : Amendment  offered  by Mr.  MAPEs:  Page  7, line 16,  after  the word 

"conducted,"  strike out the words  "between  two  States  only are  in-

volved  " and insert in lieu thereof the words  " involve  not more than three  Stat e s." 

Mr.  GARBER of Oklahoma. Mr. Chairman, I rise  in support of the pending amendment, and ask unanimous consent to  pro-

ceed for  10  minutes. The  OHAIRMAN.  The gentleman from Oklahoma [Mr. 

GARIJER]  a~ks  unanimous consent to proceed for  10  minutes. Is there objection? There was no objection. Mr. GARBER of Oklahoma.  Mr.  Chairman  and members of the committee, in resuming the consideration of this  bill  your attention is called to section 3, the administrative provisions, in connection with the amendment offered by the gentleman from Michigan  [Mr.  MAPES], which increases the administration of the joint board provision from two to three States. In the  pr esentation  of the bill on a former occasion, I stated that the most serious problem which confronted the committee was the necessary administrative machinery to administer the provisions effectively and satisfactorily throughout the country. Now, let us not be confused by the mention of joint boards. The heated argument the other day confused the term  " joint 

boards"  with that of the  State  boards. This is not a State board we propose, and it does  :riot  include a State  board. It is entirely separate and distinct from any State agency. It is aboard to be composed of one member nominated by the utilities commission of each State in which the proposed operation is to occur. That one member is nominated and then appointed by the Interstate  Commerce  Commission, and, by the provisions of this bill, is made a Federal agent. Note the distinction. He 

is  made a Federal agent for the  administration  of this bill. So  15550  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  1\{ARCH  18 it takes out of the presentation of the opposition to this amend-ment all the argument  that-has  thus far been presented. This is 

not  a State  board. It is a Federal board, and the amendment does not propose to transfer any Federal power to the State govern-ments whatever. It is not a transfer of  Federal  power to the State governments. It is a proposal to decentralize the ad-ministration of the Federal power for the convenience of the people, and the proposition ends there. After the power providing for the national defense and the establishment of courts to administer justice, in my judgment the power embodied in the commerce clause of the Constitution is the most important and valuable power in that great instru-ment. It is an economic power. It has contributed more to our economic growth and to the development of the  resources  of this country than any other  power  within that sacred instrument. We do not propose  to  permit the opposition to this amend-ment to put us in a false position as endeavoring in any way to 

h·ansfer  any of that power. That power must be left in the Constitution to be fully · exercised. The channels of commerce must be left open. It is just as important to the farmers of this country, to the farmers of the  great  West, that the products of agriculture shall flow freely to the ports and to the markets of the East as it is that the products of industry flow west for consumption. There is no purpose here to impinge upon that 

power  in any way. These boards are Federal agents and as such they are fully authorized to act under the terms of the bill and the decisions of the courts of the  United  States. 

We have  State  commissions cooperating with the Interstate Commerce  Commission  under the interstate commerce act, working together, wherein  State  and interstate rates are com-mingled, . and in connection with the granting or refusing of certificates of convenience and necessity to roads that desire to extend and to roads that desire to be discontinued. Those who insist that prejudice results from local cooperation with the Interstate Commerce Commission are answered by the administration of the interstate commerce act. Paragraph 3 of section 13 of the act provides :(3) Whenever in any investigation under the provisions of this act, or in any investigation instituted upon petition of the carrier concerned, which petition is hereby authorized to be filed, there shall be brought                                                                                                                                                                                 

> in issue any rate, fare, charge, classification, regulation, or practice, made ot• imposed by authority of any State, or initiated by the President during the period of Federal control, the commission, before proceeding to bear and ilispose of such issue, shall•cause the State or States inter-ested to be notified of the proceeding. The commission may confer with the authorities of any State having regulatory jurisdiction over the class
> of persons and corporations subject to this act with respect to the relationship between rate structures and practices of carriers subject to the jurisdiction of such State bodies and of the commission; and to that end is authorized and empowered, under rules to be prescribed by it, and which may be modified from time to time, to hold joint hearings with ·any such State regulating bodies 011 any matters wherein the commission in empowered to act and where the rate-making authority of a State is or may be affected by the action taken by the commission. The commission is also authorized to avail itself of the cooperation,
> services, records, and facilities of such State authorities in the enforce-ment of any provision of this act.

The advantages of cooperation under the above provision have been pointed out by Mr. Justice Brandeis, of the Supreme  Court, 

in his opinion in the case of Colorado against  United  States. Be invites attention to the fact that  from  the enactment of the transportation act of  1920  to February 18, 1926, 191 abandon-ment applications were acted upon by the Interstate Commerce Commission, of which  170  were granted; of these only 6 were granted contrary to the recommendations of  State  authorities, and of 47 cases where  State  authorities made recommendations, the commission acted in accordance therewith in 38 cases. (271 u. s. 153, 167.) In the annual report of the Interstate Commerce Commission for the year ending  October  31, 1926, it was stated that a check of the commission's records discloses that 27 State commissions cooperated with the Federal commission in 51 rate cases in 

which interstate-intrastate rate relations were in some manner involved, 22 State commissions cooperated in 44 construction and abandonment cases, and 6 in car-service cases. The gentleman from Kansas  [Mr.  HocH] in his argument opposing this amendment, confessed that he was not a mathema-tician, but the gentleman could see as many as 25 different boards under the  administrative  provision, called into action in :five different States. While the gentleman from Kansas may not be a good mathematician, it must be admitted that his powers of imagination are highly developed. His statement of the number of boards required running into the hundreds is not coupled with the statement that the appointee from aState would not be limited to acting on one board but would act on as many boards requiring the cooperation of his State so that in his illustration of a 5-State operation, there would 

be only 5 members composing a joint board instead of  25 

inferred from such statement. But this amendment does not extend that far. It does not include :five States. It does not include in excess of three States. 

Mr.  MOORE  of Virginia. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. GARBER of Oklahoma. I yield. 1\Ir.  MOORE  of Virginia. I am in sympathy with the amend-ment that the gentleman is supporting . I would like to ask a question which has relation to the argument of the gentleman from Kansas [l\lr. HocH]. The gentleman said there would be 

serioUB  complications; a. great multiplication of boards, and so forth. The language of the provision that the gentleman is  dis-

cussing is: The commission shall, when operations of common carriers  f>y                                

> motor vehicles conducted or proposed to be conducted between two
> States only are involved, refer to ajoint board for hearing and de-cision and recommendation of appropriate order thereon, any of the following matters.

Can  I understand that would not be construed as compelling a reference in a given case of  all  matters to the joint board, but that the commission would have the discretion to segregate the matters to be so referred? Mr.  GARBER  of Oklahoma.. I think the provision is man-datory and would be construed as requiring the Interstate  Com-

merce Commission to refer all matters therein enumerated. Mr. RANKIN. Will the gentleman yield? 

Mr.  GARBER  of Oklahoma. For a question; yes. Mr. RANKIN. The Interstate Commerce Commission, though, would have the absolute power to review every decision the joint board made, would it not? Mr.  GARBER  of Oklahoma. That is correct. Why is that 

power  granted  to the Interstate  Commerce  Commission? It is to preserve the supremacy of the comm· erce clause necessary to preserve uniformity in administration. The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from Oklahoma has expired. 

Mr.  GARBER of Oklahoma.  Mr.  Chairman, I ~k  unanimous consent to proceed for three additional minutes. The  CHAIRMAN.  Is there objection? There was no objection. Mr. GARBER of Oklahoma. In concluding this explanation of the proposed amendment I want to call your attention to an authority which I hope you will accept with favorable con-sideration. In his very  exhaUBtive  and able speech presenting the various provisions of this bill, the gentlem ·an from  IllinoLs, 

among other things, said, in reference to this scheme of admin-- istration by joint boards: The most important feature, however, from an administrative stand-point, to be gained by having local  State  authorities designated and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

> empowet-ed to act as aFederal agency, arises from the fact that such aboard will have first-hand, direct, and personal knowledge of local con·
> ditions. This is particularly desirable in view of the fact that there is no distinguishing difference between interstate and intrastate problems other than a difference in jurisdiction arising from crossing aState line.
> If it were not for the fact that such aboundary line intervened, the regulation or control of the carrier would and could be properly and satisfactorily exercised by the State board having jurisdiction over oper-ations entirely within the State. It would seem, therefore, to be rational and proper to enable State representatives to act as aFederal authority in dealing with such local interstate matters. There is also another possible advantage that might be gained from aboard so formed, in the opportunity that is afforded to deal at the same time with interstate and intrastate operations that might have arelationship to one another. The authority to act on the intrastate matter would exist by reason of the power vested in the individual mem·
> ber as apart or representative of the State regulatory body, and the authority to act with reference to the interstate matter arises by reason of the Federal agency created by this act. Thus, by the exercise of both State and Federal power, having due regard to the restrictions and limitations of each, it would be possible to coordinate the two by appropriate orders in aparticular matter in such away that one would supplement the other to the great advantage of the public.
> While the act provides that all operations involving more ~n two
> States shall be heard by the commission, or amember or examiner thereof, nevertheless, it is the opinion and judgment of many that the provisions now applying to matters involving not more than two States
> might very properly be extended to at least three States, and discre-tionary power given to the Interstate Commerce Commission to create such joint boards, no matter how many States involved, whenever tn
> the judgment of the commission it might properly be done. There ~~
> much to be said in support of this proposition, and the adoption of

it 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5551-                

> '"'WOuld certainly not detract or decreasa in any way the ·effectiveness of the administrative features of the bilL ·

The gentleman from Illinois was giving expression to that found in every decision of the  Supreme  Court  in its recognition of the doctrine of reasonable regulation in the  absence  of con-gressional action. Every  Supreme  Court  ju stice in  wrtting  an opinion in  regard  to interstate motor transportation has em-phasized the necessity of reasonable regulation to  the  limit of the constitutional exercise of the police  powers  of  the  several 

States,  especially emphasizing the need of local knowledge, in-formation, and experience. Why?  Because--not  like the  rail-

road&-these  roads have been built by the several  States  with 

the  assistance of the  Federal  Government upon  the  condition that the  States  will maintain these roads, and they can only do that by taxation. The  Supreme  Court  has  recognized  that. It 

has recognized the local need, the local  cooperation,  and the local advice and assistanse of the  States  in helping to maintain these roadways. The people of the several  States  have built the roads and are entitled to friendly administration for  their  protection and maintenance.  [Applause.] 

The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from  Okla-

homa has again expired. Mr.  COX.  Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I rise in opposition to the amendment. I take it that the mem-bers of the committee reporting this bill, who have given long and careful study to this question. have come to the conclusion that the power in the  Congress  to regulate commerce, carried on by bus lines, should be exercised. The committee is unanimous, as I understand it, in favoring legislation of some character. While there is a minority report filed by one member of the committee, that gentleman has proposed a substitute to the bill which, in my judgment, would have been a wise initial step for the  Congress  to have taken. This amendment,  Mr.  Chairman,  is proposed by a friend of the bill, but I respectfully  submit  that it is  8)1  aggravation of an evil that the bill already contains. It is an effort to satisfy the  State  commissions, who have been insisting upon no limita-tion with respect to the setting up of  State  boards to cooperate with the commission in the administration of this law. I submit, Mr.  Chairman,  there can be no reason for the existence of even a  2-State  board, much less a  3-State  board, if 

the findings of such board are not to be binding upon the Inter-state  Commerce  Commission. 

Under  the terms of the bill the  State  joint board s, while designated as agencies of the Federal Government, are nothing more nor less than  State  agencies, set up for the purpose of investigating and reporting to the Inter state  Commerce  Commis-

sion, both as to fact and as to recommendation of treatment. I submit,  Mr.  Chairman,  that there being no finality to the report of these  State  boards, there  can  be no sense in creating them. The act placing upon the  Commerce  Commission  the  re sponsi-bility of review carries with it the implication that the com-mission will itself conduct some original investigation, for if 

there be no such investigation on the part of the Interstate 

Com:merce  Commission, then there can be no intelligent exercise of the power of review. Therefore we must conclude that the commission in  testing  the accuracy of the  findings  of  State 

boards on questions of fact and in testing the wisdom of their recommendations as to treatment will investigate outside of the report as made by the  State  boards. Mr.  BURTNESS.  Will the gentleman yield? Mr.  COX.  Yes. Mr.  BURTNESS.  Does not that same argument apply to the findings of an examiner representing the commission? Mr.  COX.  I do not catch the significance of the gentleman's question or understand his question, but if the gentleman will wait until I make my statement I will be glad to yield to him. Mr.  BURTNESS.  I thought it was an appropriate question at  this  point. Mr.  COX.  The argument made by those opposing this bill is that it constitutes an invasion of the  States  on the part of the Federal Government and deprives the  States  of control over purely domestic questions. The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from  Georgia 

has expired. Mr.  COX.  Mr.  Chairman,  I ask unanimous consent to proceed for five additional minutes. '.Phe  CH.AffiMAN.  Without  objection,  it is so ordered. There was no objection. Mr.  COX.  I wish to bring to the attention of this committee that the enactment of this lawr  if  it  is  enacted, does not deprive the  State  regulatory boards or commissions of the exercise of all control over agencies  carrying  on an  interstate  business. The  argument  is.  pmde  upon  the  :tlo~r  that  immediately  upon the enactment of this legislation an  jurisdiction  exercised by  State 

boards is immediately stricken down, so far as their control over interstate agencies or a bus  line  doing an interstate busi-ness is concerned. I submit,  Mr.  Chairman,  that the power is in the  State  boards  at the present time, and it will continue to be in the  State  regulatory bodies, to pass rules which will be binding upon interstate  carriers  so far as the handling of intra-state business is concerned, and the right to exereise all police control Now, Mr.  Chairman,  I was struck with the statement made by the gentleman  from  Kansas [Mr.  Hoca]  on  Friday last when he was  quotirig  a witness appearing before the committee, who stated that if a provision of this amendment were carried in the bill it made possible the setting up of thousands of  State  joint boards. I . thought the statement rather extravagant.  So  this morning I commenced to figure on the possibilities with respect to the creation of such agencies under the proposed amendment to the bill, and I figured until I ran the number up to  2,107, 

therefore coming to the conclusion that the gentleman from Kansas and the gentleman from Texas were accurate  in  the statement they made that ..  this amendment would set up a con-dition under which it would be impossible to operate. 

Mr.  JOHNSON  of Indiana. Will the gentleman yield? Mr.  COX.  The gentleman will pardon me if I decline? 

Mr.  JOHNSON  of Indiana.  · I simply wanted to ask the gen-tleman if he has figured how  many  boards could be created with the provision in the bill with regard to two  States? 

Mr.  COX.  I did not make the calculation. If the gentleman is opposed to that feature of the bill I join  him,  because I, too, am  opposed  to it; but this seems to have been the best the com-mittee could do in order to enlist the support that meant the 

passage  of the measure. But,  Mr.  Chairman,  this is the observation I wish to make:  

> If

you are in favor of  legislation  you want the best legislation you can get, and if you adopt this  a,mendment  you destroy the possibility of uniformity of treatment of the entire problem. You will have as many  different  rates governing this proposition as there are  State  agencies set up under this provision of the bill. You will have  as  many different bases of calculating rates as there are different  agencies  set  up under the bill. You will have a different  method of determining what degree of control should be  exel"cised  over  the  operator, over the instrumentality that is used in the carrying on of the business. You create a condi-tion,  Mr.  Chairman,  which makes it absolutely impossible that you may have  uniform  rates established by any agency covering the entire country. The h ope of  effectuating  the purpose of the bill, in the event this proposed principle is incorporated as one of its provisions, lies in the expectation that the Interstate 

Commerce  Commission  will make liberal  use  of its power of revie w. 

:Mr.  STAFFORD.  Mr.  Chairman,  I move to strike out the last word.  ·

Mr.  Chairman,  the question before the  Hou...c;:e  is merely whether we should extend the provision recommended by the committee one degree. The committee recognized . that so far as  the · operation of  busses  between two  States  is conce'rned, all 

que.stions  as to necessity for is suance of certificates, consolida-tions of  bus  companies, approval of surety bonds, and rates of fare and the like should be  determined  by a representative  of 

the utility  commission  of each  State  on a joint board, with au-thority to hear and determine such matters. I respectfully submit for your consideration that this author-ity should be extended to where three  States  are involved, as purposed by the pending amendment I submit in support of my position concrete instances which will show the need  for  the extension of this power. For instance, busses running from Buffalo to  Cleveland  have to go through  three  States--New 

York, Pennsylvania, and  Ohio. 

The character of this service should be determined by a repre-

sentative of the utility  commissions  of New York, Pennsylvania, and  Ohio,  acting as a joint board rather than by an examiner of the Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  as the bill now pro-vides, for questions of necessity and convenience, mergers, fares, and the like where more than two  States  are concerned. Another concrete instance is the bus service between New York and Boston, a very frequent  bus  service, going through the 

States  of New York,  Connecticut,  and Massachusetts. This is another concrete  instance  where this character of service and the number of vehicles and the rates to be charged for the serv-ice should be determined by a joint board comprised of a repre-sentative of the utility commissions of New York,  Connecticut, 

and Massachusetts, highly qualified utility commissions, rather  

> than

by an  examiner  of the Interstate  Commerce  Commission, a bureaucrat. 5552  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 I may cite as another Instance, and I assume  this  instance is the one that inspired the gentleman from Michigan to sponsor this amendment, the bus line from Detroit to Chicago. This service goes through three States-Michigan, Indiana, and Illi-

nois.  A representative of the utility commissions of these States should determine the number of vehicles and the character of that service rather than an examiner of the Interstate Com-merce Commission not accountable  to  the people of the respec-tive States for service, rates, or any related service matter.  

> It

has been my privilege in recent years to travel frequently between Detroit and Chicago on the fast  trains  of  the  Michigan 

Central, paralleling the highways that these busses use. Itravel by daytime on the Wolverine, the Twilight, and on the Niagara Falls Special, keeping my eyes open and following the traffic on this great highway between Detroit and Chicago. There are not any great number of passenger busses crowding out other passenger traffic. I am acquainted with the  char· 

acter of busses that ply between Detroit and Chicago.  One  line leaves the Fort Wayne Hotel at midnight. I am  acquainigQ  also with the busses of its competitors, and 

l say to you that this character of service should not be left 

•:o  a representative  of a bureau here, with the localities con-

.terned  having no voice in the matter, but should be left to ajoint board composed of one representative appointed by the utility commissions of the respective States involved. I bottom my argument on State rights and on State opera-tion, and not upon control and domination by an examiner appointed by the Interstate Commerce Commission. 

Mr.  SMITH of  Idaho.  Will the gentleman yield? Mr.  STAFFORD.  I will be pleased to yield if I have the time. Mr. SMITH of Idaho. How would the gentleman handle the company that operates through more than three States, probably a dozen States? 

1\fr.  STAFFORD.  Oh,  it is entirely a question of practical control. I might be able to extend the illustration to some instances where it might be practicable if four or five States we .re involved, but commissioners of three States can get to-gether and determine the proper policy, as that policy is local, of which each represeentative would have personal knowledge of the existing conditions. They would be directly interested and would be acquainted with the actual conditions. The commis-sioners of four States or five States might not be acquainted with local conditions, and therefore it would become more anational than a local question. I can multiply these instances where it would be practicable to vest authority in a 3-State board, for instance, the service from Washington to Philadelphia, involving three States; Chi-cago to  St.  Paul and Minneapolis, where three States are concerned. Why should not the number of these vehicles, as well as the policy generally, be subject to the police power of the States as lt exists to-day guaranteeing the rights and the safety of the public under the constitutional power of our Government? 

As  I understand the decisions of the Supreme Court-and Ihave read them quite closely within the last two  weeks--when 

the Congress attempts to regulate these powers, then the  States 

do not have corrective power of regulation over such interstate 

earriers.  [Applause.] The CHAIRMAN. The time of the gentleman from Wisconsin has expired. Mr. ABERNETHY. Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the amendment. Mr. Chairman and Members of the House, I am very much gratified and pleased to know that the distinguished gentleman from Michigan [Mr. MAPES], a very prominent mem-ber of the Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee, has seen fit to introduce this amendment. I think there is some hope of passing it. I think the Interstate  Commerce  Commission has about as much power at the present time as it ought to have--and too 

much,  according to my notion. Wherever I can vote to cut down some of that power and at the same time preserve it to the States, I am willing to support any measure that  wiU  do it. 

Under  the law under which the Interstate Commerce  Commis-

sion operates,  we  can scarce do anything pertaining to railroads in the several States without getting the consent of the Inter-state Commerce Commission. This powerful commission has gone into my State in the last few months and has required the State commission to  raise  intrastate rates so as to conform with the rates of a sister State. We have no power at all unless we come with our hats in our hands to the Interstate Commerce Commission and ask them to please give us a little crumb now and then, and the people get precious little from this body.  ·

I wish the amendment had gone further and provided for three or more States, and leaving it entirely to the State com-missions of those States jointly acting. I am in favor of  pre-

serving the rights of all States to deal with this matter, and Ihope that you will support the amendment of the gentleman from Michigan as going part of the way. [Applause.] 

1\fr.  EATON  of  Colorado.  Mr. Chairman, an examination of th e bill before me and an attentive presence during the debate have shown that the. committee reached a conclusion that there were two types or classes of interstate common carriers of passengers by automobile  busses  which should hereafter operate under Federal legislation. The class to which I shall address my remarks is that one in which the regular route within adefined district extends to no more than two States. Possibly, the best answer to the query why this was limited to two States was given by the gentleman from Illinois [Mr.  DENISON]  when he said :The committee, in its wisdom, decided we ought not to  extend  the           

> provision for joint boards beyond the interstate operations involving two States only.

Of  course the designation of two is the selection of an arbi-trary number. Possibly, any number is arbitrary. I want to ask you to consider the Rocky Mountain situation, using the city of Denver as a point from  which  the Rocky Mountain motor-bus business radiates. Comparatively speaking, there may not be a great deal of interstate traffic in that district, but when busses run from Denver to Yellowstone Park they go through Colorado, Wyoming, and  Montana.  To  Salt  Lake  City 

they run through Colorado, Wyoming, and  Utah.  To Amarillo, Tex., they run through Colorado,  Utah,  and Texas. To Kansas City they run through Colorado, Kansas, and Missouri. These give you a fair  view of the situation. Three States are traversed in every such interstate trip. I might say that these routes cover most of the  interstate 

motor-bus transportation that would be affected by the Parker bill in  that  region. By adopting the amendment and  changing  the figure  " 2 " to 

"3,"  this House itself will  conside -r  public convenience and serve the public interest best  by  providing that the questions covered by subsection d of section 3 of the bill, shall be heard and determined by a joint board of three selected in a territory which is from  1,800  to  2,500  miles from Washington. Will not the members of the standing committee concede that much and support the amendment of the gentleman from Michi-gan [Mr.  MAPES]? 

Safety requirements-are they to await the delays  incident 

to hearings being made by a delegate from Washington whose experience bas been with bus transportation over the crowded paved roads of eastern cities, but not mountain passes? The gentleman from Maine  [1\Ir.  NELSoN] quoted from the Supreme  Court  of the United  States,  and said:                     

> Freedom of commercial intercourse between the States is of such paramount importance that interference with it by the States can not be permitted.

Note that he did not say that aid by the States would be 

pr:ohibited. 

Why can we not go as far as the Supreme Court? We are delegating power as far as  we  may do so constitu-tionally. The wisdom of the committee has been expressed by creating joint boards from tw o States. Why not recognize that in the more sparsely settled parts of this country, that a 3-State  joint board may best serve the public interest and permit freedom of commercial intercourse? And that in proper cases of  ~·  paramount importance  " the Interstate Commerce Committee should have the power to exercise its discretion and call to its aid a joint board from more than three States. I submit that this amendment meets the situation squarely and ought to be adopted. Mr.  NELSON  of Maine. Mr. Chairman and Members of the House, I realize the  difficulty  of attempting, in a few words, to explain the very serious objections, well founded or otherwi e, which some members of the committee have to this proposed amendment offered by the gentleman from Michigan. 

On  its face it seems the change of a simple detail of adminis-tration, but to some of us it seems to go further and impinge on a very serious constitutional question. I think Members might better understand our position in this matter if I took a moment to review the history of this legisla-tion. The debate on the bill has shown that previous to 1925 Congress having taken no action in the matter, the State regu-latory boards, believing that they had the right to regulate interstate commerce, did so  regulate  it and regulated it satis-factorily. That same year we had the Buck decision, which said that the States could not regulate interstate motor bus transportation .

# •1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5553 

The court held  that  it was an attempt on  the  part of the  State 

to say, not how the highways should be used, but by whom. Quoting from the opinion :Moreover it determined whether the prohibition shall be applied by  

> resort

thro~gh  State officials to a test which is peculiarly within the province of Federal action-the existence of adequate facilities for con-ducting interstate commerce. Now . on account of that decision,  the- first bill was introduced in  Dedember  1925.  That was  S.  1734, introduced by Senator Cummins.  Since  the time of the Buck decision, the question has been, and now is, whether or not we shall restore  to  the 

State  regulatory bodies the powers which  the_  Supreme  Court  of the  United  States aid they should not  exerctse. 

I think every member of the committee believes in the decen-tralization of Government. Surely every member of the com-mittee would do his utmost not to interfere with  State  rights; but we can not preserve to a State  a right that it never had, and a right which the Supreme  Court  said it.  shon1:d  n~t  exercis~. 

I am giving you now the history of  thi~  legt~lation.  Th~s 

legislation, as then embodied in the  Cummrns  bill, started  _m 

to give back to the  State  regulatory bodies, the same bodies that had been regulating interstate commerce previous to 1925, the very powers which the Supreme  Court  said they should not 

exercise.  Those powers were given in  S.  1734. That was five years a a-o . All the time since the struggle  has  been between those  who  believe that the commerce clause of the Constitution intended that interstate matters should be decided by those who, removed from, and unaffected by, the local prejudices and inter-ests of the States might view the projects from a national stand-point, and those who want to give the  decision  of such matters back to the  State  regulatory bodies, who are immediately  inter-

ested in all of the matters concerned.  

> All

of the evidence taken out in these hearings disclosed the expectation on the part of every witness; that the  member  of the  State  regulatory body would represent his  State  and nobody the Nation ; that the  State  member would take heed  o~  the con-ditions of the ways and streets and tunnels and the  mtrastate 

commerce of his own  State  and no one would take heed or give voice to the interstate need of the proposed line. We started with a bill that would give back to the very bodies that the Supreme  Court  said should not exercise it, the very rights the court said they should not exercise, and we have worked down 

through  various  modifications to the  prresent  bill. In its initial form this very bill which we are considering  to-day  not only adopted representatives of these  State  bodies as administrative agents but gave to them the final power of determining whether a certificate should or should not be granted. I do not contend for a moment that we  may  not delegate  powe:r  to administrative agents. I do not contend that we may not delegate such ad-ministrative power to State. officials, but there is a limit to our discretion beyond which we should not go. A judge may  very 

properly delegate to a referee or appraiser certain duties, but it would be highly  imprope'r  to select as  such  referee or  ap-

praiser one directly interested in the subject matter of the case. Here it was the intent of Congress that these matters should be decided by men not influenced by local conditions. If this  regu-

lation is a matter of national importance, if it is a national problem, then it should be administered by a national board. The bill we have before us is a compromise  of the ideas of the various members of the committee.  

> It

appeared in the course of the evidence that much of the trouble was confined to and arose out of the local transporta-tion problems of cities located near the  State  line. The gen-tleman from California suggested some case involving the in-terpretation of some act to regulate commerce which would seem to differentiate this purely local commerce from the purely interstate commerce. I do not believe we really have even the justification of that case . Certainly, however, this situation of local commerce over short distances across  State  lines is  a

peculiar one that never could have been in the contemplation of the founders when the Constitution  was  formulated. I am not in favor of the  State  board proposition, and I believe that the  less  power we give to - the local board and the more power we retain in the Federal authorities the better off we will be. 

Mr.  1\I.APES.  Mr.  Chairman,  will the gentleman yield? Mr.  NELSON  of Maine. Yes. Mr.  MAPES.  The gentleman has said quite frankly that he does not believe in the use of the  State  boards at all, not even in the  2-State  proposition as set forth in the bill. Does he think 

that such use is unconstitutional, or, if so, that  the- amendment that I have proposed is any more unconstitutional than the present provision of the bill? Mr.  NELSON  of Maine. I can only answer that proposition in 

a very general statement . I think the  va~dity  of an  ac~  is de-

termined  more by  ~ta  substance  t~  blr  its.  ~orm.  I think we ought not to attempt by indirection  what  we  can  not do by  direc-

tion. I think the intent of the Constitution in that these matters of interstate regulation should not be left to those who  are 

directly  interested  in them, and to that  extent  I do not approve of this  2-State  board. I believe that it probably does avoid the objection that it is unconstitutional. I think the Supreme 

Court  would go far to sustain any such legislation. But it is a

question - of policy; it is a question of whether this Congress wants to attempt to circumvent even the spirit and intent of the Constitution. Personally I do not. Mr.  MAPES.  Does the gentleman think the amendment that I propose  is any more unconstitutionaL than the present provision of the bill? Mr.  NELSON  of  1\Iaine.  I think perhaps not.  Some  claim that there is justification for the 2-State method, not only through necessity but also from the fact that it deals with purely local transportation, which ought not to be considered as inter-state. I do not think we should give that claim much  considera-

tion. I think the 2-State board is bad enough, but that when you make it a 3-State  board;  you are adding considerably to the difficulties and cost of administration. The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of  "the  gentleman from Maine has expired. 

:Mr.  MOORE  of  Virginia.  Mr. Chairman, I agree with the distinguished gentleman from Maine [Mr.  NELSON]  that we have no legal question here, but simply a question of policy. I am supporting the amendment of the gentleman from Michi-gan [Mr.  l\1APES],  and I would be glad to go a step further and vest in the Interstate Commerce Commission discretion to make  

> a.

reference to - joint boards in any other cases even though more than three States might be involved.  Concerning · the amendment now under consideration, the reason why I support 

it is this, mainly: The situation being dealt with differs alto-gether from the railroad situation. The railroads buy their rights of way and build their tracks and incur the necessary 

expenditure  for that purpose.  Their  status is different from the highway status, inasmuch as the States have at . their own 

expense,  with the exception of such aid as they have gotten from the Federal Government,  which  is comparatively small, constructed the highways; therefore they shou ld be given alarger mea sure of cooperative authority by this bill than any-body  thinks  of ' giving them relative to interstate commerce by rail. The  particular  question under debate is not a new question.  

> It

was not a new question when it was taken  up  by the very able committee, for which I have so much respect. Prior to that time the Interstate  Commerce  Commission itself had  engaged  in a protracted investigation.  ·If  you will  look  at the report fol-lowing that investigation made in 1928 you will find that there were represented before the commission all of the  State  com-missions all of the railroads, and all others who cared to appear and  pres'ent  their views. In that elaborate report made in 1928 the commission submitted its conclusions, and on the point that is now being discussed its conclusion is unmistakable. Here is the substance of what the commission said, without reading it all: Joint boards composed of two or more States, or representatives  of -            

> such State boards and of the Interstate Commerce Commission when acting instead of

a State board, should be authorized t() act where the commerce is carried on in two or more States. Now, who is in a better position to know what is the wise course to take relative to this matter than the Interstate  Com-

merce Commission, which has dealt with cognate matters for so many years, and which  has  so plainly advised that in its opinion 

it would not be going beyond the limits of a wise policy to pro-vide for the creation of joint boards in all cases? And why should we not do what the amendment proposes as a first step? 

If we take that course, where three States are involved, and give  di.sc'retion  to the . commission to act where there are more than three  States--if  we  take that course at the outset, and then it is found that all the trouble occurs that was predicted the other day by my friend from Kansas [Mr.  HooH]~  it will be a very easy matter for  Congress  to amend the act. The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from  Virginia 

has expired. Mr.  MOORE  of  Virginia.  May I have  three  minutes  mor~? 

The  CHAIRMAN.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from  Vi!!ginia? 

Mr.  MOORE  of Virginia.  My  friend from Kansas gave avery alarming picture of what may take place, and yet  wh!lt 

do we discover, as found by the Interstate Commerce  Comnns-

sion in its investigation? Mr.  RAMSEYER.  M'r . ..Chairman,  will the gentleman  yield? 

Mr.  MOORE  of  Virginia.  In a minute. 5554  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 I want first to refer to the report of . the commission. Analyzing conditions in eight  States,  it did not find that the motor vehicle interstate operations were ordinarily over such long routes as to inspi _re the alann felt by the gentleman from Kansas.  Over  50  per cent of the routes were only  20  miles in length, nearly three-fourths less than  30  miles, and only 11.9 per cent of the routes were more than  50  miles in length. Now, if the routes were so short in 1928, or rather in 1926, when the analysis was made, what reason on earth have we to fear that the routes have become so long in the limited interval between that date and now that if joint boards are provided for these may be so many operations through two or three 

States  that innumerable joint boards would have to be created as apprehended by my friend from Kansas and my friend from Georgia [Mr.  Cox]  ?The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from Virginia has again expired.  

> M1·.

MERRITT rose. The  CHAIRMAN.  The gentleman from Connecticut is recog-

mzed.  .Mr. MERRITT.  Mr.  Chairman, I do not think I need take time to argue on the general question of providing  State  boards in all cases. Mr.  RAMSEYER.  Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman yield there?  

> :Mr.

MERRITT. Yes. 

Mr.  RAMSEYER.  The gentleman gets up he .re and talks about  "State  boards."  There is nothing pending here about 

State  boards. They are joint boards. Mr. MERRITT. I accept the correction of the gentleman. We need not discuss the general question of providing joint boards in all cases, because the difficulty of that was  conclu-

sively shown on Friday last by the gentleman from Kansas. The fact that many of these routes are now in existence and will be taken care of by the grandfathe .r clause is not important, for the reason that these same joint boards would be necessary to take care of violations, so that we should have an infinity of joint boards. Another thing that I think should be taken into consideration there is this: What we need in this great country, as the  net-

work spreads, is uniformity of law, so that men starting new routes can know what their .rights are, and their counsel  can 

advise them what their rights are. Now, if we have this infinity of joint boards, we will get innumerable varying decisions on the same states of fact, whereas if we empower the Interstate  Commerce  Commission to perform this function we shall not have that confusion, so that lawyers  can  properly and conscientiously advise their clients. Now, coming to this particular motion or amendment that is before the House, gentleman argue that there is no special  dif-

ference between a case of two  States  and a case of three  States. 

There does not seem to be much numerical difference, but Ithink the difference  which  has been stated should be clearly kept in mind by the members of this committee, and that is in all the cases of 2-State boards the important cases come in what may be termed metropolitan areas, as, for instance, New York and Jersey  City,  Philadelphia and  Camden,  and  St. 

Louis and East  St.  Louis. They are practically one community, like regulating a street railway, not in the ordinary sense of interstate commerce, because the interests are not different, as was spoken of by the gentleman from Maine [Mr.  NELSON], 

whereas if you get into three  States  you necessarily spread over a large area and get into an interstate relation. And in those cases the reasons set forth for action by the Interstate 

Commerce  Commission come strongly in force; so that while it seems not important to speak of the difference between 2 and 3, yet, in fact, looking at the geographical situation, you find an important difference--which shows the importance of supporting the bill, and voting against this amendment. 

l\Ir.  PARKER  and Mr. RANKIN rose. Mr.  PARKER.  Mr.  Chairman,  I move that all debate on this amendment close in  20  minutes. The motion was agreed to. Mr. RANKIN. Mr. Chainnan, I ask unanimous consent to proceed for  10  minutes. The  CHAIRMAN.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Mississippi? There was no objection. Mr. RANKIN. Mr.  Chairman,  every Member who has spoken in opposition to this amendment seems to be opposed to any  State  board  or any joint board at all. The gentleman from Georgia [Mr.  Cox]  spoke about  requir-

ing  2,100  different boards to do all this work. As a matter of fact, these joint boards are composed of members of your 

State  utility boards or  co~sions  and, they are already or-ganized in all States except possibly one or two. But, if the work is going to be so heavy on all these  2,100  boards, surely it would be much heavier on the Interstate  Commerce  Commis-

sion if all of it were placed upon them. The gentleman from Maine [Mr.  NELSON]  seems to be under the impression that we should not have any  State  representa-

tives on these boards because of  " local  prejudice."  The  gen-

tleman seems to travel on the theory that the further we get away from the people we represent the better Government they will have. Mr.  NELSON  of Maine. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. RANKIN. I yield for a question. Mr.  NELSON  of Maine. Do you dissent from the provisions and the idea of the Constitution in regard to the regulation of interstate commerce? Mr . RANKIN. I am now discussing the distinguished  gen-

tleman from Maine [Mr.  NELSON]  and his argument. Mr.  NELSON  of Maine. And I stand with my feet on the Constitution of the  United  States. 

Mr. RANKIN. I will ask the gentleman to kindly sit down on the Constitution, and let me show him the fallacy of his argument. [Laughter.] 

'.rhe  gentleman from Maine [Mr. NELSoN] seems to think that if any of this power is left to the joint board, composed of members of your State boards, they will be actuated by prejudice. Does he think our  State  boards are actuated by prejudice? Did we act with prejudice when we issued bonds to build the roads that they now propose to turn over to the lar ge bus companies and railroad companies owning bus  Unes 

and deprive our people of the ordinary use of those highways?  

> If

the further you get from the people the less prejudice you find, as indicated by the gentleman from Maine, possibly we had better refer this question to the World  Court,  where we will have very little say so; and then if you want to get it further from the prejudice of the people you represent, you might pass it on to the League of Nations, where we will  have 

no say so at all. [Laughter.]  

> 1\lr.

Chairman,  the closer you get these boards to the people you represent, the better service the people are going to get. I am in favor of the amendment offered by the gentleman from Michigan  [Mr . MAPES],  but I want to call attention to the fact that these boards, until other amendments to the same section are adopted, are largely perfunctory. Why? Because you make them all subservient to the Interstate  Commerce 

Commission. It will be seen from reading that section that all the decisions of  the  joint boards are subject to review by the Interstate  Commerce  Commission. That ought not to be.  If 

the representative from your  State  and the representative from my  State,  members of one of these boards, get together and agree on these rates and regulations between the  States  in-

volved, their decisions should be final. I shall offer an  amend-

ment to that  effect  at the proper time, if some other Member does not do it. I may say further that we have a checkrein  on the members of the various  State  boards. We have the power to get rid of them every two years or every four years, or if they go wrong we can call the legislature together and impeach them. But, when you transfer all of this power, as this bill does, to  Wash-

ington, in order to remove it from the  "prejudice"  of the people you represent, I want to sound a warning to you to-day, and especially those of you whose districts touch a State  line, that you will live to regret it.  

> If

you turn over to the Interstate  Commerce  Commission in Washington all of this vast power which this bill gives, more power than has ever been given in any one bill since the United  States  emerged from the World  War~  and deprive your  State  boards of any power at all except as clerks, which they will be under the provisions of this bill, you will regret it, and the chances are you will regret it just as soon as the people in your  State  find out what you have done. There is no agitation for this bill, except on the part of the corporations that are interested-the people who own these 

lru·ge  bus lines and the railroads. The bus companies want to sell their lines and the railroads want to buy them, and they want the people to furnish the roads, and want us to shut out competition. 

One  member of the committee took me to task the other day, stating that the railroads were not represented at the hearings. I looked up the hearings, and every once in a while one of these gentlemen, ostensibly representing the bus lines, would get into deep water and he would turn around and ask Mr. Thorn about it. Mr. Thorn would proceed to give the committee information. Everybody knows that Mr. Thorn is one of the leading railroad a.ttorneys or lobbyists of the country. The people are not  clamoling  for this bill. The people along the  State  lines, who will be drastically affected if this measure 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5555 

goes into effect, have not asked for it. They have not  even 

heard of it. They are satisfied. They have  at  least some faith in their local commissions or they would remove them. 

So  in supporting the amendment offered by the gentleman from Michigan I am  trying to retain to the people  as  much power as possible over the regulation of their  local  affairs  and their local transportation. Mr.  DENISON.  Will the gentleman yield? Mr. RANKIN. I yield. Mr.  DENISON.  The gentleman understands, does he not, that interstate busses are not now under regulation? Mr. RANKIN. Yes; except by  State  authorities. That  !s 

thoroughly understood. Mr.  DENISON.  Does the gentleman want it  to  continue that way? Mr. RANKIN. I prefer the present situation to this bill. And the gentleman further understands that the interstate busses and the interstate railroads and their in1luences are  re-

sponsible for the large crowd which came here to testify before the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Mr.  STAFFORD.  Will the gentleman yield? Mr. RANKIN. I yield. Mr.  STAFFORD.  The gentleman realizes  that  the interstate busses are under the control of the  State  commissions as far as police regulations are  concerned.. 

Mr. RANKIN. Certainly, and we are getting along  remark-

ably well with them. Why all  this · haste to take this vast power from the people of the  States,  concentrate it in  Washington,  and 

place it in the hands of a commission that the people of the 

States  have no voice in selecting, and, as I said, depriving them of control over their  local  transportation and over their local 

affairs? 

I hope the amendment offered by the gentleman  from  Michi-

gan will be adopted, and then that we may adopt a further 

amendment  making the decisions of  these  joint boards final. {Applause.]  •

The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from  Missis-

sippi has expired. Mr. LEA. of California. Mr.  Chairman,  these joint boards 

are  composed of representatives of the  State  boards,  but  the selection of the representatives of the  States  is required by law, so while constitutionally this is a Federal board, in fact and substance it is a State  board. It is a case  where it is the hand of  Esau  but the voice of Jacob. During the hearings Mr. McDonald appeared before the committee to represent the organized  State  utility commissions of the United  States.  Asked  by the gentleman from  Alabama   

> [Mr. HUDDLESTON]

if  State  commissions would support  this  bill if they were not in the picture, Mr. McDonald replied they would support it just the same. Mr. McDonald then made this 

further  statement : ·

The Interstate Commerce Commission eventually is going to  regulate 

interstate commerce by motor vehicle, I think both persons and com-merce, so far as they are handled by motor vehicles, before many years.  

> If

you will consider the practical working out of what is proposed  here,  I think no man will say  that  after a few years' experience we will have  a duplicated and complicated system of boards such as is proposed in this amendment. 

Under  the plan proposed, we will have  a duplicated system. Interstate lines on the same road will originate from different sources. We  may  have  a hearing  to-morrow in  Salt  Lake  City 

for three  States,  and  at  the same time in the same city, we will be conducting another hearing separately by the Interstate  Com-

merce Commission. The duplicated plan would be in use all over the United  States.  Instead of setting up  a harmonious, uniform, and businesslike plan holding hearings for the Inter-state  Commerce  Commission, it is proposed to adopt a compli-cated, duplicated, and impracticable system. In  a few years it will have to be abandoned. If the provisions of the bill remain, 

an  examiner representing the commission will go  ove1·  the coun-try on a circuit and  hear  many  cases in regular order while he is on that trip. If the plan proposed by the amendment  of-

fered by the gentleman from Michigan is adopted, we will have separate boards, each one called for a specific purpose. They will have no.  regular  place of meeting; they will have no regular place for keeping records, and there will be no regular place to present your cases. In addition to that, we will always have the board members  subjected  to the inconvenience of leaving their 

State  duties and assembling to perform a Federal  fw.nction.  The meetings will be postponed and delayed to suit the members remotely located from the place of meeting. They  will  frequently neglect their  State  duties to attend. 

Mr.  PARKER.  Mr.  Chairman, there has been enough dis-cussion of this amendment to convince the committee that there was a decided division of opinion in our committee. There was a school of thought in the  committee  which believed that the regulation should be entirely in the hands of the Interstate 

Commerc-e  Commission.  There were those who believed it should be left to the  State  commissions. . .

State  commissions, let me say, had regulated this commerce up until the decision in the Buck case in 1925. They had  regu-

lated it satisfactorily, but the  Supreme  Court  of the  United 

States  said  they  ha,d  no right to do it. Now, there would be no particular discussion of this  particu-

lar amendment if it were not for the activities of the  State 

commissions, and I do not mean that in  an  offensive way. It is perfectly natural that men wish to retain all the power  they 

have and it is perfectly natural that the  State  commissions wish  

> to

retain  all the power they have. They came to us in the first instance and they wished us to write  a law which would give them the power to do what the  Supreme  Court said they could not do. We have not ability enough in the Committee on  Inter-

state and Foreign  Commerce  to do that  thing,  namely, to write 

a law which the  Supreme  Court  has said is unconstitutional which we know will go back to them, and they will then  over: 

rule themselves. Now, this is a compromise,  and  to relieve anyone of any doubt that we do not intend to leave to the  States  the entire control of intrastate situations allow me to read an amendment I am  going to offer that was stricken from the bill, not because there was any objection to it but because it was thought to be unnecessary. However, the public utilities commissions of the  States  believe it is important,  ~nd  it reads as follows: 

SEC.  14. (a) Nothing in this  act  contained shall be construed to afl'ect the powers of taxation of the several  States  or to authorize a motor carrier to do an intrastate business on the highways  of  any 

State.  It is not intended hereby to interfere with the exclusive exer-cise by each  State  of the power  of  regulation  of  intrastate commerce by motor carriers on the highways thereof ; and notwithstanding this act, motor carriers operating in intrastate commerce on the highways of a  State  shall continue to be subject to the laws of the  State  regu-lating such intrastate commerce, and motor carriers operating in inter-state commerce shall be subject to the proper exercise by the  State  of 

its pollee powers. (b) The commission while acting under authority of this act sball not have any jurisdiction or authority over intrastate commerce by motor carriers, and the commission is expressly prohibited from inter-fering  in  any way with or attempting to regulate such intrastate  com· 

merce by motor carriers. Mr.  GARRETT.  Could this bill possibly give them that power? 

Mr.  PARKER.  I started out by saying it was stricken from the bill because we thought it  wa,s  unnecessary, but the public-utility commissions wish it restored to the bill, and, as I said, I am going to offer that as an amendment. What is the reason for the  2-State  proposition? I went all over it in my original statement. You have any number of sizeable cities  a,nd  towns in this country that a.re right on 

State  lines. You do not have to go to New York; you do not have to go to Philadelphia to find  them.  You can go down to Augusta, Ga., which is right acrss the  South  Carolina line, or you can go up to Portland, Oreg.--Mr.  RAMSEYER.  Will the gentleman yield? Mr.  PARKER.  Certainly. 

Mr.  RAMSEYER.  That illustration has been presented here time and again-New York and Jersey  City,  Kansas  City,  Mo., and Kansas  City,  Kans.-but under the bill you do not limit 

the joint boards to  taking  care of those peculiar situations. Mr.  P A.RKER.  That is true, and I think that is the weakness of the proposition. Mr.  RAMSEYER.  And you give these joint boards power, under the direction of the Interstate Commerce Commission, to investigate and report to the commission and the commission itself  really  makes the decision in the last analysis. 

Mr.  PARKER.  Yes. Mr.  RAMSEYER.  That same illustration has been used here time and  again,  and I do not think it properly applies. Mr.  PARKER.  Let me follow out the line of the gentleman's argument by stating I do not believe we can, under the Consti-tution, delegate this power to any board, to delegate this power to some one else, and have them make the final decision. 

Mr.  RAMSEYER  rose.  

> Mr.

PARKER.  I must  !':€fuse  to yield further, because I have not the time. 

1\fr.  RAMSEYER.  That is an unusual statement. Mr.  PARKER.  I mean the Interstate  Commerce  Commission has not the power to delegate to anybody the making of a final 

decision. 5556  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  l\fARCII  18 

The  CHAIRMAN.  The time of the gentleman from New York has expired. The question is on the  l!,mendment  offered by the gentleman from Michigan [Mr.  MAPES]. 

Mr.  BURTNESS.  Mr.  Chairman,  may we have the  amend-

ment again reported? The Mapes amendment was again reported. The question was taken; and the  Chair  being in doubt, the committee divided, and there  w.ere--ayes  134, noes 45. 

So  the amendment was agreed to. 

Mr.  PARKER. Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee do now rise. The motion was agreed to. Accordingly the committee rose; and the Speaker having  re-

sumed the chair, Mr.  LEHLBACH,  Chairman  of the Committee of the Whole House on the state of the  Union,  reported that that committee, having bad under consideration the bill (H. R. 

10288)  to regulate the transportation of persons in interstate and foreign commerce by motor carriers operating on the public 

Mghways,  bad come to no resolution thereon.    

> MESSAGE FBOM THE SENATE

A message from the Senate by  Mr.  Craven,  its principal clerk, announced that the Senate agrees to the amendments of the House to the bill  S.  3579, entitled  "An  act authorizing per capita payments to the Shoshone and Arapahoe  Indians."     

> MAJ. GEN. WILLIAM GEORGE HA.AN

Mr.  SCHAFER  of Wisconsin. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to extend my remarks in the  RECOBD  by including the proceedings held at Arlington Cemetery at  10.30  a. m., Novem-9, 1929, on the occasion of the unveiling of the Maj. Gen. Wil-liam George Haan Monument, erected by the officers and men of the Thirty-second Division Veteran Association. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Wisconsin? Ther e was no objection. The proceedings were as follows : Music-A Night in June-Serenade by K.  A.  King,  Third  Cavalry Band, Fort  Myer,  Va. Inv ocation-Monsignor Patrick Dunnigan: 

" Our  Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name, Thy king-dom come, Thy will be done on earth as in heaven; give us this  day 

our daily bread (by which we pray for all the necessities of soul and body), and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.  Amen." 

Addr es s: Maj. Gen. Briant H. Wells, deputy chief of  staff: 

"The  Secretary of War, Mr. Good, regretted very much that his absence from Washington prevented him from accepting the invitation of the Thirty-second Division Association to be here to-day.   

> "It

is a great privilege to be here repres enting him and the War Department in doing honor to Maj. Gen. William G. Haan. I may say that additional pleasure and satisfaction comes to me from the fact that I am here on my own account to pay  u tribute of respect and love to a friend and comrade, ' Bunker ' Haan, as he was familiarly and affectionately known amongst us. 

"Our  acquaintance extended over a period of more than  30  years, of which I can count at least  10  when I served near him or under his immediate supervision and direction. 

" I had the happiness of his friendship, the confidences of his aspira-tions, the opportunity to observe the development of his career, and the advantages of his personality and example to guide my own endeavors. 

"Hi s experience before the war ran into every phase of military activity. There was no problem that could come before him that he had not already met and solved. Thus equipped he was quickly able to apply his knowledge and experience to the problems of war. He greatly appreciated the services of his  staff  officers and used the in-formation and facts it was their duty to give him. He listened care-fully and sympathetically to counsel and re commendations, and was quick to accept or reject them ; but he always had a solution of his own to serve his needs, that he was ready to follow if a better was not forthcoming at the hour when a solution was needed. 

"To  those of us who had known General Haan before the World 

War  it was no surprise that he exhibited a consummate leadership and at the same time held the  affection,  yes the love, of those he led. Through a long and brilliant career he had continuously displayed high tal e nt for command, fortifi ed by solid common sense, and cloaked in a broad humanity. He was a soldier's general, trusted  and  beloved by rank and file. He was decorated by his own Government; foreign 

nations  delighted to honor him ; but I know that he esteemed as his greatest r e ward the privilege of leading home his own division, battle tried and und efeated. 

" The high point in his life of military service was undoubtedly that period when he led from victory to victory the splendid division, which under his command had forged itself into an irresistible striking force. In the  Thirty-second  Division he encountered the soldier's ideal-an organization composed of strong men, strong in body, strong in mind, above all strong in will. It was made up of men who deliberately and lrnowlngly dedicated themselves to the dangers and hardships of battle in the certainty that something greater than their own lives and fortunes was at stake. 

"He  was a national character. It is most fitting that there should arise a memorial to  him  in this our American pantheon. It is all the more suitable that this material tribute should be at the Nation's Capital, visible to those who come from all over our country . He needs no local monument. In each of the many localities where he served, his memory is interwoven with the traditions of the community. In no place is this more true than in Michigan and Wisconsin, those great States where his soldiers  lived." 

Address: Ron. Wilbur M. Brucker, attorney general, State of Michi-gan: 

"Mr.  Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, I am directed by the Ron. Fred W. Green, Governor of Michigan, to convey to this assemblage his very keen regret that he can not be here to-day to express his own personal tribute of respect to the memory of Gen. William G. 

Ila:m  from the people of Michigan. 

" It  is  indeed a high patriotic privilege . to be here. Arlington and sacrifice are synonymous. No man can stand on this hallowed ground  

> w~thout

feeling the absolute futility of expressing the realization that here lie thousands of our hero dead who gave the best years of their life for America. 

"In  the hectic days of 1917, when America was frantically going to war, trying in its own characteristic way to embrace the blessings of preparedness in a fortnight, some divinely inspired hand must have written the order that brigaded together the National  Guar<l  troops of two great sister States-Wisconsin and Michigan-to form the Thirty-second Division.  Over  12 years later when the din and noise of battle have long since been hushed, it is again peculiarly significant, and almost like a page from the Illiad and  Odessy,  that the friendly rivalry 

of  these same two sister States should again be united in common peaceful purpose to do honor to the great leader of our division. Memory leads us on and back again. 

" Every man is the product of his time. No man more truly typifies the highest traditions of the American officer from George Washington down to the present day than General Haan. Schooled in the military science at West  Point,  groomed in the postgraduate course of hard knocks in junior command of troops, experienced in tactics  from  close contact with the various arms of th e service, General Haan came up through the ranks. If Providence had intended it every day from June, 1885, when be entered the Military Academy, until September, 1917, when he assumed command of the Red Arrow Division, he could not have been better prepared for that tremendous undertaking. It 

was  as though his life bad been planned that way  from  the  beginnin,g. 

" Leadership is no coincidence. Men do not succeed on any perma-nent basis as leaders of men without the lasting virtues of l eadership. Fortune may help, influence may ha ste n, but the leadership that calls men together a decade after it has been finished in solemn recognition of greatness is based upon genius combin ed with years of toil and preparation. 

" So it was with the leadership of General Haan. From the day he assum ed command at Waco, Tex., he was instinctively 'the chief.' No one was left in doubt after the first day but that he 'had the situation well in hand.' Discipline was his handmaiden. He breathed it and he lived it. It was his creed and his apotheosis. Naturally, it descended upon the division as the foremost requirement of success. Then followed the banishment of that defeatist theory, which wns abroad in the land , that we would never really 'get into it,' but that the war would be won before we 'got in.' Like a blight this iniquitous, unfounded belief crushed the morale. General Haan cleared the  atmos-

phere like a morning sun when he dispelled all doubts and paved the way for the divisional fighting spirit. 

"But  another essential element was needed-loyal followership. This, too, was no coincidence. The flower of these two States matched t he leadership of General Haan. The officers and .men of these two States  

> had

been toiling and ceaselessly prepa .ring the National Guard for an emergency. This was  scoffed  at by large numbers of our people who opposed any  e:xpenditur~  or move in the direction of preparedness, call-ing it ' militarism.' But thanklessly they toiled on to prepare  a small body of men for our national defense; men who had served on the Mexican border in 1916 and had seen enough of the service to realize the seriousness of the grim job of war. 

" From this union of peerless leadership  and  loyal followership there was builded a divisional esprit de corps that was not surpassed in the whole  American  Expeditionary Forces. No wonder the brilliant record of General Haan resulted. To honor him is  likewise  to honor every officer and man of the Red Arrow Division. 

" But General Haan had also a high sense of loyalty to his command that had no superior  anywhere.  When upon its arrival overseas the Thirty-second Division seemed destined to the ignominy of being areplacement division, here it was that General Haan displayed his absolute loyalty to  his  command. With dogged persistence in the belief ~ "1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5557 

that the splendid fighting spirit of the Red Arrow should not be sacri-ficed so needlessly, undaunted by discouragement, unfaltering because of the dismal prospect, he fought  :for  his command, determined to  pre-

serve the integrity  of  this great fighting machine for the Stars and Stripes. Who knows  what  might have been the delay in the final glorious result bad it not been for the preservation of the Red Arrow with its combat morale beating with triphammer  blows  in the drive  of 

the late summer and early fall of 1918? 

"It  may be truly said that the spirit of General Haan was the spirit 

of  the division. Defeat never once entered his head. Neither did it 

occur to the officers and men of the division. In the three major  ofi'en-

sives, first from the Ourcq to the  Vesle;  second, in the  Oise-Aisne  ;third, in the Meuse-Argonne, this spirit was the chief element of hard-won victory. How Genera l Haan must have gloried in the dash and courage of those men he had trained ! How his heart must  have  been heavy for the  14,000  who  suffered  the casualties of war. Did his pre-cept and example succeed? The answer has been written deep in the heart of America.  

> "If

ever a service was timely, it is this one. The dedication of  this 

monument comes at the armistice  season  as the tribute of thousands of surviving veterans of the Red Arrow Division. It is being unveiled at an hour when we uncover our hearts in gratitude for the victory that this day represents. 

" Michigan is proud to join in honoring this fallen leader and to say to him in sincerest eulogy, in the words of the immortal Scott: 

"'  Soldier, rest; thy warfare o'er, Sleep the sleep that knows not breaking; Dream of battle fields no more, Days of danger, nights of waking.'  •• 

Music:  A dream-J. C. Bartlett, by  Third  Cavalry  Band. Address: Hon. Walter J. Kohler, Governor  State  of Wisconsin :

"The  dedication of  a permanent memorial to Maj.  Gen.  William George Haan at Arlington National Cemetery is not only a tribute  of 

respect to a great citizen and soldier but is also  a tribute of  a:ffectlon. 

"General  Haan's record reveals him as a man of conspicuous ability, who developed strength through the practice of thoroughness and in-tense application, which characterized his entire career. Advancing through his own  efi'orts  from modest beginnings to unusual eminence, he knew and sympathized with the problems of his fellow men.   

> "It

was my privilege to have made the acquaintance of General Haan nearly  20  years ago, a. nd so I speak from personal knowledge when i

refer to his sympathetic understanding and human qualities. 

" He was born on an Indi ana farm October 4, 1863, the son of  parents 

who had emigrated from Germany. 

" Following the early training of a district school and of a near-by high school, he received an appointment to the  United  States  Military 

Academy at West Point, where he was graduated in 1889 with high honors. 

" In  1905  he married Margaret H. Haan, of  San  Mateo, Calif., awoman of charm and culture whose constant support and faithful,  true-

hearted help added greatly to his constructive pl'Ogram. 

· "He  spent his entire adult life in the military service of his country until his retirement in 1922. Commencing as a second  lieutJ!nant  of Artillery, he progressed steadily, and a consecutive reading of his mili-tary record shows an unbroken series of commendations and promotions. 

"In  the  war  with Spain be went to the  Philippfue  Islands, a member of General Merritt's expeditionary force, won a brevet for daring con-duct, was honorably mentioned in general orders  ' for distinguis .hed conduct in the attack on Manila, August 13, 1898,'  was  recommended 'for bravery,  efficiency,  and energy' in an attack on the Filipinos near Manila, February 15, 1899, and was promoted to  a captaincy  and made acting quartermaster,  Oc tober  17, 1898. 

" Following the close of the war in the Philippines, he was  assigned  to the General  Stafi'  and studied in the Army War College, from which he was graduated. 

" He acted as Chief of  Stafi'  for Gens. Frederick T. Funston and 

A.  W. Greeley at the time of the  San  Francisco disaster and was highly commended by them. In  1906  and 1907, when an  army  was sent to Cuba, he was adjutant  general.  General Wotherspoon  said  of him that he had 'shown the greatest skill and administrative ability in the conduct of that  office,  adding much, in my opinion, to his already well-earned reputation.' 

"He  commanded at various other times some  of  the most important coast defenses  of  the country, including Fort Wadsworth, on Staten Island, N. Y., and the defenses of Boston, Mass., and Fort Totten, on Long Island. 

" In 1912 he was selected for a second time to serve with the  Gen-

eral  Stafi'  as  Assistant  Chief of  Stafi'  and afterwards as chief of staff for the Eastern Department at Governors Island,  where  he won high praise from  his  superiors, Gens. Thomas  Barry · and Leonard Wood. Gen e ral Barry and others recommended him for chief of the Coast Artillery and for brigade command. 

" These are characteristic pages of his record prior to our entrance into the World War. 

" In the late summer  uf  1917 troops from Wisconsin and Michigan began to pour into Waco, Tex., and plans were made for the formation of the Thirty-second Division. Colonel Haan, promoted to brigadier general, was then made commander of the  Fifty-se>enth  Artillery  Brig· 

ade.  Upon  the assignment a few weeks later of General Parker to duties abroad General Haan was placed in command of the Thirty-second Division, with which his name and fame will ever be associated.  •

" He trained his troops with characteristic vigor and thoroughness, with the re sul t that the Thirty-second led many other divisions  through· 

out the  United  States in preparation for overseas duty. The sailing schedule was advanced and the Red Arrows, later called  Les  Terribles, were sent to France ahead of a number of other divisions. In December, 1917, Brigadier General Haan was appointed a major general of the National Army and the division was ordered to the seat of war in France. 

" General  Haan's confident prediction  of  the  effectiveness  of the divi-sion and his deep interest in his soldiers were indicated in his earnest protest against using them as replacement troops. Many of the men in the Thirty-second had already been transferred to other divisions, but the process was halted and by means of replacements the strength of the Thirty-second was restored 

"After  weeks of  str-enuous  training under General Haan's immediate supervision, the Thirty-second went into its first bard battle on July 28, 1918, with the French  Sixth  Army and was continuously in combat  or 

just behind the firing line in reserve from that date until the armistice. Its  first  fighting was on the Marne, northward from Chateau Thierry, and resulted in heavy casualties, amounting to about  4,000. 

"Following  the  second  battle of the Marne General Haan's division was transferred to the Tenth French Army, commanded by General Mangin, and against the most desperate  resistance  captured the  village 

of Juvigny and surrounding strong enemy territory. This action resulted again in  heavy  casualties, the losses amounting to abOut  3,500  men, but the result of the  vi~tory  was not only the capture of the key position but the taking of  a thousand  prisoners as well as large quantities of material. 

"The  fighting around Juvigny demonstrated the quality of the  sol· 

diers composing the Thirty-second Division, the splendid training Gen-eral Haan had  givel1  them, their implicit confidence in his  leadership, 

and his clear grasp of the military problem.  · General Mangin was enthusiastic in his commendation  of  General Ha.an and  of  his men.  

> "It

was, however, as a unit of the  first  American Army  and  under the orders  of  the American high command that the Thirty-second was to perform its most arduous and brilliant service. In the Meuse-Argonne 

offensive  the division was in the front line continuously for  20  days, driving the enemy back  81h  kilometers, capturing over  1,100  prisoners, and  taking  great quantities of  material,  at a cost, however, of over 

6,000  casualties. 

" This brilliant successful attack against the  COte  Dame Marie drove the enemy from a key position and won  for  General Haan and the Thirty-second Division the highest praise and most distinguished honors. The general received an additional silver star through a citation in the War D epartment general orders and was awarded the distinguiShed-service medal, the French croix de guerre, and commander of the Legion of Honor. Following the war he was decorated with the Italian Order of the Crown. 

" The French citation, which was typical, reads as follows : ' He com-manded the Thirty-second Division in a remarkable manner during the operations which ended in the retaking of the Chemin des Dames and Laon. Thanks to his tactical sense, to his strategical skill, to his indomitable tenacity, and to the magnificent spirit of his troops, who had absolute confidence in their commander, he advanced several kilo-meters and captured the important positions at Juvigny, which the enemy was defending with desperate ob s tinacy.' 

·•  Premier Clemenceau, of France, in a letter to General Haan, said :'From May to November, 1918, the Thirty-second Division passed  120 

days on the firing line, 35 of which were passed in very severe battles. The enemy fire cost it 14,268 men.  • • • You engaged successfully 

20  German  divisions ; nev~r  did you yield them an inch of ground.'   

> "It

was an additional and high tribute to the men and their leader that the Thirty-second was selected by General Pershing as one of the three divisions to compose the American Army of Occupation and was assigned to hold the Coblenz bridgehead. About the same time Ge neral Haan was promoted  ' to  the command of the Seventh Corps, which it was his  difficult  task to organize. He received at this time the rank of brigadier gen e ral in the R egular  Army.  When in the spring of 1919 the Thirty-second was ordered home General Haan requested and receiv ed permission to return with his old division. 

"Following  the war the President assigned him the position  or 

Director of War  Plans  Division of the General  Sta:ff,  making him responsible for the r eorganization of the Army. His conception of the national land forces, consisting of the Regular  Army,  the National Guard, and the Organized Reserves, was adopted.   

> "In

July,  1920,  he became a majo1·  general in the Regular Army, and on March 31, 1922, at his own  request,  he went on the retired 5558  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MARCH  18 list. He became a resident  of  Milwaukee, where he engaged in jour-nalistic work. 

"On  Sunday,  October  26, 1924, General Haan passed away at the Mount Alto Veterans'  Hospital  in Washington.   

> "It

is fitting that in this resting place of the Nation's heroes we dedicate a permanent memorial to this great but modest man, a man 

• who schooled himself long and faithfully, proved equal to the heaviest responsibility in peace and in war, and exercised his gift of leadership with brilliant success and with commendable regard for all associated with him. He left a record of remarkable achievement and of unblem-ished character.   

> "It

is appropriate that in these ceremonies the  States  of Michigan and  Wisconsin,  and particularly the veterans of the Thirty-second Divi-sion who served with General Haan in the  World  War,  should play a

representative  part.  

> "It

is  a privilege to express the sentiments of pride, respect, and affection of the people of  the  two great Commonwealths and the soldiers of the Thirty-second for this great leader, in whose memory this memorial is now to be  unveiled." 

Music : The Thirty-second Division March, Theodore Steinmetz, Third Cavalry Band. 

Placing  of Floral Tributes, Lieut. Col. Robert M. Beck, jr. :

"General  Haan, the living members of the  Thirty-se_cond  Division Veterans' Association will always remember your fine soldierly qualities, 

yom·  'superior leadership as exemplified by justice, firmness, and human interest in our welfare. To you with this token we open our  hearts." 

Brig. Gen. Edward G. Heckel: 

"This  is a token to the memory of Gen. William G. Haan from the men of the  One  hundred and twenty-fifth Infantry Veterans' Association, who learned to love and respect as well as honor and obey  him." 

Airs.  Mary L. Pendergast :

"I  present this floral arrow in memory of Maj. Gen.  William  George 

Haan,  who was greatly beloved by the Women's Memorial Association of the Thirty-second Division." Ron.  JOHN  C.  ScHAFER,  :Representative, fourth district,  Wisconsin  :

"Maj.  Gen. William G. Haan was a patriot of the most self-sacrific-ing type, and one of the outstanding American heroes of the late 

World  War.  From the time that he entered the  l1nited  States  Military Academy, on June 14, 1885, until he passed into the Great Beyond, he gave his services unstintingly to our common country and his fellow men. The keen intellect, sterling character, extraordinary ability, and the kind heart of  their·  beloved commander inspired and instilled confidence  

> in

the men of the Thirty-second Division in their struggles on the battle fields. 

" This division, which was originally  made  up entirely of National Guardsmen from the great  States  of  Wisconsin  and Michigan, carved arecord of achievement surpassed by none.  Upon  some of the most shining pages of our Nation's history the name of Gen. William G. Haan and the Thirty-second Division is written, running like a golden thread. 

" The late general's heart, now stilled in death, had ever been  filled 

with the noblest purposes and the highest aims-with the last throb of life he kept the faith. 

"I  have the great honor to present this wreath from the General 

William  G. Haan Post, No. 234, American Legion, Milwaukee,  Wis. 

" A brave man now is sleeping While his deeds in memory live And the tribute  we  are bringing Is a Nation's joy to  give. 

" Hero of old, we humbly lay The laurel on your grave again. 

What  men have done, men may. The deeds you wrought are not in vain." Benediction: Col. Edmund  P.  Easterbrook, Chief of Chaplains,  United 

States Army :

" May the Lord bless thee and keep thee. May He make His face to shine upon thee and give thee peace.  Amen." 

Salute  to the dead: Three volleys and taps.-Detachments from the Third Cavalry,  United  States  Army, Fort Myer,  Va.       

> THE FEDERAL AND JOINT-STOOK LAND ~A.NK SYSTEM

Mr.  HENRY T. RAINEY.  Mr.  Speaker,  I ask  unanimous 

con ent to extend my remarks in the  RIDCORD  on the Federal 

farm  loan system .The SPEAKER. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman  from  lllinois? There was no objection. 

l\1r.  HENRY T. RAINEY. 1\lr. Speaker, I have  obtained  per-

mission to extend my remarks in the  RECORD  for the purpose of explaining the fa.rm loan land bank bill which I introduced in the House on Monday, March 17,  1930,  and which is numbered H.  R.10830. 

This bill changes in one  particular  the bill I introduced on the 9th day of December last  and  which was numbered H. R. 6983. . That bill provided that  whenever  a joint-stock land bank should vote to suspend dividends in the manner provided in  the 

bill its assets should be taken over by the Federal Farm Loan Board and administered through the 12 Federal land banks, merger consolidated bonds to be issued for the purpose of taking up the stock and bonds of the bank so voting to suspend. 

On  the  10th  day of December, 1929, I printed in the  CoN- 

> GRESSIONAL

REcoRD  of that date an explanation of this bill. The bill I have now introduced provides, in brief, for an amendment to the agricultural marketing act of 1929 and authorizes the Federal Farm Board to organize a Federal merger land bank for the purpose of taking over the assets  of 

the bank or banks so voting to suspend operations. The Federal merger land bank to issue Federal merger land bank bonds to take up the stock and bonds of the bank or banks so voting to suspend, each stockholder and bondholder to re-ceive in lieu of his stock and bonds merger bonds issued by this bank to the amount he paid for his stock and bonds not to exceed par. The Federal merger land bank is authorized to administer upon the farms turned over to it and can hold any of them  or 

all of them out of production, planting them only in legumes and grasses and using them only for grazing purposes for such period of time as the bank may deem necessary. The bank may farm all or any part of the farms on the share system or with tractors on a large scale or group method if it shall determine so to do under regulations to be issued by the Federal Farm Board. Holding part of these farms out of production and using them only for grazing purposes would tend to control agricultural  out-

put and farming them in larger units under the control of the Federal Farm Board would also be a step in the direction of con-trolling the volume of production and the flow of agricultural products to the market. Whenever conditions seem to warrant the return of  any  part or all the farms so taken over to private ownership and private control the Farm Board could so direct under this bill and it could be accomplished through the medium of the Federal merger land bank provided for. The proposition I am submitting in the bill I am now dis-

cussing  would tend to consolidate the two Federal farm-loan systems of banks. It is reasonable to suppose that most of the 22 joint-stock land banks, which have now suspended dividends, would vote to discontinue operations. Those which will  discon-

tinue the payment of dividends in the near future will soon follow in suspending operations. This would remove from the field all but a very few of the joint-stock land banks, and the entire system of Federal farm loans could then be controlled by the 12 Federal land banks or through branch banks to be estab-lished by them. PENDING  COLLAPSE  OF  OUR  FEDERAL  FARM  LOAN  SYSTEM 

During the 12 months ending November  30,  1929, only 14 joint-stock  l~nd  banks issued any bonds, and these 14 only issued atotal of  $5,455,000  worth of bonds. Practically one-half of this amount was issued by joint-stock land banks which are affiliated with and owned by other financial institutions,  and  they took up their own bonds, of course. Three of these joint-stock land banks issuing last year over 

$900,000,000  worth of bonds have indicated to me that they may soon suspend the payment of dividends; therefore, the issuing and marketing of bonds does not indicate that banks are always prospering. By reloaning their amortization payments  and  by issuing bonds the 47 joint-stock land banks now operating were able to close loans during the 12 months ended November  30, 

1929, to the amount of a little over  $20,000,000.  During the 12 months ended November  30,  1929, the 12 Federal land banks issued bonds to the amount of  $18,850,000  and closed loans to  tile 

amount of a little over  $68,000,000. 

Recently the Treasury Department called attention to the record made by the 12 Federal land banks during the period of time I have mentioned and pointed to it as evidence of the fact that the banks were still functioning. The facts are, however, that six yea.rs ago the 12 Federal land banks and the joint-stock land banks then functioning were loaning a million dollars a day. In other words, in 88 days six years ago these two systems loaned as much as the entire aggregate amount of their loans during the 12 months ended November  30,  1929. When we compare what these banks are accomplishing now with what they accomplished a few years ago we can see that the system is rapidly failing.   

> REVAMPING THE SYSTEM

The amended bill I have introduced will revamp the entire 

5ystem  and put it on its feet again. More loans ought to be made now to farmers than were made five and six  years  ago. 

Now is a better time  for  young farmers to buy  farms  and to •

# CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5559 

pay for them on the amortization plan of the Federal farm loan act. 

Under  the present method of managing these systems joint-stock land banks are being forced to liquidate. Most of the suspended  banks  are merely buying in their own bonds. The amended bill I have introduced will revamp the entire system without the slightest ultimate cost to the Government .

Under  it the  Gove'l"llment  wl11  be able to redeem all its implied promises and be relieved from the odium which now rests upon it in this connection. The present stockholders and  ·bondholders 

will be treated fairly. There will be no opportunity for  ·more 

speculators to make money  out  of their purchases of stocks and bonds-they only get back in  merger  bonds what they paid for the stock and bonds they hold, provided that amount  does  not exceed par. An immense volume of stock of  Feder-al  land banks has been purchased at negligible prices by speculators-a still larger volume of bonds hav e been purchased by  SJ)eculators  at ridiculously low rates. These speculators get only what they 

py_id  for  these  securities--no more. _Nothing can be done, of course, for the stockholders and bond-holders who have part ed with their holdings at these low prices. They have taken their losses voluntarily and they are  com-

pletely out of consideration. Insurance companies are commencing to fail on account of their investments in Federa l l an d-bank securities. Relying upon the representations of the Federal Government, many millions of fiduciary and trust funds have been invested in th es e securi-

ties. Some of the S ta tes, following the Federal act, have also made these securities legal investments for fiduciary and trust funds . Organizations creating annuity funds for municipal employees, on the faith of the Government, have invested in these securities. Some of these investments have been made also under laws passed by State legislatures, and they have suffered a loss as matters now stand of  50  per cent of the amount of their investments. The present session of Congress ought not to adjourn without passing constructive legislation relieving the present situation, which may soon assume the proportions of a national  financial 

disaster.      

> ADDRESS OF RON. GEORGE WHARTON PEPPER

Mr. McFADDEN. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to extend my remarks in the RECoRD by printing an address of George Wharton Pepper, delivered over the radio. The  SPEAKER.  The gentleman from Pennsylvania asks unanimous consent to extend his remarks in the RECORD by printing an address of ex-Senator P epper . Is there objection? Mr. RANKIN. Reserving  th~  right to object, was that speech made while Mr. Pepper  wa~  ~ the Senate? 

Mr.  McFADDEN. No. Mr. RANKIN.  On  what subject? 

· 1\fr.  McFADDEN.  On  international questions. Mr. RANKIN. It is not a political speech? Mr. McFADDEN. No. Mr. RANKIN. I am not going to object, but I am sorry that the gentleman from Massachusetts [Mr.  UNDERHILL]  is not here to take care of this. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Pennsylvania? There was no objection. Mr. McFADDEN. Mr. Speaker, under leave to extend my remarks in the  RECORD,  I include an address which was  deliv-

ered by Hon. George Wharton  Peppel~,  of Philadelphia, a former 

United  States Senator from Pennsylvania, covering one phase of the international situation-the Permanent  Court  of  Inter-

national .Justice or the World  Court. 

The address is as follows : THE  WOODEN  HORSE 

Young people tell me that in these enlightened days a father's advice is little heeded and that it is a wise father who gives none at all. These young p eo ple may be right, and yet when, on February 22, I read again Washington's Farewell Address, I was  deeply  im,pressed 

with the number of instances in which we seem to have been guided by his parting words of counsel. In bequeathing his wisdom to posterity he himself had doubts wh et her we could be trust ed to make the  best  use of his legacy. He was inclined to believe that the self-confidence of the young would outweigh the wisdom of their elders. This is what he said :

" In  offering  to you, my  counh·ymen,  these counsels of an old and 

affectionate  friend, I dare not hope they  will  make the strong and lasting impression I could wish;  that  they will control  the  usual  Clll'-

rent of the passions, or prevent our Nation from running the course whi ch has hitherto marked the destiny of nations; but, if I may even 

flatter  myself that they may be productive of some partial benefit,  some 

LXXII--350 

occasional good, that they may now  and  then require to moderate  thl:l 

fUI'y  of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs of foreign intrigu e, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism ; this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare  by  which  th ey 

have been  dictated."  

> If,

on his birthday anniversary, Washington could have surveyed the  · whole  field of our national life, he would have realized that hi smisgivings were unnecessary,  and  that in two among other particulars we have  had  the good sense to follow his advice. We have maintain ed a Military and  Naval  Establishment adequate for national defens e,  anti 

we have consistently avoided permanent alliances with foreign power s . To Washington's precept and example, more than to the influence of .

any  other man in our history, we owe the maintenance of our Army and Navy and  olll'  wise  refusal  to join the L ea gue of Nations. As to national defense, I am  sure that he would be gratified by the breadth of our policy. We are constantly reminding ourselves that peace without  freedo·m  is not worthy to be called peace, and that  free-

dom without peace is not freedom at all. We steadfastly decline to allow peace  mov&ents  to blind us to the neces sity of preparedness, and yet we combine with our policy of preparedness an earnest and effective lead e rship in efforts to limit armaments and to outlaw war as an instrument of policy. It would be a sad day for the Republic  if 

advocates of preparedness were to withhold their support from our representatives  at · the London conference. It would, if possible, be  a

sadder day were the supporters of the conference to oppose reasonable programs for the naval and military defense of the Republic. After all, the value of advice is proportionate to our affection and respect for the adviser and to our capacity to appreciate the soundness of the counsel  that  be gives. As for  affection  and  resped,  Washington's place in the hearts of his countrymen is  secure  for all time to come. Neither calumny nor detraction has been able to disturb it.  Even  in a day when attacks upon the defenseless dead arouse little indignation efforts to shake popular regard for Washington are proving to be about as effective  lis  if their authors were severally to attem -pt to shake the Washington  Monu-

ment at its base. As respects the soundness  of  Washington's advice you will often hear the assertion made that the advice was wise when given, but that  

> it

has little application to the  modern  world. We are reminded, as if such a reminder were necessary, that the telegraph, the  telephone. 

the radio,  the  airplane, the conveniences of travel, and the spirit of commercial int e rcourse hav e brought all peoples and nations neareL' together and have in  effect  made the people  of  the world one great family.  "Therefore,"  such people say,  " Washington's warning against entanglements is out of date. Let  · us  face the facts, modify our  na-

tionalism, and join the League of  Nations."  This, I am sure, is the exact opposite of the conclusion that  ought  to be drawn from t he  -com-

plexity of modern life. Imagine a family living in the country  and 

suddenly moved into a crowded city. In the country a wise father had taught his children the wisdom of minding their own business  of 

helping others when in need, of giving advisory opinions to neighbors only when asked, of preserving family customs and traditions, and  of 

guarding  against  sudden  attachments,  strong dislikes, and too great  in-

timacy with strangers. What should we think of a friend who  under-

took to reverse this advice merely because the family had moved  into 

a crowded neighborhood.  "Space,"  says he,  "has  been annihilated and distant neighbors are now close at hand; you  must,"  he insists,  "think 

of your family as including the whole ward in which you live, forego 

· your  distinctive family customs, pry into everybody's  business,  have a

finger  in every pie, tell all the neighbors what they must and must not do, and so give them an excuse for advising you how to lead your daily life. Do  this,"  says he,  " and you will be  happy." 

Everybody within the sound of my voice knows that such talk is mere nonsense and that the friend who tries to nullify the advice of awise father is no friend at all. It is, of course, true that in their  rela-

tion to God Almighty all men everywhere are of one family and of one blood, and that the church of the living  QQd  should  ba ) regarded  as agreat unincorporated unity. Nations, on the other hand, are  incorpo-

ra ted differences. It is to pre se rve those things in our Government which  differ  from other constitutional and governmental systems that we  exist  as an independent nation. The varying needs of people in 

different  parts of the world make the idea of a world government an idle dream. When we see our own Congress in action and noto the clash of conflicting interests between different parts of the United States, we should realize that we already have  on  hand  a gigantic task to  pre-

serve the unity of the Republic. The simple truth is that if Washington's advice was sound when given it is no less sound to-day. This is because his advice was based on enduring principles of psychology and its weight is quite independent of time and circum stance .

Bear  with me while I quote from this wise father of our country apassage of which we can not too often be reminded: 

"Against  the insidious wiles  oi  foreign influence-! conjure you to 

believe me, fellow  citizens--the  jealousy of a free people ought to be 

coiLStantly  awake, since history and experience prove that foreign 5560  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  ~lARCH  18 

tnflue nc!}  is  one -of the most  baneful  foes of republican  ·government.  But that jealousy to be useful must be  impartial,  else it becomes the  instru-

ment of the very influence to be avoided instead of a defense .against it. Exc essive partiality for one foreign nation and excessive dislike for ano t her cause those whom they actuate to see danger only on one side and serve to veil and even second the arts  of  influence on the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are liable to become suspected and odious, while its tools and dupes usurp the applau se and confidence of the people to surrender their interests. 

"The  great  rule  of conduct for us in regard to foreign  nations  is, 

in · extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political connection as possible. So far as we have already formed  en-

gagements, let them be  fulfilled  with perfect good faith. Here let us stop.  1

" Europe has a set of primary interests  which  to us have none, or avery remote relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent  contro-

versies, the causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore: it must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties in the ordinary vicissitudes of her  politks  or the ordinary combinations and collisions of her friendships or enmities. 

"Our  detached and distant situation invites and enables us to  pursue 

a different course. If we remain one people, under an  ~cient  Govern-

ment,  the period is not far  off  when we may defy material injury from external annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time resolve upon to be scrupulously  re-

spected ; when belllgerent nations, under the impossibility of  making 

acquisitions upon  us.  will not lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war  as  our interest, guided by  justice, 

shall counsel. 

" Why forego the advantages  of  so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to stand upon foreign ground? Why, by  interweaving  our destiny with that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace and  pros-

perity in the toils of European ambition,  .rivalship,  interest, humor, or caprice?   

> "It

is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliance with  any 

portion of the foreign  world." 

I repeat that these words of advice have colored our national history and have helped us to shape a wise foreign policy.  Under  such guidance we, the people  of  the  United  States, have definitely decided that to join the League of Nations would be for the  United  States  an act of folly. This is so well settled that the advocates of league membership have all but abandoned their policy of direct attack and are resorting to astratagem to detect which we should be  " constantl  awake." 

When a national policy has been definitely adopted the restless souls who want to change It usually abandon direct attack and try to  accom-

plish their purpose by subtlety. When  this  happens we should recall the once  familiar  legend of the fall of Troy. Aft er the assaults of the Greeks had year  after  year been repulsed by the defenders of the city, the canny Ulysses gave out the story that he and the other attackers had decided to quit and were going home in  disgust,  but were  · leaving 

behind them a peace  offering  to the gods in the form of a huge wooden horse. In spite of a warning that they had better let the harmless looking monster alone, the Trojans,  ready  to accept whatever bore the trade-mark of peace, dr ew the wooden horse inside the defenses of the city. After nightfall the armed men concealed inside the horse came out, slew the Trojan guards, and opened the gates to waiting friends outside. Is anything happening in the  United  States  at thls moment which · makes it wise to remind ourselves that even peace offerings  re-

quire scrutiny? I think there is ; and it is to invite your attention to a modern instance that I have repeated to you this ancient story. The Permanent  Court  of International Justice, or the World . Court, as it is usually called, is a court that was established after the war by the action of the  League  of Nations. Our new Chief Justice, Judge Hughes, was for a time one of the judges of this court. A few weeks ago he gave to a radio audience a most interesting and effective  ac-

count of the way the court works. All who heard it were much  1m-

pressed and many people asked,  " Why does not the  United  States join with other nations in supporting this institution, the creation of which was originally advoca ted in America ? "

Comparatively few of those who asked this question know that more than four years ago the Senate of the  United  States  voted to adhere to the court upon terms deemed necessary to prQtect our national  in-

terests. For four years we have been ready and willing to unite with our friends tn this experiment and for four years they have kept us 

waiting  at the gate. At first they said :

."We  do  not · llke  one of the conditions upon which you insist; we can't agree to  it."  ·

Now they are adopting a different  attitude, and they  speak  to us in this wise: 

" We have changed .our minds about the condition you propose. Aft er keeping you out of the court for four years we are now ready to agree to your condition and to admit you. In so doing we make only one stipulation, and that  is  that instead of insisting upon the language ()f the Senate resolution you will let us express your thought in our language. We assure you it will mean the same thing; but we Old World diplomats have a liking  for long and complicated contracts. Your  Senate  resolution  iS  perfectly all right, but it is too short and ·too  cle ar."  •

Now, as a lawyer, when my client is negotiating a business contract and he and I haw  put this meaning into language that can't be  mis-

und e rstood, I can't help being suspicious when the lawyer on the other side says: 

"These  two pages that I have drafted mean the same thing as your two lines, but I shalJ be better satisfied if the contract follows my draft instead of  yours." 

In such a case I should reply :

"No  i:loubt  you mean well and perhaps  your  long formula means the same thing as my short one , but I do not think it does, and I am advising my client to make this agreement in his own language or not at  all." 

In order to understand the point at issue you must remember that the judges of the World Court have two sorts of duties to perform that are entirely distinct from one another. The judg es sit as a court to decide international controversies which disputing nations submit to them. This is the admirable function which Judge Hughes so ably described. The  Senate  eondition has nothing to do with this function.  

> If

this  court were only a court, we should have adhered to it long ago. But, in addition to their duties in cases between disputing  nations,  the judges of the World Court constitute the department of justice of the League of Nations. The court, as one of its ablest judges  has  said, is the advisory organ of the League of Nations. Its duty is to give 

advice  to the league on request by the league's council or the  league'8 

assembly.  If  two sovereign nations get into a dispute  and do not choose to lay their troubles before the league ()r to  refer  their case to the World Court, there is  only  one way in which the League of Nations can  inject  itself  into the controversy-and that is by calling on the World Court to give an opinion upon the question on which the two nations have divided. The  :tight  of  the league to ask for such advice does not spring from the constitution of the court itself but from one of the articles in the covenant of the League of Nations. The theory upon which the league is entitled to treat the judges of the court as league adv i sers is that they are elected by the league ; that they are paid by the league ; and that when they  resign,  as  Judge 

Hughes recently did, their resignations go to the secretary of the league. Such being the situation, 1f two nations are engaged in a serious dispute, the action of such an outside organization as the league in 

calling  for a court opinion might easily arouse fierce indignation and precipitate a war which might otherwise have been averted. Suppose a case in which the  United  States  were having a serious  controversY  

> with

another nation. Then imagine that we were to wake up some fine 

morning  and read that the  League  of Nations  bad  wired the World Court for an opinion whether the  stand  of the  United  States  was or was not well taken.  This  would be front-page news with a sca.re  head· 

ing in every newspaper in the  United  States. That the opinion of the World Court wh en given would not bind  us  is not important. The important point is that we do not wi. sh any  foreign  power or any  com-

bination of foreign powers, whether you call the combination a league or what you will , to carry our business without our permission before the judges of a court which has no conce rn with the rightness or  wrong-

ness of our conduct unless we ourselves submit the controversy and ask for a decision. George Washington was a man of peace ; but if he were alive when such a thing happened, he would be fighting mad. To prevent anybody from getting mad, the  Senate  of the United States four years ago said to the other nations: 

"The  United  States will be glad to join you in supporting the Permanent Court of International Justice in so far as it is a court; but we want it clearly understood that  after  we have adhered tbe court  

> is

to give no advice to the League of Nations without our consent in any matter in which the United States bas or claims an  interest." 

I was 1n the  Senate  at that time. I thought then,  llB  I think now, that the hold which the league has on the court is a terrible handicap to the court and ought to be relaxed. But I am a lawyer and  a man of peace. I believe in the judicial settlement of international disputes, and, since it is not now practicable to cut the tie between court and league, I was willing to vote for adherence upon the protective  condi-

tion which I have specified. When the other nations said,  "We  won't accept your  condition"  I though t to myself  "Well,  we have done our duty; if they don't want us on these terms, they will have to get along without  us."  When, after four years, I heard it said,  "The  other 

· nations  have accepted  the  Senate  conditions," I was mildly astonished; because the Old World diplomats are not apt to yield. However, Istudied carefully and with an open mind the complicated and obscure documents  o.fl'ered  us as the equivalent of the clean-cut  Senate  provision, 

and when I had finished I said to mys e lf,  " There  ~s  a joker in ev e ry paragraph. This so-called equivalent fails to give us the protection upon which we insist. It is a subtle attempt to tie us up t o  the 

League  of  Nations through the court. It is once more the wooden 

horse--and  I decline to be  deceived." 

I am aware that in saying this I differ  from some of our ablest and most patriotic publlc men. To expr e ss disagreement with many of one's own  friends  is not an agreeable duty, This, however, is a subject upon .'1930  CONGRESSIONAL .  RECORD-HOUSE  5561 

which I feel qualified to speak  with  the authority of long study and  care-

ful analysis, and when the safety of the United States is involved party ties and personal friendships must be  ignored.  I earnestly assert that  if 

we are going to adhere to the World Court we must do so only  upcm  the condit ion already dictated by the Senate, a condition which conforms to Wa s hington's policy of  pe::tce  and freedom, for by it we assert the 

gladness ' of the United States to cooperate in all honorable  efforts  to substitute peaceful settlements for the arbitrament of war, but proclaim our fixed determination to avoid those entanglements against which the Father of  his  Country so wisely warned us. We are told that if we adhere to the court we may at any time  with-

draw our adherence and go home without being called quitters. This kind of an assurance bas no value. Even if no such assurance is given the United States or any other party to a treaty might denounce it and withdraw at will. When you go to a theater  !Jr  other place of public assembly, it is important to note the red lights and study the exits in order that you may make your way out safely in case of fire.  

> If

the calamity happens, there is no division of opinion as to what ought to be done. Everybody wants to leave at once and successful escape is a perfect remedy for those who succeed in achieving it. In the case of international engagements, however, the thing that makes  

> fOU

want to withdraw is the same thing that makes the other parties want to keep you in. No matter how earnestly they assure you that  

> in

the event of disagreement you may go in peace you know perfectly 

well  that when the time comes assurances of good will will be forgotten and the torrent of abuse that will be liberated against America for withdrawing from Europe will be comparable only to the  flood  of  re-

proaches directed against us  for  not going over there sooner. The argument in favor of experimental unions appeals more strongly to the young and the irresponsible than to those who are older and more 

l experienced.  If we adhere to the World Court let it be whole-heartedly and upon such terms as will make it possible to continue our adherence. The time to look is before you leap and the time to reserve your rights is before you sign on the dotted line. Ask yourself, What would Washington have done when confronted with a demand for his  signa-

ture? If you seriously put this question to yourself, the first thing that you will do is to write your Senator and urge him to support the Senate resolution and to accept no imported substitutes.   

> ORDERi OF BUSINESS

1\Ir.  PARKER.  Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that to-morrow, after the  Committee  on  Coinage,  ·weights,  and  Meas-

ures have  completed  their two bills, that we may go on with the consideration of this motor bus bill, H. R. 10288. 

Mr.  FISH.  Reserving the right to object, if it was merely to permit the  Committee  on  Coinage,  Weights, and Measures to complete the bills they have for consideration I would not object, but if it is any attempt to dispense with  Calendar 

'Vednesday I would object. 

' Mr.  PARKER.  I did not mean to limit it to two bills for the 

Committee  on  Coinage,  Weights, and  Measures,  but whatever business they have. Mr.  FISH.  If you are going to get through early to-morrow, would it be in order, Mr. Speaker, for me to ask unanimous consent to  Speak  for 5 or  10  minutes? The  SPEAKER.  The  Chair  would recognize the gentleman for that  pm·pose. 

Mr.  FISH.  Then I will ask unanimous consent to address the House for  10  minutes after the  Calendar  Wednesday business is completed. The  SPEAKER.  The gentleman from New York asks  unani-

mous consent that after the  Committee  on  Coinage,  Weights, and Measures shall  have  disposed of their  business  to-morrow  fur-

ther business on  Calendar  Wednesday shall be dispensed with. 

l\Ir.  MAPES.  Reserving the right to object, in looking  over 

the record, my recollection is that the  Committee  on  Coinage, 

Weights, and Measures has reported three bills. Mr. RANKIN. Reserving the right to object, is that the . only committee that would have the call to-morrow? 

Mr.  PARKER.  The next  comlnittee  would be the  Committee 

on Interstate and Foreign  Commerce.  .

Mr.  FISH.  I will ask my  colleague  from New York if he will yield to me to make a request? Mr.  STAFFORD.  I think, Mr. Speaker, it might be well to have  the  matter clarified, that it is not the intention of the  gen-

tleman from New York [Mr.  PARKE&]  to count  to-morrow  as one of the days that the  Committee  on Interstate and Foreign  Com-

merce is entitled to. Mr.  PARKER:  Oh,  no; that was stated yesterday; that it should not be counted and that we want two full days. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the  gen-

tleman from New York [Mr.  PARKER]? 

There was no objection. Mr.  FISH.  Now,  l\1r.  Speaker, I renew the request that Imay speak for  10  minutes to-m()rrow after the business of the Committee on  Coinage,  Weights, and Measures is disposed of. The  SPEAKER.  Is there objection to the request of the  gen-

tleman from New York [Mr.  FisH]? 

l\Ir.  SCHAFER  of Wisconsiu. Heserving the right  to  object, on what subject? 

l\Ir.  FISH . .  On  the proposed memorial meeting for Genernl Foch, to be held on Thursday. The  SPEAK .ER.  Is there  objection? 

There was no objection.      

> SENATE ENROLLED JOI TRESOLUTIONS SIGNED

The  SPEAKER  announced his signature to enrolled joint  reso-

lutions of the Senate of the following titles: 

S.  J. Res. 17. Joint resolution authorizing the  Secretary  of War to receive for instruction at the  United  States  1\'Iilitarv 

Academy at West  Point,  Bey Mario Ar()Semena, a citizen  ot Panama  ; and  ·

S.  J. Res.  30.  Joint resolution authorizing the use of tribal moneys belonging to the Fort Berthold Indians of North Dakota for certain  purpqses.     

> RILL PRESENTED TO THE PRESIDENT

Mr.  CAMPBELL  of Pennsylvania, from the Committee on Enrolled Bills, reported that that committee did on this day present to the  President,  for his approval, a bill of the House of the following title: H. R. 8423. An act granting the consent ()f  Congress  to the 

State  of Minnesota, or any political subdivision thereof, to  con-

struct, maintain, and operate a b. ridge across e the Mississippi River at or near Topeka, Minn. 

> ADJOURNMENT

l\Ir.  PARKER.  1\Ir.  Speaker, I move that the House do now adjourn. The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 5 o'clock and 11 minutes p. m.) the House adjourned until to-morrow,  Wednes-

day, March 19, 1930, at 12 o'clock noon. 

COMMITTEE  HEARINGS Mr.  TILSON  submitted the following tentative list of commit-tee hearings scheduled for Wednesday, March 19,  1930,  as  re-

ported to the floor leader by clerks ()f the several committees:      

> COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS

(10  a.m.) To authorize the sale of Government property acquired for apost-office site in Akron,  Ohio  (H. R. 3246). To provide better facilities  for  the enforcement of the customs    

> a~-d

immigration laws (H. R.  10416). 

To authorize the Secretary of  Commerce  to purchase land and to construct buildings and facilities suitable for radio-research investigations (H. R. 10652).    

> COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIA.R.Y

(10  a.m.) Proposing an amendment to the  Constit11tion  of the  United 

States  (H. J. Res. 114, H. J.  Res.  11, H. J. Res. 38). Proposing an amendment to the eighteenth amendment of the Constitution (H. J. Res. 99). Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the  United 

States providing for a referendum on the eighteenth amendment thereof (H. J. Res. 219). Proposing  an  amendment to the eighteenth amendment of the Constitution of the  United  States (H. J. Res. 246).     

> COMMITTEE ON BANKING AND CURRENCY

(10 .30  a. m..) To consider branch, chain, and group banking as provided in House Resolution  141~   

> COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

(10.30  a. m.) 

Navy Department appropriation bill. Legislative appropriation bill. 

EXECUTIVE  COMMUNICATIONS,  ETC. 

Under  clause 2 of Rule  XXIV,  executive communications were taken from the Speaker's table and referred as follows: 37L A letter from the Acting Secretary of the Navy,  trans-

mitting draft of a bill to amend the act entitled  "An  act t()  au-

thorize the construction  and  procurement of aircraft and  air-

craft equipment in the Navy and  Marine  Corps,  and to adjust and define the status of the operating personnel in connection 

therewith,"  approved June 24, 1926, with reference to the  num-

ber of enlisted pilots in the Navy; to the Committee on Naval Affairs. 372.  A letter from the Comptroller General of the  United 

States, transmitting second supplemental report of the claims 

transmitted,  to this  Qffice  by the Secretary  9f  the Navy covering 5562  CONGRESSIONAL . RECORD--· HOUSE  MARCH  18 

the property damage,  death,  or · personal injury due to the ex-plosion at the naval  ammunition  depot, Lake Denmark, N. J., July 10, 1926 (H. Doc. 231); to the  Committee  on  Claims  and o. rdered to be printed. 

REPORTS  OF  COMMITTEES  ON  PUBLIC  BILLS  AND 

RESOLUTIONS 

Under  clause 2 of Rule XTII. Mr.  FRENCH:  Committee  on Appropriations. H. J. Res.  264. 

A joint resolution making an appropriation to  complete  the restoration of the frigate  Oonstitu.tion;  wi~hout  amendment (Rept. No. 925). Referred to the  Committee  of the Whole House on the state of the  Union. 

Mr.  SWING:  Committee on the  Public  Lands. H. J. Res. 181. A joint resolution to amend a joint resolution entitled  "Joint 

resolution giving to discharged soldiers, sailors, and marines apreferred right of  homestead  entry,"  approved  ·February  14, 

1920,  as amended January 21, 1922; with amendment (Rept. No. 929). Mr.  HAUGEN:  Committee on Agriculture. H. R.  9900.  Abill to provide for the acceptance of a donation of land and the 

constt·uction  thereon of suitable buildings and appurtenances for , the forest products laboratory,  ana  . for other purposes; without amendment (Rept. No. 930). Referred to the  Com-

mittee of the  W'.Eole  House on the  state  of the  Union. 

· Mr.  NOLAN  : Committee  on the Public Lands. H. R. 6981. A bill to  promo •te  the better  ·protection  and highest public use of the lands of the  United  States  and adjacent lands and waters in northern Minnesota for the production of forest prod-ucts, the development and extension of recreational uses, the preservation of wild life, and other purposes not inconsistent therewith; and to protect more effectively the streams and lakes dedicated to  public  us~  under the terms and spirit of clause 2 of the Webster-Asbburton treaty of 1842 between Great Britain and the  United  States;  and looking toward  the 

joint development of indispensable international recreational and economic assets; with amendment (Rept. No. 931). Re-ferred to the House  Calendar. 

REPORTS  OF  COl\IMITTEES  ON  PRIV .ATE  BILLS  AND 

RESOLUTIONS 

Under  clause 2 of Rule Xlli, Mr.  JOHNSON  of Nebraska:  Committee  on Claims. H. R. 

1029.  A bill for the relief of .Arthur D. Story, assignee of Jacob  Story,  and Harris H. Gilman, receiver for the Murray & Thregurtha plant of the National Motors Corporation; with-out amendment (Rept. No. 926). Referred to the  Committee 

of the Whole House. .Mr. GUYER:  Committee  on Claims. H. R. 1176. A bill  for 

the relief of  Catherine  C.  Schilling; without amendment (Rept. No. 927). Referred to the Committee of the Whole House. Mr. IRWIN:  Committee  on  Claims.  H. R. 1354. A bill for the relief of .Arthur H. Teeple; without amendment (Rept. No. 928). Referred to the  Committee  of the Whole House. 

PUBLIC  BILLS  AND  RESOLUTIONS 

Um:ler  clause 3 of Rule XXII, public bills and resolutions were introduced and severally  refP.rred  as  follows: 

By Mr.  COX:  .A  bill (H. R.  10876)  to  provide  for the pur-chase of  a lot for the enlargement of the post-office building 

at  Tifton,  G&.;  to the  Committee  on Public Buildings and Grounds. By Mr.  CLARKE  of New  York;  A bill (H. R. 10877) author-izing appropriations to be expended under the provisions of sections 4 to 14 of the act of March 1, 1911, entitled  "An  act to enable any  State  to cooperate with any other  State  or  States 

or with · the  United  States,  for the protection of the watersheds of navigable streams and to appoint a commission for the acquisition of lands for the purpose of conserving the naviga-bility of navigable  rivers,"  as amended; to  ·the  Committee  on Agriculture. By Mr. HILL  of  Washington:  .A  bill (H. R. 10878) fixing 

time for reimbursement of  the  United  States  for money ad-vanced for acquisition of water rights for Indian lands within the Oroville-Tonasket irrigation district under act of  May  18, 1916, and supplemental acts,  and  for other purposes; to the 

Committee  on Irrigation and Reclamation. By Mr.  LEA  VI'IT:  .A  bill (H. R.  10879)  directing the  S~e 

tat·y  of the  _Interior  to investigate reimbursable charges against Indian tribes, and for other purposes; to the  Cominittee  on Indian Affairs. By Mr.  SMITH  of  Idaho:  .A  bill (H.  RJ  10880)  authorizing the construction of the Michaud division of the Fort  Hall  

> !!;~.dian

irrigatio .n  project,  Idaho, an appropriation  therefore, 

and tbe completion of the  proJect,  ;and  for other pnrposes; to 

the  Committee on Indian  Affairs. 

By Mr.  JENKINS~  .A  bill (H. R.  10881)  to amend section 24 of the immigration act of 1917, as amended; to the  Com-

mittee on Immigration  and  Naturalization. By  Mr.  CURRY:  A bill (H. R.  10882)  to provide for exami-nation and survey of the Mormon  Channel  section of the  San 

J oaq.uin  River and  Stockton  Channel,  Calif.,  project ; to the 

Committee  on Rivers and Harbors. By Mr.  JAMES  (by request of the  War  Department):  A bill {H. R.  1.0883)  to authorize  certain  activities for the mainte-nance of the  .Army  ; to the Committee on Military Affairs. 

Also  (by request of the War Department),  a bill (H.  R. 

10884) to authorize the acquisition of a right of way for sewer line in connection  with  the Fort Bragg Military Reservation, 

N.  C.;  to the  Committee  on Military Affairs. By Mr. McLEOD : A bill (H. R.  10885)  to provide a tax on the  sale  on margin of corporate securities; to the Committee on Ways and  :Means.  -

By Mr.  STONE:  A bill (H. R. 10886) an  act  to establish  a

Federal  board  of veterans' affairs to consolidate, coordinate, and provide for equalization and efficient management of  .all 

activities relating to the relief and other  benefits  provided by law for former members of the  Military  and Naval Establi h-ments of the  United  States;  to the Committee  'On  Expenditures 

in the Executive Departments. By Mr.  HOUSTON  of Delaware:  .A  bill (H. R. 10887)  author-

izing the Delaware & New Jersey  Bridge  Corporation,  a corpora-

tion  of  the  State  of Delaware, domiciled  at  Wilmington, Del., its successors and assigns, George .A.  Casey,  of Wilmington, Del; 

Clifford  R.  Powell,  of Mount Holly, N. J.;  and  Anthony J. Siracusa, of Atlantic City, N. J., their heirs, executors, admin-istrators, or assigns, to construct, maintain, and operate abridge across . the Delaware River at or near Wilmington, Del.; to the  Committee  on  Interstate  and Foreign  Commerce. 

By Mr.  LEHLB.ACH:  Joint resolution (H. J. Res. 272) con-struing section  7 of the merchant  marine  act,  1920;  to the 

Committee  on the  Merchant  Marine  and  Fisheries. By  1\fr.  HASTINGS:  Joint resolution (H. J. Res. 273) to pay the _ judgment rendered by the  United  States  Court  of  Claims  to the Iowa Tribe of Indians, Oklahoma ; to the  Committee  on 

Indian  Affairs. 

By Mr. GARNER: Resolution (H. Res. 188) authorizing the appointment of  a special  committee to investigate the Bureau of Internal Revenue of the Treasury Department; to the  Com-

mittee on Rules. 

PRIVATE  BILLS  AND  RESOLUTIONS 

Under  clause 1 of Rule XXII, private bills and resolutions were introduced and  severally  referred as follows: By Mr.  BARBOUR:  ·.A  bill (R. R. 10888) for the relief of Margaret  V.  Pearson;  to the  Committee  on Claims. 

By  1\Ir.  BOHN:  .A  bill (H. R. 10889) granting certain  lands 

to the city of  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  State  of Michigan ; to the  Com-

mittee on the Public Lands. By  Mr.  BUCKBEE:  A bill  (H. R.  1.0890)  granting  an  in-

crease  of pension to  Carrie  M. Backus; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  CLAGUE:  .A  bill (H. R. 1.0891) granting a pension to Mary  C.  Greene; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  COCHRAN  of Missouri:  .A  bill (H. R. 10892) grant-ing a pension to George Kohler; to the Committee on  Pensions. 

By  Mr.  CARTER  of Wyoming:  .A  bill (H.  R.  10893) granting 

a pension to Kate  V.  Richards; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  COYLE:  .A  bill (H. R.  10894)  granting an increase of pension to Isabella  Young;  to the  Committee  on Invalid Pen-sions: By Mr.  COX:  A bill (H. R.  10895)  for the relief of Tift 

County  Exchange (Inc.); to the  Committee  on  Claims. 

.Also, a bill (H. R.  10896)  for the relief of John Rufus Turner ;to the  Committee  on Military  Affairs. 

By Mr.  CRAIL:  .A  bill (H. R.  10897)  granting a pension to Alvina  Courtright;  to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  CURRY  : .A  bill (H. R.  10898)  granting a pension to 

Earl  G. Barnum; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. 

-Also,  a bill (H. R.  10899)  to authorize the  Secretary  of War  

> to

donate two bronze cannon to the city of Benicia,  Calif.  ; to 

the  Committee  on  Military  Affairs. 

By  Mr.  ELLIS:  .A  bill (H. R.  10900)  for the retirement of Oharles W. Luthy; to the  Committee  on Military  .Affairs. 

By Mr.  ESLICK:  .A  bill (H. R.  10901)  granting a pension to Lula Insley ; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. 

By  .Mr.  EVANS  of  California:  A bill (H. R.  10902)  granting a pension,  to  Fred E. Kunkel ; to  tb.e  Committee  o~  Pensions. 1930  CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  5563 

By Mr. FINLEY : A bill (H. R.  10903)  for the relief of Dillon A. Collett; to the Committee on Military Affairs. By Mr. FITZGERALD: A bill  (H. · R.  10904)  granting an  in-

crease of pension to Mary Ida Acton ; to the  Committee  on  In-

valid Pensions. By Mr. GREEN: A bill (H. R.  10905)  granting a pension to Dena  C.  Mudge; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By Mr. HILL of Washington: A bill (H. R.  10906)  for the relief of Panhandle Lumber  Co.  (Ltd.), a cor~ration  of the 

State  of Idaho; to the  Committee  on  Claims. 

By Mr. HOLADAY: A bill (H. R.  10907)  for the relief of 

Charles  E. Dern; to the Committee  on  Military Affairs. By  Mr.  HOPKINS:  A bill (H. R.  10908)  granting a pension to Elizabeth Bowen ; to the Committee on Inv.alid Pensions. Also,  a bill (H. R.  10909)  granting a pension to  Sarah  E. 

Reno ; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  HUDDLESTON:  A bill (H. R.  10910)  for the relief of the heirs of  0.  M. Dodgen, alias  C.  M.  Dodgen ; to the  Com,. 

mittee on  Claims. 

By Mr. IRWIN: A bill (H. R.  10911)  for the relief of George W. Steele, jr., captain, United  States  Navy; to the Committee on 

Claims. 

By  Mr.  JENKINS:  A bill (H. R.  10912)  granting an increase of pension to  Laura  Hysell; to the Committee on Inv.alid Pensions. By Mr.  JOHNSON  of Oklahoma: A bill (H . R.  10913)  for the relief of Andrew J. Murphy, otherwise known as Andrew or A. Johnson; to the Committee on Military Affairs. By Mr.  JOHNSTON  of Missouri: A bill (H. R.  10914)  grant-

ing a pension to William Newton; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. By  Mr.  KOPP:  A bill (H. R.  10915)  granting  a pension to Jessie Cordelia McLane; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. By Mr. LANKFORD of Virginia: A bill (H. R.  10916)  for the relief of the heirs of John W. Odend'hal, deceased; to the Committee on Naval Affairs. Also, a bill (H. R.  10917)  to reimburse W. H. L. Joynes; to the Committee on  Claims. 

By Mr.  MANLOVE:  A bill (H. R.  10918)  granting  an  in-

crease of pension to Willis P. McCampbell ; to the Committee on Pensions. By  Mr.  MARTIN: A bill  (H. R.  10919)  for the relief of  cer-

tain officers and employees of the Foreign Service of the United 

States,  and of Elise Steiniger, housekeeper for  Consul  R. A. Wallace Treat at the  Smyrna  consulate, who,  ~bile  in the course of their  respective  dutie , suffered losses of Government funds and/or personal property by reason of theft, warlike conditions, catastrophes of nature, shipwreck, or other causes; to the Committee  on  Foreign Affairs. By Mr. MORGAN: A bill (H. R.  10920)  granting  a pension to Selvanis B.  Cork;  to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  1\ffiRPHY:  A bill (H. R.  10921)  granting an increase of pension to Lydia Nickerson ; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. By  Mr.  O'CONNOR  of Oklahoma: A bill (H. R.  10922)  grant-

ing  a pension to Ralph  Smith  ; to the Committee on Pensions. By  Mr.  REECE:  A bill (H. R.  10923)  granting a pension to 

Mary  A. Green; to the Committee on Pensions. By  Mr.  STRONG  of Kansas: A bill (H. R.  10924)  for the relief of Roland Baldwin Estep; to the  Committee  on Naval Affairs. By Mr.  SWICK:  A bill (H. R.  10925)  granting  an increase of 

pension to Margaret A. Bauder; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. Also, a bill (H. R.  10926)  granting  a,n  increase of pension to Nancy J. Critchlow; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By Mr.  TILSON:  A bill (H. R.  10927)  granting  an increase of pension to Elizabeth M. Olson; to the Committee on Pensions. By  Mr.  WHI'.rEHEAD: A bill (H. R.  10928)  to confer au-thority on the Commissioner of Pensions to permit W.  C.  Jami-

son  to :file his application for retirement annuity and to author-ize and empower the Commissioner of  Pensions  to hear and determine the same; to the Committee on the  Civil  Service. 

By Mr.  WOOD:  A bill (H. R.  10929)  granting a pension to Emma Berryman ; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By Mr. ADKINS: A bill (H. R.  10930)  granting an increase of pension to Charlotte  C.  Hay; to the  Committee  on Invalid Pensions. By  Mr.  MORGAN: Resolution (H. Res. 187) to pay Amanda A. Richmond, widow of .James  E.  Richmond, six months'  com-

pensation and an additional  $250  to defray funeral  expenses 

and last illness of said James E. Richmond ; to the Committee on Accounts. 

PETITIONS,  ETC. 

Under  clause 1 of Rule XXII, petitions and papers were laid on the  Clerk's  desk and referred as follows :5776. By  Mr.  ADKINS: Petition of citizens of Fisher,  ill., 

petitioning Congress to secure early and favorable considera-tion of House bill 2562, providing for increased rates of pension to the men who served in the armed forces of the  United  States during the Spanish War ; to the Committee on Pensions. 5777. By  Mr.  BACHMANN  : Petition of Thomas H. Parsons and other citizens of Proctor,  Wetzel  County,  W. Va., urging immediate action on  Senate  bill 476 and House bill 2562,  pro-

viding for increased rates of pension to veterans of the  Spanish-

American War; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5778. By Mr.  BARBOUR:  Petition of residents of the seventh congressional district of California, urging enactment of House bill 2562, which would increase the pensions of Spanish War veterans; to .the Committee on Pensions. 

5779.  By Mr. BEEDY: Petition of citizens of Maine, urging increased rates of pensions  fot·  Spanish-American War veterans; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 

5780.  By Mr.  BEERS:  Petition from citizens of Lewisburg, Pa., favoring the passage of  Senate  bill 476 and House bill 2562; to the Committee on Pensions. 5781. By Mr.  BECK:  Petition of E. J. Shields and 86 other citizens of Philadelphia and vicinity, for consideration of House bill 2562, providing  inc.-reased  rates of pension for veterans  of 

the Spanish War ; to the Committee on Pensions. 5782. By Mr.  BLACKBURN:  Petition of the Women's Aux-

iliary  of the Maxwell Presbyterian  Church,  at  Lexington.  Ky., praying for the enactment of legislation providing for Federal supervision of motion pictures; to the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. 5783. Also, resolution of the members of the executive board of the Kentucky Library Association, opposing the enactment of House bill 2667, prohibiting the importation of certain reading matter into the United  States  from foreign countries ; to the Committee on Inter state and Foreign Commerce. 

5784.  By Mr.  BLOOM:  Petition of Visugraphic Pictures (Inc.), producers and distributors of advertising motion pic-tures, protesting against the Hudson bill (H. R. 9986) to appoint 

a Federal motion picture commission with wide powers and which they  feel  would practically paralyze the motion-picture industry; to the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. 5785. By Mr.  CARLEY:  Petition by citizens of Brooklyn, N. Y., indorsing legislation for increase of pensions for veterans of the war with  Spain  ; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5786. By Mr.  CARTER  of  California:  Petition of the city council of the city of Alameda,  Calif.,  memorializing the  Con· 

gress of the United  States  to enact into law House Joint  Reso-

lution 167, directing the President of the United  States  to  pro-

claim  October  11 of  each  year  as General Pulaski's memoria] day ; to the Committee on the Judiciary. 5787. By Mr.  CARTER  of Wyoming: Petition of citizens of Sheridan, Wyo., asking that the pensions of the  Civil  War veterans and widows of veterans be increased ; to the Committee on Invalid Pensions. 5788. By  Mr.  CRAIL:  Petition of many citizens of Los  An-

geles  County,  Calif.,  favoring increased pensions for  Spanish 

War veterans; to the Committee on Pensions. 5789. By  Mr.  CRAMTON:  Petition of Flint River Grange, No. 656, of  Lapeer  County,  Mich., in favor of the export debenture amendment to the  pendfng  tariff bill; to the Committee on Ways and  Means. 

5790.  Also,  petition  of Columbia and Almer Grange, Tuscola 

County,  Mich.,  in favor of the export debenture amendment to the pending tariff bill ; to the Committee on Ways and Means. 5791. By  Mr.  CULLEN:  Petition of  the  Midwest  States  Air Parley, indorsing the principle of the Federal road act applied to the establishment of a national system of airways, and  recom-

mend to Congress the passage of such Federal enabling act ; to the Committee on the Post  Office  and Post Roads. 5792. Also, petition of Midwest  States  Air Parley, indorsing House bill  9500,  known as the Watres bill, providing for the change of payment for carrying air mail from the poundage basis to a basis of rental of definite spaces, as the railroads are now paid, per mile; to the  Committee  on the Post  Office  and Post Roads. 5793. By Mr.  DEMPSEY:  Petition signed by 25 residents of Buffalo, N. Y., urging speedy consideration and passage of House bill 2562 and Senate bill 476; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5794. By Mr.  DENISON:  Petition of various citizens of Marion, Williamson  County,  Ill., urging speedy consideration and passage of Senate bill 476 and House bill2562; to the  Com-

mittee on Pensions. 556<1  ·cONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-HOUSE  MAROH  18 5795. Also, petition  of  certain  citizenS  of Johnston  City,  Ill., urging speedy consideration and passage of Senate  bill  476 and House bill 2562; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5796. Also, petition of various citizens of Williamson  County, 

Ill., urging speedy consideration and passage of Senate bill 476 and House bill 2562; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5797. Also, petition of the village board of  St . .Johns, urging the passage of Senate bill 476 and House bill 2562; to the  Com-

mittee on Pensions. 5798. Also, petition signed by citizens of West  Frankfort, 

lll.,  urging  speedy  cons ideration and  passage  of Senate bill 476 and House bill 25 62; to the Committee on Pensions. 5799. By Mr.  ESTEP:  Petition supporting  Senate  bill 476 and Bouse bill 2562, sent by D. G.  McCafferty  and other citizens of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh, Pa..; to the  Committee  on  Pen-

sions. 

5800.  By Mr. FENN: Resolutions of the West Hartford League of Women Voters, West Hartford,  Conn.,  favoring the so-c alled  Jones-Cooper  bill for maternity and child hygiene work, and opposing House bill 9888 ; to the  Committee  on  Inter-

state and Foreign  Commerce. 

5801.  By Mr. FITZGERALD: Petition of  5,700  members of the Fraternal  Order  of Eagles, favoring old-age pensions; to the  Committee  on Labor. 

5802.  Also, petition of  4.2  citizens of Dayton,  Ohio,  praying for early consideration and passage of a bill to increase the pensions of  Spanish  War veterans; to the Committee on  ~

Judiciary. 

5803.  By Mr.  FITZPATRICK  : Petition of the National  Asso-

ciation of Letter  Carriers,  Branch 387, Yonkers, N. Y., urging the speedy passage of  House  bill  6603,  providing for a short workday on Saturdays for postal employees; to the  Committee 

on the Post  Office  and Post Roads. 

5804.  By Mr.  FOSS:  Petition of George Lamoureux and 85 other residents of Spencer,  1\Iass.,  urging passage of Senate bill 476 and House bill 2562, providing for increased rates of pen-sion for veterans of the Spanish War; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 

5805.  By Mr.  GLOVER:  Petition of citizens of Redfield, Ark., urging the passage of House bill 2562, granting an increase of pension to Spanish-American War veterans; to the  Committee 

on Pensions. 

5806.  By Mr.  GREENWOOD  : Petition of W. H. Hensley and others, of Morgan  County,  Ind., urging the passage of House  bi~ 

2562, granting an increase of pensions to Spanish-American War veterans; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 

5807.  By Mr.  HESS:  Petition of citizens of Lockland and Mount Healthy,  Ohio,  urging the passage of House bill  10, 

creating a department of education; to the  Committee  on  Edu-

cation. 

5808  : By Mr. HICKEY: Petition of Marion Esarey and other citizens of  St.  .Joseph  County,  Ind., urging the early passage of 

a bill increasing the pensions of Spanish  War  veterans;  tG  the 

Committee  on Pensions. 

5809.  By Mr. HILL of Washington: Petition of J. F. True and 51 other residents of Spokane, Wash., asking for speedy consideration and passage of Senate bill 476 and House bill 2562, providing for increase of  pension  rates to Spanish War veterans ; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 

5810.  Also, petition of George F. Vath and 16 other citizens of Valley, Wash., asking for prompt  co~sideration  and passage of House bill 2562; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5811. By Mr.  HOOPER:  Petition of Jennie M. Wilkins and 214 other residents of Branch  County,  Mich., against  manufac-

turing, selling, or using malt; to the  Com.m,ittee  on the  Judiciary. 

5812. By Mr.  JAJ\fES:  Petition  Gf  citizens of Nicula,  Hough-

ton  County,  Mich., petitioning for increa s ed rates of pension to the men who served in the armed forces of the  United  States during the Spani sh War; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5813. By  :Mr.  JOHNSON  of South Dakota: Resolution  of ·

board  of commissioner s of Aberdeen,  S.  Dak., memor.ializing 

Congress  to enact legislation for the proper commemoratiGn of the dea th of Brig. Gen.  Casimir  Pulaski; to the  Committee  on the Judiciary. 5814. By Mr.  KEARNS  : Petition of citizens of Bethel,  Cler-

mont  County,  Ohio,  .in  support of the bill to increase the rates of pen s ion of  Civil  War soldiers and their dependents; to the 

Committee  on Invalid  Pensions. 

5815. .Also, petition of 56 residents of Aberdeen, Brown 

County,  Ohio,  in support of the bill to increase the rates of 

·pension  of Span,ish  War  soldiers; to  ~he  Committee  on  Pensions. 

5816. Also, petition of 22 residents of Goshen, Clermont .County, sixth congressional district of  Ohio,  urging enactment of House bill 2562, providing for increased rates of pension for Spanish War veterans; to the  Committee  on Pens,ions. 5817. Also, petition of 66 residents of McDermott, Scioto County,  Ohio,  requesting an early consideration of House bill 

2562,  a bill to increase the rates of  pension  for Spanish War soldiers ; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5818. By Mr.  KELLY:  Petition of citizens of Turtle  Creek, 

Pa.,  asking for quota-immigration restrictions on Mexico; to the Committee on Immigration and Naturalization. 5819. By Mr.  KENDALL  of Pennsylvania: Petition of  cer-

tain citizens of Connellsville, Pa., asking that favorable  consid-

eration be given to House bill 2562 and Senate bill 476,  provid-

ing for increased pensions for  Spanish-American  War veterans; to the  Committee  on  Pensions. 

5820.  By Mr.  LANKFORD  of Virginia : Petition of Mrs. Arthur Depue and others, indorsing the bill for exemption of dogs from vivisection in the District of Columbia or in any of the Territorial or insular  possessions  of the  United  States, as proposed by the International  Conference  for the Investigation of Vivisection ; to the  Committee  on the District of Columbia. 5821. By Mr. LINDSAY: Petition of the Maritime Association of the Port of New York, New York  City,  expressing disapproval of Senate bill  306,  entitled  "A  bill to amend certain laws  relat-

ing to American seamen  " ; to the  Committee  on the Merchant Marine and Fisheries. 5822. By Mr.  LOZIER  : Petition of numerous citizens of Ran-dolph and Chariton  Counties,  Mo., urging the enactment of Senate bill 476 and House bill 2562; to the  Committee  on  Pen-

sions. 5823. By Mr.  McKEOWN:  Petition of H. D. Hewlett, of 24 West Main  Street,  Shawnee, Okla., and other members of  Shaw-

nee Lodge, No. 25, Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows, Shawnee, Okla., urging immediate action on House bill 2562, a bill  pro-

viding increased rates of pension for veterans of the Spanish War period ; to the  Committee  on  Pensions. 

5824. By Mr.  McREYNOLDS:  Petition of 67 voters of Polk County, Tenn., urging immediate consideration of Bouse bill 2562 and Senate bill 476, providing for increased rates of pen-sion to the men who  served  in the armed forces of the  United 

States during the Spanish-American War; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5825. By  Mr.  MAAS:  Resolution by  -the  city council,  St.  Paul, Minn., the capital city of Minnesota, recognizing the debt we owe to the splendid service of Indian war veterans who fought for  home  and country, and asking that unanimous approval be given to the Manlove bill, which seeks to do justice to the few remaining survivors of these frontier struggles and urging the Minnesota Representatives in  Congress  to support  this  measure; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 

582ft  By Mr.  MANLOVE:  Petition of Henry R.  Carlson  and other citizens of Monett, Mo., urging early passage of  legisla-

tion increasing the pensions of  Spanish  War veterans ; to the 

Committee  on Pensions. 5827. By Mr. MILLER : Petitions of citizens of Seattle, Wash., and vicinity, indorsing legislation prohibiting vivisection  experi-

ments, especially on dogs, in the District of  Columbia;  to the 

Committee  on the District of  Columbia. 

5828. By Mr.  MURPHY:  Petition signed by Mr. J. H. Mc-Elroy and 72 other citizens of  Carrollton,  C.arroll  County,  Ohio, 

relative to Senate bill 476 and House bill 2562, providing  in-

creased rates of pension to Spanish War veterans; to the  Com. 

mittee on Pensions. 5829. By Mr.  O'CONNELL  of New York: Petition of the  Na-

tional Bridge Works, Long Island  City,  N. Y., favoring the passage of the Capper-Kelly bill (H. R. 11); to the Committee on Interstate and Foreign  Commerce. 

5830.  Also, petition of the  United  Retail  Grocers'  Associa-

tion, of Brooklyn, N. Y.,. favoring the pa ssage of House bill 11, the price maintenance bill; to the  Committee  on Inter s ta t e and Foreign  Commerce. 

5381. By Mr.  O'CONNOR  of  Oklahoma:  Petition from Mr. Gustavus E. W.  Cox  and 59 other citizens of Keystone,  Okla., 

urging early and favorable consideration of the measure  pro-

viding for incr eases in the Spanish-American War veterans' pensions; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5832. By Mr.  PARKS.  Petition of citizens of Stephen s, Ark., urging the passage of House bill 2562, granting an increase of pensions to Spanish-Am e rican War veterans; to the Committee on Pensions.  ·

5833. By  Mr.  HARCOURT  J.  PRATT:  Petition of Harry J. Gilbert, D. L.  Stewart,  G.  A.  Plass, T. I. Hewlett,  V..  E. 

Andrus,  Burdette Dyer, .John F. Hungaboom, and other  resi-

dents of J efferson, Schoharie  County,  N.  Y.,  praying for passage of legislation to increase the pensions of Spanish War veterans; to the  Committee  on Pensions. •

# CONGRESSIONAL  RECORD-SENATE 5565 '

5834. By Mr. FRANK M.  RAMEY;  Petition of John T. B. runs and 61 other residents of Pana, Ill., urging passage of Senate bill 4 76 and House bill 2562, providing for increased rates of pension for Spanish-American War veterans; to the Committee on Pensions. 5835. By Mr.  SMITH  of West Virginia: Resolution of  the ·

Woman's Christian Temperance  Union  of Charleston, W.  Va., 

urging Congress to enact a law providing for Federal supervi-sion of motion pictures ; to the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. . 5836. Also, resolution of the Woman's  Christian  Temperance 

Union  of South Charleston, W.  Va.,  urging Congress to enact a law providing for Federal supervision of motion pictures; to the Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. 5837. By Mr. SNELL: Petition of citizens and res .idents of the thirty-first congressional district of New York, protesting against the  United  States entering the World  Court  ; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.  ,

5838. By  1\fr.  SPEAKS:  Petition signed by 31 citizens of 

Columbus.  Ohio,  urging passage of House bill 2562, proposing increased pension allowances for Spanish War veterans ; to the Committee on Pensions. 5839. By Mr.  STRONG  of Pennsylvania: Petition of citizens of Indiana  County,  Pa., in favor of increased rates of pension for veterans of the war with Spain ; to the Committee on Pensions. 

5840.  By Mr.  SWICK:  Petition of the mayor and city council of New  Castle,  Lawrence  Comity,  Pa., urging the enactment of House Joint Resolution 167, directing the President of the 

United  States to proclaim October 11 of each year as General Pulaski's memorial day, for observance and commemoration of the death of Brig. Gen.  Casimir  Pulaski ; to the Committee on the Judiciary. 5841. Also, petition of Hadassah Chapter, New  Castle,  Pa., Mrs. Louis F. Kohn, president; Mrs. Harold  E.  Abkowitz, secretary, opposing any change in the calendar which in any way endangers the  fixity  of the Sabbath, and the participation of the  United  States in any international conference for such purpose unless the delegates thereto are instructed to oppose such change; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 5842. By Mr. WHITEHEAD: Petition of W. G. Shackelford and others, of Henry  County,  Va.,  urging the enactment  of 

House bill 2562, for increase of pensions to Spanish-American War veterans; to the Committee on Pensions. 5843. By Mr. WHITTINGTON: Petition of Martin G. Mc-

Crail  and  70  other citizens, to pass House bill 2562 and Senate bill 476, to increase rates of pension to Spanish-American War veterans ; to the  Committee  on Pensions. 5844. By Mr. WILLIAMSON: Petition of L.  C.  Valle  and  30 

other residents of Hot Springs,  S.  Dak., for the passage of legis-lation on behalf of Spanish-American War veterans; to the Committee on Pensions. 

# SENATE  

> WEDNESDAY,

## March 19, 1930 

(Legislative  aa .y  ot  Mrmaay,  Jawuary  6,  1990) 

The Senate met at 11 o'clock a. m., on the expiration of the recess. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The Senate resumes the considera-tion of the unfinished business. 

REVISION  OF  THE  TARIFF 

The Senate resumed consideration of the bill (H. R. 2667) to provide revenue, to regulate commerce with foreign countries, to encourage the industries of the  United  States, to protect Ameri-can labor, and for other purposes.  •

:Mr.  SMOOT.  Mr.  President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate reconsider the vote taken last night by which the amendment to section  305  was concurred in, and I move that subparagraph (b) of the amendment adopted in Committee of the Whole be amended by substituting therefor the matter which I send to the desk. 

M:r.  MOSES.  Let it be reported. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The  Chair  is advised that this is to correct a parliamentary situation. Without objection, the vote whereby the amendment made as in Committee of the Whole was concurred in will be reconsidered. The provision now submitted by the Senator from  Utah  will be reported. The  LEGISLATIVE  CLERK.  It is proposed to amend the amend-ment made as in Committee of the Whole by substituting there-for the following :  ·                                                                                                                                                     

> (b) Penalty on Government officers: Any officer, agent, or em-ployee of tlie Government of the United States who shall knowing:IJ:
> aid or abet any person engaged in any violation of any of the provisions of law prohibiting importing, advertising, dealing in, exhibiting, or sending or receiving by mail -obscene or indecent publications or repre-
> sentations, or books, pamphlets, papers, writings, advertisements, circu-
> lars, prints, pictures, or drawings containing any matter advocating or urging treason, or insurrection against the United States, or forcible resistance to any law of the United States, or containing any threat
> to take the lite of or inflict bodily harm upon any person in the United
> States, or means !or preventing conception or procuring abortion, or other articles o! indecent or immoral use or tendency, shall be deemed guilty of amisdemeanor, and shall for every offense be punishable by afine o! not more than $5,000, or by imprisonment at hard labor for not more than 10 years, or both."

The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Without objection, the amendment to the amendment is agreed to. Without objection, the amend-ment as amended is concurred in. 

CALL  OF  THE ROLL Mr.  FESS.  1\ir.  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk called the roll, and the following Senators answered to their names :Allen George Keyes Ashurst Glass La Follette Baird Glenn  McCulloch                                           

> Barkley Goff McKellar Bingham Goldsborough McMaster Black Gould McNary
> Blaine Greene Metcall Blease Grundy Moses Borah Hale Norris Bratton Harris Nye Broussard Harrison Oddie
> Capper Hatfield Overman Caraway Hawes Patterson Connally Hayden Phipps Copeland Hebert Pine Couzens Heflin Pittman Cutting Howell Ransdell Dale Johnson Robinson, Ind. Dill Jones Robsion, Ky. Fess Kean Schall Frazier Kendrick Sheppard Shortridge Simmons Smoot Steck Steiwer
> Stephens
> Sullivan
> Swanson
> Thomas, Idaho Thomas, Okla.
> Townsend Trammell Tydings Vandenberg Wagner Walsh, Mass.
> Walsh, Mont. Waterman Watson Wheeler

M:r.  SHEPPARD. The junior Senator from  Utah  [Mr. KING] is necessarily detained from the Senate by illness. I will let this announcement stand for the day. I also desire to announce the  necessary  absence of the Senator from Arkansas [Mr.  RoBINSON]  and the Senator from Pennsyl-vania [Mr. REED], who are delegates from the  United  States to the London Naval Conference. 

M.r.  SCHALL.  My colleague [Mr.  SHIPBTEAD]  is unavoidably absent. I ask that this announcement may stand for the day. Mr. McKELLAR. I wish to announce that my colleague the junior Senator from Tennessee [Mr. BRocK] is necessarily  de-

tained from the Senate by illness. I ask that this announce-ment may stand for the day. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Eighty-three Senators have  an-

swered to their names. A .quorum is present. 

EXPLANATION  AND  CORRECTION 

Mr.  BLEASE.  Mr.  President, I notice in this morning's RECoRD, on page 5479, that the nomination of James A.  Cobb 

to be judge of the municipal court of the District of  Columbia 

was reported at the desk, and then the President pro tempore said: Without objection, the nomination is confirmed. 

On  the same page, at the top of the second column, appear my remarks objecting to this nomination. I also wish to send to the desk a telegram from Professor Morse, of the  University  of South Carolina, in reference to  a

quotation from him made yesterday by the Senator from Mon-tana [Mr.  WHEELER.],  as found on page  5504  of yesterday's 

RECORD.  I ask that the telegram may be read. The  VICE  PRESIDENT. Without objection, the clerk will read, as requested. The  Chief  Clerk read as follows : 

COLUMBIA.  S.  C.,  March  18,  1930.                                

> Senator CoLE. L. BLEASE,
> United States Senate, Waahington, D. 0.:
> My position evidently misinterpreted. Do not approve unrestricted censorship by unqualified persons, but am as strongly opposed as anyone to importation and distribution of obscene books.
> JosiAH Moas:m.

WASHINGTON  AIRPORT-RETRACTION  OF  H. E.  YOUNG'S  CHARGES 

Mr.  VANDENBERG. Mr. President, I desire to make this immediate, informal report to the  Senate  respecting certain charges which were publicly made in the city of Washington last Saturday night, and which, if true, would have impugned the integrity of pending airport legislation and Senators con-nected with it.
