Title: The 2024 Presidential Elelction: Provisions of the Constituion and U.S. Code

URL Source: https://www.archives.gov/files/electoral-college/state-officials/presidential-election-brochure.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 30 Sep 2024 18:46:44 GMT

Markdown Content:
TME 202 4 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION PROVISIONS or TME CONSTITUTION AND U.S. CODE This pamphlet has been compiled and published by the Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records 

Administration, for use by the Executives and electors of the States (including the District of Columbia) in the perfor -

mance of their duties in connection with Presidential Elections. 

[Revised July 2023]   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code

PREFACE 

The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is proud to acknowledge its role in the Presidential election 

process. NARA ’s Office of the Federal Register (OFR) acts as the administrator of the Electoral College and carries out the 

duties of the Archivist. In this role, the OFR is charged with helping the States carry out their election responsibilities, 

ensuring the completeness and integrity of the Electoral College documents submitted to Congress, and informing the 

public about the Presidential election process. 

Article II and Amendment 12 of the U.S. Constitution establish the Electoral College system. In each State, the voters 

choose electors to select the President and Vice President of the United States, based on the results of the November 

general election. 

Before the general election, the Archivist officially notifies each State ’s executive of their electoral responsibilities. The 

OFR provides instructions and resources to help the States and District of Columbia carry out those responsibilities. As 

the results of the popular vote are finalized in each state, election officials create Certificates of Ascertainment –which 

name and appoint their State ’s electors –that are transmitted to OFR and each State ’s body of electors. In December, the 

electors hold meetings in their States to vote for President and Vice President. The electors seal Certificates of Vote 

along with the Certificates of Ascertainment and send them to the OFR and Congress. In January, Congress sits in joint 

session to certify the election of the President and Vice President. In the year after the election, electoral documents are 

held at the OFR for public viewing, and then transferred to the Archives of the United States for permanent retention 

and access. 

In this Presidential election year, the cover of this pamphlet shows a representation of the Electoral College system in 

celebration of the spirit of the American democratic process. 

For more information on the Electoral College, visit NARA ’s website at: 

http://www.archives.gov/federal -register/electoral -college /

Our thanks are extended to the Creative Services Division of the U.S. Government Printing Office for its assistance in de -

veloping this cover.   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

2024 Presidential Election Summary of Key Dates, Events and Information ……………………………………………….  1

2024 List Of States and Votes ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  3

THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION ~ ………………………………………………………………………………………………………  4

Article II ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… . 4

Twelfth Amendment ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  4

Fourteenth Amendment ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  4

Fifteenth Amendment …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  5

Nineteenth Amendment ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  5

Twentieth Amendment ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  5

Twenty -Second Amendment ………………………………………………………………………………………………………… . 5

Twenty -Third Amendment ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  5

Twenty -Fourth Amendment …………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  6

Twenty -Fifth Amendment ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  6

Twenty -Sixth Amendment ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  6

UNITED STATES CODE ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  7

CHAPTER 1. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS AND VACANCIES ………………………………………………………………………………  8

§ 1 Time of Appointing Electors ……………………………………………………………………………………………….  8

§ 2 [Repealed. Pub. L. 117 –328, div. P, title I, § 102(a), Dec. 29, 2022, 136 Stat. 5233]…………… ..  8

§ 3 Number of Electors …………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ..  8

§ 4 Vacancies in Electoral College …………………………………………………………………………………………….  8

§ 5 Certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors …………………………………………………….  8

§ 6 Duties of Archivist ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  9

§ 7 Meeting and Vote of Electors …………………………………………………………………………………………… ..  9

§ 8 Manner of Voting ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  10 

§ 9 Certificates of Votes for President and Vice President …………………………………………………………  10 

§ 10 Sealing and Endorsing Certificates ………………………………………………………………………………………  10 

§ 11 Transmission of Certificates by Electors ………………………………………………………………………………  10 

§ 12 Failure of Certificates of Electors to Reach President of the Senate 

or Archivist of the United States; Demand on State for Certificate ………………………………………………… ..  10 

§ 13 Same; Demand on District Judge for Certificate ………………………………………………………………… ..  10 

§ 14 [Repealed. Pub. L. 117 –328, div. P, title I, § 108(c)(1), Dec. 29, 2022, 136 Stat. 5237]…………  11 

§ 15 Counting Electoral Votes in Congress ………………………………………………………………………………….  11 

§ 16 Same; Seats for Officers and Members of Two Houses in Joint Session ……………………………….  13 

§ 17 Same; Limit of Debate in Each House ………………………………………………………………………………… ..  13 

§ 18 Same; Parliamentary Procedure at Joint Session …………………………………………………………………  13 

§ 19 Vacancy in Offices of Both President and Vice President; Officers Eligible to Act …………………  13 

§ 20 Resignation or Refusal of Office ………………………………………………………………………………………… ..  14 

§ 21 Definitions ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ..  15 

§ 22 Severability …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………  15 

MORE INFORMATION ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  16   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code

4. December 17, 2024 

1. June through October 2024 

2024 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION 

Summary of Key Dates, Events , and Information 

General Authority: 

The Archivist of the United States, as the head of the Na -

tional Archives and Records Administration (NARA), is re -

sponsible for carrying out ministerial duties on behalf of the States and the Congress under 3 U.S.C. sections 6, 11, 12, and 13. NARA is primarily responsible for coordinating the various stages of the electoral process by helping the States prepare and submit certi fi cates that establish the appointment of electors and validate the electoral votes of each State. The Archivist delegates operational duties to the Director of the Federal Register. Office of the Feder -

al Register (OFR) staff help ensure Congress receives elec -

toral documents, make them available to the public, and preserve them as part of our nation ’s history. OFR staff 

reviews the electoral certi fi cates for the required signa -

tures, seals, and other matters of form, as speci fi ed in Federal law. Only the Congress and the Courts have the authority to rule on substantive legal issues. 

In this pamphlet, the word “State ” also refers to the Dis -

trict of Columbia. 

Preparation Stage: 

∙ OFR Legal staff prepare letters and instructional materi -

als for the Archivist to send to the Governors of the 50 

States and the Mayor of the District of Columbia. 

The materials include this pamphlet and detailed instruc -

tions on how to prepare and submit the electors ’ creden -

tials (Certi fi cates of Ascertainment) and the electoral 

votes (Certi fi cates of Vote). 

∙ During the summer and fall, OFR Legal staff begin con -

tacting Governors and chief election officers of the States 

to establish contacts for the coming election. 

2. November 5, 2024* 

General Election: 

∙ The voters in each State choose slates of electors to 

serve in the Electoral College. Forty -eight of the fi fty 

States and the District of Columbia are “winner -take 

all ” (Maine and Nebraska are the exceptions). 

*States that appoint electors by popular vote (currently 

all) may include a modified voting period necessitated by 

force majeure events that are extraordinary and cata -

strophic as part of ‘election day ’. 

3. Mid -November through December 11, 2024 

Issuing and Sending Certi fi cates of Ascertainment to NA -

RA: 

No later than 6 days before the meeting of the electors, 

the executive of each State shall issue a certificate of as -

certainment. 

Each Certificate of Ascertainment lists the names of the 

electors appointed for that State and the number of votes 

cast for each person. 

∙ Each State prepares SEVEN duplicate originals, which are 

authenticated by the State executive ’s signature and the 

State seal. 

Each State executive must send ONE original Certi fi cate of 

Ascertainment to the Archivist, Colleen Shogan, c/o Office 

of the Federal Register (F), immediately after their State 

certifies election results. 

∙ The remaining SIX duplicate original Certificates of Ascer -

tainment will be attached to the Certificates of Vote at the 

State meetings. 

Meeting of the Electors and Sending Certi fi cates of Vote to 

NARA (first Tuesday after second Wednesday in Decem -

ber): 

∙ The electors meet in their respective States to select the 

President and Vice President of the United States. No Con -

stitutional provision or Federal law requires electors to   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code

5. December 25, 2024 

6. January 6, 2025 

7. January 20, 2025 at Noon 

vote in accordance with the popular vote in their States. 

However, the U.S. Supreme Court decided (in 2020) that 

States can enact requirements on how electors vote. 

The electors record their votes on SIX “Certi fi cates of 

Vote, ” which are then paired with the SIX remaining origi -

nal Certi fi cates of Ascertainment. 

∙ After signing the Certificates of Vote, the electors seal 

and certify the electoral votes in packages containing a 

paired duplicate original Certificate of Ascertainment and 

original Certificate of Vote. They immediately distribute 

the paired certificates as follows: 

∙ One pair of original certificates is sent to the President 

of the Senate (Kamala D. Harris) 

∙ Two pairs of original certificates are sent to the Archi -

vist, Colleen Shogan, c/o Office of the Federal Register (F) 

The Archivist holds one pair subject to the order of the 

President of the United States Senate in case the elec -

toral votes fail to reach the Senate. The other pair is held 

by the OFR for public inspection for one year. 

∙ Two pairs of certificates are sent by the most expedi -

tious method available to the chief election officer of 

each State, who holds one pair subject to the order of the 

President of the United States Senate in case the elec -

toral votes fail to reach the Senate. 

∙ One pair of original certificates is sent to the Chief Judge 

of the Federal District Court located where the electors 

meet. It is held subject to the order of the President of 

the United States Senate or the Archivist of the United 

States in case the electoral votes fail to reach the Senate 

or the Archivist. 

Deadline for Receipt of Electoral Votes at NARA (no later 

than the fourth Wednesday in December): 

∙ The President of the Senate and the Archivist should 

have the electoral votes in hand by December 25, 2024. If 

votes are lost or delayed, the Archivist may take extraor -

dinary measures to retrieve duplicate originals. 

Counting Electoral Votes in Congress: 

∙ The Congress meets in joint session to count the elec -

toral votes. The President of the Senate is the presiding 

of fi cer, whose powers are ministerial only. If one -fifth of 

the House and one -fifth of the Senate jointly submit an 

objection, each House would retire to its chamber to con -

sider it. 

The President and Vice President must achieve a majority 

of electoral votes (270) to be elected. In the absence of a 

majority, the House selects the President, and the Senate 

selects the Vice President. 

Certificates issued by a State executive in pursuance to 3 

U.S.C.  5(a)(1), or those required to be issued or revised by 

any State or Federal judicial relief granted prior to the 

date of the meeting of electors, are treated as conclusive 

in Congress. 

Inauguration: 

∙ The President - elect and Vice -President elect take the 

Oath of Of fi ce and become the President of the United 

States and Vice President of the United States, respec -

tively. If the 20th falls on a weekend there is usually a 

private swearing in ceremony on the 20th, followed by 

the public swearing in the next business day.   

> The 2024 Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 2

2024 LIST OF STATES AND VOTES 

Allocation of Electoral Votes 

(based on the 2020 census) 

Total: 538; Majority Needed to Elect: 270 

Alabama - 9 Montana - 4

Alaska - 3 Nebraska - 5

Arizona - 11 Nevada - 6

Arkansas - 6 New Hampshire - 4

California - 54 New Jersey - 14 

Colorado - 10 New Mexico - 5

Connecticut – 7 New York - 28 

Delaware - 3 North Carolina - 16 

District of Columbia - 3 North Dakota - 3

Florida - 30 Ohio - 17 

Georgia - 16 Oklahoma - 7

Hawaii - 4 Oregon - 8

Idaho - 4 Pennsylvania - 19 

Illinois - 19 Rhode Island - 4

Indiana – 11 South Carolina - 9

Iowa - 6 South Dakota - 3

Kansas - 6 Tennessee - 11 

Kentucky - 8 Texas - 40 

Louisiana – 8 Utah - 6

Maine - 4 Vermont - 3

Maryland - 10 Virginia - 13 

Massachusetts - 11 Washington - 12 

Michigan - 15 West Virginia - 4

Minnesota - 10 Wisconsin - 10 

Mississippi - 6 Wyoming - 3

Missouri - 10   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 3

UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION 

## ARTICLE II 

SECTION 1. The executive Power shall be vested in a 

President of the United States of America. He shall hold 

his Office during the Term of four Years, and, together 

with the Vice President, chosen for the same Term, be 

elected, as follows 

Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legisla -

ture thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to 

the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to 

which the State may be entitled in the Congress: but no 

Senator or Representative, or Person holding an Office of 

Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appoint -

ed an Elector. 

**

* * * * *

The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the 

Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their 

Votes; which Day shall be the same throughout the Unit -

ed States. 

## TWELFTH AMENDMENT 

The Electors shall meet in their respective states, and 

vote by ballot for President and Vice -President, one of 

whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same 

state with themselves; they shall name in their ballots 

the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots 

the person voted for as Vice -President, and they shall 

make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, 

and of all persons voted for as Vice -President, and of the 

number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and 

certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the govern -

ment of the United States, directed to the President of 

the Senate; The President of the Senate shall, in the pres -

ence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open 

all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted; —

The person having the greatest number of votes for Presi -

dent, shall be the President, if such number be a majority 

of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no per -

son have such majority, then from the persons having the 

highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those 

voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall 

choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in 

choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by 

states, the representation from each state having one 

vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a mem -

ber or members from two -thirds of the states, and a ma -

jority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. …

The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice -

President, shall be the Vice -President, if such number be 

a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed, 

and if no person have a majority, then from the two high -

est numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice -

President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two -

thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of 

the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no 

person constitutionally ineligible to the office of Presi -

dent shall be eligible to that of Vice -President to the Unit -

ed States. 

## FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT 

* * * * * *

SECTION 3. No person shall be … elector of President 

and Vice President … who, having previously taken an 

oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the 

United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or 

as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support 

the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged 

in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid 

or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may by 

a vote of two -thirds of each House, remove such disabil -

ity.   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 4

## FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. The right of citizens of the United States to 

vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States 

or by any State on account of race, color, or previous con -

dition of servitude. 

* * * * * *

## NINETEENTH AMENDMENT 

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not 

be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State 

on account of sex. 

* * * * * *

## TWENTIETH AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. The terms of the President and Vice Presi -

dent shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the 

terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d 

day of January, of the years in which such terms would 

have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the 

terms of their successors shall then begin. 

SECTION 2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in 

every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 

3d day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a 

different day. 

SECTION 3. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the 

term of the President, the President elect shall have died, 

the Vice President elect shall become President. If a Presi -

dent shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for 

the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall 

have failed to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall 

act as President until a President shall have qualified; and 

the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein nei -

ther a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have 

qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the 

manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and 

such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice 

President shall have qualified. 

SECTION 4. The Congress may by law provide for the case 

of the death of any of the persons from whom the House 

of Representatives may choose a President whenever the 

right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the 

case of the death of any of the persons from whom the 

Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of 

choice shall have devolved upon them. 

* * * * * *

## TWENTY -SECOND AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. No person shall be elected to the office of the 

President more than twice, and no person who has held 

the office of President, or acted as President, for more 

than two years of a term to which some other person was 

elected President shall be elected to the office of the Pres -

ident more than once. But this Arti cle shall not apply to

any person holding the office of President when this Arti -

cle was proposed by the Congress, and shall not prevent 

any person who may be holding the office of President, or 

acting as President, during the term within which this Arti -

cle becomes operative from holding the office of President 

or acting as President during the remainder of such term. 

* * * * * *

## TWENTY -THIRD AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. The District constituting the seat of Govern -

ment of the United States shall appoint in such manner as 

the Congress may direct: 

A number of electors of President and Vice President 

equal to the whole number of Senators and Representa -

tives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if 

it were a State, but in no event more than the least popu -

lous State; they shall be in addition to those appointed by 

the States, but they shall be considered, for the purposes 

of the election of President and Vice President, to be elec -

tors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the Dis-  

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 5

trict and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment. 

* * * * * *

## TWENTY -FOURTH AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. The right of citizens of the United States 

to vote in any primary or other election for President 

or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice 

President, or for Senator or Representative in Con -

gress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United 

States or any State by reason of failure to pay any 

poll tax or other tax. 

* * * * * *

## TWENTY -FIFTH AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. In case of the removal of the President 

from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice 

President shall become President. 

SECTION 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office 

of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a 

Vice President who shall take office upon confirma -

tion by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress. 

SECTION 3. Whenever the President transmits to the 

President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker 

of the House of Representatives his written declara -

tion that he is unable to discharge the powers and 

duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a 

written declaration to the contrary, such powers and 

duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as 

Acting President. 

SECTION 4. Whenever the Vice President and a ma -

jority of either the principal officers of the executive 

departments or of such other body as Congress may 

by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempo-

re of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of 

Representatives their written declaration that the 

President is unable to discharge the powers and du -

ties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately 

assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting 

President. 

Thereafter, when the President transmits to the Pres -

ident pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of

the House of Representatives his written declaration 

that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers 

and duties of his office unless the Vice President and 

a majority of either the principal officers of the exec -

uti ve department or of such other body as Congress

may by law provide, transmit within four days to the 

President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker 

of the House of Representatives their written decla -

ration that the President is unable to discharge the 

powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress 

shall decide the issue, assembling within forty -eight 

hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Con -

gress, within twenty -one days after receipt of the 

latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in ses -

sion, within twenty -one days after Congress is re -

quired to assemble, determines by two -thirds vote of 

both Houses that the President is unable to discharge 

the powers and duties of his office, the Vice Presi -

dent shall continue to discharge the same as Acting 

President; otherwise, the President shall resume the 

powers and duties of his office. 

## TWENTY -SIXTH AMENDMENT 

SECTION 1. The right of citizens of the United States, 

who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall 

not be denied or abridged by the United States or by 

any State on account of age. 

* * * * * *  

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 6

UNITED STATES CODE 

The following provisions of law governing Presidential Elections are contained in Chapter 1 of Title 3, United States Code 

(62 Stat. 672, as amended): 

Title 3 — The President 

Chapter 1 

Presidential Elections and Vacancies 

Section 

1. Time of appointing electors. 

2. [Repealed.] 

3. Number of electors. 

4. Vacancies in electoral college. 

5. Certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors. 

6. Duties of Archivist. 

7. Meeting and vote of electors. 

8. Manner of voting. 

9. Certificates of votes for President and Vice President. 

10. Sealing and endorsing certificates. 

11. Transmission of certificates by electors. 

12. Failure of certificates of electors to reach President of the Senate or Archivist of the United States; demand on State 

for certificate. 

13. Same; demand on district judge for certificate. 

14. [Repealed.] 

15. Counting electoral votes in Congress. 

16. Same; seats for officers and Members of two Houses in joint session. 

17. Same; limit of debate in each House. 

18. Same; parliamentary procedure at joint session. 

19. Vacancy in offices of both President and 

Vice President; officers eligible to act. 

20. Resignation or refusal of office. 

21. Definitions. 

22. Severability.   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 7

§ 1. Time of Appointing Electors 

The electors of President and Vice President shall be 

appointed, in each State, on election day, in accordance 

with the laws of the State enacted prior to election day. 

§ 2. [Repealed. Pub. L. 117 –328, div. P, title I, 

§ 102(a), Dec. 29, 2022, 136 Stat. 5233] 

§ 3. Number of Electors 

The number of electors shall be equal to the number of 

Senators and Representatives to which the several 

States are by law entitled at the time when the Presi -

dent and Vice President to be chosen come into office; 

except, that where no apportionment of Representa -

tives has been made after any enumeration, at the time 

of choosing electors, the number of electors shall be 

according to the then existing apportionment of Sena -

tors and Representatives. 

§ 4. Vacancies in Electoral College 

Each State may, by law enacted prior to election day, 

provide for the filling of any vacancies which may occur 

in its college of electors when such college meets to give 

its electoral vote. 

§ 5. Certificate of ascertainment of appoint-

ment of electors 

(a) IN GENERAL.— 

(1) CERTIFICATION.—Not later than the date that is 6 days before the time fixed for the meeting of the electors, the executive of each State shall issue a 

certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors, 

under and in pursuance of the laws of such State provid-ing for such appointment and ascertainment enacted prior to election day. 

(2) FORM OF CERTIFICATE.—Each certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors shall— 

(A) set forth the names of the electors 

appointed and the canvass or other determina -

tion under the laws of such State of the number of votes given or cast for each person for whose appointment any and all votes have been given or cast; 

(B) bear the seal of the State; and 

(C) contain at least one security feature, as determined by the State, for purposes of veri-fying the authenticity of such certificate. 

(b) TRANSMISSION.—It shall be the duty of the execu-tive of each State— 

(1) to transmit to the Archivist of the United States, immediately after the issuance of a certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors and by the most expeditious method available, such certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors; and 

(2) to transmit to the electors of such State, on or before the day on which the electors are required to 

meet under section 7, six duplicate -originals of the same certificate. 

(c) TREATMENT OF CERTIFICATE AS CONCLUSIVE.—For purposes of section 15: 

(1) IN GENERAL.— 

(A) CERTIFICATE ISSUED BY EXECUTIVE. 

—Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a cer-tificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors issued pursuant to subsection (a)(1) shall be treated as conclusive in Congress with respect to the determination of electors ap-pointed by the State. 

(B) CERTIFICATES ISSUED PURSUANT TO 

COURT ORDERS.—Any certificate of ascertain-ment of appointment of electors required to be   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 8

(i) the court shall be comprised o two judges of the circuit court of appeals in which the district court lies and one judge of the district court in which the 

action is brought; and 

(ii) section 2284(b)(2) of such titl shall not apply. 

(C) EXPEDITED PROCEDURE.—It shall be 

the duty of the court to advance on the docket and to expedite to the greatest possible extent the disposition of the action, consistent with all 

other relevant deadlines established by this chap ter and the laws of the United States. 

issued or revised by any State or Federal judicial 

relief granted prior to the date of the meeting of 

electors shall replace and supersede any other 

certificates submitted pursuant to this section. 

(2) DETERMINATION OF FEDERAL QUESTIONS.— 

The determination of Federal courts on questions arising under the Constitution or laws of the United States with respect to a certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors shall be conclusive in Congress. 

(d) VENUE AND EXPEDITED PROCEDURE.— 

(1) IN GENERAL.—Any action brought by an ag-grieved candidate for President or Vice President that aris-es under the Constitution or laws of the United States with respect to the issuance of the certification required under section (a)(1), or the transmission of such certifica-tion as required under subsection (b), shall be subject to the following rules: 

(A) VENUE.—The venue for such action 

shall be the Federal district court of the Federal 

district in which the State capital is located. 

(B) 3 -JUDGE PANEL.—Such action shall be heard by a district court of three judges, convened pursuant to section 2284 of title 28, United States 

Code, except that— 

f

e

-

(D) APPEALS.—Notwithstanding section 

1253 of title 28, United States Code, the final judg-ment of the panel convened under subparagraph (B) may be reviewed directly by the Supreme Court, by writ of certiorari granted upon petition 

of any party to the case, on an expedited basis, so 

that a final order of the court on remand of the Supreme Court may occur on or before the day before the time fixed for the meeting of electors. 

(2) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—This subsection— 

(A) shall be construed solely to establish venue and expedited procedures in any action brought by an aggrieved candidate for President 

or Vice President as specified in this subsection that arises under the Constitution or laws of the United States; and 

(B) shall not be construed to preempt or displace any existing State or Federal cause of ac-tion. 

§ 6. Duties of Archivist 

The certificates of ascertainment of appointment of elec-tors received by the Archivist of the United States under section 5 shall— 

(1) be preserved for one year; 

(2) be a part of the public records of such office; 

and 

(3) be open to public inspection. 

§ 7. Meeting and Vote of Electors 

The electors of President and Vice President of each State 

shall meet and give their votes on the first Tuesday after 

the second Wednesday in December next following their 

appointment at such place in each State in accordance 

with the laws of the State enacted prior to election day.   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 9

§ 8. Manner of Voting 

The electors shall vote for President and Vice President, 

respectively, in the manner directed by the Constitution. 

§ 9. Certificates of Votes for President and Vice Presi -

dent 

The electors shall make and sign six certificates of all the 

votes given by them, each of which certificates shall con -

tain two distinct lists, one of the votes for President and 

the other of the votes for Vice President, and shall annex 

to each of the certificates of votes one of the certificates 

of ascertainment of appointment of electors which shall 

have been furnished to them by direction of the execu -

tive of the State. 

§ 10. Sealing and Endorsing Certificates 

The electors shall seal up the certificates of votes so 

made by them, together with the annexed certificates of 

ascertainment of appointment of electors, and certify 

upon each that the lists of all the votes of such State giv -

en for President, and of all the votes given for Vice Presi -

dent, are contained therein. 

§ 11. Transmission of Certificates by Electors 

The electors shall immediately transmit at the same time 

and by the most expeditious method available the certifi -

cates of votes so made by them, together with the an -

nexed certificates of ascertainment of appointment of 

electors, as follows: 

(1) One set shall be sent to the President of the Senate at the seat of government. 

(2) Two sets shall be sent to the chief election officer of the State, one of which shall be held subject to the order of the President of the Senate, the other to be 

preserved by such official for one year and shall be a part of the public records of such office and shall be open to 

public inspection. 

(3) Two sets shall be sent to the Archivist of the United States at the seat of government, one of which shall be held subject to the order of the President of the Senate and the other of which shall be preserved by the Archivist of the United States for one year and shall be a part of the public records of such office and shall be open to public inspection. 

(4) One set shall be sent to the judge of the dis-trict in which the electors shall have assembled. 

§ 12. Failure of Certificates of Electors to 

Reach President of The Senate or Archivist of 

The United States; Demand on State for Certif-

icate

When, after the meeting of the electors shall have been 

held, no certificate of vote mentioned in sections 9 and 

11 of this title from any State shall have been received by 

the President of the Senate or by the Archivist of the 

United States by the fourth Wednesday in December, 

the President of the Senate or, if the President of the 

Senate be absent from the seat of government, the Ar -

chivist of the United States shall request, by the most 

expeditious method available, the chief election officer 

of the State to send up the certificate lodged with such 

officer by the electors of such State; and it shall be the 

duty of such chief election officer of the State upon re -

ceipt of such request immediately to transmit same by 

the most expeditious method available to the President 

of the Senate at the seat of government. 

§ 13. Same; Demand on District Judge for Cer-

tificate 

When, after the meeting of the electors shall have been 

held, no certificates of votes from any State shall have 

been received at the seat of government on the fourth 

Wednesday in December, the President of the Senate or, 

if the President of the Senate be absent from the seat of 

government, the Archivist of the United States shall send   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 10

a special messenger to the district judge in whose custody 

one certificate of votes from that State has been lodged, 

and such judge shall forthwith transmit that certificate by 

the hand of such messenger to the seat of government. 

§ 14. [Repealed. Pub. L. 117 –328, div. P, title I, 

§ 108(c)(1), Dec. 29, 2022, 136 Stat. 5237] 

§ 15. Counting Electoral Votes in Congress 

(a) IN GENERAL.—Congress shall be in session on the sixth day of January succeeding every meeting of the electors. The Senate and House of Representatives shall meet in the Hall of the House of Representatives at the hour of 1 o’clock in the afternoon on that day, and the President of the Senate shall be their presiding officer. 

(b) POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT OF SENATE.— 

(1) MINISTERIAL IN NATURE.—Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the role of the President of the Senate while presiding over the joint session shall be lim-ited to performing solely ministerial duties. 

(2) POWERS EXPLICITLY DENIED.—The President of the Senate shall have no power to solely determine, accept, reject, or otherwise adjudicate or resolve disputes over the proper certificate of ascertainment of appoint-ment of electors, the validity of electors, or the votes of electors. 

(c) APPOINTMENT OF TELLERS.—At the joint session of the Senate and House of Representatives described in subsec-tion (a), there shall be present two tellers previously ap-pointed on the part of the Senate and two tellers previ-

ously appointed on the part of the House of Representa-tives by the presiding officers of the respective chambers. 

(d) PROCEDURE AT JOINT SESSION GENERALLY.— 

(1) IN GENERAL.—The President of the Senate 

shall— 

(A) open the certificates and papers pur-

porting to be certificates of the votes of electors 

appointed pursuant to a certificate of ascertain -

ment of appointment of electors issued pursuant 

to section 5, in the alphabetical order of the States, beginning with the letter A; and 

(B) upon opening any certificate, hand the certificate and any accompanying papers to the tellers, who shall read the same in the presence 

and hearing of the two Houses. 

(2) ACTION ON CERTIFICATE.— 

(A) IN GENERAL.—Upon the reading of each certificate or paper, the President of the Sen-ate shall call for objections, if any. 

(B) REQUIREMENTS FOR OBJECTIONS OR QUESTIONS.— 

(i) OBJECTIONS.—No objection or other question arising in the matter shall 

be in order unless the objection or ques-tion— 

(I) is made in writing; 

(II) is signed by at least 

one -fifth of the Senators duly cho-sen and sworn and one -fifth of the Members of the House of Representatives duly chosen and 

sworn; and 

(III) in the case of an ob-jection, states clearly and concise-

ly, without argument, one of the grounds listed under clause (ii). 

(ii) GROUNDS FOR OBJECTIONS.— 

The only grounds for objections shall be as 

follows: 

(I) The electors of the   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 11

State were not lawfully cer-tified under a certificate of ascertainment of appoint-ment of electors according 

to section 5(a)(1). 

(II) The vote of one or more electors has not been regularly given. 

(C) CONSIDERATION OF OBJECTIONS 

AND QUESTIONS.— 

(i) IN GENERAL.—When all objections so made to any vote or paper from a State, or other ques-tion arising in the matter, shall have been received and read, the Senate 

shall thereupon withdraw, and such objections and questions shall be 

submitted to the Senate for its deci-sion; and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall, in like man-ner, submit such objections and questions to the House of Repre-sentatives for its decision. 

(ii) DETERMINATION.—No objection or any other question aris-ing in the matter may be sustained 

in the matter, shall have been finally dis-posed of. 

e) RULES FOR TABULATING VOTES.— 

(1) COUNTING OF VOTES.— 

(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provid-ed in subparagraph (B)— 

(i) only the votes of electors 

who have been appointed under a certificate of ascertainment of ap-pointment of electors issued pursu-ant to section 5, or who have legally been appointed to fill a vacancy of any such elector pursuant to section 

4, may be counted; and 

(ii) no vote of an elector de-scribed in clause (i) which has been 

regularly given shall be rejected. 

(B) EXCEPTION.—The vote of an elector who has been appointed under a certificate of ascertainment of appointment 

of electors issued pursuant to section 5 shall not be counted if— 

(i) there is an objection which meets the requirements of subsection (d)(2)(B)(i); and 

(ii) each House affirmatively sustains the objection as valid. 

(2) DETERMINATION OF MAJORITY.—If the number of electors lawfully appointed by any State 

pursuant to a certificate of ascertainment of ap-pointment of electors that is issued under section 5 is fewer than the number of electors to which the State is entitled under section 3, or if an objection 

(

unless such objection or question is sustained by separate concurring votes of each House. 

(D) RECONVENING.—When the two 

Houses have voted, they shall immediately again meet, and the presiding officer shall then announce the decision of the questions submitted. No vote or paper from any other State shall be acted upon until the objec-tions previously made to any vote or paper from any State, and other questions arising   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 12

the grounds for which are described in subsection (d)(2) 

(B)(ii)(I) has been sustained, the total number of electors 

appointed for the purpose of determining a majority of 

the whole number of electors appointed as required by 

the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution shall be re -

duced by the number of electors whom the State has 

failed to appoint or as to whom the objection was sus -

tained. 

(3)  LIST OF VOTES BY TELLERS; DECLARATION OF 

WINNER. — The tellers shall make a list of the votes as 

they shall appear from the said certificates; and the votes 

having been ascertained and counted according to the 

rules in this subchapter provided, the result of the same 

shall be delivered to the President of the Senate, who 

shall thereupon announce the state of the vote, which 

announcement shall be deemed a sufficient declaration of 

the persons, if any, elected President and Vice President 

of the United States, and, together with a list of the votes, 

be entered on the Journals of the two Houses. 

§ 16. Same; Seats for Officers And Members of 

Two Houses in Joint Session 

At such joint session of the two Houses seats shall be pro -

vided as follows: For the President of the Senate, the 

Speaker ’s chair; for the Speaker, immediately upon his 

left; the Senators, in the body of the Hall upon the right of 

the presiding officer; for the Representatives, in the body 

of the Hall not provided for the Senators; for the tellers, 

Secretary of the Senate, and Clerk of the House of Repre -

sentatives, at the Clerk ’s desk; for the other officers of the 

two Houses, in front of the Clerk ’s desk and upon each 

side of the Speaker ’s platform. Such joint session shall not 

be dissolved until the count of electoral votes shall be 

completed and the result declared; and no recess shall be 

taken unless a question shall have arisen in regard to 

counting any such votes, or otherwise under this subchap -

ter, in which case it shall be competent for either House, 

acting separately, in the manner hereinbefore provided, 

to direct a recess of such House not beyond the next cal -

endar day, Sunday excepted, at the hour of 10 o ’clock in 

the forenoon. But if the counting of the electoral votes 

and the declaration of the result shall not have been com -

pleted before the fifth calendar day next after such first 

session of the two Houses, no further or other recess shall 

be taken by either House. 

§ 17. Same; Limit of Debate in Each House 

When the two Houses separate to decide upon an objec -

tion pursuant to section 15(d)(2)(C)(i) that may have been 

made to the counting of any electoral vote or votes from 

any State, or other question arising in the matter —

(1) all such objections and questions permitted 

with respect to such State shall be considered at such time; 

(2) each Senator and Representative may speak to 

such objections or questions for up to five minutes, and not more than once; 

(3) the total time for debate for all such objections 

and questions with respect to such State shall not exceed 

two hours in each House, equally divided and controlled by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader, or their re-spective designees; and 

(4) at the close of such debate, it shall be the duty 

of the presiding officer of each House to put each of the objections and questions to a vote without further debate. 

§ 18. Same; Parliamentary Procedure at Joint 

Session 

While the two Houses shall be in session as provided in 

this chapter, the President of the Senate shall have power 

to preserve order; and no debate shall be allowed and no 

question shall be put by the presiding officer except to 

either House on a motion to withdraw under section 15(d) 

(2)(C)(i). 

§ 19. Vacancy in Offices of Both President and 

Vice President; Officers Eligible to Act 

(a)(1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from 

office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is neither a  

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 13

(2) An individual acting as President under this subsection shall continue so to do until the expiration of the then current Presidential term, but not after a quali-fied and prior -entitled individual is able to act, except 

that the removal of the disability of an individual higher on the list contained in paragraph (1) of this subsection or the ability to qualify on the part of an individual high-er on such list shall not terminate his service. 

(3) The taking of the oath of office by an individ-ual specified in the list in paragraph (1) of this subsection 

shall be held to constitute his resignation from the office by virtue of the holding of which he qualifies to act as 

President. 

(e) Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of this section shall apply only to such officers as are eligible to the office of Presi-dent under the Constitution. Subsection (d) of this sec-tion shall apply only to officers appointed, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, prior to the time of the death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, of the President pro tempore, and only to officers not under impeachment by the House of Representatives at the time the powers and duties of the 

President nor Vice President to discharge the powers 

and duties of the office of President, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall, upon his resignation as Speaker and as Representative in Congress, act as President. 

(2) The same rule shall apply in the case of the death, resignation, removal from office, or inability of an individual acting as President under this subsection. 

(b) If, at the time when under subsection (a) of this sec-tion a Speaker is to begin the discharge of the powers and duties of the office of President, there is no Speaker, or the Speaker fails to qualify as Acting President, then the President pro tempore of the Senate shall, upon his resignation as President pro tempore and as Senator, act as President. 

(c) An individual acting as President under subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section shall continue to act un-til the expiration of the then current Presidential term, except that —

(1) if his discharge of the powers and duties of the office is founded in whole or in part on the failure of both the President -elect and the Vice -President -elect to 

qualify, then he shall act only until a President or Vice 

President qualifies; and 

(2) if his discharge of the powers and duties of 

the office is founded in whole or in part on the inability of the President or Vice President, then he shall act only until the removal of the disability of one of such individ-uals. 

(d)(1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from 

office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is no President  § 20. Resignation or Refusal of Office 

pro tempore to act as President under subsection (b) of this section, then the officer of the United States who is highest on the following list, and who is not under disa -

bility to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President shall act as President: Secretary of State, Sec -

retary of the Treasury, Secretary of Defense, Attorney General, Secretary of the Interior, Secretary of Agricul -

ture, Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of Labor, Secre -

tary of Health and Human Services, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Secretary of Transportation, Secretary of Energy, Secretary of Education, Secretary of Veterans Affairs. 

office of President devolve upon them. 

(f) During the period that any individual acts as President under this section, his compensation shall be at the rate then provided by law in the case of the President. 

The only evidence of a refusal to accept, or of a resigna -

tion of the office of President or Vice President, shall be 

an instrument in writing, declaring the same, and sub -

scribed by the person refusing to accept or resigning, as 

the case may be, and delivered into the office of the Sec -

retary of State.   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 14

§ 21. Definitions 

As used in this chapter the term —

(1) “ election day ” means the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, in every fourth year succeeding every election of a President and Vice President held in each State, except, in the case of a State that appoints electors by popular vote, if the State modifies the period of voting, as necessitated by force majeure events that are extraordinary and catastrophic, as provided under laws of the State enacted prior to such day, ‘election day ’ shall include the modified period of voting. 

(2) “ State ” includes the District of Columbia. 

(3) “ executive ” means, with respect to any State, the Gov-ernor of the State (or, in the case of the District of Colum-bia, the Mayor of the District of Columbia), except when the laws or constitution of a State in effect as of election day expressly require a different State executive to per-form the duties identified under this chapter. 

§ 22. Severability 

If any provision of this chapter, or the application of a pro -

vision to any person or circumstance, is held to be uncon -

stitutional, the remainder of this chapter, and the applica -

tion of the provisions to any person or circumstance, shall 

not be affected by the holding.   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 15

MORE INFORMATION 

For more information on the Electoral College and the election responsibilities of the States and the Archivist 

of the United States, visit  www.archives.gov/electoral -college   

> The 202 4Presidential Election/ Provisions of the Constitution and United States Code
> 16

## For more information, visit 

## https:/ /www.archives.gov/electoral-college/
