Title: amended-complaint.pdf

URL Source: https://www.harvard.edu/federal-lawsuits/wp-content/uploads/sites/17/2025/06/amended-complaint.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 05 Jun 2025 22:23:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 101

Markdown Content:
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 

FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS 

PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF 

HARVARD COLLEGE, 

Plaintiff, 

v. 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND 

SECURITY; 

KRISTI NOEM, in her official capacity as Secretary of the 

United States Department of Homeland Security; 

UNITED STATES IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS 

ENFORCEMENT; 

TODD LYONS, in his official capacity as Acting Director of 

United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement; 

STUDENT AND EXCHANGE VISITOR PROGRAM; 

JOHN DOE, in their official capacity as Director of the Student 

and Exchange Visitor Program; 

JAMES HICKS, in his official capacity as Deputy Assistant 

Director of the Student and Exchange Visitor Program; 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; 

PAMELA BONDI, in her official capacity as Attorney General 

of the United States ;

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE; 

MARCO RUBIO, in his official capacity as Secretary of the 

United States Department of State, 

Defendants. 

Case No. 1:25 -cv -11472 -ADB 

AMENDED COMPLAINT 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 1 of 101 1

1.  For more than 70 years, Harvard University (“Harvard” or the “University”) has 

enroll ed international students under the government’s F -1 international student visa program and 

hosted students and scholars under the government’s J-1 exchange visitor program . Harvard has, 

over this time, developed programs and degrees tailored to its international students, invested 

millions to recruit the most talented such students, and integrated its international students into all 

aspects of the Harvard community. Yesterday , the President abruptly put a stop to all of this by 

proclamation, immediately suspending entry of all foreign nationals “who enter or attempt to enter 

the United State s to begin attending Harvard University,” and directing the Secretary of State to 

consider revoking the visas of “ foreign nationals who currently attend Harvard University. ”

2.  This is not the Administration’s first attempt to sever Harvard from its international 

students. On May 22, 2025, without process or cause, the Secretary of Homeland Security (“DHS 

Secretary” ) summarily revoked Harvard ’s certification to enroll international students under the 

F-1 visa program , and purported to end Harvard’s designation as an exchange program sponsor to 

host J -1 nonimmigrants , to immediate and devastating effect for Harvard and more than 7,000 visa 

holders —not to mention all of Harvard’s do mestic students . Although the revocation was 

temporarily enjoined by Court order, the DHS Secretary did not withdraw, and has not withdrawn, 

the revocation letter. 

3.  Both the President’s proclamation and the DHS Secretary’s revocation violate the 

First Amendment . Each is part of a concerted and escalating campaign of retaliation by the 

government in clear retribution for Harvard ’s exercising its First Amendment rights to reject the 

government’s demands to control Harvard’s governance, curriculum, and the “ideology” of its 

faculty and students. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 2 of 101 2

4.  The government’s actions , moreover, have no basis in law. The DHS Secretary’s 

revocation disregard s the government’s own regulations —under which Harvard should remain 

certified to host F-1 and J -1 visa holders . It depart s from decades of settled practice and come s

without rational explanation. It was carried out abruptly without any of the detailed procedures the 

government has established to prevent just this type of upheaval to thousands of students’ lives .

And it was undertaken to apply leverage to force Harvard to yield to the Administration’s unlawful 

demands. 

5.  The President’s proclamation lacks a statutory basis. T he President invoked 8 

U.S.C. § 1182(f), but that statute is plainly inapplicable here. The statute gives the President 

authority to protect the country from a class of aliens whose entry would be “detrimental to the 

interests of the United States.” But the President is not suspending entry for any “class of aliens ”; 

to the contrary, nonimmigrants may enter the country unabated, as long as they do not attend 

Harvard . The President’s actions thus are not undertaken to protect the “interests of the United 

States,” but instead to pursue a government vendetta against Harvard. 

6.  With the stroke of a pen, the DHS Secretary and the President have sought to erase 

a quarter of Harvard’s student body —international students who contribute significantly to the 

University and its mission and the country .

7.  Harvard’s certification s are essential for each of Harvard’s thousands of 

international students to lawfully remain in this country while they complete coursework, obtain 

degrees, and continue critical research. Without those certifications in place, most of Harvard’s 

thousands of enrolled F -1 and J -1 visa students (and their more than 300 dependents) have little 

choice but to secure transfer to another school or risk losing lawful status in the United States. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 3 of 101 3

Moreover, Harvard can no longer sponsor F -1 and J -1 visa holders for its upcoming summer and 

fall terms, despite having admitted thousands. 

8.  The President’s proclamation has equally harmful and irreparable consequences. 

Effective immediately, foreign nationals who seek to “begin attending Harvard University” will 

be denied entry to the United States. What the DHS Secretary has purported to take away on the 

back end by revoking Harvard’s certifications to host foreign students , the President purports to 

take away on the front end by preventing the students and scholars invited to Harvard from gaining 

entry into the country in the first place . The proclamation is a patent effort to end -run this Court’s 

order .

9.  The result of the Administration’s actions —individually and cumulatively —is 

devastating. Effective immediately, countless academic programs, research laboratories, clinics, 

and courses supported by Harvard’s international students have been thrown into disarray. The 

Secretary’s action c ame just days before graduation. The President’s action comes just as summer 

students are arriving on campus and students slated to start in the fall are procuring visas and 

finalizing their travel arrangements . Both actions are designed to prevent Harvard’s international 

students from attending Harvard , and they fundamentally alter the education that Harvard 

endeavors to provide to all its students —including domestic students —as it prepares them to 

contribute to and lead in our global society . With no basis in law, the Proclamation denies 

thousands of Harvard’s students the right to come to this country to pursue their education and 

follow their dreams , and it denies Harvard the right to teach them. Without its international 

students, Harvard is not Harvard. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 4 of 101 4

10.  Harvard therefore brings this action under the United States Constitution, the 

Administrative Procedure Act (APA), and the equitable authority of this Court to vacate, set aside, 

and enjoin the government’s unlawful acts. 

INTRODUCTION 

11.  For more than 70 years, Harvard has continuously hosted international students on 

its campus under the F -1 international student visa program. The F -1 program is currently a part 

of the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) overseen by the U.S. Department of 

Homeland Security . Harvard has also long been designated as an exchange program sponsor to 

host J -1 nonimmigrants under the U.S. Department of State’s Exchange Visitor Program (EVP) .

The F -1 and J -1 visa programs, which allow international student s to enter the United States on 

nonimmigrant visas to enroll at Harvard and thousands of other schools, 1 ha ve boosted America’s 

academic, scientific, and economic success and its global standing. 

12.  Tens of thousands of international students have studied at Harvard under the F -1

visa program. Additional international students and scholars have come to Harvard under the J -1

visa program. These students have contributed to the University’s research advancements in 

immeasurable ways. They do so by (among other things) publishing pioneering scholarship, 

supporting scientific research, inventing groundbreaking technologies, and, after leaving Harvard, 

starting thriving businesses here in America. 

13.  Building the international program that sponsors these students did not happen 

overnight. It has been a painstaking, decades -long project to cultivate the programs, opportunities, 

personnel, and reputation that allow Harvard to attract the most qualified i nternational students,  

> 1

U.S. Immigr. & Customs Enfor., SEVP Certified Schools (updated Apr. 28, 2021), 

https://studyinthestates.dhs.gov/ assets/ certified -school -list -04 -28 -21.pdf. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 5 of 101 5

support their visa applications , and integrate them into the Harvard community. Harvard’s robust 

and thriving visa programs have inured to the benefit of Harvard’s entire population and the United 

States. 

14.  Since the inception of the F -1 visa program more than 70 years ago, Harvard and 

the government have worked cooperatively to advance these goals. Harvard has been continuously 

certified to host F -1 visa holders since 1954. Under the modern program establish ed in 2003, 

certified schools must comply with specified recordkeeping, retention, and reporting requirements 

and renew their F -1 certification every two years. And, since then, Harvard has complied with all 

applicable reporting requirements and renewed it s certification without incident. For more than 70 

years , the government has never threatened Harvard’s certification. 

15.  All of that changed on April 16, 2025, when the Secretary of Homeland Security, 

Kristi Noem, sent Harvard’s International Office (HIO) a letter (the “Records Request”) . The 

Records Request demanded that HIO produce wide -ranging information for “each student visa 

holder [] ” across Harvard’s 13 schools within ten business days and further stated that failure to do 

so “within the timeframe provided” —that is, by April 30, 2025 —would be “treated as a voluntary 

withdrawal” from the F -1 program and “not … subject t o appeal.” 

16.  Despite the unprecedented nature of this demand, HIO immediately began 

collecting responsive records from the information it maintains or keeps “accessible,” 8 C.F.R. 

§ 214.3(g)(1), and, on April 30, Harvard produced that information to DHS. On May 14, Harvard 

produced additional information in response to a follow -up request from DHS. Yet, on May 22, 

2025, DHS deemed Harvard’s responses “insufficient” —without explaining why or citing any 

regulation with which Harvard failed to comply —and revok ed Harvard’s SEVP certification 

“effective immediately.” 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 6 of 101 6

17.  The government’s termination of Harvard’s SEVP certification was, at the time, the 

culmination of an unprecedented and retaliatory attack on academic freedom at Harvard: 

a.  In recent weeks and months, through a multi -agency Task Force to Combat 

Anti -Semitism (“Federal Task Force”) , the government has conditioned Harvard’s continued 

receipt of numerous federal benefits, including billions of dollars of federal funding , on the 

University’s acceptance of sweeping changes to its governance , admissions, hiring, and academic 

programs. 

b.  The government enumerated these demands in extensive detail in an 

April 11, 2025, letter to Harvard’s President. The government demanded (among other things) that 

Harvard hire a third party to “audit” the viewpoints of its students, faculty, and staff; depending 

on the results of the audit, hire and admit a “critical mass” of people to achieve the government’s 

preferred level of “viewpoint diversity” in “each department, field, or teaching unit”; refuse 

admission to international students “hostile to … American values”; “exclusively” “empower [] ”

faculty supportive of the government’s action and “reduce[] the power” of those opposed; allow 

the government to review its faculty hires; expel or suspend specific sets of students; disband 

disfavored student clubs; and establish mechanisms for Harvard community members to report on 

one another and send those reports to the government. 

c.  When, on April 14, 2025, Harvard communicated its refusal to accede to 

these demands, the government’s retribution was swift. Hours later, the government froze more 

than $2.2 billion in federal funding critical to the support of ongoing cutting -edge research at 

Harvard —research with the potential to improve the health and safety of millions of Americans 

by better ing cancer treatments, model ing and manag ing the spread of infectious disease outbreaks, 

produc ing vital innovations in quantum computing and artif icial intelligence, and reduc ing the 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 7 of 101 7

short - and long -term consequences of battlefield -related injuries, among myriad other 

developments and discoveries. 2

d.  The next day, on April 15, 2025, President Trump posted on Truth Social 

suggesting that “Harvard should lose its Tax -Exempt Status” as a not -for -profit educational 

institution under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, “if it keeps pushing polit ical, 

ideological, and terrorist inspired/supporting ‘Sickness.’” But Harvard is not a commercial 

business and does not seek investors to fund its activities and then share in their proceeds. So, 

maintaining Section 501(c)(3) status —which permits the Unive rsity to receive tax -deductible 

gifts, raise capital from investors on affordable terms, and provide access to federal student aid 

programs —is vital to Harvard’s existence as a modern research university dedicated to serving the 

public. 

e.  The following day, the President doubled down, asserting in a post on Truth 

Social that “Harvard has been hiring almost all woke, Radical Left, idiots and ‘birdbrains’ who are 

only capable of teaching FAILURE to students” and that “Harvard can no longer be considered 

even a decent place of learning, and should not be considered on any list of the World’s Great 

Universities or Colleges.” On April 16, Secretary Noem sent her letter to HIO, seeking eight broad 

categories of information on every international s tudent studying at Harvard under an F -1 visa, 

threatening that failure to comply would be deemed a “voluntary withdrawal” of Harvard’s SEVP 

certification, and warning that “[t]he withdrawal will not be subject to appeal.” This demand was 

unprecedented, see king information far beyond what DHS’s regulations require Harvard to  

> 2

Harvard has challenged the government’s freeze order and subsequent terminations of billions of 

dollars in multi -year grants to Harvard in President and Fellows of Harvard College v. U.S. Dep’t 

of Health and Human Services , No. 25 -cv -11048 (D. Mass. Apr. 21, 2025) (the “Funding Case”). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 8 of 101 8

maintain and report, and far beyond any request Harvard has received in its more than 70 years 

hosting foreign students under the F -1 visa program. 

f.  Just hours later, DHS issued a press release announcing both its cance llation 

of “two DHS grants totaling over $2.7 million to Harvard” as well as the Secretary’s “scathing 

letter demanding detailed records on Harvard’s foreign student visa holders’ illegal and violent 

act ivities .” The press release asserted that Harvard has allowed “anti -American, pro -Hamas 

ideology [to] poison[] its campus and classrooms” and “undermine America’s values.” It added 

that DHS’s demand for records encompassing thousands of st udent visa holders “follows President 

Donald J. Trump’s decision to freeze $2.2 billion in federal funding to Harvard University, 

proposing the revocation of its tax -exempt status over its radical ideology.” And it concluded by 

stating that “if Harvard can not verify it is in full compliance with its reporting requirements, the 

university will lose the privilege of enrolling foreign students.” 

g.  Despite the unprecedented nature and scope of the April 16 demand, and 

the lack of any clear authority for most of the requests, Harvard worked diligently to collect and 

produce the information it is required to maintain and report under the SEVP program . On 

April 30, 2025, Harvard produced responsive information falling within 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1). 

Specifically, Harvard produced to DHS thousands of data points concerning its entire F -1 visa 

student population. 

h.  Then, on May 7, 2025, DHS notified Harvard that DHS believed Harvard’s 

initial production was incomplete and asked for four of the eight categories of information 

referenced in the initial request. This request continued to be both unprecedented and well beyond 

the scope of the authority invoked by DHS. Harvard therefore requested clarification of the scope 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 9 of 101 9

of the demand and —after DHS invoked a different set of regulatory authority —again conducted a 

search and produced additional responsive information. 

i.  In the wake of Harvard’s productions, DHS summarily revoked Harvard’s 

SEVP certification on th e basis that Harvard’s responses were “insufficient.” But it did not explain 

why that was so, let alone identify any actual noncompliance with the governing regulations or 

follow any of the detailed processes required under the regulations prior to revoking a school’s 

certification .

j.  DHS’s revocation letter leaves no doubt that the revocation is part of DHS’s 

campaign to coerce Harvard into surrendering its First Amendment rights. The letter declares: 

“Consequences must follow to send a clear signal to Harvard and all universities that want to enjoy 

the privilege of enrolling foreign students, that the Trump Administration will enforce the law and 

root out the evils of anti -Americanism and antisemitism in society and campuses. ” Or put another 

way: because the Administration perceives th at members of Harvard’s community have the wrong 

viewpoints, Harvard will be punished until it alters its viewpoints to satisfy the Administration’s 

demands. 

18.  The surrounding events, and Defendants’ express statements, make clear that DHS 

took these actions not for any valid reason, but purely as punishment for Harvard’s speech, its 

perceived viewpoint, and its refusal to surrender its academic independence or r elinquish its 

constitutional rights. A central tenet of our constitutional system is that the government cannot 

“invok[e] legal sanctions and other means of coercion” to micromanage private speech. Nat’l Rifle 

Ass’n of Am. v. Vullo , 602 U.S. 175, 189 (2024 ) (quoting Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan , 372 U.S. 

58, 67 (1963)). And it is bedrock law that the viewpoint -based justifications the government has 

repeatedly and publicly invoked as a basis for its campaign against Harvard are a particularly 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 10 of 101 10 

“egregious form of content discrimination,” subject to the strictest scrutiny. Reed v. Town of 

Gilbert , 576 U.S. 155, 168 -69 (2015) ( citation omitted). Those First Amendment concerns are 

heightened here, as “academic freedom” is “a special concern of the First Amendment,” Keyishian 

v. Bd. of Regents of Univ. of N.Y. , 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967). The government’s actions violate 

Harvard’s rights under the First Amendment several times over. 

19.  Compounding these First Amendment infirmities, the government’s retaliatory 

revocation of Harvard’s certification is the very definition of arbitrary and capricious agency action 

proscribed by the APA . DHS provided no coherent reason for taking these actions, and it s

revocation fully bypassed the detailed statutory and regulatory framework governing the F -1 and 

J-1 visa programs, which specify procedures and standards for revoking a school’s certification —

all of which the government ignored. And the governm ent’s actions run roughshod over the 

procedural due process protections of fair notice and an opportunity to respond owed to Harvard 

under the U.S. Constitution and the APA as the holder, for more than 70 years, of a government 

license to participate in th e F -1 visa program. 

20.  There is no lawful justification for the government’s unprecedented revocation of 

Harvard’s SEVP certification, and the government has not offered any. DHS’s actions go well 

beyond terminating the visa of any individual student —or even a category of students —for 

noncomplian ce with immigration laws. They target Harvard itself, and for no remotely cognizable 

purpose. Harvard is fully committed to ensuring the integrity of its SEVP certification. Indeed, the 

government has continuously certified Harvard to hos t F -1 visa students for more than seven 

decades across 14 presidential administrations. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 11 of 101 11 

21.  After this Court temporarily restrained the revocation, the President issued a 

Proclamation purporting to bar the entry of noncitizens with F, M, and J visas who sought to study 

or conduct research at Harvard, and Harvard alone. 3

22.  The President’s Proclamation is equally unlawful. It escalates and intensifies the 

campaign of retaliation in violation of the First Amendment. In the wake of the Secretary’s 

revocation and Harvard’s successful motion to enjoin that revocation temporarily, the 

Administration’s unconstitutional efforts to increase the pressure on Harvard continued . The White 

House convened senior Administration officials to , according to media reports, “brainstorm 

additional punitive measures ” to punish Harvard . DHS issued an official notice to move forward 

with revocation of Harvard’s program to host F visa holders even after the Court enjoined the 

original revocation —and on the eve of the Court’s preliminary injunction hearing. The Secretary 

of State implemented a “pilot” program for “enhanced vetting” of visa applications and chose 

Harvard ’s admitted and incoming students as the sole population for that program . The President 

repeatedly criticized Harvard for exe rcising its legal rights to challenge unlawful government 

action in court. And the Proclamation was issued just days later. 

23.  Just as the revocation is retaliatory in violation of the First Amendment, the 

Proclamation is retaliatory too. Just as the revocation unconstitutionally intrudes on academic 

freedom, the Proclamation unconstitutionally intrudes too. 

24.  The Proclamation also lacks any statutory basis. The core of the cited statute is the 

President’s authority to “suspend the entry” of a class of foreign nationals upon a finding that entry 

of that class would be “detrimental to the interests of the United States.” But the Proclamation 

does not categorically prevent a class of foreign nationals from entering the country at all; it merely  

> 3

Harvard does not host students on M visas, which are intended for students studying at vocational 

or technical schools. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 12 of 101 12 

prevents their entry if they intend to affiliate with Harvard. And the Proclamation does not find 

that “entry” of the class is “detrimental to the interests of the United States.” Instead, it finds at 

most that having foreign nationals study at Harvard is detrimental to the United States. 

25.  Indeed, on its face, the Proclamation clearly reveals that the government is not 

concerned about the detrimental effects of entry by anyone at all. It is instead (if the Proclamation 

is to be believed) about Harvard’s responsiveness to data requests, Harvard’s “discriminatory” 

policies, and Harvard’s contributions from foreign governments. 

26.  The Proclamation is also an effort to accomplish by Presidential action what the 

Secretary was enjoined from effectuating through agency action. When the Court enjoined the 

Secretary’s efforts to revoke Harvard’s certifications and force its students to tr ansfer or depart the 

country, the President sought to achieve the same result by refusing to allow Harvard students to 

enter in the first place. That was an unlawful evasion of the Court’s order. 

27.  The government has casually discarded core First Amendment protections, the 

protections of procedural due process, and DHS’s own regulations to immediate and devastating 

effect for Harvard and its community. Harvard’s more than 7,000 F -1 and J-1 visa holders —and 

their dependents —have become pawns in the government’s escalating campaign of retaliation. 

Based on these actions , Harvard may no longer sponsor or host F -1 or J -1 visa students. It cannot 

issue Form I -20s to new students, including those who have b een admitted for the upcoming 

summer and fall terms. The thousands of international students who are scheduled to come to 

campus for the summer and fall terms will no longer be able to enter the country. And the several 

thousand international students currently present in the United States —who constitute more than 

a quarter of Harvard’s student population —would, without further action of this Court, be subject 

to immediate removal from the United States. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 13 of 101 13 

28.  Immediate relief is necessary to restore Harvard’s SEVP certification , to prevent 

the implementation of the suspension of and limitation on entry, and to stop the government’s 

arbitrary, capricious, unlawful, and unconstitutional action. 

JURISDICTION AND VENUE 

29.  This action arises under the Administrative Procedure Act (AP A) , 5 U.S.C § 551 et 

seq. ; the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), 8 U.S.C. § 1101 et seq. , and its implementing 

regulations ; and the United States Constitution .

30.  This Court has subject -matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331. Because 

this suit seeks relief other than money damages and instead challenges Defendants’ unlawful 

actions, the United States has waived sovereign immunity from this suit. 5 U.S.C. § 702. 

31.  The Court is authorized to award the requested declaratory and injunctive relief 

under 5 U.S.C. §§ 702, 703, 705, and 706 ; 28 U.S.C. §§ 2201 and 2202 ; 42 U.S.C. § 1988 ; and 

through the equitable powers of this Court. 

32.  Venue is proper in this District under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(e)(1), because Defendants 

are agencies of the United States and officers of the United States acting in their official capacit ies; 

a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claims occurred in this District ; and 

Harvard reside s in this District .

33.  Harvard has standing to bring this case. Defendants’ actions —unless halted by this 

Court —will cause an imminent, concrete, and irreparable injury to Harvard , its students and 

faculty, and its ability to achieve its educational mission. 

PARTIES 

34.  Plaintiff President and Fellows of Harvard College is a non -profit corporation that 

is the senior governing board of the organization known as Harvard University. Harvard is a private 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 14 of 101 14 

research university and the oldest institution of higher learning in the United States. Harvard’s 

13 schools provide undergraduate and graduate instruction and degree programs to more than 

24,000 enrolled students annually, including more than 5, 000 international students who study in 

the United States on F -1 visas . Additionally, Harvard sponsors approximately 2,000 recent 

graduates who are working in jobs across the country on F -1 visas as part of the Optional Practical 

Training (OPT) and STEM OPT program s. And Harvard also hosts several hundred individuals 

who hold J -1 visas. 

35.  Defendant United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is a cabinet -

level Department of the federal government. DHS is responsible for overseeing enforcement and 

implementation of certain provisions of the nation’s immigration laws by all DHS subagencies and 

personnel. 

36.  Defendant Kristi Noem is the Secretary of DHS. Defendant Noem is sued in her 

official capacity. 

37.  Defendant United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is a 

component of DHS. ICE is responsible for administering SEVP and overseeing proceedings to 

grant, recertify, and withdraw an institution’s SEVP certification. 

38.  Defendant Todd Lyons is the Acting Director of ICE. Defendant Lyons is sued in 

his official capacity .

39.  Defendant Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) is a component of ICE. 

SE VP is responsible for administering the F-1 visa program and proceedings to grant, recertify, 

and withdraw an institution’s SEVP certification. 

40.  Defendant John Doe is the Director of SEVP. Director Doe is sued in his official 

capacity. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 15 of 101 15 

41.  Defendant J ames Hicks is the Deputy Assistant Director of SE VP. Defendant Hicks 

is sued in his official capacity. 

42.  Defendant United States Department of Justice is a cabinet -level Department of the 

federal government. The Department of Justice is charged with overseeing domestic enforcement 

of federal laws. 

43.  Defendant Pamela Bondi is the Attorney General of the United States. Defendant 

Bondi is sued in her official capacity. 

44.  Defendant United States Department of State is a cabinet -level Department of the 

federal government. The State Department is responsible for conducting American foreign policy 

and diplomacy, and relevant here, for administering the J -1 Exchange Visitor Program. 

45.  Defendant Marco Rubio is the Secretary of State. Defendant Rubio is sued in his 

official capacity. 

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 

A.  The F-1 Visa Program and SEVP Certification 

46.  SEVP is a federally regulated program that recognizes the inherent value in 

bringing the best and brightest students —wherever they are found —to the United States , to study 

and contribute to American academic institutions .

47.  Under the INA, certain international students are permitted to attend American 

universities on nonimmigrant F -1 visas. An F -1 visa permits international student s to enter and be 

lawfully present in the United States to complete their course s of study, among other things. 

48.  Eligibility to maintain F -1 status is governed by 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(F)(i) and 

8 C.F.R. § 214.2(f). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 16 of 101 16 

49.  As relevant here, i n order to qualify for an F -1 visa, a noncitizen must : (1) “hav[e] 

a residence in a foreign country which he has no intention of abandoning”; (2) be “a bona fide 

student qualified to pursue a full course of study”; and (3) “seek[] to enter the United States 

temporarily and solely for the purpose of pursuing such a course of study … at an established 

college, university, … or other academic instituti on … particularly designated by him and 

approved by the Attorney General .” 8 U.S.C. § 1101( a)(15)(F)(i) (emphasis added). 

50.  The statutorily mandated process by which schools are “approved by the Attorney 

General” to host students who hold F -1 visas is administered by SEVP, a subcomponent of ICE 

(within DHS) .4

51.  The process for seeking the required approval is known as “SEVP certification,” 

see, e.g. , 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(f), and a school that receives that approval is said to be “SEVP -

certified,” see, e.g. , id. § 214.2 (f)(4). 

52.  The requirements for obtaining SEVP certification are set out in 8 C.F.R. § 214.3. 

53.  To begin the SEVP certification process, a school must “file a petition for 

certification” with DHS using an online portal known as “the Student and Exchange Visitor 

Information System,” or SEVIS , and pay a filing fee . Id. §§ 214.3(a)(1) , 103.7(d)(2)(i) .

54.  The requirements for obtaining initial SEVP certification (the “Initial Certification 

Criteria”) are enumerated in the governing regulation . The school “must establish at the time of 

filing” that it: (A) “[i]s a bona fide school”; (B) “[i]s an established institution of learning or other 

recognized place of study”; (C) “[p]ossesses the necessary facilities, personnel, and finances to  

> 4

For ease of reference , Harvard refer s to Defendants collectively as “DHS” from this point 

forward. References in the INA to the Attorney General are generally understood also to refer to 

the DHS Secretary. See 6 U.S.C. § 236(b) (transferring many functions relating to federal 

immigration law to the Secretary of Homeland Security) .

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 17 of 101 17 

conduct instruction in recognized courses ”; and (D) “[i]s, in fact, engaged in instruction in those 

courses.” Id. § 214.3(a)(3)(i)(A) -(D ). 

55.  After receiving its initial certification, a school must petition to renew that 

certification every two years , see id. § 214.3(h)(2) ; 8 U.S.C. § 1762(a) .

56.  To “be eligible for recertification,” the school must establish that: (A) it “[r]emains 

eligible for [initial] certification in accordance with paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section” (that is, it 

continues to satisfy the four Initial Certification Criteria ); and (B) the school and its Designated 

School Officials ( DSO s) have “complied during its previous period of certification … with 

recordkeeping, retention, and reporting requirements and all other requirements of paragraphs (g), 

(j), (k), and (l) of this section” (the “Compliance Criteria”). 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(a)(3)(ii)(A) -(B) ; see 

also id. § 214.3(h)(2)(iii)(B) (stating that individual DSO compliance may be considered). 

57.  Section 214.3(g) of the regulations enumerates the Compliance Criteria relating to 

a school’s recordkeeping , retention, and reporting obligations . It requires schools to “keep records 

containing certain specific information and documents relating to each F -1 … student” and to 

“furnish the[se records] to DHS representatives upon request.” Id. § 214.3(g)(1). 

58.  DHS defined and limited this “specific information” by regulation. The information 

includes the student’s name, “date and place of birth, [and] country of citizenship”; the “[c]urrent 

address where the student and his or her dependents physically reside”; the student’s “[r]ecord of 

coursework”; his “[a]cademic status,” including “the effective d ate or period if suspended, 

dismissed, placed on probation, or withdrawn”; and, if applicable, a “[t]ermination date and 

reason.” Id. § 214.3(g)(1)(ii) -(iv), (vi), ( ix). These categories largely track the information that the 

school is required to maintain by statute. See 8 U.S.C. § 1372(c)(1). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 18 of 101 18 

59.  Sections 214.3(j) -(l) of the regulations set forth the additional Compliance Criteria 

a school seeking recertification must satisfy . Section 214.3(j) limits schools to certain specified 

language when discussing their SEVP certification in advertising or promotional materials. See 8

C.F.R. § 214.3(j). Section 214.3(k) provides that the school may only issue a Form I -20 —a critical 

document in the noncitizen’s F -1 visa application —to foreign students who have applied to the 

school in writing and have been accepted on the merits. See id. § 214.3(k). And Section 214.3( l)

requires schools to designate one Principal Designated School Official (PDSO) and any number 

of additional DSOs , “whose compensation does not come from commissions for recruitment of 

foreign students,” to advise F -1 students “reg arding maintenance of nonimmigrant status and to 

support timely and complete recordkeeping and reporting to DHS .” Id. § 214.3( l)(1)(ii) -(iii). These 

are the only recertification eligibility requirements specified in DHS’s regulations. 

B.  Withdrawal of SEVP Certification 

60.  In addition to the ordinary biennial recertification process described above , the 

regulations provide that DHS may review and (if warranted) withdraw a school’s certification “in 

accordance with the provisions of [8 C.F.R. § 214.4] ,” id. § 214.3(f)(1) . The regulations refer to 

this alternative means of withdrawing a school’s certification as an “out -of -cycle review” leading 

to “[w]ithdrawal on notice.” Id. § 214.4(b). 

61.  SEVP may initiate an out -of -cycle review of a school’s certification “to verify the 

school’s compliance with the recordkeeping, retention, reporting and other requirements of 

paragraphs (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l) of this section to verify the school’s con tinued eligibility for 

SEVP certification pursuant to paragraph (a)(3) of this section.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 19 of 101 19 

62.  As part of this out -of -cycle review process, “SEVP may request a school to 

electronically update all Form I -17 fields[ 5] in SEVIS and provide SEVP with documentation 

supporting the update ,” and “[t]he school must complete such updates in SEVIS and submit the 

supporting documentation to SEVP within 10 business days of the request from SEVP.” Id. 

§ 214.3(h)(3)(ii). 

63.  If DHS identifies any non -compliance during the out -of -cycle review process, the 

regulations give the agency only two options for taking adverse action against the school: it may 

(1) “initiate remedial action with the school, as appropriate,” or (2) “initiate withdrawal 

proceedings against the school pursuant to [8 C.F.R. § 214.4.( b)] if noncompliance or ineligibility 

of a school is identified.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii); see also id. § 214.3(h)(3)(vi) (providing that 

“SEVP will institute withdrawal proceeding s in accordance with [8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b)] if, upon 

completion of an out -of -cycle review, SEVP determines that a school or its programs are no longer 

eligible for certification”). 

64.  The regulations do not create any mechanism for summary withdrawal of a school’s 

certification after an out -of -cycle review has been conducted. Instead, DHS’s authority to revoke 

a certification is limited both substantively and procedurally. 

65.  Substantively, DHS may seek to withdraw a school’s certification if (after 

conducting this out -of -cycle review process) it determines that the school “has failed to sustain 

eligibility or has failed to comply with the recordkeeping, retention, reporting and other 

requirements of paragraphs (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l) of this section,” id. § 214.3(e)(4)(ii) & (f)(1) —

in other words, if it fails to satisfy either the Initial Certification Criteria or the Compliance Criteria . 

> 5

The Form I -17 is a form the school fills out in connection with its petition for certification, 

providing information such as the school’s address and disciplines taught. See, e.g. , 8 C.F.R. 

§ 214.3(h)(3)(i)(A) -(T). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 20 of 101 20 

66.  Section 214.4 likewise provides that SEVP certification may be withdrawn under 

this out -of -cycle review mechanism only “if the school … is determined to no longer be entitled 

to certification for any valid and substantive reason.” Id. § 214.4(a)(2) ; see 8 U.S.C. § 1762(c) 

(stating that “[m]aterial failure … to comply with the [specified] recordkeeping and reporting 

requirements to receive nonimmigrant students” is grounds for withdrawal of certification) .

67.  The regulation lists 19 “valid and substantive reason[s]” for withdrawing 

certification . One such reason is “[f]ailure to comply with [8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1)] without a 

subpoena.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(a)(2) (i) . Others include failure to adhere to the Initial Certification 

Criteria , id. § 214.4(a)(2)(xii) -(xiii), (xv) -(xvii); failure to comply with the Compliance Criteria ,

see id. § 214.4(a)(2)(i) -(iv), (viii) -(x), (xiv), (xviii) -(xix); and misconduct by or lack of 

qualification of the school’s DSOs, see id. § 214.4(a)(2)(v) -(vii). 

68.  Procedurally, e ven where DHS identifies a “valid and substantive reason” for 

withdrawing a school’s certification, the regulations do not permit DHS to summarily decertify a 

school . Instead, Section 214.4 establishes a detailed set of procedures that DHS must follow if it 

wishes to withdraw certification pursuant to out -of -cycle review (i.e., outside the biennial 

recertification process ).

69.  The process for withdrawal of certification following out -of -cycle review is 

governed by 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b), which is entitled “Withdrawal on notice.” As the name reflects ,

DHS may initiate withdrawal -on -notice proceedings only by serving the school with a notice 

known as a “Notice of Intent to Withdraw” or NOIW . I d. § 214.3(e)(4) . The NOIW must “inform 

the school” of “[t]he grounds for withdrawing SEVP certification .” Id. § 214.4(b) (1) .

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 21 of 101 21 

70.  The issuance of a NOIW is the first step in what the regulation s elsewhere refer to 

as “withdrawal proceedings.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii). Those proceedings involve detailed procedural 

protections —including administrative appeals —prior to effectuating a withdrawal of certification .

71.  Upon receipt of a NOIW , the school has 30 days to submit an answer either 

admitting or denying the allegations in the NOIW and supporting its position with “sworn 

statements, and documentary or other evidence, to rebut the grounds for withdrawal of 

certification.” Id. § 214.4(b)(2); see id. § 214.4(d) -(e). The school may also submit “a written 

request … for a telephonic interview in support of its response to the NOIW.” Id. § 214.4(b)(3). 

And the school is permitted to be represented by counsel during these proceedings. See id. 

§ 214.4(c). 

72.  If DHS wishes to proceed with withdrawing the school’s certification following 

this period of review , it must issue a written decision explaining “the specific reasons for” its 

decision. Id. § 103.3(a)(1)(i); see id. § 214.4(g). 

73.  The regulations also provide that “[a] school can voluntarily withdraw from SEVP 

… in lieu of complying with an out -of -cycle review or request.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(vii). To do so, 

the school generally must “ initiate voluntary withdrawal by sending a request for withdrawal on 

official school letterhead to SEVP.” Id. (emphasis added). The regulations also state that “[f]ailure 

of a school to comply with an out -of -cycle review or request by SEVP will be treated as a voluntary 

withdrawal .” Id. This voluntary withdrawal procedure can only be read as appl ying in cases where 

no out -of -cycle review in fact occurs, despite the agency’s desire to conduct such a review, because 

of the school’s decision to withdraw from the progr am in lieu of compliance. 

74.  In sum, the regulations provide DHS with only two means of terminating a school’s 

existing F -1 visa program outside of the normal biennial recertification process : First , DHS can 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 22 of 101 22 

withdraw a certification only by issuing a NOIW and initiating “withdrawal proceedings” pursuant 

to 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b). Second , if DHS initiates an out -of -cycle review and the school wishes to 

acquiesce in the withdrawal of its certification, it can “voluntarily withdraw” its certification either 

by submitting a letter to that effect or simply by declining to engage with the out -of -cycle review 

process. 

75.  Upon information and belief, prior to the decertification decision in this case, no 

school had ever had its SEVP certification revoked for any reason other than failure to meet the 

eligibility criteria for certification or failure to comply with the record keeping, retention, reporting, 

and other requirements set out in the federal regulations governing certification. 

C.  The Administrative Appeals Process for Challenging Revocation of SEVP 

Certification 

76.  The regulatory scheme also entitles a school whose certification is withdrawn to 

file an administrative appeal of that decision . Specifically , the regulations authorize the school to 

“file an [administrative] appeal of a … withdrawal [of certification] no later than 1 5 days after the 

service of the decision by ICE.” Id. § 214.4(h). 

77.  Publicly available g uidance documents promulgated by DHS and ICE describe the 

multi -step appeal process. 6

78.  In the first instance, an administrative appeal is assigned to the same “adjudicator 

who originally adjudicated the case to determine whether to uphold or overturn the original 

decision.” Ex. 2. 

> 6

See DHS, General Appeals Process Information (attached as Exhibit 1) (describing 

administrative appeals process); ICE , Appeal Processing Steps (attached as Exhibit 2) (same) . The 

processes outlined in these two documents are substantively identical. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 23 of 101 23 

79.  If the original adjudicator affirms his earlier decision, the case proceeds to the 

Administrative Appeals Team, or AAT, which “reviews the case and all the evidence relating to 

the petition” and “draft[s] a preliminary appeal decision.” Id. 

80.  That preliminary decision is then subject to “[l]egal and [r]egulatory [r]eview” to 

“ensure regulatory compliance and legal sufficiency .” Id. 

81.  From there, a different body known as the Final Appeals Authority, or FAA, 

“reviews the entire case proceedings to ensure understanding of [the] case, including both 

comments from the AAT adjudicator and from the legal entity” that performed the legal and 

regulatory review. Ex. 1.

82.  The AAT adjudicator then reviews the FAA’s comments and makes any necessary 

changes . See id. 

83.  Afterward, the decision is returned to the FAA for approval of a final, signed 

appellate decision. See id. That “final decision is then issued to the petitioner and [its] attorney, if 

applicable, via email.” Ex. 2.

84.  This administrative appeals process “takes roughly 60 business days.” Ex. 1.

D.  Consequences of Withdrawing SEVP Certification 

85.  The consequences of withdrawing SEVP certification are drastic —for the school 

that loses certification , for its students, and for its broader community. 

86.  Effective immediately upon DHS’s decision, the school may no longer issue new 

Forms I -20 to foreign students as needed to allow them to obtain F-1 visa s and therefore admission 

into the United States . 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(1). The effect is to preclude the school from accepting 

any new foreign students to its programs. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 24 of 101 24 

87.  With respect to current students with F -1 status, students whose school is 

decertified are, necessarily, no longer “pursuing a full course of study at an educational institution 

certified by SEVP for attendance by foreign students,” id. § 214.2(f)(5)(i), and thus are at 

immediate risk of losing their F -1 status. 

88.  A student who remains in the United States after his or her F -1 status is terminated 

is unlawfully present and may be placed in removal proceedings. See 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(1)(C)(i). 

A noncitizen who remains unlawfully present for more than 180 days is thereafter rendered 

inadmissible for a period of three years. See id. § 1182(a)(9)(B)(i)(I), (ii). 

89.  As a practical matter, the regulations and publicly available guidance indicate that 

loss of a student’s F -1 status is triggered not on the date of the school’s decertification, but rather 

on the later date when the school’s access to the online SEVIS portal is terminated —known as its 

“SEVIS access termination date .” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(2). On this date, DHS “will automatically 

terminate any remaining Active SEVIS records for that school.” Id .7

90.  Termination of SEVIS records presents student visa holder s whose school loses its 

certification with two bad choices: (a) attempt the uncertain path of securing immediate “[t]ransfer 

to another SEVP -certified school,” which typically will not be feasible —much less guaranteed —

in the middle of an academic year (particularly when thousands of students are seeking transfers 

en masse ), or (b) “[d]epart the United States.” Ex. 3 at 2. 

91.  Although termination of SEVIS access eventually follows from withdrawal of 

certification, DHS must make an independent determination as to when it occurs —and thus when 

to terminate the status of its F -1 visa students . “In most situations,” and unless the school is  

> 7

See U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec. , Loss of SEVP Certification (Dec. 19, 2024) (attached as 

Ex hibit 3). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 25 of 101 25 

“suspected of criminal activity or poses a potential national security threat,” DHS “will not 

determine a SEVIS access termination date for that school until the [administrative] appeals 

process has concluded and the … withdrawal has been upheld.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(2). In

determin ing the SEVIS access termination date, DHS “will consider the impact that such date will 

have upon SEVP, the school, and the school’s nonimmigrant students.” Id. 

92.  A school whose certification is withdrawn is in eligible to petition again for SEVP 

certification until one year after withdrawal, and even then, “[e]ligibility to re -petition will be at 

the discretion of the Director of SEVP.” Id. § 214.4(a)(2). 

E.  The J Visa Program 

93.  The J visa is the nonimmigrant visa class for foreign citizens who are approved to 

participate in an exchange visitor program in the United States, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(J), 

including as students, professors, and research scholars. 22 C.F.R. § 62.4. 

94.  To host individuals on J -1 visas, an institution must be designated as a n “Exchange 

Visitor Program sponsor” by the Department of State. 22 C.F.R. § 62.3, 62.5. 

95.  Revocation of a sponsor’s Exchange Visitor Program (EVP) designation is 

governed by 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d). The provision authorizes the Department of State’s Office of 

Exchange Coordination and Designation (the “Office”) to serve a sponsor with written notice of 

its intent to revoke the sponsor’s Exchange Visitor Program designation “[u]pon a finding of any 

act or omission set forth in [ paragraph (a) of the regulation ].” 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d). Paragraph (a), 

in turn, provides that notice of intent to revoke m ay be issued upon a finding that the sponsor has 

violated one or more provisions of 22 C.F.R. Part 62; evidenced a pattern of failure to comply with 

one or more provisions of 22 C.F.R. Part 62; committed an act of omission or commission, which 

has or could have the effect of endangering the health, safety, or welfare of an exchange visitor; 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 26 of 101 26 

or otherwise conducted its program in such a way as to undermine the foreign policy objectives of 

the United States, compr om ise the national security interests of the United States, or bring the 

Department or the Exchange Visitor Program into notoriety or disrepute. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(a). 

96.  Upon such a finding, the regulations afford sponsors notice and an opportunity to 

be heard before the revocation takes effect: 

a.  The Office must provide at least 30 days’ written notice of its intent to 

revoke. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(1). 

b.  That notice must “specify the grounds for the proposed sanction and its 

effective date, advise the sponsor of its right to oppose the proposed sanction, and identify the 

procedures for submitting a statement of opposition thereto.” Id. 

c.  The sponsor is then afforded the opportunity to submit a statement in 

opposition to or mitigation of the proposed sanction, the submission of which serves to stay the 

effective date of the proposed sanction pending decision of the Principal Deputy Assistan t

Secretary for Educational and Cultural Affairs. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(2)(i) -(ii). The Principal 

Deputy Assistant Secretary is then responsible for reviewing the submissions of both the sponsor 

and the Office and either modifying, withdrawing, or confirmin g the proposed sanction by serving 

the sponsor a written decision that specifies the grounds for the sanction, identifies its effective 

date, advises the sponsor of its right to request a review, and identifies the procedures for 

requesting such review. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(2)(v). 

97.  The effect of an order of revocation is outlined in 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(i). A sponsor 

against which an order of revocation “has become effective may not thereafter issue any Certificate 

of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor (J -1) Status (Form DS -2019) or adver tise, recruit for, or 

otherwise promote its program.” 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(i). And even where the sponsor has already 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 27 of 101 27 

issued a Form DS -2019, the sponsor may not under any circumstances “facilitate the entry of an 

exchange visitor into the United States” after revocation. Id. The regulation also expressly states 

that an order of revocation “will not in any way diminish or restrict the sponsor ’s legal or financial 

responsibilities to existing program applicants or participants.” Id .

F. The President’s Authority Over Immigration 

98.  Section 212 of the INA, codified at 8 U.S.C. § 1182, is entitled “Inadmissible 

aliens” and sets forth various grounds of inadmissibility. It “defines the universe of aliens who 

are admissible into the United States.” Trump v. Hawaii , 585 U.S. 667, 695 (2018). 

99.  Section 212(f) “enabl[es] the President to supplement the other grounds of 

inadmissibility in the INA.” Id. at 684 (quoting Abourezk v. Reagan , 785 F.2d 1043, 1049 n.2 

(D.C. Cir. 1986)). It specifies that if the President determines “that the entry of any aliens or of 

any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United 

States,” the President “may by proclamation, and for such period as he shall deem necessary, 

suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or impose 

on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate .” 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f). 

100.  Section 212(f) has been invoked to address noncitizens who risked harm to the 

United States and as a diplomatic tool to induce cooperation from foreign countries. Hawaii , 585 

U.S. at 679 -80, 692 -93. Section 212(f) has never been invoked to target U.S. institutions by 

barring from the country noncitizens who wish to affiliate with those institutions. 

101.  Section 215(a) of the INA makes it unlawful “for any alien to depart from or enter 

or attempt to depart from or enter the United States except under such reasonable rules, 

regulations, and orders, and subject to such limitations and exceptions as the Presi dent may 

prescribe.” 8 U.S.C. § 1185(a)(1). As the Supreme Court and the government have recognized, 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 28 of 101 28 

this provision has typically been invoked in conjunction with Section 212(f) and “‘substantially 

overlap[s]’ with [Section 212(f)].” Hawaii , 585 U.S. at 683 n.1 (quoting Brief for Petitioners 32 -

33). 

FACTUAL BACKGROUND 

A.  Harvard’s Participation in the F -1 Visa Program 

102.  Harvard first became certified to host students with F -1 visas in 1954 and has 

continuously maintained its certification for the 70 -plus years since. Throughout that period, all 

of Harvard’s required biennial petitions for recertification have been approved without issue. 

103.  The seamless recertification across this period —spanning more than 14 presidential 

administrations —reflect s a determination by DHS and SEVP (and their predecessor agencies) that 

the University has remained eligible for certification . In other words, Harvard is a bona fide and 

established institution of learning; possesses the necessary facilities, personnel, and finances to 

conduct instruction in recognized courses and is in fact engaged in instruction in those courses; 

and has continuously complied with applicable recordkeeping, retention, and reporting 

requirements and all other requirements of the governing regulations. 

104.  International students who hold F -1 visas , as well as students and scholars visiting 

on J -1 visas, form a vital part of Harvard’s academic community. Over 5, 000 F -1 visa holders are 

currently enrolled at Harvard, representing approximately 26% of the total student body across 

Harvard’s 13 schools. These students hail from 143 different countries, contributing unique social, 

cultural, and intellectual perspectives that enrich classroom discussions, research endeavors, and 

campus life. Among other activities, they run labs, teach courses, assist faculty members, drive 

innovative research, and participate across a wide range of athletic programs and 42 varsity sports. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 29 of 101 29 

105.  Harvard’s ability to enroll international students directly affects its global rankings 

and reputation as an institution of higher learning. Harvard fills its classes with the most qualified 

applicants from around the world. 

106.  For some disciplines, this results in class es with large shares of international 

students. For example, a t the Harvard Kennedy School , the mission of which depends on providing 

students with the perspectives of current and future policymakers from around the world, 49% of 

students hold F -1 visas. One third of Harvard Business School students are F-1 visa holders . And 

nearly all —94% —of the students in Harvard Law School’s LL.M. program on comparative law 

are international students with F -1 visas .

107.  Leading scholars often consider a university’s international profile , the caliber of 

its students, and its research and teaching support resources in deciding where to teach and conduct 

research. 

108.  The many notable alumni who have enrolled at Harvard as student visa holders —

including Benazir Bhutto , the former Prime Minister of Pakistan , Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the former 

President of Liberia, Empress Masako of Japan , and countless corporate executives, university 

professors, and high -ranking government officials across the world —amplify and enhance the 

profile that attracts top talent to the University. 

B.  Harvard’s Response to Antisemitism on its Campus 

109.  On October 7, 2023, the terrorist organization Hamas conducted a surprise attack 

on Israeli citizens. This began an ongoing war between Israel and Hamas . The escalating conflict 

in the Middle East dominated headlines around the globe. In the United States, protests erupted on 

university campuses across the country. Like other schools, Harvard experienced increased 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 30 of 101 30 

tensions among members of its campus community, including students. Members of the Jewish 

and Israeli communities at Harvard reported treatment that was vicious and reprehensible. 

110.  In the aftermath of these events, Harvard made substantial changes aimed at 

ensuring its campus is safe, fair, and welcoming to Jewish and Israeli students. Harvard has 

adopted new accountability procedures and clarified policies; imposed meaningful discipline for 

those who have violate d applicable policies; enhanced programs designed to address bias and 

promote ideological diversity and civil discourse; hired staff to support these programs and 

impacted students; and enhanced safety and security measures. Harvard’s work is ongoing, and it 

continue s to update and enforce its policies and procedures to protect Jewish and Israeli members 

of the Harvard community while permitting the free and open exchange of ideas. 

C.  The Government’s Attack on Harvard and Retaliatory Funding Freeze 

111.  Following President Trump’s inauguration, on February 3, 2025, the government 

announced the formation of its Federal Task Force , led by Senior Counsel to the Assistant Attorney 

General for Civil Rights, Leo Terrell. 8 On February 26, 2025, a news article reported Terrell as 

saying, “When you see universities start losing millions of dollars in federal funding, you’re going 

to see a change in their behavior.” 9

112.  A few days later, Terrell stated in a Fox Business clip he later shared on X, “I’ve 

targeted ten schools. Columbia, Harvard, Michigan, UCLA, USC. Let me tell you what we’re 

going to do. We’re going to take away your funding.” 10  

> 8

See Press Release, U.S. Dep’t of Just ., Off. of Pub. Affs. , Justice Department Announces 

Formation of Task Force to Combat Anti -Semitism (Feb. 3, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 4).  

> 9

Andrew Bernard, “Head of DOJ Antisemitism Task Force: We’ll Put Hamas Supporters in Jail 

‘for Years ’,” Jewish News Syndicate , at 2 (Feb. 26, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 5). 

> 10

@TheLeoTerrell, X (Feb.  28, 2025, 11:48  AM  ET) , https://x.com/TheLeoTerrell/ status/ 

1895516455392985171 .

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 31 of 101 31 

113.  On February 28, 2025, the Federal Task Force issued a press release announcing its 

plans to visit ten university campuses, including Harvard, to gather information about allegations 

of antisemitic incidents. 11 

114.  On March 31, 2025, the Federal Task Force sent Harvard a memorandum 

announcing its intent to conduct a review of more than $8.7 billion in federal research grants to 

Harvard and “its affiliates .”12  This memorandum stated that Harvard was “being investigated for 

potential infractions and dereliction of duties to curb or combat anti -Semitic harassment.” Id. 

115.  On April 3, 2025, the government sent Harvard a letter (the “April 3 Letter”) 

conveying a list of “broad, non -exhaustive areas of reform that the government views as necessary 

for Harvard to implement to remain a responsible recipient of federal taxpayer dollars ,” which 

went far beyond concerns regarding antisemitism .13 

116.  On April 11, 2025, the government sent another letter to Harvard that went even 

further (the “Demand Letter”) .14  The Demand L etter superseded the April 3 Letter, enumerating 

detailed conditions for “maintain [ing] Harvard’s financial relationship with the federal 

government .” Id. at 1. These conditions sought to regulate or put under direct government control  

> 11

Press Release, U .S. Dep’t of Just. , Federal Task Force to Combat Antisemitism Announces Visits 

to 10 College Campuses that Experienced Incidents of Antisemitism (Feb. 28, 2025) (attached as 

Exhibit 6).  

> 12

Memorandum from Josh Gruenbaum , U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., to Alan M. Garber , Harvard 

Univ., and Penny Pritzker , Lead Member, Harvard Corp. , Re: Review of Federal Government 

Contracts , at 1 (Mar. 31, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 7).  

> 13

Letter from Josh Gruenbaum, U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., Sean R. Keveney, U.S. Dep’t of Health 

& Hum. Servs., and Thomas E. Wheeler , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., to Alan M. Garber , Harvard Univ., 

and Penny Pritzker , Lead Member, Harvard Corp., at 1 -2 (Apr. 3, 2025) (the “April 3 Letter”) 

(attached as Exhibit 8).  

> 14

Letter from Josh Gruenbaum, U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., Sean R. Keveney, U.S. Dep’t of Health 

& Hum. Servs., and Thomas E. Wheeler , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., to Alan M. Garber , Harvard Univ., 

and Penny Pritzker , Lead Member, Harvard Corp. (Apr. 11, 2025) (the “Demand Letter”) (attached 

as Exhibit 9). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 32 of 101 32 

a slate of core university functions, including regulation of the viewpoints of Harvard’s students 

and faculty. Among the conditions we re the following (emphases added): 

• Viewpoint Diversity in Admissions and Hiring . … [T]he University shall commission 

an external party … to audit the student body, faculty, staff, and leadership for viewpoint 

diversity , such that each department, field, or teaching unit must be individually viewpoint 

diverse . … Harvard must abolish all criteria, preferences, and practices, whether 

mandatory or optional, throughout its admissions and hiring practices , that function as 

ideological litmus tests. Every department or field found to lack viewpoint diversity must 

be reformed by hiring a critical mass of new faculty within that department or field who 

will provide viewpoint diversity; every teaching unit found to lack viewpoint diversity 

must be reformed by admitting a critical mass of students who will provide viewpoint 

diversity. 

• Governance and leadership reforms. … Harvard must make meaningful governance 

reform and restructuring … [including] empowering tenured professors and senior 

leadership, and, from among the tenured professoriate and senior leadership, exclusively 

those most devoted to the scholarly mission of the University and committed to the 

changes indicated in this letter; reducing the power held by students and untenured 

faculty ; [and] reducing the power held by faculty (whether tenured or untenured) and 

administrators more committed to activism than scholarship .

• International Admissions Reform. … [T]he University must reform its recruitment, 

screening, and admissions of international students to prevent admitting students hostile 

to the American values and institutions inscribed in the U.S. Constitution and Declaration 

of Independence, including students supportive of terrorism or anti -Semitism. Harvard 

will immediately report to federal authorities, including [DHS] and [t he] State 

Department, any foreign student, including those on visas and with green cards, who 

commits a conduct violation. … [T]hese reforms must be durable and demonstrated 

through structural and personnel changes .

• Student Discipline Reform and Accountability. … In the future, funding decisions for 

student groups or clubs must be made exclusively by a body of University faculty 

accountable to senior University leadership . In particular, Harvard must end support and 

recognition of those student groups or clubs that engaged in anti -Semitic activity since 

October 7th, 2023, including the Harvard Palestine Solidarity Committee, Harvard 

Graduates Students 4 Palestine, Law Stud ents 4 Palestine, Students for Justice in 

Pales tine, and the National Lawyers Guild, and discipline and render ineligible the 

officers and active members of those student organizations. 

• Transparency and Monitoring. … The University shall … , [n]o later than June 30, 

2025, and every quarter thereafter … at least until the end of 2028, … submit to the federal 

government a report —certified for accuracy —that documents its progress on the 

implementation of the reforms det ailed in this letter …. [and] must also, to the satisfaction 

of the federal government, disclose the source and purpose of all foreign funds; cooperate 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 33 of 101 33 

with the federal government in a forensic audit of foreign funding sources and uses, 

including how that money was used by Harvard, its agents, and … third parties acting on 

Harvard’s campus. 

Id. at 1-5. 

117.  The Demand Letter reiterated the government’s expectation of “immediate 

cooperation in implementing these critical reforms.” Id. at 5 . It cited no authority for that demand 

or any other. 

118.  On April 14, 2025, Harvard declined to accept the government’s demands .

President Garber, in a letter to the Harvard Community , wrot e: “Although some of the demands 

outlined by the government are aimed at combating antisemitism, the majority represent direct 

governmental regulation of the ‘intellectual conditions’ at Harvard.” 15  President Garber added that 

“[n]o government —regardless of which party is in power —should dictate what private universities 

can teach, whom they can admit and hire, and which areas of study and inquiry they can pursue. ”

Id. at 2. 

119.  In a separate April 14, 2025 letter to the government, attorneys for Harvard stated 

that “[n] either Harvard nor any other private university can allow itself to be taken over by the 

federal government .”16 

120.  The government’s response was swift and punishing. The same day, the Federal 

Task Force responded by “announcing a freeze on $2.2 billion in multi -year grants and $60M in 

multi -year contract value to Harvard University” (the “Freeze Order”). 17  The Freeze Order cited  

> 15

Alan M. Garber, The Promise of American Higher Education , Harvard Univ., Office of the 

President (Apr. 14, 2025) (the “Garber Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 10 ).  

> 16

Letter from William A. Burck & Robert K. Hur , Counsel for Harvard Univ., to Josh Gruenbaum, 

U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., Sean R. Keveney, U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., and Thomas E. 

Wheeler , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., at 2 (Apr. 14, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 1 1).  

> 17

Press Release, U .S. Dep’t of Educ. , Joint Task Force to Combat Anti -Semitism Statement 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 34 of 101 34 

“[t]he harassment of Jewish students” and “the troubling entitlement mindset that is endemic in 

our nation ’s most prestigious universities and colleges.” Id .

121.  The government immediately began implementing the Freeze Order. Within hours 

of the Freeze Order, Harvard began receiving stop work orders. 

122.  The next morning, on April 15 , 2025, President Trump published the following post 

on his social media website , Truth Social: 18 

Regarding Harvard University (Apr. 14, 2025) (the “Freeze Order”) (attached as Exhibit 12).  

> 18

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Apr . 15, 2025, 10:09 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 13); see also Tyler Pager et al., Trump Threatens Harvard’s Tax Status, 

Escalating Billion -Dollar Pressure Campaign , N.Y. Times (Apr. 15, 2025) (attached as 

Ex hibit 14). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 35 of 101 35 

123.  The following day —April 16, 2025 —President Trump again target ed Harvard in a 

Truth Social post :19 

D.  The April 16, 2025 Records Request 

124.  Within hours of the President’s April 16 Truth Social post, Secretary Noem sent 

HIO a letter entitled “Student and Exchange Visitor Program Records Request .”20  The Records 

Request demanded voluminous documents, including those not contemplated by any of the 

applicable statutes or regulations , and threatened to withdraw Harvard’s certification in the event 

of noncompliance: 

a.  The Records Request began by stating that Harvard’s foreign student 

program “is a privilege [,] … not a guarantee ” and that “[t] he United States Government 

understands that Harvard University relies heavily on foreign student funding from over 10,000  

> 19

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Apr. 16, 2025, 7:05 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 15). 

> 20

Letter from Kristi Noem, U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec. , to Maureen Martin, Harvard Univ., 

Student and Exchange Visitor Program Records Request (Apr. 16, 2025) (the “ Records Request ”) 

(attached as Exhibit 16). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 36 of 101 36 

foreign students to build and maintain their substantial endowment.” Id. at 1 . The Request offered 

no basis for this claim , though its reference to “foreign student funding ,” id. , echoes language in 

the April 11 Demand Letter seeking to require Harvard to permit the government to inspect all 

“foreign funding sources and uses ,” Ex. 9 at 5. 

b.  The Records Request continued: “At the same time, your institution has 

created a hostile learning environment for Jewish students due to Harvard’s failure to condemn 

antisemitism .” Ex. 16 at 1. Quoting Executive Order 14188 , the letter stated that it is “the policy 

of the United States to combat anti -Semitism vigorously, using all available and appropriate legal 

tools, to prosecute, remove, or otherwise hold to account the perpetrators of unlawful anti -Semitic 

harassment and violence.” Id. Again, the Request offered no basis for the claim that Harvard 

“created a hostile learning environment for Jewish students ,” id. , which paralleled claims made in 

the government’s March 31, April 3, and April 11 communications to Harvard. See Ex. 7 at 1 

(asserting that Har vard has neglected its “dut[y] to curb or combat anti -Semitic harassment”); Ex. 8

at 1 (asserting that Harvard operates “biased programs that fuel antisemitism”); Ex. 9 at 3 

(asserting that some Harvard programs have “[e]gregious [r]ecords of [a]ntisemitism”). 

c.  The Records Request then shifted gears, stating that the SEVP “regularly 

monitors SEVP -approved schools to determine their compliance with governing regulations, ” and 

the “accuracy of information in ” SEVIS. Id. It went on: “Your continued SEVP certification is 

contingent upon meeting the requirements of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 

set out in Title 8 Code of Federal Regulations (8 CFR) .” Ex. 16 at 1. 

d.  Pointing to one of the provisions contained in the referenced regulations, 

the Records Request then stated that “SEVP may request information regarding nonimmigrant 

students from certified schools under 8 CFR § 214.3(g)(1) .” Id. Invoking the government’s 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 37 of 101 37 

authority under that provision, the Records Request stated that Harvard ’s PDSO “must submit the 

following information to our office on or before April 30, 2025 ,” id. at 1 -2:

1.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known illegal 

activity, and whether the activity occurred on campus. 

2.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known 

dangerous or violent activity, and whether the activity occurred on campus. 

3.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known 

threats to other students or university personnel, and whether the activity 

occurred on campus. 

4.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known 

deprivation of rights of other classmates or university personnel, and whether 

the activity occurred on campus. 

5.  Provide relevant information on whether any student visa holders have left 

Harvard University due to dangerous or violent activity or deprivation of rights, 

and whether the activity occurred on campus. 

6.  Provide relevant information on whether any student visa holders have had 

disciplinary actions taken as a result of making threats to other students or 

populations or participating in protests, which impacted their nonimmigrant 

student status. 

7.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s obstruction 

of the school’s learning environment. 

8.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s maintenance 

of at least the minimum required coursework to maintain nonimmigrant student 

status. 

125.  Despite the letter’s invocation of Section 214.3(g)(1), much of the information 

listed above is not information that HIO is required to maintain or report to DHS under that 

provision. 

126.  The Records Request did not define any terms in these requests —such as “known,” 

“illegal,” “dangerous or violent,” “deprivation of rights,” “threats,” or “obstruction of the school’s 

learning environment” —and did not specify a time period for which the specified information was 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 38 of 101 38 

requested . Y et it threatened serious consequences for noncompliance , for both the PDSO who 

would be responsible for submitting the responsive documents and Harvard itself :

e.  As to the PDSO , attached to the Records Request was an “Evidence 

Attestation Statement” to be completed and signed by the PDSO and submitted in connect ion with 

the production of documents . This Attestation asked the PDSO to personally attest to her 

understanding that “willful misstatements may constitute perjury (18 USC § 1621)” ; that 

“providing materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent information may subject me to criminal 

prosecution under 18 USC § 1001 ”; and that “[o] ther possible criminal and civil v iolations may 

also be applicable[.]” Ex. 16 at 3 ; see also id. at 2 (also invoking 8 U.S.C. § 1001 and “[o]ther 

possible criminal and civil violations”). 

f.  The Evidence Attestation Statement also asked the PDSO to attest to her 

understanding that “SEVP may review my institution’s certification at any time and may request 

documentation to establish my institution’s eligibility for certification as well as review evidence 

and records for compliance with t he regulations.” Id. at 3 .

g.  Finally, t he Records Request warned Harvard that “[f] ailure to comply with 

this Records Request will be treated as a voluntary withdrawal, per 8 CFR § 214.3(h)(3)(vii) .” Id. 

at 2. It concluded: “ Therefore, in the event the school fails to respond to this request [by April 30, 

2025] , SEVP will automatically withdraw the school’s certification. The withdrawal will not be 

subject to appeal.” Id. 

127.  Shortly after DHS sent HIO the Records Request , it publicized the Request —as 

well as DHS’s cancel lation of “two DHS grants totaling over $2.7 million to Harvard” —in a press 

release (the “Press Release”) .21  Th e Press Release referred to the Records Request as a “scathing  

> 21

Press Release, U .S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec. , Secretary Noem Terminates $2.7 Million in DHS 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 39 of 101 39 

letter demanding detailed records on Harvard’s foreign student visa holders’ illegal and violent 

acts.” Id. The Press Release asserted that Harvard has “ben[t] the knee to antisemitism ,” adopted 

a “radical ideology,” and allowed “anti -American, pro -Hamas ideology [to] poison[] its campus 

and classrooms ,” such that “Harvard’s position as a top institution of higher learning is a distant 

memory.” Id. It concluded by stating that “if Harvard cannot verify it is in full compliance with its 

reporting requirement s, the university will lose the privilege of enrolling foreign students.” Id. 

128.  Over the last twelve years, HIO has received only a handful of requests for 

information about its F -1 visa students . These requests have generally sought straightforward 

information plainly contemplated by the applicable regulations, such as the student’s email ,

physical addresses , and phone number , about a single student at a time . No prior request has asked 

for information as broad or open -ended —or covering as many students —as the Records Request .

No prior request , moreover, has ever come directly from the Secretary of Homeland Security. Nor 

has any prior request ever been accompanied by a Press Release calling the request “scathing” or 

citing Harvard’s so -called “radical ideology” ; included an “Evidence Attestation Statement” 

suggest ing that any misstatement may subject Harvard’s PDSO or anyone else to criminal liability ;

or threatened Harvard with “voluntary withdrawal” for less -than -perfect compliance .

E.  Subsequent Developments Prior to April 30 

129.  In the run -up to the April 30 deadline for Harvard’s response to the Records 

Request , the Administration continued its public attack on Harvard. 

130.  On April 17, 2025, Secretary of Education Linda McMahon sent Harvard a letter 

accusing the University of “incomplete and inaccurate disclosures” of foreign gifts and contracts 

Grants; Orders Harvard to Prove Compliance with Foreign Student Requirements (Apr. 16, 2025) 

(the “Press Release”) (attached as Exhibit 17). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 40 of 101 40 

pursuant to Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965. Secretary McMahon demanded that 

Harvard release a list of gifts, grants, and contracts from foreign sources, communications betwee n

Harvard and foreign governments, and internal correspondence about expelled foreign students 

and faculty affiliated with foreign countries. 

131.  On April 20, 2025, the Administration threatened to pull an additional $1 billion 

in Harvard’s federal funding that had been allocated for health research .

132.  On April 24, 2025, President Trump posted the following message on Truth 

Social: 22 

133.  On April 25, 2025, the Acting Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity 

Commission, Andrea Lucas, filed a charge that launched an investigation in Harvard’s 

employment practices. 23 

134.  On April 30, 2025, President Trump , Secretary Noem , and Secretary McMahon 

discussed Harvard at a public Cabinet meeting. 24  At the conclusion of Secretary McMahon’s  

> 22

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Apr. 24 , 2025, 9:33 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 18 ).  

> 23

In addition, o n May 13, 2025, the Department of Justice issued a civil investigative demand to 

the University, purporting to investigate False Claims Act violations related to Harvard’s 

compliance with the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2023 decision in Students for Fair Admissions v. 

President and Fellows of Harvard College.  

> 24

The White House, President Trump Participates in a Cabinet Meeting, Apr. 30, 2025 , YouTube 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 41 of 101 41 

remarks, President Trump offered his view that Harvard was “scamming the public and hiring 

people like [former New York City Mayor Bill] DeBlasio and [former Chicago Mayor] Lori 

Lightfoot who are certainly two of the worst mayors in the history of our coun try, paying them a 

fortune on salary, and having them teach our children how to manage cities and how to manage 

government.” Id. at 1:21:50 -1:22:20. President Trump then asked Secretary McMahon for an 

update on Harvard specifically, which led to the following colloquy: 

Secretary McMahon : We’re negotiating with them. When we went back to them 

to say we’d welcome them back to the negotiating table, their response was a 

lawsuit. So [Attorney General] Pam [Bondi] and her team are helping work with 

that. … We’re staying tough with them. The other thing we’re looking at also are 

the [Section] 117 [25 ] violations of these big universities, like Harvard and others, 

who are not reporting, as they’re required to do by law, foreign money that comes 

in and how much that is and where it comes from. 

President Trump: And students, where are these people coming from? 

Secretary Noem: So , we’ve pulled back their grants because Harvard isn’t 

responding to us [about] criminal activity by their students. And until they give us 

that list they’re not getting any more grants from Homeland Security. 

President Trump: Good, I think we should pull it back. The students they have, 

the professors they have, the attitude they have, is not American and I think you 

should —a grant is a grant, we don’t have to give grants. 

Secretary Noem: Exactly right. 

President Trump: So we’ll pull back the grant. 

Id. at 1:22:21 -1:23:33 (emphasis added) .

(Apr. 30, 2025), available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wn2XtufOAHc.  

> 25

Secretary McMahon’s reference was likely to Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, 

20 U.S.C. § 1011f. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 42 of 101 42 

F.  Harvard’s Compliance With the Records Request 

135.  Despite the scope and context of the Records Request , HIO worked diligently to 

compl y and produce responsive information that it maintain s under the governing statute and 

regulations .

136.  To that end, within the 10 working days DHS allotted for compliance, HIO 

collected and produced thousands of pages of records responsive to the Records Request 

maintained by or accessible to HIO as required by 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1). 

137.  The production was accompanied by a cover letter (the “ First Production Letter”) 

explaining the scope of Harvard’s responsive production and responding to the allegations in the 

Demand Letter. 26 

138.  The First P roduction Letter noted that “portions of the [ Records Request ] seek 

categories of information using terms not defined in the regulation .” First Production Letter at 1. 

But it explained that, because “Harvard is committed to good faith compliance,” it was “producing 

responsive materials that [it] believe[s] are reasonably required by 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1).” Id. 

139.  Accordingly, the First Production Letter explained that Harvard had produced the 

following categories of “information relevant to F -1 status” in response to the Records Request :

(1) “[r]ecords that reflect student enrollment information, by SEVIS ID Number, for each F -1 visa 

holder enrolled at Harvard throughout the duration of the program in which that student is presently 

enrolled ”; and (2) “SEVIS termination and cancellation data that include SEVIS ID Number, 

SEVIS Status, Education Level, Major/Academic Program, Date of Termination or Cancellation, 

Termination or Cancellation Reason, and Program Start and End Date.” Id. at 2. This latter  

> 26

Letter from Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ., to SEVP, Re: Harvard University –

BOS214F0016200 0 (April 30, 2025) (the “ First Production Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 19 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 43 of 101 43 

category of data, the First Production Letter explained, “reflect[s] changes to nonimmigrant status 

for a range of reasons, including but not limited to disciplinary action,” though “[t]he basis for any 

such disciplinary action is not covered by 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1).” Id. 

140.  Since the Records Request did not specify a time period, Harvard produced this 

information for “academic year 2023 -2024 and academic year 2024 -2025 (through and including 

April 30, 2025),” though the student enrollment records produced as to some students cover shorter 

or longer periods, depending o n the duration of the student’s academic program. Id. at 1. 

141.  The First Production Letter noted that “Harvard’s production reflects its best effort 

to meet [the Records Request ’s April 30] deadline notwithstanding the scope of the requests in the 

[Records Request ], which cover more than 5,200 students.” Id. And it explained that “[i]f Harvard 

discovers additional information falling into the categories listed above, it will promptly produce 

that information as a supplement.” Id. 

142.  The First Production Letter emphasized, in bold and underlined font, that “ Harvard 

is complying with the [ Records Request ’s] lawful requests in lieu of voluntary withdrawal 

from SEVP certification. Harvard does not seek to withdraw from SEVP. Any withdrawal 

of Harvard’s certification would be involuntary and would cause immediate harm and 

disruption to Harvard, its mission, and its thousands of international students who hail from 

over 140 countries and enrich the University community immeasurably with thei r presence 

and contributions. ” Id. 

143.  The First Production Letter went on to state, also in bold and underline d font , that 

“[i]f any aspect of this production raises questions or is deemed incomplete or insufficient in 

any respect, and before DHS takes any steps adverse to Harvard due to any perceived 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 44 of 101 44 

deficiency in Harvard’s response, Harvard respectfully requests that DHS notify Harvard’s 

counsel in writing and provide an opportunity to discuss, to be heard, and to cure. ” Id. at 2 -3. 

144.  Finally, the First Production Letter addressed the Records Request ’s allegations 

“that Harvard has ‘created a hostile learning environment for Jewish students ’ due to a purported 

‘failure to condemn antisemitism,’ and that Harvard ‘relies heavily on foreign student funding … 

to build and maintain [its] substantial endowment.’” Id. at 3. The Production Letter explained that 

“[t]hese assertions have no basis in fact, and [the Records Request ] suggests none.” Id. And it 

affirmed that, “[t]o the contrary, Harva rd has strongly and repeatedly condemned antisemitism and 

has undertaken substantial efforts to ensure that its campus is safe, fair, and welcoming to Jewish 

and Israeli students —including those who attend Harvard on F -1 visas.” Id. 

145.  The First Production Letter concluded: “In short, Harvard denies the [ Records 

Request ’s] assertions and any suggestion that they justify actions by DHS in contravention of the 

statutes and regulations governing SEVP.” Id. 

G.  Developments from April 30 to May 7

146.  In the days after Harvard responded to the Records Request, Harvard received no 

outreach from DHS. But the Administration continued to target Harvard in other ways. 

147.  On May 2, 2025, the President posted the following on Truth Social: 27  

> 27

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (May 2, 2025, 7:25 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 20 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 45 of 101 45 

148.  Then, on May 5, 2025, Secretary of Education Linda McMahon sent Harvard a 

letter (the “McMahon Letter”) informing the University that “Harvard should no longer seek 

GRANTS from the federal government, since none will be provided.” 28  The McMahon Letter 

stated that Harvard has “invited foreign students” who “show contempt for the United States of 

America[] to its campus.” Id. at 1. And it asked: “Where do many of these ‘students’ come from, 

who are they, how do they get into Harvard, or even into our country —and why is there so much 

HATE?” Id. at 1. The McMahon Letter also criticized Harvard’s hiring decisions and its 

“management” and asserted that Harvard “teach[es] [its] students to despise” the “free -market 

system.” Id. at 1 -2. 

149.  In a May 7, 2025 television interview, Secretary McMahon reiterated these 

statements, stating about Harvard: “[A]re they vetting students who are coming in from outside 

of the country to make sure they’re not activists? Are they vetting professors that the y’re hiring 

to make sure that they’re not teaching ideologies, but that they’re teaching subject matter? …. 

They’ve taken a very hard line, so we took a hard line back.” 29 

H.  DHS’s Second Information Request and Harvard’s Second Document Production 

150.  On May 7, 2025, Acting General Counsel of the Department of Homeland 

Security, Joseph Mazzara, sent an email to Harvard’s counsel (the “Mazzara Email”) indicating 

that DHS had reviewed Harvard’s initial document production and “concluded that it does not 

completely address the Secretary’s request .”30  

> 28

Letter from Linda E. McMahon, Sec. of Educ., to Dr. Alan Garber, Harvard Univ., at 2 (May 5, 

2025) (the “McMahon Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 21 ).  

> 29

CNBC Television, Education Secretary Linda McMahon to Harvard: Obey the law and you can 

be eligible for funding , YouTube, at 1:04 -31 (May 7, 2025), available at 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bb6YJUHMqc4 . 

> 30

Email from Joseph Mazzara, DHS, to Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ. (May 7, 2025) 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 46 of 101 46 

151.  The Mazzara Email reiterated DHS’s request for four of the eight categories of 

information referenced in the Records Request —those relating to student visa holders’ “known 

illegal activity,” “known dangerous or violent activity,” “known threats to other students or 

university personnel,” and “known deprivation of rights of other classmates or university 

personnel” —and indicated that Harvard’s response should “likely include the disciplinary 

records for student visa holders.” Id. 

152.  The Mazzara Email gave Harvard until the close of business on May 14, 2025, to 

respond. 

153.  On May 12, 2025, Harvard’s counsel sent Acting General Counsel Mazzara an 

email observing that the Mazzara Email , like the Records Request before it, “ask[ed] for 

information outside of 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1), which was cited in the [Records Request].” 31  The 

email asked if Harvard should construe the Mazzara Email “as requesting information under 8 

C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(2).” Id. On May 13, 2025, Harvard had not yet heard back from Mr. Mazzara, 

so its counsel sent Mr. Mazzara a follow -up email again asking whether Harvard should construe 

the request as one under § 214.3(g)(2). See id. 

154.  On the morning of May 14, 2025, Mr. Mazzara wrote back, stating: “While many 

of the records we are seeking and have received may be required to be kept by Harvard pursuant 

to 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1), our authority to request information is broader. We are requesting 

records pursuant to all our authorities contained in 8 C.F.R.§ 214 (many of which are also 

refenced [sic] in the letter).” Id. 

(the “Mazzara Email ”) (attached as Exhibit 22 ).  

> 31

Email Exchange between Joseph Mazzara, DHS, and Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ., 

at 1 (May 7 to May 14, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 23 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 47 of 101 47 

155.  On May 14 , 2025, Harvard sent DHS a letter (the “Second Production Letter”) 

responding to the additional requests made in the Mazzara Email .32  As the Second Production 

Letter explained, Harvard identified three F-1 visa students who were subject to discipline that 

resulted in a change of academic status as defined in 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1)(vi) where the 

discipline was based on one of the four categories of conduct identified in the Mazzara Email . Id. 

at 1. For each of these three students, Harvard provided information about the conduct that led to 

discipline. Id. The Second Production Letter explained that, as to the request for conduct that 

involved “known deprivation of rights,” H arvard interpreted the phrase in line with federal 

statutes that “use[d] similar formulations [to] refer to rights secured by the Constitution or statute” 

and found no students who received discipline on the basis of having “deprived a classmate or 

univers ity personnel of such rights.” Id. at 2. But the Second Production Letter stated that, if DHS 

meant “something else” by this phrase, DHS should “let [Harvard] know, and, upon receipt of 

clarification, [Harvard] will promptly reply in accordance with applicable law.” Id. 

156.  The Second Production Letter reiterated that Harvard did not wish to voluntarily 

withdraw its SEVP certification, and asked for notice and an opportunity to be heard before DHS 

took any adverse action stemming from perceived noncompliance. Id. 

I.  DHS’s Revocation of Harvard’s Certification 

157.  After submitting the Second Production Letter, Harvard did not hear from DHS for 

more than a week. 

158.  Then, o n May 22 , 2025 , Secretary Noem sent Harvard a letter entitled “Harvard’s 

Student and Exchange Visitor Program Decertification” (the “Revocation Notice” ) stating that,  

> 32

Letter from Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ., to SEVP, Re: Harvard University –

BOS214F00162000 (April 30, 2025) (the “Second Production Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 24 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 48 of 101 48 

“effective immediately, Harvard University’s Student and Exchange Visitor Program certification 

is revoked .” 33 

159.  The Revocation Notice , like the Records Request before it, stated that “it is a 

privilege to enroll foreign students .” The Notice added that “it is also a privilege to employ aliens 

on campus.” Id. at 1. It asserted that, as a result of Harvard’s “refusal to comply with multiple 

requests to provide [DHS] pertinent information while perpetuating an unsafe campus environment 

that is hostile to Jewish students, promotes pro -Hamas sympathies, and employs racist ‘diversity, 

equity, and inclusion’ policies, [Harvard] ha[s] lost this privilege.” Id. 

160.  The Revocation Notice acknowledged the profound consequences of 

decertification. It stated that, effective immediately, “Har vard is prohibited from having any aliens 

on F - or J - nonimmigrant status for the 2025 -2026 academic school year.” Id. It also stated that 

“[t]his decertification also means that existing aliens on F - or J - nonimmigrant status must transfer 

to another university in order to maintain their nonimmigrant status.” Id. 

161.  The Revocation Notice state d that this action was “the unfortunate result of 

Harvard’s failure to comply with simple reporting requirements.” Id. But the Revocation Notice 

did not identify any specific “reporting requirements” with which Harvard had failed to comply ,

and did not cite any of the regulatory provisions governing an SEVP -certified school’s reporting 

requirements . Id. Instead, the Revocation Notice stated that Harvard had failed to comply with the 

demands in the Records Request and the Mazzara E mail for “information regarding misconduct 

and other offenses that would render foreign students inadmissible or removable .” Id. But, as  

> 33

Letter from Kristi Noem, U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., to Maureen Martin, Harvard Univ., 

Harvard’s Student and Exchange Visitor Program Decertification (May 22, 2025) (the 

“Revocation Notice”) (attached as Exhibit 25 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 49 of 101 49 

explained above, the regulations governing schools’ eligibility for SEVP certification do not 

require Harvard to maintain records on such information or report it to DHS. 

162.  The Revocation Notice stated that DHS had revoked Harvard’s certification “to 

send a clear signal to Harvard and all universities that want to enjoy the privilege of enrolling 

foreign students, that the Trump Administration will enforce the law and root out the evils of anti -

Americanism and antisemitism in society and campuses.” Id. 

163.  The Revocation Notice offered Harvard no opportunity to defend itself against the 

withdrawal of its certification, including to present evidence or be heard on its argument that it has 

complied with the law. See 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b) -(f). Nor did the Revocation Notice offer Harvard 

any opportunity to cure the supposed noncompliance prior to revocation of its certification. See 5

U.S.C. § 558(c). 

164.  The Revocation Notice also provided Harvard no avenue for seeking administrative 

review of the withdrawal of its certification. See 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(h). 

165.  Having summarily revoked Harvard’s SEVP certification, the Revocation Notice 

went on to state that “[i]f Harvard would like the opportunity of regaining [SEVP] certification 

before the upcoming academic school year, [it] must provide all of the information requested 

below within 72 hours ”: 

1.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

illegal activity whether on or off campus, by a nonimmigrant student enrolled 

in Harvard Universi ty in the last five years. 

2.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

dangerous or violent activity whether on or off campus, by a nonimmigrant 

student enrolled in Har vard University in the last five years. 

3.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 50 of 101 50 

threats to other students or university personnel whether on or off campus, by a 

nonimmigrant student enrolled in Harvard University in the last five years. 

4.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

deprivation of rights of other classmates or university personnel whether on or 

off campus, by a nonimmigrant student enrolled in Harvard University in the 

last five years. 

5.  Any and all disciplinary records of all nonimmigrant students enrolled in 

Harvard University in the last five years. 

6.  Any and all audio or video footage, in the possession of Harvard University, of 

any protest activity involving a nonimmigrant student on a Harvard University 

campus in the last five years. 

166.  These demands seek different —and a broader set of —information than what the 

Records Request sought. And the Revocation Notice cited no statutory or regulatory authority for 

these additional demands. 

167.  Shortly after she sent Harvard the Revocation Notice, Secretary Noem posted an 

image of the Revocation Notice on X (the “Noem Post”) , along with a message stating that “[t]his 

Administration is holding Harvard accountable for fostering violence, antisemitism, and 

coordinating with the Chinese Communist Party on its campus.” 34 

168.  DHS also issued a press release (the “Revocation Press Release”) proclaiming: 

“Harvard University Loses Student and Exchange Visitor Program Certification for Pro -Terrorist 

Conduct.” 35  The Revocation Press Release began by asserting: “Harvard’s leadership has created 

an unsafe campus environment by permitting anti -American, pro -terrorist agitators to harass and 

physically assault individuals, including many Jewish students, and otherwis e obstruct its once - 

> 34

Secretary Krist Noem ( @Sec_Noem ), X (May 22, 2025, 2:01 PM ET) (the “Noem Post ”)

(attached as Exhibit 26 ).  

> 35

Press Release, U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., Harvard University Loses Student and Exchange 

Visitor Program Certification for Pro -Terrorist Conduct (May 22, 2025) (the “Revocation Press 

Release”) (attached as Exhibit 27 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 51 of 101 51 

venerable learning environment. Many of these agitators are foreign students. Harvard’s leadership 

further facilitated, and engaged in coordinated activity with the CCP, including hosting and 

training members of a CCP paramilitary group complicit in the Uy ghur genocide.” Id. at 1. The 

Revocation Press Release then quoted the Noem Post in its entirety, adding boldfaced emphasis to 

the Noem Post’s reference to “the Chinese Communist Party .” Id. 

169.  The Revocation Press Release stated that “[o]n April 16, 2025, Secretary Noem 

demanded Harvard provide information about the criminality and misconduct of foreign students 

on its campus.” Id. And it asserted that “Harvard University brazenly refused to provide the 

required information requested and ignored a follow up request from the Department’s Office of 

General Council. [sic] Secretary Noem is following through on her promise to protect students and 

prohibit terrorist sympathizers from receiving benefit s from the U.S. government.” Id. The 

Revocation Press Release also did not identify any specific reporting requirements with which 

Harvard allegedly failed to comply. 

170.  The Revocation Press Release stated that “[t]his action comes after DHS terminated 

$2.7 million in DHS grants for Harvard last month.” Id. 

171.  The Revocation Press Release then went on to list a number of purported “[f]acts 

about Harvard’s toxic campus climate,” including allegations of “pervasive race discrimination 

and anti -Semitic harassment plaguing [Harvard’s] campus .” Id. The Revocation Press Release also 

stated that “[i]nstead of protecting its students, Harvard has let crime rates skyrocket, enacted racist 

DEI practices, and accepted boatloads of cash from foreign governments and donors.” Id. at 2. 

172.  Harvard has had no opportunity to rebut the factual allegations levied against it in 

the Revocation Notice, Noem Post, and Revocation Press Release , as required under DHS’s 

process for withdrawal of SEVP certification. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 52 of 101 52 

173.  Notably, the State Department seemed unaware that Secretary Noem was taking 

action to dismantle a program over which she lacks legal authority —i.e. , the Exchange Visitor 

Program for J visas . When asked after the Revocation Notice and Revocation Press Release about 

those actions, State Department spokesperson Tammy Bruce stated: “I can’t speak to Sec retary 

Noem’s plans and strategy and her decision to implement this. ”36 

J.  Harvard’s Lawsuit and This Court’s Temporary Restraining Order 

174.  On May 23, 2025, less than 24 hours after the Revocation Notice issued, Harvard 

filed a Complaint and Motion for a Temporary Restraining Order seeking to immediately enjoin 

the Revocation Notice. See ECF Nos. 1 , 4. The Complaint alleged multiple violations of the U.S. 

Constitution, the APA, and the statutes and regulations governing the visa programs at issue. 

175.  The Court granted Harvard’s Motion and entered a Temporary Restraining Order 

on May 23, 2025. See ECF No. 11. The Order enjoined “ Defendants, their agents, and anyone 

acting in concert or participation with ” them from either ( a) “ [i] mplementing, instituting, 

maintaining, or giving effect to the revocation of Plaintiff’s SEVP certification ”; or ( b) “ [g] iving 

any force or effect to the Department of Homeland Security’s May 22, 2025 Revocation Notice. ”

Id .

176.  The Court also scheduled a status conference for May 27, 2025, and a preliminary 

injunction hearing for May 29, 2025. See ECF Nos. 12, 13. 

177.  At the status conference on May 27, 2025, counsel for the government did not 

indicate whether or when the government might file a brief opposing Harvard’s requested relief 

in this litigation and instead averted to “other possible avenues the government might take.”  

> 36

New York Post, State Department Defends the Cancellation of Harvard’s Student and Exchange 

Visitor Program , YouTube (May 22, 2025), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=isRL -wnUREY .

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 53 of 101 53 

K.  The Administration’s Continued Targeting of Harvard 

178.  Despite the entry of this Court’s Order on May 23, 2025 , the Administration’s 

targeting of Harvard continued unabated. 

179.  On May 25, 2025, President Trump addressed “the problem with Harvard” when 

speaking to the press. 37  He asserted that “there are about 31 percent, almost 31 percent, of 

foreigners coming to Harvard ,” an apparent reference to the percentage of international students 

in Harvard’s student body. Id . That figure is incorrect. 

180.  The President went on to state that “ they refuse to tell us who the people are ,” an 

apparent allegation that Harvard does not identify its international students to the government. Id .

He continued: “ we want a list of those foreign students .” Id . Those statements reflect a fundamental 

misunderstanding of the visa programs at issue and the regulations that govern them. International 

students at Harvard who hold F and J visas are present in the United States only because the 

government has vetted them and app roved their visas, and it has detailed information about those 

students available at the click of a button in SEVIS. 

181.  The President also acknowledged in these remarks that “ a lot of the foreign students 

we wouldn’t have a problem with ” and that “many will be okay, I assume.” Id . Yet he offered the 

assumption —without any support —that “ with Harvard, many will be bad .” Id .

182.  President Trump’s comments targeting Harvard continued the next day. On 

May 26 , 2025, President Trump published the following post on Truth Social: 38  

> 37

KSDK News, Trump: Harvard has too many foreigners, we want to know who they are ,

YouTube (May 25, 2025), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VOhyUbBGgQ0 . 

> 38

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social ( May 26 , 2025, 8:27 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 29 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 54 of 101 54 

183.  Minutes later, he made a second post about Harvard on the same site: 39 

184.  On May 28, 2025, according to public reporting, the White House convened top 

government officials from nearly a dozen agencies to discuss additional punitive measures to 

target Harvard. 40  The reporting cited senior Administration officials who said that they would 

continue to target Harvard, and it quoted a White House spokesperson who said: “The latest 

moves against Harvard are truly just scratching the surface.” Id . at 3. The same spokesperson also 

stated that Harvard would suffer a “self -inflicted demise” because it “decided to litigate.” Id.  

> 39

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social ( May 26 , 2025, 8:42 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 30 ).  

> 40

Sophia Cai & Megan Messerly, White House convenes meeting to brainstorm new Harvard 

measures , Politico (May 30, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 3 1). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 55 of 101 55 

185.  During a press conference in the Oval Office that day, President Trump again 

targeted Harvard. 41  Echoing prior remarks, he insinuated that the government has no information 

regarding the identity of Harvard’s international students and “where … these people come 

from.” Id . Again, this is untrue. The government has information about, among other things, the 

identity of every Harvard student on a nonimmigrant visa and where they are from —which the 

government can access through its own database with a keystroke .

186.  The President also made clear that his Administration was retaliating against 

Harvard for its exercise of its legal rights. He stated: “ Every time they fight, they lose another 

$250 million. Yesterday we found another $100 million.” Id . He continued that Harvard was 

“hurting” itself by “fighting” the Administration, commenting: “ They want to show how smart 

they are, and they’re getting their ass kicked.” Id .

187.  Terrell put it even more plainly. Speaking of Harvard during a Fox News 

appearance days later, he warned: “We are going to go after them where it hurts them financially, 

and there’s numerous ways —I hope you can read between the lines —there’s numerous ways to 

hurt them financially .” 42 

L.  DHS ’s Issuance of a NOIW 

188.  Hours after the President’s remarks on May 28, 2025, and on the eve of this Court’s 

preliminary injunction hearing, DHS issued a NOIW to Harvard by sending an email to HIO 

personnel at 11:48 PM. See ECF No. 49.  

> 41

Bloomberg Podcasts, Trump Says Harvard Must Show List of Foreign Students (Full Q&A) ,

YouTube (May 28, 2025), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L6yjpvZTbjA . 

> 42

Betsy Klein, Universities quietly negotiating with White House aide to try to avoid Harvard’s 

fate, source says , CNN (May 31, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 3 2). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 56 of 101 56 

189.  The NOIW is directed to Harvard’s PDSO and signed by Defendant Lyons. It 

announces the government’s intent to withdraw Harvard’s SEVP certification for allegedly “failing 

to comply with the federal regulations detailed below.” 

190.  The NOIW identifies three purported “compliance issues.” The first is that Harvard 

allegedly failed to comply with reporting requirements under 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g) in its responses 

to the Records Request and Maz zara Email. The NOIW declares that “Harvard University has not 

sufficiently addressed the requested information,” without identifying why the responses were 

insufficient or what information Harvard was required by regulation, but allegedly failed, to 

provide. 

191.  The second “compliance issue” is described as DHS’s “serious concerns that 

Harvard has failed to maintain a campus environment free from violence and antisemitism.” The 

NOIW presents various allegations, without any supporting material, an d then proclaims that 

“failure to protect Jewish students is a valid and substantive reason for withdrawing Harvard 

University’s SEVP certification to enroll foreign students.” 

192.  Third on the NOIW’s list of “compliance issues” is a claim that Harvard’s 

“practices with foreign entities raise national security concerns.” These practices and concerns 

were not cited in the Records Request or Mazzara Email, nor in the Revocation Notice. These 

alleged practices range from Harvard’s receipt of funding from foreign governments to Harvard’s 

alleged ties to China. 

193.  The government ’s counsel filed a notice regarding the NOIW the following 

morning, hours before the preliminary injunction hearing. See ECF No. 49. The notice provided 

no further explanation of why the NOIW was issued or how it interacted with the earlier 

Revocation Notice. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 57 of 101 57 

194.  On May 29, 2025, the Court held a preliminary injunction hearing. At that hearing, 

the government’s counsel denied that issuance of the NOIW was “ an admission that anything was 

done wrong ” yet argued the case was moot and resisted entry of a preliminary injunction . ECF No. 

52. The government’s counsel also argued that any “ injunction should be narrowed to sort of the 

decertification through this process and just enjoining that and no other sort of legal bases that 

might be used for other means .” Id . He did not specify the “other means” that the government 

intended to pursue, but they soon became apparent. 

M.  The State Department “Pilot Program” 

195.  Later that day, the State Department issued a cable from Secretary Rubio to all 

diplomatic and consular posts , titled: “ACTION REQUEST – Enhanced vetting for All 

Nonimmigrant Visa Applicants Traveling to Harvard University.” 43 

196.  The cable directed recipients “to immediately begin additional vetting of any 

nonimmigrant vis a applicant seeking to travel to Harvard University for any purpose,” including 

any “prospective students, students, faculty, employees, contractors, guest speakersk [sic], and 

tourists.” It described the initiative as a “pilot for expanded screening and vetting of visa 

applicants” to “be expanded over time,” yet the sole institution targeted by the “pilot” is Harvard. 

197.  It continued: “Effectively immediately, consular sections must conduct a complete 

screening of the online presence of any nonimmigrant visa applicant seeking to travel to Harvard 

University for any purpose ,” detailing how consular sections can identify such a connection to 

Harvard. When applicants are linked to Harvard, “[s]uch applicants, if otherwise eligible, should 

be refused under INA 221(g) pending review of their online presence.”  

> 43

Department of State, ACTION REQUEST – Enhanced vetting for All Nonimmigrant Visa 

Applicants Traveling to Harvard University (May 30, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 33); see Nahal 

Toosi & Eric Bazail -Eimil, State begins rolling out expanded student visa vetting – starting with 

Harvard , Politico (May 30, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 34 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 58 of 101 58 

198.  The cable further stated that applicants’ lack of online presence by applicants or 

their setting of social media accounts to private “may be reflective of evasiveness and call into 

question the applicant’s credibility” and warrant refusal “under INA 214(b).” 

199.  The cable also directed that even if an applicant “is otherwise eligible for the 

requested nonimmigrant status, the consular officer must refuse the case under INA 221(g), inform 

the applicant that his case is subject to review of his online presence, requ est that the applicant set 

all of his social media accounts to ‘public ,’ and remind him that limited access to or visibility of 

social media activity could be construed as an effort to evade or hide certain activity.” 

200.  According to the cable, all applicants “must” be referred to the Fraud Prevention 

Unit using a designated category for social media review —after which that unit “must not limit 

their review of these cases to the applicant’s social media activity alone” but rather “should 

conduct a comprehensive and thorough vetting of each such applicant.” 

201.  To justify this new program targeting Harvard -bound visa applicants, Secretary 

Rubio points to “information identified by the Department of Homeland Security” about an alleged 

failure by Harvard “to maintain a campus environment free from violence and anti -Semitism” —

the precise language of the NOIW. 

N.  The President’s Proclamation Against Harvard 

202.  That was not the end of the government’s pursuit of “other means” to accomplish 

its desired and unlawful result. On June 4, 2025, President Trump issued a Proclamation entitled 

“Enhancing National Security by Addressing Risks at Harvard University” (the “P roclamation”), 

which prohibits foreign nationals from entering the United States to study or research at Harvard —

and only Harvard. 44  

> 44

President Donald J. Trump, Executive Order, Enhancing National Security by Addressing Risks 

at Harvard University (June 4, 2025) (the “Proclamation”) (attached as Exhibit 35). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 59 of 101 59 

203.  The Proclamation makes a series of unsubstantiated claims about Harvard, ranging 

from assertions that crime rates at the University have risen, to allegations that Harvard failed to 

comply with the Records Request to contentions about Harvard’s “extensive entanglements with 

foreign countries ,” to criticisms of Harvard’s past and present admissions practices and “excessive 

foreign student enrollment.” 

204.  It continues: “Considering these facts, I have determined that it is necessary to 

restrict the entry of foreign nationals who seek to enter the United States solely or principally to 

participate in a course of study at Harvard University or in an exchange visitor program hosted by 

Harvard University.” 

205.  The Proclamation primarily relies on Section 212(f) of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f), 

which authorizes the President to “suspend the entry” of “all aliens or any class of aliens” when 

their entry “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States.” It also cites Section 215(a) 

of the INA, id. § 1185(a), which provides that “[u]nless otherwise ordered by the President, it shall 

be unlawful … for any alien to depart from or enter or attempt to depart from or enter the United 

States except under such re asonable rules, regulations, and orders, and subject to such limitations 

and exceptions as the President may prescribe.” Id. § 1185(a)(1). 

206.  In issuing the Proclamation, the President did not find that a class of person’s entry 

into the United States “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States.” 8 U.S.C. 

§ 1182(f). Quite the contrary, the Proclamation merely bars F -1 students fr om entering the United 

States “to pursue a course of study at Harvard ,” and bars J -1 students and researchers from 

entering “to participate in an exchange visitor program hosted by Harvard .” Ex. 35 , § 1 (emphases 

added). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 60 of 101 60 

207.  In other words, the Proclamation does not deem the entry of an alien or class of 

aliens to be “detrimental to the interests of the United States,” 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f), because 

noncitizens who are impacted by the Proclamation can enter the United States —just so long as 

they go somewhere other than Harvard. The Proclamation says so explicitly: “The suspension and 

limitation on entry pursuant to section 1 of this proclamation shall not apply to any alien who 

enters the United States to attend other universities through the SEVP.” Ex. 35 , § 2(c) .

208.  The Proclamation goes far beyond suspending and limiting entry “to aliens who 

enter or attempt to enter the United States to begin attending Harvard University through the SEVP 

after the date of this proclamation.” It also directs the Secretary of State to “consider, in the 

Secretary’s discretion, whether foreign nationals who currently attend Harvard University and are 

in the United States pursuant to F or J visas and who otherwise meet the criteria described in 

section 1 of this proclamation should have t heir visas revoked.” 

209.  In other words, the Proclamation aims to accomplish precisely what the Secretary 

attempted through the unlawful and enjoined Revocation Notice: to prevent Harvard from 

enrolling new visa holders, and to prevent the visa holders already studying, researching, and 

teaching at Harvard from continuing to do so. 

210.  The suspension effectuated by the Proclamation lasts for six months, and it provides 

that within 90 days, “the Attorney General and the Secretary of Homeland Security shall jointly 

submit to the President, through the Assistant to the President for Nationa l Security Affairs, a 

recommendation on whether an extension or renewal of the suspension and limitation on entry in 

section 1 of this proclamation is in the interests of the United States.” 

211.  The Proclamation was accompanied by a “Fact Sheet” that aptly summarize s the 

Proclamation’s key provisions as follows: 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 61 of 101 61 

• “The Proclamation suspends the entry into the United States of any new 

Harvard student as a nonimmigrant under F, M, or J visas. 

• It directs the Secretary of State to consider revoking existing F, M, or J visas 

for current Harvard students who meet the Proclamation’s criteria. 

• The Proclamation does not apply to aliens attending other U.S. universities 

through the Student Exchange Visa Program (SEVP) and exempts aliens 

whose entry is deemed in the national interest.” 45 

O.  The Immediate and Irreparable Harm to Harvard 

212.  The government’s unlawful revocation of Harvard’s longstanding SEVP status , the 

President’s Proclamation, and the overall campaign by this Administration targeting Harvard and 

its international students are causing the University immediate and irreparable harm and will lead 

to a cascade of additional negative consequences affecting Harvard and its community. 

213.  First, the government’s actions seriously and immediately disrupt the University’s 

ongoing, day -to -day operations. International students play vital roles on campus, including as 

instructors, academic and residential advisors, lab managers, and medical providers. Eliminating 

the population of F -1 students and J -1 students and scholars fulfilling these functions will halt 

important research, hamper the educational experience for students left without teachers or 

advisors, and deprive the community of medical care. This is particularly true in the STEM fields ,

where international students contribute significantly to Harvard’s critical research enterprise . The 

sudden inability to maintain these students’ enrollment jeopardizes ongoing research projects, 

damages Harvard’s reputation as a world -class research institution, and deprives our nation of the 

benefits of these vital research projects.  

> 45

The White House, Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Restricts Foreign Student Visas at 

Harvard University (June 4, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 36). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 62 of 101 62 

214.  Second, t he loss of certification irreparably harms Harvard’s ability to compete 

with other institutions for the most qualified applicants at home and abroad. In our interconnected 

global economy, a university that cannot welcome students from all corners of the world is at a 

competitive disadvantage. Harv ard’s F -1 and J -1 visa program s are therefore a key factor in 

maintaining its standing in academia . If the government’s actions are permitted to stand, Harvard 

will not be able to offer admission to any new visa holder students for at least the next two class 

years, see 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(1) -(2), and perhaps longer, since once DHS takes the drastic action 

of withdrawing certification, it forever retains discretion whether to allow Harvard ever to petition 

for renewed certification, id. § 214.4(a)(2). Even if Harvard were ever to regain cert ification or the 

President were to rescind the Proclamation , future applicants may shy away from applying out of 

fear of further reprisals from the government. 

215.  Third, the abrupt revocation of certification and the unprecedented Proclamation 

targeting Harvard impair the educational experience of all Harvard students by diminishing the 

global character and overall strength of the institution. This is particularly true for specific 

programs that offer richer experiences when they feature dialogue between students from different 

backgrounds. For instance, the Harvard Kennedy School curriculum focuses on global politics, 

international systems of governance, and similar topics on which F -1 and J -1 visa holders can 

provide unique and direct commentary. Similarly, Harvard Law School’s LL.M. program is 

enhanced by the participation of F -1 and J -1 visa holders, who help deepen the community’s 

understanding of comparative law and for eign legal systems. The loss of these international 

students materially diminishes the breadth of discussion and debate across the entire Harvard 

community and further irreparably damages Harvard and its reputation. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 63 of 101 63 

216.  Fourth, the government’s actions irreparably damage HIO as an institution. G iven 

the importance of the F -1 and J -1 visa program s to Harvard’s educational mission, Harvard has 

invested substantial resources in HIO programs and personnel to attract and enroll top -tier 

international students , integrate them into the broader Harvard community , and comply with SEVP 

and EVP requirements . HIO employs 25 professionals with specific expertise in support ing these 

processes, and many are likely to go elsewhere if DHS’s actions are sustained . That off ice has an 

annual budget of $3.44 million, a substantial portion of which is devoted to facilitating the 

admission of international students and success of Harvard’s visa program s. The revocation of 

SEVP certification renders much of Harvard’s investment in that office and the visa program s

effectively worthless, undermining years of careful institutional planning and resource allocation. 

217.  These immediate and irreparable harms are not hypothetical. Harvard and its visa 

holders began facing immediate repercussions following the Revocation Notice on May 22, 2025 .

218.  As a result of the Revocation Notice, students and faculty alike have expressed 

profound fear, concern, and confusion. Faculty members and administrators have been inundated 

with questions from current international students and scholars about their status and options. 

219.  Many international students and scholars are reporting significant emotional 

distress that is affecting their mental health and making it difficult to focus on their studies. Some 

were afraid to attend their own graduation ceremonies out of fear that some immigration -related 

action would be taken against them. Some have cancelled upcoming international travel plans to 

conduct academic research or see their families in light of the risk that they might not be admitted 

back into the United States. Some are co ncerned that losing their visas could mean being forced to 

separate from partners who live in Cambridge. Some fear being compelled to return abruptly to 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 64 of 101 64 

home countries where they might not be safe due to ongoing conflicts or where they could face 

persecution based on their identity or background. 

220.  At least half a dozen foreign consulates in the United States have reached out to 

Harvard seeking information about how the Revocation Notice affects the welfare of students and 

scholars from their countries who are enrolled at Harvard. 

221.  Because of the Revocation Notice, currently enrolled international students are 

reconsidering their futures at Harvard. Too many international students to count have inquired 

about the possibility of transferring to another institution. At least three curr ently enrolled domestic 

students have expressed serious interest in transferring rather than attend an educational institution 

without international students. 

222.  Even for students who wish to transfer, however, that option may not be available 

to them or may harm their academic career. At the undergraduate level, for example, many transfer 

deadlines have already passed for the upcoming fall term. At the graduate an d PhD level, transfer 

options can be limited given the small sizes of programs and the specialized fields that many 

students at Harvard pursue. Moreover, these students may lose competitively awarded research 

grants and other funding sources if they transf er. Transfer is particularly challenging for PhD 

students who have completed their requirements other than finishing their dissertations, and these 

students may be required to backtrack or start again even if they can secure a transfer. 

223.  The Revocation Notice is also hurting Harvard’s ability to attract and enroll 

international students and scholars going forward, particularly in STEM fields. As one example, 

an incoming international student about to begin a graduate program in physics at Harvard has 

decided to transfer to another U.S. institution given the uncertainty surrounding Harvard’s ability 

to welcome international students. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 65 of 101 65 

224.  Dozens of incoming international students have asked about deferring their 

admission or obtaining Harvard’s assistance in enrolling elsewhere. At least one international 

student has officially deferred admission to a PhD program at Harvard Medical School f or visa -

related reasons, and another incoming student to Harvard Law School has withdrawn for visa -

related reasons. 

225.  The Revocation Notice is also hurting Harvard’s ability to enroll domestic students. 

For example, an incoming domestic student at Harvard Business School requested a deferral 

following the Revocation Notice, stating that the educational experience would be different 

without any international students. 

226.  In addition, administrators are already receiving emails from prospective 

international applicants who are worried about whether they will be able to apply to Harvard for 

the 2026 -27 academic year. 

227.  At the same time, news coverage and public statements indicate that universities in 

Europe and Asia are already taking the Revocation Notice as an opportunity to recruit talented 

U.S. and international students who would otherwise pursue their studies at H arvard. This is 

especially true for international students who have already been accepted into STEM programs at 

Harvard. 

228.  As one example, on May 23, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 

(HKUST) issued a press release announcing “ unconditional offers, streamlined admission 

procedures, and academic support ” (bold in original) for current and incoming international 

students at Harvard. 46  The press release promoted HKUST as a leader in data science and artificial  

> 46

Press Release, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, HKUST Opens Doors to 

Harvard Students Amid Global Academic Shifts (May 23, 2025), (attached as Exhibit 3 7).

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 66 of 101 66 

intelligence and said: “A dedicated team has been established to assist students with admissions, 

credit transfers, housing, and visa logistics. Interested individuals are encouraged to contact hkust -

Harvard@ust.hk for personalized guidance.” 

229.  Furthermore, e ven during the few hours when the Revocation Notice was in effect 

last week, Harvard visa holders, visa applicants, and their dependents experienced significant 

consequences during interactions with the U.S. government. 

230.  Within hours of the Revocation Notice issuing, HIO began to receive reports that 

DHS’s Customs and Border Protection at Boston Logan International Airport was requiring 

Harvard visa holders and their dependents to undergo secondary processing, a more detai led 

inspection to verify admissibility. Individuals subject to secondary processing during this 

timeframe included a visa holder’s wife and one -year -old child, as well as a former head of state 

who is a current fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School. 

231.  The Revocation Notice has also affected admitted international students who have 

not yet matriculated and visiting scholars who have not yet started their research. 

232.  On the morning of May 23, HIO began to receive reports of incoming international 

students and scholars who are scheduled to travel to the United States to begin studies at Harvard 

in the fall but were told by U.S. embassy officials that their visa applications had been denied. At 

least ten international students or scholars who applied for visas were refused for “administrative 

processing” immediately following the Revocation Notice. 

233.  For example, an incoming student scheduled to start a PhD program in Government 

in the fall reported that on May 23, a consular officer at the U.S. embassy in São Paulo told him 

that his visa application was “refused” for “administrative processing.” The c onsular officer 

explained that she was awaiting further instructions from the Department of State and could not 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 67 of 101 67 

answer the student’s follow -up questions about whether it would be possible to obtain visa 

approval if the Revocation Notice were enjoined or withdrawn. After this incident, the incoming 

student cance lled his travel plans so that he could stay in São Paulo and address the situation 

regarding his visa. 

234.  Likewise, an incoming visiting research scholar at the Harvard School of Dental 

Medicine visited the U.S. embassy in Prague on May 23 to obtain a J -1 visa to travel to the United 

States. A consular officer at the embassy informed this scholar that her visa was refused due to the 

Revocation Notice. According to the consular officer, because of the Revocation Notice issued on 

May 22, the embassy was required to revoke visa applications for Harvard University starting the 

morning of May 23. The officer gave th e scholar a slip that stated she had “been found ineligible 

for a nonimmigrant visa based on section 221(g) of the U.S. Immigration and Nationality Act 

(INA).” The slip said, “In your case the following is required,” and the consular officer checked 

the bo x marked “Other” and handwrote, “SEVP Revocation / Harvard.” 

235.  On the same day, another incoming student in the LL.M. program at Harvard Law 

School visited the U.S. embassy in Bern to obtain his F -1 visa, as needed to travel to the United 

States for fall semester. He plans to leave his current job to start his studies in the United States. 

The consular officer informed the student that the officer could not issue visas for Harvard students 

at this time and gave the student a slip indicating that the student’s application “has been refused 

under § 221(g).” 

236.  Likewise, an incoming student to a PhD program at Harvard Medical School 

reported that he attended his visa interview on May 23 at the U.S. embassy in Milan and was given 

a section 221(g) slip that said his visa application was “refused” for “administrativ e processing.” 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 68 of 101 68 

The consular officer explained that administrative processing was required given “the current 

situation.” 

237.  Other incoming international students whose visa applications had already been 

approved received notices that their visas had been revoked. 

238.  For example, an incoming Harvard College student who had just been approved at 

the U.S. embassy in Madrid on May 22 received a notice on May 23 that her visa application had 

been refused under section 221(g) because Harvard’s SEVP certification had been re voked before 

the visa could be printed. The notice said the student had a year to adjust her application by 

providing documentation from a different institution. 

239.  Another incoming student from the United Kingdom is scheduled to start in the 

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences in September. He reported that at his visa appointment on 

May 16, a consular officer took his passport and told him that his visa application was successful. 

But on May 23, his passport was returned with a section 221(g) slip stating that his “case is refused 

based DHS terminating Harvard’s SEVP certification [sic].” 

240.  Although HIO has heard from some of these visa applicants that they were 

contacted by U.S. officials following entry of the Court’s Temporary Restraining Order and invited 

to submit additional documentation, the harms to Harvard -affiliated visa applicants have continued 

notwithstanding the Court’s Order —including due to the “pilot program” subjecting visa 

applicants affiliated with Harvard to additional scrutiny, including their social media accounts. 

241.  As a result of the “pilot program,” incoming students have reported being told by 

government officials that they will be subject to delayed administrative processing of their visa 

applications and additional vetting of their social media accounts simply because they are admitted 

Harvard students. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 69 of 101 69 

242.  For example, one applicant for a J visa was required to share his social media 

account information and attend four different interviews at the São Paulo consulate before 

ultimately receiving his visa. 

243.  Another incoming Harvard student report ed that two other visa applicants slated to 

attend other universities were approved at their visa interviews at the U.S. Embassy in Vienna, 

whereas the Harvard student was required to undergo additional review and corresponding delay. 

244.  Consular officers are asking both Harvard -affiliated visa applicants and their 

spouses to change all social media account settings from private to public to allow embassy staff 

to conduct a review of their social media .

245.  The President’s Proclamation —which seems to effectuate the action this Court has 

already enjoined —intensifies all of this harm to Harvard and its students. 

CLAIMS FOR RELIEF 

COUNT I

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

FIRST AMENDMENT RETALIATION 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

246.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

247.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

248.  Under the APA , a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

249.  The First Amendment provides that the federal government “shall make no law … 

abridging the freedom of speech.” U.S. Const. amend. I. The First Amendment also “prohibits 

government officials from relying on the threat of invoking legal sanctions and other means of 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 70 of 101 70 

coercion … to achieve the suppression of disfavored speech.” Vullo , 602 U.S. at 175 (ellipses in 

original) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 

250.  Academic freedom is “a special concern of the First Amendment.” Keyishian , 385 

U.S. at 603. Colleges and universities have a constitutionally protected right to manage an 

academic community and evaluate teaching and scholarship free from governmental interference .

This right protects “not only students and teachers, but their host institutions as well.”  Asociaci ón

de Educaci ón Privada de Puerto Rico, Inc. v. Garcia -Padilla , 490 F.3d 1, 8 (1st Cir. 2007) 

(citation  omitted). 

251. Harvard has long exercised its academic freedom by “determin[ing] for itself on 

academic grounds who may teach” and what they teach. Weinstock v. Columbia Univ. , 224 F.3d 

33, 47 (2d Cir. 2000) ( citation omitted). 

252.  “As a general matter the First Amendment prohibits government officials from 

subjecting an [entity] to retaliatory actions for engaging in protected speech.” Nieves v. Bartlett ,

587 U.S. 391, 398 (2019) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). To succeed on a First 

Amendment retaliation claim, a plaintiff must prove that: (1) it “engaged in constitutionally 

protected conduct”; (2) it “was subjected to an adverse action by the defendant”; and (3) “the 

protected conduct was a substantial or motivating factor in the adverse action.” D.B. ex rel. 

Elizabeth B. v. Esposito , 675 F.3d 26, 43 (1st Cir. 2012) ; see also Aref v. Lynch , 833 F.3d 242, 258 

(D.C. Cir. 2016). 

253.  Each of these elements is satisfied here. 

254.  The demands in the April 11 Demand Letter go to the core of Harvard’s 

constitutionally protected academic freedom by seeking to assert governmental control over 

Harvard’s teaching, community, and governance. Accepting these demands would restrict 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 71 of 101 71 

Harvard’s academic “programs,” Ex. 9 at 3, thereby constraining the content Harvard’s faculty 

may teach students. The demands also require that Harvard modify its hiring and admissions 

practices to achieve the government’s preferred balance of viewpoints in every “department,” 

“field,” and “teaching unit.” Id. And they seek to restrict Harvard’s ability to manage its own 

internal “governance” and “leadership,” requiring Harvard to engage in a “governance reform and 

restructuring” that “exclusively” “empower [s]” those faculty members who are “most …

committed to the changes” outlined in the Demand Letter and “reduc[es] the power held by 

faculty … and administrators” who are “committed to activism.” Id. at 1. 

255.  Adhering to the demands would amount to relinquishing control over Harvard’s 

core academic functions, thereby ceding Harvard’s constitutionally protected academic freedom. 

Harvard’s refusal to do so, as stated by President Garber in his April 14 Letter to the Harvard 

Community, is protected by the First Amendment. See Ex. 10. 

256.  Defendants then subjected Harvard to a series of adverse action s. Defendants issu ed 

the Revocation Notice and revok ed Harvard’s SEVP certification. That action was adverse: it 

sought to deprive Harvard of its constitutionally protected property interest in continued 

certification; prevent Harvard from continuing its robust F -1 and J -1 visa programs, which have 

long inured to the benefit of the broader Harvard community; damage Harvard’s reputation as a 

global research institution by preventing the universit y from attracting top students and faculty 

from around the world; render meaningless years of careful institutional planning and resource 

allocation with respect to its F -1 and J -1 programs; and cause immediate chaos by potentially 

rendering over a quarter of Harvard’s student body unlawfully present in the United States just 

days before the end of the spring term and then the start of the summer term, without regard to the 

vital contributions these students make on campus. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 72 of 101 72 

257.  Harvard has established the requisite causal link between it s protected conduct —

the exercise of its academic prerogatives and the refusal to relinquish that freedom —and the 

adverse action s. The causal link is clear from the broader context in which the decertification 

occurred : a series of unprecedented adverse actions, each in contravention of governing statutes 

and regulations, that began mere hours after Harvard announced it would not comply with the 

demands. 

258.  The link between Harvard’s protected conduct and the government’s adverse 

actions is also clear from the government’s own statements. In the April 16 Press Release, DHS 

explained that it had issued a “scathing letter” —the Records Request —to Harvard demandi ng 

“detailed records on Harvard’s foreign student visa holders’ illegal and violent activities,” because 

of what the government views as Harvard’s tolerance for “anti -American, pro -Hamas ideology 

poisoning its campus and classrooms.” The May 22 Revocation Notice makes similar statements, 

albeit with shifting rationales, accusing Harvard of “perpetuating an unsafe campus environment 

that is hostile to Jewish students, promotes pro -Hamas sympathies, and employs racist ‘diversity, 

equity, and inclusion ’ policies” and stating that the Administration will “ root out the evils of anti -

Americanism and antisemitism in society and campuses .” In the May 22 Revocation Press Release, 

DHS stated that Harvard had lost its SEVP certification “for Pro -Terrorist Conduct” and its “toxic 

campus climate,” not for any identified regulatory violations, and further stated that the revocation 

of Harvard’s certification “comes after DHS terminated $2.7 million in DHS grants for Harvard 

last month .” Ex. 27, at 1 .

259.  The surrounding circumstances —including the White House meeting and the State 

Department’s Harvard -only pilot program —make plain that Defendants have withdrawn 

Harvard’s SEVP certification , suspen ded the entry of Harvard students , and directed the potential 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 73 of 101 73 

revocation of current Harvard students’ F and J visas not for any valid reason, but because they 

seek to punish the University for its courage in refusing to surrender its independence or relinquish 

its constitutional rights under the First Amendment. 

260.  Further evidence of Defendants’ retaliation is the President’s June 4, 2025 

Proclamation , which “restrict[s] the entry of foreign nationals who seek to enter the United States 

solely or principally to participate in a course of study at Harvard University or in an exchange 

visitor program hosted by Harvard University” and “den[ies] foreign nationals access to Harvard 

under the auspices of educational exchange.” Ex. 35 . The Proclamation brands Harvard as “an 

unsuitable destination for foreign students and re searchers” and asserts that Harvard has “failed to 

discipline at least some categories of conduct violations on campus.” Id . And the Fact Sheet 

accompanying the Proclamation claims that Harvard “has a demonstrated history of ... radicalism” 

and “has persisted in prioritizing diversity, equity, and inclusion.” Id . These statements all 

demonstrate that the revocation of Harvard’s certification and the Proclamation’s suspension of 

entry are simply part of the government’s larger scheme of retaliation against H arvard. 

261.  Th is constitutional violation cause s immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

COUNT II 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

FIRST AMENDMENT VIEWPOINT DISCRIMINATION 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

262.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

263.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

264.  Under the APA, a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 74 of 101 74 

265.  The First Amendment prohibits the regulation or censure of speech based on “the 

specific motivating ideology or the opinion or perspective of the speaker.” Reed , 576 U.S. at 168 -

69 (quoting Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va. , 515 U.S. 819, 829 (1995)). Such 

government action is a “‘blatant’ and ‘egregious form of content discrimination’” and is subject to 

strict scrutiny. Id. at 168, 171 (citation omitted). A finding that the government has discriminated 

based on viewpoint is “all but disposit ive” in a First Amendment challenge. Sorrell v. IMS Health 

Inc. , 564 U.S. 552, 571 (2011). 

266.  The series of retaliatory actions against Harvard impermissibly seeks to employ 

viewpoint -based distinctions as a means of correcting the University’s perceived “ideological 

capture ,” Ex. 9 at 1 , and “history of ... radicalism,” Ex. 36, at 2 . The Demand Letter expressly 

classifies Harvard’s community members on the basis of their actual or perceived viewpoints, 

requiring differential treatment along ideological lines. Defendants’ actions designed to coerce 

Harvard’s compliance with these demand s, including the summary decertification and 

Proclamation , similarly aim to bring Harvard’s expressive activity (and the expression of 

Harvard’s community members) more closely in line with the government’s preferred viewpoints. 

“[T]he concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our socie ty in order 

to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment.” Buckley v. Valeo ,

424 U.S. 1, 48 -49 (1976), superseded by statute as stated in McConnell v. Fed. Election Comm’n ,

540 U.S. 93 (2003). 

267.  Defendants’ campaign of retribution against Harvard is expressly viewpoint -based, 

both in its motivation and its demanded effects. The Demand Letter itself makes plain that its 

demands are premised on the Administration’s perception of Harvard as an institution in the grips 

of “ideological capture,” whose leadership, faculty, and students lack sufficient “viewpoint 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 75 of 101 75 

diversity.” Ex. 9 at 1 -2. And the Press Release, which links those demands to what it touts as a 

“scathing letter” threatening Harvard’s SEVP certification, doubles down —citing Harvard’s “anti -

American … ideology,” its research that supposedly “brand[s] co nservatives as far -right 

dissidents,” and its “public health propaganda.” Ex. 17. The Revocation Notice and the Revocation 

Press Release make many of the same points, while not identify ing any failure on Harvard’s part 

to comply with the regulations govern ing SEVP certification. In other words, Defendants expressly 

attribute perceived viewpoints to Harvard and have targeted the University (including its SEVP 

certification) on that basis. 

268.  Viewpoint discrimination that is retaliatory cannot be justified by any government 

interest. 

269.  In any event, even supposing the revocation of Harvard’s certification served some 

compelling governmental interest, Defendants cannot reasonably argue that summary withdrawal 

is the “least restrictive means of achieving” it. Ams. for Prosperity Found. v. Bonta , 594 U.S. 595, 

607 (2021) ( citation omitted). Defendants’ own regulations supply, and indeed require , a less 

restrictive means of ensuring compliance by SEVP -certified institutions: namely, by following a 

detailed set of procedures for resolving alle ged noncompliance that present opportunities for the 

institution to cure prior to withdrawal. Defendants failed to follow those procedures and instead 

summarily revoked Harvard’s certification. 

270.  These constitutional violations cause immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

COUNT III 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITION 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

271.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 76 of 101 76 

272.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

273.  Under the APA, a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

274.  Although the government generally may “impose limits on the use of [government] 

funds to ensure they are used in the manner Congress intends,” the government cannot “leverage 

funding to regulate speech” or other protected conduct “outside the contours of t he [government] 

program itself.” Agency for Int’l Dev. v. All. for Open Soc’y Int’l, Inc. , 570 U.S. 205, 213 -15 

(2013). 

275.  The First Amendment forbids the government from conditioning access to 

government benefits on the relinquishing of constitutional rights or adherence to the government’s 

viewpoint. That is true even where the speaker “has no entitlement to that benefit.” Rumsfeld v. 

Forum for Acad. & Institutional Rts., Inc. , 547 U.S. 47, 59 (2006) (quotation marks omitted). 

276.  SEVP certification is a government benefit and thus cannot be conditioned on an 

institution’s relinquishing its academic freedom or adopting the government’s preferred 

viewpoints. 

277.  Here, the government made clear that Harvard would face significant consequences 

unless it agreed to conform the content of its teaching, the composition of its community, and the 

structure of its governance to align with the government’s agenda —that is, if it conformed its own 

speech to the government’s preferred message. Those conditions are plainly unconstitutional. 

278.  Harvard complied with the lawful inquiries in the Records Request and the Mazzara 

Email by producing requested documents that fell within the scope of the University’s 

recordkeeping obligations as a SEVP -certified institution. Yet DHS summarily deemed these 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 77 of 101 77 

responses “insufficient,” Ex. 25 at 1, without identifying any actual regulatory requirement with 

which Harvard had failed to comply, and revoked Harvard’s certification “effective immediately,” 

id. , without providing Harvard an opportunity to cure any purported noncompliance or otherwise 

following the usual, required procedures. 

279.  By threatening to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification in retaliation for 

constitutionally protected conduct , and then following through on that threat without any 

legitimate regulatory basis for doing so, Defendants effectively conditioned Harvard’s SEVP 

certification on the University’s relinquishing of its constitutional rights. Put otherwise, Harvard’s 

SEVP certification was effectively conditioned not on Harvard’s compliance with its obligations 

as a SEVP -certified institution, but instead on its compli ance with the administration’s 

impermissible ideological demands. That condition violates the First Amendment.  

> 280.

This constitutional violation causes immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

COUNT IV

VIOLATION OF THE FIRST AMENDMENT 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION AND PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION) 

281.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs 

282.  Federal courts have the “equitable power[]” to “enjoin unconstitutional actions by 

state and federal officers.” Armstrong v. Exceptional Child Ctr., Inc. , 575 U.S. 320, 327 -28 (2015); 

see also R.I. Dep’t of Envtl. Mgmt. v. United States , 304 F.3d 31, 42 -43 (1st Cir. 2002) (stating 

that “district court[s]” retain the “nonstatutory” power “to review agency action that is ultra vires” 

and provide equitable relief unless Congress precludes that review). 

283.  As alleged in Counts I, II, and III, Defendants’ action to revoke Harvard’s SEVP 

certification constitutes impermissible First Amendment retaliation and viewpoint discrimination 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 78 of 101 78 

and involved the imposition of unconstitutional conditions. The Constitution forecloses any lawful 

authority for that actions. 

284.  For the same reasons articulated in Counts I, II, and III, Defendants’ actions to 

implement the Proclamation and thereby suspend the entry of any new Harvard student as a 

nonimmigrant under F or J visas and to direct the potential revocation of existing F or J visas for 

current Harvard students likewise constitute impermissible retaliation, viewpoint discrimination, 

and the imposition of an unconstitutional condition, all in violation of the First Amendment. 

285.  Even supposing the suspension of entry of Harvard students served some 

compelling governmental interest, Defendants cannot reasonably argue that the suspension is the 

“least restrictive means of achieving” it. Ams. for Prosperity , 594 U.S. at 607 (citation omitted). 

Suspending the entry into the United States of any new Harvard student as a nonimmigrant under 

F or J visas and directing the Secretary of State to consider revoking existing such visas for current 

Harvard students are plainly not narrowly tailo red to whatever interest —including any purported 

national security interest —the government might invoke. 

286.  Because Defendants’ actions are unconstitutional and ultra vires , this Court should 

enjoin Defendants in their official capacities from withdrawing Harvard’s SEVP certification and 

implementing the suspension of entry or revocation of Harvard students seeking or holding F or J 

visas. 

287.  If Defendants’ actions are not declared unlawful, set aside, and enjoined as 

unconstitutional and ultra vires , Harvard will suffer substantial injury, including irreparable injury. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 79 of 101 79 

COUNT V

VIOLATION OF THE FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHT TO 

PETITION THE GOVERNMENT 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION AND PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION) 

288.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

289.  The Proclamation violates Harvard’s First Amendment right “to petition the 

Government for a redress of grievances.” U.S. const. amend. I. The Supreme Court has held that 

the “right to petition extends to all departments of the Government,” including “court s.” Cal. 

Motor Transp. Co. v. Trucking Unlimited , 404 U.S. 508, 510 (1972). Accordingly, the Court has 

treated “a lawsuit” as a kind of “petition” for purposes of the Petition Clause. Borough of Duryea 

v. Guarnieri , 564 U.S. 379, 390 (2011); see id. at 387 (identifying “precedents confirm[ing] that 

the Petition Clause protects the right of individuals to appeal to courts and other forums established 

by the government for resolution of legal disputes”). 

290.  The Proclamation violates the Petition Clause by punishing Harvard for filing this 

lawsuit and having filed the Funding Case . The Supreme Court has long adhered to the 

“proposition that when a person petitions the government for redress,” the “First Amendment 

prohibits any sanction on that action ... so long as the petition was in good faith.” Nader v. 

Democratic Nat’l Comm. , 567 F.3d 692, 696 (D.C. Cir. 2009). The Proclamation violates the 

Noerr -Pennington doctrine by sanctioning Harvard for bringing a goo d-faith —and thus far 

successful —lawsuit challenging the revocation of its SEVP certification , as well as for bringing a 

good -faith lawsuit challenging the government’s actions to freeze federal funds to Harvard .

Defendants plainly seek to punish Harvard for these protected petitioning activit ies by means of a 

proclamation that achieves essentially the same result as the revocation that Harvard initially 

challenged. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 80 of 101 80 

291.  This constitutional violation causes immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

COUNT V I

ACTION UNAUTHORIZED BY STATUTE , 8 U.S.C. §§ 1182(f) and 1185(a) 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

(AS TO PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION) 

292.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

293.  The Proclamation principally invokes Section 212(f) of the Immigration and 

Nationality Act (“INA”), which provides that when the President “finds that the entry of any aliens 

or of any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United 

States,” the President may “suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or 

nonimmigrants.” 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f). 

294.  Section 212(f), however, does not authorize the Proclamation’s measures against 

Harvard. The Proclamation does not bar the entry of any noncitizen or find that any noncitizens 

entry would be detrimental to the interests of the United States. It simply picks out a disfavored 

domestic institution, Harvard, and punishes it by forbidding international students from coming to 

study there. Broad though Section 212(f) may be in its “sphere,” Hawaii , 585 U.S. at 695, that 

sphere does not encompass excluding nonciti zens from particular U.S. institutions that the 

President disfavors. 

295.  First, the Proclamation does not “suspend … entry.” 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f). This 

authority empowers the President to render noncitizens inadmissible to the United States. Hawaii ,

585 U.S. at 695 n.4 (“The concepts of entry and admission —but not issuance of a visa —are used 

interchangeably in the INA. See § 1101(a)(13)(A) (defining ‘admission’ as the ‘lawful entry of the 

alien into the United States’).”). But any noncitizen potentially subject to the Proclamation can 

continue to enter the United States and can do so under the same immigrant or nonimmigrant 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 81 of 101 81 

admission programs. The Proclamation merely prevents that noncitizen from studying at Harvard. 

See Proc. § 1 (purporting to limit entry of noncitizens “to pursue a course of study at Harvard 

University” or “to participate in an exchange visitor program hosted by Harvard University”); id. 

§ 2(c) (“The suspension and limitation on entry pursuant to section 1 of this proclamation shall not 

apply to any alien who enters the United States to attend other universities through the SEVP.”). 

Section 212(f) authorize s the President to suspend entry and admission into the United States, not 

entry into Harvard Yard. 

296.  Second, the Proclamation does not suspend the entry of any “class of aliens as 

immigrants or nonimmigrants.” 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f). As just explained, any noncitizen potentially 

subject to the Proclamation can continue to enter the United States and can do so under the same 

immigrant or nonimmigrant admission programs. The Proclamation merely prevents that 

noncitizen from studying at Harvard. Section 212(f) allows the President to restrict the entry of 

particular classes of noncitizens and to limit particular types of admissions, not to target particular 

classes of U.S. institutions receiving noncitizens —in this case, a class of one. Cf. Hawaii , 585 U.S. 

at 688 (“the word ‘class ’ comfortably encompasses a group of people linked by nationality”). 

297.  Third, the Proclamation does not set forth the predicate the statute requires —a

finding that the “entry of any aliens or any class of aliens into the United States would be 

detrimental to the interests of the United States.” As just explained, noncitizens covered by the 

Proclamation can still enter the United States and can still do so via the very same SEVP programs 

to study at other Universities. The Proclamation merely purports to find that it would be 

detrimental to the United States for noncitizens “to participate in a course of study at Harvard 

University or in an exchange visitor program hosted by Harvard University.” Section 212(f) 

requires that the President find that particular noncitizens ’ entry would be detrimental to the 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 82 of 101 82 

interests of the United States and does not permit the President to enforce his view that it would 

be detrimental to the interests of the United States for noncitizens to attend particular U.S. 

institutions .

298.  Moreover, the Proclamation makes plain that the “interests of the United States” 

that it pursues reflect animus toward Harvard, not any national interest related to the “entry of any 

aliens or of any class of aliens.” The Proclamation is clear that the supposed “interests of the United 

States” concern Harvard’s admissions practices, Harvard’s supposed suitability as a “destination 

for foreign students and researchers,” and Harvard’s provision of data concerning its international 

stud ents to DHS. However bro ad may be the scope of Section 212(f)’s authority to suspend the 

entry of noncitizens whose admission would be detrimental to interest of the United States, it does 

not empower the President to punish disfavored domestic institutions by barring noncitizens from 

those institutions. Nor do the “interests of the United States” that the President may advance via 

Section 212(f) encompass evading the limitations of the SEVP regulations on what information 

may be required from U.S. institutions. 

299.  Fifth, the Proclamation violates 8 U.S.C. § 1372(c), which confirms that the 

Proclamation exceeds the authority that Section 212(f) confers. In 8 U.S.C. § 1372(c)(1), Congress 

identified the “information for collection” under the SEVP program, and in 8 U.S.C. § 1372(c)(5), 

Congress specified that the “Attorney General shall prescribe by regulation reporting 

requirements.” The President may not, under the guise of Section 212(f), create his own reporting 

requirements or circumvent the procedural and substant ive limits on the authority that Congress 

set forth in 8 U.S.C. § 1372(c), including that “the Attorney General” must act “by regulation” to 

establish reporting requirements. That would allow the President to entirely displace Congress’s 

reticulated scheme by banning international students from attending institutions that do not comply 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 83 of 101 83 

with the new scheme that the President has devised apart from Congress . See O.A. v. Trump , 404 

F. Supp. 3d 109, 151 (D.D.C. 2019) (holding that “a presidential proclamation” under Section 

212(f) could not be used to “sidestep [a] statutory restriction on” agency authorities) ; cf. United 

States v. Fausto , 484 U.S. 439, 455 (1988) (explaining that where Congress “establishe[s] a 

comprehensive scheme,” omissions from that scheme should be given force). 

COUNT VII 

VIOLATION OF THE FIFTH AMENDMENT – EQUAL PROTECTION 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

(AS TO PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION) 

300.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

301.  The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, as incorporated against 

the federal government through the Fifth Amendment, protects all individuals and entities from 

unjust discrimination by the federal government. Though the Fifth Amendment “doe s not contain 

an equal protection clause,” discrimination by the federal government that would run afoul of the 

Equal Protection Clause if undertaken by a State is “violative of due process.” Bolling v. Sharpe ,

347 U.S. 497, 499 (1954). 

302.  The government violates equal protection when, as here, it singles out similarly 

situated entities for adverse treatment without a constitutionally legitimate justification. Vill. of 

Willowbrook v. Olech , 528 U.S. 562, 56 3-64 (2000) ( per curiam ). 

303.  In cases where the government treats similarly situated individuals or entities 

differently, the government must articulate a legitimate interest for doing so. Such justification 

cannot be arbitrary, irrational, or pretextual, which is to say that it canno t serve only to mask the 

government’s true, illegitimate motive for singling out the entity. A desire to single out that group 

will not suffice. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 84 of 101 84 

304.  The Revocation Notice and the Proclamation plainly violate these equal -protection 

principles. The evident purpose of both the Revocation Notice and the Proclamation is to 

discriminate against Harvard and Harvard alone by imposing on Harvard extraordinary and 

punitive measures that apply to no other school in the country. On information and belief, scores 

of other universities receive foreign funding (including from Ch ina) admit large numbers of 

international students, and maintain and report information to DHS only as required by applic able 

regulations. Yet none of these other similarly situated schools have been subject to a similar 

Proclamation. This singling out of Harvard demonstrates that the Proclamation was motivated by 

a bare intent to punish Harvard, as just the latest aspect of the Administration’s months’ long 

campaign of retaliation. 

305.  Defendants’ discriminatory intent is reinforced by the numerous public statements 

made by President Trump and various other members of his Administration that reflect the 

President’s deep -seated animus toward Harvard and his desire to seek retribution against it at all 

costs for the way it exercises its First Amendment right to academic freedom and its refusal to 

capitulate to the Administration’s demands. 

306.  No credible or rational justification exists for singling out Harvard in this way. 

Indeed, t he Proclamation is a transparent attempt to circumvent the temporary restraining order 

this Court already entered against the summary revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification. 

COUNT VIII 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO LAW 

VIOLATION OF 8 C.F.R. § 214.4 (b) -(h) 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

307.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 85 of 101 85 

308.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice ,

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification , and refusing to withdraw the Revocation 

Notice . See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

309.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action that is not in 

accordance with law, id . § 706(2)(A), or that fails to observe “procedure required by law,” id. 

§ 706(2)(D). 

310.  Under applicable regulations, if DHS wishes to withdraw a school’s certification 

out -of -cycle, it must provide the school with a NO IW stating “[t]he grounds for withdrawing SEVP 

certification.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b)(1). After receiving a NOIW , the school has 30 days to submit 

an answer either admitting or denying the allegations in the NOIW and supporting its position with 

“sworn statements, and documentary or other evidence, to rebut the grounds for withdrawal of 

certification.” Id. § 214.4(b)(2); see id § 214.4(d) -(e). The school must be given the opportunity to 

request “a telephonic interview in support of its response to the NOIW,” id. § 214.4(b)(3), and it 

must be permitted to be “represented by counsel of its choice” during these proceedings, id. 

§ 214.4(c). 

311.  If DHS intends to proceed with withdrawing a school’s certification, it must 

consider the school’s evidentiary submissions and issue a decision “explain[ing] in writing the 

specific reasons for” withdrawing the certification. Id. § 103.3(a)(1)(i); see id. § 214.4(g). It must 

also provide the school with the opportunity to take an administrative appeal of the decertification 

decision. See id. § 214.4(h). 

312.  In addition, under 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(1), only the Department of State can revoke 

a school’s designation to sponsor J -1 students and only then with 30 days’ notice. That notice must 

“specify the grounds for the proposed sanction and its effective date, advise the sponsor of its right 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 86 of 101 86 

to oppose the proposed sanction, and identify the procedures for submitting a statement of 

opposition thereto.” Id. 

313.  The government did not provide Harvard with any of these procedural protections 

prior to summarily revoking Harvard’s certification to host F -1 students and designation to sponsor 

J-1 students. That is unlawful: “An agency may not … simply disregard rules that are still on the 

books.” FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc. , 556 U.S. 502, 515 (2009). 

314.  Because Defendants failed to withdraw Harvard’s certification “in accordance 

with” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b), id. , the revocation of Harvard’s certification must be set aside. 

315.  The summary revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification, without the benefit of 

codified procedural protections, causes immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to Harvard. 

COUNT IX 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO LAW 

VIOLATION OF 5 U.S.C. § 558 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

316.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

317.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice ,

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification , and refusing to withdraw the Revocation 

Notice . See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

318.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action that is not in 

accordance with law, id . § 706(2)(A), or which fails to observe “procedure required by law,” id. 

§ 706(2)(D). 

319.  The APA defines “licenses” to include “the whole or part of an agency permit, 

certificate, approval, registration, charter, membership, statutory exemption or other form of 

permission.” Id . § 551(8). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 87 of 101 87 

320.  SEVP certification is a “license” within the meaning of the APA. See Blackwell 

Coll. of Bus. v. Att’y Gen. , 454 F.2d 928, 933 -35 (D.C. Cir. 1971) . Thus, in order to revoke that 

license, the government was required to comply with the strictures of Section 558(c)(1) -(2). 

321.  Section 558 provides that “[e]xcept in cases of willfulness or those in which public 

health, interest, or safety requires otherwise, the withdrawal, suspension, revocation, or annulment 

of a license is lawful only if, before the institution of agency proceedings therefore, th e licensee 

has been given” both (1) “notice by the agency in writing of the facts or conduct which may warrant 

the action” and (2) “opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance with all lawful 

requirements.” 5 U.S.C. § 558(c)(1) -(2) .

322.  DHS violated Section 558(c) because it failed to “institut[e] … agency 

proceedings” for the revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification, id. § 558(c), instead purporting 

to summarily revok e Harvard’s certification by issuing the Revocation Notice. 

323.  DHS also violated Section 558 (c)(1) because the Revocation Notice failed to 

provide the required “notice … in writing of the facts or conduct which may warrant the action.” 

Id. § 558(c)(1). The Revocation Notice does not identify any regulatory provision with which 

Harvard failed to comply, instead purporting to revoke Harvard’s certification based on its failure 

to comply with demands that exceeded the scope of its reporting requ irements. Failure to comply 

with such demands is not conduct that “may warrant” revocation of Harvard’s certification. 

324.  Relatedly, DHS also violated Section 558(c)(2). That provision requires DHS, 

“before the institution of [revocation] proceedings,” to give schools an “opportunity to demonstrate 

or achieve compliance with all lawful requirements” of licensure. Id. § 558(c)(2) (emphases 

added). The “lawful requirements” of continued SEVP certification, id. , are those specified by the 

regulations . DHS has not identified any such lawful requirements with which Harvard has failed 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 88 of 101 88 

to comply . Nor has it given Harvard the required chance to “demonstrate or achieve compliance 

with” any such requirements. Id. § 558(c)(2). 

325.  These violations of Section 558 cause immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard by depriving the University of its property interest without required procedure. 

COUNT X

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

326.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

327.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice ,

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification , and refusing to withdraw the Revocation 

Notice . See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

328.  Under the APA, a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

329.  As a license, SEVP certification is a protected property interest subject to the 

procedural due process requirements of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. See 

Blackwell Coll. of Bus. , 454 F.2d at 933 ((holding that “withdrawal of [certification]” is permitted 

“only in accordance with procedural due process”). 

330.  Due process requires the government to provide “fair notice of conduct that is 

forbidden or required” before depriving private parties of their property. FCC v. Fox Television 

Stations, Inc. , 567 U.S. 239, 253 (2012); see Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville , 405 U.S. 156, 

162 (1972). “This requirement of clarity in regulation is essential to the protections provided by 

the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment,” and “[i]t requires the invalidation of laws [and 

regulations] that are impermissibly vague. ” Fox Television Stations , 567 U.S. at 253. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 89 of 101 89 

331.  Due process also requires notice and an opportunity to be heard “at a meaningful 

time and in a meaningful manner” before the government may deprive a person of a protected 

interest. Mathews v. Eldridge , 424 U.S. 319, 333 (1976) (quotation marks omitted). 

332.  Defendants violated Harvard’s right to procedural due process by (a) failing to 

provide adequate notice of the grounds for withdrawal of Harvard’s SEVP certification and 

opportunity to avoid those grounds; (b) failing to disclose the evidence upon which SEVP relied 

in making its decision; and (c) denying Harvard a meaningful opportunity to respond to the 

allegations and evidence before the adverse action was taken, including but not limited to a pre -

deprivation hearing. 

333.  The revocation also violated due process because the Records Request and the 

Mazzara Email both “fail[ed] to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what [was 

required]” and was “so standardless that it authorize[d] or encourage[d] serious ly discriminatory 

enforcement.” United States v. Williams , 553 U.S. 285, 304 (2008). DHS demanded information 

that HIO is not required to maintain under the applicable regulations, did not specify the time 

period for which it sought information, and employ ed hopelessly vague descriptions of the 

information sought. DHS did not define what it considers to be “dangerous” conduct, or 

“obstruction of the school’s learning environment,” within the meaning of the Records Request, 

and those terms are not defined in the regulations. DHS then summarily stated that Harvard’s 

responses were “insufficient .” Ex. 25 at 1. 

334.  Subjecting Harvard to deprivation of its protected property based on failure to 

comply with this “impermissibly vague” request, Fox Television Stations , 567 U.S. at 253, plainly 

designed to authorize “seriously discriminatory enforcement,” Williams , 553 U.S. at 304, violated 

Harvard’s rights under the Due Process Clause. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 90 of 101 90 

335.  Defendants’ actions deprive Harvard of its constitutionally protected property 

interest in continued certification; prevent Harvard from continuing its robust F -1 visa program, 

which has long inured to the benefit of the broader Harvard community; damage Harvard’s 

reputation as a global research institution; and disrupt years of careful institutional planning and 

resour ce allocation with respect to its F -1 program. 

336.  The harm caused by the improper revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification is 

immediate and severe, while the additional burden on the government of providing constitutionally 

adequate procedures would be minimal. 

COUNT XI 

PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

337.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

338.  As alleged in Count V II , Defendants’ revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification 

and refusal to withdraw the revocation deprived Harvard of protected property interests without 

due process. 

339.  The Constitution forecloses any lawful authority for Defendants’ actions, and this 

Court should declare them unconstitutional and ultra vires .

COUNT XII 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO LAW 

8 C.F.R. §§ 214.3( e)(4)(ii ) & 214.4(a)(2) 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

340.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

341.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice ,

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification , and refusing to withdraw the Revocation 

Notice . See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 91 of 101 91 

342.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action that is arbitrary 

and capricious and not in accordance with law. Id . § 706(2)(A). 

343.  8 C.F.R. § 214.4(a)(2) permits DHS to withdraw certification but only for a “valid 

and substantive reason.” A “valid and substantive reason” must be understood in context to mean 

a violation of the regulations governing SEVP -certified institutions, for two reasons. 

344.  First, to withdraw a school’s certification out of cycle, the government must issue 

a NOIW . But it can only issue a NOIW under the narrow circumstances specified in 

Section 214.3(e)(4)(ii) of the regulation: if the university “has failed to sustain eligibility” under 

Section 214.3(a)(3)(i) (which requires that the school is “bona fide,” an “established institution of 

learning or other recognized place of study,” possesses “the necessary facilities, personnel, and 

finances to conduct instruction in recognize d courses,” and “engage[s] in instruction in those 

courses”), or if it “has failed to comply with the recordkeeping, retention, reporting and other 

requirements of paragraphs (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l).” 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(a)(3)(i), (e)(4)(ii). If the 

alleg ed violation is something other than ineligibility or the specified regulatory requirements, the 

government cannot issue a NOIW , and therefore cannot withdraw a school’s certification. 

345.  Second, and confirming the point, all examples of “valid and substantive reason[s]” 

for withdrawing a certification enumerated in 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(a)(2) are regulatory violations. 

Under those examples, decertification must be tied either to failure to maintain eligibility or failure 

to comply with regulations governing the program. 

346.  Indeed, the Evidence Attestation Statement attached to the Records Request 

confirmed this understanding of the permissible reasons for decertification. That document stated 

that “SEVP may review [a school’s] certification at any time and may request documentation to 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 92 of 101 92 

establish [the school’s] eligibility for certification as well as review evidence and records for 

compliance with the regulation .” Ex. 16 at 3 (emphasis added). 

347.  Here, DHS’s revocation of Harvard’s certification was not based on a determination 

that Harvard was no longer eligible for certification, and it was not based on a determination that 

Harvard had failed to comply with the regulations. While the Revocation Notice asserts that 

Harvard’s responses to the Records Request and the Mazzara Email were “insufficient,” Ex. 25 at 

1, DHS has not identified any actual regulatory requirement with which Harvard has failed to 

comply. 

348.  The Records Request exceeded the scope of 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1). That provision 

specifies nine categories of information that a school “must keep on each [F -1] student” and 

“furnish … to DHS representatives upon request.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1). Not among the listed 

categor ies of information: conduct of F -1 students that constitutes “illegal,” “dangerous,” or 

“violent” conduct; “deprivation of rights”; “threats”; or “obstruction of the school’s learning 

environment,” Ex. 16 at 1 -2, particularly where such conduct did not result in disciplinary action 

that altered the student’s academic status. 

349.  To the extent Defendants have revoked Harvard’s SEVP certification for failure to 

comply with a request made pursuant to Section s 214.3(g)(1) and 214.3(g)(2) for information not 

required to be maintained or produced to DHS under those provision s, Defendants have failed to 

base the revocation of Harvard’s certification on a “valid and substantive reason,” 8 C.F.R. 

§ 214.4(a)(2), and the revocation must be set aside. 

350.  The improper revocation of Harvard’s certification causes immediate, ongoing, and 

irreparable harm to Harvard. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 93 of 101 93 

COUNT XIII 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS 

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION) 

351.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

352.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice ,

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification , and refusing to withdraw the Revocation 

Notice . See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

353.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside final agency actions that are 

arbitrary and capricious or an abuse of discretion. Id . § 706(2)(A). 

354.  Under the APA, an agency must “examine the relevant data and articulate a

satisfactory explanation for its action including a rational connection between the facts found and 

the choice made,” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of U.S., Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co ., 463 

U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quotation marks omitted), consider all “important aspect[s] of the problem” 

when setting forth that explanation, DHS v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. , 591 U.S. 1, 30 (2020) 

(quoting State Farm , 463 U.S. at 43), and, if the agency’s action represents a change in positions, 

“be cognizant that longstanding policies may have engendered serious reliance interests” and 

ensures that those reliance interests are “taken into account.” Id. (quotation marks omitted). 

355.  Defendants ’ decision to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification failed each of these 

requirements. That action was therefore arbitrary and capricious and an abuse of discretion. 

356.  The Revocation Notice asserts that DHS is revoking Harvard’s certification 

because of “Harvard’s failure to comply with simple reporting requirements.” Ex. 25 at 1. But 

Defendants have not identified any actual “reporting requirements” with which Harvard has failed 

to comply. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 94 of 101 94 

357.  Defendants’ decision to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification on those grounds was 

arbitrary and capricious because it reflects an unacknowledged and unexplained change in the 

agency’s policy. See Am. Wild Horse Pres. Campaign v. Perdue , 873 F.3d 914, 923 (D.C. Cir. 

2017) (stating that agencies must both “acknowledge” and “offer a reasoned explanation for” 

deviations from past agency practice). Upon information and belief, prior to the decertification 

decision in this case, no school had ever had its SEVP cer tification revoked for any reason other 

than failure to meet the eligibility criteria for certification or failure to comply with the 

recordkeeping, retention, reporting, and other requirements set out in the federal regulations 

governing certification. In revoking Harvard’s certification, Defendants did not acknowledge, 

much less provide a reasoned explanation for, that change in policy. 

358.  Defendants also have not articulated any rational explanation for revoking 

Harvard’s certification. Harvard complied with the lawful requests within the Records Request 

and the Mazzara Email . In response, Defendants summarily deemed Harvard’s document 

production noncompliant without providing a cogent reason for that determination, and without 

explaining why the noncompliance —if any —warranted revocation of Harvard’s certification. 

Indeed, the revocation letter was wholly irrational. It states that Harvard f ailed to comply with 

reporting requirements, without explaining what those reporting requirements were and why 

Harvard did not comply with them. It states that Harvard failed to provide a sufficient response to 

DHS’s records request, without articulating w hy the response was insufficient, why DHS’s records 

request complied with DHS’s regulations, or why Harvard’s purportedly insufficient response was 

a basis to revoke Harvard’s statements. And it makes generalized statements about campus 

environment and “an ti -Americanism,” again without articulating any rational link between those 

statements and the decision to retaliate against international students. Accordingly, Defendants 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 95 of 101 95 

failed to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action including 

a rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.” State Farm , 463 U.S. at 43. 

359.  The decertification decision was arbitrary and capricious because it was not 

supported by any evidence. The revocation letter stated that Harvard violated “reporting 

requirements” and that its response to DHS’s record requests were “insufficient.” It faile d to 

substantiate these statements. 

360.  The decertification decision was also arbitrary and capricious because it fails to 

explain why wholesale decertification —rather than some lesser “remedial action” to cure any 

noncompliance, 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii) —was the appropriate remedy here. 

361.  The decertification decision was also arbitrary and capricious because the penalty 

imposed —wholesale decertification of a program that has been continuously certified for over 

70 years —was entirely disproportionate to the alleged noncompliance identified: failure to supply 

information that the regulations do not require Harvard to maintain or report as a condition of its 

continued SEVP certification. 

362.  The decertification decision was also arbitrary and capricious because it ignores 

Harvard’s and its students’ reliance interests and does not provide an explanation that accounts for 

those reliance interests. Decertification directly impacts both Harvard and its many international 

students. The decision thus lacks a rational connection between the facts found and the choice 

made. 

a.  Harvard invests in recruitment, housing, support services, and specialized 

programs designed specifically for its international student populations. The Harvard International 

Office, with its 25 full -time staff members and annual budget of $3.44 million, i s the hub of this 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 96 of 101 96 

investment. It represents decades of accumulated expertise and systems for recruiting and enrolling 

students through the F -1 visa program. 

b.  Harvard relies on its ability to enroll international students to enrich its 

student population and to attract other students and faculty. Harvard’s dual mission of teaching 

and research relies on its global character and its ability to attract students wi shing to participate 

in an intellectual community populated by the brightest minds it can recruit to Massachusetts. 

c.  Harvard relies on its SEVP certification in admitting its incoming summer 

students and its incoming fall class. Reconfiguring these admitted classes in both the 

undergraduate and graduate schools is not practically possible given that the admissions cycle is 

nearly concluded. 

d.  Students, likewise, rely on Harvard’s SEVP certification to legally enter and 

remain in the United States. Students make significant financial and time commitments based on 

a school’s certification. Students build academic and career plans around specific programs at 

certified institutions. Interruptions in academic plans can derail degree completion. Students make 

major life and professional decisions ba sed on their educational plans, including to pursue a 

program on the understanding that they will be abl e to access pre - and post -graduate pathways to 

employment like the Optional Practical Training and Curricular Practical Training Visas . They 

transplant themselves, and often their families, too, to come to Cambridge and Boston to study. 

e.  Students also make practical decisions in reliance on Harvard’s SEVP 

certification . Students do not prepare for the costly travel and moving arrangements needed to 

return home abruptly upon revocation of an F -1 visa, nor do they prepare for facing return to a 

home country where they may face violent or dangerous circumstances. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 97 of 101 97 

363.  Defendants’ arbitrary decertification decision causes immediate, ongoing, and 

irreparable harm to Harvard. 

COUNT XIV 

SEPARATION OF POWERS 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

(AS TO SEVP REVOCATION AND PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION) 

364.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

365.  As alleged, the Revocation Notice and the Proclamation bypass any judicial 

process to single out Havard for punishment. In so doing, they violate fundamental separation -

of -powers principles. 

366.  The Revocation Notice and the Proclamation effectively function as a “prepared 

and proclaimed governmental blacklist[]” —they “possess almost every quality of [an unlawful] 

bill[] of attainder.” Joint Anti -Fascist Refugee Comm. v. McGrath , 341 U.S. 123, 143 -44 (1951) 

(Black, J., concurring); see U.S. Const. art. I, § 9, cl. 3 (“No Bill of Attainder ... shall be passed”). 

They punish Harvard —and only Harvard —without process or cause. From the very beginning of 

our Republic, such measures have been “forbidden to both national and state governments.” 

McGrath , 341 U.S. at 144 (Black, J., concurring). It cannot be “that the authors of the 

Constitution, who outlawed the bill of attainder, inadvertently endowed the executive with power 

to engage in the same tyrannical practices that had made the bill such an odio us institution.” Id. 

367.  This ultra vires action causes immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

REQUEST FOR RELIEF 

WHEREFORE, Harvard respectfully requests the following relief: 

A.  Declare that Defendants’ actions to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification and/or 

EVP designation through the Revocation Notice are unconstitutional and/or 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 98 of 101 98 

unlawful ;

B.  Declare that the June 4, 2025 , Presidential Proclamation entitled, “Enhancing 

National Security by Addressing Risks at Harvard University,” is unconstitutional 

and unlawful ;

C.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from implementing, instituting, 

maintaining, or giving effect to the unlawful revocation of Harvard’s SEVP 

certification or EVP designation ;

D.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from giving any force or effect to the 

Department of Homeland Security’s May 22, 2025 Revocation Notice; 

E.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from giving effect to any suspension, 

withdrawal, revocation, termination, or other alteration of Plaintiff’s SEVP 

certification or EVP designation or any other categorical restriction of Plaintiff’s 

authority to sponsor non -immigrant F visas or J visas, other than th rough the 

procedures laid out in 8 C.F.R. §§ 214.3 and 214.4 or in 22 C.F.R. § 62 ;

F.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from implementing, enforcing, or 

giving effect to the June 4, 2025 , Presidential Proclamation entitled, “Enhancing 

National Security by Addressing Risks at Harvard University” ;

G.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from relying on or giving force or effect 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 99 of 101 99 

to any suspension or limitation on entry for Harvard students, or removal orders 

issued to Harvard students, pursuant to the Proclamation ;

H.  Award Harvard its reasonable fees, costs, and expenses, including attorneys’ fees, 

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2412; and 

I.  Grant other such relief as this Court may deem equitable, just, and proper. 

Dated: June 5 , 2025 

JENNER & BLOCK LLP 

Ishan Bhabha *

Ian Heath Gershengorn *

Lauren J. Hartz *

1099 New York Avenue, NW 

Suite 900 

Washington, DC 20001 

Tel: (202) 639 -6000 

IBhabha@jenner.com 

IGershengorn@jenner.com 

LHartz@jenner.com 

Andrianna Kastanek *

353 N Clark Street 

Chicago, IL 60654 

Tel: (312) 222 -9350 

AKastanek@jenner.com 

William A. Burck *

QUINN EMANUEL URQUHART & 

SULLIVAN, LLP 

1300 I Street NW, Suite 900 

Washington, DC 20005 

williamburck@quinnemanuel.com 

Robert K. Hur *

KING & SPALDING LLP 

1700 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Suite 900 

Washington, DC 20006 

rhur@kslaw.com 

Respectfully submitted, 

LEHOTSKY KELLER COHN LLP 

By: /s/ Steven P. Lehotsky 

Steven P. Lehotsky (BBO # 655908) 

Scott A. Keller *

Serena M. Orloff *

Shannon G. Denmark *

Jacob B. Richards (BBO # 712103) 

200 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Suite 700 

Washington, DC 20001 

T: (512) 693 -8350 

F: (512) 727 -4755 

steve@lkcfirm.com 

scott@lkcfirm.com 

serena@lkcfirm.com 

shannon@lkcfirm.com 

jacob@lkcfirm.com 

Katherine C. Yarger *

700 Colorado Blvd., #407 

Denver, CO 80206 

katie@lkcfirm.com 

Joshua P. Morrow *

408 W. 11th Street, 5th Floor 

Austin, TX 78701 

josh@lkcfirm.com 

Danielle K. Goldstein *

3280 Peachtree Road NE 

Atlanta, GA 30305 

danielle@lkcfirm.com 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 100 of 101 100 

*Admitted Pro Hac Vice 

Case 1:25-cv-11472-ADB Document 54 Filed 06/05/25 Page 101 of 101
