Title: Reporting-on-Terror-in-a-Networked-World-(Beckett)

URL Source: https://www.lse.ac.uk/media-and-communications/assets/documents/news/past-news/Reporting-on-Terror-in-a-Networked-World-Beckett.pdf

Published Time: 2017-10-25T23:43:58.000Z

Markdown Content:
FANNING 

# THE FLAMES: 

# REPORTING 

# TERROR IN A 

# NETWORKED 

# WORLD 

# CHARLIE BECKETT 2

# FOREWORD 

September 2016 

The use of fear as a weapon in political campaigning is long established, 

and often highly effective for candidates who deploy it. More often than not, 

spreading fear means the demonizing of a section of society: immigrants, 

unions, African Americans, bankers—and in this year’s US presidential 

election, American Muslims. 

Republican candidate Donald Trump’s racist language and xenophobic 

pledges are tapping into an electorate made fearful by the perceived 

threats of global terrorism. The violent attacks over the past year—in the 

US and France, in particular—have provided a highly charged backdrop 

for an already polarized campaign. In December 2015 Trump’s campaign 

released a statement on the mass shooting in San Bernardino by suspected 

ISIS sympathizers, saying, “Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and 

complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country’s 

representatives can figure out what is going on.” 

Trump’s alarmist rhetoric, far from undermining his candidacy, spurred him to 

a resounding victory over other Republican contenders. The initial success of 

Trump’s candidacy necessitates a widespread examination of the media’s role 

in amplifying the divisive extremism and falsehoods of his campaign. 

Covering terrorism brings its own challenges for media organizations and 

increasingly for social media companies too. Journalists and the press have 

historically played a dual role of both amplifying and interrogating campaign 

messages and political statements. Reporting terrorist attacks fulfills the 

aims of the terrorism itself in spreading fear, but stifling or limiting 

coverage can fuel both distrust in the news media and undemocratic 

practices such as censorship. 

In the past decade, the mainstream media has been joined by a plethora 

of social platforms in forming the public discussion around terror. This has 

allowed candidates, propagandists, activists, and all citizens to contribute to 

an often unmediated political debate. As technology companies expand into 

publishing territory, they occupy an increasingly important and sometimes 

conflicted position. At a White House summit on combating terrorism, 

Facebook, Google, and Twitter were key participants. 3FOREWORD 

The Tow Center for Digital Journalism at the Columbia Graduate School for 

Journalism has partnered with Democracy Fund Voice as part of a project 

examining the links between terrorism, political rhetoric and media coverage 

with particular reference to the impact on American Muslims. We are 

releasing three white papers looking at how recent events inform the current 

political cycle, linking terrorism, political rhetoric, and media coverage with 

particular reference to the impact on American Muslims. The motivation 

is to improve the understanding of these relationships, and to engage 

journalists and social media companies in developing improved reporting of 

terrorism in a live, digital environment for the benefit of everyone in society. 

Writer and lawyer Rafia Zakaria focuses on research of search and social 

media to show how the rhetoric and discussion of Muslims in relation to 

terrorism not only creates a skewed public discourse but also puts US 

Muslims in a special category of those tracked, surveilled, and discriminated 

against by law. Journalist Burhan Wazir examines case studies from the past 

twenty years to show how the links between terrorism, political messaging, 

and reporting have evolved. Charlie Beckett, director of the London School 

of Economics media policy think tank POLIS, examines what the standards 

and guidelines for reporting and editing during terrorist attacks might be 

developed and modified for a digital world. 

Their initial reporting highlights both the lack of standardized best practices 

and the nature of the challenges a distributed news environment presents. 

The papers emphasize the need for robust protection of First Amendment 

rights in the US, and call upon the social platforms to enter into regular 

conversation with publishers on editorial decisions and content guidelines. 

We are grateful to those who helped shape and deliver the project. The 

support of Democracy Fund Voice for commissioning the project, the editors 

Paul Harris and Nausicaa Renner for helping shape and deliver the papers 

against a tight deadline, Kathy Zhang at the Tow Center for orchestrating 

the ongoing activity and events in this area, and the staff at Columbia 

Journalism School, the Columbia Journalism Review, and the Tow Center 

for their tireless contributions. 

We look forward to feedback and responses and continuing our work 

in this area over the coming weeks and months. 

Emily Bell 

Director, Tow Center for Digital Journalism 

Columbia Journalism School 4

# EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Terrorism is a brutal and violent practice, but it is also a media 

phenomenon. Terror is vital news: a dramatic, important story that the 

public needs to know about and understand. But terrorism also relies 

on such publicity to disrupt society, provoke fear, and demonstrate 

power. This problematic relationship predates digital technology. 

In 1999, American historian Walter Laqueur wrote: 

It has been said that journalists are terrorists’ best friends, because 

they are willing to give terrorist operations maximum exposure. This 

is not to say that journalists as a group are sympathetic to terrorists, 

although it may appear so. It simply means that violence is news, 

whereas peace and harmony are not. The terrorists need the media, 

and the media find in terrorism all the ingredients of an exciting story. 1

So what is the responsibility of journalists, who supply the oxygen 

of publicity? Journalism that reports, analyzes, and comments upon 

terror faces a challenge in creating narratives that are accurate, 

intelligible, and socially responsible. Many of the issues journalists 

face also relate to wider journalism practices, especially around 

breaking news and conflict journalism. 2

In the last few years, this problem has become more acute and more 

complicated technically, practically, and ethically with the acceleration 

of the news cycle and the advent of social media. News events are 

amplified by social media, which often host the “first draft” of terror 

coverage. These platforms are specifically targeted by terrorists and 

referenced by journalists. Yet these companies often have only a short 

history of dealing with the political and commercial pressures many 

newsrooms have lived with for decades. The fear is that reporting of 

terror is becoming too sensationalist and simplistic in the digitally driven 

rush and that the role of professional journalism has been constrained 

and diminished. In February 2016, when the White House sought help 

to counterterror groups, it invited executives from Facebook, Google, 

Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, Tumblr, and Microsoft to come up with 

ideas to halt the use of the internet by extremists. 3

This paper seeks to describe this developing situation in the context 

of changes in the very nature of journalism and news. It identifies trends, 

problems, and best practices for more constructive journalism about 5

terror. In the first section, the paper will look at the problems facing 

journalism around terrorism: the increasing speed of the news cycle; new 

technologies and the limits on resources; the challenge of verification, 

definition, proportionality; and dealing with spin and propaganda. 

The second section explores ways towards better reporting of terror: 

which systems should be in place; what language journalists should 

use; how journalists should judge perspective and give context in a fast-

moving incident; the responsibilities of the journalist to show empathy, 

to demonstrate discretion, and to avoid sensationalism; and the 

possibility of creating narratives that show the relevance of what 

is happening to different communities and influence policy. 

The third section will look at the role of the major platforms, especially 

Google, Facebook, and Twitter. What impact do they have on audiences? 

How do they relate to the creation of journalism about terror, especially 

in disseminating news? Social platforms have become part of the way the 

public understands and responds to terror events, but their ethical, social, 

and editorial responsibilities are yet to be determined. The role of the 

platforms is evolving significantly as they become part of the news flow. 

How transparent should they be about their algorithms or policies that 

shape the flow of content? New developments, such as live video, are 

creating fresh dilemmas. 

Journalism has a responsibility to help society cope with the threat, 

reality, and consequences of terrorism. The role of independent, critical, 

and trustworthy journalism has never been more important. Yet, the news 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

# News events are amplified by 

# social media, which often host 

# the “first draft” of terror coverage. 

> 1 Walter Laqueur. “The New Terrorism: Fanaticism and the Arms of Mass Destruction,”
> Oxford University Press, 1999, p.44.
> 2 James Rodgers, “Reporting Conflict,” 2012, available at: https://he.palgrave.com/page/detail/
> reporting-conflict-james-rodgers/?sf1=barcode&st1=9780230274464
> 3 “US asks tech and entertainment industries in fighting terrorism,” New York Times, 2016, available
> at: http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/25/technology/tech-and-media-firms-called-to-white-house-
> for-terrorism-meeting.html?_r=0

6

media has never been under such pressure economically and politically. 

This paper seeks to add to that pressure with a plea for better reporting. 

This is not just a moral or academic appeal. Unless journalism responds 

to the challenges that issues like terror poses, it will become less and less 

valued. Improving the work of journalists is central to the news media’s 

survival as a vital part of a modern, democratic society. 

This is neither a handbook for journalism about terrorism nor a 

comprehensive research study. The aim of this paper is to provoke 

reflection and improve the diversity and quality of journalism. This paper 

also has a self-conscious bias towards American and European media, 

partly because of the importance of this issue in the current American 

and European electoral cycles. 

# Improving the work of journalists 

# is central to the news media’s 

# survival as a vital part of a 

# modern, democratic society. 7

# KEY FINDINGS 

• There is widespread concern that the news media is reporting terror 

events in a way that can spread fear and confusion. Journalists struggle 

with the accelerating pace of the news cycle and the complicated and 

diverse nature of terrorism itself. Especially in the context of breaking 

news, they have to adapt to the speed and complexity of information 

flows that are increasingly influenced by the authorities, the digital 

platforms, and even the terrorists themselves. 

• There is a danger that news coverage can provide the publicity 

the terrorist seeks, as well as add to disinformation through poor 

verification and lack of context. Such publicity can even be seen to 

be helping terrorists increase their impact and make their recruitment 

more effective. The way journalists frame news around terror events 

can also reinforce prejudices and stereotypes. 

• Social media amplifies the communicative scale and impact of 

terrorism, and it adds to the misinformation and emotional responses 

to terror events. Journalists using social media as a platform or a 

source do not always maintain the best editorial standards. Social 

media has changed the very nature of news around terror, for example, 

by providing imagery, eyewitness accounts, and live video. But it can 

also deceive, distort, and distract. Journalists are adapting to this new 

context, but there are still practical and policy problems in terms of 

verification and news judgment. 

• Digital platforms are now where many people consume news about 

terrorism. They are influential in filtering information and shaping the 

flow of news, but they do not have the same ethos or practical capacity 

and experience as news organizations. They also have not yet come 

to fully understand their role or accepted their responsibilities in the 

mediation of terrorism, and are still negotiating their relationship with 

news media. 

• Digital platforms have a special dilemma as open environments that 

also seek to protect their users from offense. While they provide 

an immense opportunity for journalists and the public to be better 

informed and to interact around these events, their algorithms and 

editing policies are still problematic. 

> KEY FINDINGS 8

# RECOMMENDATIONS 

• News media organizations need to have detailed guidelines on 

all aspects of terrorism coverage. They need to deal with language, 

significance, and context, as well as accuracy and balance. Coverage 

needs to be backed up by a self-conscious iterative process that allows 

journalists to reflect, discuss problems and best practices, and improve. 

Especially for those organizations that are larger or are multiplatform, 

these guidelines need to be communicated widely. Coordinated internal 

systems, including systems such as Slack, should be put in place to 

make sure best practices are maintained even in breaking news or 

developing story situations. 

• Journalists need to be as transparent as possible with the audience 

about their sources and the limits of their knowledge. Transparency 

is key to trust. Social media can be a valid and important source, but 

it must be verified and put into context. 

• News media and digital platforms need to develop better technical 

and editorial systems for verification and accuracy. This might include 

using “honest brokers” or other agencies and experts. Fact-checking 

needs to be central. The principle of “better right rather than first” has 

to be enforced across all publications or broadcasts on all platforms. 

Editorial management has to make sure the pressure to be fast does 

not threaten the audience’s right to be able to trust what is published. 9

• Journalists need to think harder about the way they are framing stories. 

The news media logic that determines how important a story is and 

what scale of treatment it gets is too often driven by herd mentality 

or repeated formulae. Journalists need to reflect on whether they 

treat similar stories in different places proportionally, and whether 

they include diverse voices and informed comments. 

• News media should invest in the great opportunities for deeper 

reporting presented by new technologies. Not just to report faster 

and to more people, but to create better context and clarity. Data 

visualization offers the opportunity for more fact-based reporting, for 

example. New platforms offer creative ways to engage with different 

demographics. But ultimately, better journalism is about digging deeper 

and looking further. More constructive narratives that include empathy, 

resilience, and positive responses to terror should be created as part of 

the news coverage itself. The social impact of news coverage should be 

considered, not just audience numbers and the drama of the event. 

• The digital platforms need to work more closely with news 

organizations to improve the production and distribution of trustworthy 

information and informed debate around terror events. They need to 

bring in more journalistic expertise to improve their own verification 

and filtering systems. They should use more “honest broker” 

organizations and be more transparent about their own systems. 

Above all, they need to accept their responsibilities as de facto 

editors of news about terror. 

> RECOMMENDATIONS

10 

By its very nature, terrorism challenges normal narrative frames and 

processes. The basic facts themselves are often difficult to establish 

after a terrorist incident, much less analyze: What happened? Who 

did it? Why? What is the reaction of the authorities and the public? 

What policy or political change might it provoke? How can we report 

it without making it more likely to happen again? 

This chapter looks at the challenges of covering terror events. Some 

of these are new problems, created by technological innovation or 

economic and political factors. Some are longstanding issues that have 

become much more complex in the digital environment, making good 

editorial practices more difficult to carry out. 

# HISTORICAL COVERAGE OF TERRORISM 

Terrorism is always a relative term, and its application has changed over 

time. Former UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher once labeled Nelson 

Mandela’s anti-apartheid African National Congress party as a “terrorist” 

organization 4 before later going on to urge his release. The American 

extreme left-wing group the Weathermen, founded in 1969, began as an 

anti-imperialist group that bombed government buildings and ended up 

as a counter-cultural cult. The nationalist Irish Republican Army (IRA) 

was highly organized along military lines which Thatcher also described 

as terrorist, but with whom she initiated negotiations. 5 Hamas has won 

elections and has a strong social service network but has also carried 

out attacks, including suicide bombings on civilians. The American 

government describes Hamas as terrorist, while others such as Turkey 

are prepared to treat it as a political actor in the Middle East 

and give it support. 

# Section 1 

# The Problem With Covering Terrorism 11 

Because of the term’s subjective nature, some people argue terrorism 

should not be used at all by journalists. 6 But semantics are only part of 

the problem. For journalists, part of the challenge has always been how 

to reflect the perspectives of the authorities and public in their own 

countries. This is only made more complex with international terrorism 

and transnational media. For example, this year Turkey was subject to 

a series of attacks by different groups killing civilians. The way those 

narratives are framed by Western news media has not been consistent, 

according to Azzam Tamimi, editor in chief of the London-based Arabic 

channel Al Hiwar: 

Whereas the Islamic State [Daesh] is considered a menace, the 

PKK and its affiliates are seen as legitimate actors or even freedom 

fighters. Few Western journalists can resist the temptation to take 

sides on ideological or cultural basis. The inherited fear or hate of 

Islam and Muslims usually manifests itself. 7

Terrorism has always had a symbiotic relationship with news media, one 

that predates the internet. Journalist and terrorism expert Jason Burke 

points out that those involved in violent struggle soon realized the 

opportunity provided by the arrival of mass media: 

In 1956, the Algerian political activist and revolutionary Ramdane Abane 

wondered aloud if it was better to kill 10 enemies in a remote gully 

“when no one will talk of it” or “a single man in Algiers, which will 

be noted the next day” by audiences in distant countries who could 

influence policymakers. 8

SECTION 1 

> 4 “Margaret Thatcher branded ANC ‘terrorist’ while urging Nelson Mandela’s release,”
> The Independent, 2013, available at: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/
> margaret-thatcher-branded-anc-terrorist-while-urging-nelson-mandela-s-release-8994191.html
> 5 “Thatcher gave approval to talks with IRA,” The Guardian, 1999, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/oct/16/northernireland.thatcher
> 6 “Internal emails show Al Jazeera English banning use of terms “terrorist,” “Islamist” and “militant.”
> National Review, 2015, available at: http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/397320/internal-emails-
> show-al-jazeera-english-banning-use-terms-terrorist-militant-islamist
> 7 “Drawing the line in coverage of terrorist attacks,” Anadolou Agency, 2016, available at:
> http://aa.com.tr/en/turkey/drawing-the-line-in-coverage-of-terrorist-attacks/537853
> 8 “How the changing media is changing terrorism,” The Guardian, 2016, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/how-changing-media-changing-terrorism 12

As Burke writes, the same technological advances such as 

communications satellites which created a globalized media 

also gave opportunities for expanded publicity for terrorism: 

In 1972, members of the Palestinian Black September group 

attacked Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, the first games to 

be broadcast live and the first to be the target of a terrorist attack. 

The cameras inevitably switched their focus from the sports to the 

ongoing hostage crisis. 9

The September 11 attacks were, of course, a watershed moment. 

Observing the attacks unfold in real time was a communal event, shared 

by tens of millions of people around the world. A report by Annenberg 

on journalism and terror published two years later recognized the internet 

had become a significant factor. 10  It points out that the internet allowed 

the public to “aggregate bits of information” independently and extended 

“reach” for smaller media organizations. It also notes that “problematic 

information is now available on non-journalistic sites.” 

Al-Qaeda also exemplified the way that terror organizations have become 

media producers as well as media subjects. Most famously, Osama bin 

Laden made a series of videos that allowed him to speak through the 

world’s media. But as Burke has chronicled, from 2005 onwards with 

the expansion of the internet, the Al-Qaeda network with its widespread, 

diffuse organization of cells and affiliates prioritized the recording of its 

activities and the dissemination of its propaganda online. 11  Some of this 

ended up in mainstream news media, such as the video of the beheading 

in 2004 of the American contractor Nick Berg in Iraq. 12 

A few years later, the transformative effect of Web 2.0 and the meteoric 

rise of Facebook, Twitter, and other social networks would utterly 

reshape that digital context. Although the core editorial concerns of the 

report would remain, the media landscape in which terror attacks now 

unfold is on a very different scale. 13 

Terrorism in the age of instant news and social media is a “different 

beast,” said former BBC Global News Director Richard Sambrook 

in an interview. He has worked through the last three decades 

and insists the subject is now more complex: 

Twenty years ago… reporting terror was simpler. You knew who 

had done it. A car bomb goes off outside Harrods, and the IRA 

communicate directly with code words. The police would know. 

The issues were more straightforward, and you knew who you were 

dealing with. Now it’s much more complicated. Terrorism is a different 

beast, and the fact that it is networked or that it is more likely to be 

indigenous raises a raft of issues. 13 

ISIS again raises the problem of how journalists define terror events. 

Acts committed in the name of ISIS don’t always have clear links with 

the core organization, and claims of responsibility are more tenuous. 

This amorphous form of terrorism raises the question of what other 

violent, ideologically motivated attacks on innocent civilians—designed 

to gain publicity for a cause and to create fear and reaction—fall under 

the label of terror. The 2016 attack on the gay nightclub in Orlando, the 

2015 shootings in San Bernardino, and the 2016 Munich shopping center 

shooting were all very different kinds of events described as “terrorism” 

at some point. If we give a name to one incident, why not another? 

SECTION 1 

> 9 “How the changing media is changing terrorism,” The Guardian, 2016, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/how-changing-media-changing-terrorism
> 10 Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania, “Reporting on Terrorism:
> Newsroom Discussion Guide” available at: http://www.annenbergpublicpolicycenter.org/wp-
> content/uploads/2003_03_reporting-on-terrorism_rpt21.pdf
> 11 “How the changing media is changing terrorism,” The Guardian, 2016, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/how-changing-media-changing-terrorism
> 12 “American beheaded in revenge for torture,” The Guardian, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/may/12/iraq.alqaida
> 13 Interview with the author, September 2016

# Terror organizations have become media 

# producers, as well as media subjects. 14 

# THE CHALLENGING NEW CONTEXT 

# FOR THE JOURNALIST AND AUDIENCE 

Social platforms are increasingly the place where terrorism is reported 

first. From ISIS beheadings to video from inside the Bataclan Paris 

nightclub, these sites are a key news player, sometimes shaping coverage. 

There has been a fundamental shift, from news media having control 

over the flow of information to a more distributed set of sources and 

platforms. The journalist is no longer the primary gatekeeper. Today’s 

audiences have vastly more immediate and direct access to a greater 

volume of material and variety of sources online. The public can get 

information directly from other citizens, the authorities, or even terrorists 

themselves. The relative ease with which the news media are able to 

report events quickly and graphically—thanks to digital technology— 

means that audiences often report they feel overwhelmed and even 

repulsed by the onslaught of “bad news” events. 14 

Around terror events, live broadcasting, and particularly television, 

remains the dominant news information source for a majority of the 

media-consuming public. However, over the last decade, those reports 

are becoming more reliant on social media. Coverage of the London 

bombings in 2005 featured grainy mobile phone video of survivors 

walking away from the wrecked train carriages down underground 

tunnels. 15  In the wake of that, the BBC set up a user-generated content 

# There has been a fundamental shift, 

# from news media having control 

# over the flow of information to a 

# more distributed set of sources and 

# platforms. The journalist is no 

# longer the primary gatekeeper. 15 

(UGC) hub specifically to gather and verify content created by citizens 

for use in its news. 16  By the attacks in Mumbai in 2008, journalists were 

able to find imagery and information from citizen photography sites such 

as Flickr and the 900 tweets published every minute. 17  Traditional news 

distribution agencies such as Reuters became clearing houses for UGC. 

AP appointed its first social media editor in 2012. 18 

In 2016, the first phase of broadcast coverage of the attacks in urban 

centers such as Paris, Brussels, Munich, and Ankara was dominated 

by both video and stills harvested from social media. ABC News’s 

International Managing Editor Jon Williams, who has been making 

broadcast news for more than 30 years, points out that this is an 

historical change in the visibility of news events: 

Clearly in the 1970s and 80s very often incidents would happen 

without pictures. In 1996 the only imagery of the IRA Manchester 

bombing came from CCTV some time after the event. Today there 

would be any number of people recording that on cellphones and 

inundating social media with it in real time. 19 

SECTION 1 

> 14 “Beyoncé, cute kittens or relentless tragedy?,” The Guardian, 2015, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/01/beyone-cute-kitten-tragedy-news
> 15 “Smartphone journalism: photographs,” BBC, available at: http://www.bbc.co.uk/academy/
> journalism/skills/filming-and-recording/article/art20130702112133388
> 16 Valerie Blair-Gagnon, “Social Media at BBC News,” 2015, available at:
> https://www.routledge.com/Social-Media-at-BBC-News-The-Re-Making-of-Crisis-Reporting/
> Belair-Gagnon/p/book/9781138823488
> 17 “Mumbai attacks: Twitter and Flickr used to break news,” The Daily Telegraph, 2009, available at:
> http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/india/3530640/Mumbai-attacks-Twitter-and-
> Flickr-used-to-break-news-Bombay-India.html
> 18 “AP names first international social media and UGC editor,” The AP, 2012, available at:
> http://www.ap.org/Content/Press-Release/2012/AP-names-first-international-social-media-and-
> UGC-editor
> 19 Interview with the author, September 2016 16

New technologies also provide opportunities for other kinds of enhanced 

visual input such as the live Google Map created by one journalist during 

the Mumbai attacks. 20  The arrival of live video on social networks means 

that the citizen (as well as the journalist and terrorist) can become 

a social network broadcaster. As discussed in the second and third 

sections, this immediate streamed access creates editorial issues for 

news organizations and ethical problems for the platforms themselves. 

At the moment, their use around terror incidents is sporadic but 

becoming more common. 

Social media networks also mean terror news intrudes directly into our 

intimate media sphere. The same profiles we use for personal content 

or the consumption of entertainment, routine information, and social 

exchange are now a space filled with dramatic and shocking images 

and messages. News is increasingly consumed on mobile devices and 

smartphones, making the news part our personal, socially connected 

lives. In their interaction with media, it is not surprising that people 

react more personally, emotionally, and instantly than ever before. 21 

# FRAMING THE NARRATIVE: 

# DEFINITIONS OF “TERRORISM” 

There is enormous pressure with a major breaking story to come up 

with a fresh line amidst the surge of information. Audience expectations 

of instant reportage combined with the increasing market competition 

add to that need for journalists to work quickly and at the limits of their 

abilities and resources. This rush to certainty can lead to false leads from 

mainstream as well as social media. Journalists and audiences inevitably 

seek to fit terrorist incidents into a pattern. This is exacerbated by group 

think among journalists, especially on social media. In the race to publish 

and in the midst of a dangerous situation it is difficult to maintain 

a critical attitude to those dispensing authoritative information. 

One manifestation of this is the expert commentator, who is often 

chosen as much for their closeness to a TV studio as for their relevant 

insights. 22  Live broadcasters are developing a language that relativizes 

its statements: “this is what is being reported,” “this is what we are being 

told,” and “reports on social media suggest.” The danger is the audience 

does not understand the precise nature of the qualifications involved. 

Adding qualifiers such as “appears to be” or “potential” to “terrorism” 17 

is highly risky in a breaking news story. “Terrorism” has traditionally been 

seen as an external threat, such as 9/11, but as the London Bombings of 

2005 and many of the incidents of 2016 show, there are “home-grown” 

terrorists who draw upon international networks as well as “domestic” 

terrorists with a local or national agenda. Individuals who carry out terror 

attacks are not necessarily a “lone wolf.” Someone with mental health 

issues might also be a terrorist. The descriptions are rarely clear. Section 

two makes the case for greater reflection on terminology and sets out 

some principles. 

One option is to never use the word. Al Jazeera English made it clear 

that its journalists should not use the term, along with others such 

as “jihadist.” 23  BBC guidelines do not ban the use of the term, but 

admit it is problematic: 

The word “terrorist” itself can be a barrier rather than an aid 

to understanding. We should convey to our audience the full 

consequences of the act by describing what happened. We should 

use words which specifically describe the perpetrator such as 

“bomber,” “attacker,” “gunman,” “kidnapper,” “insurgent,” and 

“militant.” We should not adopt other people’s language as our own; 

our responsibility is to remain objective and report in ways that enable 

our audiences to make their own assessments about who is doing 

what to whom. 24 

SECTION 1 

# Social media networks also mean 

# terror news intrudes directly into 

# our intimate media sphere. 

20 Map of Mumbai attacks, available at: https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?ll=18.92244 

5%2C72.832242&spn=0.007054%2C0.007864&hl=en&msa=0&z=17&ie=UTF8&mid=1I6SuyXR -

ZLDapOIK8ViEQ3j608Tw 

21 Charlie Beckett and Mark Deuze, “On the Role of Emotion in the Future of Journalism,” 2016, 

available at: http://sms.sagepub.com/content/2/3/2056305116662395.long 

22 “After the Paris attacks: live news should challenge narratives, not desperately try to create 

them,” Common Dreams, 2015, available at: http://www.commondreams.org/views/2015/11/14/after-

paris-attacks-live-news-should-challenge-narratives-not-desperately-try 

23 “Internal emails show Al Jazeera English banning use of terms ‘terrorist,’ ‘Islamist’ and ‘militant.’” 

National Review, 2015, available at: http://www.nationalreview.com/corner/397320/internal-emails-

show-al-jazeera-english-banning-use-terms-terrorist-militant-islamist 

24 “Terrorism: Language When Reporting Terrorism,” BBC, available at: 

http://www.bbc.co.uk/editorialguidelines/guidance/terrorism-language/guidance-full 18 

This approach has not changed significantly in principle in response 

to recent developments in terrorism or media technology. 

ABC News in America has a similar approach. International Managing 

Editor Jon Williams says their journalists should not use the word 

“terrorism” except when quoting other people: 

Words matter. We would not have described [the 2016 London 

Russell Square stabbing] as a “potential terror incident.” We would 

just describe it as a stabbing and have put it in the context of other 

incidents. Our modus operandi is to do what it says on the tin. We 

would wait to see how someone [in authority] characterized it. 

With the San Bernardino incident our assumption was that with the 

prevalence of mass shootings in America we should assume it’s just 

a shooting. It began as a workplace shooting but came into the 

context of people who had been radicalized but it still requires 

someone to characterize it as “domestic” terror or “inspired by ISIS.” 25 

As Sambrook points out, deciding whether to use the word “terror” 

is only part of the problem: 

I think it’s a bit of a cop out to simply say you won’t use the word 

“terror” or “terrorism.” There are some actions to which that term will 

apply. I think there is a neat way through this. Simply describe what 

has happened and report what people have said. Recent incidents 

have shown how many factors are potentially involved. Is the killer 

suffering from mental illness, or if he shouts “Alluha Akbar” does that 

make it a Jihadist? In the end, report what has happened and what 

people say and let the viewer draw their own conclusions. 26 

Above all, the growth of terrorists ascribing a religious motivation to their 

actions has raised fresh dangers of associating neutral words such as 

Islamic or Muslim with terrorism. While the terrorist may make religious 

claims, there is no reason for journalists to treat that uncritically. 19 

# AVOIDING HARM: THE NEWS MEDIA’S 

# RELATIONSHIP TO TERRORISM 

Terrorists are now media producers themselves. Anders Breivik was 

acutely conscious of the role the media would have in promoting 

his beliefs. He sent a 1,500-word manifesto to more than a thousand 

people just before his first bomb went off. 27  ISIS has an extensive media 

production capacity, creating videos and articles that are distributed 

through highly-developed social media activities. 28  They use the 

kidnapped British journalist John Cantlie as a subject of their videos and 

then as a presenter. 29  Much of the material is English-language targeted 

at potential sympathizers or recruits online internationally. 30  To tell 

the story of what the terrorist is thinking, saying, and doing it is often 

useful to use this material. But the danger is that even in a critical context 

this effectively relays and amplifies the terrorist’s message. As Erica 

Chenoweth explains: 

What’s important is that the imitative effects of mass shootings 

and terror attacks may not be unrelated to one another. The blurry 

distinction between what constitutes mass shootings versus acts of 

terror means that, functionally, those motivated to obtain notoriety or 

political power through graphic violence may not really care whether 

their competitors are “terrorists,” “shooters” or something else. 31 

SECTION 1 

25 Interview with the author, August 2016 

26 Interview with the author, September 2016 

27 “Inside the warped mind of Anders Brevik,” The Daily Telegraph, 2016, available at: 

http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/22/anders-breivik-inside-the-warped-mind-of-

a-mass-killer/ 

28 “Inside the surreal world of the Islamic State’s propaganda machine,” The Washington Post, 2015, 

available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/inside-the-islamic-states-

propaganda-machine/2015/11/20/051e997a-8ce6-11e5-acff-673ae92ddd2b_story.html 

29 “British hostage John Cantlie narrates new ISIS video,” Heavy, 2016, available at: 

http://heavy.com/news/2016/03/new-isis-islamic-state-news-pictures-videos-john-cantlie-talks-

about-the-american-airstrikes-on-media-kiosks-in-mosul-city-john-cantlie-britain-united-kingdom-

hostage-president-obama-full-uncensored/ 

30 “ISIS is using social media to reach YOU, its new audience,” The Daily Beast, 2014, available at: 

http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/08/31/isis-s-use-of-social-media-to-reach-you-

its-new-audience.html 

31 “Yes, mass shootings tend to produce copy cats. So do terror attacks,” The Washington Post, 

2015, available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2015/12/04/ 

yes-mass-shootings-tend-to-produce-copycats-so-do-terror-attacks/ 20 

There is always a danger of media giving terrorists details about security 

operations that help them improve their work. This is particularly relevant 

in the midst of a terrorist operation. Live video or pictures of a scene may 

endanger security forces or hamper their work. It is essential that, when 

the public is at risk, the news media works closely with security officials. 

There is also a wider problem that those authorities, especially politicians, 

frame their commentary on terror events to suit their own interests. 

Journalists have an obligation to report what powerful people say— 

but they do not have an obligation to replicate their perspective. As 

British journalist and former  London Times  editor Simon Jenkins argues, 

politicians have their own agendas: 

To the media, terrorism is meat and drink. To politicians, it is an 

opportunity to flex muscles, brandish guns, boast revenge. Talk of 

war adds ten points to an approval rating. It saved George Bush as 

it is now saving France’s François Hollande. Counter-terror theory 

may advise caution and an emphasis on normality. Political necessity 

counsels the opposite; the trumpets and drums of battle. It requires 

the terrorist’s deeds to be amplified, headlined, exaggerated to justify 

a warlike response. 

The sheer volume of terror news may make further attacks more likely. 

Michael Jetter, a professor at the School of Economics and Finance at 

Universidad EAFIT in Medellín, Colombia, argues that increased coverage 

of terror attacks correlates to an increase in their frequency. 32  He also 

argues that terror tactics that have greater media impact, such as suicide 

bombings, could lead to their increased popularity. Olivier Roy, French 

political philosopher and expert on the causes of terror, argues that 

media coverage helps extremist organizations in recruiting and mobilizing 

terrorists. 33  He says that the framing of terror events by politicians and 

the media “valorizes the up rootedness of uprooted people” and provides 

them with a sense of belonging and meaning. 

Language is critical because the public make judgments about risk based 

on the terminology involved. Just because something creates “terror” 

does not make it a “terrorist” event. The Daily Mail Online headline on the 

next page uses the word “terror”—but the sub-head makes it clear that 

it was not “terror-related”: 21 

# At least four dead and dozens injured 

# as Thailand is hit by multiple explosions: 

# Mobile phone bombs hidden in plant pots 

# leave Western tourists fleeing resorts in terror 

WARNING GRAPHIC CONTENT 

• At least four people have been killed and dozens injured in a wave 

of bomb attacks in Thailand 

• First two explosions hit busy street in tourist resort of Hua Hin 

overnight, killing at least one person 

• The town, which is close to Bangkok, was reportedly struck again 

by multiple blasts on Friday morning 

• Two blasts ripped through Patong on the island of Phuket, a 

destination popular with foreign tourists 

• Twin explosions in southern city of Surat Thani have killed one person 

and injured at least three more 

• At least 10 foreign tourists have been injured in the strikes, which 

are not thought to be terror related 

• It is believed the explosives were hidden in plant pots and flower 

beds and detonated by mobile phones 

SECTION 1 

> 32 Michael Jetter, “Terrorism and the Media,” 2014, available at: http://ftp.iza.org/dp8497.pdf
> 33 “Terrorism in the age of Twitter,” The New Yorker, 2015, available at:
> http://www.newyorker.com/news/john-cassidy/terrorism-in-the-age-of-twitter 22

At what point does a “hate crime” such as the Charleston church 

shooting become categorized as “terrorism”? Breivik had active links 

with extreme right-wing groups and used his actions to promote his 

anti-Islamic, anti-liberal ideology. His convictions included “terrorism.” 

However, in the media, he was most often referred to as a mass murderer 

or mass killer, not a terrorist. Likewise, Ali Sonboly, the 2016 Munich 

shooter was described by police as “inspired” by Breivik, but they 

said the incident was not “terror-related.” Sonboly had been receiving 

psychiatric treatment, raising the definitional problem around terror 

and mental health. In considering the mix of motives, it does seem that 

mainstream media has a propensity to describe events as “terror” if they 

have some element of jihadist or Islamist ideological ingredient. 

Even if a recognized terrorist organization does claim responsibility, 

journalists may need to fine-tune the language. There was evidence 

that the 2016 Wurzburg train attacker was “inspired” by ISIS propaganda 

rather than controlled by them, yet ISIS still claimed it as part of their 

campaign in Europe. The Ansbach bomber Mohammed Daleel had 

stronger links to ISIS including a propaganda video he made pledging 

allegiance to the ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. His preparation for 

the bombing was more sophisticated and planned. Does that make him 

more of a terrorist? What significance should journalists have given to the 

fact that several of this summer’s German attackers were asylum seekers 

or refugees? As soon as perpetrators are identified with a minority group, 

the danger is that community will be impugned in a way that does not 

happen when perpetrators are seen to be from the majority population. 

In a political environment where in many regions there are tensions over 

ethnic identity, immigration, and cultural values, it is even more important 

that the news media does not make unqualified connections between 

race, religion, and terror acts. 

# VERIFICATION AND TRANSPARENCY 

There are some obvious problems created by this new engagement from 

the audience on terror events. There is a great deal of misleading or false 

audience-created content, much of it highly reactive and subjective, 

and there is an increasing number of fake news sites that deliberately 

spread this content to attract traffic. 34  Social networks are somewhat 

self-correcting and are moderated, but this can be delayed—by 

which time falsehoods or false impressions have spread, uncorrected. 

A missing student Sunil Tripathi was named on Reddit in the wake of the 23 

Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, leading to a manhunt before police 

were able to rule him out. But in that four-hour period many journalists 

disseminated the rumor on their own social media accounts. 35  They 

appeared to accept a lower standard of verification then they would 

have done for publication on their regular news channels or sites. 

The primary function of journalism is still to get facts right. The volume 

of social media content and the fact that some of it is inaccurate or 

misleading should not make professional journalists complacent. News 

media content is now blended into the audience’s news feeds and 

audiences often do not discriminate between “amateur” and “official” 

or journalistic content online. Research shows that on social media 

people trust their peers as much as the news media (although that 

includes their peers sharing news media content). 36 

In this context, it is even more important that the news media distinguish 

itself by providing reliable information. Statistics show mainstream 

journalists are still trusted to varying degrees, depending to the medium, 

the user’s age, and the perceived partisanship of the news brand. One 

of the key variables is their perception of the accuracy and impartiality 

of the journalism. 37  Verification of facts and the correct expression 

of “what we know to be true” is under enormous pressure as breaking 

news accelerates. 

As discussed in the next section, editorial guidelines at most major news 

organizations have since been revised to make it clear that the same 

standards must apply to gathering material from or posting material 

on social media. 

SECTION 1 

> 34 “5 ways fake news websites are evolving,” First Draft News, 2016, available at:
> https://firstdraftnews.com/5-ways-fake-news-websites-are-evolving-hoax/
> 35 “Mistaken identity manhunt: the case of Sunil Tripathi,” Storify, 2015, available at: https://storify.
> com/srich2/getting-started
> 36 “Digital News Report 2016,” available at:
> http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2016/trust-in-the-news-2016/
> 37 “Digital News Report 2016,” available at:
> http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2016/trust-in-the-news-2016/

24 

This chapter will identify how news organizations are best able 

to address the challenges set out in reporting on terrorism. 

# RESHAPING THE NEWSROOM 

New skills are needed to understand user-generated imagery from social 

networks, terrorist propaganda on specialist websites (often not English 

language), government or security communications, expert and academic 

analysis/research blogs and websites, local, specialist, international, 

and foreign language news media organizations, aggregators, bots and 

campaign groups. 

Yet a guiding philosophy through this complex network of information 

should be simple: Only report as facts what you know to be true. We can 

put aside philosophical debates over truth and focus on the journalistic 

process of identifying some kind of evidence-related process that gives 

us the best, most reliable account of who, what, where, when, and why. 

The newsroom will always be core to this process: its resources, task 

management, technologies, skills, and infrastructure. Increasingly the 

larger broadcasters such as CNN and the BBC are the ones that have 

extensive online operations with the capacity to cope with the full range 

of sources and platforms. Legacy newspaper operations such as  The 

Guardian  and  The New York Times  have developed processes such as 

live blogs where they too are able to exploit and showcase a greater 

number of sources. At the same time, local news organizations have 

the advantage of intimately knowing their area, and are often able to 

keep ahead of their larger rivals as news breaks. Other specialist media, 

such as the nonprofit Conflict News Twitter account, act as aggregators, 

filtering information online. 38 

# Section 2 

# Better Terror Reporting 25 

Some news organizations such as  The Wall Street Journal  and the UK’s 

ITN have outsourced some of their newsgathering to agencies such as 

Storyful, which have highly developed expertise in verifying imagery, 

video, messages, and other data from social networks. 39  “Real-time 

information discovery company” Dataminr specializes in scouring Twitter 

and its analytics for breaking stories including the first news alert on the 

death of Osama bin Laden. 40  Banjo has developed software that allows 

it to monitor geo-located social media activity globally and provide 

news alerts to its media partners, including American Sinclair Broadcast 

Group. 41  These companies often have commercial as well as news media 

clients and they do not claim to be journalism agencies. But they are 

engines for online discovery that can spot stories before newsrooms. 

First Draft News is another coalition of organizations that provides 

verification insights, training, information, techniques, and research. 42 

There are also individual small-scale operations that focus on particular 

areas or issues, such as Bellingcat which its founder Elliot Higgins 

describes as “by and for citizen investigative journalists.” It has developed 

sophisticated forensic data-analysis tools and techniques to provide 

deeper information in the wake of events. The European Journalism 

Centre (EJC) has produced a Verification Handbook that gives detailed 

guidance on how this can work in emergency situations such 

as terror attacks. 43 

SECTION 2 

> 38 “Conflict News,” available at: http://www.conflict-news.com/
> 39 “News Corp buys Storyful,” The Guardian, 2013, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/20/news-corp-buys-storyful-social-news
> 40 “Bin Laden death-detecting analytics service signs partnership with Twitter,” Ars Technica, 2016,
> available at: http://arstechnica.com/business/2012/04/bin-laden-death-detecting-analytics-service-
> signs-partnership-with-twitter/
> 41 “The most important social media company you have never heard of,” Inc., 2015, available at:
> http://www.inc.com/magazine/201504/will-bourne/banjo-the-gods-eye-view.html
> 42 First Draft News, available at: https://firstdraftnews.com
> 43 European Journalism Centre, Verification Handbook available at: http://verificationhandbook.com/

# A guiding philosophy through this complex 

# network of information should be simple: 

# Only report as facts what you know to be true. 26 

# “Publish and be damned” is not applicable 

# in the terror context. 

Organizations such as First Draft and the EJC demonstrate the processes 

that journalists can adopt if they have the time and will to do so. The key 

is to have a set of guidelines related to breaking news and terror that can 

form the basis for newsroom culture, standards, and practice. Different 

news brands will make their own calculations about how to implement 

best practices universally across an organization. CNN and BuzzFeed use 

the internal messaging system Slack, for example, to ensure that all staff 

on all platforms are getting the same guidance as news breaks. 

# GETTING TO THE TRUTH 

CNN took a serious reputational hit for its mistake in coverage 

of the Boston Marathon. Like almost all major news organizations, 

it has adopted a more effective way of reconciling the competing 

demands from audiences for instant news and verified information. 44 

It now has a more coordinated editorial management structure with 

digital platforms integrated with broadcast. 

The business as well as the ethical case for journalism in a media 

environment so full of false, partial, or provisional information must be 

based on trust. Citizens now have social media feeds full of messages, 

often from peers not professionals, that alert them to breaking terror 

news. When they click onto the mainstream news media material, they 

expect something more reliable. Journalists cannot police the internet for 

truth, but as well as getting their own facts right, journalists can also have 

a role helping to identify fake or mistaken information on social media. 

This kind of “myth-busting” helps arrests the spread of false information 

and can educate the audience in online verification. 45 

“Publish and be damned” is not applicable in the terror context. 

Samantha Barry, CNN’s Head of Social Media, said in an interview 

that they are aware of changing expectations of the audience, but 

they sometimes have to pause before publication to retain trust: 27 

It is really important for CNN to be right not necessarily first. 

Audiences are more forgiving than other media people when it’s 

a developing story. There was one example from the Dallas police 

shooting when police released a video of a suspect. We didn’t put it 

out on digital and social because we saw questions about whether 

it was a suspect. The police then rowed back. We get pressure for 

example, from people tweeting at us when they see something on 

social media. This happened around the recent evacuation of JFK 

airport. But we only put out the story when we had something we 

were comfortable with what we knew for ourselves. 46 

Newsgathering from social media should abide by the same principles 

used for any other source. However, the BBC gives additional advice in 

its guidelines on gathering user-generated content around issues such 

as copyright, crediting producers, and treating the public with respect 

and sensitivity. 47  Organizations such as First Draft News also have more 

detailed advice on verification and the treatment of contributors. 48 

# TRANSPARENCY IN BREAKING NEWS 

News organizations will make individual mistakes of fact, taste, or 

framing, but it is how you handle the development of breaking news 

overall that matters. 49  News organizations are desperate for audience 

attention. Online analytics now provide instant, live statistics on page 

views, engagement, and traffic, as well as the usual broadcast audience 

levels and share. Competition is a vital motive for journalism, and 

especially during breaking news, it drives newsrooms to provide a rapid 

response as well as more considered context. So increasingly news 

organizations must develop a credible grammar for provisional 

narratives. Donald Rumsfeld’s famous aphorism is relevant here: 

SECTION 2 

> 44 “The pressure to be a news leader tarnishes a big brand,” The New York Times, 2013, available at:
> http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/22/business/media/in-boston-cnn-stumbles-in-rush-to-break-
> news.html?_r=0
> 45 “Debunked: what social media got wrong about Paris Attacks,” CNN, 2015, available at:
> http://edition.cnn.com/2015/11/18/europe/paris-terror-attack-myths/
> 46 Phone interview with the author, August 2016
> 47 BBC News Group, “Social Media Guidance for Staff,” 2015, available at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/
> shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/26_03_15_bbc_news_group_social_media_guidance.pdf
> 48 “Are you a journalist? Download this free guide for verifying photos and videos,” First Draft
> News, available at: https://firstdraftnews.com/are-you-a-journalist-download-this-free-guide-for-
> verifying-photos-and-videos/
> 49 Interview with the author, August 2016 28

There are known knowns; there are things we know we know. We also 

know there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are 

some things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns— 

the ones we don’t know we don’t know. 50 

Mainly through social media, but sometimes through other news media 

sources, the audience is now often conscious of the basic facts and 

“known unknowns” as news breaks, whether via social or traditional 

media. As Sambrook points out, social media tells people instantly 

that something has happened, but it cannot always explain what it is: 

You get a situation like in Bangkok [2015] where we first know that 

something has happened because people start tweeting and then a 

bystander starts broadcasting pictures of the aftermath on live on 

Periscope [Twitter’s live stream tool]. The guy doing it literally didn’t 

know what he was showing and when he realized he was filming body 

parts he regretted it. 51 

As that amateur broadcast went out, viewers were able to comment and 

the man filming also responded, but while his actions gave the world 

images of this event, it could not give much insight. 52 

This is now how news is made. There has been some kind of explosion. 

But we do not know what kind of explosion. One possibility at the front 

of people’s minds, regardless of statistical probability, is terrorism. 

But journalism’s key task is to find out what we don’t know. 

Journalists covering breaking terror news are adapting their language 

and being humbler in publicly sharing their ignorance as well as their 

knowledge—something once unimaginable to newsroom culture. To 

say that something has not been confirmed is not adequate as a final 

narrative, but in the early stages of an incident it is as important to 

identify uncertain information. Authority is enhanced, not diminished, 

by making sources as clear and precise as possible. A general statement 

such as “reports on social media” is at the worse vague end of the 

spectrum, but if the platform and social media account is identified then 

that helps build a more nuanced picture. This is part of building much-

needed media literacy in the audience. Detailed, continual  transparency 

helps promote public understanding of the process of news as well as 

building trust in its outputs. 29 

News organizations need to be aware that simply by reporting an 

emerging situation they are signaling that it is of potential significance. 

“We are getting reports” is not a phrase that should allow editors to 

suspend their usual judgment. That judgment, though, can now 

be more openly made. 

News media institutions have intellectual and professional capital. 

It is good to share the caveats and conditions that are applied in the 

newsroom on screen. With breaking news—especially on a topic so 

fraught with competing and complex definitions and perspectives as 

terror—authority is gained not by automatic certainty but by sharing 

the journey towards understanding. 

# USING THE RIGHT LANGUAGE 

Journalists have to use shortcuts to compress complex realities 

into formats people can consume quickly. The formula of headlines, 

edited video, graphics and so on are part of the necessary process of 

simplification and communication under limited time and space. But with 

a complex subject like terror, precise language is vital, as Mary Hockaday, 

the BBC’s controller of World Service English wrote to me in an email: 

The recent rapid sequence of events does challenge us about 

language. Terrorist, the lone wolf, the mentally ill, the loner, ISIS 

directed, ISIS sympathizer, ISIS inspired…. News events rush past and 

headlines simplify… but it’s really important we go on striving to be 

precise, recognize the complexity – of the people and indeed what 

the policy response needs to be. And use accurate, concrete language 

when we can rather than generalities. 53 

SECTION 2 

> 50 “OMG I can’t unsee that! What happened when the aftermath of the Bangkok bombing was
> streamed live on Periscope,” Medium, 2015, available at: https://medium.com/1st-draft/omg-i-
> can-t-ever-unsee-that-what-happened-when-the-aftermath-of-the-bangkok-bomb-blast-was-
> 7a3f39ee2b0#.taux6r5t3
> 51 Interview with the author, September 2016
> 52 Eyewitness Media Hub, “‘OMG I can’t ever unsee that’: What happened when the aftermath
> of the Bangkok bomb blast was streamed live on Periscope,” 2015, available at: https://medium.
> com/1st-draft/omg-i-can-t-ever-unsee-that-what-happened-when-the-aftermath-of-the-bangkok-
> bomb-blast-was-7a3f39ee2b0#.p98vyuvjg
> 53 Email to the author, August 2016 30

Language should be concrete and consistent. In Western media, critics 

say that with the post-9/11 rise in extreme violence that proclaims itself 

to have an Islamist motivation, there has been a tendency to reserve the 

term “terrorism” for only that category: 

We used to use terrorist to describe all kinds of people, from  Irish 

Catholic republicans  to  American Jewish radicals . But since 9/11, 

we’ve been using it much more swiftly in reference to Islamists. 54 

Dylann Roof, the alleged perpetrator of the 2015 Charleston shooting 

of nine African American churchgoers was accused of a hate crime, not 

terrorism. Yet he had an ideological agenda and drew upon the ideas of 

white supremacist groups. Micah Johnson, who shot police officers in 

Dallas, appeared to have a strong political motive for his actions based 

on his anger at police shootings of black civilians. 55  The BBC’s Director 

of Editorial Policy David Jordan warns against applying the term terrorist 

too widely: 

The problem is with the word “terrorist” rather than “terrorism.” When 

you apply it to an individual you must do it with care and caution. In 

the case of the Charleston shooter he appeared to have mental health 

issues and political motives but was not associated with a political 

group that had the declared aim of using extreme violence against 

innocent people to achieve a specified goal. As an international news 

organization we increasingly find governments around the world who 

want to apply the label “terrorist” to anyone who opposes them and 

so it is important not to use it without thinking. 56 

As terrorism becomes more diffuse and the association of a specific act 

with an organization becomes harder to ascertain it becomes even more 

important that news organizations compare and contrast the way they 

use words—not just terrorism itself but also the accompanying adjectives 

and the assumptions they carry. 

Language matters especially when it turns to metaphor. Most famously, 

the use of the “war on terror” metaphor should act as a warning. Its 

widespread deployment following the cue from the George W. Bush 

administration declined as mainstream media understood that actual 

wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and against ISIS were not working militarily. 31 

As one of the UK’s most senior judicial officials, the then Director of 

Public Prosecutions, Sir Ken Macdonald made clear just two years after 

the London Bombings, the military metaphor also boosts the terrorist’s 

sense of power and ignores other policy options in countering their 

campaigns: 

London is not a battlefield. Those innocents who were murdered on 

July 7, 2005, were not victims of war. And the men who killed them 

were not, as in their vanity they claimed on their ludicrous videos, 

“soldiers.” […] We need to be very clear about this. On the streets of 

London, there is no such thing as a “war on terror,” just as there can 

be no such things as “war on drugs.” […] The fight against terrorism 

on the streets of Britain is not a war. It is the prevention of crime, the 

enforcement of our laws and the winning of justice for those damaged 

by their infringement. 57 

Labels such as “lone wolf” or “evil” resonate but have little factual 

meaning. 58  Apart from sensationalizing the perpetrator, they give the 

sense that the individual was operating in isolation. In fact, it is difficult 

to find any examples of terrorists not influenced to some degree by 

the messaging of terror groups even if their actions were not explicitly 

controlled or directed. 59 

SECTION 2 

54 Adam Ragusea, Slate, available at: http://www.slate.com/authors.adam_ragusea.html 

55 Dallas Police shootings, Wikipedia, available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_shooting_of_ 

Dallas_police_officers 

56 Interview with the author, September 2016 

57 “There is no war on terror,” The Daily Telegraph, 2011, available at: 

www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1540399/There-is-no-war-on-terror-says-DPP.html 

58 “The Myth of Lone Wolf Terrorism,” Foreign Affairs, 2016, and “The Restoration of the Caliphate,” 

LinkedIn, 2016, available at: https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/western-europe/2016-07-26/ 

myth-lone-wolf-terrorism and https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/isis-network-warriors-making-jihad-

web-erika-lisa-panuccio 

59 Interview with the author, September 2016 

# Labels such as “lone wolf” 

# or “evil” resonate but have 

# little factual meaning. 32 

Likewise, the distinction between mental health and terror is rarely 

clearcut. On the one hand, the application of the label “mental illness” 

is a useful indicator if supported by some authoritative assessment that 

helps guide the audience. The London 2016 Russell Square stabber had 

been receiving treatment in a psychiatric hospital, for example. But it 

is arguable that anyone who believes in killing innocent people for an 

ideological cause has a dysfunctional psychology. Mainstream news style 

guides do not refer to this dilemma specifically. Jordan says this is an 

area where guidance is still evolving: 

The mental health issue regarding terror is a comparatively new 

problem and we are talking with other standards people to try to 

create guidelines. But by its nature it is complex. For example, just 

because someone once had treatment for a mental health problem 

does not mean that they are still “mentally ill. So as usual, we should 

avoid vague terms and only report facts. 60 

Language matters because it conditions the public acceptance, 

for example, of negotiations with extremist groups as political 

or military actors. 

In the heat of reporting a breaking news incident such as the London 

Russell Square knife attack, we can see how the news media struggles 

to cope with these competing demands for categorization, as “facts” are 

emerging. The attacker, Zakaria Bulhan, was arrested immediately after 

the incident occurred at around 10:30 p.m. on Wednesday August 3, 2016. 

The story broke quickly, 61  partly through eyewitness accounts on social 

media. 62  The news media initially reporting it prominently as a “possible” 

terrorist attack, based on police statements. By 11 a.m. the following day, 

the police were effectively ruling out terror. A random stabbing with one 

fatality by a person with a mental health problem would have been a 

story in its own right, but not necessarily the lead on the BBC’s flagship 

morning radio program Today without the terror connotation. The initial 

prominence of the story—and its later drop down the running order—is 

not necessarily a failure of journalism; it reflects the development of 

the story through time. At 5 a.m. as the Today program prepared to air, 

Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley, from the Metropolitan Police, said: 33 

This was a tragic incident resulting in the death of one woman and 

five others being injured. Early indications suggest that mental health 

was a factor in this horrific attack. However, we are keeping an open 

mind regarding the motive and terrorism remains one line of inquiry 

being explored. 63 

Jamie Angus, editor of the BBC’s morning Today program, explains how 

they assessed a series of factors: 

With the benefit of hindsight, we would not have given the story such 

prominence, but at the time it was right to treat it so seriously even 

though we did not have absolute confirmation that it was terrorism. 

When the story broke we got in extra people to prepare our morning 

report because the 1 a.m. statement by the police mentioned terror 

as a factor and they repeated that later. The genre of the attack was 

not clear, but it often isn’t a clear distinction between someone who 

is mentally ill or a Jihadist. Of course, radicalized people are often 

psychologically vulnerable anyway. The police had also mentioned 

that he was Norwegian with Somali heritage, which suggested they 

were considering a terror motive, too. We took our cue from the 

fact that such a senior officer was still mentioning the possibility 

of terrorism. 64 

Much of the pressure to publish live is driven by news breaking on social 

media first from “non-journalistic” sources. As one producer on a news 

channel says, the fear of missing out on a story surfacing on social media 

can lead to the temptation to cover it before significant details 

are confirmed: 

I resisted “breaking” news of a shooting in a Spanish supermarket until 

we knew more. As it turned out, it was a domestic dispute. We didn’t 

report it at all. But my boss on the day wanted to break it because 

people were mentioning it on social media and he felt it “might” 

be something else. 65 

SECTION 2 

> 60 Interview with the author, September 2016
> 61 “Pictured: the moment police bundled crazed Norwegian-Somali knife attacker to the ground,”
> The Daily Mail, 2016, available at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3722796/Woman-killed-
> five-people-injured-terrorist-knife-attack-central-London.html
> 62 Available at: https://twitter.com/hyperlinkhelen/status/760984211633373184
> 63 “Update: Incident in Russell Square: Metropolitan Police, 2016, available at:
> http://news.met.police.uk/news/update-incident-in-russell-square-177433
> 64 Interview with the author, September 2016
> 65 Anonymized interview with author August 2016 34

But the news media is not a tracking system for online activity. Platforms 

such as Facebook are increasingly a source for news for the public 66  and 

can provide a great source of facts and opinion but it is highly selective. 

All the newsrooms spoken to for this report insist that they apply the 

same editorial standards to social media as to any other source. As the 

CNN guidelines state: 

Citizen-generated reports are subject to the same strict review 

process that CNN applies to traditional reporting before they 

are included in CNN stories. 67 

# WORKING WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 

The best news media encourages interaction and listens and responds. 

Alex Thomson, Chief Correspondent for the UK’s Channel 4 News uses 

his Twitter feed to show and discuss his journalism as he gathers 

news. He posts smartphone footage and replies to comments. Other 

“traditional” international correspondents such as CNN’s Christiane 

Amanpour have used Facebook Live video to provide a more interactive 

user experience. Journalists say that while much of the feedback 

can be bland or unhelpful, it can help give a sense of what the public 

misunderstands and so encourage journalists to address those gaps. 

Correspondents such as the BBC’s Matthew Price say even interacting 

with people who complain or are confused can be a useful way 

of understanding what people do not know. By correcting or responding 

to them you can help that individual but, of course, the message also 

goes out to the journalist’s wider network: 

Covering the refugee crisis live from the field in its early phase, I got 

many comments saying that these were not real refugees because 

they were almost all men. So they were “just” economic migrants. 

I reflected on that and asked the refugees where the women and 

children were. They pointed out that often the men go ahead to 

prepare the way for their families. So although the images were 

of men, many were in effect, travelling ahead of their families. 

I then made sure to make that point on social media but also 

in my reporting. 68 

For Price, even a “mistaken” audience comment on social media 

can lead to better journalism. 35 

Sometimes the public knows more than the journalist about an aspect 

of a story. They might have eyewitness accounts, local knowledge, or 

specialist insights. Social media can provide perspectives and information 

not available through the usual channels or sources and it can provide 

them quickly. Tapping into the social media of groups traditionally 

marginalized by mainstream media helps the journalist and the public 

understand the context of the extremist individuals who might draw 

upon those cultures. This could be the online discourse of US “alt right” 

activists 69  or the social media messaging of youths in Molenbeek, the 

Brussels district with a high Muslim population where ISIS had text 

messaged locals. 70  There is increasing evidence that those marginalized 

communities feel misrepresented by mainstream media. Paying attention 

to their online voice—albeit not always representative—can add to overall 

understanding for the journalist and audience. 

Editors, too, should take the context of social media into account when 

making judgments around framing narratives. Just because posts on 

social media are often confused, misleading, or ill-informed does not 

mean they should be dismissed. This is especially true now that news 

coverage itself is subject to constant online critique.  The Guardian ’s 

social media editor, Martin Belam, said: 

And all the time you’ve got people @-messaging you that you are 

doing it wrong, or serving an agenda, or displaying bias. With one 

tweet about the Iranian background of one of the recent attackers, 

the replies criticized The Guardian for being racist to even mention 

it, and other people criticized The Guardian for trying to suppress 

information that he was an ISIS fighter. 71 

SECTION 2 

> 66 “News use across social media platforms,” Pew Research Center, 2016, available at:
> http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-social-media-platforms-2016/
> 67 “Journalistic Integrity,” Time Warner, available at: http://www.timewarner.com/company/
> corporate-responsibility/telling-the-worlds-stories/journalistic-integrity
> 68 Email to the author, August 2016
> 69 “An establishment conservative’s guide to the Alt-Right,” Breitbart, 2016, available at:
> http://www.breitbart.com/tech/2016/03/29/an-establishment-conservatives-guide-to-the-alt-right/
> 70 “Brussels Attacks: fight the Westerners texts sent to Molenbeek,” The Guardian, 2016, available
> at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/brussels-attacks-fight-westerners-text-sent-
> youths-molenbeek-isis
> 71 “How should the media cover terror attacks?” The Guardian, 2016, available at: https://www.
> theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/jul/28/how-should-the-media-cover-terror-attacks-
> live-debate?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=Media+Briefing+new+v2&utm_
> term=183715&subid=631473&CMP=ema_546 36

But these also raise valid points that can contribute to reflection in the 

newsroom about the framing of terror narratives. 

# AVOIDING HARM AND RELATIONS 

# WITH AUTHORITIES 

Reporting on terror events must also be sensitive to security 

considerations. Journalists have a duty to report as fully as possible 

but in a terror-related scenario the news media has a responsibility 

to avoid causing harm. Journalists can legitimately not report facts if 

doing so would increase risks or hamper a security operation. This means 

responding to requests from the authorities to not report particular facts 

or not to show certain images. There should always be a due process 

within the news organization of making that decision. Ideally, the fact 

of any decision to restrict reporting should be reported. 

During the 2004 school siege in Beslan, Chechnya, the BBC decided to 

go on a time delay for its live feed because of the danger of showing 

graphic imagery of hostages including children. During the security 

operation following the 2015 attacks on the Charlie Hebdo offices in 

Paris and the siege of a supermarket where hostages had been taken, 

the French broadcast regulator issued a notice to domestic newsrooms 

asking them to show “discretion.” Paris police on the scene told TV crews 

not to broadcast their officers in action. At the same time broadcasters 

were regulating themselves. Paris-based BFM TV chose not to broadcast 

the police rescue operation live. It also did not air an audio interview it 

recorded with the hostage-takers themselves until after the incident was 

over. BFM TV journalist Ruth Elkrief said it was a series of decisions they 

had to make for themselves in the newsroom: 

It’s very difficult. We have to move fast. But are we undermining 

the investigation? Are we being manipulated? We’re asking ourselves 

these questions constantly. We had several emergency meetings 

during the day to debate what to do. We’re always 

checking ourselves. 72 

Transparency about making those judgments helps build the 

understanding and confidence of the audience. Clearly, journalists cannot 

give a running commentary on all their editorial decisions, but a similar 

approach could be adopted to that when embedded with the military 

during conflicts, as suggested in BBC guidelines: 37 

We should normally say if our reports are censored or monitored or 

if we withhold information, and explain, wherever possible, the rules 

under which we are operating. 73 

Journalists have a civic duty to cooperate in the interests of public safety, 

but this does not mean automatically complying with police or security 

requests. The seizing of the laptop of BBC journalist Secunder Kermani— 

who had made contacts with extremists—appeared to challenge in 

principle the idea that journalists can ever talk to terrorists or their 

associates. 74 

These judgments are hard at a practical level with breaking news. 

Journalists now have access to real-time live video and images of alleged 

participants instantly uploaded on social media. The news media should 

not wait for guidance before assessing whether using material might 

cause harm. Showing the outside of a building where an incident is taking 

place might, for example, give the terrorist information about deployment 

of security forces. Clear lines of communication with the police are vital. 

As one senior broadcast journalist said, there can be a moment when the 

natural desire to cover a breaking story clashes with security imperatives: 

During recent shootings in Munich, the local police tweeted several 

requests that everyone refrain from speculation, and also that people 

stopped showing live pictures of police positions. We were doing 

exactly that at the time, taking live agency feeds of heavily armed 

cops, and staying on air by saying things like “we shouldn’t 

speculate but… 75 

SECTION 2 

> 72 “Social media complicates police efforts amid attack,” Wall Street Journal, 2015, available at:
> http://www.wsj.com/articles/gag-order-during-french-raids-highlights-technology-
> dilemma-1420923128
> 73 “War, Terror and Emergencies,” Editorial Guidelines, BBC, available at:
> http://www.bbc.co.uk/editorialguidelines/guidelines/war-terror-emergencies/accuracy-and-
> impartiality
> 74 “Terror police ask journalists to think twice about contacting jihadis,” The Independent, 2015,
> available at: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/terror-police-ask-journalists-to-
> think-twice-about-contacting-jihadis-a6714146.html
> 75 Anonymized interview with the author, August 2016 38

For local media especially, the relationship with police can be mutually 

beneficial. During the Lindt Cafe siege, Channel Seven had remarkable 

access to police operations because they agreed to give them oversight 

of their picture feeds. The police were able to use the material to assess 

what was happening. The broadcasters in turn had to agree not to show 

sensitive images live, to have a time delay on their broadcast feed, and 

to keep some material back until the siege was over. 76 

# NOT HELPING THE TERRORIST 

There is also a long-term issue about how detailed media coverage might 

help terrorists improve their operational effectiveness. As Javier Delgado 

Rivera has written, thanks to news media reports, terrorists now know 

how the FBI tracked the network of the San Bernardino shooters with 

information from their damaged cell phones. They know that French 

police linked one of the Paris attackers to the Brussels attacks through 

parking tickets. Perhaps future terrorists will be more careful: 

Detailed media reporting on police investigations can inadvertently 

help attackers avoid past miscalculations and refine their modus 

operandi. Journalists would argue that their job is to protect society’s 

right to know. Yet in such exceptional circumstances, editors should 

ensure that the latest information they feed to their audience is 

useless to fundamentalists seeking to do harm. 77 

This is especially important as terrorists become increasingly self-

radicalized and train themselves partly through the study of previous 

incidents. 78  Overall, it would be impossible for the news media not to 

report any circumstantial detail that could help a future terrorist, but as 

with the reporting of suicide, where journalists refrain from describing 

methods of self-killing, discretion around the depth of information on 

methods and countermeasures is possible. 79 

This is part of the bigger issue about proportionality around reporting 

on terror, according to University of Western Australia professor 

Michael Jetter: 

The purpose of not reporting suicides fully is to not encourage 

copycats. What German newspapers are doing is they’re blowing it 

up so much that everybody who is seeking attention is really given 39 

the signal that, “I will be famous.” That is very likely a reason why you 

see so many more of those things. It’s a scary development and I do 

think they need to think about how they cover things. 80 

As we have seen there are many reasons that journalists might decide 

to withhold facts or material. This can vary due to the news brand’s 

ethos and their audience culture. 81  British broadcasters now rarely show 

ISIS propaganda videos, although there is no blanket ban. But when ISIS 

made a video of a four-year-old British child apparently blowing up a car 

with captives inside,  The Sun  newspaper ran the image as its front page: 

“Junior Jihadi” 82  and the  New York Post  even ran the story with a slide 

show of “terrorist photos that made us gag.” 83  The coverage was clearly 

hostile, but it was the kind of publicity ISIS sought. A few months later 

ISIS released videos showing children executing prisoners. 84  The BBC’s 

Jordan said they chose not to show the images partly because of the 

issue of consent with a minor, but also because they did not want 

to help ISIS: 

SECTION 2 

76 “Sydney siege: a chilling account,” News.com.au, 2014, http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/ 

tv/sydney-siege-a-chilling-account-by-chris-reason-of-the-barbaric-night/news-story/423c4ce37c2 

0914e8db92b927d1795b6 

77 “Does the media say too much when reporting on terrorism?,” Open Democracy, 2016, available 

at: https://www.opendemocracy.net/arab-awakening/javier-delgado-rivera/does-media-say-too-

much-when-reporting-on-terrorism 

78 “Does the media say too much when reporting on terrorism?,” Open Democracy, 2016, available 

at: https://www.opendemocracy.net/arab-awakening/javier-delgado-rivera/does-media-say-too-

much-when-reporting-on-terrorism 

79 “Media guidelines for the reporting of suicide,” The Samaritans, available at: 

http://www.samaritans.org/media-centre/media-guidelines-reporting-suicide 

80 “Expert calls for terror attacks to be treated same way as suicide when it comes to media 

coverage,” News.com.au, 2016, available at: http://www.news.com.au/world/europe/expert-calls-for-

terror-attacks-to-be-treated-same-way-as-suicide-when-it-comes-to-media-coverage/news-story/0 

4d99ebfd2092d9be952928a92995360 

81 “French media to stop publishing photos and names of terrorists,” The Guardian, 2016, available 

at: https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/french-media-to-stop-publishing-photos-and-

names-of-terrorists 

82 Tomorrow’s Papers Today, blog, available at: http://suttonnick.tumblr.com/post/136561141471/ 

mondays-sun-front-page-jihadi-junior 

83 ISIS makes 4-year-old execute prisoners,” New York Post, 2016, available at: 

http://nypost.com/2016/02/11/4-year-old-junior-jihadi-used-in-isis-video/ 

84 “ISIS video appears to show children, including Briton, killing captives,” The Guardian, 2016, 

available at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/27/isis-video-appears-to-show-children-

including-briton-killing-captives 40 

It was perfectly possible to tell that story without using the pictures. 

The danger is that by showing it there becomes a kind of diminishing 

return for the terrorist so the next time they have to create something 

even more outrageous. Arguably, if people had not published those 

images in the first instance then ISIS would not have made more. 

This is partly why we don’t show propaganda videos unless there 

is a serious news reason to do so. 85 

The counter argument is that to understand the full horror of terrorism, it 

is vital to show what they do in full detail. Yet, in a world where just about 

everything is available online it is difficult to argue that the public is being 

denied information. In the end, it is a decision that should be thought 

through by the individual organizations in relation to specific events. 

By reporting on a terror event, research suggests that we make another 

one more likely. 86  So it is important that the scale of reporting as well 

as its content is considered. The drama and danger combined with 

the ideological threat and human impact create a compelling narrative 

cocktail. For  The Guardian , the 2015 Paris attacks saw more unique visits 

to its website than any event in its history bar one—the extraordinary 

story of Britain voting to leave the European Union. The increasing 

proximity of terror attacks to our everyday lives adds to their fascination 

and immediacy. The prominence given in terms of duration and visibility 

of reporting on terrorism sends a strong signal to the audience. 

Judgment on this is not a science, but journalists need to consider 

external perspectives as well as the temptation of “going big” 

on a particular incident. 

# Language is critical because the 

# public makes judgments about risk 

# based on the terminology involved. 

# Just because something creates 

# “terror” does not make 

# it a “terrorist” event. 41 

# GEOGRAPHICAL BIAS 

There was a lively debate in the wake of the Paris and Brussels attacks 

comparing the coverage of those incidents with similar incidents in places 

like Beirut and Ankara. 87  These events were reported in the Western 

media but not to the same extent. Journalists explained that many of the 

complaints on social media about this were inaccurate and suggested 

critics were trying to score political points and demonstrate their own 

ethical virtue. 88  Journalists point out that even when reported, the 

coverage attracted far less interest from the public. This is partly because 

overall audiences will always respond more to news that has relevance 

to their own lives and for a Western audience, the French and Belgian 

attacks were on people and a society that the majority population could 

identify with more readily. 89  ABC’s Jon Williams explains: 

Our first responsibility is to the audience, and we have a US audience. 

For them a bomb in Paris is a bigger deal than Baghdad. They visit 

Paris, they know and care more about France. That’s not to say we 

don’t cover the Iraq incident but we will generally tell stories that 

connect with our audience. In the same way an earthquake in Italy 

is more important than the same deaths in Sumatra because these 

places speak to Americans in a way that others don’t. It’s different 

if you are a global broadcaster is like the BBC with a less defined 

idea of the audience—but our audience is in the USA. 90 

SECTION 2 

> 85 Interview with the author, September 2016
> 86 Michael Jetter, “Terrorism and the Media,” 2014, available at: http://ftp.iza.org/dp8497.pdf
> 87 “Days before Brussels there were two devastating terrorist attacks the media ignored,”
> US Uncut, 2016, available at: http://usuncut.com/world/brussels-media-ankara-turkey/
> 88 “You won’t read about this in the media but…”. Medium, 2016, available at:
> https://medium.com/@martinbelam/you-won-t-read-about-this-in-the-media-but-b275d46fd51f#.
> m4adv9lna
> 89 “There is nothing wrong with mourning Brussels, but not Beirut,” The Guardian, 2016, available
> at: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/nothing-wrong-mourning-brussels-
> not-beirut
> 90 Interview with the author, August 2016 42

He also points out that the attacks in Europe this summer were 

significant because they represented a change in strategy by ISIS. They 

also raised fresh questions about community relations in those countries 

and the military/political strategy of governments in domestic and 

foreign policy areas. 

The recent American terror events were also qualitatively different. The 

San Bernardino attacks were by “home-grown” extremists radicalized by 

online jihadist propaganda. The Orlando nightclub shooting was claimed 

by ISIS as inspired by them, although it seems the perpetrator was also 

driven by homophobia. Likewise, the Dallas police shooting challenged 

the usual frame of “terror” but it clearly had ideological motives, was 

connected to extremist groups, and sought to spread fear. 

Journalists should always be reflecting on their editorial judgments 

and the quality of their coverage. Reporting by western media of the 

European and American attacks tended to focus more on the victims. 91 

It used more emotive, compassionate, and outraged language. It stressed 

the surprise of the attacks, while the incidents in Lebanon, for example, 

were framed as just another tragedy in a violent region. 92  More voices and 

detail from non-Western incidents would help redress the tonal balance, 

while more foregrounding of the connections with western politics 

would close the interest gap, too. These are perennial concerns regarding 

coverage of international stories but the paradox is that it is now much 

easier to cover distant events in the same way as “domestic” incidents. 93 

The extent of the discrepancy is a matter of editorial choice and effort. 

# QUALITY, CONTEXT AND 

# CONSTRUCTIVE REPORTING 

Under the pressure of limited time and resources the news media is 

still a powerful and efficient resource for reporting and understanding 

complicated and challenging incidents. As the UK Editor of BuzzFeed, 

Janine Gibson, points out, the large amount of information around these 

events can paradoxically make creating a clear narrative more difficult: 43 

Perpetrators now leave a much wider information footprint. They 

leave records of their lives on social media or they make videos and 

write messages. Friends or witnesses provide a whole load more 

material to sift through. We just know more about everybody. 

So the picture we try to build is much more complex and hard 

to simplify into the usual clichés. 94 

The audience now expects analysis and context almost simultaneously 

with reporting of the facts. Social media means that there is an instant 

explosion of often-erroneous information that presents the journalist 

with an additional task, that Gibson says BuzzFeed has taken on, along 

with its breaking news and background coverage: 

In a breaking crisis situation, we usually set up a thread for “myth-

busting” that will point out fake images or correct false leads and give 

basic background information. People expect us to do that and they 

trust us to do it. We ask readers to send us things they find and we 

will check it out. It’s a kind of media literacy and I think young people 

in particular feel pride in correcting mistakes seen on social 

or mainstream media. 95 

SECTION 2 

91 “Paris, Beirut and the language used to describe terrorism,” The Atlantic, 2016, available at: 

http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/11/paris-beirut-media-coverage/416457/ 

92 “Lives fit for print: exposing media bias in coverage of terrorism,” The Nation, 2016, available at: 

https://www.thenation.com/article/lives-fit-for-print-exposing-media-bias-in-coverage-of-terrorism/ 

93 Phil Harding, “The Great Global Switch-off,” available at: 

http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/Polis/Files/globalswitchoff.pdf 

94 Interview with the author, September 2016 

95 Interview with the author, September 2016 

# In a breaking crisis situation, we usually 

# set up a thread for “myth-busting” that 

# will point out fake images or correct 

# false leads and give basic background 

# information. People expect us to do that 

# and they trust us to do it. 

Janine Gibson 

UK Editor of Buzzfeed 44 

There are individual journalists such as Rukmini Callimachi of  The New 

York Times  who write compellingly, critically, and with a large reservoir 

of knowledge. Her lengthy piece based on an interview with a former 

ISIS member, for example, provided deep information on its organization, 

strategy, and training of recruits who then make up its diffuse 

international network. 96  Research shows that this kind of narrative, using 

defectors, is effective in giving credible insights into terrorist motives. 97 

Understanding the history helps understand the resultant terror attacks. 

The Financial Times  special feature on ISIS’s dealing in the oil market 

was an outstanding use of interactive graphics that showed how the 

terror organization was funding itself and its links with international 

markets. 98  This kind of background reporting is an essential supplement 

to the reporting of terror events. As media researcher Arda Bilgen has 

written, this helps with the “desecuritization” of narratives. Instead of 

concentrating only on the incident, the victims, and the drama of the 

disruption of normal life, this kind of objective, fact-based, nonpartisan 

reporting helps differentiate the various terror types and provide 

much-needed clarity. 99 

Collectively, news teams now deploy new tools such as data visualization, 

video with text, and short-form explainers to enhance audience 

understanding across a wide range of platforms. These platforms, such 

as Snapchat, can also reach different demographics. “Digitally native” 

news organizations have been pioneers at finding new styles for gaining 

attention for these difficult topics. VICE documentaries on ISIS, for 

example, have gained remarkable access, and their style of less mediated, 

less formulaic reporting allows the audience a more direct insight into 

their subject. 

Journalism must be independent, critical, and realistic, but there is 

opportunity for narratives of resistance, solidarity, and compassion. 

This would also help a fearful or jaded public engage with the issues 

and generate a more positive discussion about resilience in the face 

of the threat and a better quality of debate around “solutions,” 

according to media researcher Arda Bilgen: 45 

Implementing certain [editorial] policies that are different than the 

previous failed policies can facilitate the breaking of that cycle by 

forcing at least one side of the equation–the media–to act in a more 

responsible, more conscious, and more cooperative manner. Only 

then starving the terrorists of the oxygen of publicity on which they 

depend can become possible and more robust steps can be taken to 

win the ideological and actual battle against terrorism. 100 

Perhaps most urgently, it would arrest a tendency towards Islamophobia. 

This is a problem for society, not just the news media. As Mary Hockaday, 

the BBC’s controller of World Service English, points out, this can be a 

question of responding to those who are themselves trying to create 

more constructive narratives around terror: 

I thought it was very interesting that the Imams who attended the 

funeral in Rouen were quite clear they wanted to do it and needed 

to do it to “show” they are different. They fully understood image 

matters—and didn’t complain about needing to attend to that. It’s 

therefore really important that we the media report the voices who 

appeal to better nature, to peace, who show solidarity, and the people 

working hard and painstakingly at counter-radicalization. Not because 

I’m a softy, but because these things are also true and need to be said 

over and over again to counter the negative. 101 

One example of solutions-oriented journalism broadcast in the same 

week as the Brussels attacks was a short news film by the BBC that 

looked at Mechelen, another Belgian town with a high Muslim population, 

that seems to have avoided any significant radicalization through a policy 

of “zero tolerance” policing and outreach policies. It allowed the city 

mayor to explain his policies in detail and got high viewing figures. 102 

SECTION 2 

> 96 “How a secretive branch of ISIS built a global network of killers,” The New York Times, 2016,
> available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/04/world/middleeast/isis-german-recruit-interview.
> html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Frukmini-callimachi&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&re
> gion=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=4&pgtype=collection&_r=0
> 97 “Victims, perpetrators, assets: the narratives of Islamic State defectors,” ICSR, 2015, available at:
> http://icsr.info/2015/09/icsr-report-narratives-islamic-state-defectors/
> 98 “Inside ISIS: the journey of a barrel of oil,” The Financial Times, 2015, http://ig.ft.com/
> sites/2015/isis-oil/
> 99 Arda Bilgen, “Terrorism and the media: a dangerous symbiosis,” 2012, available at:
> http://www.e-ir.info/2012/07/22/terrorism-and-the-media-a-dangerous-symbiosis/
> 100 Arda Bilgen, “Terrorism and the media: a dangerous symbiosis,” 2012, available at:
> http://www.e-ir.info/2012/07/22/terrorism-and-the-media-a-dangerous-symbiosis/
> 101 Email to the author, August 2016
> 102 “Brussels attacks: Belgium’s zero tolerance mayor,” BBC, 2016, available at:
> http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35897299

46 

Journalism around terror events also has a role in mediating the 

emotional impact for the audience. There is an element of useful ritual 

about the creation of instant shrines at the scene of incidents, the 

memorial services, and the expressions of condolence. Social media and 

platforms now play a part in that, with special hashtags or profile flags 

to show solidarity. By showing this process of grieving, the news media 

helps communities recover from the trauma. By focusing on the victims 

rather than the perpetrators, journalists can bring humanity and dignity 

back into a narrative of destruction and fear. Samantha Barry 

of CNN explains: 

Our audience tells us in a number of ways that they want us to 

focus on the victims. One of the most powerful pieces we did which 

achieved unprecedented levels of engagement across all platforms 

was when Anderson Cooper choked up reading the names of the 

Orlando victims. We try to be impersonal in how we report, but we 

are not robots. And the audience needs good news, too. Survivor 

stories are important as are those stories of personal courage such 

as the people who went back into the Bataclan nightclub to save 

their friends. 103 

Emotion used to be seen as an indulgence in hard news journalism, but 

when it comes to terrorism it is important to treat it as more than a 

commodity, 104  especially with the advent of social media. 105  Part of this is 

acknowledging the emotional impact of terrorist events on the journalist 

themselves. 106  Anderson Cooper’s tears over the Orlando massacre run 

the risk of appearing too personally involved with the story. But it is 

possible to include feelings as part of storytelling without diluting factual 

and critical perspective. BuzzFeed’s Gibson says news organizations 

should be able to operate in different modes without compromising 

overall integrity: 

# Humanizing terror’s victims and 

# their communities may be the best 

# counter-extremist measure media 

# can provide. 47 

With these events we are operating in three dimensions at the same 

time. We are simultaneously doing the breaking news, the analysis, 

and we are also sending reporters without a specific deadline to 

go find out what is going on—not to talk to the police but to talk 

to people to get the emotion behind the story. To go to vigils to talk 

to people to get their testimony but also to get the reasons why 

people were out and about in the wake of the event–seeing it from 

bottom up. 107 

Perhaps most important is to ensure that this is inclusive of the wider 

communities involved, be they the LBGT population of Florida or the 

Muslims of Europe. Humanizing terror’s victims and their communities 

may be the best counter-extremist measure media can provide. 

SECTION 2 

> 103 Interview with the author, August 2016
> 104 Charlie Beckett, 2015, available at: http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/polis/2015/09/10/how-journalism-
> is-turning-emotional-and-whatthat-might-mean-for-news/
> 105 Charlie Beckett and Mark Deuze, “On the Role of Emotion in the Future of Journalism,” 2016,
> available at: http://sms.sagepub.com/content/2/3/2056305116662395.short
> 106 Charlie Beckett and Mark Deuze, “On the Role of Emotion in the Future of Journalism,” 2016,
> available at: http://sms.sagepub.com/content/2/3/2056305116662395.long
> 107 Interview with the author, September 2016

48 

This chapter will examine the increasingly important role of platforms 

such as Facebook, Google, Apple, and Twitter in providing information, 

connecting to journalism, and framing narratives around terror 

news events. 

# THE POWER OF THE PLATFORMS 

The major platforms are now increasingly the way the Western public 

accesses news about terror. Twitter, Facebook, Google, and Apple 

provide the infrastructure for mainstream news media to disseminate 

their material. 108  Sixty-two percent of Americans now say they get news 

via social media. 109  Sixty-three percent of American Twitter and Facebook 

users say they get news from those platforms, with Twitter especially 

popular for breaking news (59 percent). 110  Facebook also owns the hugely 

popular social messaging apps Instagram and WhatsApp. Snapchat is 

increasingly used by news brands like CNN and Vice, who push content 

to users through Snapchat Discovery. 

Platforms also aggregate news stories through Apple News, Google 

News, and Twitter Moments. They make deals with news organizations 

to feature journalism, further shaping the dissemination and consumption 

of news. They are also starting to provide new production tools for 

journalists such as livestreaming on Facebook and YouTube or through 

apps such as Twitter’s Periscope. Journalists have lost control over the 

dissemination of their work. This is a crucial challenge for the news 

media overall, but the issue is especially acute when it comes 

to reporting on terror. 

The platforms provide an unprecedented resource for the public to 

upload, access, and share information and commentary around terror 

events. This is a huge opportunity for journalists to connect with a wider 

public. But key questions are also raised: Are social media platforms 

# Section 3 

# Journalism, Terror, and Digital Platforms 49 

now becoming journalists and publishers by default, if not by design? 

How should news organizations respond to the increasing influence of 

platforms around terror events? Facebook is becoming dominant in the 

mediation of information for the public, which raises all sorts of concerns 

about monetization, influence, and control over how narratives around 

terrorist incidents are shaped. 

As Guardian Editor Katharine Viner points out, we live in a world 

of information abundance, a world where “truth” is often harder 

to establish than before, partly because of social media: 

Now, we are caught in a series of confusing battles between opposing 

forces: between truth and falsehood, fact and rumor, kindness and 

cruelty; between the few and the many, the connected and the 

alienated; between the open platform of the web as its architects 

envisioned it and the gated enclosures of Facebook and other social 

networks; between an informed public and a misguided mob. 111 

It is in the public interest for these platforms to give people the best 

of news coverage at critical periods. But will that happen? 

SECTION 3 

> 108 “Facebook is eating the world,” Columbia Journalism Review, 2016, available at:
> http://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_and_media.php
> 109 “News use across social media platforms 2016,” Pew Research Center, 2016, available at:
> http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-social-media-platforms-2016/
> 110 “State of the news media 2016,” Pew Research Center, 2016, available at:
> http://www.journalism.org/2016/06/15/state-of-the-news-media-2016/
> 111 “How technology disrupted the truth,” The Guardian, 2016, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth

# Facebook’s role in the dissemination of news 

# is concerning because it is not an open and 

# accountable organization. 50 

Facebook’s role in the dissemination of news is concerning because 

it is not an open and accountable organization. 112  Recently, a Facebook 

moderator removed a story by Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten that 

featured the famous “napalm girl” image of a girl running from an attack 

during the Vietnam War. It was removed because the image violated the 

platform’s Community Standards on showing naked children. 113  When 

Facebook deleted the image, Aftenposten’s editor accused Facebook’s 

Mark Zuckerberg of “an abuse of power”: 

I am upset, disappointed – well, in fact even afraid – of what you 

are about to do to a mainstay of our democratic society. 114 

However, initially, even when the historic context of the image was 

pointed out along with its importance to the news story, Facebook 

stood by its stance: 

While we recognize that this photo is iconic, it’s difficult to create 

a distinction between allowing a photograph of a nude child in one 

instance and not others. 115 

Following a global outcry—including thousands of people posting the 

image on Facebook—they backed down and said they would review their 

policy and consult with publishers. 

This case was more than a one-off failure of judgment by Facebook. It 

is a symptom of a systematic, structural problem. CEO Mark Zuckerberg 

insists that Facebook is “a tech company, not a media company…. 

we build the tools, we do not produce any content.” 116  Yet Facebook 

aggregates news, and its algorithms and moderation teams influence 

what news appears in people’s streams. It recently reviewed its 

procedures in response to fears that human editors on the trending team 

might have a “liberal” bias. An internal inquiry did not find evidence of 

bias, but it did make clear that both algorithms and human curators 

are making judgments in a similar way to how a news organization 

filters information. 117  Other platforms that curate news content, such as 

YouTube, face similar issues. They may not call themselves news 

or media companies, but they are editors of journalism. 51 

This is a pressing policy problem, and the platforms are eager to engage 

in a dialogue. Tackling this is critical to them partly because it might drag 

them into regulatory oversight that will limit their control over their own 

platforms. However, there is a fundamental clash of interests between the 

publishers and platforms, which makes it hard to establish such policies. 

News is a good way of getting people to come to their platform, but 

it is a relatively minor part of their business (more so for Twitter than 

Facebook). How the platforms deal with this in regard to terrorism is an 

extreme case of a wider problem, but it brings the issues into sharp focus 

and reminds us of what is at stake. 

# THE PLATFORMS AND BREAKING NEWS 

When two men murdered off-duty British soldier Lee Rigby in Woolwich, 

London, in 2013, it was a precursor of the attacks of summer 2016 in 

America and Europe. The attackers used the incident to promote their 

extremist Islamist ideologies. It provoked a limited anti-Muslim backlash, 

such as an attack on a mosque, two potential copycat incidents, and at 

least one white supremacist “revenge” attack. The British government 

responded by setting up an anti-extremist task force. 

SECTION 3 

112 “Facebook is eating the world,” Columbia Journalism Review, 2016, available at: 

http://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_and_media.php 

113 “Community Standards,” Facebook, available at: 

https://www.facebook.com/communitystandards/ 

114 “Facebook backs down from napalm girl censorship and reinstates photo,” The Guardian, 2016, 

available at: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-reinstates-napalm-

girl-photo 

115 “Mark Zuckerberg accused of abusing power after Facebook deletes napalm girl post,” The 

Guardian, 2016, available at: 

https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-napalm-girl-

photo-vietnam-war 

116 “Zuckerberg says Facebook will never be a media company,” Quartz, 2016, available at: 

http://qz.com/770743/zuckerberg-says-facebook-will-never-be-a-media-company-despite-

controlling-the-worlds-media/ 

117 “Facebook to change trending topics after investigation into bias claims,” The Guardian, 2016, 

available at: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/24/facebook-changes-trending-

topics-anti-conservative-bias 52 

As Rigby was being attacked in the street, bystanders were tweeting 

about it. One person recorded a video of one of the attackers—with 

blood still on his hands—talking about why he had carried out the killing. 

A research project that looked at the Woolwich incident concludes that 

social media is the place where this kind of news breaks with important 

implications for “first responders.” 118  The report also says social media 

is now a key driver of public understanding. This has implications for 

the authorities, the study states, but also for the platforms, who must 

consider their role in mediating the public reaction to avoid negative 

outcomes in terms of both further incidents and community relations. 

For mainstream media, this was a test case of how to handle user-

generated content in a breaking terror news situation. As  The Sun 

Managing Editor Richard Caseby said: 

This was very graphic and disturbing content. Would it only serve 

as propaganda fueling further outrages? These are difficult moral 

dilemmas played out against tight deadlines, intense competition, 

and a desire to be respectful to the dead and their loved ones. 119 

The video first appeared on YouTube in full. News channels such as Sky 

carried the footage of Michael Adabalajo wielding a machete and ranting 

at onlookers. ITN obtained exclusive rights to run it on the early evening 

bulletin, just hours after the incident and before 9 p.m., known in the UK 

as the “watershed,” after which broadcasters are permitted to air adult 

content.  Those reports, unlike the YouTube footage circulated on social 

media, were edited and contextualized, and warnings were given. But 

there were still more than 700 complaints from the public about the 

various broadcasts, including on radio. 120  The UK’s broadcasting regulator 

Ofcom cleared the broadcasters and said their use of the material was 

justified, although it did have concerns about “health warnings” and 

published repeated guidelines. 121 

For the platforms, it brought up two issues. Firstly, it was through the 

platforms that the news broke, raising questions about their responsibility 

for content uploaded to their networks. Second, the incident raised a 

problem about the platforms’ reporting of users who post inflammatory 53 

material. This second issue emerged during the trial of the second 

attacker, Michael Adebowale. Adebowale had posted plans for violence 

on Facebook, and its automated monitoring system had closed some of 

his accounts. This information was not forwarded to the security services. 

Facebook was accused of irresponsibility, including by the then UK Prime 

Minister David Cameron: 

If companies know that terrorist acts are being plotted, they have 

a moral responsibility to act. I cannot think of any reason why they 

would not tell the authorities. 122 

Facebook’s standard response is that it does not comment on individual 

accounts but that it does act to remove content that could support 

terrorism. Like all platforms, it argues that it cannot compromise the 

privacy of its users. 

The three main platforms—Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube—all have 

broadly similar approaches to dealing with content curation during 

a terror event. All have codes that make it clear they do not accept 

content that promotes terrorism, celebrates extreme violence, or 

promotes hate speech. 123  Twitter’s stance is typical: 

We are horrified by the atrocities perpetrated by extremist groups. 

We condemn the use of Twitter to promote terrorism and the  Twitter 

Rules  make it clear that this type of behavior, or any violent threat, 

is not permitted on our service. 124 

SECTION 3 

> 118 “Security, terrorism and social media,” The Economic and Social Research Council, 2015,
> available at: http://www.esrc.ac.uk/news-events-and-publications/evidence-briefings/security-
> terrorism-and-social-media/
> 119 “Security, terrorism and social media,” The Economic and Social Research Council, 2015,
> available at: http://www.esrc.ac.uk/news-events-and-publications/evidence-briefings/security-
> terrorism-and-social-media/
> 120 “Coverage of the Lee Rigby killing,” Slideshare, 2014, available at:
> http://www.slideshare.net/ahobbs2/week-28-lee-rigby-killing
> 121 “Lee Rigby video: BBC, ITV, Sky News cleared over graphic footage,” The Guardian, 2013,
> available at: https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/20/lee-rigby-video-bbc-itv-sky-news-
> michael-debolajo
> 122 “Broadcast bulletin,” OFCOM, 2014, available at:
> http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/enforcement/broadcast-bulletins/245/obb245.pdf
> 123 “Facebook could have prevented Lee Rigby murder,” The Daily Telegraph, 2014, http://www.
> telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/terrorism-in-the-uk/11253518/Facebook-could-have-prevented-Lee-
> Rigby-murder.html
> 124 Twitter post, 2016, available at: https://blog.twitter.com/2016/combating-violent-extremism 54

Twitter has taken down over 125,000 accounts since 2015, mainly 

connected to ISIS. It has increased its moderation teams and use 

of automated technology such as spam-fighting bots to improve its 

monitoring. It collaborates with intelligence agencies and has begun 

a proactive program of outreach to organizations such as the Institute 

for Strategic Dialogue to support online counter-extremist activities. 

As Twitter has stated, these platforms are in a different situation 

to news organizations. They are open platforms dealing with a vast 

amount of content that can only be filtered post-publication. 

They are still developing the systems to manage the problem: 

There is no “magic algorithm” for identifying terrorist content on the 

internet, so global online platforms are forced to make challenging 

judgment calls based on very limited information and guidance. In 

spite of these challenges, we will continue to aggressively enforce 

our Rules in this area, and engage with authorities and other relevant 

organizations to find solutions to this critical issue and promote 

powerful counter-speech narratives. 125 

Google says the public assumes there is a technical fix, but in practice 

the volume and diversity of material (40 hours of video are uploaded 

every minute to YouTube) make it impossible to automate a perfect 

system of instant policing of content. Artificial intelligence and machine 

learning can augment systems of community alerts. But even if a piece 

of content is noted, a value judgment has to be made about its 

status and what action to take. Should the material be removed, 

or a warning added? 

This puts the platforms in a bind. YouTube, for instance, wants to hang 

onto its status as a safe harbor for material that might not be published 

elsewhere. When video was uploaded of the results of alleged chemical 

weapons attacks on rebels in Syria, YouTube had to make a judgment 

about their graphic nature and impact. 126  Much of the material was 

uploaded by combatants, but YouTube had to make judgments about 

how authentic or propagandistic it was. YouTube says it generally makes 

such judgments case by case; in this instance, many mainstream news 

organizations were then able to use that material from YouTube in their 

own reporting. 55 

# LIVESTREAMING 

This problem of balancing protection of the audience, security 

considerations, and social responsibility with privacy and free speech 

becomes even more acute with the arrival of new tools such as live video 

streaming from Facebook Live, Twitter Periscope, YouTube, and even 

Snapchat and Instagram. 127  This affords ordinary citizens the opportunity 

of broadcasting live. Many people welcome it as an example of the 

opening up of media. But what happens when a terrorist like Larossi 

Aballa uses Facebook Live to broadcast himself after murdering a 

French policeman and his wife, holding their 3-year-old child hostage, 

broadcasting threats, and promoting ISIS? 128  The Rigby killers relied on 

witnesses to broadcast them after the incident, but Aballa was live and 

in control of his own feed. That material was reused by news media but 

edited and contextualized. 129 

There is a case for allowing virtually unfettered access that gives citizens 

a direct and immediate, unfiltered voice. Diamond Reynolds filmed 

the shooting of her boyfriend Philando Castile by a police officer in St. 

Paul, Minnesota, live on Facebook. The video was watched by millions, 

shared across social media as well as re-broadcast on news channels 

and websites. It attracted attention partly because it was the latest in 

a series of incidents where African Americans were subject to alleged 

police brutality. 130  In this case, Facebook Live made a systematic injustice 

visible through the rapid reach of the platforms. Local police contested 

her version of events, but the live broadcast and the rapid spread of the 

video meant her narrative had a powerful impact on public perception. 

It was contextualized to varying degrees when re-used by news 

organizations, but the narrative was driven to a large extent by Reynolds 

and her supporters. 

SECTION 3 

> 125 Twitter post, 2016, available at: https://blog.twitter.com/2016/combating-violent-extremism
> 126 YouTube video, 2015, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eimj5QG0o0M
> 127 “Death on smartphones: in a world of livestreamed tragedy, what do we gain?” The
> Conversation, 2016, available at: https://theconversation.com/death-on-smartphones-in-a-world-of-
> live-streamed-tragedy-what-do-we-gain-62769
> 128 “French terrorist attack aftermath broadcast on Facebook Live,” Digital Trends, 2016, available
> at: http://www.digitaltrends.com/social-media/facebook-live-terror-attack/
> 129 “French terror attacker threatened Euro 2016 in Facebook post, source says,” CNN, 2016,
> available at: http://edition.cnn.com/2016/06/14/europe/french-policeman-terror-attack/
> 130 Florida police shoot black man lying down with arms in air,” The Guardian, 2016, available at:
> https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/florida-police-shoot-black-man-lying-down-
> with-arms-in-air

56 

News organizations need to consider how to report these broadcasts 

and what to do with the material. Research shows varying approaches 

to dealing with this kind of graphic footage, even when not related to 

terrorism. 131  Should news organizations include direct access to live video 

as part of their coverage, as they might from an affiliate or a video news 

agency? In principle, they all resist becoming an unedited, unfiltered 

platform for live video broadcasts by anyone, with no editorial control. 132 

As Emily Bell, director of the Tow Center for Digital Journalism 

at Columbia’s Journalism School, points out that this reflects 

a difference between news organizations and the digital platforms: 

When asking news journalists and executives “if you could develop 

something which let anyone live stream video onto your platform 

or website, would you?” the answer after some thought was 

nearly always “no.” For many publishers the risk of even leaving 

unmoderated comments on a website was great enough, the idea 

of the world self-reporting under your brand remains anathema. 

And the platform companies are beginning to understand why. 133 

Media organizations are having to negotiate with the platforms about 

how to inhabit the same space when these dilemmas arise. Sometimes, 

they have to act unilaterally. For example, CNN has turned off auto play 

for video on its own Facebook pages around some terror events and 

routinely puts up warning slates for potentially disturbing content. 

# These platforms insist they are not 

# publishers, let alone journalistic 

# organizations. 57 

# HOW THE PLATFORMS HANDLE 

# RISK AND RESPONSIBILITY 

The platforms are acting to protect users from harmful content, as 

well as to comply with security considerations. Facebook, for example, 

deactivated the account of Korryn Gaines (who was later shot and killed) 

during a standoff with police. 134  A mainstream media organization might 

well have complied with a similar request. However, it raised questions 

as to why that particular action was taken, but not others. The perceived 

inconsistency of the platforms’ policies comes from a lack of clarity 

and transparency. Twitter has removed ISIS-related material, but it does 

not always do the same for homophobic or racist tweets. In the wake 

of the Dallas shooting of police officers, there was a spate of extremist 

messaging that Twitter struggled to moderate. 135  The company accepts 

it has a problem: 

We know many people believe we have not done enough to curb this 

type of behavior on Twitter. We agree. We are continuing to invest 

heavily in improving our tools and enforcement systems to better 

allow us to identify and take faster action on abuse as it’s happening 

and prevent repeat offenders. We have been in the process 

of reviewing our hateful conduct policy to prohibit additional 

types of abusive behavior and allow more types of reporting. 136 

SECTION 3 

131 “How did news organizations handle the Philando Castile Facebook Live video?” First Draft 

News, 2016, available at: 

https://firstdraftnews.com/real-time-decisions-how-news-organisations-handled-the-philando-

castile-facebook-live-video/ 

132 “Live Output,” Editorial Guidelines, BBC, available at: 

http://www.bbc.co.uk/editorialguidelines/guidance/live-output/guidance-full 

133 “The unpredictable course of livestream has caught us unprepared,” The Guardian, 2016, 

available at: https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/17/live-streaming-violent-events-

crisis-facebook 

134 “Facebook shuts down livestream of shooting at police request,” Fortune, 2016, available at: 

http://fortune.com/2016/08/05/facebook-video-police/ 

135 “Minutes after Dallas shooting #BLM radicals for death of cops on Twitter,” HypeLine, 2016, 

available at:http://hypeline.org/minutes-after-dallas-shooting-blm-radicals-call-for-death-of-cops-

of-twitter/ 

136 “Milos Yiannopoulos permanently banned from Twitter,” The Mary Sue, 2016, available at: 

http://www.themarysue.com/milo-yiannopoulos-permanently-banned-from-twitter-after-racist-

harassment-inflicted-on-leslie-jones/ 58 

These platforms insist they are not publishers, let alone journalistic 

organizations. Their business is built upon providing an easy-access, 

open channel for the public to communicate. The terms and conditions 

of use, however, allow them to remove content, including shutting off 

live video. This is now done according to a set of criteria that are 

enforced through a combination of automated systems that identify 

key words, flagging of offensive content by users, and decisions by 

platform employees to remove or block the content or to put up 

a warning. This sort of post-publication filtering is not the same 

process as a journalist selecting material pre-publication. 

However, it is editing. It involves making calculations of harm and 

judgments about taste. Monika Bickert, Facebook’s head of policy, 

has said the platform does not leave this decision to algorithms. Instead, 

decisions are made on the basis of what is uploaded and how it is shared. 

Someone condemning a video of hate speech might not, for example, 

have his or her account suspended, but someone sharing the same video 

in a way that incites further hatred might: 

Was it somebody who was explicitly condemning violence or raising 

awareness? Or was it somebody who was celebrating violence or not 

making clear their intention or mocking a victim of violence? 137 

The obvious, critical difference with a news organization is that 

platforms do not have control over the content creators as they 

create and publish material. 

Because of their much wider structural role, platforms have agreed to 

co-operate more extensively with the authorities on counterterrorism 

than news organizations and journalists often do. In the UK, there is 

the formal D Notice process that allows authorities to make one-off 

arrangements with news organizations to delay publication of security-

sensitive material. When  The Guardian  was preparing publication of the 59 

Snowden revelations, its Editor Alan Rusbridger had conversations with 

British intelligence. 138  However, the relationship between the authorities 

and the news media is always ad hoc and built on the idea of journalistic 

independence, even hostility.  The Guardian  ended up with British 

intelligence officers coming into its newsrooms to destroy hard-drives 

that carried the classified information. 139  Technology companies have 

also resisted attempts to allow the authorities more access to their data 

and to preserve the privacy of their users. 140  But the Snowden revelations 

suggest that intelligence agencies have been successfully targeting 

online communications covertly. 141 

SECTION 3 

137 “In wake of shootings, Facebook struggles to define hate speech,” NPR, 2016, available at: 

http://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2016/07/14/486036166/in-wake-of-shootings-

facebook-struggles-to-define-hate-speech 

138 “The Snowden leaks and the public,” The New York Review of Books, 2013, available at: 

http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2013/11/21/snowden-leaks-and-public/ 

139 Ibid. 

140 “US tech firms criticize UK spying legislation,” The Wall Street Journal, 2016, available at: 

http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-tech-firms-criticize-u-k-spying-legislation-1452190202 

141 “NSA Prism program taps into use data of Apple, Google and others,” The Guardian, 2013, 

available at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data 

# It is important for journalists 

# to understand how platforms 

# shape the framing of issues 

# and the public’s response. 60 

# SHAPING THE NARRATIVE: FILTER 

# BUBBLES AND POLARIZATION 

It is important for journalists to understand how platforms shape the 

framing of issues and the public’s response. Posting on social media 

has a performative element; people say things because they are feeling 

emotional or signaling a point of view. Especially during the coverage of 

terror events, the reaction of the online public will be instinctive, and not 

necessarily representative. That does not mean it should not be noted 

and taken into account. But the danger of narratives built on social media 

content or that use social media as a proxy for what people are saying is 

that it privileges a highly selective sample. 

Currently, the platforms’ algorithms are tuned to bring personalized 

content that heightens engagement. The danger of this approach is 

that it clearly shapes the distribution of content to what people like, and 

users may be more likely to see political content they agree with rather 

than a broad spectrum of opinions. This is particularly relevant to terror 

events because evidence shows the greatest polarization of opinion 

online happens with divisive issues around ideology and race. 142  Research 

on online echo chambers has mixed results. But it does suggest that the 

polarization of politics is partially reinforced by social media, particularly 

by certain platforms such as Twitter. 142 

Sometimes this has a positive motivation. After the Paris attacks, 

Facebook encouraged people to add the French flag to their profiles 

to demonstrate solidarity with the people of France. That immediately 

raised the question of whether it would do the same for every country 

that suffered a terrorist incident. 144  Facebook would prefer this to be done 

by algorithms that are more powerful, faster, and cheaper than humans. 

Indeed, it has reportedly shifted further away from human curation on its 

trending online news streams, partly because of allegations of a liberal 

human bias. 145  Algorithms are ultimately programmed by humans, but 

the main work of selection and personalized dissemination of content 

will be done automatically. This is of particular concern when the subject 

is political. During the UK’s European Union referendum campaign, the 

social media activist Tom Steinberg, who founded MySociety, said that he 

found it almost impossible to find a different view on the issue from his 

personal opinion on his Facebook feed even when he actively sought a 

more diverse diet: 146 61 

The polarization of opinion around terror is also potentially worrisome. 

SECTION 3 

142 “Israel, Gaza, War and Data,” Medium, 2014, available at: https://medium.com/i-data/israel-gaza-

war-data-a54969aeb23e#.v9kp3mmt3 

143 “Political polarization on social media: do birds of a feather flock together on Twitter?,” The 

Policy and Internet Blog, 2015, available at: http://blogs.oii.ox.ac.uk/policy/political-polarization-on-

social-media-do-birds-of-a-feather-flock-together-on-twitter/ 

144 All flags profile photo convertor, available at: https://killscreen.com/articles/facebook-filter-

adds-flags-countries-attacked-isis-picture/ 

145 “Facebook is trying to get rid of bias in trending news by getting rid of humans,” Quartz, 2016, 

available at:http://qz.com/768122/facebook-fires-human-editors-moves-to-algorithm-

for-trending-topics/ 

146 “Defined by the filter bubble,” Civic Hall, 2016, available at: 

http://civichall.org/civicist/defined-by-the-filter-bubble/ 62 

One of the great advantages of the internet was the possibility of 

connecting to a greater range of sources and perspectives, but the 

algorithms of search and social counter this. This raises serious questions 

about the public formation of opinion around terror events, whether 

minority views will be excluded and a diverse debate on terrorism 

homogenized. Part of the role of a healthy news media is to provide 

that wider and deeper perspective and to include challenging as well as 

reassuring views. The platform algorithms seem to militate against that. 

# SHOULD PLATFORMS BECOME MORE 

# LIKE MEDIA ORGANIZATIONS? 

The platforms are in a difficult place in terms of the competing pressures 

of corporate self-interest, the demands of their consumers for open 

access, the public interest involved in supporting good journalism, 

and fostering secure and cohesive societies. They are relatively young 

organizations that have grown quickly, and are still accreting institutional 

knowledge on these issues. 

The platforms have accepted they have a public policy role in combatting 

terrorism. Facebook now has a head of policy for counter-terrorism. They 

have gone further than most Western news media in allowing themselves 

to be co-opted into counter-terrorism initiatives. Yet any intervention 

# News organizations have had to 

# change to adapt to social networks, 

# and platforms too must continue to 

# develop the way they behave in the 

# face of breaking news. 63 

raises questions. For example, Facebook offered free advertising for 

accounts that post anti-extremist content. 147  But which ones and how far 

should it go? The platforms all say this is a developing area, and they are 

still consulting to see what is most effective and most consistent with 

the goal of being politically neutral. Platforms like Google argue they are 

only part of an existing conversation with governments and international 

bodies. They point out it is not for them to push a counter-narrative as it 

probably would not be credible or authentic. Instead they see their job as 

enabling the capacity of others. 

The platforms do provide an opportunity for building social solidarity in 

the wake of these incidents far beyond the ability of news media. In the 

wake of the Lee Rigby killing, there was widespread reaction on social 

media expressing shock and disgust at the attacks including from many 

Muslims. There were also positive social media initiatives that sought to 

pay respect to the victim. 148  But some reaction was incendiary and anti-

Islamic. Some people faced charges for inciting racial hatred on social 

media. 149  At the height of the European attacks in July 2016, one study 

recorded 7,000 Islamophobic tweets daily in English, compared to 2,500 

in April. 150  More could be done to police these conversations, but as we 

have seen, there is a limit at the moment to its efficacy. As Martin Innes, 

the author of a report on social media and terror warns, this is still a 

nascent science: 

Traditional “big data” science statistical methods can be misleading 

in terms of how and why events are unfolding after major terrorist 

incidents, due to the complex conflict and information dynamics. 

Theory-driven methods of data analysis need to be urgently 

developed to realize the potential of social media analytics. 151 

SECTION 3 

> 147 “Facebook gives free advertising to users who counter terror propaganda,” The Verge, 2016,
> available at: http://www.theverge.com/2016/2/12/10957776/facebook-terrorism-counter-speech
> 148 RIP Drummer Lee Rigby, Facebook post, available at:
> https://www.facebook.com/RIPdrummerLeeRigby/
> 149 “Woolwich attack: online posts over Lee Rigby killing spark charges,” BBC, 2013, available at:
> http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-22665443
> 150 “Islamophobic tweets peaked in July,” BBC, 2016, available at:
> http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-37098643
> 151 “Security, terrorism and social media: evidence briefing,” Economic and Social Research Council,
> 2015, available at: http://www.esrc.ac.uk/files/news-events-and-publications/evidence-briefings/
> security-terrorism-and-social-media/ 64

British MPs recently criticized the platforms for not doing enough 

to counter ISIS. The then-Chairman of the Commons Home Affairs 

Select Committee, Keith Vaz said: 

They must accept that the hundreds of millions in revenues generated 

from billions of people using their products needs to be accompanied 

by a greater sense of responsibility and ownership for the impact that 

extremist material on their sites is having. 152 

However, the platforms say they are already doing much to remove 

incendiary content. As the radicalization expert, Peter Neumann from 

London’s Kings College, has pointed out, media is only a part of the 

extremist strategy: 

The vast majority of ISIS recruits that have gone to Syria from Britain 

and other European countries have been recruited via peer-to-

peer interaction, not through the internet alone. Blaming Facebook, 

Google, or Twitter for this phenomenon is quite simplistic, and I’d even 

say misleading. 153 

The platforms (and the news media) cannot police these networks alone. 

There is also a responsibility for the authorities to monitor and engage 

with social media and to actively counter bad information and to provide 

reliable, real-time streams of information. Ultimately, the price of open 

access and exchange on these platforms might be an element of negative 

and harmful material. 65 

However, just because these issues are complex does not mean platforms 

cannot adapt their policies and practices. It might be a virtual switch put 

in place to delay live feeds that contain violence. More “honest-broker” 

agencies such as Storyful or First Draft might emerge to act as specialist 

filters around terror events. One suggestion has been platforms like 

Facebook should hire teams of fact-checkers. 154  Another is they should 

hire senior journalists to act as editors. 155 

Of course, those last suggestions would make those self-declared tech 

companies more like news media. But we now inhabit what Andrew 

Chadwick 156  calls a “hybrid media” environment where distinctions are 

blurred. News organizations have had to change to adapt to social 

networks, and platforms too must continue to develop the way they 

behave in the face of breaking news. Companies such as Facebook and 

Google are already reaching out to journalists and publishers to find 

ways of working that combine their strengths. Twitter and Facebook, 

for example, have created a coalition organized by verification agency 

First Draft with 20 news media organizations to find new ways to filter 

out fake news. 157  Platforms and the news media both have much to gain 

in terms of trust by taking the initiative instead of waiting for angry 

governments to impose solutions that hurt creativity and freedom in 

the name of security. One only has to glance at more repressive regimes 

around the world to see the price paid for democracy when reactionary 

governments restrict any form of media in the name of public safety. 

SECTION 3 

> 152 “Social media giants failing on extremism – MPs,” BBC, 2016, available at:
> http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37180159
> 153 Ibid.
> 154 “Facebook should hire fact checkers: here is what they would do,” Poynter, 2016, available at:
> http://www.poynter.org/2016/facebook-should-hire-fact-checkers-heres-what-they-would-
> do/428118/
> 155 “Facebook needs an editor,” Medium 2016, https://medium.com/whither-news/facebook-needs-
> an-editor-b388f789a9c3#.idyqs3g3t
> 156 Andrew Chadwick, “Hybrid media systems: politics and power,” 2013, available at:
> https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hybrid-Media-System-Politics-Studies/dp/0199759480
> 157 “Facebook and Twitter join coalition to improve social media news gathering,” The Guardian,
> 2016, available at: https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/facebook-twitter-social-media-
> newsgathering 66

# CONCLUSION 

This paper has set out a range of problems in reporting on terrorism 

that are practical, political, ethical, and structural. This is an evolving 

issue as both the nature of terrorism and media environment continue 

to change. This paper has also highlighted good practice and innovation 

that suggests progress is not just possible, but is already happening. Yet 

we need a process of self-critical debate both within newsrooms and 

between the news media and other people involved in these narratives. 

The practical problem is of improving accuracy and providing better-

informed context. It is particularly difficult with limited resources and 

rapidly multiplying sources and platforms. The same technologies that 

give journalists the power to report quicker and more extensively also 

speed up the news cycle and fill the public sphere with confusing, false, 

and complex information. Yet verification can be improved by adopting 

better techniques and insisting on standards across all platforms and 

under all circumstances. Greater transparency is a key attitudinal change 

that will help improve the search for truth and build trust. 

The political problems are harder to solve. Journalists must understand 

the way they frame these stories has an impact on individuals, 

communities, and public policy. The fact news media gives publicity 

to the terrorist is a problem that cannot be completely resolved. But 

journalism can be created in ways that reduce the propaganda effect for 

either the terrorist or the panicked politician. By showing more empathy 

for the people involved and including more constructive narratives of 

resilience and understanding, the news media can at least counter the 

sense of fear and hopelessness terror news can induce. 67 

The technology companies that provide platforms for the public and 

journalists to discuss and debate terrorism must do much more to 

improve how they filter and distribute information. There must be a more 

productive dialogue between the platforms and the news media about 

how their relationship can work better for the public good. Promoting 

more “good” journalism would be a start. In the same way the news 

media has to accept a wider responsibility for effects of reporting on 

terror, the digital giants must also recognize they are not just data or tech 

companies. They are part of the creation of narratives and formation of 

public opinion. 

It is important we get this right. Trust in American media has plummeted 

to new lows. At a time when journalism is facing an economic crisis, 

we must rebuild the public’s confidence. Consumers have so many 

alternatives to mainstream news media and so many distractions from 

journalism overall, we need to prove our worth. Terrorism is a key testing 

ground. Improving coverage of terrorism is important because violent 

extremism is a significant issue and symptomatic of wider problems 

around the world. The case for more intelligent, informed, and socially 

responsible reporting of terror is not just a moral plea. It is a chance to 

show journalism remains a vital part of modern society. 

Charlie Beckett is a professor in the Department of Media and 

Communications at the London School of Economics and founding 

director of Polis, the LSE’s international journalism think-tank. Before 

joining the LSE, he was a journalist at the BBC and ITN. He is the author 

of “SuperMedia” and “WikiLeaks: news in the networked era.”  

> CONCLUSION 68

journalism.columbia.edu
