Title: 

URL Source: https://www.swansea.ac.uk/media/Policy-Brief-18.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 26 Oct 2023 13:59:44 GMT

Markdown Content:
ISSN 2054-1910 

# Scanning the Horizon: 

# Drones and Counter-narcotics in Latin America 

# Jochen Kleinschmidt  * and Luca Trenta  a

# Policy Brief 18 | January 2022 

## KEY POINTS 

• Most Latin American states have generated some drone capabilities for military or 

security purposes, as well as scientific and environmental purposes, but their approaches 

have varied widely. This is also the case in terms of the policy aims that they seek to 

achieve. These vary between acute counterinsurgency or counter-narcotics problems 

and more diffuse longer-term foreign policy aims. 

• The defence industrial approaches of the different countries range from the utilisation of 

already existing capacities to elaborate international co-development and co-production 

schemes. The deployment of drones, however, has contributed to the long-term process 

of blurring the lines between state activities (counter-narcotics, counterinsurgency, and 

border patrol). 

• Drones have permitted governments in the region to expand their surveillance and 

‘remote’ control over populations in both urban centres and (more) marginalised rural 

communities. 

• Despite a few voices calling for weaponisation, drones remain unarmed and no Latin 

American government has carried out a kinetic operation. Drones, however, have 

participated in more indirect forms of violence (e.g. crop spraying) and the intelligence 

provided by drones has aided governments in kill/capture operations against drug 

traffickers, guerrilla members, and (illegal) border crossers.   

> *Research Associate and Coordinator of the Center for Latin American Studies, Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
> aAssociate Professor in International Relations, Swansea University

2

INTRODUCTION 

In the last ten years the proliferation of drones 

(or UAVs) 1 has extended to Latin America. 

Governments in the region have invested in 

drones both through the purchase of technology 

and finished products from abroad, and through 

the development of their own domestic industry, 

which have taken distinct paths. Some have 

developed smaller and lower altitudes drones 

for tactical missions, while others, particularly 

Brazil, have been working on drones to fulfil 

broader strategic ambitions. In terms of exports 

of technology to the region, two main actors 

emerge. Israel, particularly  Elbit Systems,  has 

provided most drones; their  Heron  drones are 

among the most widespread in the region. The 

United States has contributed by collaborating 

with local governments (e.g., Colombia and the 

Scan Eagle  drone) and through the transfer of 

technology. 2

While the focus of this report is primarily 

on their deployment for counter-narcotics 

purposes, drones in the region have performed 

a plethora of tasks. These could be broadly 

divided into three main categories. First, 

several countries in the region have developed 

and deployed drones for scientific research and 

environmental missions. They have helped in 

combating fires and managing natural disasters, 

as well as in mapping remote terrains. Second, 

several governments have deployed drones for 

counter-narcotics purposes. This has included 

surveillance and reconnaissance missions, as 

well as intelligence and counter-intelligence 

operations. Drones have been used to identify 

drug trafficking routes and drug traffickers, and 

to communicate this intelligence more rapidly 

to government forces. In this context, and 

due to the porous nature of several borders in 

the region, drones have permitted authorities 

to expand surveillance and interdict illegal 

border crossings and cross-country smuggling. 

Third, drones are increasingly understood by 

governments in the region as a method to 

expand state surveillance and control over 

the population. Surveillance and control are 

extended over both (historically) marginalised 

and repressed communities, as well as over 

social movements and public demonstrations 

which might challenge the government. As 

Tyler Wall has argued in the context of the 

United States’ domestic use of drones, the 

deployment of drones in this area can be 

understood as a form of ‘pacification.’ 3 The 

region’s police and military forces have a

long history of domestic deployment for the 

enclosure, ‘normalization,’ and exploitation of 

‘at risk’ communities. 4 Drones, then, fit into 

(and escalate) this longer-term process. 

With the increase in tasks performed by 

drones, especially in countries that have been 

heavily involved in the ‘war on drugs,’ this 

new technology is contributing to the already 

advanced blurring of boundaries between 

war and law enforcement. In Colombia, for 

example, drones (like other government forces) 

are involved in tasks that conflate counter-

narcotics and counterinsurgency. 5 In Mexico, the 

picture is further complicated by the blurring of 

these two activities with border patrol. 6

Like previous reports on the region, 7 this 

analysis finds that – despite some isolated 

voices calling for weaponisation – drones in 

the region remain unarmed. The surveillance 

and reconnaissance capabilities of drones, 

however, have permitted governments in 

the region to use the intelligence provided 

by drones to capture (and at times kill) drug 

traffickers, as well as members of guerrilla 

forces, even without direct kinetic operations. 

This technology, therefore, is already 

contributing to ‘manhunts’ in the context of 

local conflicts, thus transforming security (and 

potentially war) in the region. 8

This report, while discussing the region in 

general, focuses primarily on four countries: 

Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico. 

These are the countries with the largest drone 

programmes (Argentina and Brazil) and with 3

the heaviest involvement in counter-narcotics 

(Colombia and Mexico). Within each section the 

analysis explores the drone industry, the tasks 

drones have performed and the risks they might 

pose. The report uses primarily secondary 

sources: academic works, journalistic accounts 

and reports from NGOs and think tanks. 9 In 

Latin America, as in other regions, government 

activities, progress in the drone industry and 

the deployment of drones are often shrouded in 

secrecy. 10  Furthermore, drones are understood 

as an element of prestige, a status symbol 

that increases a country’s global standing. 

Therefore, public announcements may suggest 

significant progress in domestic mastery of 

drone technology, while the details and possible 

(often exaggerated) operational benefits 

remain classified. This dynamic has two main 

consequences. First, it contributes to a drone 

arms race, with some countries acquiring 

and developing the technology because their 

neighbours appear to be doing the same. 

Second, for researchers, it makes it even harder 

to acquire solid and objective information on 

the development of drones and to distinguish a 

genuine development from propaganda. 

ARGENTINA 

The Argentine security sector operates under 

circumstances somewhat different from 

that of most other Latin American countries. 

Historically, its military industry acquired 

significant indigenous capabilities, which 

manifested themselves in early designs of jet 

aircraft and, later, armoured vehicles. This 

development was initiated as part of a state-

driven industrial growth strategy with the “ ley 

secreta ” of 1923, and the  Dirección General 

de Fabricaciones Militares  at one time during 

the Cold War constituted 15% of the country’s 

economy. 11  The general tendency of Argentine 

military industry was to provide relatively 

sophisticated designs, yet with only marginal 

attention to cost-benefit calculations. The 

early investments in the aircraft industry also 

led to Argentina being the first Latin American 

country which may claim to have produced an 

indigenous military drone design. The  I.A. X 59 

Dronner  was a single-prototype, but functional, 

radio-guided drone propelled by a chainsaw 

engine, with a flight time of one hour and a speed 

of 340 kph, which was tested multiple times 

from 1972 on. It was able to carry photographic 

reconnaissance equipment or to tow aerial 

targets. 12  Other sources also mention further 

developments during the 1970s, resulting in a 

prototype of an improved version. 13 

The resulting technological abilities may 

have been judged sufficiently important to 

be resuscitated after the 1980s’ “unilateral 

disarmament” driven by “social condemnation” 

of the armed forces following the military 

dictatorship and its defeat in the Malvinas War. 14 

Today, the Argentine military is running, often 

in cooperation with state-financed research 

institutions of various kinds, a number of 

drone programmes that have resulted in some 

interesting platforms. It is noteworthy that 

these programmes are, overall, not only more 

oriented towards the acquisition of national 

capabilities for eventual system integration, 

with less disposition towards international 

collaboration than in other South American 

states, but also that the Army, Air Force and 

Navy of Argentina have at times been managing 

at least partly competing drone projects. 15  It 

is hardly surprising that most of these projects 

are still in an experimental stage, and some 

have been controversially cancelled, 16  but it 

should be noted that they are accompanied 

by serious doctrinal and structural efforts to 

generate some organic UAV capabilities under 

conditions of financial austerity. 

Of the competing programmes, the most 

advanced is the  Lipan  drone, which was 

developed by the Combat Intelligence 

Detachment 601 of the Argentine Army and 

has been in operational service since 2007. 

It is a light battlefield reconnaissance drone 

with two independent cameras, one fixed and 

one rotatory, giving the vehicle a 360-degree 4

day and night observation capability. In 

its overall performance parameters, the 

original  Lipan M3  variant is not too dissimilar 

from the 1980s-vintage  IAI Scout  drone, but 

represents a serious instance of domestic 

capacity development, with at least four and 

possibly up to ten being operational in the 

Army, according to current public sources. 17 

Additionally, the updated version  Lipan XM4 ,

of which at least two prototypes have been 

manufactured, has both longer range and 

more sophisticated automation. 18 

Besides other drone programmes of unclear 

status undertaken by the Navy and Air 

Force, which are sometimes criticised for 

demonstrating an almost traditional lack of 

inter-service coordination, 19  there is  SARA 

(Sistema Aéreo Robótico Argentino  – Argentine 

Robotic Aerial System), which is one of the 

more ambitious drone programmes in Latin 

America at the moment. Being designed by a 

public-private consortium, which includes the 

successor to the military aviation company 

already involved in the 1970s’  Dronner 

design as well as the satellite and systems 

engineering firm INVAP, the core element 

of  SARA  is expected to be a domestically-

designed synthetic aperture radar that will 

be carried by a Class III drone with roughly 

one day of endurance. 20  These drones will 

therefore be extremely useful to the Sistema 

Nacional de Vigilancia y Control Aeroespacial, 

a fully integrated border surveillance system 

supported by a multitude of sensor carriers 

such as boats and tethered air balloons. 21 

After having been temporarily defunded in 

favour of the importation of Israeli equipment 

by the Macri government,  SARA  is now being 

pursued again as a national project with 

multiple stakeholders and a high degree of 

media attention, which may generate political 

incentives for its completion. 22 

The impetus behind the contemporary 

reactivation of Argentine drone programmes can 

be seen in the combination of several factors. 

First, the necessity for border surveillance and 

maritime security along long and sometimes 

scarcely inhabited frontiers, which are 

increasingly menaced by transnational organised 

crime. 23  Second, the possibility to use drones for 

agricultural purposes in the large-scale farms 

typical of the country. 24  And third, the need for 

long-range maritime surveillance and sea control 

in order to deter illegal fishing expeditions by 

extra-hemispheric powers – a problem that has 

already produced robust reactions from the 

Argentine Coast Guard, the Prefectura Naval. 25 

With the considerable knowledge base already 

developed within different military and civilian 

research organisations, they will also see these 

projects as being both prestigious as well as 

relevant to important national security issues. 

On the other hand, the relevance of drones for 

counternarcotics purposes will be reduced both 

by the absence of significant production and 

cultivation, as well as by a longstanding tradition 

of rejecting military involvement in the domestic 

security environment, which stems partly from 

the experience of military dictatorship. While 

the former Macri administration seemed to aim 

at the militarization of the drug problem, 26  this 

trend does not seem to have continued under the 

current government. The general characteristics 

of drug trafficking in Argentina, with many 

dispersed organizations possessing relatively 

low-level capabilities, 27  do not generally lend 

themselves to the intense securitization that 

would legitimize the introduction of new 

technologies associated with militarized law 

enforcement, such as drones. 

Overall, Argentina has amassed considerable 

experience in the design and operation of 

drones, with serious ambition, conceptual 

and organisational underpinnings, including 

its own drone school and doctrinal integration 

of drones into the armed forces. The capacity 

of its national aircraft industry to design 

capable UAVs and to continually undertake 

relevant research and design projects have 

been demonstrated. Possible weak points 5

can be seen in a lack of prioritisation of 

programmes – besides the ones discussed 

here, the literature mentions several other 

programmes that were apparently ended 

without results, and furthermore, the lack 

of industrial expertise may hamper serial 

production as well as economic efficiency 

– problems that already haunted earlier 

attempts at the development of military 

industries in Argentina. 28  It remains to be seen 

how the situation will evolve. The increased 

incursion of drug trafficking organizations, 

the frequently changing economic situation 

of Argentina, as well as the evolving role of 

extra-hemispheric powers, particularly China, 

will all have an impact on the development 

of drone capabilities in the country. If the 

security trajectory of the country or of 

its immediate surroundings do not change 

drastically, it is likely that there will be a 

continuation of the domestic development 

of limited capabilities. In this scenario, 

these will be aimed at maritime and border 

surveillance, and will be only tangentially 

involved with counternarcotics. 

BRAZIL 

Brazil is the perennial South American candidate 

for great power status. Despite having endured 

setbacks on the way towards its sometimes 

considerable strategic ambitions, 29  and despite 

its military having had lower funding priority 

since the end of the military dictatorship 

in 1985, even in comparison to the smaller 

regional powers it has generated a significant 

defence industry, and often accounts for more 

than half of the region’s total spending. 30 

These factors, as well as significant industrial 

capacities and funding for technological 

research, have also led to sometimes ambitious 

projects designed to acquire drone capabilities 

and associated technologies. In terms of 

their counter-narcotics applications, and in 

contrast to other states such as Colombia or 

Mexico, their use has been focused less on 

the interdiction of trafficking routes or the 

surveillance of production areas, but rather on 

the suppression of urban violence connected 

with the flourishing consumer markets for 

narcotics that exist in Brazil. 31  The shooting 

down of police helicopters in urban security 

operations in 2009 and 2016, with several 

fatalities, may further have underscored the 

potential utility of drones in that context. 32 

There are also, besides these possibilities, more 

strategic national projects. While only a drone 

in the most extended sense of the concept, the 

“14-X Hypersonic Aerospace Vehicle ” project, 

which has been underway for the last 15 years, 

represents the first and only attempt by a Latin 

American country to produce an unmanned 

hypersonic glide vehicle. It is a waverider-

type fuselage, which will be propelled to 

hypersonic speed by booster rockets derived 

from sounding rockets developed within 

the Brazilian space programme, and at that 

stage, by a domestically developed scramjet. 

A prototype has been tested using the 

hypersonic shock tunnels constructed for this 

purpose at the  Henry T. Nagamatsu Laboratory 

of Aerothermodynamics and Hypersonics ,

indicating a possible long-term commitment to 

the programme. Possible uses are seen mainly 

in the deployment of satellites. 33  However, 

it is not inconceivable that the capabilities 

achieved with a successful hypersonic glider 

might also raise non-proliferation concerns, 

especially in combination with Brazil’s nuclear 

submarine design efforts. On the other hand, 

it is currently not clear how far the effort 

continues to be financed – an announced test 

flight has been repeatedly postponed, and it 

is also unknown whether production is even 

planned in case of successful testing. 34  In 

any case, the  14-X  project demonstrates that 

issues beyond domestic security do influence 

some drone development in Latin America. 

Other projects that seek to develop drone 

capabilities in Brazil are more in line with 

the experience of other countries in the 

region. 35  Overall, with five  Heron 1 heavy 6

reconnaissance UAVs (only two according to 

other reports) and five  Hermes 450  and  900 

medium reconnaissance UAVs in service with 

the Air Force, the Brazilian inventory of drones 

is not unusually large, but does incorporate 

heavier equipment than usual in Latin America. 

The number of  Herons  in service may rise to 

up to 15 according to a deal reported in the 

press. After some political debates over risks 

and responsibilities, drone control has been 

transferred to the Brazilian Air Force 36  from the 

National Police, which uses them for a variety 

of security operations with sophisticated 

intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition 

and surveillance equipment, and, somewhat 

uniquely in the region, is able to control them 

via satellite communications. 37  This capability, 

besides the size of the drones, may suggest 

a more strategic outlook on drones than just 

domestic security operations, but might also 

simply reflect the range advantages that may 

someday be crucial for patrolling the vast 

expanse of the Amazon region. 

On the other hand, the ambitious project for 

territorial surveillance in that area, SIVAM 

(Sistema de Vigilância da Amazônia  – “System 

for the Surveillance of Amazonia”), and its 

subdivision that manages the aerial part of 

that surveillance, CENSIPAM (Centro Gestor 

e Operacional do Sistema de Proteção da 

Amazônia  – “Administrative and Operational 

Centre of the System for the Protection of 

Amazonia”) do not currently use drones 

beyond the local employment of quadcopters 

for observation purposes. 38  Instead, the 

capability of aerial surveillance in the 

region is maintained through the updating 

of  Embraer E-99M  airborne early warning 

and control (AEW&C) aircraft with a large 

synthetic aperture ground surveillance radar. 39 

It is plausible to assume the nascent satellite 

control capability of the Brazilian Air Force is 

not yet sufficient for the reliable transmission 

of the large amounts of data generated from the 

long-range, high-resolution radars. Economic 

reasons may also play a role, both in terms of 

sticking with an already established system, 

which furthermore is produced domestically 

by a ‘national champion’ business, and due 

to the heightened risk of losing an extremely 

expensive surveillance radar in a crash. 

This important national security project is 

therefore, currently, not an area where drone 

capabilities play a major role. 

In Brazil as a country with a considerable 

commercial aircraft industry, there is naturally 

an interest in acquiring domestic design and 

production capabilities. Brazil has taken a

somewhat more cooperative approach than, 

for example, Argentina, choosing to partner 

with Israeli enterprises in most cases. Early 

attempts to go it alone included the design 

and prototyping of the single-engine  Falcão 

surveillance drone by domestic military aviation 

company  Avibras , which appeared to belong 

to the same general category as the  Hermes 

drones. 40  This project was then taken over by 

a consortium called  Harpia Sistemas , formed 

by  Avibras , the major Brazilian aerospace 

manufacturer Embraer, and the Brazilian-Israeli 

(Elbit ) joint venture  AEL Sistemas , only to be 

stopped in 2016 due to government spending 

cuts. 41  The consortium was then dissolved due 

to a lack of economic perspectives, but the 

partners announced that they would take care 

to maintain the knowledge generated through 

this cooperation. 42 

Another relevant joint venture is that of 

Israel Aerospace Industries  with the Brazilian 

aerospace technology and service company 

Avionics Services . These businesses teamed-up 

in 2014 to produce the  Caçador  drone, a further 

development of the Israeli  Heron 1  already in 

service. 43  It is not known whether the presence 

of operational  Caçadors  has resulted in the 

discrepancies in the reported numbers of  Herons 

in service, since the aircraft seems to be very 

similar, and at least an operational prototype 

is reported to have been presented to Brazilian 

police forces for possible environmental and 

security surveillance operations, complete 7

with a satellite link capacity. 44  The possibility 

of arming the  Caçador  in the future, which 

would represent a first for Latin American 

armed forces, is at least discussed in Brazilian 

military publications. 45  While it is unclear what 

precisely will become of this project, it clearly 

demonstrates that the Brazilian security sector 

is interested in the further development of 

higher-level drone capabilities. 

This is also underlined by the recent signing 

of an MoU by  Embraer  and the Brazilian Air 

Force for a joint study regarding the possible 

development of a “loyal wingman”-type drone, 

possibly involving the experience gained in the 

cooperation with  Saab  during the production 

of the  Gripen  fighter aircraft, as well as the 

knowledge derived from earlier cooperation 

with  Elbit .46  At the same time, the domestic 

security use of drones appears to be a possible 

growth sector as well, even though perhaps 

at a technologically less spectacular level; 

the national government even experimented 

with smaller drones to detect signs of 

slavery in agricultural enterprises. 47  The 

enormous discrepancy between strategic 

and technological ambition on the one hand, 

which is reflected in the  14-X  and  Caçador 

programmes, and the great institutional 

deficits on the other, illustrate the diversity of 

challenges confronting contemporary Brazil. In 

an environment marked by uncertainty, Brazil 

seems to opt for a strategy of low numbers, but 

advanced capabilities, with a desire to localise 

as many technological capabilities as possible. 

COLOMBIA 

Colombia has been at the forefront of the ‘war on 

drugs’ since the 1980s. Over time it has become 

one of main receivers of US aid as well as one 

of the staunchest US allies in the region. For 

the purposes of the report, important elements 

of this relationship have been the deployment 

of aircrafts for surveillance and the conduct of 

tactical counter-narcotic operations. 

In 1986 the Reagan Administration approved 

National Security Decision Directive 221 

‘Narcotics and National Security.’ The 

document identified drugs not only as an 

endemic problem but as a threat to the 

stability of US allies in the region and, hence, 

to US national security. The document also 

explicitly connected drug trafficking to the 

activities of insurgents and terrorist groups. 48 

This understanding paved the way for the 

militarisation of the war of drugs and it is 

understood as a clear escalation of the supply-

side of the drug war. In this war, among other 

measures, the US government deployed a

plethora of aircrafts in the Andean region in 

the hope of identifying and intercepting drug 

smuggling, by closing ‘radar gaps.’ 49 

Towards the end of the 1980s, under the George 

H. W. Bush Administration, Congress approved 

the President’s $2.2 billion Andean Initiative to 

hit the supply-side of the drug trade. At this point 

the hunt for ‘kingpin’ Pablo Escobar represented 

the Administration’s priority. Despite an initial 

reluctance, the Pentagon soon found itself at 

the forefront of this confrontation. As Russell 

Crandall has argued, the unprecedented 

deployment of US surveillance aircrafts in the 

hunt for Escobar represented a ‘precursor 

of the postmodern military and intelligence 

drone.’ In the search, the CIA deployed a

Schweizer SGM 2-37 , ‘a fixed-wing surveillance 

glider that could hover stealthily over a target 

for hours.’ Soon, US surveillance planes covered 

the Medellin sky. 50  Up until the 1990s, the 

institution receiving most of the U.S. aid was 

the National Police. Starting in 1999, and later 

with Plan Colombia, the Clinton Administration 

shifted most of the aid towards the Colombian 

military. 51  Of the $2.4 billion given to Colombia 

between 1999 and 2002, for example, 83% went 

to the military. 52 

As in many other areas, contractors have 

played a prominent role in strengthening 

surveillance of the region. In 1998,  Northrop 

Grumman  started its work in Colombia by 8

developing and operating a ‘Counter-narcotics 

Surveillance and Control System’ to monitor 

cocaine distribution routes. 53  Other contractors 

such as  DynCorp  played a leading role in aerial 

fumigation operations. 54  The often-tragic 

difficulties encountered by the programme – 

such as the downing of Cessna aircrafts and 

the taking of US hostages – might well have 

contributed towards an early shift to drones. 

As documents declassified by Wikileaks 

revealed, Colombia was one of the first 

countries to enter the drone age. In 2006, 

US Ambassador to Colombia William Wood 

requested the delivery of  Scan Eagle  drones to 

Colombia. The aim was to support US hostage 

rescue efforts as well as help the Colombian 

military in the pursuit of guerrilla leaders. 

Eventually, the memo continued, drones might 

also help in counter-terrorism operations. 55 

Wood’s memo is emblematic of the blurring 

of the boundaries between counter-narcotics, 

counterinsurgency, and counterterrorism 

that had started under Reagan. It is also 

emblematic of the blurring of the distinction 

between war and law enforcement that has 

long characterised the ‘war on drugs’ in the 

region. 56  It is in this context that drones 

have the potential to play a particularly 

controversial role. 

The Colombian government has made drones 

a high priority. After the early use of the US-

made  Scan Eagle  drone, the Ministry of Defence 

invested $25 million in the acquisition of drones 

for counterinsurgency, counter-narcotics, and 

counter-terrorism operations. The Air Force 

acquired the small VTOL from  Neural Robotics .

This, however, was just part of a broader push 

that combined increased acquisitions and 

procurement from abroad with the development 

of a solid domestic industry. 57  As for foreign 

procurement, the Israeli  Elbit Systems  has been 

one of the main providers in the region. After 

secret negotiations, Colombia acquired  Hermes 

450  and  Hermes 900 .58  While private institutions 

such as the University of San Buenaventura 

have recently participated in the production 

of drones, Colombia’s domestic industry relies 

largely on the collaboration between the Air 

Force, the Ministry of Defence, and  Colombian 

Aeronautical Industry Corporation (CIAC ), with 

the financial support of  INDUMIL  (Colombia’s 

State weapons manufacturer). 59  Starting in 2013, 

Colombia also developed the first drone flight 

simulator to train a higher number of operators. 60 

One of the first models produced by  CIAC 

was the  IRIS . First flown in 2010, it was 

soon abandoned due to weight issues. After 

the failure of the  IRIS , Colombia looked 

at international partners to strengthen its 

drone development and production. Between 

2016 and 2019, it initiated and concluded an 

agreement with Spain for the development 

and production of a tactical Medium Altitude 

Long Endurance (MALE) drone, the  Atlante II .61 

The drone is to be manufactured in Colombia 

and it is understood to be a replacement 

for the failed  IRIS  programme. 62  Beyond 

this international collaboration, Colombian 

authorities have provided clear signals of 

the importance of the drone industry for the 

military and industrial sectors. Maj. Rafael 

Alberto Velasquez Garavito, responsible for 

the Special Projects Division at  CIAC,  recently 

stressed how UAV will be one of the two 

main areas of investment for the company in 

the next 10 years. 63  The apparent aim is full 

independence through the development of 

an entirely national tactical UAV system. The 

latest project is the  Quimbaya , a medium 

range drone first introduced at the 2019 

Expodefensa , but according to recent reports 

it is still in the development and testing 

phase. 64  As WOLA has reported, Colombia aims 

to become a net exporter of weapons and the 

drone industry is likely to play a prominent 

role in reaching this objective. 65 

Despite a mixed track-record and development 

delays, drones are now pervasive among 

Colombian military and law enforcement, 

with the Army, Navy, Air Force and National 9

Police all making use of the technology. As 

in the rest of the region, drones have served 

a multiplicity of functions. These have 

included border patrol and the surveillance 

and protection of strategic infrastructure. 

The purchase of  Hermes  drones and the 

development of the  Quimbaya  drone, for 

example, were partly funded by  Ecopetrol ,

with the understanding that the technology 

will be used for the protection of its pipelines 

and infrastructure. 66  Drones have played 

a prominent role in the realm of counter-

narcotics, both in terms of identifying and 

tracking drug-traffickers and as a substitute 

for traditional (piloted) aircrafts used for 

the aerial fumigation of coca plantations. 

In the latter area, drones are seen as a less 

risky alternative. Unmanned aircrafts can 

fly at lower altitudes and deliver smaller 

amounts of herbicides thus better protecting 

neighbouring crops and – according to German 

Huertas director of operations of  Fumi Drones 

Sas  which has partnered with the Colombian 

government – destroying them more 

efficiently. 67  It has also been claimed that 

drones have the advantage of reducing the 

health risks for the targeted communities. 68 

In this context, the most controversial use has 

to do with the blurring of counter-narcotics 

and counterinsurgency. As the Colombian 

former president Santos admitted in his 

memoirs, the assassination of guerrilla leader 

Raul Reyes in 2008 was achieved through the 

interception via drones of communication and 

electronic signals. 69  More generally, drones are 

deployed as instruments of control in rural 

areas formerly controlled by the guerrilla. As 

one army commander explained: “Territorial 

control can’t entail stationing a soldier every 

few feet, because it’s impossible; Colombia is 

immense. We need to cover it with intelligence, 

with a network of collaborators, with drones. 

We need a combination of methods to 

maintain effective military control.” 70  The 

commander’s admission highlights one of the 

main critiques raised against the use of drones 

in the region: that they have become a means 

of extending state control and surveillance. 

Especially in areas that have traditionally been 

outside the control of the government, drones 

permit states to monitor people remotely and 

without risking the deployment of personnel. 

As Arteaga Botello writes, drones transform 

individuals and large segments of the (rural) 

population into potential targets with the 

aim of controlling, monitoring and, in certain 

cases, displacing them. 71  Some evidence 

suggests that this might not be limited to 

rural areas. The Mayor of Bogot á has called 

for the use of drones for the surveillance of 

‘crowds’ in cities, 72  and the police are showing 

an increasing interest in the development of 

drones and their employment in urban areas. 

For now, drones in Colombia (as in the rest of 

the region) have not carried weapons. Recent 

history, however, suggests that, for a number 

of reasons, future weaponization might not be 

unthinkable. First, in recent years voices have 

emerged calling for the weaponisation of drones 

to be used against drug traffickers. (A precedent 

already exists: the targeting of Afghan Taliban-

linked drug-traffickers by US drones.) 73  More 

generally, we have already seen a cross-

pollination of practices between the ‘war on 

drugs’ and the ‘war on terror.’ Beyond training 

and financial support, this has extended, for 

example, to the use of FAST teams. 74  Second, 

Colombia, from the ‘kingpin strategy’ onwards, 

has a long history of conducting programmes of 

targeted killing against kingpins, drug traffickers 

and guerrilla leaders both independently 

and with US support. As the ground-breaking 

investigative reporting of Dana Priest has 

uncovered, this tendency was very much alive 

in the Bush and Obama years. A plan started 

under Bush and continued under Obama 

permitted the transfer to Colombian forces of 

a ‘$30,000 GPS guidance kit that transforms a 

less-than-accurate 500-pound gravity bomb into 

a highly accurate smart bomb.’ The programme 

seemingly violated the US ban on assassination, 

but it could rely on two legal findings approved 10 

by Reagan: one for the conduct of operations 

against terrorist organisations, 75  and the 

other which authorised action against narco-

traffickers. The Bush Administration’s ‘global 

war on terror’ framework and the designation of 

the FARC as a terrorist organisation permitted 

the US government’s involvement in the 

assassination of FARC leaders, since they were 

considered a threat to US national security. 

Operations included the controversial cross-

border targeted killing of FARC leader Raul Reyes 

in Ecuador in 2008. Colombia justified the strike 

by adopting the rhetoric of pre-emptive self-

defence against terrorism first developed by the 

Bush Administration - still the main rationale for 

drone strikes and targeted killings. 76  The strike 

caused an international outcry. Although the CIA 

initially maintained control over the encryption 

key inserted in the bomb, Colombian forces 

were given full control in 2010. 77  Already in 2013 

the Council for Hemispheric Affairs warned that 

the region was presenting a ‘mixed’ picture on 

the issue of weaponisation. 78  And while no drone 

has been weaponised so far, ‘killer drones’ have 

started to appear at regional expositions. 79 

MEXICO 

In 1969 the Nixon administration saw the 

overflight of Mexican territory and the spraying 

of plantations as a key step in undermining 

the production and transport of illicit drugs. 80 

Mexico’s refusal to take part in the then 

recently launched US ‘war on drugs,’ pushed the 

US government to launch Operation Intercept, 

an effort to interdict drug trafficking along the 

land border dividing the two countries. The 

operation brought the border to a standstill and 

the Mexican government to its knees. While the 

anti-drugs results were meagre, as a pressure 

campaign Intercept succeeded. 81  Later, in 

Operation Cooperation, Mexico allowed US 

agents to work south of the border and in 

1976, Mexico and the United States launched 

Operation Condor. The operation targeted the 

so-called Mexican ‘golden triangle’ (the states 

of Sinaloa, Durango, and Chihuahua) and the 

DEA supplied planes for aerial spraying. As Ioan 

Grillo writes, the operation set three main 

precedents. First, aerial spraying became a 

key component of the ‘war on drugs.’ Second, 

the Mexican government was able to keep the 

hardware used for spraying, thus making the 

‘war on drugs’ a valid pretext to expand its 

airpower. Third, taking advantage of counter-

narcotics operations, Mexican authorities also 

rounded-up and killed suspected guerrillas, in 

the same blurring of the distinction between 

counter-narcotics and counter-insurgency 

operations that we have seen in other 

countries. 82  The ‘war on drugs’ returned to 

Mexico with a vengeance in the 1990s. The 

squeeze of the Colombian so-called ‘cartels’ 

(or drug trafficking organisations) led to what 

scholars describe as a key example of the 

‘balloon effect’ that has long characterised 

the supply-side of the war on drugs. 83 

Starting in the 1990s, drones have played an 

increasingly prominent role in this war. Mexico 

is reportedly the largest market in the region; 

the largest buyer of drones and one of the main 

regional producers. 84  Several organisations, 

including the National Defence Secretariat 

(SEDENA), the Army, the air force and the 

attorney general’s office fly drones. 85  In this 

context, two important observations arise. 

First, while the use of drones has contributed 

to the blurring between counter-narcotics and 

counterinsurgency, in the Mexican case, a third 

dimension should be added. Counter-narcotics 

and counterinsurgency have become enmeshed 

in border surveillance and in the apprehension 

of illegal crossers. Second, in the Mexican 

context, most uses of drones have been carried 

out by the US government either along the 

border or over Mexican territory. In the latter 

case, the Mexican government has agreed to 

this use. More recently, the Mexican government 

has also developed a domestic drone industry, 

but the bulk of technology and operations still 

rely on US hardware. This section briefly details 

US drone use in Mexico and will then consider 

the Mexican drone industry. 11 

In 1990 Operation Alliance saw US Marines 

pilot UAVs in Texas along the US-Mexican 

border. While the stated purpose was drug 

interdiction, the operation also picked up 

unauthorised migrants. 86  In the aftermath of 

9/11 the Department of Homeland Security 

increased its use of drones along the border. 

After successful testing by Homeland Security, 

US Customs and Border Protection started 

to fly  Predator B  along the border in 2004. 87 

While surveillance, intelligence, and counter-

narcotics played a prominent role in the Bush 

Administration’s Merida Initiative, drones did 

not. 88  Interestingly, according to Dana Priest, 

as the situation in Mexico worsened, President 

Felipe Calderon had requested the deployment 

of armed US drones in Mexican skies, but the 

Bush Administration refused. 89 

The use of (unarmed) drones expanded under the 

Obama Administration as the situation in Mexico 

markedly deteriorated. In 2009, the US flew an 

unarmed Predator drone over Mexican territory 

after the killing of US Immigration agent Jaime 

Zapata. According to Priest, an agreement 

was reached between the two countries for 

the flight of drones: ‘U.S. pilots sitting in the 

States would control the planes remotely, but a 

Mexican military or federal police commander 

would be able to direct the pilot within the 

boundaries of a Mexico-designated grid.’ 90  In 

2011, investigative reporters from the  New York 

Times  revealed that the US government had also 

started regularly flying high-altitude unarmed 

drones, including the  Global Hawk  over Mexico. 

Drones were used to collect information for 

Mexican law enforcement agencies. They also 

contributed to find suspects linked to the 

murder of Zapata. 91 

At the time, Obama and Calderon also agreed 

to create intelligence ‘fusion centers’ for the 

exploitation of human and signal intelligence 

in Mexico, not unlike the one the US used 

with local allies in Afghanistan and Iraq. 92  In 

particular, two fusion centres were created: one 

run by the CIA in Mexico City, and another run 

by the DEA in Monterrey. The use of drones and 

the creation of fusion centres meant that the 

‘United States had been given near-complete 

entrée to Mexico’s territory and the secrets 

of its citizens.’ 93  These measures represented 

a historic turn of events considering Mexico’s 

traditional reluctance to host US forces on 

its territory and its concerns surrounding 

sovereignty. 94  Fusion centres were not the only 

practice transferred from the ‘war on terror’ 

to the ‘war on drugs.’ The hunt for ‘high-value 

targets’ that characterised much of the US 

targeted killing programme was redeployed 

in Mexico. US authorities used ‘used real-time 

intelligence against kingpins on a Mexican-U.S. 

priority list — including cell phone geolocation, 

wiretaps, electronic intercepts and tracking of 

digital records — to help Mexican authorities 

target them.’ 95  This allegedly contributed to 

the capture of several kingpins. 

These successes reportedly convinced Mexican 

authorities of the importance of drones. 

Mexican requests, however, encountered the 

expansion of the drone wars under Obama, 

and US resource constraints convinced Mexico 

of the need to both expand its commercial 

partners and strengthen the domestic drone 

industry. When purchases were made, Mexico, 

like many other countries in the region, relied 

on the Israeli  Elbit Systems . It first acquired the 

Orbiter in 2009 96  and then the  Hermes  450 and 

Hermes  900, the latter is used by the Mexican 

SEDENA for reconnaissance and surveillance. 97 

Mexican-made drones first emerged in 2002 

with the development of the  S3Manta , a

short-range tactical drone. The success of 

the drone led to the establishment of a new 

company,  Hydra Technologies , in 2005. The 

company has been at the forefront of Mexican 

drone production. A follow-up to the S3, the 

S4Ehecatl  had a slightly longer range. 98  By 

2013 the Mexican government had over 100 

drones and additional companies had joined in 

production.  SOS Global  and  Sonora Technical 

Institute  now produce drones. The government 12 

has also moved from short to medium range 

drones. These include the  G1 Guerrero ,

Ehecatl , Gavilan  and  S45 Bala , all produced by 

Hydra Technologies .99 

In this context, Mexican authorities have also 

invested in anti-drone technologies such as anti-

drone rifles like the  Hikvision  UAV jammer. 100 

This technology has been used for three main 

NARCO-DRONES: CARTELS, DRONES AND KINETIC OPERATIONS 

The proliferation of drones, the accompanying technological innovation and the ensuing 

reduction in costs have raised concerns regarding their use by violent non-state groups, such 

as terrorist groups and drug trafficking organisations. 102  Ever since Escobar’s narcosubmarines, 

so-called cartels have invested in technology for drug trafficking. Like the governments of the 

region, the cartels use drones for a multiplicity of tasks. They have diversified their production 

of drones and have shown innovation in repurposing and modifying drones to suit the mission. 

For example, since 2014, cartels have been commissioning the construction of small drones to 

local workers. 103  In this as in many other contexts, cartels behave like ‘vicious’ logistics firms. 104 

For cartels, drones help to spot counter-narcotics forces and subsequently re-direct drug trafficking. 

They are deployed to prevent counternarcotic raids, since the availability of the technology 

makes them cheaper than traditional human ‘lookouts.’ 105  They also helped in establishing new 

avenues and routes for drug trafficking, especially across the border into the United States. As 

one journalist quipped, drones are ‘the perfect drug mule, they are expendable and will never 

talk to the authorities.’ 106  Meanwhile, the development and deployment of narcosubmarines has 

continued, including large electric models with an estimated cost of $1.5 million. 107 

Recently, cartels have also crossed the threshold into kinetic operations. A leading innovator 

has been the C ártel Jalisco Nueva Generación (CJNG). The cartel guided by Nemesio Oseguera 

Cervantes, who is known as El Mencho, has over 5,000 members worldwide. According to US 

sources, the cartel is ‘estimated to control a third of the drugs consumed in the US.’ 108  US Federal 

Drug agents have watched the cartel develop ‘a large and disciplined army, control of extensive 

drug routes throughout the U.S., sophisticated money-laundering techniques and an elaborate 

digital terror campaign.’ 109  It has also seemingly institutionalised the use of weaponised drones. 

In 2017, the cartel prepared a drone fitted with an IED - known as ‘papa bomba’ (or potato 

bomb) - and a remotely controlled detonator. In 2018, the same cartel carried out a drone 

attack against the public safety secretary of Baja California. In 2021, the cartel carried out two 

further attacks using drones fitted with explosives against both police, military officials and rival 

cartels.  110  While so far not deadly, these attacks are used to send signals and for propaganda 

purposes both against the state and against rivals (such as the Nueva Familia Michoacana, main 

rival of the CJNG). 111  In 2021, members of a second cartel, the Cartel Santa Rosa de Lima, were 

also arrested after being found guilty of fitting drones with explosives. 112  These developments 

seems to signal the possibility that small, weaponised drones could become a key component of 

both violence against the state and of intra-cartel wars. 

purposes. First, they have been deployed during 

public events and demonstrations, like the 

Women’s march. Second, they have been used 

for the protection of state official, although it 

appears SEDENA has cancelled a public tender 

for an anti-drone system to be installed at the 

top of the Presidential Palace. 101  Finally, they 

have been used to combat the use of drones by 

so-called cartels (see text box). 13 

In terms of use, Mexican drones have been used 

for a variety of missions. These have included 

counter-narcotics, counterinsurgency, 

border surveillance, management of national 

disasters and, more recently, the surveillance 

and control of demonstrations and social 

movements. In 2013, for example, drones were 

used for surveillance of the demonstration of 

the ‘normalistas’ in Michoacan and the  YoSoy 

movement. Mexican authorities have explicitly 

stated that drones are preferable for the 

control of specific areas that are considered 

at particularly high risk of criminality. 113 

Such a development is concerning, especially 

considering Mexico’s long history of targeting 

and killing individuals taking part in protests 

and demonstrations. 114  The transformation of 

civilians into targets has featured prominently 

in border surveillance. The border region has 

been turned into a militarised area, one of 

complete surveillance and control. This, once 

again, has been influenced by developments 

in the United States. In recent years, with 

deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan winding 

down, the Department of Homeland Security 

established a programme to repurpose military 

equipment previously deployed in those 

two countries. These have included towers, 

aerostats, helicopters and drones. 115  As  The 

Intercept  has reported, this programme also 

included the repurposing of the NSA RT-RG mass 

surveillance system from Iraq and Afghanistan 

to the Mexico border. This technology has 

brought to border surveillance practices – such 

as pattern of life analysis – usually deployed in 

war. 116  Scholars have correctly criticised 117  this 

approach, highlighting the US government’s 

historical overconfidence in technology as a 

‘fix’ to solve human and social problems. As 

in other countries, Mexican drones remain 

unarmed. Calderon’s request and other voices 

in the country, however, seemingly suggest 

that the use of armed drones, especially 

against high-level drug traffickers, might be 

under consideration. 118 

OTHER COUNTRIES 

The coverage of Latin American drone use in this 

report is not comprehensive. Obviously, other 

Latin American countries also operate, and in 

some cases, manufacture drones for security 

and military purposes. For several reasons, 

the cases covered above display the most 

important facets of the phenomenon. There 

are, however, other countries in the region that 

deploy drones.  Chile  uses three  Hermes 900 

drones. 119  The Chilean government has used the 

Hermes  drones for the surveillance of national 

airspace and, more recently, to help with fires 

and other natural disasters. 120  Major cities in 

Chile, as in other countries in the region, also 

reportedly use drones for urban surveillance. 121 

Ecuador  is the only country besides Brazil to 

deploy two  Heron  drones, along with smaller 

Trackers ,122  and uses them for maritime 

narcotics interdiction. 123  These capabilities 

are controlled exclusively by the Ecuadorian 

Navy, which makes it South America’s foremost 

naval drone operator. Ecuador has also used 

drones for scientific missions and disaster 

management. More recently, the Joint Group 

for Monitoring and Electronic Reconnaissance 

(GMREC) has used drones in intelligence and 

counter-intelligence operations as well as 

for the interdiction of smuggling operations 

(primarily of natural resources). 124  Peru  does 

not utilize large drones for military or security 

purposes, though it has experimented with the 

development and deployment of smaller UAVs 

for reconnaissance or surveillance purposes. 125 .

Reportedly the country also ‘worked with 

South Korea to develop a training simulator for 

drone pilot instructions.’ 126  Of interest in the 

region is  Venezuela’s  cooperation with Iran 

(see textbox). The Venezuelan government 

uses drones for surveillance, the monitoring 

of infrastructure and for drug interdiction. 127 

Beyond the cases mentioned above, no use of 

Class III drones or above for military or security 

purposes by Latin American countries has been 

commonly reported. 14 

THE IRANIAN CONNECTION AND DRONES IN VENEZUELA 

Venezuela’s geopolitical reorientation has led to curiosity, condemnation and a large 

amount of sometimes sensationalist speculation on the strategic significance of its - real or 

imagined - new affiliation. Besides the great-power competition issues inherent in Russian 

and Chinese engagement with Venezuela, 128  the one connection that has generated the most 

intrigue is probably the Bolivarian Republic’s relationship with Iran. Beyond issues such as 

oil, crime and terrorism, drones have also formed part of the panoply of “anti-imperialist” 

projects. 129  In 2012, in response to U.S. investigations, Hugo Chávez stated that Venezuela 

was indeed building a small drone with surveillance capabilities in cooperation with, among 

other countries, Iran, and announced its use in resource surveying. 130 

The actual results of the Iran-Venezuela cooperation on drones falls somewhere between 

the extremes, at least in terms of what can be verified. There has been some limited use 

of 12  Mohajer-2  UAVs, delivered as kit from Iran to Venezuela, for territorial surveillance. 

Some sources also mention the evaluation of Russian drones, with unknown results. 131  The 

licensed production of  Arpía  had been announced in 2012 but has not led to any concrete 

evidence of success. 132  According to some reports, three of the imported drones crashed 

shortly after delivery. Overall, the actual activities connected to the drone programme 

seemed so minor that there was speculation that the drone facilities might serve the 

purpose of hiding other types of clandestine activities. 133  In 2020, president Maduro claimed 

again that Venezuela might soon produce drones, this time the missile-carrying  Mohajer-6 

variant, of which he displayed two static models. 134  Considering the fate of other frequently 

publicised Venezuelan projects, such as the Venezuelan Kalashnikov factory that has been 

announced from time to time since 2006, 135  this announcement is unlikely to raise fears 

among Venezuela’s neighbours. It is, however, an indicator of the facility with which drones 

can be used for misinformation due to the mystique that appears to surround them. 

CONCLUSION 

This report has provided an overview of drone 

operations and capabilities in Latina America. It 

has focused on four main countries: Argentina, 

Brazil, Colombia and Mexico. These are the 

countries with the largest drone programmes, 

and they have made extensive use of the 

technology. The report has focused on two main 

areas: first, the conditions of the drone industry 

in each country; second, the rationales for the 

deployments of drones and the tasks they have 

completed. In terms of acquisition, design, 

development and production capabilities, the 

four main cases above hint at the possible 

construction of four different ideal types of 

industrial drone strategies. 

Industrial focus 

domestic  international 

> Policy focus
> diffuse

Argentina  Brazil 

> acute

Mexico  Colombia 

> Figure 1 Drone Industrial Strategies in Latin America

15 

Some countries, exemplified here by 

Argentina, choose to leverage the capabilities 

of their domestic industries more for industrial 

reasons, or with wider or more diffuse policy 

objectives, rather than to address concrete 

and urgent security threats. In contrast, 

others, exemplified by Colombia, count on 

international collaboration in combination 

with the pragmatic development of domestic 

industrial capabilities in order to address 

acute security problems. Furthermore, as 

in Mexico, some countries leverage their 

existing domestic industry in order to address 

acute problems. And finally, there are 

cases such as Brazil, which aims at realizing 

international industrial cooperation for a

wide variety of diffuse long-term policy aims. 

It would be interesting to study the reasons 

why certain strategies were adopted. In any 

case, neither the country’s security situation 

nor its industrial potential seems to play a 

dominant role alone. Issues such as strategic 

culture, civil-military relations, foreign policy 

ambitions and social perceptions of technology 

might all be considered to explain the political 

choices discussed above. 

Beyond industrial strategies, the analysis 

above confirms that the UAV sector is rapidly 

expanding in the region. This proliferation is 

at least partially driven by an arms race that 

goes beyond the practical uses of drones. As 

Franke pointed out when looking at other 

regions, drones have come to represent a

status symbol and an element of prestige for 

governments in the region, especially in their 

international relations. 136  While many of the 

programmes are secret, information is surely 

available within policymaking circles in the 

region. As mentioned in the introduction, the 

‘prestige’ of drones also makes it harder to 

distinguish between actual drone programmes 

and propaganda activities. 

As to their deployment, drones and UAVs are 

often used for scientific, environmental and 

disaster management/prevention activities. As 

scholarship on ‘drones for good’ has pointed 

out, drones clearly provide advantages in terms 

of costs, ease of deployment and geographical 

reach. 137  For governments in the region, counter-

narcotics remains one of the main rationales 

behind the use of drones. This includes the 

deployment in surveillance and reconnaissance 

operations, the use of drones for the collection 

of electronic and image intelligence and the 

use for the spraying of illegal crops. 

There are, however, clear indications that 

drones are also helping governments in the 

region to extend surveillance and control of 

the population. This process is not new, and it 

did not start with drones. As several scholars 

have pointed out, aerial surveillance has often 

played a prominent role in domestic and foreign 

campaigns of pacification. 138  Most scholarship 

on the topic focuses on US politics and foreign 

policy. In this context, some have understood 

this process as a blurring of the distinction 

between the realms of law enforcement and 

war and, therefore, a blurring of the distinction 

between the functions of the military and 

those of other institutions. 139  Others, looking 

at the history and the violence of US policing, 

have argued that drones better permit us to 

understand that ‘war and police have long been 

sutured together in the name of security.’ In 

this understanding, the process is not one of 

blurring of boundaries, but of revealing the 

long and violent history of the deployment 

of military force abroad and the policing of 

undesirables domestically. Drones are not so 

much a novelty, but the latest technological fix 

unveiling this continuity. 140  The same argument 

can be extended to Latin America and its violent 

history of policing and counterinsurgency. 

Furthermore, starting in the early 2000s, and 

following US examples and directives, many 

governments in the region approved vague 

counter-terrorism legislation. This legislation 

has often been exploited for the deployment 

of violence against protestors and social 

demonstrators. This has developed hand in hand 16 

with an increase in the deployment of military 

forces for domestic policing tasks. 141  Drones 

build on these precedents and fit into a pattern 

of expanded and militarised state control. 

They have permitted governments to further 

extend surveillance, control and pacification 

of traditionally out-of-reach areas. As Arteaga 

Botello noted, drones have contributed to 

turning the individuals living in these areas into 

targets, criminals, and, at times, enemies. 142 

This pattern of control has also extended to 

urban centres, especially with the surveillance 

of social movements and demonstrations. 

In this context, it should be pointed out that, in 

spite of few and so far, isolated voices, drones 

in the region remain unarmed. However, 

they still have the potential to increase the 

state apparatus for repression as well as the 

resentment felt by marginalised individuals 

and communities. Finally, the report highlights 

the proliferation of drones among violent 

non-state groups with a focus on the Mexican 

cartels, who have shown the ability to deploy 

somewhat rudimentary weaponised drones. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors would like to thank Professor 

Dave Bewley-Taylor and the Global Drug Policy 

Observatory for the opportunity to write this 

report. They would like to thank the Open 

Society Foundation for the research grant 

funding this project. Finally, they would also 

like to thank several colleagues for their input, 

feedback and comments on earlier drafts. 

These include: Ross Eventon, Professor Arlene 

Tickner, Professor Dave Bewley-Taylor, Delina 

Goxho and Professor Oscar Palma. 17 

ENDNOTES 

1 The two terms will be used interchangeably in this report 

2 In the case of Mexico, the US government has also 

deployed its own drones over Mexican territory. 

China and Iran play a far more modest role 

3 Tyler Wall, ‘Unmanning the police manhunt: vertical 

security as pacification,’  Socialist Studies , Vol. 9 (2), 

2013, p. 141 

4 Ian G. Shaw,  Predator Empire  (Minneapolis: University 

of Minnesota Press, 2016), p. 300 

5 Rodriguez, M. C., ‘Militarism on the Colombian 

Periphery in the Context of Illegality, 

Counterinsurgency, and the Postconflict,’ Current 

Anthropology, Vol. 60, Supplement 19, 2019, p. 137 

and Tickner, A. ‘Colombia and the United States: 

From Counter-narcotics to Counterterrorism,’ 

Current History , 2003, pp. 77-85 

6 This blurring is also driven by the apparent 

convergence of criminal and insurgent actors – cf. 

Kleinschmidt, J., and Palma, O. “The conceptual 

puzzle of violent non-state actors in Latin America: a 

critique of the convergence hypothesis.”  Small Wars & 

Insurgencies  31.6 (2020): pp. 1323–1348 

7 Three were particularly useful in informing the 

analysis: W. Alejandro Sanchez, ‘COHA Report: drones 

in Latin America,’ Council on Hemispheric affairs, 12 

January 2014,  https://www.coha.org/coha-report-

drones-in-latin-america/ , Zwijnenburg W. and Foeke 

Postma, ‘Unmanned ambitions: security implications 

of growing proliferation in emerging military markets,’ 

Pax Report,  July 2018,  https://paxforpeace.nl/media/ 

download/pax-report-unmanned-ambitions.pdf , and 

Glickhouse, R. ‘Explainer: Drones in Latin America,’ 

AS/COA, 28 August 2013,  https://www.as-coa.org/ 

articles/explainer-drones-latin-america 

8 Gregoire Chamayou,  Drone Theory  (London: Penguin, 

2015), p. 165 

9 Three were particularly useful in informing the 

analysis: W. Alejandro Sanchez, ‘COHA Report: drones 

in Latin America,’ Council on Hemispheric affairs, 12 

January 2014,  https://www.coha.org/coha-report-

drones-in-latin-america/ , Zwijnenburg W. and Foeke 

Postma, ‘Unmanned ambitions: security implications 

of growing proliferation in emerging military markets,’ 

Pax Report,  July 2018,  https://paxforpeace.nl/media/ 

download/pax-report-unmanned-ambitions.pdf , and 

Glickhouse, R. ‘Explainer: Drones in Latin America,’ 

AS/COA, 28 August 2013,  https://www.as-coa.org/ 

articles/explainer-drones-latin-america 

10  Arteaga Botello, N. ‘Política de la verticalidad: 

drones, territorio y poblaci ó n en América Latina,’ 

Region y Sociedad , No. 65, 2016, p. 267 

11  Franko, P. “Defense production in Argentina, Brazil 

and Chile: A comparative perspective.”  Defense 

Analysis  12.3 (1996): pp. 315–326, p. 317 

12  Arreguez, Ángel César.  Fábrica Militar de Aviones: 

Crónicas y Testimonios . C ó rdoba: Ministerio de Ciencia 

y Tecnología, 2 nd  ed., 2008 

13  The same source also mentions an alternative project 

name:  https://aviationsmilitaires.net/v3/kb/aircraft/ 

show/1450/fma-ia-59-tabano 

14  Battaglino, J. “The politics of defense revival in 

Argentina.”  Defense & Security Analysis  29.1 (2013): 

pp. 3–15 

15  Serruya, A. “Desarrollos de UAVs en Argentina.” 

Revista de la Escuela Superior de Guerra Aérea  228 

(2013): pp. 12–24, p. 16 

16  A rare extensive description of one case may be found 

at  https://www.unsam.edu.ar/tss/fuego-amigo-

contra-el-sara/ 

17  Dubois, G. “FAdeA e INVAP unen fuerzas para revivir el 

desarrollo de Vehículos Aéreos no Tripulados.”  Online 

at  https://www.aviacionline.com/2020/09/fadea-

e-invap-unen-fuerzas-para-revivir-el-desarrollo-de-

vehiculos-aereos-no-tripulados/ 

18  Sánchez Jiménez, G., Mulero Valenzuela, M., and 

Saumeth Cadavid, E.  Vehículos aéreos no tripulados en 

Latinoamérica . Madrid: IDS, 2013, pp. 15–16 

19  Dubois, G. “FAdeA e INVAP unen fuerzas” 

20  Mosle, J. “FAdeA e INVAP volverán a desarrollar Vehículos 

Aéreos No Tripulados.”  Online at  https://www.telam. 

com.ar/notas/202009/516135-fadea-vehiculos-aereos-

no-tripulados-industria-aeronautica.html 

21  Szklarz, E. “FAdeA e INVAP volverán a desarrollar 

Vehículos Aéreos No Tripulados.”  Online at  https:// 

dialogo-americas.com/articles/argentina-launches-

first-smart-border-surveillance-system-in-latin-

america/#.YQDrbo4zaUk 

22  Arias, D. “Por la vuelta de los drones argentinos 

‘SARA’.”  Online at  https://agendarweb.com. 

ar/2019/10/20/por-la-vuelta-de-los-drones-

argentinos-sara/ 

23  InsightCrime. “Clans, Corruption and Cross-border Crime 

in Argentina.”  Online at  https://insightcrime.org/news/ 

clans-corruption-transborder-crime-argentina/ 

24  Krishna, K. R.  Push Button Agriculture: Robotics, 

Drones, Satellite-Guided Soil and Crop Management .

Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2016, p. 232 

25  Espach, R. “A New Great Game Finds the South Atlantic.” 

Online at  https://warontherocks.com/2021/03/a-new-

great-game-finds-the-south-atlantic/ 

26  Battaglino, J. “Threat Construction and Military 

Intervention in Internal Security: The Political Use 

of Terrorism and Drug Trafficking in Contemporary 

Argentina .”  Latin American Perspectives  46.6 (2019): 

pp. 10 –24 

27  Flom, H. “State Regulation of Organized Crime: 

Politicians, Police, and Drug Trafficking in Argentina .” 

Latin American Politics and Society  61.3 (2019): 

pp. 104 –128 

28  Franko, P. “Defense production in Argentina.” 

29  Peña Galindo, A. “¿Soft power o hard power? 

Reflexiones teóricas sobre la política exterior 

brasileña.”  Revista de Relaciones Internacionales, 

Estrategia y Seguridad  13.2 (2018): pp. 97–121 

30  Burges, S. W.  Brazil in the world: The international 

relations of a South American giant . Manchester: 

Manchester University Press, 2017, p. 136 

31  Cf. Bastos, F. I. “Structural Violence in the Context of 

Drug Policy and Initiatives Aiming to Reduce Drug-

Related Harm in Contemporary Brazil: A Review.” 

Substance Use & Misuse  47.13-14 (2012): pp. 1603–1610 

32  Prengaman, P. “Brazilian military police helicopter 

down in Rio, killing 4.”  Online at  https://apnews. 

com/article/latin-america-thiago-rio-de-janeiro-

brazil-21aaad2cf5454aadbf2395d23080db9a 18 

33  Toro, P . G., Minucci, M. A., Rolim, T., Follador, R., Santos, 

A., Camillo, G., & Barreta, L. “Brazilian 14-X Hypersonic 

Aerospace Vehicle Project.” In: American Institute of 

Aeronautics and Astronautics (ed.):  18th AIAA/3AF 

International Space Planes and Hypersonic Systems and 

Technologies Conference . Tours: AIAA, 2012, pp. 1–14 

34  Speier, R. H., Nacouzi, Lee, G. C., and Moore, R. M. 

Hypersonic Missile Nonproliferation: Hindering the 

Spread of a New Class of Weapons . Santa Monica: 

Rand Corporation, 2017, pp. 62–63 

35  Kleinschmidt, J. “Drones y el orden legal internacional. 

Tecnología, estrategia y largas cadenas de acci ó n.” 

Colombia Internacional  84 (2015): pp. 17–42 

36  International Institute of Strategic Studies.  The Military 

Balance 2021 . London: Routledge, 2021, p. 400 

37  Moralez, J. P. “Brazil’s Drone Expansion.” Online at 

https://www.key.aero/article/brazils-drone-expansion 

38  Ministério da Defesa. “Servidores do Censipam 

participam do Curso de Pilotagem do Drone Matrice 

210 V2 RTK.” Online at  https://www.gov.br/defesa/ 

pt-br/assuntos/censipam/noticias/servidores-do-

censipam-participam-do-curso-de-pilotagem-do-drone-

matrice-210-v2-rtk 

39  Barreira, V. “Brazil seeks first modernised AEW&C; 

aircraft in 2020.” Online at  https://web.archive. 

org/web/20190513184615/https://www.janes.com/ 

article/88475/brazil-seeks-first-modernised-aew-c-

aircraft-in-2020 

40  9 Maria Clemencia Rodriguez, ‘Militarism on the 

Colombian Periphery in the Context of Illegality, 

Counterinsurgency, and the Postconflict,’ Current 

Anthropology, Vol. 60, Supplement 19, 2019: 143. 

41  Vinholes, T. “Embraer e FAB assinam acordo para 

desenvolver drone militar.”  Online at  https://www. 

cnnbrasil.com.br/business/2021/04/23/embraer-e-

fab-assinam-acordo-para-desenvolver-drone-militar 

42  EFE. “Brazil’s Embraer announces end of drone-making 

JV.”  Online at  https://www.efe.com/efe/english/ 

business/brazil-s-embraer-announces-end-of-drone-

making-jv/50000265-2806333 

43  Defesanet. “Brazilian MoD Approves Caçador ARP from 

Avionics Services as a Strategic Defense Product.” 

Online at  https://www.defesanet.com.br/en/e_ 

laad2017/noticia/25179/Brazilian-MoD-Approves-

Cacador-ARP-from-Avionics-Services-as-a-Strategic-

Defense-Product/ 

44  Caiafa, R. “Avionics Services demonstra ARP Caçador 

para a Polícia Militar Ambiental de São Paulo.”  Online 

at  https://tecnodefesa.com.br/avionics-services-

demonstra-arp-cacador-para-a-policia-militar-

ambiental-de-sao-paulo/ 

45  Ferreira da Costa, J. “A Evolução das Aeronaves 

Remotamente Pilotadas – RPA.”  Passadiço  40 (2020): 

pp. 62–65 

46  Charpentreau, C. “Brazilian Air Force and Embraer 

to study loyal wingman concept.”  Online at  https:// 

www.aerotime.aero/27800-brazil--and-embraer-to-

study-loyal-wingman-concept 

47  Wilkens, C. “Using Drones to Fight Slavery in the 

Fields: An Examination of the Practicality and 

Constitutionality of Applying 21st Century Technology 

to a 21st Century Problem.”  Hastings Environmental 

Law Journal  24.1 (2018): pp. 157–178. 

48  Reagan, R. ‘‘Narcotics and National Security,’ National 

Security Decision Directive 221, 8 April 1986,  https:// 

fas.org/irp/offdocs/nsdd/nsdd-221.pdf 

49  Gambone, M.  Small Wars: low-intensity threats and 

the American response since Vietnam  (Knoxville: 

University of Tennessee Press, 2013), pp. 183-184 

50  Crandall, R.  Drugs and thugs: the history and future 

of America’s war on drugs  (Yale: Yale University Press, 

2021), p. 208 

51  Isacson, A. ‘Mission Creep: the US military’s 

counterdrug role in the Americas,’ in Bruce Bagley 

(Ed.),  Drug trafficking, organized crime, and violence 

in the Americas today  (Miami: University Press of 

Florida, 2015), p. 93 

52  Vaicius I. and Adam Isacson, ‘The “war on drugs” 

meets the “war on terror,”’  International Policy 

Report , Center for International Policy, February 2003 

53  McLinden, T. ‘The SOUTHCOM Reconnaissance Systems 

Program in Colombia,’  International Affairs Review ,

Summer 2019, p. 4 

54  Eventon R. and Dave Bewley-Taylor, ‘Above the law 

and under the radar” a history of Private Contractors 

and aerial fumigation in Colombia,’  GDPO Policy 

Report , 4 February 2016,  https://www.swansea. 

ac.uk/media/Above-the-Law,-Under-the-Radar.pdf 

55  De Young, K. ‘WikiLeaks: Colombia began using U.S. 

drones for counterterrorism in 2006,’  The Washington 

Post , 23 March 2011,  https://www.washingtonpost. 

com/world/wikileaks-colombia-began-using-us-

drones-for-counterterrorism-in-2006/2011/03/23/ 

AB0nTjLB_story.html 

56  Eventon,R. ‘Justifying Militarisation; ‘Counter-

Narcotics’ and ‘Counter Narco-Terrorism,’’  GDPO 

Policy Report  3, March 2015,  https://www.swansea. 

ac.uk/media/Justifying-Militarisation.pdf 

57  Sánchez Jiménez, G., Manuel Mulero Valenzuela, 

and Erich Saumeth Cadavid, ‘Vehículos aéreos no 

tripulados en Latinoamérica,’ Infodefensa, May 2013, 

https://www.infodefensa.com/wp-content/uploads/ 

Vehiculos_aereos_no_tripulados_en_Latam.pdf 

58  Pinzon Arana, F. ‘The Geostrategic use of drones in 

South America,’  World Geostrategic Insight , 6 August 

2020,  https://wgi.world/the-geostrategic-use-of-

drones-in-south-america/ 

59  Sánchez Jimenez et al. 2013, ‘Vehiculos.’ 

60  Bergen P. and Jennifer Rowland, ‘World of drones: 

the global proliferation of drone technology,’ in Peter 

Bergen and Daniel Rothenberg (Eds),  Drone Wars 

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), p. 310 

61  Oliver D. and Paolo Valpolini, ‘The Colombian military-

industrial complex,’  European Defense Review Reports 

(EDR) , 28 January 2018, https://www.edrmagazine. 

eu/the-colombian-military-industrial-complex-2 

62  Zwijnenburg and Postma, ‘Unmanned ambitions,’ p. 26 

63  Valpolini, P. ‘CIAC an unmanned future,’  EDR , 4 

December 2019,  https://www.edrmagazine.eu/ciac-

an-unmanned-future 

64  Infodefensa, ‘Interviews infodefensa, Brig. Gral. 

E. Benavides (Colombia),’ 22 July 2021,  https:// 

www.infodron.es/id/2021/07/22/noticia-benavides-

colombia-quimbaya-primer-programa-realiza.html 

65  Pelzer, M. ‘Bullets from Brazil: Growing Military 

Industrialism in Latin America,’ WOLA, 21 March 2014, 

https://www.wola.org/analysis/bullets-from-brazil-

growing-military-industrialism-in-latin-america/ 

66  Infodron.es, ‘Colombia contara con un UAV Hermes 900 

de Elbit Systems para misiones de seguridad fronteriza,’ 

Infodron.es , 19 January 2012,  https://www.infodron. 19 

es/id/2012/01/19/noticia-colombia-contara-con-un-

uav-hermes-900-de-elbit-systems-para-misiones-de-

seguridad-fronteriza-2.html  and Valpolini, P ., David 

Oliver, and Douglas Hernandez, ‘A joint audience for 

the Quimbaya UAV system,’ EDR, 4 December 2019 

67  BBC News, ‘Drones hunt cocaine farms in Colombia,’ 

21 August 2018,  https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/ 

technology-45259181 

68  Felbab-Brown, V. ‘Can Colombia eradicate coca by 

drones? The illusion of a technological fix,’  Brookings 

Institution , 24 July 2018,  https://www.brookings.edu/ 

blog/order-from-chaos/2018/07/24/can-colombia-

eradicate-coca-by-drones-the-illusion-of-a-technological-

fix/ . For further analysis also see Bewley-Taylor, D., & 

Shortis, P . The World Drug Report 2020: Perspectives on 

Markets, Technology and Policy,  International Drug Policy 

Consortium/Global Drug Policy Observatory, February 

2021,  http://files.idpc.net/library/IDPC_Response_ 

WDR_2020.pdf  and Bewley-Taylor, D., ‘Airwave’  Jane’s 

Intelligence Review,  Vol. 33, 6, June 2021, pp. 12-15 

69  Arteaga Botello, ‘Política de la verticalidad,’ p. 279 

70  Clemencia Rodriguez, M. ‘Militarism on the 

Colombian Periphery in the Context of Illegality, 

Counterinsurgency, and the Postconflict,’  Current 

Anthropology , Vol. 60, Supplement 19, 2019: 143 

71  Arteaga Botello, ‘Politica,’ p. 237.  As Ross Eventon 

has convincingly argued, the same applies to aerial 

spraying which can have displacing effects not 

dissimilar from chemical warfare. See Eventon and 

Bewley-Taylor, ‘Above the law and under the radar.’ 

72  Arteaga Botello, ‘Politica,’ p. 282 

73  Risen, J. ‘U.S. to Hunt Down Afghan Drug Lords Tied to 

Taliban,’  The New York Times , 9 August 2019,  https:// 

www.nytimes.com/2009/08/10/world/asia/10afghan. 

html?_r=1&hp .

74  Crandall,  Drugs and thugs , pp. 308-310 

75  Trenta, L. ‘Death by Reinterpretation: Dynamics of 

Norm Contestation and the US Ban on Assassination in 

the Reagan Years,’  Journal of Global Security Studies ,

2021, ogab012,  https://doi.org/10.1093/jogss/ogab012 

76  Emerson, G. ‘Radical neglect? The “War on Terror” and 

Latin America,’  Latin American Politics and Society ,

52, 1, 2010, p. 47 

77  The account above is based on Dana Priest, ‘Covert 

Action in Colombia,’  The Washington Post , 21 

December 2013,  https://www.washingtonpost.com/sf/ 

investigative/2013/12/21/covert-action-in-colombia/ 

78  COHA, ‘Latin America Puts Forward A Mixed Picture 

on the Use of Drones in the Region,’ 8 October 2013, 

https://www.coha.org/latin-america-puts-forward-a-

mixed-picture-on-the-use-of-drones-in-the-region/ 

79  Valpolini, P. ‘Killer drones from Turkey,’  EDR , 15 

December 2017,  https://www.edrmagazine.eu/killer-

drones-from-turkey 

80  Galen Carpenter, T.  Bad Neighbor Policy  (New York: 

Palgrave, 2003), pp. 12-13 

81  Craig, R. ‘Operation Intercept: The International 

Politics of Pressure,’  The Review of Politics , 42(4) 

(1980), pp. 556-580 

82  Grillo, I.  El Narco  (London: Bloomsbury, 2011), pp. 44-50 

83  Bagley, B.  Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime 

in Latin America and the Caribbean in the  Twenty 

First Century: Challenges To Democracy  (Bogot á:

Universidad de los Andes, 2013), p. 2 and Crandall, 

Drugs and Thugs , p. 185 

84  Gieras, P. ‘Drones: Am érica Latina bajo vigilancia, el 

impacto de las nuevas tecnolog ías en la resolución de 

conflictos,’  Pensamiento proprio , 51 (2020), p. 56 

85  Kersley, E. ‘Drones, drugs and death,’  Open 

Democracy , 17 March 2016,  https://www. 

opendemocracy.net/en/drones-drugs-and-death/ 

86  Koslowski R. and Marcel Schulzke, ‘Drones Along 

Borders: Border Security UAVs in the United States 

and the European Union,’  International Studies 

Perspectives  (2018) 19, p. 309 

87  Koslowski and Schulzke, ‘Drones,’ p. 309 

88  Watt P. and Roberto Zepeda,  Drug War Mexico: 

Politics, Neoliberalism, and violence in the new 

narcoeconomy  (London: Zed Books, 2012), p. 180 

89  Priest, D. ‘U.S. role at a crossroads in 

Mexico’s intelligence war on the cartels,’ The 

Washington Post, 27 April 2013,  https://www. 

washingtonpost.com/investigations/us-role-at-a-

crossroads-in-mexicos-intelligence-war-on-the-

cartels/2013/04/27/b578b3ba-a3b3-11e2-be47-

b44febada3a8_story.html 

90  Priest, ‘US role.’ 

91  Thompson, G. and Mark Mazzetti, ‘U.S. Drones Fight 

Mexican Drug Trade,’  The New York Times , 15 March 2011 

92  Thompson, G. ‘U.S. Widens Role in Battle Against 

Mexican Drug Cartels,’  The New York Times ,

6 August 2011 

93  Priest, P. ‘U.S. role at a crossroads in Mexico’s 

intelligence war on the cartels,’  The Washington 

Post , 27 April 2013,  https://www.washingtonpost. 

com/investigations/us-role-at-a-crossroads-in-

mexicos-intelligence-war-on-the-cartels/2013/04/27/ 

b578b3ba-a3b3-11e2-be47-b44febada3a8_story.html 

94  Isacson, ‘Mission creep,’ p. 98 

95  Isacson, ‘Mission creep,’ p. 98 

96  Guevara, I. ‘Los “drones” de México: quién los utiliza 

y por qué,’ Animal Politico, 11 Jly 2015,  https://www. 

animalpolitico.com/2015/07/los-drones-de-mexico-

quien-los-utiliza-y-por-que/ 

97  Monroy, J. ‘Estos son los drones que usa el Ejército 

para vigilar ductos de Pemex y hacer operaciones 

de inteligencia,’  El Economista , 28 February 2021, 

https://www.eleconomista.com.mx/politica/ 

Estos-son-los-drones-que-usa-el-Ejercito-para-

vigilar-ductos-de-Pemex-y-hacer-operaciones-de-

inteligencia-20210228-0034.html 

98  Guevara, ‘Los drones.’ 

99  Wim Zwijnenburg and Foeke Postma, ‘Unmanned 

ambitions: security implications of growing 

proliferation in emerging military markets,’  Pax 

Report,  July 2018, p. 31 

100  Mark Stevenson, ‘México: Cárteles atacan con 

drones cargados de explosivos,’  AP News , 22 

April 2021,  https://apnews.com/article/noticias-

6ff6ce500ca6b34165fd687f96a3150e 

101  Proceso, ‘Sedena cancela licitaci ó n para instalar 

sistema antidrones en Palacio Nacional,’ 4 

August 2021,  https://www.proceso.com.mx/ 

nacional/2021/8/4/sedena-cancela-licitacion-

para-instalar-sistema-antidrones-en-palacio-

nacional-269207.html 

102  Berger and Rowland, ‘World of drones,’ p. 302 

and Smith, A. ‘The Rising drone threat from terrorists,’ 

Georgia Journal of International Affairs , 19, 2018, p. 97 20 

103  Asmann, P. ‘Are Armed Drones the Weapon of the 

Future for Mexico’s Cartels?’  Small Wars Journal , 16 

August 2018,  https://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/ 

are-armed-drones-weapon-future-mexicos-cartels 

104  Rexton Kan, P. ‘Mexican Cartels as Vicious Firms,’ 

Small Wars Journal, 15 March 2015,  https:// 

smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/mexican-cartels-as-

vicious-firms 

105  Koslowski and Schultze, ‘Drones along borders,’ p. 312 

106  Hambling, D. ‘Mexican Drug Cartel Carries Out ‘Drone 

Strikes’ In Gang War,’  Forbes , 24 August 2020,  https:// 

www.forbes.com/sites/davidhambling/2020/08/24/ 

mexican-drug-cartel-carries-out-drone-strikes-in-gang-

war/?sh=2947657b9432 

107  H. I. Sutton, ‘Rare Electric Narco Submarine Seized in 

Colombia,’ USNI News, 16 November 2020,  https:// 

news.usni.org/2020/11/16/rare-electric-narco-

submarine-seized-in-colombia 

108  Hambling, ‘Mexican Drug Cartel.’ 

109  Warren, B. ‘A ruthless Mexican drug lord’s empire 

is devastating families with its grip on small-

town USA,’  Courier Journal , 25 November 2019, 

https://eu.courier-journal.com/in-depth/news/ 

crime/2019/11/24/el-menchos-mexican-drug-cartel-

cjng-empire-devastating-small-towns/4181733002/ 

110  Bunker, R. J., John P. Sullivan, and David A. Kuhn, 

‘Use of weaponized consumer drones in Mexican crime 

wat,’  Small Wars Journal , 2002-2021, pp. 70-71. 

Small Wars Journal has covered extensively the use of 

drones by cartels 

111  Stevenson, ‘Mexico.’ 

112  Infobae, ‘Cártel del Tepalcatepec denunci ó 

incursi ó n del CJNG con supuestos drones,’ Infobae, 

5 may 2021,  https://www.infobae.com/america/ 

mexico/2021/05/05/cartel-del-tepalcatepec-

denuncio-incursion-del-cjng-con-supuestos-drones/ 

113  Arteaga Botello, ‘Politica,’ p. 278 

114  William Aviles,  The drug war in Latin America: 

hegemony and global capitalism  (London: Routledge, 

2018), pp. 64 and 78 

115  Nixon, R. ‘On the Mexican Border, a Case for Technology 

Over Concrete,’  The New York Times , 20 June 2017 

116  Moltke, H. ‘Mission Creep: how the NSA’s game-

changing targeting system built for Iraq and Afghanistan 

ended up on the Mexico border,’  The Intercept , 29 May 

2019,  https://theintercept.com/2019/05/29/nsa-data-

afghanistan-iraq-mexico-border/ 

117  Kuzmarov, J. ‘The Failure of the U.S. High-Tech War 

on Drugs,’ Diplomatic History, 2021,  https://doi. 

org/10.1093/dh/dhab043 

118  Arteaga Botello, ‘Politica,’ 278 

119  International Institute of Strategic Studies.  The 

Military Balance 2021 , p. 403 

120  Pamela Squella, ‘UAV Hermes de la Fuerza Aerea 

refuerza el combate de incendios en Chile,’  Defensa. 

com , 9 January 2019,  https://www.defensa.com/ 

chile/uav-hermes-900-fuerza-aerea-refuerza-combate-

incendios-chile 

121  Zwijnenburg and Postma, ‘Unmanned ambitions,’ p. 27 

122  International Institute of Strategic Studies.  The 

Military Balance 2021 , p. 412 

123  Cook, G. “UAVs Help Ecuador’s Navy Catch Drug 

Traffickers From the Air.”  Online at  https://dialogo-

americas.com/articles/uavs-help-ecuadors-navy-

catch-drug-traffickers-from-the-air/#.YR6k34gzbIU 

124  Baquero Montoya P . and Ren é Vásquez Briones, ‘Empleo 

de los UAV en operaciones de seguridad y vigilancia en 

las areas estrategicas en Ecuador,’  Revista de Ciencias 

de Seguridad y Defensa , IV, 4, 2019, p. 87 

125  Peru.com. “Conozca los drones peruanos, aviones no 

tripulados fabricados en Perú.”  Online at  https:// 

peru.com/2012/07/12/actualidad/mi-ciudad/conozca-

drones-peruanos-aviones-no-tripulados-fabricados-

peru-noticia-74726 

126  Zwijnenburg and Postma, ‘Unmanned ambitions,’ p. 26 

127  Glickhouse, R. ‘Explainer.’ 

128  For a balanced view see Rouvinski V., ‘Russian-

Venezuelan Relations at a Crossroads,’  https://5g. 

wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/media/ 

documents/publication/russia-venezuela_report_ 

rouvinski_final.pdf 

129  Sorio, A. B. ‘Venezuela and the Middle East Under 

Hugo Chávez (1999–2013): Strategic Continuities and 

Ideological Preferences,’ In: Kuri, M. T. (Ed.).  Latin 

American Foreign Policies towards the Middle East :

Actors, Contexts, and Trends  (New York: Palgrave 

Macmillan, 2016), pp. 99–134 

130  Ellsworth B., ‘Venezuela says building drones with 

Iran’s help,’  Reuters , 14 June 2012,  https://www. 

reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-iran-drone-

idUSBRE85D14N20120614 

131  Sánchez et al.  ‘Vehículos aéreos no tripulados,’ p. 61 

132  Diálogo, ‘Iran May Be Providing Military Equipment 

to Venezuela, Report Warns,’ 10 December 2020, 

https://dialogo-americas.com/articles/iran-may-be-

providing-military-equipment-to-venezuela-report-

warns/#.YR6oKogzbIU 

133  Cenciotti, D. ‘Iranian Mohajer-2 drone appears in 

Venezuela.  Chavez’s building his own drone fleet with 

the help of Tehran,’  The Aviationist , 12 June 2012, 

https://theaviationist.com/2012/06/12/venezuela-

mohajer-2/ 

134  Webinfomil, ‘Venezuela se armará con drones de 

combate iraníes Mohajer-6,’ December 2020,  https:// 

www.webinfomil.com/2020/12/venezuela-se-armara-

con-drones-de.html 

135  Interfaks, ‘Koronavirus zatormozil stroitel’stvo zavoda 

po vypusku AK v Venesuele,’ 20 January 2021,  https:// 

www.interfax.ru/world/748244 

136  Franke, U. E. ‘The global diffusion of unmanned aerial 

vehicles (UAVs), or ‘drones’’ in Aaronson, M., Wali 

Aslam, Tom Dyson, Regina Rauxloh,  Precision Strike 

Warfare and International Intervention  (London: 

Routledge, 2014) 

137  See for example Bergtora Sandvik K. and Maria 

Gabrielsen Jumbert , The Good drone  (London: 

Routledge, 2017) 

138  Thomas Hippler,  Governing from the Skies  (London: 

Verso, 2017) and Shaw,  Predator 

139  Rosa Brooks, ‘Duck-rabbits and drones: legal 

indeterminacy in the war on terror,’  Stanford Law and 

Policy Review , Vol. 25, 2014, pp. 301-315. 

140  Wall, ‘Unmanning,’ p. 41. 

141  For a detailed analysis of this process see Centro de 

Estudios Legales y Sociales, The Internal War, CELS 

Report, 2018,  https://www.cels.org.ar/web/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/TheInternalWar_Web.pdf 

142  Arteaga Botello, ‘Politica.’ 21 

# About the Global Drug Policy Observatory 

The Global Drug Policy Observatory aims to promote evidence and human rights based drug 

policy through the comprehensive and rigorous reporting, monitoring and analysis of policy 

developments at national and international levels. Acting as a platform from which to reach 

out to and engage with broad and diverse audiences, the initiative aims to help improve the 

sophistication and horizons of the current policy debate among the media and elite opinion 

formers as well as within law enforcement and policy making communities. The Observatory 

engages in a range of research activities that explore not only the dynamics and implications 

of existing and emerging policy issues, but also the processes behind policy shifts at various 

levels of governance. 

# Global Drug Policy Observatory 

School of Social Science 

Department of Politics, Philosophy and 

International Relations 

James Callaghan Building 

Swansea University 

Singleton Park 

Swansea, SA2 8PP 

Tel: +44 (0)1792 604293 

www.swansea.ac.uk/gdpo 

> @gdpo_swan

supported by
