Title: Fair Housing Act Design Manual

URL Source: https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/PDF/FAIRHOUSING/fairfull.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 25 Feb 2008 17:08:11 GMT

Markdown Content:
A SSIST D B UILDERS IN MA CCESSIBILITY R EQUIREMENTS F AIR H OUSING A CT 

F AIR H OUSING A CT D ESIGN M

A M ANUAL TO ESIGNERS AND EETING THE OF THE ANUAL 

U.  S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Office of Housing F AIR H OUSING A CT D ESIGN M ANUAL 

A M ANUAL TO A SSIST D ESIGNERS AND B UILDERS IN M EETING THE A CCESSIBILITY R EQUIREMENTS OF THE F AIR H OUSING A CT 

> designed and developed by

Barrier Free Environments, Inc. Raleigh, North Carolina 

> for

The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity and the Office of Housing Contract # 15903 

August 1996 Revised April 1998 C REDITS 

Project Director  Ronald L. Mace, FAIA 

Project Manager  Leslie C. Young 

Technical Assistance  Cheryl Kent , FHEO, HUD 

Authorship  Leslie C. Young Ronald L. Mace 

> Geoff Sifrin

Architectural Design and Conceptual Illustration  Ronald L. Mace Leslie C. Young Rex J. Pace 

> Geoff Sifrin

Graphic Design  Christopher A. B. McLachlan 

Illustration  Rex J. Pace 

> Mark Pace

Photography  Kelly Houk Leslie C. Young 

Acknowledgements  Creation of this design manual involved the close cooperation of many people. Among them are the reviewers and technical staff at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, including Cheryl Kent, Judy Keeler, Merle Morrow, Alan Rothman, Nelson Carbonell, and Gail Williamson. Special appreciation to the Barrier Free Environments, Inc. staff who contributed to this publication, including Leslie Young, Rex Pace, and Ron Mace. Special thanks also to Geoff Sifrin in South Africa and Lucy Harber. Every attempt was made with this project to provide a concise and easy-to-follow guide on the construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act. Our hope is that the construction and disabil-ity communities to whom this manual is directed will be able to use and benefit from our efforts. C ONTENTS 

Part One 

page 1 

Part Two 

page 1.1 

page 2.1 

page 3.1 

page 4.1 

page 5.1 

page 6.1 

page 7.1 page 7.31 

Part Three 

page A.1 page B.1 page C.1 

I NTRODUCTION 

D ESIGN R EQUIREMENTS OF THE G UIDELINES 

Chapter One: R EQUIREMENT 1 – Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route 

Chapter Two: R EQUIREMENT 2 – Accessible and Usable Public and Common Use Areas 

Chapter Three: R EQUIREMENT 3 – Usable Doors 

Chapter Four: R EQUIREMENT 4 – Accessible Route into and Through the Covered Unit 

Chapter Five: R EQUIREMENT 5 – Light Switches, Electrical Outlets, Thermostats, and Other Environmental Controls in Accessible Locations 

Chapter Six: R EQUIREMENT 6 – Reinforced Walls for Grab Bars 

Chapter Seven: R EQUIREMENT 7 – Usable Kitchens and Bathrooms  

> ■

P ART A: Usable Kitchens  

> ■

P ART B: Usable Bathrooms 

A PPENDICES  

> ■

Product Resources and Selected References  

> ■

Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines  

> ■

Supplemental Notice: Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines: Questions and Answers About the Guidelines INTRODUCTION 

Part One INTRODUCTION 

I NTRODUCTION 

T HE F AIR H OUSING A CT 

Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, com monly known as the Fair Housing Act, prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, and financing of dwellings based on race, color, religion, sex, and national origin. In 1988, Congress passed the Fair Housing Amendments Act. The Amendments expand coverage of Title VIII to prohibit discrimi natory housing practices based on disability 1 and familial status. Now it is unlawful to deny the rental or sale of a dwelling unit to a person because that person has a disability. 

As a protected class, people with disabilities are unique in at least one respect because they are the only minority that can be discriminated against solely by the design of the built environment. The Fair Housing Act remedies that in part by estab lishing design and construction requirements for multifamily housing built for first occupancy after March 13, 1991. The law provides that a failure to design and construct certain multifamily dwellings to include certain features of accessible design will be regarded as unlawful discrimination. 

The design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act apply to all new multifam ily housing consisting of four or more dwelling units. Such buildings must meet specific design requirements so public and common use spaces and facilities are accessible to people with disabili ties. In addition, the interior of dwelling units 

covered by the Fair Housing Act must be designed so they too meet certain accessibility requirements. 

The Fair Housing Act is intended to place “modest accessibility requirements on covered multifamily dwellings .... These modest require ments will be incorporated into the design of new buildings, resulting in features which do not look unusual and will not add significant additional costs” (House Report 711 2 at 25 and 18 ). Fair Housing units are not fully accessible, nor are they purported to be; however, new multifamily housing built to comply with the Guidelines will be a dramatic improvement over units built in the past. 

The Fair Housing Act gives people with disabilities greater freedom to choose where they will live and greater freedom to visit friends and relatives. But the Fair Housing Act has other broad implications. It proactively addresses the needs of an evolving population, looking ahead at future needs. With the aging of the population and the increase in incidence of disability that accompanies aging, significant numbers of people will be able to remain in and safely use their dwellings longer. For example, housing designed in accordance with the Fair Housing Act will have accessible entrances, wider doors, and provisions to allow for easy installation of grab bars around toilets and bath tubs, i.e., features that make housing safer and more responsive to all users. 

> 1The Fair Housing Act statute uses the term “handicap”; however, this manual uses the terms “disability” or “persons with disabilities” to the greatest extent possible to be consistent with current preferred terminology as reflected in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
> 2House Report No. 711, 100th Congress, 2nd Session

1PART ONE 

T HE R OLE OF HUD 

The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is the Federal agency respon sible for enforcement of compliance with the Fair Housing Act. On January 23, 1989, HUD pub lished its final rule implementing the Fair Housing Act. In the preamble to this rule, HUD indicated that it would provide further guidance on meeting the new construction requirements of the Act by developing accessibility guidelines. The preamble stated that until these guidelines are published, designers and builders may be guided by the requirements of the ANSI A117.1-1986 American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities – Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People . More information on the ANSI standard appears on page 13. 

The final Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) were published on March 6, 1991 (56 Federal Register 9472-9515, 24 CFR 3 Chapter I, Subchapter A, Appendix II and III). The Guidelines provide technical guid ance on designing dwelling units as required by the Fair Housing Act. The Guidelines are not manda tory, but are intended to provide a safe harbor for compliance with the accessibility requirements of the Fair Housing Act. The Guidelines are included in this manual as Appendix B. 

The Guidelines published on March 6, 1991, remain unchanged. However, on June 28, 1994, HUD published a supplemental notice to the Guidelines, “Supplement to Notice of Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines: Questions and Answers About the Guidelines.” This supplemental notice reproduces questions that have been most frequently asked by members of the public, and 

> CFR = Code of Federal Regulations
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

HUD’s answers to those questions. The Supplement also is included in this manual as Appendix C. 

Under the Fair Housing Act, HUD is not required to review builders’ plans or issue a certi fication of compliance with the Fair Housing Act. HUD prepared the Guidelines and will answer technical questions. HUD also provides this pub lication as additional guidance. 

The burden of compliance rests with the person or persons who design and construct covered multifamily dwellings. HUD or an individual who thinks he or she may have been discriminated against may file a complaint against the building owner, the architect, the contractor, and any other persons involved in the design and construction of the building. See page 22 for additional information on enforcement. 

T HE P URPOSE OF THE M ANUAL 

This design manual has been produced by HUD to assist designers, builders, and developers in understanding and conforming with the design requirements of the Fair Housing Act. It contains explanations and uses detailed illustrations to explain the application of the Guidelines to all aspects of multifamily housing projects. 

The manual consists of three parts: 

Part One: T HE I NTRODUCTION contains an overview of the Fair Housing Act, outlines other national laws and standards that regulate accessible design, presents the types of buildings/dwellings that are covered by the Fair Housing Act, and gives a brief discussion of the different types of disabilities. 

2

> 3INTRODUCTION

Part Two: T HE D ESIGN R EQUIREMENTS OF THE G UIDELINES is a detailed, illustrated explana tion of the seven requirements of the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines. 

Part Three: T HE A PPENDIX contains additional information that may be useful to anyone needing to be familiar with the design requirements of the Fair Housing Act. Included are a list of product resources, a list of selected references, a reprint of the Guidelines, and a reprint of the Supplemental Notice to the Guidelines. 

L AWS AND C ODES THAT M ANDATE A CCESSIBILITY 

Over the past two and a half decades, several statutes have been enacted at various levels of government that ensure nondiscrimination against people with disabilities, both in the design of the built environment and in the manner that pro grams are conducted. Even though this manual addresses the application of the Fair Housing Act and the Guidelines, certain dwellings, as well as certain public and common use areas, may be covered by several of the laws listed below. A brief synopsis of the landmark legislation follows to show where the Fair Housing Act fits into the overall history of accessibility legislation. 

T HE A RCHITECTURAL B ARRIERS A CT (1968) 

This Act stipulates that all buildings, other than privately owned residential facilities, constructed by 

or on behalf of, or leased by the United States, or buildings financed in whole or in part by the United States must be physically accessible for people with disabilities. The Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) is the applicable standard. 

S ECTION 504 OF THE R EHABILITATION A CT (1973) 

Under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended, no otherwise qualified indi vidual with a disability may be discriminated against in any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. The purpose of Section 504 is to eliminate discriminatory behavior toward people with disabilities and to provide physical accessibil ity, thus ensuring that people with disabilities will have the same opportunities in federally funded programs as do people without disabilities. 

Program accessibility may be achieved by modifying an existing facility, or by moving the program to an accessible location, or by making other accommodations, including construction of new buildings. HUD’s final regulation for Section 504 may be found at 24 CFR Part 8. Generally, the UFAS is the design standard for providing physical accessibility, although other standards which provide equivalent or greater accessibility may be used. 

T HE F AIR H OUSING A CT OF 1968, AS A MENDED 

The Fair Housing Act provides equal opportunities for people in the housing market regardless of disability, race, color, sex, religion, familial status or national origin, regardless of whether the housing is 

3PART ONE 

publicly funded or not. This includes the sale, rental, and financing of housing, as well as the physical design of newly constructed multifamily housing. The Fair Housing Act is discussed in more detail in the next section, “General Provisions of the Fair Housing Act.” 

T HE A MERICANS WITH D ISABILITIES A CT (1990) 

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is a broad civil rights law guaranteeing equal opportu nity for individuals with disabilities in employ ment, public accommodations, transportation, state and local government services, and telecom munications. Title III of the Act covers all private establishments and facilities considered “public accommodations,” such as restaurants, hotels, retail establishments, doctors’ offices, and theaters. People with disabilities must have equal opportu nity in these establishments, both in terms of physical access and in the enjoyment of services. Title II of the ADA applies to all programs, ser vices, and activities provided or made available by public entities. With respect to housing, this includes, for example, public housing and housing provided for state colleges and universities. 

Under Title I of the ADA, employers may not discriminate in hiring or firing, and must provide reasonable accommodations to persons with disabilities, such as providing special equip ment or training and arranging modified work schedules. A discussion of the relationship between the ADA and the Fair Housing Act appears on page 2 of the “Supplement to Notice of Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines: Questions and Answers About the Guidelines” at Appendix C. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

S TATE AND L OCAL C ODES 

All states and many cities and counties have developed their own building codes for accessibil ity, usually based in whole or in part on the specifi cations contained in the major national standards such as ANSI and UFAS. Many states also have nondiscrimination and fair housing laws similar to the Fair Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 

When local codes differ from the national standard, either in scope or technical specification, the general rule is that the more stringent require ment should be followed. Many states also have provisions that a certain percentage (often 5%) of new multifamily housing must meet more stringent physical accessibility requirements than required under the Fair Housing Act. In such cases, both the state’s mandated percentage of accessible units must be provided and all dwellings covered by the Fair Housing Act must meet the Guidelines. 

G ENERAL P ROVISIONS OF THE F AIR H OUSING A CT 

The 1988 amendments to the Fair Housing Act extend to persons with disabilities and to families with children the same kinds of nondiscrimination protections afforded to persons based on race, color, religion, sex, and national origin. Thus, the Fair Housing Act protects persons with disabilities from discrimination in any activities relating to the sale or rental of dwellings, in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwellings, and in the availability of residential real estate related transactions. 

4INTRODUCTION 

The Fair Housing Act covers most types of housing. In some circumstances it exempts owner-occupied buildings with no more than four units, single-family housing sold or rented without the use of a broker, and housing operated by organiza tions and private clubs that limit occupancy to members. 

The design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act and the Guidelines apply only to new construction of housing built for first occupancy after March 13, 1991. Those require ments are the focus of this manual; however, a brief discussion follows on the effect of the Fair Housing Act on policies and procedures in both new and existing multifamily housing developments. 

The broad objective of the Fair Housing Act is to prohibit discrimination in housing because of a person’s race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, or disability. To ensure that persons with disabilities will have full use and enjoyment of their dwellings, the Fair Housing Act also includes two important provisions: one, a provision making it unlawful to refuse to make  

> reasonable accommodations

in rules, policies, practices, and services when necessary to allow the resident with a disability equal opportunity to use the property and its amenities; and two, a provision making it unlawful to refuse to permit residents with disabilities to make reasonable modifica-tions to either their dwelling unit or to the public and common use areas, at the residents’ cost. 

R EASONABLE A CCOMMODATIONS 

Under the Fair Housing Act, it is unlawful for any person to refuse to make reasonable accommoda tions in rules, policies, practices, or services when 

such accommodations may be necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling. For example, in buildings with a “no pets” rule, that rule must be waived for a person with a visual impairment who uses a service dog, or for other persons who use service animals. In buildings that provide parking spaces for residents on a “first come, first served” basis, reserved parking spaces must be provided if requested by a resident with a disability who may need them. Sales material for apartments may need to be provided in a format so an individual with a visual disability may access the information. 

R EASONABLE M ODIFICATIONS 

When a resident wishes to modify a dwelling unit under the reasonable modification provisions of the Fair Housing Act, the resident may do so. The landlord/manager may require that the modifica tion be completed in a professional manner under the applicable building codes, and may also require that the resident agree to restore the interior of the dwelling to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 

Landlords may not require that modifica tions be restored that would be unreasonable, i.e., modifications that in no way affect the next resident’s “enjoyment of the premises.” For ex ample, in existing construction, a resident needs grab bars and pays to have the original wall rein forced with blocking between studs so grab bars can be securely mounted. It would be reasonable to require that the resident remove the grab bars at the end of the tenancy; however, it would be unreasonable to require that the blocking be removed since the reinforced wall would not 

5PART ONE 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

interfere with the next resident’s use and enjoyment  modification and the builder may not refuse. 

of the dwelling unit and may be needed by some  However, the resident is responsible for any extra 

future resident.  cost that the modifications might create over and 

However, if a resident who uses a wheel- above what the original design would have cost. 

chair were to remove a kitchen base cabinet and 

mount a lowered countertop to a height suitable for 

his or her use, the landlord may condition permis 

sion on the resident agreeing to restore the cabinet 

to its original condition when the resident vacates 

the unit. On the other hand, if a resident who uses 

a wheelchair finds that the bathroom door in the 

dwelling unit is too narrow to allow his or her 

wheelchair to pass, the landlord must give permis 

sion for the door to be widened, at the resident’s 

expense. The landlord may not require that the 

doorway be narrowed at the end of the resident’s 

tenancy because the wider doorway will not inter 

fere with the next resident’s use of the dwelling. 

Residents also may make modifications to 

the public and common use spaces. For example, in 

an existing development it would be considered 

reasonable for a resident who uses a wheelchair to 

have a ramp built to gain access to an on-site 

laundry facility. Modifications of this type are not 

required to be returned to their original condition. 

If a resident cannot afford such a modification, the 

resident may ask a friend to do his or her laundry in 

the laundry room, and the landlord must waive any 

rule that prohibits nonresidents from gaining access 

to the laundry room. 

Regarding the cost of special modifications 

in new construction, builders or landlords are 

responsible only for meeting the design require 

ments specified by the Fair Housing Act. If a 

particular resident intends to buy a unit and needs 

additional modifications to meet the needs of his or 

her disability, then the resident may ask for such 

6INTRODUCTION 

T HE S COPE OF THE D ESIGN different people. The Fair Housing Act incorpo- 

> AND

C ONSTRUCTION R EQUIREMENTS rates the adaptable/adjustable concept in bathroom  

> OF THE

F AIR H OUSING A CT walls by requiring that they contain reinforced 

The accessibility requirements of the Fair Housing Act are intended to provide usable housing for persons with disabilities without necessarily being significantly different from conventional housing. The Fair Housing Act specifies certain features of accessible design and certain features of adaptable design. These basic design features are essential for equal access and to avoid future de facto exclusion of persons with disabilities, as well as being easy to incorporate into housing design and construction. These design features assist not only persons with disabilities but also other persons to use and enjoy all aspects of a residential development. 4

A DAPTABLE D WELLING U NITS 

Covered dwelling units that meet the design requirements of the Guidelines are sometimes referred to as “adaptable dwelling units” or units that meet “certain features of accessible design.” The Guidelines incorporate accessibility features that are both accessible and adaptable. Accessible elements and spaces are those whose design allows them to be used by the greatest number of users without being modified. For example, the require ment within the covered dwelling unit for “usable” doors, with a nominal clear opening of 32 inches, ensures that dwelling unit doors are not too narrow or impassable for any resident. 

Adaptable/adjustable elements and spaces are those with a design which allows them to be adapted or adjusted to accommodate the needs of 

> House Report No. 711, 100th Congress, 2nd Session

areas to allow for later installation of grab bars without the need for major structural work on the walls. 

D WELLINGS C OVERED BY THE D ESIGN R EQUIREMENTS 

The design requirements apply to buildings built for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, which fall under the definition of “covered multifamily dwellings.” See page 12 for a discussion of “first occupancy.” Covered multifamily dwellings are:  

> 1.

all dwelling units in buildings containing four or more dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators, and  

> 2.

all ground floor dwelling units in other buildings containing four or more units. 

To be a covered unit, all of the finished living space must be on the same floor, that is, be a single-story unit, such as single-story townhouses, villas, or patio apartments. Even though raised and sunken areas are permissible in covered dwelling units, there are limitations to their use and they are discussed in Chapter Four: “Accessible Route Into and Through the Covered Unit.” Multistory dwelling units are not covered by the Guidelines except when they are located in buildings which have one or more elevators, in which case, the primary entry level is covered. 

7

> 4PART ONE

Dwelling Units in Buildings with Elevator(s) 

As is evident from the preceding discussion, the Fair Housing Act’s definition of “covered multifam ily dwellings” distinguishes between buildings with elevators and buildings without elevators. Thus, if a building has one or more elevators, all of the dwelling units in the building are covered. 

There is one exception to this requirement, and that is when an elevator is provided only as a means of creating an accessible route to dwelling units on a ground floor. In that case, the elevator is not required to serve dwelling units on floors which are not ground floors, and the building is not considered to be a “building with one or more elevators” that would require all of the dwelling units to meet the requirements of the Guidelines. This concept is discussed more fully in Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route,” starting on page 1.21.   

> single-story unit (covered)
> finished basement with living space two-story units makes this a two-(not covered) story dwelling unit, thus, it is not covered

Ground Floor Dwelling Units 

The ground floor is defined as a floor of a build ing with a building entrance on an accessible route. The ground floor may or may not be at grade. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> elevator two-story units one-story units

Buildings with Elevator(s): All Single-Story Units and the Primary Entry Level of Multistory Units Are Covered 

> = covered floors
> primary entry

Ground Floor Units in Buildings of 4 or More Units Are Covered 

> = covered unit

8INTRODUCTION 

The definition of ground floor further provides that where the first floor containing dwelling units in a building is above grade, all units on that floor must be served by a building entrance on an accessible route. This floor will be considered to be a ground floor. 

If more than one story can be designed to have an accessible entrance on an accessible route, then each story becomes a ground floor and all units on those stories are covered. However, the Fair Housing Act and the Guidelines do not require that there be more than one ground floor. See Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route” for more detailed discussion of covered ground floors.     

> placing shops or
> garages under multi-
> an accessible route via a family housing is a
> ramp or elevator must design choice and is
> be provided to the first not dictated by
> floor of dwelling units extremes of terrain
> ground floor with single-story dwelling units shops or
> garage

Covered Dwelling Units Over Shops and Garages  

> planned
> = covered floors grade level entrance
> planned lentrance

Building Has Two Ground Floors, Each with an Accessible Entrance on an Accessible Route 

> grade leve
> single-story walk-up units (not covered) single-story units (covered)

Dwelling Units on the Ground Floor Are Covered (the Guidelines Do Not Require that There Be a Second Ground Floor) 

9PART ONE 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

E XAMPLES OF C OVERED M ULTIFAMILY D WELLINGS 

The Fair Housing Act does not distinguish between different forms of ownership when determining whether a unit or building is covered. Condomini ums are covered by the Fair Housing Act even if they are pre-sold as a shell and the interior is designed and constructed by the buyer. All covered units must comply with the design and construc tion requirements of the Guidelines. Single-story townhouses are covered, as are other types of housing including vacation timeshare units, college dormitories, apartment housing in private universi ties, and sleeping accommodations intended for occupancy as a residence in a shelter. 

Continuing care facilities or retirement communities are covered even when they include health care, provided the facility includes at least one building with four or more dwelling units. Whether a facility is considered a “dwelling” depends on whether the facility is to be used as a residence for more than a brief period of time. The operation of each continuing care facility must be examined on a case-by-case basis to determine whether it contains covered multifamily dwellings. 

Buildings Separated by Firewalls or Covered Walkways 

Dwellings built within a single structure but separated by a firewall are treated under the Fair Housing Act as a single building. For example, a structure containing two units on each side of a firewall would not be regarded as four two-unit buildings (and thus not covered by the Guidelines) but as a single eight-unit building. 

In other situations where the dwelling units are connected, such as by stairs or a walkway that is structurally tied to the main body of the building, for purposes of the Guidelines, they are considered a single building and ground floor units in such buildings without elevators are covered. 

> fire walls

Building with Firewalls Is Treated as a Single Building   

> stair, overhead walk, and roof
> 3 units 3 units structurally tied to each building makes this a six-unit single building

For Purposes of the Guidelines, Two Structurally Joined Buildings Are Treated as a Single Building 

10 INTRODUCTION 

Building Conversions 

If a building was used previously for a nonresiden tial purpose, such as a warehouse, office building, or school, and is being converted to multifamily housing, the conversion is not covered. The Fair Housing Act only applies to covered buildings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991. The regula tions define “first occupancy” as “a building that has never before been used for any purpose.” See page 12 for additional discussion of “first occupancy.” 

New Construction Behind Old Facade 

In cases where the facade of a building is preserved, but the interior of the building, including all structural portions of floors and ceilings is re moved, and a new building is constructed behind the old facade, the building is considered a new building for the purposes of the Fair Housing Act. Thus, it is covered and must comply with the Guidelines. 

Additions to Existing Buildings 

When an addition is built as an extension to an existing building, the addition of four or more units is regarded as a new building and must meet the design requirements of the Guidelines. If any new public and common use spaces are added, they are required to be accessible. If, for example, an apartment wing is added to an existing hotel, the apartments are covered by the Fair Housing Act. 

Housing for Older Persons Is Covered 

Housing built specifically for older persons is exempt from complying with the Fair Housing Act’s prohibition against discrimination based on familial status (see 24 CFR 100.303 and 100.304). However, such housing is still subject to the Fair Housing Act’s other requirements, including the design requirements for accessibility. 

> facade is all of original construction that remains new construction

New Construction Behind Old Facade Is Covered 

11 PART ONE 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

F IRST O CCUPANCY A FTER M ARCH 13, 1991 

The Fair Housing Act does not require any renova tions to existing buildings. Its design requirements apply to new construction only – to covered multifamily dwellings that are built for first occu pancy after March 13, 1991. First occupancy is defined as “a building that has never before been used for any purpose.” See also “Definitions Used in the Guidelines,” page 16. 

A building is not subject to the design requirements of the Fair Housing Act if:  

> 1.

it was occupied on or before March 13, 1991, – or – 

> 2.

the last building permit or renewal thereof was issued by a state, county, or local government on or before June 15, 1990. 

For a building to be considered occupied, the following criteria must be met:  

> 1.

a certificate of occupancy must have been issued, – and – 

> 2.

at least one dwelling unit actually must be occupied. 

a.  For a building containing rental units , this means that a resident has signed a lease and taken possession of a unit. The resident must have the legal right to occupy the premises, but need not have physically moved in yet. 

b.  For a building containing for-sale units ,this means that a new owner has completed settlement and taken possession of a unit. The new owner must have the legal right to occupy the premises, but need not have physically moved in yet. 

A certificate of occupancy, or the fact that units are being offered for sale but not yet sold, would not be an acceptable means of establishing occupancy. For a project consisting of several buildings which are constructed in phases spanning the March 13, 1991 date, first occupancy will be determined on a building-by-building basis. 

12 INTRODUCTION 

T HE ANSI S TANDARD , THE F AIR H OUSING A CT , AND THE G UIDELINES 

The Fair Housing Act requires certain features of accessible design for covered multifamily dwellings built for first occupancy after March 13, 1991. The Act and HUD's implementing regulations, as well as the final Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) reference the 1986 ANSI A117.1 

American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities – Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People as an acceptable standard to meet when designing accessible elements, spaces, and features outside covered dwelling units. 

The level of accessibility required by the Fair Housing Act is relatively high on the site and in common use areas where compliance with much of the ANSI Standard is required. Access ibility is less stringent within the dwelling units where only specific features outlined in the Guide lines are required. In some instances, the specifica tion is a modification of the related ANSI section, and in other instances the Guidelines substitute specifications. 

The Guidelines state in the “Purpose” Section that the Guidelines are to provide technical guidance on designing dwelling units that are in compliance with the Fair Housing Act, and are not mandatory. Rather, the Guidelines provide a safe harbor for compliance with the accessibility requirements of the Act. 

The “Purpose” Section also states, “Build ers and developers may choose to depart from these Guidelines and seek alternate ways to demonstrate that they have met the requirements of the Fair Housing Act.” However, it is recommended that, 

if a designer or builder chooses to follow an accessi bility standard other than the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard, or a more recent version of the ANSI A117.1, such as the 1992 CABO/ANSI, that care be taken to ensure the standard used is at least equivalent to or stricter than the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard.  

> Note:

Whenever this Manual states the ANSI Standard or the ANSI A117.1 Standard “must be followed,” it means the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard or an equivalent or stricter standard. 

13 PART ONE 

T HE G UIDELINES 

The design requirements of the Guidelines to which new buildings and dwelling units must comply are presented in abridged form below. Dwelling units are not subject to these requirements only in the rare instance where there are extremes of terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. Such instances are discussed in detail in Chapter One: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route.” 

R EQUIREMENT 1 

> Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route:

Covered multifamily dwellings must have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. For all such dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route the following six requirements apply. 

R EQUIREMENT 2 

> Accessible and Usable Public and Common Use Areas:

Public and common use areas must be readily accessible to and usable by people with disabilities. See Chapter Two. 

R EQUIREMENT 3 

> Usable Doors:

All doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises must be sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons in wheelchairs. See Chapter Three. 

R EQUIREMENT 4 

> Accessible Route Into and Through the Covered Dwelling Unit:

There must be an accessible route into and through the dwelling units, providing access for people with disabilities throughout the unit. See Chapter Four. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R EQUIREMENT 5 

> Light Switches, Electrical Outlets, Thermostats and Other Environmental Controls in Accessible Locations:

All premises within the dwelling units must contain light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations. See Chapter Five. 

R EQUIREMENT 6 

> Reinforced Walls for Grab Bars:

All premises within dwelling units must contain reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars around toilet, tub, shower stall and shower seat, where such facilities are provided. See Chapter Six. 

R EQUIREMENT 7 

> Usable Kitchens and Bathrooms:

Dwelling units must contain usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual who uses a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. See Chapter Seven. 

14 INTRODUCTION 

D EFINITIONS U SED IN THE G UIDELINES 

This is the complete list of definitions used in the Guidelines, excluding a definition for “handicap” and “controlled substance.” See Appendix B of this manual for a reprint of the Guidelines, which contains the complete list. Two additional defini tions, taken from the regulations and a Guideline Requirement, are provided below. They are so noted with the definition. 

> Accessible

when used with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multi family dwelling units, means that the public or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities. The phrase “readily accessible to and usable by” is synonymous with accessible. A public or common use area that complies with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1-1986, a comparable standard, or these Guidelines is “accessible” within the meaning of this paragraph. 

> Accessible route

means a continuous and unobstructed path con necting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair, and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. Interior accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, and lifts. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps, and lifts. A route that complies with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1-1986, a comparable standard, or 

Requirement 1 of these Guidelines is an “accessible route.” In the circumstances described in Require ments 1 and 2, “accessible route” may include access via a vehicular route. 

> Adaptable dwelling units

when used with respect to covered multifamily dwellings, means dwelling units that include the features of adaptable design specified in 24 CFR 100.205(c) (2)-(3). 

> ANSI A117.1 - 1986

means the 1986 edition of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled people. 

> Assistive device

means an aid, tool, or instrument used by a person with disabilities to assist in activities of daily living. Examples of assistive devices include tongs, knob-turners, and oven-rack pusher/pullers. 

> Bathroom

means a bathroom which includes a water closet (toilet), lavatory (sink), and bathtub or shower. It does not include single-fixture facilities or those with only a water closet and lavatory. It does include a compartmented bathroom. A compart mented bathroom is one in which the fixtures are distributed among interconnected rooms. A compartmented bathroom is considered a single unit and is subject to the Act’s requirements for bathrooms. 

15 PART ONE 

> Building

means a structure, facility, or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units. 

> Building entrance on an accessible route

means an accessible entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to public trans portation stops, to parking or passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available. A building entrance that complies with ANSI A117.1 -1986 (see Requirement 1 of these Guide lines) or a comparable standard complies with the requirements of this paragraph. 

> Clear

means unobstructed. 

> Common use areas

means rooms, spaces, or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building or the guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas, and passageways among and between build ings. See Requirement 2 of these Guidelines. 

> Covered multifamily dwellings

or covered multifamily dwellings subject to the Fair Housing Amendments means buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators, and ground floor dwelling units in other buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units. Dwelling units within a single structure separated by firewalls do not constitute separate buildings. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> Dwelling unit

means a single unit of residence for a household of one or more persons. Examples of dwelling units covered by these Guidelines include: condomini ums, an apartment unit within an apartment building, and other types of dwellings in which sleeping accommodations are provided but toileting or cooking facilities are shared by occupants of more than one room or portion of the dwelling. Examples of the latter include dormitory rooms and sleeping accommodations in shelters intended for occupancy as a residence for homeless persons. 

> Entrance

means any exterior access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering. For purposes of these Guide lines, an “entrance” does not include a door to a loading dock or a door used primarily as a service entrance, even if nondisabled residents occasionally use that door to enter. 

> Finished grade

means the ground surface of the site after all construction, levelling, grading, and development has been completed. 

> First occupancy

means a building that has never before been used for any purpose. (Definition found in regulations at 24 CFR 100.201) 

16 INTRODUCTION 

> Ground Floor

means a floor of a building with a building en trance on an accessible route. A building may have one or more ground floors. Where the first floor containing dwelling units is above grade, all units on that floor must be served by a building entrance on an accessible route. This floor will be considered a ground floor. 

> Loft

means an intermediate level between the floor and ceiling of any story, located within a room or rooms of a dwelling. 

> Multistory dwelling unit

means a dwelling unit with finished living space located on one floor and the floor or floors imme diately above or below it. 

> Powder room

A room containing a toilet and a sink. (Definition found in Requirement 6 of the Guidelines.) 

> Public use areas

means interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided at a building that is privately or publicly owned. 

> Single-story dwelling unit

means a dwelling unit with all finished living space located on one floor. 

> Site

means a parcel of land bounded by a property line or a designated portion of a public right of way. 

> Slope

means the relative steepness of the land between two points and is calculated as follows: The dis tance and elevation between the two points (e.g., an entrance and a passenger loading zone) are determined from a topographical map. The differ ence in elevation is divided by the distance and that fraction is multiplied by 100 to obtain a percentage slope figure. For example, if a principal entrance is ten feet from a passenger loading zone, and the principal entrance is raised one foot higher than the passenger loading zone, then the slope is 1/10 x 100 = 10%. 

> Story

means that portion of a dwelling unit between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or the roof of the unit. Within the context of dwelling units, the terms “story” and “floor” are synonymous. 

> Undisturbed site

means the site before any construction, levelling, grading, or development associated with the current project. 

> Vehicular or pedestrian arrival points

means public or resident parking areas, public transportation stops, passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks. 

> Vehicular route

means a route intended for vehicular traffic, such as a street, driveway, or parking lot. 

17 PART ONE 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

D ISABILITY T YPES AND I MPLICATIONS FOR D ESIGN 

T YPES OF D ISABILITIES 

Most people will, at some time during their life, have a disability, either temporary or permanent, which limits their ability to move around in and use the built environment. In fact, more than one in five Americans aged 15 and over have some type of disability; problems with walking and lifting are the most common. Not until fairly recently have the needs of people with disabilities been given adequate attention. The passage of the Fair Hous ing Act is another step in the process to create a built environment where people with disabilities can move freely in society as do persons who have no disability. 

According to the “Statistical Report: the Status of People with Disabilities,” compiled by the President’s Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities, published in 1994 5 :        

> •48.9 million Americans are persons with disabilities;
> •32 million Americans are age 65 or over;
> •3.3 million Americans are 85 and older, and this number is projected to grow by 100%, to over 6 million by 2010;
> •70% of all Americans will, at some time in their lives, have a temporary or permanent disability that makes stair climbing impossible;
> •8,000 people survive traumatic spinal cord injuries each year, returning to homes that are inaccessible;
> •17 million Americans have serious hearing disabilities;
> •8.1 million Americans have vision disabilities;
> •27 million Americans have heart disease and reduced or limited mobility.

There are hundreds of different disabilities and they manifest themselves in varying degrees. One person may have multiple disabilities while another may have a disability whose symptoms fluctuate. Most standards and design criteria are based on the needs of people defined by one of the following four general categories: 

1.  M OBILITY D ISABILITIES 

This category includes people who use wheelchairs and those who use other mobility aids. 

Wheelchair Users 

People with severe mobility disabilities use either a power-driven or manually operated wheelchair or, the more recent development, the three-wheeled cart or scooter to maneuver through the environ ment. People who use wheelchairs have some of the most obvious access problems. They include maneuvering through narrow spaces, going up or down steep paths, moving over rough or uneven surfaces, making use of toilet and bathing facilities, reaching and seeing items placed at conventional heights, and negotiating steps or changes in level at the entrance to a dwelling unit. 

The design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act and the Guidelines focus primarily on the spatial needs of people who use wheelchairs because those needs are met more easily in the initial construction phase of a building project. This section provides basic information on the spatial requirements for an average seated adult   

> Based on the census report Americans With Disabilities 1991/1992, published January 1994

18 

> 5INTRODUCTION
> footrests and toes

in a stationary position and the space necessary to 30" X 48" clear may extend farther floor space 

> 6" 42" 26" 18" for some people

execute the two most common turns typically described in accessibility standards. The specifica tions given here are based on the A117.1 - 1986 ANSI Standard (see ANSI 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4). 

Clear Floor Space: The minimum clear floor space required to accommodate a single, stationary wheelchair is 30 inches by 48 inches. For an approach to an object, counter, or control, 

Space Allowances and Approximate Dimen-sions of Adult-Sized Wheelchairs 

depending upon the object, the user may position his or her chair either parallel or perpendicular to the object. These two types of approaches are discussed in more detail in Chapters Five and Seven. 

Turning Spaces: The space required for a person using a wheelchair to make a 180-degree turn is a circle with a diameter of 60 inches. Alternatively, a person can make a T-shaped turn, similar to a three-point turn in a car, at the inter section of a hall or in a room where some of the 

space necessary to perform the turn may be under a desk, table, or countertop. 

> 60"
> 60"

Pivoting Turn Space  

> wall wall 60" min. 36" min. 60" min. the minimum space necessary to perform
> min. 30" wide knee
> a T-turn

T-Turn Space 

> space increased to 36" min. to provide for T-turn

T-Turn within a Knee Space 

19 PART ONE 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Ambulatory Mobility Disabilities 

This category includes people who walk with difficulty or who have a disability which affects gait. It also includes persons who do not have full use of arms or hands, or who lack coordination. Persons who use crutches, canes, walkers, braces, artificial limbs, or orthopedic shoes are included in this category. Activities that may be difficult for people with mobility disabilities include walking, climbing steps or slopes, standing for extended periods of time, reaching, and fine finger manipulation. 

2.  V ISUAL D ISABILITIES 

This category includes people with partial vision or total vision loss. Some people with a vision disability can distinguish light and dark, sharply contrasting colors, or large print, but cannot read small print, negotiate dimly lit spaces, or tolerate high glare. Many people who are blind depend upon their sense of touch and hearing to perceive their environment and communicate with others. Many use a cane or have a service animal to facilitate moving about.  

> 31" to 32-1/2" 28"

Space Necessary for Adults Using Crutches or Walker 

> 32"

Minimum Space Necessary for Person with a Service Animal 

20 INTRODUCTION 

3.  H EARING D ISABILITIES 

People with partial hearing often use a combina tion of speech reading and hearing aids which amplify the available sounds. Echo, reverberation, and extraneous background noise can distort hearing aid transmission. People who are deaf and who rely on lip reading for information must be able to see clearly the face of the individual who is speaking. Those who use sign language to commu nicate also may be adversely affected by poor lighting. People who are hard of hearing or deaf may have difficulty understanding oral communi cation and receiving notification by equipment that is exclusively auditory such as telephones, fire alarms, public address systems, etc. 

4.  C OGNITIVE D ISABILITIES  

> AND

O THER H IDDEN C ONDITIONS 

People with cognitive and learning disabilities may have difficulty using facilities, particularly where the signage system is unclear or complicated. In addition to people with permanent disabilities, there are others who may have a temporary condi tion which affects their usual abilities. Broken bones, illness, trauma, or surgery – all may affect a person’s use of the built environment for a short time. Frequently, people have diseases of the heart or lungs, neurological diseases with resulting lack of coordination, arthritis, or rheumatism that may reduce physical stamina or cause pain. Reduction in overall ability is also experienced by many people as they age. People of extreme size or weight often need special accommodation as well. 

21 PART ONE 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

E NFORCEMENT 

Under the Fair Housing Act, discrimination  in a civil action. An aggrieved person may bring a 

includes a failure to design and construct covered  civil action in state or federal district court within 

multifamily dwellings in a manner which includes  two years after occurrence or termination of an 

the specific features of accessible design delineated  alleged discriminatory housing practice. 

in the Act. Thus, responsibility for complying with  lf an administrative law judge finds that a 

the law rests with any and all persons involved in  respondent has engaged in or is about to engage in 

the design and construction of covered multifamily  a discriminatory housing practice, the administra 

dwellings. This means, for example, that if a  tive law judge will order appropriate relief. Such 

complaint is filed, the complaint could be filed  relief may include actual and compensatory dam-

against all persons involved in the design and  ages, injunctive or other equitable relief, attorney's 

construction of the building, including architects,  fees and costs, and may also include civil penalties 

builders, building contractors, the owner, etc.  ranging from $10,000 for the first offense to 

HUD has the responsibility for enforce- $50,000 for repeated offenses. In addition, in the 

ment of the Fair Housing Act. The Fair Housing  case of buildings which have been completed, 

Act provides that an aggrieved person may, not  structural changes could be ordered, and an escrow 

later than one year after an alleged discriminatory  fund might be required to finance future changes. 

housing practice has occurred or terminated, file a  With respect to the design and construc 

complaint with the Secretary of HUD. The Secre  tion requirements, HUD may encourage, but 

tary, on the Secretary’s own initiative, also may file  cannot require, states and units of local govern-

such a complaint. With respect to the design and  ment to include in their existing procedures for the 

construction requirements, complaints could be  review and approval of newly constructed covered 

filed at any time that the building continues to be  multifamily dwellings, determinations as to 

in noncompliance, because the discriminatory  whether the design and construction of such 

housing practice – failure to design and construct  dwellings are consistent with the requirements 

the building in compliance – does not terminate.  of the Fair Housing Act, HUD's implementing 

Following the filing of the complaint, an  regulations, and the Fair Housing Accessibility 

investigation is conducted and completed within  Guidelines. 

100 days, unless impracticable to do so. During the  HUD provides technical assistance to 

period beginning with the filing of the complaint  states and units of local government and other 

and ending with the filing of a charge or a dismissal  interested persons, in order to implement the 

by the Secretary, HUD will engage in conciliation.  design and construction requirements of the Fair 

If a charge of discrimination is issued after  Housing Act. Architects, designers and builders 

an investigation, an aggrieved person or a respon  may contact HUD with questions, either by 

dent may elect, in lieu of an administrative pro- telephone or by letter. However, HUD is not 

ceeding with HUD, to have the complaint decided  required to, nor does the agency have a procedure 

22 INTRODUCTION 

for, review and approval of building plans to determine if they are in compliance. Technical assistance provided by HUD serves only as general interpretation of law and regulations and is not binding on the agency with respect to a specific case. 

Some states have incorporated the require ments of the Fair Housing Act into their state laws. How this is done may differ from state to state. Some states, for example, have included the design and construction requirements as a part of the state law and simply incorporated HUD’s Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines by reference. Other states have drafted their own language to implement the design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act into the state building code. States which have incorporated the requirements of the Fair Housing Act into their state laws enforce those laws independently of the federal government. However, it should be noted that it is the state law that is being enforced. Such enforcement will not preclude any individual from exercising his or her right to file a complaint with HUD under the Fair Housing Act, or from filing a private lawsuit; nor does it preclude HUD from conducting a Secretary-initiated complaint. 

The Fair Housing Act does not invalidate or limit any law of a state or local government that requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater accessibility than the requirements of the Fair Housing Act. Likewise, the Fair Housing Act does not invalidate or replace other federal laws which require greater accessibility in certain housing, such as Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968. 

The following is a list of HUD enforce ment offices. Architects, builders and other users of this manual are encouraged to contact these and other HUD Fair Housing field offices for technical assistance as needed. 

New England 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development Thomas P. O’Neill, Jr. Federal Building 10 Causeway Street, Room 308 Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1092 (617) 994-8300 

> Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,Vermont

New York/New Jersey 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development 26 Federal Plaza New York, New York 10278-0068 (212) 264-1290 

> New Jersey, New York

Mid-Atlantic 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development The Wanamaker Building 100 Penn Square East Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106-3392 (215) 656-0647  

> Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia

23 PART ONE 

Southeast/Caribbean 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development Five Points Plaza 40 Marietta Street Atlanta, Georgia 30303-3388 (404) 331-5140 

> Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Puerto Rico,Virgin Islands

Midwest 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development 77 West Jackson Boulevard Chicago, Illinois 60604-3507 (312) 353-7776  

> Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin

Southwest 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development 801 North Cherry Street Fort Worth, Texas 76113-2905 (817) 978-5900  

> Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas

Great Plains 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development Gateway Tower II, 400 State Avenue Kansas City, Kansas 66101-2406 (913) 551-6958 

> Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Rocky Mountain 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development First Interstate Tower North 633 17th Street Denver, Colorado 80202-2349 (303) 672-5434 

> Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, Wyoming

Pacific/Hawaii 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development Phillip Burton Federal Building 450 Golden Gate Avenue 

P.O.  Box 36003 San Francisco, California 94102-3448 (415) 436-6569 

> Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, Guam, American Samoa

Northwest/Alaska 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal Office Building 909 First Avenue, Suite 200 Seattle, Washington 98104-1000 (206) 220-5170 

> Alaska, Idaho, Oregon,Washington

24 D ESIGN R G UIDELINES 

Part Two 

EQUIREMENTS OF THE Chapter One: 

R EQUIREMENT 1

Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route 

...covered multifamily dwellings shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so because of terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. 

> Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205

# 1PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Definitions from the Guidelines 

Accessible route. A continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair, and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. Interior accessible routes may include corri dors, floors, ramps, elevators and lifts. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps, and lifts. A route that complies with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1 – 1986, a comparable standard, or Section 5, Requirement 1 of these guidelines is an “accessible route.” In the circum stances described in Section, 5, Requirements 1 and 2, “accessible route” may include access via a vehicular route. 

Building. A structure, facility or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units. 

Building entrance on an accessible route. An accessible entrance to a building that is con nected by an accessible route to public transportation stops, to parking or passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available. A building entrance that complies with ANSI A117.1 – 1986 or a comparable standard complies with the requirements of this paragraph. 

Entrance. Any exterior access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering. For purposes of these guidelines, an “entrance” does not include a door to a loading dock 

or a door used primarily as a service entrance, even if nonhandicapped residents occasionally use that door to enter. 

Finished grade. The ground surface of the site after all construction, levelling, grading, and development has been completed. 

Site. A parcel of land bounded by a property line or a designated portion of a public right of way. 

Slope. The relative steepness of the land between two points and calculated as follows: The distance and elevation between the two points (e.g., an entrance and a passenger loading zone) are determined from a topographical map. The difference in elevation is divided by the distance and that fraction is multiplied by 100 to obtain a percentage slope figure. For example, if a principal entrance is ten feet from a passenger zone, and the principal entrance is raised one foot higher than the passenger loading zone, then the slope is 1/10 x 100 = 10%. 

Undisturbed site. The site before any construction, levelling, grading, or development associated with the current project. 

Vehicular or pedestrian arrival points. Public or resident parking areas, public transportation stops, passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks. 

Vehicular route. A route intended for vehicular traffic, such as a street, driveway, or parking lot. 

1.2 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

I NTRODUCTION 

The Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) define covered multifamily dwellings as  

> 1.

those buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators and  

> 2.

ground floor units in other buildings having four or more units. The Guidelines do not specify the total number of entrances a building must have nor where they must be positioned. However, the Guidelines do stipulate that each covered building on a site must have at least one accessible entrance on an accessible route. It is expected that most sites can and should be made accessible, i.e., an accessible route can be provided to entrances of covered dwellings; therefore, it is also expected that covered dwelling units will be provided on all building sites, including those where steep slopes, rock outcroppings, marshy areas, and similar conditions exist. 

The requirements of the Fair Housing Act are outlined in the Act itself and in the implement ing regulations issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Section 100.205 (a) of these regulations states: “Covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site.” 

Requirement 1 of the Guidelines presents guidance on designing an accessible building entrance on an accessible route. Requirement 1 also provides tests to assist a developer of buildings that do not have one or more elevators to determine when an accessible entrance is impractical because 

of extreme terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. See impracticality tests pages 1.40 through 

1.55.  Units where entrances are impractical do not have to meet the other design requirements; the tests, therefore, can alter the number of units on a site that must comply. 

The language of the Fair Housing Act itself does not provide an exception for site impracticality; however, as HUD notes in the preamble to its regulations, “the legislative history makes it clear that Congress was ‘sensitive to the possibility that certain natural terrain may pose unique building problems.’” 6 In applying the site impracticality tests, architects and builders should keep in mind that in enforcement proceedings under the Fair Housing Act, it is the person(s) who designed and con structed the building(s) who has the burden of establishing that site impracticality existed. 

Accessible routes and accessible entrances may occur in the course of any design project. They also may not occur and be expensive to include later if a careful approach to site design is not conducted. Deliberate manipulation of the grade to avoid the requirements of the Fair Housing Act is regarded as a discriminatory housing practice and must be avoided. This chapter offers methods and strategies to assist designers and builders to more efficiently provide accessible entrances and routes for all sites. 

> 6House Report No. 100-711, page 27

1.3 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

E ARLY P LANNING FOR A CCESSIBLE R OUTES AT E NTRANCES 

The language of the Fair Housing Act requires covered multifamily dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that incorporates certain features of accessible and adaptable design. The Act specifically includes the design process, thereby recognizing that changes will need to be made in the way buildings are designed in order to assure accessibility. 

Planning for accessibility should be an integral part of the design process in multifamily housing developments. This is particularly crucial in the early stages of planning when major deci sions are being made about the overall design of the site. The location and orientation of buildings, parking areas, loading zones, and other elements have a major impact on the ease with which accessibility can be achieved in a finished develop ment. This is especially important on sloping sites where careful initial planning can eliminate the need for major earthwork and the construction of elaborate ramps, bridges, lifts, or elevators to provide accessibility. 

Attempts should be made to set the entrance floor levels of buildings at or close to ground levels to eliminate or minimize changes in level that may require steps or ramps. Often this may be accomplished by making use of fill dirt which has been excavated from other parts of the building site to alter the ground levels at appropri ate places. 

Since people generally arrive at buildings by a private car, bus, or taxi, the location of vehicle arrival points is critical. Passenger drop-off points and parking areas for people with disabilities 

should be located close to building entrances and at levels which do not necessitate climbing steep slopes to reach the entrance floor level. 

The path of travel to and placement of site amenities, such as outside mailboxes, refuse dis posal areas, swimming pools, clubhouses, and sports facilities should be given careful consider ation early in the planning process. The intent of the Fair Housing Act is that people with disabilities be able to reach and use such amenities. 

In this manual, the ANSI Standard A117.1 

- 1986 is referenced as the accessibility standard for compliance in much of public and common use space of multifamily housing developments. The Guidelines themselves cite the ANSI A117.1 1986 Standard ( the American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities – Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People ). Although referenced, the ANSI specifications are not mandated. Any ANSI citation in this manual refers to the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard and should be understood to mean that compliance with ANSI or any other similar accessibility standard that is equal to or more stringent than the ANSI A117.1 (1986) Standard would fulfill the requirements of the accessibility provisions of the Fair Housing Act. 

1.4 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

impractical based in buildings with accessible pedestrian with site facilities designated accessible in buildings without an accessible pedes and accessible parking 

a portion or all of entrances may be elevators all dwelling units are covered route connecting covered dwellings parking spaces for residents and visitors elevators all ground floor dwelling units because tennis courts are not reachable on trian route, a road must be provided 

are covered 

certain building inaccessible if on site tests 

accessible routes between buildings with covered dwelling units not required, but are recommended 

building entrances must be connected by an accessible route to public transportation stops within the boundary of the site 

the jogging trail must 

be accessible unless 

impractical due to 

extremes of terrain 

accessible community 

center or clubhouse 

on an accessible route 

accessible common the swimming pool, picnic area, and playground are site amenities  building 

and must be reachable by an  entrance 

accessible route; in this example, 

a road and accessible parking are  Careful Site Analysis and Building Placement in the 

not required since there is an Planning Stage of a Housing Development Makes 

accessible pedestrian route Accessible Entrances Easier to Provide 

1.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

W HAT IS AN A CCESSIBLE R OUTE ?

An accessible route is a continuous, unobstructed path through sites and buildings that connects all accessible features, elements, and spaces. It is the critical element that allows the successful use of any site or building by a person with a disability. Such a route is safe for someone using a wheelchair or scooter and also is usable by others. 

Accessible routes on a site may include parking spaces, parking access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps, and lifts. Accessible routes within buildings may include corridors, doorways, floors, ramps, elevators, and lifts. Specifications for accessible routes are found in ANSI 4.3. Certain elements of accessible routes which must be given 

careful attention are: 

• width of route  • slope of route 

• ground and floor surfaces  • cross slope 

• headroom  • curb ramps 

• protruding objects  • lift/elevator design 

> stop shelter parking space
> people with
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

These elements are discussed in detail in Part Two, Chapter 2. 

Stairs and Accessible Routes 

Stairs are not an acceptable component of an accessible route because they prevent use by people using wheelchairs and others who cannot climb steps. ANSI specifications for accessible stairs (4.9) make stairs safer and more usable by mobility impaired people who can climb stairs. 

> accessible routes must connect covered dwelling units with accessible site facilities (and at least one of each type of recreational facility when more than one of each is provided at any location)
> accessible bus with wheelchair
> limited stamina
> accessible curb ramp that accessible
> and seating for
> play area

Route with No Abrupt Change in Level  

> complies with ANSI 4.7 provides benefits mailbox kiosk
> for other users

to Provide Access to Dwelling Units and Site Amenities 

1.6 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

When stairs are installed along routes that are required to be accessible, there must be an alternative way to get between levels. If the alterna tive way is an elevator or lift, the stairs do not need to comply with ANSI 4.9. If the alternative way is a ramp, the stairs must comply with ANSI 4.9. When an accessible route consists of both a ramp and stairs, it is best if they are located in close proximity so people who can use only one of the two (such as the ramp), need not travel an unreasonable addi tional distance. 

> accessible clubhouse and offices that comply with ANSI specifications
> accessible tennis courts
> curb ramp that complies with ANSI 4.7

Walks on Accessible Routes 

Walks that are part of accessible routes become ramps when their slope exceeds 5% (1 in 20). Handrails are not required on walks with slopes between 0% and 5%, but they are required on those steeper than 5% and up to 8.33% (1 in 12). Slopes steeper than 8.33% are not usable by most people with disabilities and cannot be considered part of an accessible route. Handrail requirements for walks differ, depending upon which buildings the walks connect. This is addressed in the follow ing sections. 

> each building on site must have at least one building entrance on an accessible route unless prohibited by extreme terrain or unusual characteristics of the site
> access to pool and surrounding area
> accessible
> building
> entrance to
> covered
> units
> accessible parking
> space and accompanying
> access aisle that comply
> with ANSI 4.6

1.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

W HERE A RE A CCESSIBLE R OUTES R EQUIRED ON S ITES ?

Accessible Route from Site Arrival Points to Accessible Building Entrances 

The Guidelines require that an accessible route be provided from public transportation stops, acces sible parking spaces, accessible passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks to accessible building entrances unless it is impractical to do so as determined by application of the site tests specified in Requirement 1(site impracticality due to terrain or unusual site characteristics, see page 1.38). Because these walkways are required to be accessible, handrails, as per ANSI, must be pro vided when the slope of the walk is between 5% (1 in 20) and 8.33% (1 in 12). 

Accessible Routes and Walks Between Accessible Buildings and Site Facilities 

The Guidelines require accessible routes to connect buildings containing covered dwelling units (those with one or more elevators and ground floors of other buildings, except two-story townhouses) and accessible facilities, elements, and spaces on the same site. The Guidelines do not require accessible routes, walks, or paths between buildings contain ing only covered dwelling units unless the route is also part of a required accessible route. For ex ample, if a building also contains a facility such as a laundry that is shared by two buildings, then an accessible route must be provided between the two buildings. 

If no portion of the finished grade of a route between two buildings that contain only dwelling units exceeds 8.33% (1 in 12), it is 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

recommended that the route be made accessible. Such voluntary accessible walks must meet the same specifications as an accessible route except that handrails, commonly required on accessible routes when their slope exceeds 5% (1 in 20), are not required. 

Accessible Site Facilities on Accessible Routes 

The Guidelines require accessible and usable public and common use areas. All facilities, elements, and spaces that are part of public and common use areas must meet ANSI 4.1 through 4.30 and must be on an accessible route from covered dwelling units. Such facilities might include outside mail boxes, site furnishings, outside storage areas, refuse disposal areas, playing fields, amphitheaters, picnic sites, swimming pools and sun decks, tennis courts, clubhouses, playgrounds, gazebos, parking areas, sidewalks, and all or part of nature trails and jogging paths. 

Where multiple recreational facilities of the same type are provided at the same location on the site (e.g., tennis courts), not all but a “sufficient” number of the facilities must be accessible to ensure an equitable opportunity for use by people with disabilities. Whenever only one of a type of recreational facility is provided at a particular location on the site, it must be accessible and connected by an accessible route to the covered dwelling units. (See Chapter 2: “Accessible Public and Common Use Spaces.”) 

1.8 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

Use of Vehicles for Access to Site Facilities 

When the finished grade exceeds 1 in 12 or other physical barriers (natural or man made) or legal restrictions, all of which are outside the control of the owner, prevent the installation of an accessible pedestrian route between covered dwellings and some public or common use site facilities; the Guidelines allow for automobiles to be used for access if certain conditions are met. When such a vehicular route is used as an alternative method to achieve accessibility:  

> 1.

the required parking at covered dwelling units must be provided, and 

2.  an appropriate number of additional accessible parking spaces on an accessible route must be 

provided at each facility that is otherwise unreach able by means of an accessible pedestrian route. For a complete discussion of parking requirements, see Chapter 2: “Accessible and Usable Public and Common Use Areas.” 

Careful planning and strategic location of accessible parking spaces and curb ramps around dwelling units and amenities will help give conti nuity between vehicular and pedestrian accessible routes. Accessible parking spaces and curb ramps are recommended at all on-site amenities to give residents choices in how to reach them, even those served by accessible pedestrian routes. This is especially important where accessible routes are very long and where parts or all of the route have maximum allowable slopes of 1 in 12 (1:12), which are difficult or impossible for many people to use. 

> accessible parking spaces and other access amenities inaccessible pedestrian to on-site amenities (typical on-site
> features are required at site routes from dwelling unit tennis court
> accessible parking spaces at dwelling unit

In Some Circumstances, Site Access by Vehicle May Be Acceptable 

> amenity)

1.9 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

A CCESSIBLE E NTRANCES 

All buildings containing covered dwelling units and separate buildings containing public and common use spaces, such as clubhouses, must have at least one accessible building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so as deter mined by applying the site impracticality tests provided in the Guidelines; see pages 1.38 through 

1.58.  Entrances into individual dwellings on an interior accessible route are referred to in the Guidelines as “entries.” These entries and the entries to dwelling units having separate exterior ground floor entrances will be discussed in Chapter 3: “Usable Doors.” The Guidelines establish three requirements for an accessible building entrance. 

Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route 

The building entrance must be connected by an accessible route to public transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading zones, and to public streets or sidewalks. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Primary Use 

The accessible (common use) entrance must be one which is typically used by residents and/or guests for the purpose of entering the building. Service doors or loading docks cannot serve as the only accessible entrance to buildings, even if residents occasionally use such a door for entering the building. 

Building Entrance Design Features 

The entrance door itself must be usable by people with disabilities. Detailed specifications to achieve this are given in ANSI 4.13. Accessible building entrances are considered public and common use spaces and, unlike unit entrances, must meet the ANSI requirements on both sides of the door; see the next page. 

Main factors which must be addressed are: 

• minimum clear width of open doorway 32 inches, 

• low or no threshold, 

• clear maneuvering space inside and outside the door, 

• force needed to open the door, 

• accessible door hardware, and 

• safe door closing speed.  

> accessible entrance accessible entrance

Accessible Primary Use Entrance 

> service entrance may not be the primary or only

1.10 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

good general  weather 

illumination  protection  high intensity lighting focused at 

wide angle peep hole in door) 

open door (ANSI 4.13.11) door closer period (ANSI 4.13.10) 

between door and 

easy-to-use door 4.13.9) 

lighted doorbell buttons 

clear width of min. 32" (ANSI 4.13.5) space next to latch side of door (ANSI 4.13.6) 

adequate slope build-up 

(ANSI 4.13.8) 

package shelf view window (or 

low force to with safe sweep 

clear, readable, high contrast signage color contrast frame locks for people with low vision 

lever or other hardware (ANSI open doorway maneuvering 

to prevent ice 

low or no threshold Call and mail boxes within 

reach of a seated person. 

Design of Accessible 

Call boxes should be equipped  Building Entrances 

with both visual and audible signals so as to be usable by both Notes in italic type are recommendations only 

hearing and non-hearing people. and are not required by ANSI or the Guidelines. 

All recommended features are helpful to people with and without disabilities. 

1.11 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

S ITE P LANNING FOR A CCESSIBLE E NTRANCES ON A CCESSIBLE R OUTES 

The ease of establishing an accessible route at building entrances can be radically affected by the type of construction used and the placement and positioning of the building on the site. These factors should be considered along with others essential to successful early planning and design of a housing complex. 

Careful Building Placement 

Regardless of the type of construction, the way in which a building is located on a site will affect accessibility at entrances. If entrances exist at locations where the floor level is close to the ground, parking often can be relocated to maximize use of accessibility will be easier and less expensive to existing grades. In some cases, the best solution is provide. Sometimes plans can be rotated or flipped to redesign the proposed floor plan to place en-to bring entrances closer to grade. Entrances and trances at or as near grade as possible. 

Plan to Place Entrance as Close Rotate, Flip, or Redesign Floor to Grade as Possible          

> 99
> 8877665544
> 33
> 22
> covered building
> slope rises 3'-0'' covered building between parking
> slope rises 1'-0''
> between parking and entrance and entrance

Current Position of Parking Lot Makes Accessible Reorientation of Parking Area to Route Difficult or Impossible to Provide Achieve Accessible Route 

1.12 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

Earthwork and Site Grading 

It is often possible to create accessible routes to entrances by means of earthwork and the grading of sites. On sloping sites, fill can be added or the land can be cut and graded to place the building entrance at ground level. 

> line of existing grade with steeper slope

Bridges and Elevated Walks 

Bridges or elevated walkways may be a good solution to providing an accessible route to an entrance on a sloping site, particularly where the building is approached from an uphill location. Combinations of techniques can be used on some sites to provide accessible entrances on more than one level. Bridges usually can be made level and thus easy and safe for everyone. 

> line of existing grade line of finished grade waterproofing

Earth Cut Site Grading 

> compacted waterproofing earth fill with shallow slope

Earth Fill at Entrance 

> bridge line of existing grade

Bridges to Uphill Locations on Sloping Sites 

1.13 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> line of finished grade line of existing grade compacted earth fill with shallow slope waterproofing

Combination Earth Cut and 

Earth Berms and Bridges  Accessible Bridge/Walk to Entrances 

On flat or irregular sites an accessible route to an above grade entrance might be created by provid ing a low retaining wall, an earth berm, and a bridge. There are several advantages to this method. The retaining wall is held several feet away from the foundation forming a moat that allows drainage and ventilation to occur at the foundation 

the berm, if kept flush with the earth and less than 

> berm with 1:20 eliminates handrails bridge

and eliminates the need for additional waterproof ing. The bridge from the retaining wall to the floor landscaped garden entrance rather than an “access 

Earth Berm and Bridge 

> paved walk at need for ramps and required moat for plants, drainage, and air circulation retaining wall

of the building can be level. The sloping walk on 

1:20  slope, will not require handrails, thus elimi nating the awkward sloping appearance of access ramps and their handrails. Plants on and around the berm and in the moat create an attractive 

ramp.” 

1.14 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

In this site configuration a ramp provides the accessible route from several possible site arrival points to the building entrance. Often a ramp can ground floor units are be combined with stairs and a planter to create covered in this building attractive entrances that serve the needs of a without elevator(s) wide range of people. 

accessible primary 

entrances to covered ground floor units 

ramp and stairs that comply with ANSI 4.8 and 4.9 provide an accessible route to first floor covered units, slopes less than the max. 1:12 slope are recommended – for slopes at 1:20 or less, handrails are not required 

Site Grading with Combined Ramp and Stairs to Create Access to First Floor Units 

curb ramp that complies with ANSI 4.7 

access aisle and accessible parking spaces that comply with ANSI 4.6 

site arrival points 

Key Plan 4 Units on Each Floor 

1.15 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

In this site configuration the parking for 

the building is divided between two levels, 

with the accessible parking provided on the 

upper level. This solution creates the 

possibility of an accessible route, with little 

or no slope, to the building entrance and 

may reduce the required amount of 

earthwork necessary for a larger parking  buildings without one or 

lot on the upper level that would serve the  more elevators, only ground 

entire building.  floor units are covered 

access aisle and accessible parking curb ramp that complies with ANSI 4.7 entrances to floor units ANSI 4.3 that complies with first floor units site arrival points spaces that comply with ANSI 4.6 accessible primary covered ground walk that is part of an accessible route must comply with 

Earthwork and Site Grading to Achieve Access to Ground Floor Units accessible route, ANSI 4.3, from upper level site arrival point to 

Key Plan 4 Units on Each Floor 

1.16 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

point to the accessible floor at the far end of the building. arrival point side of the building. lof an accessible ANSI 4.3 curb ramp that complies with ANSI 4.7 

lunits and up to units access aisle and accessible parking the near end of the building Accessible route from lower level site arrival ground floor entrances to two covered units on the lower level ground upper level site Access by level bridge and walk provides an accessible route from site arrival points to entrance of two covered units on the second floor level on this In this site configuration a combination of leve walkway and bridge is used to create an accessible route to the units on the second floor. On such sloping sites, bridges can provide convenient, safer, and direct access to the upper level. this walk is part route and must comply with stairs down to two lower leve two top floor If the resulting design plan was such that the two units on the lower ground floor at 

were on an accessible route,  Bridge to Achieve Access that comply with those units would also be  to Second Floor Units ANSI 4.6 covered. 

this building has four dwelling units on each floor with separate unit entrances and stairs at each end 

Key Plan 4 Units on Each Floor 

1.17 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

In this site configuration an ordinary site feature, a bridge over a stream, has been integrated with a level walkway to create an accessible route to the ground floor units of the building. 

access by level bridge and walk provide an accessible route from site arrival points to primary entrances to two ground floor covered units at the near end of the building 

accessible route from site arrival point to accessible primary entrances to two ground floor units at the far end of the building 

level bridge with surface flush with walk surfaces 

walk that is part 

of an accessible site  route must comply 

arrival  with ANSI 4.3 point  Bridge to Achieve Access to Ground Floor Units 

access aisle and accessible parking spaces curb ramp that that comply complies with with ANSI 4.6 ANSI 4.7 

Key Plan 4 Units on Each Floor 

1.18 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

entrances on a central double-

stairs need not single building with all units in the Guidelines this building has four units on each floor, each with primary comply with ANSI 4.9, recommended compliance for safe egress elevator and bridges; building are covered and must meet the elevator 

Building with Exterior Elevator (All Units are Covered) 

accessible route from site entry points via the exterior elevator to the primary entrance of each dwelling unit 

site arrival point 

access aisle and accessible parking spaces that comply with ANSI 4.6 

curb ramp that complies with ANSI 4.7 

Key Plan  loaded corridor 

4 Units on Each Floor 

1.19 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

C OVERED D WELLING U NITS AND T HEIR A CCESSIBLE E NTRANCES 

In buildings containing multiple dwelling units, common use exterior entrances and individual exterior entrances to ground floor units are required by the Guidelines to be accessible, unless it is impractical to do so as determined by one of the site impracticality tests discussed in the next section on pages 1.38 through 1.58. 

It is expected that all multifamily buildings will have covered dwelling units. However, the configuration of the building; the location of the entrances; the determination of which is the ground floor(s) (there can be more than one); the placement, origin, and destination (range) of elevators; and site impracticality will affect which units in multifamily buildings are covered and where or how accessible entrances are provided. This section of the manual discusses coverage and accessible exterior entrances in  

> 1.

buildings having one or more elevators,  

> in a building with one or more elevators that go to units above or below
> 2.

buildings with separate ground floor entrances to dwelling units, and  

> 3.

buildings with common entrances. 

Entrances to covered dwelling units from interior halls, corridors, or accessible common use spaces are discussed in Chapter 3: “Usable Doors.” 

Based on the legislative history of the Fair Housing Act, it is expected that only extreme conditions of a site may make it impractical to provide an accessible route to entrances of some covered dwelling units. The Guidelines allow, in some instances, the number of covered units to be reduced where such impracticality can be demon strated. Requirement 1 of the Guidelines includes two site impracticality tests that can be used to determine if an accessible route at a required entrance is impractical due to extreme terrain or site conditions. The tests are referenced in this section and their applications are described in detail on pages 1.38 to 1.58 of this chapter.     

> = covered units
> ground floor units, all dwelling units in the building must be on an elevator accessible route and all units must comply with buildings with one or Requirements 3-7 more elevators, regard less of site conditions, must have at least one accessible entrance on
> ground floor units an accessible route

In Buildings with One or More Elevators: (Elevator Buildings) All Units are Covered 

1.20 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS WITH E LEVATORS 

All dwelling units are covered in buildings having one or more elevators and one or more common entrances. The Guidelines require that such buildings with elevators (elevator buildings) have at least one accessible entrance on an accessible route, regardless of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. In other words, site impracticality as defined in the tests discussed on pages 1.38 through 1.58 is not allowed for “buildings having one or more elevators.” 

The rationale for disallowing site impracti cality for such buildings includes the assumption that a building having elevators is a mid- to high-rise building and that all floors are accessible via the elevators. In addition, it is expected that the site work performed when building such elevator buildings generally results in a finished grade that would make an accessible route into and through the building practical. For a building to meet the Fair Housing Act definition of a “building having one or more elevators” (elevator building), it must have at least one elevator that travels from an 

> accessible entrance required elevators
> all units are covered

Termination of Elevator as Shown in this Building is NOT Acceptable 

> when an elevator provides access to dwelling units other than dwelling units on a ground floor, it becomes a “building with one or more elevators” and the elevator must go to all floors and all dwelling units are covered
> = covered units

that is above or below a “ground floor.” If such an elevator is planned, it must go to all floors that contain dwelling units. Thus, it is not acceptable to provide elevator service to some floors or units and not others. 

In the building shown in the upper right column on this page, the elevator only goes to the first and second floors containing dwelling units. This is unacceptable because the elevator is going to a floor other than a ground floor (floor two), therefore, floors three and four also must have access via the elevator.  

> accessible entrance elevators required

entrance level to a floor containing dwelling units 

> all units are covered

Elevators Must Provide Access to All Dwelling Units in Elevator Buildings 

1.21 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

In the example to the right, if the elevator elevator must have stops 

stops at floors other than just one, the building is  at all floors containing 

> single-story units and at

classified as a building with one or more elevators the primary entry floor of  = covered units 

> two-story dwelling units

(an elevator building), and the elevator must have a stop at the second and fourth floors. Floor three is  single-story 

not required to have a stop since it contains only  dwelling unit 

second floors of two-story dwelling units. Note: 

most building codes require buildings over three  second story 

> of two-story

stories to have elevators. All such buildings are dwellings 

covered by the Guidelines.  first story of two-story 

> dwellings single-story dwelling units

4321

Elevators Must Provide Access to Primary Entry Floors of Two-Story Dwellings in Elevator Buildings 

> both buildings are covered – all units must be accessible
> elevator
> connecting walkways

If an elevator in or at one building is connected to other buildings via overhead walks or bridges, the connectors must be accessible and all the connected buildings are covered. 

A Central Elevator Serving a Building with Two Wings 

1.22 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

F REE -S TANDING E LEVATORS FOR S ITE A CCESS D O N OT C REATE E LEVATOR B UILDINGS 

serve as part of an accessible route from one site 

building’s status as an elevator or nonelevator building. 

> elevator
> drop-off zone and

B UILDINGS N OT H AVING E LEVATORS 

In buildings not having elevators, only ground floor dwelling units are covered and each dwelling unit must be on an accessible route and meet Requirements 3-7. 

Buildings not having elevators must have at least one accessible entrance on an accessible route, unless prohibited by extreme terrain or unusual site characteristics. See site impracticality section, page 

1.38.  Note, in buildings either with or without elevators, more than one accessible entrance may be required when:  

> 1.

there is more than one ground floor,  

> 2.

there is a split-level ground floor, or  

> 3.

units are clustered on the ground floor and each 

cluster has a separate entrance. These situations are covered on the next several pages. 

> lcommon and individual unit lfree-standing parking leve upper terrace entrance leve

Free-standing elevators not connected to buildings level to another and do not have any effect on the 

Free-Standing Elevators for Site Access Do Not Create Elevator Buildings 

> = covered units
> floor units ground

In Buildings Not Having Elevators (Nonelevator Buildings) Only Ground Floor Units Are Covered 

1.23 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

In some circumstances the “ground floor” units that are covered may not actually be at grade level. For example, when common use spaces such as parking, meeting rooms, shops, etc. occupy the floor at grade, the first floor containing dwelling units above or below that level will be the desig nated “ground floor” for purposes of the Guide lines. All dwelling units on such levels must meet Requirements 3-7 and be on an accessible route. 

It is important to note that some buildings may contain an elevator and not be considered a “building having one or more elevators” for pur poses of the Guidelines. For example, when an elevator travels from a garage or other entry level not containing dwelling units only to a “ground floor” containing dwelling units, these “ground floor” units are covered; however, the building is not a “building having one or more elevators” (elevator building) and the elevator is not required to travel to all floors.  

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> other floor units common use space accessible entrance not covered elevator ground floor units covered required

Elevator to First Floor of Dwelling Units Above Grade or Entrance Level Does Not Make a Building with One or More Elevators (a Covered Elevator Building)   

> = covered units If a building elevator is provided only as a means of creating an accessible route from parking to dwelling units on a ground floor, the building is not considered an elevator building. In this case, the dwelling units on the “ground floor,” plus one of each type of public and common use area, must comply with the Guidelines.
> floor an accessible ground elevator provides route from parking to ground floor covered units

Elevators for Access to Ground Floor Units Do Not Make an Elevator Building 

1.24 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS H AVING C ONNECTED E LEVATOR AND N ON -E LEVATOR W INGS 

Buildings having multiple wings of different configurations may have to provide more than one entrance and possibly more than one elevator. If any wing has an elevator, all of the units in the building are covered and must be on an accessible route. 

In the example below, a single building has two wings, one of which has an elevator. A lobby or similar public and common use space connects the wings and serves both wings. All the units in the building are covered, therefore, the building either must have an additional elevator serving the two-story wing, or an alternative means of access to the 

> common use entrance and lobby provide interior accessible route between bottom floors of both wings

Buildings with Multiple Wings 

dwelling units on the second floor of the two-story wing. In addition, since the two wings share the common use entrance, lobby, and related ameni ties, such as mailboxes, reception desk, etc., there must be an interior accessible route between the lobby and the two-story wing. In this example, an accessible route has been created from the second floor of the five-story wing to the second floor of the two-story wing by means of a covered walkway, thereby providing the necessary access. 

> = covered units
> elevators alternate solution: entrance and floors this wing all units are covered covered walkway from second story of five-story wing to second story of low-rise wing provide accessible route to both all units are covered lobby

1.25 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

B UILDINGS WITH S EPARATE E XTERIOR U NIT E NTRANCES 

B UILDINGS WITH S EPARATE E XTERIOR G ROUND F LOOR U NIT E NTRANCES 

Where a building has ground floor units, each with its own exterior entrance, the Guidelines provide that each of these ground-floor units shall:  

> 1.

have an accessible entrance,  

> 2.

be on an accessible route, and  

> 3.

meet all other design requirements of the 

Guidelines. The only exception applies to ground floor units where terrain or unusual characteristics of the site make an accessible entrance on an accessible route impractical. 

> = covered units impractical ground floor entrance serv ing unit #5
> 5
> stairs to noncovered unit #3
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

The example below is a single non-elevator building on a site and has multiple entrances. Regardless of which site impracticality test is used, a minimum of 20% of the ground floor units must be accessible, and possibly more, based on the results of the test. The individual building test was used, and resulted in site impracticality at Unit #5. The site was not impractical for Units #1 and #2, and therefore, those units must be made accessible. Two out of three units = 66%, so the minimum of 20% has been satisfied, and no additional ground floor units must be made accessible. See site impracticality on page 1.38.    

> stairs serving noncovered units #4
> 6and #6
> 16
> 4
> 4
> 31
> 3
> 2
> accessible entrances to covered dwelling
> units #1

Ground Floor Units with  and #2 

Separate Entrances Are Covered 

1.26 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS WITH S EPARATE G ROUND F LOOR U NIT E NTRANCES ON T WO OR M ORE G ROUND F LOORS 

Where a building has ground floor units with their own individual entrances on two or more ground floors, the Guidelines provide that each of these entrances shall be an accessible entrance on an accessible route. The only exception to this applies to ground floor units where terrain or unusual characteristics of the site make an accessible entrance impractical, see site impracticality tests, page 1.38. 

= covered units stairs at this 

Since entrances were planned on both ground floors and all ground floor units are covered, each must have an accessible entrance on an accessible route and meet the other design require ments of the Guidelines. 

building serve ing serve 

stairs at this end of noncovered units 

end of build 

noncovered 

#3, #5, and #9 unit #10 

10 

8

9

7

upper ground floor level 

5

r gr ound accessible entrance to covered units #7 and #8 

3

e

efloor le 

lo w

16

4accessible entrance to covered unit #4 

stair and entrance to noncovered 

2

accessible entrances to covered 

Ground Floor Units dwelling units 

on Two Ground Floors Are Covered #1 and #2 

unit #6 

1.27 

v l PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

B UILDINGS WITH S EPARATE U NIT E NTRANCES H AVING S PLIT -L EVEL A PPROACHES 

Apartments with split-level approaches to their entrances typically cannot provide an accessible route from parking or other pedestrian arrival points to either lower or upper level primary entrances. Redesign is necessary to ensure an accessible building entrance on an accessible route to ground floor units. Note, however, that simply 

=covered units 

secondary (patio) door 

NOT Acceptable – Lacks an Accessible Route to a Primary Entrance Door 

lparking no entrance covered ground floor unit primary entrance pedestrian route to upper leve units from secondary or primary entrance secondary entrance (balcony) 

Solution One: Reorient Ground Floor Plan to Reverse Entrances 

parking and accessible route 

Solution Two is for a building having single-story units on each floor. Note, however, that if multistory units are stacked over the single-story units, then the building is still covered, and access to the single-story units secondary entrances would be required, as shown in Solution One. 

Solution Two: Regrade and Add Bridge from Parking to Second Story Entrance 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

adding an accessible route to the secondary, rear entry is not acceptable as that results in “back door” access. See the first illustration and Solution One. 

In Solution Two, regrading and the addi tion of a bridge provides access to the upper level, making that level the ground floor. Because no primary entrance was planned at the rear of the lower level units, and since there is no requirement to have more than one ground floor, an accessible route is not required to those units. 

parking “back door” will not suffice doors pedestrian route to units from covered ground floor unit stacked single-story units an accessible route to this primary entry 

8.33% and no abrupt change ltwo-story townhouse elevated walk way with a slope no greater than in leve single-story covered unit If the units are one story, either level could be designated as the ground floor. If two-story townhouses are stacked over one-story units on grade, the building is still covered. Access must be provided to the lower units. primary entrance 

1.28 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS WITH S EPARATE G ROUND F LOOR U NIT E NTRANCES O VER P RIVATE G ARAGES (C ARRIAGE U NITS )

Carriage House Units 

Carriage houses in which the garage footprint is used as the footprint for the remaining floor 

Carriage Units in Buildings Having One or   

> and is covered
> an attached 3 single-story single-story
> dwelling units dwelling unit
> at grade level

or floors of the units are not required to meet  over private  establishes a one- or two-car 

the design and construction requirements. (See  garages  ground floor 

December 16, 1991 memorandum from Frank  for this building 

Keating at back of Appendix C.) If buildings containing carriage units have one or more units at grade level with an entrance on an accessible route, the grade level unit establishes a ground floor for the building and is covered.  More Grade Level Units Are Not Covered 

There is no requirement for there to be more than one ground floor nor for other units in the building  covered units = 

on the second or elevated floor to be accessible. 

> if visitor or public parking accessible spaces with accessible entrances is provided, an accessible route should connect
> 4 or more carriage units with separate ground floor accessible entrances
> an interior accessible route to garage spaces is not required
> an exterior vehicular or accessible pedes trian route to garages is required

Carriage Units Having an Accessible Route to an Entry Are Covered 

1.29 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Guidelines, it subjects people with to parking and exposes them in an with assigned parking an accessible entrance on This building accessed 

This elevator serves several buildings on the site. Although this configura tion meets the requirements of the disabilities to using a more circuitous route from the dwelling unit entrances unequal way to inclement weather single-story walk-up units on second floor above common garage space are not covered single-story dwelling units over a common garage spaces are covered ground floor units and must have an accessible route elevator 

conditions. 

by another, similar elevator at opposite end of the site. 

accessible routes to ground floor unit entrances on upper grade level 

drop-off zone  common parking garage at grade level with assigned parking spaces and one interior set of stairs at 

accessible route from a  junction of two wings 

public street or sidewalk or other pedestrian Single-Story Ground Floor Dwelling  accessible route from 

arrival point to accessible Units with Separate Entrances 

entrances to covered units Over Common Use Parking Garages 

elevator to create an accessible route from parking to ground floor does not make these elevator buildings 

parking to accessible common or individual ground level entrances to covered units 

1.30 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS WITH C OMMON E NTRANCES 

Buildings with Ground Floors  an accessible route to 

Over Shops or Garages  dwelling unit entrances must be provided 

parking, shops, or other common use spaces third floor single-story units are not covered covered single-story units 

Where the first floor containing dwelling units in a building is above grade, all units on that floor are covered and must be served by a building entrance on an accessible route. This floor will be considered a ground floor, thus making dwelling units over retail stores, garages, or other common use spaces 

grade level is used entirely for 

covered units. 

ground floor for purposes of the Guidelines 

three-story building of single-story dwelling units on a double-loaded open-air corridor 

parking at grade level are covered 

or bridge is required to provide accessible route to covered units 

Note: if the elevator is also taken to the next level, the building becomes a building with one or more elevators and all floors and units must comply. 

If one or more single-story dwelling units with an accessible entrance on an accessible route are located at grade level in buildings other wise having public or common use parking or shops at grade level, a new grade level ground floor is established and only the grade level units are covered. 

= covered units 

stairs elevator common use parking 

elevator, ramp, lift, elevated walkway, single-story units above common use 

Walk-Up Dwelling Units Over Garages, Shops, and Other Public or Common Use Spaces Are Covered 

shops or common use parking covered single-story unit 

One or More Grade Level Accessible Units Estab lishes a Ground Floor and Eliminates Need for Accessible Routes to Units Over Garages or Shops 

1.31 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

B UILDINGS WITH O NE OR M ORE C OMMON E NTRANCES 

When a building has one or more common en trances, the Guidelines provide that at least one of these entrances shall be accessible and shall be on an accessible route to all dwelling units in build ings with one or more elevators, and to all ground floor units in nonelevator buildings. Examples of how this applies to specific buildings and sites follow. The only situation where an accessible entrance is not required is when there is a single building with a single entrance on a site with no elevator, and the terrain or unusual characteristics 

elevator 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

This is a single building on a site. It has two common entrances and an elevator serving multiple floors. Because it is a building with one or more elevators (an elevator building), all units in the building are covered, and at least one common entrance must be accessible and on an accessible route from a public street or sidewalk or other pedestrian arrival point, regardless of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site; site impracticality tests do not apply for elevator buildings. 

page 1.38. 

be one which is purpose of entering the building, and entrance is some although acceptable under the 

all floors 

of the site make the provision of an accessible route to the entrance impractical. See site impracticality, 

required accessible entrance must always typically used by residents for the cannot be a service entrance, even if that times used by residents inaccessible secondary entrance, Guidelines, may have to be accessible to meet local, state, and other emergency egress requirements accessible route to all dwelling units on 

Buildings with Common Entrances 

1.32 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS WITH C OMMON E NTRANCES AND A S INGLE G ROUND F LOOR 

When a building has a single ground floor and more than one common entrance, at least one entrance must be accessible. This accessible entrance should be the primary entrance and must provide an interior accessible route to all ground floor units in the building. If an interior accessible  = covered units 

route does not connect the primary entrance to all ground floor units, additional entrances on accessible routes are necessary to reach the addi tional ground floor units. 

> entrances must be accessible entrance accessible entrance on not all ground floor accessible, but more than one may be necessary under some circumstances nonelevator building with one ground floor, must have at least one all ground floor units are covered and must be served by an an accessible route

Common Entrances in Buildings with a Single Ground Floor 

1.33 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

B UILDINGS WITH C OMMON E NTRANCES AND C LUSTERED D WELLING U NITS 

Where dwelling units are clustered in a building, each cluster which has its own entrance or entrances shall have at least one accessible entrance providing access to all ground floor units in the cluster. 

even though this cluster contains only three units, all are covered units because the cluster is part of the overall building 

Guidelines, may have to be accessible to meet local, state, or other emergency egress requirements  Common Entrances  at least one of the 

This is a single building with common use entrances an accessible entrance on an accessible entrance be accessible although acceptable under the no elevator and with multiple serving clustered dwelling units. Each cluster must have accessible route. primary this entrance must inaccessible secondary entrances, 

at Clustered Dwelling Units three entrances serving this cluster must be accessible and on an accessible route 

1.34 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDINGS WITH S PLIT -L EVEL G ROUND F LOORS 

Split-level floors of less than a full story in height are not separate floor levels and are considered to be one ground floor. Covered ground floor units on each level must have entry doors on an acces sible route connecting to at least one accessible common use building entrance and at least one of each type of common use facility or feature, such as mail rooms, laundries, vending areas, etc. Since steps and stairs cannot be part of an accessible route, changes in level on covered floors must be accomplished by means of ramps, lifts, or elevators. 

If an accessible route, in lieu of or in addition to steps or stairs, is provided between levels, the route must not be remote, hidden, 

circuitous, or require people with disabilities to travel excessively long distances to arrive at the same point as others. Finally, the accessible route between levels must be readily available to all residents and visitors and not be locked or require keys, attendants, or special services or permits for use. 

If an accessible route is not provided between covered floor levels, each level must have its own accessible common use entrance on an accessible route; any common use facilities or features provided on one level must also be avail able on an accessible route on each other level.     

> Apt
> D
> Apt
> C
> Apt
> BApt
> A
> multiple dwelling steps must be replaced units on all levels or accompanied by an accessible route
> – OR – additional common use additional entrance accessible entrances and on each level may other facilities must be be necessary provided on each level

Split-Level Ground Floor Regarded as Single Ground Floor 

1.35 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

B UILDINGS WITH C OMMON E NTRANCES AND M ORE THAN O NE G ROUND F LOOR 

In building designs that are planned to have more than one ground floor, an entrance on each ground floor is required to be accessible unless site condi tions make it impractical to provide an accessible route to each entrance. See page 1.38 for site impracticality. In this illustrated example, the planned location of parking and sidewalks (that would serve as the pedestrian and vehicular arrival points) is close to the planned entrances, with only minor changes in level between the arrival points and the floor level of the building at the planned entrances, therefore, it is practical to make the planned entrances accessible. Because the common 

> floors accessible and on an accessible practical to do so
> middle level units are covered lower level units are covered two ground all entrances are route because it is

entrances are accessible via an accessible route, all the dwelling units served by each entrance are covered dwelling units and must meet the require ments of the Guidelines. 

Common Entrances at Buildings with More Than One Ground Floor 

1.36 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

B UILDING F LOORS H AVING C OMMON E NTRANCES S ERVED BY E LEVATED W ALKWAYS 

When a developer plans an elevated walkway from a pedestrian or vehicular arrival point to the building entrance and the walkway has a slope of 10% or less, that floor shall be considered a ground floor. The dwelling units on that floor are covered and the site is not considered impractical. Since the walkway meets the 10% slope criterion, it is practical to provide an accessible route to the entrance, and the slope of the walkway must be reduced to 8.33% maximum. accessible route to 

both of the first floor 

one is planned and its inaccessible common entrance second floor common entrance causes this floor to be common entrances is impractical 

Elevated walkways are not required; however, if Elevated Walkways to Accessible Entrances 

accessible route to accessible considered a ground floor 

slope is no greater than 10%, then the slope must be reduced to 8.33% maximum and the dwelling units on that floor shall be accessible. 

1.37 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

S ITE I MPRACTICALITY 

I NTRODUCTION 

HUD’s regulations implementing the Fair Housing Act state: 

Covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991 shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. [24 CFR 100.205(a)]. 

The Fair Housing Act itself does not contain an impracticality exception; however, the preamble to HUD’s regulations explains as follows: “Congress did not intend to impose an absolute standard that all covered multifamily dwelling units be made accessible without regard to the impracticality of doing so. Even though the statute itself does not contain an impracticality standard the legislative history makes it clear that Congress ‘was sensitive to the possibility that certain natural terrain may pose unique building problems’.” Thus, the regulations and the Guidelines recognize that certain site conditions may make it impractical to make all ground floor units accessible in buildings that do not have an elevator due to the difficulty of providing an accessible route to the building entrance or to individual dwelling unit entrances. The Guidelines provide tests for determining site impracticality, which are discussed beginning on page 1.40. 

> Elevators from garages or grade levels to ground floors need not serve other floors and only the ground floor dwelling units must meet the design requirements of the Guidelines.

Buildings With Elevators, Including Those Having Elevators Only for Access to Covered Ground Floor Units, Cannot Claim Site Impracticality 

> accessible entrance is required

Elevator From Garage to Covered Ground Floor Units  

> units accessible required common use spaces entrance is ground floor

Elevator From Garage Levels to Ground Floor Units Above Common Use Grade Level Floor 

> ground
> common use spaces accessible entrance floor units required

Elevator From Grade Level Common Use Spaces to Covered Ground Floor Units Above 

1.38 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

> If an elevator provides access to any floors other than a ground floor, then it must go to all floors in the building and all units in the building must meet the design require ments of the Guidelines.
> accessible entrance to floors other than
> required elevator from garage ground floor units elevator must go to all floors

Buildings with One or More Elevators Cannot Claim Site Impracticality 

> point

These building types for which site impracticality is 

> covered dwelling units arrival

not permitted are illustrated on this page and 1.38. 

> Site impracticality is not allowed where the entrance to the building is provided by an elevated walkway between the building entrance and an arrival point with a planned slope no greater than 10%. By meeting the 10% slope criterion, it is considered practical to

B UILDING T YPES W HERE S ITE I MPRACTICALITY I S N OT A LLOWED 

The Guidelines address the regulatory provision for site impracticality discussed above in Requirement 1, Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route. The Guidelines do not allow site imprac-ticality for certain buildings. These buildings are: 

1.  Buildings with one or more elevators – These buildings are covered and must have at least one entrance on an accessible route regardless of terrain or other characteristics of the site. 

2.  Buildings where an elevator is provided solely as a means of access to units on a ground floor – These buildings are covered and all ground floor units must be accessible. However, this type of building is not treated as an elevator building where all of the units in the building are cov ered. For a full explanation of buildings with elevators, see pages 1.20 through 1.25. 

3.  Buildings that have an elevated walkway – Site impracticality is not allowed for buildings where an elevated walkway is planned between a building entrance and a vehicular or pedestrian arrival point and the planned walkway has a 

slope no greater than 10%. The 10% criterion only determines whether making the entrance is practical. Once this criterion is met, the slope would have to be reduced to a maximum of 

8.33  %. 

Buildings Served by a Planned Elevated provide an accessible route, and the slope must be 

Walkway Cannot Claim Site Impracticality reduced to 8.33% maximum. 

1.39 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

S ITE I MPRACTICALITY T ESTS FOR S ITES WITH D IFFICULT T ERRAIN 

The Guidelines provide two tests to determine site impracticality based upon difficult terrain conditions, the Individual Building Test and the 

> Site Analysis Test

.

Since buildings with one or more elevators and those served by a planned elevated walkway cannot claim site impracticality, the site impracti cality tests apply only to other types of buildings on sites having extreme terrain or unusual charac teristics. The tests will help determine the actual number of units that must meet the Guidelines on such sites. 

The tests differ and their application will be affected by the number of buildings on the site, the number of planned entrances, the slope of the land, and the distance between key points on the planned site. Unusual site characteristics, including such conditions as federally designated flood plains or coastal high hazard areas where it is required to raise the floor level of buildings above a base flood elevation, also have an impact on the number of covered dwelling units. Each of the tests follow the Guidelines and conclude with a minimum required number of accessible units. 

The Individual Building Test accepts as inaccessible, because of site impracticality due to terrain, all ground floor units in which the eleva tion difference between the undisturbed site grade and the proposed finished site grade from arrival points and the planned building entrance is over 10% when measured in a straight line. If either the undisturbed slope or the proposed finished slope, measured in a straight line, is 10% or less, then site impracticality due to terrain does not exist and the 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

developer must provide an accessible route to the particular entrance being measured. 

The Site Analysis Test measures the total buildable area of undisturbed or natural grade having an existing slope before grading less than 10% ( Step A ). The area of less than 10% slope is expressed as a percentage of the total site area less any restricted use areas such as wetlands or flood plains. The percentage establishes the minimum percentage of ground floor units to be made acces sible ( Step B ) subject to the additional requirement of Step C . Step C requires that, in addition to the percentage established in Step B , all ground floor units in a building or ground floor units served by a particular entrance shall be made accessible if the entrance to the units is on an accessible route, defined as a walkway with a slope between the planned entrance and a pedestrian or vehicular arrival point that is no greater than 8.33%. 

Which Tests Apply to Which Sites 

The tests relate to different buildings and site conditions. It is important to remember before discussing the test applications that they are not applicable to buildings having one or more elevators (elevator buildings) because they already are covered and all units in them must meet the requirements of the Guidelines, and they must have at least one entrance on an accessible route regardless of terrain or other characteristics of the site. None of the buildings described in the following explanation of test applications are elevator buildings; nor are they served by an elevated walkway between a building entrance and an arrival point. 

1.40 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

Sites Where Only the Individual Building Test May be Used 

For sites with difficult terrain which have a single building with only one common entrance on the site, the individual building test must be used. If the results of this test determine that it is impracti cal to make that entrance accessible, then the building is not required to be accessible and none of the ground floor units are covered. This is the only circumstance under which an entire site may not be covered. 

Sites Where Either Test May be Used 

Either test may be used for building sites having multiple buildings or a single building with more than one common entrance. When the Individual Building Test is applied to such sites it must be calculated for each building and each building entrance separately. 

Single Building on a Site with One Common Entrance 

The 20% Rule 

For those sites where either the Individual Build ing Test or the Site Analysis Test may be used, the Guidelines set a minimum percentage of ground floor units, which serves as a starting point even before the tests are applied. This minimum is 20%. Thus, for those sites where either test may be used, there never will be a situation where less than 20% of the units are required to comply with the Guidelines; in most cases the tests will result in a much larger percentage of units required to be accessible. Keep in mind that this 20% minimum cannot be used as a maximum. The results of the test, depending on which test is used, will determine the maximum number of units required to be accessible.     

> Note: The following examples apply only to buildings that do not have one or more elevators (elevator buildings). Buildings having one or more elevators must be accessible regardless of site conditions.
> • one building
> •4 or more units
> •1 entrance
> •must use the Individual Building Test
> A site with a single building with one common entrance may not be required to be accessible if the site is impractical and application of the Individual Building Test determines impracticality at this entrance.

Example of Potentially Impractical Site Based on Terrain and Application of Individual Building Test 

1.41 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Single Building with Multiple Entrances on a Site 

Note: The following examples apply only to buildings that do not have one or more elevators (elevator buildings). Buildings having one or more elevators must be accessible regardless of site conditions. 

• single building on a site 

• 4 or more units 

• 2 or more entrances 

• may use either the Individual Building Test or the Site Analysis Test 

A minimum 20% of ground floor units must comply with the requirements of the Guidelines, plus an additional number determined by application of one of the tests. In addition, if any entrance is made accessible to meet either the 20% minimum or the percentage resulting from the test: 

all units served by that entrance must comply. 

• multiple buildings an a site 

• 4 or more units in each building 

• 1 or more entrances 

• may use either the Individual Building Test or the Site Analysis Test 

A minimum 20% of ground floor units must comply with the requirements of the Guidelines, plus an additional number determined by application of one of the tests. In addition, if any entrance is made accessible to meet either the 20% minimum or the percentage resulting from the test: 

Multiple Buildings on a Site all units served by that entrance must comply. 

Examples of Potentially Impractical Sites Based on Terrain and Application of Site Impracticality Tests 

1.42 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

I NDIVIDUAL B UILDING T EST 

The Individual Building Test must be used to analyze a site with a single building with one common entrance and also may be used for all other sites. The Individual Building Test, unlike the Site Analysis Test, does not have to be certified by a professional licensed engineer, landscape architect, or surveyor; but it should be calculated on a topographic map with two-foot (or less) contour intervals. 

For it to be considered impractical to provide an accessible route to any building or individual dwelling unit entrance, the slope be tween the pedestrian arrival points and the planned 

entrances must meet both of the following two conditions (quoted directly from the Guidelines): 

S TEP A. the slopes of the undisturbed site mea sured between the planned entrance and all vehicu lar or pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet of the planned entrance exceed 10%; and 

S TEP B. the slopes of the planned finish grade measured between the entrance and all vehicular or pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet of the planned entrance also exceed 10%.      

> planned location ground level
> of entrance at at center of
> existing grade doorway
> elevation
> planned location of arrival point at existing grade top of pavement
> level

Undisturbed Site Grade  at finished  Finished Site Grade  

> Step A Step B

Measurement  grade level of  Measurement 

> the arrival point

1.43 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

If the slope of both the undisturbed site and the planned finished grade between the building entrance and pedestrian arrival points does not exceed the 10% slope criterion, then it is considered practical to provide an accessible route with a maximum slope of 8.33% to the building or dwelling unit entrance. The entrance, thus, must be accessible and the unit(s), plus the public and 

> grade

common use spaces in the building served by the entrance, must comply with the design require ments of the Guidelines. The 10% slope criterion determines whether it is practical to provide an accessible route from a pedestrian arrival point to the building or dwelling unit entrance. It is not meant to imply that 10% is the acceptable slope for an accessible route.  

> both at existing existing grade location at existing grade 26.6% 30 30'-0" line of finished grade

I B UILDING T EST :E XAMPLE O NE  

> line of existing grade measurement points for Step A, arrival point at center of entrance doorway
> NDIVIDUAL
> elevation 97

Existing Grade Calculation elevation 95  

> 10% 30 330'-0" points for Step B, both at finished line of existing finished grade location at finished grade line of finished grade
> measurement arrival point at center of entrance doorway
> grade
> grade
> elevation 99

Finished Grade Calculation elevation 96 

Individual Building Test: Example One 

> both calculations do not exceed 10%; therefore, the developer must provide an accessible route to the entrance and all units on the ground floor served by the entrance are covered

1.44 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

Vehicular or pedestrian arrival points include public or resident parking areas, public transportation stops, passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks. In applying the test, all arrival points within the radius of 50 feet must be reviewed and not just a direct line to the closest arrival point. As shown in the diagram below, a 30-foot line to the closest arrival point has a slope of more than 10%, while a 45-foot line to a farther point has a slope of less than 10%. An accessible building entrance on an accessible route is, there fore, practical and the entrance must be accessible. 

If there are no vehicular or pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet, the slope must be calculated to the closest arrival point beyond 50 feet. For sidewalks, the closest point to the planned entrance is taken at the point where a public sidewalk entering the site intersects with a sidewalk leading to the entrance.    

> greater distance has lesser slope; therefore, an accessible route is practical
> 30' distance to arrival 45' distance to point with slope arrival point with greater than 10% slope less than 10% 50' radius

All Arrival Points within 50 Feet Must Be Considered 

1.45 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

to determine the practicality 

and less than 10% slope closest to the building entrance should be tested 

> 50’ R

greater than 50' parking areas 

public sidewalk of providing an accessible route, the slope is measured between the entrance and the closest point where the  greater than 50' 

and less than 10% 

public sidewalk intersects with a sidewalk leading to  slope 

the entrance 

pedestrian 

arrival point is 

the intersection 

of the public and 

50’ radius  site sidewalks 

private sidewalk  Sidewalks as Pedestrian Arrival Points (Closest Arrival Point Is Outside 50-Foot Range) 

In the case of resident parking areas, the closest point to the planned entrance will be measured from the entry point to the parking areas that are located closest to the planned entrance. 

the slope is measured from the building entrance to the closest intersection of the sidewalk and the parking area – to be practical the slope  

> Note:

Tests are performed on both the undis turbed site and the planned finished grade. 

50' radius 

Resident Parking Outside 50-Foot Range 

must be less than 10% 

1.46 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

In some buildings the Individual Building Test may need to be applied to each entrance. The following pages contain illustrations explaining the application of this test at different site conditions. 

I NDIVIDUAL B UILDING T EST :E XAMPLE T WO 

For buildings having more than one planned common entrance on a ground floor, the Indi vidual Building Test must be conducted for each 

entrance. Even if both entrances prove to be impractical, 20% of the ground floor units still must meet the requirements of the Guidelines; and the developer must change the entrance in what ever way necessary to provide an accessible route to these units. Once the accessible route and entrance is provided, all ground floor units served by the accessible entrance must comply. However, only one entrance is required to be accessible and on an accessible route. 

> even when all arrival points (pedestrian or vehicular ) are more than 50' from the planned entrances, they must be tested
> 50'
> 50'

Individual Building Test: Example Two Buildings with More than One Planned Common Entrance on a Ground Floor 

1.47 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

I NDIVIDUAL B UILDING T EST :E XAMPLE T HREE 

For buildings having more than one planned common entrance on more than one ground floor the Individual Building Test is applied to each entrance. 

The site arrival points within 50 feet of each entrance for both the existing and finished grade do not exceed 10%; therefore, all entrances 

> pedestrian arrival point
> pedestrian arrival point
> 50' R

are practical. Since all entrances are practical, units on both floors are covered and must comply with the requirements of the Guidelines. The entrance on the lower floor level and at least one of the entrances on the upper floor level must be on an accessible route unless the two entrances on the upper level serve different sets of clustered units, in which case both upper level entrances must be on an accessible route.   

> = covered units
> 50' R
> 50' R
> lower level entrance and at least one of the upper pedestrian level entrances must be

Individual Building Test:  arrival accessible and on an  Example Three  point accessible route  Single Building with Multiple Common Entrances on Two Ground Floors 

1.48 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

I NDIVIDUAL B UILDING T EST :E XAMPLE F OUR 

There is a site arrival point within 50 feet of each planned entrance. The slopes from the existing and finished grade for the two upper level entrances do not exceed 10%, but the slopes for the lower level entrance do. 

It is impractical to provide an accessible route from parking to the entrance on the lower ground floor. However, a secondary and 

nonrequired walk system is planned (dotted lines). It would connect the lower level entrance to the upper level arrival points and to other on-site buildings, amenities, and arrival points. The walk would not exceed a 1:20 slope and would therefore be an accessible route. If the walk is installed, the lower level entrance would be on an accessible route and the units on the lower level floor also would be covered.    

> = covered units
> pedestrian arrival point
> pedestrian arrival point
> 50' R
> 50' R
> 50' R
> if this accessible route is provided, the entrance must be accessible and all the units on the lower level ground floor are covered
> secondary walk at slope exceeds 10%
> 1:20 or less making an accessible route impractical

Individual Building Test: walk to site arrival points and to other Example Four  

> buildings and facilities

Single Building with Multiple Common Entrances 

Lower Ground Floor Units May Be Covered 

1.49 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

I NDIVIDUAL B UILDING T EST :E XAMPLE F IVE 

V EHICULAR R OUTE P ROVIDES A CCESS  

> TO

B UILDING E NTRANCES 

There is a single nonelevator building on a site having one common entrance, so the Individual Building Test is used to evaluate the practicality of providing an accessible route from the arrival points to the planned entrance. The closest arrival point is the sidewalk beside the driveway that curves up a slope to a flat area in front of the entrance (point A). The slopes from the entrance to arrival point A are less than 10%, but no parking is provided. The slopes between the entrance and all 

> slopes measured from
> vehicular route can be
> curb cut must connect with the accessible route into the building
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

other vehicular and pedestrian arrival (point B) are greater than 10%, making it impractical to provide an accessible pedestrian route from the parking lot to the building entrance. 

This is still a covered building since an accessible route is possible from the entrance to the sidewalk in front of the building. Because it is impractical to install an accessible pedestrian route from the parking area, an acceptable alternative is to provide access via a vehicular route. However, necessary site provisions, such as parking spaces and curb ramps, must be provided on an accessible route to 2% of the covered dwelling units. 

> than 10%; an accessible parking is not practical
> BA
> to the building entrance; additional parking and a entrance to the intersection
> <10% >10%
> slopes measured from entrance to arrival point B are greater pedestrian route from used to provide access of the two sidewalks is less than 10%; therefore, an accessible route is possible flat area in front of building

Individual Building Test: Example Five Vehicular Route May Be Used to Provide Access to Buildings Containing Dwelling Units 

1.50 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

S ITE A NALYSIS T EST 

This test may be used to analyze the site for a multifamily housing development containing multiple buildings without elevators, or a single nonelevator building with multiple entrances. The methodology for this test is significantly different from the Individual Building Test. It requires an analysis of the site to determine the number of required units which must be on an accessible route and which must meet the design require ments of the Guidelines. After this calculation is completed, the site is laid out and the minimum number of covered units must be provided. A third step which analyzes the placement of required units, accessible routes, and accessible entrances is then performed. This step is used to identify any additional units that can and therefore must be made to comply. Where the site contains multiple buildings, all the covered units should not be clustered in one building, but, as much as the site allows, should be dispersed throughout all the buildings. To perform the Site Analysis Test the following steps must be taken: 

S TEP A  

> Calculate the percentage of total buildable area of the undisturbed site with a natural grade less than 10% slope.
> 1. Obtain a Survey Map:

Obtain a topographic survey map of the undisturbed site with 2-foot contour intervals. The map must show precise boundaries of the site as well as areas where build ing is not allowed, such as floodplains, wetlands, setbacks, easements, or other restricted use areas.   

> 2. Measure the Total Buildable Area:

Measure the total area on which building is allowed, i.e., the area of the lot or site where a building can be located in compliance with applicable codes and zoning regulations. The “Total Buildable Area” is the total area of the site minus any restricted use areas.   

> 3. Complete a Slope Analysis:

Do a slope analysis of the total buildable area and mark on the topographic survey all those areas which have a slope of 10% or less. Calculate the combined area of site with slopes less than 10%. The slope deter mination shall be made between each successive 2 foot contour interval. The accuracy of the slope analysis must be certified by a professional licensed engineer, architect, landscape archi-tect, or surveyor. 

S TEP B

> Calculate percentage of accessible units.

Calculate the percentage of total buildable area of the undisturbed site with a natural grade less than 10%. This percentage is the minimum percentage of ground floor units which must be made acces sible. See sample site on page 1.52. 

> For example, if the total buildable area is
> 125,000 square feet and the area with slopes
> of less than 10% is 100,000 square feet, then
> the minimum percentage of units to be
> accessible is 80% .

Area with slope <10%  = 100,000  = 80% 

Total buildable area  125,000 

1.51 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Site Analysis of Undisturbed Site    

> areas with slopes of 10% or greater
> areas with slopes of 10% or less
> site boundary
> nonbuildable area (floodplain, topographic map
> wetland, or other of site with 2'-0"
> restricted area) contour intervals
> total buildable area boundary

S TEP C

Additional Covered Units 

In addition to the number of units required by the preceding analysis, all ground floor units must meet the design requirements of the Guidelines if they are served by a planned building entrance which is on an accessible route, i.e., on a walkway having a slope no greater than 8.33% between the planned entrance and a vehicular or pedestrian arrival point. This requires the builder/developer to 

review the site plan a second time to determine if additional accessible routes and/or entrances have been created that will increase the number of covered accessible units. Whenever accessible routes or entrances have been created to provide access to the minimum required number of units, any additional units that may be served by those entrances also must meet the requirements of the Guidelines. 

1.52 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

A PPLYING THE S ITE A NALYSIS T EST 

Calculating the Required Number of Covered Units 

There are three nonelevator buildings on a site. Two have 16 units, 4 on the lowest ground floor level and 6 on each of the other floors. The third build ing has 12 units, 6 on each floor. Performing  

> Step A

of the site analysis test reveals that 75% of the buildable area has a slope of less than 10%. Therefore, 75% of the total number of ground floor units must meet the requirements of the Guidelines and be on an accessible route. 

Buildings One and Two have two ground floors, while Building Three has only one ground floor. The total number of ground floor units for the development is 26. Seventy-five percent of 26 = 20 (19.5 rounded up) ground floor units that are covered ( Step B ). The covered units should be dispersed on the site among the three buildings. 

To provide the required number of units the developer/builder chooses to place the covered units on the only ground floor in Building Three and on the upper ground floor of Buildings One and Two, where accessible entrances on accessible routes can be provided most easily. The number of units on these floors totals 18, which is 2 units less 

than the 20 that are needed to meet Steps A and B .

To meet the requirement for 20 accessible units, the developer/builder has the option of providing the 2 additional units on the second ground floor of either Building One or Two. In this example, the builder places the additional 2 re quired units on the lower ground floor of Building One, and provides the required accessibility by regrading and adding a ramp to the lower level entrance. Additionally, under Step C , since the 

lower level entrance is now on an accessible route, all the units on that floor become covered units and the entire ground floor must comply. As a result, the total number of covered units is 22. 

Positioning Covered Units on a Building Site 

It is permissible under the Site Analysis Test to select in which buildings and on which floors covered units will be placed; however, in a multiple building development, all the covered units should not be located in a single building. Covered units should be dispersed between buildings and, if possible, among all the ground floors. However, if the required number of covered units is less than the total number of units on a floor, all the units on that floor become covered units because the re quired units are served by an accessible route and entrance. 

1.53 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Step A 

Topographic analysis: Building #3 

Step B 

x 75% 20 

Step C 

Example One 

231

accessible entrance on an 6 units 4 units 6 units 4 units 6 units 6 units floor 6 units 6 units 

Building #2 Building #1 

Area < 10% slope = 75% Ground floor units to comply = 75% Total Ground Floor Units = 26 Covered Units = After distribution of required units, total count of 20 covered ground floor units is raised to 22. Two more units are added to lower ground floor of Building #1 and an accessible route is provided to meet the required 20. Two remaining units on that floor become covered units because all ground floor units served by an accessible route are covered units. 

Site Analysis Test: 

To meet the required number of covered units an additional accessible route must be provided to another ground floor, thus making all the units on that floor covered. additional required covered units provided on lower ground • 1 ground floor • 6 ground floor units • all 6 ground floor units covered • 2 ground floors • 10 ground floor units • 6 ground floor units covered • 2 ground floors • 10 ground floor units • all 10 ground floor units covered 

The Number of Covered Units 

1.54 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

A CCESSIBLE R OUTES M AY D ICTATE A DDITIONAL C OVERED U NITS 

If the Site Analysis Test indicates a particular percentage of required covered units and the project has a larger number, all of which are on accessible routes, the larger number are covered and must meet the design requirements of the Guidelines. 

Ten three-story nonelevator buildings are planned for a site, each having eight ground floor units for a total of 80 units. Steps A and B of the site analysis test show 60% (or 48) of the ground 

floor units must comply. During planning the developer places these 48 required units in six of the ten buildings, selecting the six buildings where providing accessibility is easily achieved. However, after the site planning is completed, application of  

> Step C

shows that all ten buildings have entrances on an accessible route, i.e., a walkway with a slope between the planned building entrances and a pedestrian or vehicular arrival point that is no greater than 8.33%. Therefore, all ground floor units in each building (or 80 units) must meet the Guidelines.      

> after planning is com-Steps A and B of the site analysis reveals 60% of ground pleted Step C of the test floor units are covered requires all buildings to
> have entrances on an
> accessible route; there
> fore, 100% of ground
> floor units are covered

Site Analysis Test: Example Two Additional Covered Units 

1.55 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

S ITES WITH U NUSUAL C HARACTERISTICS 

Certain sites are subject to laws or codes which specify that the lowest floor of a building or the lowest structural member of the lowest floor must be raised to a specified level. Examples of such sites are those located in a federally designated flood-plain or coastal high-hazard area, where buildings must be raised to a level at or above the base flood elevation. 

When these circumstances result in 

> Step One

, a difference in grade elevation exceeding 30 inches 

– and –

> Step Two

, a slope exceeding 10% between a building entrance and all vehicular and pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet of the entrance (or to the closest one if none are within 50 feet), then an accessible route to that building entrance is consid ered impractical. Therefore, the building would not be subject to the accessibility requirements of the Fair Housing Act. 

The heavy dotted line between the door threshold and the arrival point in the following illustrations is a measuring and slope determination line only. It is not intended to represent the surface of a ramp or walk. The slope and the length of this line simply will determine whether or not the building entrance is required to be on an accessible route. Once that determination is made, the developer/builder can design any system of ramps, walks, lifts, or other method of providing the necessary access. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

The entrances shown in these examples may be either a common or an individual dwelling unit entrance. If the measuring and slope determi nation line shown has a vertical elevation change less than 30 inches and the slope is less than 10%, the entrance and the route to it must be accessible (meet the Guidelines) as well as the dwelling units on that ground floor. 

Tree-save ordinances do not constitute an unusual site characteristic that necessarily would exempt a site from complying with the require ments of the Act. However, the Guidelines would not require that a site be graded in violation of a tree-save ordinance. If, however, access is required based on the final site plan, then installa tion of a ramp for access, rather than grading, could be necessary in some cases so as not to disturb the trees. 

1.56 ACCESSIBLE BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE 

Line of building floor, subfloor, underside of lowest structural member, or other 

line of measuring point required by location at center of doorway 

building local code authority is more at building entrance 

floor, than 30" above grade level at 

subfloor, the arrival point. In addition,  greater than 30" 

structure, the slope of the measuring  above grade level at 

all arrival points within 50' must arrival point  be measured the building is not covered. greater 

than 10% 

base flood line 

line between the entrance  arrival point  etc., as 

required and the arrival point is 

locally greater than 10%; therefore, 

> locally
> varies

this line is used only to illustrate the slope measurement for determining feasibility of providing an accessible route, not to specify slope or length 

Building Meets Both Criteria for Exemption 

location at center of doorway at building entrance 

line of building floor, subfloor, structure, etc., as required locally 

base flood line 

of ramp 

greater than 30" above grade at arrival point 

this line is used only to illustrate the slope for determining feasibility of providing an accessible route, not to specify slope or length of ramp 

closest arrival point if 

none are within 50' arrival point less than 10% 

> varies
> locally

Building Must Comply With Requirements of the Guidelines 

1.57 PART TWO: CHAPTER 1 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

ramps can be installed in a variety of integrated configurations other than the straight run ramp perpendicular to the building 

arrival point within the slope criteria for an 

accessible route 

Accessible Route to Grade Could Be a Ramp, Lift, Elevated Walkway, or Elevator 

shallow walk with a slope of less than 5%; walks between covered buildings and pedes trian or vehicular arrival points with slopes between 5% and 8.33% require handrails 

1.58 Chapter Two: 

R EQUIREMENT 2

Accessible and Usable Public and Common Use Areas 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed in such a manner that the public and common use areas are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons. 

> Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205

# 2PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Definitions from the Guidelines 

Accessible. When used with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multifamily dwellings, means that the public or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps. The phrase “readily accessible to and usable by” is synonymous with accessible. A public or common use area that complies with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1 – 1986, a comparable standard or these guidelines is “accessible” within the meaning of this paragraph. 

Common Use Areas. Rooms, spaces, or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building or the guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas, and passageways among and between buildings. 

Public Use Areas. Interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided at a building that is privately or publicly owned. 

2.2 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

I NTRODUCTION 

The Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) require public and common use areas and facilities in covered multifamily housing developments to be accessible to people with disabilities so they may benefit from and enjoy the amenities present in the housing development in which they live. Public and common use areas that must be accessible include, but are not limited to, such spaces and elements as selected on-site walks, parking, corridors, lobbies, drinking foun tains and water coolers, swimming pool decks or aprons, playgrounds, rental offices, mailbox areas, trash rooms/refuse disposal areas, lounges, club houses, tennis courts, health spas, game rooms, toilet rooms and bathing facilities, laundries, com munity rooms, and portions of common use tenant storage. 

The Guidelines require an accessible route (see page 2.15) to public and common use spaces, but not all features or elements within that space may be required to be accessible. The scoping 

provisions, or “where,” “when,” and “how many” elements and spaces must be accessible, will be addressed throughout this chapter. For example, where multiple recreational facilities are provided, the Guidelines do not require that each amenity be accessible, but rather that “sufficient numbers” be accessible to provide equitable use by people with disabilities. 

In general, however, if each building on a site has its own trash room, lounge area, laundry room, game room, etc., then each of these in each building must be on an accessible route and comply with the applicable portions of an appro priate accessibility standard since they serve different buildings. For an overview of the scoping requirements refer to the illustrations on pages 2.8 through 2.11 and to the chart, taken from the Guidelines, entitled “Basic Components for Accessible and Usable Public and Common Use Areas or Facilities,” reprinted on the next page. 

2.3 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

S COPE OF ANSI AND THE ADA IN P UBLIC AND C OMMON U SE S PACES 

A PPLICATION OF 

ANSI A117.1 - 1986 

The Fair Housing Act references the ANSI A117.1 Standard (American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities: Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People) as an acceptable means of complying with the design requirements of the Act. However, the Act does not exclusively require following ANSI A117.1. The Fair Housing Act regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) adopt the ANSI Standard, but specify the 1986 version of the ANSI A117.1 Standard. Likewise, the Guidelines refer ence specific portions of the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard. 

The Guidelines are to provide technical guidance and are not mandatory. They provide a safe harbor for compliance with the accessibility requirements of the Act. 

The “Purpose” section in the Guidelines states that “Builders and developers may choose to depart from these guidelines and seek alternate ways to demonstrate that they have met the requirements of the Fair Housing Act.” If an accessibility standard other than the ANSI A117.1 Standard is followed, care must be taken to ensure the standard used is at least equivalent to or stricter than the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard. See also the ANSI Standard discussion in the Introduction on page 13. 

The Guidelines, in some instances, modify the ANSI specifications and, in other instances, substitute specifications. The illustrations in this chapter provide an overview of many of the key requirements for public and common use areas. 

When designing these areas it is essential to refer to the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard specifications 4.1 through 4.31, as appropriate (or an equivalent or stricter standard), for detailed dimensional design specifications for each required accessible element or space. 

Note: When this Manual states the ANSI Standard or the ANSI A117.1 Standard “must be followed” it means the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Stan dard or an equivalent or stricter standard. 

ANSI Technical Specifications for Accessible Elements and Spaces                                

> 4.1 Basic Components
> 4.2 Space Allowances and Reach Ranges
> 4.3 Accessible Route
> 4.4 Protruding Objects
> 4.5 Ground and Floor Surfaces
> 4.6 Parking Spaces and Passenger Loading Zones
> 4.7 Curb Ramps
> 4.8 Ramps
> 4.9 Stairs
> 4.10 Elevators
> 4.11 Platform Lifts
> 4.12 Windows
> 4.13 Doors
> 4.14 Entrances
> 4.15 Drinking Fountains and Water Coolers
> 4.16 Water Closets
> 4.17 Toilet Stalls
> 4.18 Urinals
> 4.19 Lavatories, Sinks, and Mirrors
> 4.20 Bathtubs
> 4.21 Shower Stalls
> 4.22 Toilet Rooms, Bathrooms, Bathing Facilities, and Shower Rooms
> 4.23 Storage
> 4.24 Grab Bars, and Tub and Shower Seats
> 4.25 Controls and Operating Mechanisms
> 4.26 Alarms
> 4.27 Detectable Warnings
> 4.28 Signage
> 4.29 Telephones
> 4.30 Seating, Tables, and Work Surfaces
> 4.31 Auditorium and Assembly Areas

2.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

P UBLIC AND C OMMON U SE A REAS NOT C OVERED BY THE G UIDELINES 

Where a newly constructed development consists entirely of buildings of four or more multistory dwelling units without elevators (e.g., two-story townhouses), the development is not required to comply with the Fair Housing Act or the Guide lines. Since there are no covered multifamily dwellings on the site, no public and common use areas anywhere on the site are required to be accessible. Note, however, that the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 may apply. See the discussion of the ADA in the next column. 

However, in housing developments of two-or three-story walk-up buildings where the ground floor dwelling units are single-story, all the ground floor units are covered (unless site impracticality can be claimed, see Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route”) and must be on an accessible route with accessible entrances. Since an accessible route does not go to the upper floors, then the stairs up to those dwelling units, and the halls, corridors, and entry doors on the upper floors are not covered by the requirements of the Guidelines. 

Of course, public and common use facili ties must be accessible and cannot be located on upper floors of buildings which do not have an elevator(s), unless similar facilities also are located on the ground floor. For example, it would not be acceptable to have a common use trash room on the second floor of a building and not have one on the ground floor of the same building. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

I MPACT OF THE A MERICANS WITH D ISABILITIES A CT (ADA) ON P UBLIC AND C OMMON U SE S PACES 

The dwelling units of private multifamily housing developments generally are not required to meet the accessibility provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). However, some public and common use spaces such as rental offices and sales offices are considered “public accommodations” under Title III of the ADA because, by their nature, they are open to people other than residents and their guests. They, therefore, must comply with the ADA requirements in addition to all applicable requirements of the Fair Housing Act. 

Other buildings and amenities in a housing development, such as laundry buildings and recre ational facilities (clubhouses, swimming pools, spas, game rooms, and exercise rooms), will be covered by the ADA only if they are available for use by people other than residents and their guests. If such facilities are made available to the public only periodically, such as for a festival or seasonal event, they must comply with the ADA during the event. 

Fortunately the ANSI and the ADAAG have similar technical specifications for most features. However, there are some differences in scope and technical requirements. For example, the ADAAG requires designated parking spaces for vans. For more discussion of this, see page 2.20 “Access Aisles.” Since this document presents the ANSI specifications cited in the Fair Housing Act, the reader is advised to consult ADAAG only when public and common use facilities are to be available to the general public. 

2.6 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

> Places of public accommodation 1. places of lodging, 2. establish ment, 4. places of public gathering, 10. places of education, 11. social
> Definitions
> subject to the requirements of Title III of the ADA include: ments serving food or drink, 3. places of exhibition or entertain 5. sales or rental establishments, 6. service establishments, 7. stations used for specified public transporta tion, 8. places of public display or collection, 9. places of recreation, service center establishments, and 12. places of exercise or recreation.
> 28 CFR Part 36, Section 36.104.

Public and Common Use Space Covered by the ADA 

M ULTIPLE R ECREATIONAL F ACILITIES 

Where multiple recreational facilities of the same type are provided at the same location on the site (e.g., tennis courts), not all but a “sufficient” number of the facilities must be accessible to ensure an equitable opportunity for use by people with disabilities. It is recommended that all recre ational facilities be accessible when the site is relatively flat and this can be easily achieved. Whenever only one of a type of recreational facility is provided at a particular location on the site, it must be accessible and connected by an accessible route to the covered dwelling units. In instances 

where each building or cluster of buildings is served by its own recreational facility e.g., a swimming pool, then the facility must be on an accessible route from the covered dwelling units. 

In the case of recreational facilities, special equipment and features are not required by the Guidelines. For example, play areas for children and swimming pool aprons must be accessible and 

meet ANSI specifications for all commonly constructed elements, but special mechanical pool lifts or wheelchair accessible play equipment are not required. The Guidelines do not require an accessible route (ramp or lift) down into the water at pools. 

2.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

8’-0” access aisle for van  since accessibility is provided Example: Accessible Site Features for  parking at rental/sales at tennis court at playground/ 

a Multifamily Housing Development  office, see pages 2.6 and clubhouse, this public and 

Covered by the FHA Guidelines  2.20, “Access Aisles” common use facility may remain on an inaccessible walk 

1 accessible passenger loading zone, see ANSI 4.6 

2 accessible bus shelter (pedestrian arrival point) on an acces sible route, see  inaccessible 

drawing on page 1.6  tennis court 

3 accessible resident and visitor parking, rental see page 2.23 office 

4 ramp from upper level  community 

of site with tennis  building 

court to lower level with clubhouse is part of a required acces sible route and must meet ANSI 4.8 Ramps  curb ramps, see ANSI 4.7 and page 2.22 

5 both pools must be on an accessible route that continues around the apron (access into water not required) since they serve 

1

separate buildings  elevator building, see perspective on pages 2.10 and 2.11 containing covered dwelling units  7

6 all or a portion of  all public and common use spaces 

jogging trails must  and all dwelling units are covered 

be accessible where practical; this trail is accessible from this point to bridge (smooth, level, paved surface with pool no abrupt change in level); beyond bridge, trail is inaccessible  5

7 van accessible space, see page 2.13, note 16 

2.8 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

pool since accessible site to buildings containing 

6

423

picnic tables 

bridge clubhouse 

5

tennis 

buildings without stairs along inaccessible walks jogging trail parking access aisle playground Whenever multiple recreational facilities are provided, sufficient accessible facilities of each type must be provided to assure equitable opportunity for use by people with disabilities. inaccessible walk between buildings containing only covered dwelling units three-story buildings without elevator(s), ground floor units are covered inaccessible walk allowed amenities are linked by alternate accessible route covered dwelling units one-of-a-kind island gazebo and the four picnic tables are accessible and on an accessible route, see ANSI 4.30 Seating, Tables and Work Surfaces trash facility serving covered dwelling units on an accessible route with at least one dumpster being accessible, see page 2.16 court elevator(s), ground floor units are covered accessible route (part of accessible route) 

2.9 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

mail passenger loading at least one telephone per bank of telephones ANSI 4.29 

12 534

99688799

18 

located at specific elements and spaces. 

10 13 12

exercise rooms and other boxes zone, ANSI 4.6.3 must be accessible, 

11

toilet rooms, bathrooms, bathing facilities, shower rooms, and similar facilities (such as dressing rooms), when provided for common alarms, ANSI 4.26 

Example: Common Use Accessible Spaces and Elements on an Accessible Route 

See pages 2.12 and 2.13 for notes keyed to the numbers 

use, see ANSI 4.22, Note 18, similar spaces and and page 2.28 facilities, see Note 9 

2.10 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

emergency exit door seating locations ANSI 4.28 garage parking, see ANSI 4.6, Note 15, and page 2.25 ANSI 4.28 top-loading washers permitted under Guidelines van parking, see Note 16 and page ANSI 4.31.5 wheelchair seating space wheelchair seating “Usable Doors” 

963

ANSI 4.31 

18 1714 10 

and accessible route from wheelchair room signs, ramps, ANSI 4.8 laundry rooms, see directional signage, 2.20, “Access Aisles” accessible route, spaces, ANSI 4.31 performance area accessible dwelling unit door, see Chapter 3: seating areas 

1115

assembly areas, 

16

ANSI 4.32.6, Note 17, and page 2.26 

2.11 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

The following numbered notes are keyed to the 

perspective “Example: Common Use Accessible 

Spaces and Elements on an Accessible Route” 

appearing on pages 2.10 and 2.11. Each note 

contains selected technical design references 

and explanations based on the FHA Guidelines 

and the ANSI A117.1 - 1986. 

1

Passenger Loading Zones. Passenger loading zones must have a large clear pedestrian access aisle con nected by an accessible route to accessible building entrances. They also must have sufficient headroom to clear buses or vans with high roofs. See ANSI 4.6 and Notes 2 and 3 below. 

2

Overhanging Objects. Roofs, tree limbs, or other elements that overhang passenger loading zones must be kept high enough to clear buses or vans with high roofs. See ANSI 4.6. 

3

Accessible Route. Accessible routes must connect accessible transportation stops, parking spaces, passenger loading zones, and public streets and sidewalks within the boundaries of the site to acces sible entrances. See ANSI 4.3, Note 6, and page 2.15. 

4

Accessible Entrance. Doors along accessible routes must meet ANSI 4.13. See also Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route.” 

5

Revolving Doors. Revolving doors generally cannot meet the requirements of ANSI 4.13, and, therefore, cannot be the only means of passage at an accessible entrance or on an accessible route. 

6

Accessible Route. An accessible route must connect accessible building or facility entrances with accessible spaces and elements within the building or facility, including adaptable (or covered) dwelling units. See also ANSI 4.3, Note 3, and page 2.15. 

7

Reception Desk. Accessible reception desks are not specifically described in ANSI. This common use facility must be accessible to people with disabilities and should comply with the applicable specifications of ANSI 4.1 - 4.31. See also Note 9. 

8

Elevators. All elevators, if provided, must comply with ANSI 4.10. 

9

Multiple Elements, Features, or Spaces. 

Whenever one of a type of element, feature, or space is provided for public or common use of residents, it must be on an accessible route and meet the applicable specifications of ANSI. Whenever multiple features or facilities are provided, sufficient accessible features of each type must be provided to assure equitable opportunity for use by people with disabilities. 

When ANSI does not contain specifications for the specific facility or feature in question, then related human factors and performance specifications must be used to achieve accessibility. Such specifica tions include, but are not limited to, 4.2 Space Allow ances and Reach Ranges, 4.3 Accessible Route, 4.4 Protruding Objects, 4.5 Ground and Floor Surfaces, and 4.25 Controls and Operating Mechanisms. 

10 

Raised or Sunken Floor Areas. Small raised or sunken floor areas within a single space or room not connected by an accessible route may be allowed, provided that any facilities or elements on the raised or lowered area also are provided on the main or accessible floor area in the same room or space. In many building codes raised areas, such as mezzanines, are limited to a maximum of 33-1/3 percent of the floor area of the space in which they are located. This seems to be a reasonable limiting percentage for a cumulative total of the entire inaccessible raised and lowered floor areas. The majority of all facilities or elements must be on the accessible floor area and be served by an accessible route. The raised or sunken area must not prevent an accessible route from serving other accessible areas, facilities, or elements; it must not require people with disabilities to take a circuitous route or travel an inordinate additional distance to reach the accessible space. 

2.12 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

11 

Stairs Along Accessible Routes. A properly designed ramp is considered to be an acceptable part of an accessible route. However, since some users are safer on stairs than on ramps, it is best if stairs are provided in combination with ramps. This is especially true when they are located along an accessible route connecting levels not connected by an elevator. Such stairs are required to meet the ANSI requirements since they will be used by people with particular disabilities for whom steps are easier to traverse than ramps. See page 2.17 for further discussion of stairs along accessible routes. 

12 

Protruding Objects. The corridor space is an accessible route and like all accessible routes and maneuvering areas, it must be free of hazardous protruding objects that project from walls and posts and are dangerous to someone who is inobservant or a person with a visual impairment. See ANSI 4.4 Protruding Objects and page 2.18. 

13 

Drinking Fountains and Water Coolers. Where drinking fountains or water coolers are provided, 50 percent on each floor, or at least one, must be on an accessible route and comply with ANSI 4.15. 

14 

Doors to Covered Units. Doors to adaptable (or covered) dwelling units must meet ANSI 4.13 on the exterior or public and common use side, but need only meet Guidelines Requirement Three: Usable Doors on the inside. See Chapter 3: “Usable Doors.” 

15 

Parking. Where parking is provided on a multifamily building site, accessible parking spaces on an accessible route are required for residents and visitors. To comply with the Guidelines, such spaces must meet the ANSI 

4.6  specifications for parking. The accessible parking that serves a particular building should be located on the shortest possible accessible circulation route to an accessible entrance of the building. 

16 

Van Parking. The Guidelines do not require special van parking, but they do require headroom over passenger loading zones for vans. ANSI accessible parking spaces, when located in parking garages, may or may not have sufficient headroom to accommodate vans. Also, the 60-inch access aisle specified in ANSI is not wide enough for vans with side-mounted lifts. For these reasons, it is recommended, where accessible parking is located in garages not having headroom equal to that required by ANSI at loading zones, additional supplemental designated van parking spaces be placed outdoors and furnished with an 8-foot (96 inches) wide access aisle and an accessible route to the garage or other entrances of the building. 

17 

Laundry Rooms. Where laundry rooms are provided for common use of residents, at least one of each type of appliance provided in each laundry area must be accessible, see ANSI 4.32.6. Note, however, front-loading machines are not required. The accessible route into the room must adjoin a clear floor space to permit a person using a wheelchair to make a parallel or forward approach (see page 5.5) to at least one of each type of appliance, i.e., washing machines, dryers, and soap dispensers. If related features are provided in laundry rooms, such as wash sinks, tables, and storage, at least one of each type must be accessible and comply with applicable ANSI specifications. See page 2.26. 

18 

Toilet Rooms, Bathrooms, Bathing Facilities, and Shower Rooms. Where toilet rooms and bathing facilities are provided for public use or com mon use of residents, at least one fixture of each type provided must be accessible per room. See page 2.28 and ANSI 4.22. If related features are provided, such as lockers, at least one of each type must be accessible and comply with applicable ANSI specifications includ ing 4.2 Space Allowances and Reach Ranges, 4.25 Controls and Operating Mechanisms, and 4.23 Storage. 

2.13 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

storage, see  accessible route operable and 

if windows are 

ANSI 4.23  around pool; lift or intended for  other means of resident use,  access into water they must meet  not required ANSI 4.12 

> accessible r oute
> DW

sinks, as part of a public and common use space, must be accessible, see ANSI 4.19 

recommended that vending  minimum 30" 

machine be  wide knee space 

within reach  enlarged to 36" to 

range, see  allow a resident 

ANSI 4.25  using a wheelchair to make a T-turn in the kitchen, see page 19 

pool table on accessible route, see ANSI 4.3 Public and common use kitchens must 

be usable and at least meet the requirements in the Guidelines for Accessible Elements and Features of a 

Public and Common Use Clubhouse  kitchens. If preferred, the require ments for kitchens in ANSI 4.32 could be followed. 

Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by ANSI or the Guidelines. All recommended features are helpful to people with and without disabilities. 

2.14 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

S ELECTED T OPICS ON A CCESSIBLE P UBLIC AND C OMMON U SE S PACES AND F ACILITIES 

The following is additional explanatory text and illustrations describing selected topics related to accessible public and common use spaces and facilities covered by the Guidelines. 

A CCESSIBLE R OUTE 

An accessible route is a path that is at least 36 inches wide, smooth, as level as possible, and without hazards or obstructions. Within the boundary of the site, an accessible walk or route on a site must connect public transportation stops, accessible parking spaces, accessible passenger loading zones, and public streets and sidewalks to accessible building entrances. Such accessible walks and routes are subject to site constraints discussed in Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route.” In addition, an accessible route must connect accessible buildings with public and common use site amenities. The accessible route 

links all accessible elements and features on a site and within a building, making it possible for people with a wide range of disabilities to maneuver safely and use a facility successfully. 

Exterior accessible routes include but are not limited to parking access aisles, passenger loading zones, curb ramps, crosswalks at vehicular ways, walks, ramps, and lifts. See Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route” for additional discussion of accessible routes on sites. As the accessible route continues into a building, it may include corridors, doorways, floors, ramps, elevators, lifts, and clear floor space at fixtures. Accessible routes also may include sky walks, tunnels, garages, and parts of many public and common use spaces. ANSI 4.3 contains com plete technical specifications for accessible routes, including width, headroom, surface texture, slope, changes in level, doors, and egress in emergencies.  

> 24" max. 60"x 60" passing space
> 32"
> min.
> 80" min. headroom
> T-intersection
> can function as
> a passing space
> accessible route, see ANSI 4.3

Accessible Route:  

> 4" max.
> 32" min.

Width, Height, and  

> at door

Passing Spaces  

> maneuvering
> 200' max. between
> 80" min.
> passing spaces
> ecommended )(r
> 36"
> space at doors, 24" max. see ANSI 4.13.6
> min.

2.15 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> walk raised to provide easy access to the door on at least one dumpster in each such public and common use site facility

W ALKS E XEMPT FROM A CCESSIBLE R OUTE R EQUIREMENTS 

On-grade walks between separate buildings con taining only covered dwelling units are not re quired to be accessible. However, if the grade of walks between buildings containing only dwelling units does not exceed 8.33%, it is recommended that these walks meet the requirement for acces sible routes and not be interrupted by steps. If these walks are made accessible, handrails will not be required on any part of the walk where the slope is between 5% and 8.33%. 

> door hardware should be easy to operate and be within reach range of seated user, see ANSI 4.2.6
> 36" min. accessible route

Site Amenities Such As Tenant-Use Trash Facilities Must Be On Accessible Route  

> When ANSI does not contain specifications for the specific facility or feature in question, related human factors and performance specifications must be used to achieve accessibility. Such specifica tions include, but are not limited to,
> 4.2 Space Allowances and Reach Ranges, 4.3 Accessible Route, 4.4 Protruding Objects, 4.5 Ground and Floor Surfaces, and 4.25 Controls and Operating Mechanisms.

It is important to note, however, that if walks between buildings containing only covered dwelling units are also part of a required accessible route–for example, if the walk serves as the route to a common use facility located nearby--then the route would be required to be accessible. (See page 1.8, “Accessible Routes and Walks Between Acces sible Buildings and Site Facilities.”) 

2.16 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

S TAIRS AND A CCESSIBLE R OUTES 

By definition and ANSI 4.3.8 Changes in Level, a stair can never be part of an accessible route, i.e., a stair can never interrupt or be part of the path of an accessible route. Elevators, ramps, and mechanical lifts, however, can be part of an accessible route. In view of the fact that some users have difficulty walking on ramps and are safer using appropriately designed stairs, it is always best that stairs be placed adjacent to or nearby ramps that are used to provide an accessible route between levels not served by elevators. 

The ANSI and the Guidelines “Applica tion” charts both state “stairs on accessible routes connecting levels not connected by an elevator” must comply with ANSI 4.9 Stairs. However, the preamble to the Guidelines states “stairs are subject to the ANSI Standard only when they are located  

> along

an accessible route not served by an elevator.” Therefore, “along” and “on” are interpreted to have the same meaning, especially given the definition of an accessible route that states a stair cannot be part of an accessible route. Thus, “along” and “on” are intended to mean either “adjacent to” or “nearby.” 

Nearby in this case means within the same area or within sight of the accessible route or at an unseen location indicated by directional signage. See the example in the illustration below. 

In buildings that do not have elevator(s), the Guidelines do not require stairs serving floors above or below the ground floor to meet the ANSI standard. It should be noted, however, that any applicable state or local law or code that sets a stricter standard, may require the stairs to be accessible. 

For example, if the local building code has adopted the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard, then ANSI 4.9.1 would be applicable. ANSI 4.9.1 states, “Stairs that are required as a means of egress and stairs between floor levels not connected by an elevator shall comply with 4.9.” Because most stairs in nonelevator buildings are provided either to connect floors not connected by an elevator or are stairs required as a means of egress, this would mean that virtually all stairs, including monumen tal or decorative stairs, would have to comply. Therefore, it is important to check state or local laws for their applicability to stairs.    

> handrail extensions for support and guidance maintained between
> levels with ANSI stairs nearby or complying ramp, within sight of maximum slope 1:12 accessible route must comply with ANSI 4.9
> no elevator goes between level 1 and 2

2

1

Stairs at Accessible Routes Between Levels Not Connected By an Elevator Must Meet ANSI 

> accessible route

2.17 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

P ROTRUDING O BJECTS 

Many people with visual impairments use a long  Detectable items are obstacles that can be maneu 

cane for guidance. The cane is used to follow a  vered around. 

“shoreline” such as the edge of a sidewalk or a curb  There must always be a 36-inch wide 

or, indoors, the baseboard of a wall. The cane,  accessible route around any obstacle. Large wall-

when swept ahead of the user, also detects obstacles  mounted items such as fire extinguishers and 

in the path. Objects which protrude from walls or  telephone enclosures must be recessed, set in 

hang from overhead are not detectable and are,  alcoves, or designed so they have structures extend-

therefore, hazardous because a person with a visual  ing close to the floor, no higher than 27 inches, 

disability can not avoid running into them.  and within the long cane detectable area. 

> bottom edge of

Protruding Objects 

> cane detectable range
> than 27"
> wing walls or other detectable warning circulation path accessible route greater than 24" fountain outside

Hazardous 

> greater

Wall-Mounted Objects Installed Between Detectable Wing Walls 

> barrier must not reduce accessible route

2.18 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

wing walls down to floor 

protruding objects are prohib ited along all circulation paths including accessible routes and stairs, see ANSI 4.4 Protruding Objects 

80" min. headroom 

additional protection not required between wing walls for pro truding objects with leading edges greater than >27" 

4" maximum projection for objects greater than 27" above floor 

> clear min.

protruding objects hanging on wall with leading edges less than 27" are detectable 

if the accessible route is reduced to less than 36" by a Wall-Hung and Other Commonly Found Items 

wall hung object,  in Public and Common Use Spaces Located so 

then the width of  They Are Not Hazardous Protruding Objects 

the object may be no wider than 24" 

24" 

36" 

clear min. 

max. 

> 32"

2.19 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

A CCESSIBLE P ARKING ON AN A CCESSIBLE R OUTE 

When parking is provided on a residential site, accessible parking spaces on an accessible route must be provided for residents and visitors. Acces sible parking spaces must meet the requirements for parking in ANSI 4.6 and be located on the shortest possible accessible circulation route to an accessible entrance, subject to site considerations in Chapter 1.  

> Access Aisles.

Parking spaces must be wide enough to allow people using wheelchairs or mobility aids to move between cars and to enter cars or vans. Accessible parking spaces must be at least 96 inches wide and have an adjacent access aisle that is 60 inches wide. This 60-inch access aisle is regarded as a minimum, and although it is adequate for people using wheelchairs who can transfer into and out of cars, it is too narrow for safe and comfortable use for people who drive vans. The Guidelines do not require nor specify the size of van-accessible access aisles. The only nationally accepted design standard that contains such a specification is the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG), which specify that a van parking access aisle must be at least 96 inches wide and is required at sales and rental offices. See page 2.6.  

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> Curb Ramps.

Curb ramps are transitions between roads, parking areas, access aisles, and sidewalks that allow a pedestrian route to remain accessible to people who use wheelchairs and other mobility aids, see ANSI 4.7. Curb ramps are a necessity for people with mobility impairments but are a hazard to people who are blind who use the curb as a “cue” to know when they are entering the street. The ANSI Standard requires a texture on curb ramp surfaces to make them detectable. These textures often do not provide enough of a cue and a person with a visual impairment may inadvert ently enter the street. Locating curb ramps out of the usual line of pedestrian flow and “shorelines” (edge between sidewalk and grass or other cane detectable surface) is one solution to this problem. See drawing at the bottom of page 2.22. 

2.20 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

returned curb ramp, see ANSI 4.7 

building, See Guidelines access aisle flush with minimum access aisle 

accessible route to 

and ANSI 4.3 

two parking spaces may share one access aisle 

sidewalk eliminates need for curb ramps 

18'- 0" 

sign indicating  typical 

accessible parking 

> 96"  60"  96" min. shown

wheelstops to prevent parked cars from encroach-ing upon accessible route 

flared curb ramp, 

maximum 1:12 

slope 

5' X 20' street level access aisle 

car is out of 

traffic lane 

passenger drop-off area outside traffic 

lanes, see ANSI 4.6  Parking and Curb Ramps 

access aisle and curb ramp to sidewalk are part of accessible route 

to allow vehicles to stop outside traffic lane so passengers may more safely disembark, drop-off area and sidewalk are recessed; such recessed areas are not required by the Guidelines, ANSI, or ADAAG. 

2.21 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

on curb ramps, smooth transition flared curb ramp allows people to walk safely across it 

Flared Curb Ramp 

The “flared curb” ramp required textures see ANSI 4.7.7 

with no lip or is safest and allows people 

drop-off here to enter the ramp directly or from a side angle. This design is best used where pedestrians are likely to walk across the ramp. 

The “returned curb” ramp 

Returned Curb Ramp 

returned curb ramp needs protection so people will not trip on it 

has the curb “turned back” the full depth of the ramp. This design can be a tripping hazard to pedestrians and should be used only where adjacent plant beds or other features will prevent ap proach from the sides. 

required textures on curb ramps, see ANSI 4.7.7 

offset curb ramp placed out of the usual line of pedes person with visual if width less than 48" then the slope not exceed 1:12 6'-8" min. person using a wheelchair path of a person with person who is blind and uses a cane 

Offset Curb Ramps 

trian flow prevents disability from walking out into road before of the flared sides of the curb ramp must must take short detour “shoreline” guides flared curb ramp 

visual disability to the curb  realizing it 

Types of Curb Ramps 

2.22 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

R ESIDENT A CCESSIBLE P ARKING  

> Minimum Number.

The Guidelines provide that a minimum of two percent of the parking spaces serving covered dwelling units be made accessible and be located on an accessible route. For example, if 100 units are covered, then a minimum of two accessible spaces is required. 

100 x 2% = 2 

If the development provides different types of parking, such as surface parking, garage, or covered spaces, at least one of each must be made acces sible. Since many people with disabilities require more time to get in and out of vehicles, covered parking is especially important; therefore, where covered parking is provided, such covered parking must include at least one, and preferably more than one, accessible parking space. Accessible covered surface parking may be substituted for garage parking if the latter is not accessible. While the total number of spaces required to be accessible is only two percent, at least one space for each type of parking must be made accessible even if this number exceeds two percent. 

Many state or local codes may require a greater percentage of accessible parking spaces for both residents and visitors. Builders/developers must follow the local or state code whenever it is stricter. Note also that accessible spaces benefit a wide range of users, residents and visitors with disabilities, residents carrying packages, families with strollers, movers, and delivery personnel.  

> Requested Parking Spaces.

If buyers or renters request an accessible space at the time of first sale or rental, it may be necessary to provide additional 

accessible parking spaces if the two percent are already reserved. These must be offered on the same terms and with the full range of choices offered other residents, i.e., surface, garage, or covered parking. If the spaces that make up the two percent count are not being used by residents with disabilities, such space(s) may be moved to a resident requested location near a building or unit entrance. These new parking spaces must be on an accessible route including curb ramps. 

Number of Accessible Parking Spaces     

> For Residents
> •2% of parking spaces serving covered dwelling units
> •minimum of one at each site amenity
> For Visitors, When Visitor Parking Is Provided
> •a sufficient number of spaces to provide access to grade level entrances of covered multifamily dwellings
> •minimum of one at sales/rental office

P ARKING AT P UBLIC AND C OMMON U SE F ACILITIES 

If parking spaces are available at a facility, such as a swimming pool, then at least one accessible parking space must be provided and be on an accessible route. A specific number or percentage of spaces is not defined in the Guidelines; however, to provide equitable use of facilities by people with disabilities, parking should be provided in accor dance with the local code, or, at a minimum, at least one accessible parking space must be provided at each facility serving buildings containing covered dwelling units. 

2.23 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

The Guidelines allow a vehicular route as an alternative to an accessible pedestrian route between dwellings and accessible public or com mon use site amenities when the site conditions are deemed extreme or where other physical barriers or legal restrictions prevent the installation of an accessible pedestrian route. See page 1.9 for additional discussion of “Use of Vehicles for Access to Site Amenities.” When use of a vehicle is the only means for a person with a mobility disability to reach a facility, it is recommended that more than one accessible parking space on an accessible route to the facility be provided. Since there is no accessible pedestrian route, it is important to provide ample parking at such public and common use facilities that may be accessed only via a vehicular route. If a person who uses a wheelchair must drive to a site facility, he or she should not be further inconvenienced and frustrated by finding the only accessible space already occupied. 

V ISITOR A CCESSIBLE P ARKING 

If visitor parking is provided, accessible parking spaces for visitors also must be provided. The Guidelines do not specify a number or percentage of accessible visitor spaces, but provide that such parking must be “sufficient” to provide access to grade level entrances of covered multifamily dwellings. To allow people with disabilities to visit and have access to such entrances on an equitable basis, it is recommended that accessible visitor spaces be dispersed throughout the site, and that several spaces be provided at a building with large numbers of dwelling units. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

I MPRACTICAL S ITES 

Where site conditions make it impractical to provide an accessible route from the designated general parking area to a building containing covered dwelling units, accessible parking spaces at a minimum of two percent of the covered dwelling units must be provided on an accessible route to the entrance. It is strongly recommended that every effort be made to provide this parking from an adjacent location. If visitor parking is provided, there also must be accessible parking spaces on an accessible route for use by visitors. See Chapter 1: “Accessible Building Entrance on an Accessible Route,” and the illustration on page 1.50 of that chapter. 

2.24 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

C LEARANCES FOR C OVERED P ARKING 

If a project provides detached parking garages for assignment or rental to its tenants, it is considered public and common use parking. In the “Supple mental Questions and Answers,” item 14 (see Appendix), it is suggested that at least two percent of the garages should be at least 14'-2" wide and the passage door for the vehicle should be at least 10'-0" wide. The width of such garages would be adequate for cars, but to provide sufficient space for a van, it is recommended that the width be increased to between 16 and 18 feet. The door width of the garage could remain the same. 

Neither the Guidelines nor ANSI give specifications for vertical clearance in parking 

garages or at other sheltered parking to accommo date vans. However, ANSI does give specifications for vertical clearance of 108 inches at accessible passenger loading zones. The ADAAG specifies 98 inches of vertical clearance for van parking and 114 inches of clearance at accessible passenger loading zones. The dimensions shown below are a compila tion of available figures from commonly accepted accessibility standards that may be used to assist the building industry when planning to provide covered van parking. Such parking is not required by the Guidelines nor ANSI.   

> 16'-0" minimum 8'-0" same size as 6'-0" to 7'-0"
> access aisle for 2' minimum 3' preferred • ADAAG 4.6.5 minimum vertical clearance for loading zone is 114" and 98" for parking • ANSI 4.6.3 minimum vertical clearance for loading zone is 108" 98" to 104" for large raised roof vans
> van parking in 18'-0" preferred ADAAG

Reference Dimensions for Vertical and Horizontal Clearances for Raised Roof Van with Lift Extended 

2.25 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

L AUNDRY R OOMS 

Where common use laundry rooms are provided, at least one of each type of appliance provided in each laundry area must be accessible and be on an accessible route, see ANSI 4.32.6. Such appliances include washing machines, dryers, soap dispensers, and any related features such as wash sinks, tables, and storage areas. 

Where there are laundry rooms that serve each floor of an elevator building, each laundry room must be accessible. Likewise, where there is one laundry room on a ground floor in each building, each must be accessible. In the rare situation where there is a laundry room on the ground floor of a building and another located in the basement, it is acceptable to have only the ground floor laundry room accessible. 

Front-loading washing machines are not required in common use laundry rooms if manage ment, upon request, provides assistive devices (reachers) to enable a resident to use a top-loading washer. However, for people who use wheelchairs, front-loading washers generally are easier to reach into than top-loading machines. 

Top-loading machines with rear-mounted controls should not be installed on elevated pads that place the top of the cabinet and the controls beyond the reach range of a seated user. Dryers with either side-hinged or bottom-hinged doors may be installed in public and common use laundry rooms. Dryers with side-hinged doors usually are easier to reach into than those with bottom-hinged doors which, when open, obstruct floor space in front of the dryer. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

The washer and dryer must have controls (including coin slots) within the reach range of a seated user. Since the Guidelines permit the installa tion of stacked washers and dryers, this same requirement for controls applies to at least one of these stacked units. Controls should be operable with one hand and not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist. If they can be operated with a closed fist they would work well for most users. See ANSI 4.25 Controls and Operating Mechanisms. 

It is possible that management will be requested to provide, in addition to the grabbers, a knob turner that would allow someone with limited grasp to operate washer/dryer controls more easily. See Product Resource List in Appendix A, under “Assistive Devices” for manufacturers that carry knob turners in addition to reachers/grabbers. 

> an obstruction 24" max.
> 46" max.
> maximum height obstruction that can maximum reach to controls over reacher of controls over an be reached from a parallel approach

Use of Top-Loading Machine Made Possible With Assistance of a Mechanical Reacher 

2.26 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

top-loading washer 54” max. 

dryer floor of dryer high side reach limit for a parallel approach to appliances 

Stacked Washer/Dryer Unit with Dryer and All Controls Within Reach Range of Seated User 

folding table height. Since deep locations, knee space is not possible as per a 30" X 48" clear floor space parallel 30" X 48" clear of at least one of 3 washers clearances at doors, knee space below at least 27" high, top-loading washers permitted (see text, page 2.26) 

Sample Guideline Complying 

3 dryers service space Utility sink must meet ANSI 4.19 with regard to faucet controls and sinks are usually provided in these ANSI 4.19; therefore, to the sink must be provided floor space in front each type of fixture accessible route maneuvering see ANSI 4.13.6 top from 28" to 34" above floor, see ANSI 4.30 

Laundry Room Plan 

2.27 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

T OILET R OOMS , B ATHROOMS ,B ATHING F ACILITIES , AND S HOWER R OOMS 

The Guidelines require that all toilet rooms and bathing facilities in all public and common use facilities must be on an accessible route and at least one of each fixture type in each room or space must be accessible. The ANSI Standard addresses the types of fixtures and their mounting heights, the types of controls, and the amount of clear floor space required at accessible fixtures. These specifi cations, combined with clearances for doors and turning spaces for wheelchairs, determine the minimum toilet room requirements. See ANSI 

4.22  Toilet Rooms, Bathrooms, Bathing Facilities, and Shower Rooms. 

Toilet and bathing facilities that are required to be accessible include shower/dressing rooms located on the site for use of residents and their guests in addition to such spaces as common use public toilet rooms. Although neither the Guidelines nor the ANSI contain specifications for 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

shower/dressing rooms, such as those which may serve a swimming pool, the applicable sections of ANSI for similar components apply in these spaces and must be provided.  

> Three Types of Toilet Stalls.

The ANSI Standard allows considerable flexibility in the size and layout of toilet rooms. There are three types of accessible toilet stalls for use by people with different disabili ties. The narrow stall is 36 inches wide and varies in length, depending on whether it has a floor-mounted or wall-hung toilet fixture. This stall was originally intended for people who walk with difficulty, many of whom use crutches and braces and who need grab bars to steady themselves when sitting down and standing up. Such people gener ally have good upper body strength, a characteristic not always true of people who use wheelchairs. This 36-inch wide stall, although space efficient, does not work well for many people who use wheelchairs.      

> 36" dimension is absolute so parallel grab bars are within reach while at toilet
> 32" min.
> 18"
> 36"
> stalls must be located 66" min. with wall-mounted toilet floor-mounted toilets (water
> on an accessible route, 69" min. with floor-mounted toilet closets) require more floor
> see ANSI 4.3 space than wall-hung toilets

Alternate Stall 1: 36" Wide 

2.28 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

The 60-inch wide stall is a significant improvement over the narrow one because it accommodates most users. The extra floor space allows a person who uses a wheelchair to maneuver  alternate 

into his/her own best position to transfer onto the  door location 

toilet. It also allows space for an attendant, if needed, to assist a person with a disability. 

> stalls must be located on an accessible route, see ANSI 4.3
> 32" min.

Standard Stall: 60" Wide 

The third ANSI stall is 48 inches wide and is a compromise between the first two. This stall offers slightly more flexibility in the manner it is used by people with disabilities than the 36-inch wide stall. Since it cannot be used the same way as either of the others, it is limited in its usefulness. Often it is designed into renovation projects where sufficient space for the 60-inch stall is not available.   

> stalls must be
> located on an accessible route, see ANSI 4.3
> 32" min.
> 56" min. with wall-mounted toilet 59" min. with floor-mounted toilet
> 18"
> 18"
> 48" min.  60" min.

Alternate Stall 2: 48" Wide 

> 66" min. with wall-mounted toilet 69" min. with floor-mounted toilet

2.29 PART TWO: CHAPTER 2 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Sample plans of toilet rooms and shower/dressing rooms are presented to offer examples of how fixtures and elements can be combined into modest  By repositioning the partition 

efficient spaces that comply with the ANSI.  layout, additional space can be 

60" 14'-6" 56" min. 4'-0" 8'-2" 3'-6" 4'-0" with wall-mounted toilet standard stall  added to the toilet compartment to provide more maneuvering space without adding additional square footage to the room. 

Small Toilet Room with Single  Standard Alcove or 

Standard Stall “End of Row” Stall 

Scale 3/16"=1'-0"  Scale 3/16"=1'-0" 

5'-0" 4'-0" 5'-0" 11'-9" 17'-1" 56" min. 10'-7" 60" diameter wheelchair turning space kneespace under ANSI 4.19 30" x 48" clear floor space urinal with 

standard stall Larger Public and Common Use 

lavatory, see elongated bowl 

Toilet Room  with wall-

Scale 3/16"=1'-0"  mounted toilet 

2.30 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE PUBLIC AND COMMON USE SPACES 

(24" x 48" min. recommended) 

36" x 48" clear floor space 36" x 9'-7" 5'-0" 12'-8" 8'-0" 

dressing bench 

36" transfer shower, see ANSI 4.21 standard accessible stall lockers 

kneespace underneath lavatory, see ANSI 4.19 

storage closet 

30" x 48" clear floor space 

Some lockers must be acces sible. When ANSI does not contain specifications for the specific facility or feature in question, related human factors and performance specifications must be used to achieve accessibility. Such specifications include, but are not limited to, 4.2 Space Allowances and Reach Ranges, 4.3 Accessible Route, 4.4 Protruding Objects, 

4.5  Ground and Floor Surfaces, and 4.25 Controls and Operating Mechanisms. 

Small Toilet/Dressing Room with 36-Inch x 36-Inch Transfer Shower 

Scale 3/16"=1'-0" 

accessible 30" x 48" clear floor space 15'-8" 5'-0" 4'-0" 6'-0" 6'-6" 3'-0" 4'-8" combination 9'-10" 36" x 48" clear floor space 

(24" x 48" min. 

storage closet kneespace underneath 

some lockers see note above standard roll-in/transfer 

dressing bench recommended) 

lavatory, see ANSI 4.19 

accessible stall shower 

Small Toilet/Dressing Room with Combination Roll-in/Transfer Shower 

Scale 3/16"=1'-0" 

2.31 Chapter Three: 

R EQUIREMENT 3

Usable Doors 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed in such a manner that all the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs. 

> Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205

# 3PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

◆ accessible doors (in public and common use spaces and on public side of dwelling unit entry door) 

• must provide 32" minimum clear width 

• must meet ANSI 4.13 Doors 

● usable doors (within interior of dwelling unit) 

• must provide 32" nominal clear width (see page 3.5) 

• have no additional requirements except low or no 

threshold, see Chapter Four: “Accessible Route powder room 

bathroom and 

Into and Through the Covered Unit” doors must be usable 

exit stair 

elevator ANSI 4.10 

✽

exterior of primary entry door 

interior of primary entry door 

ANSI complying hardware not required 

building entrance 

✽

easy to use hardware (e.g. lever type) complies with ANSI 4.13.9  Accessible and Usable Doors in Buildings Containing Covered Dwelling Units 

3.2 USABLE DOORS 

I NTRODUCTION 

corridor or lobby or can be private individual entry doors accessed directly from the outside. 

The regulations for the Fair Housing Act state that  

> all

doors “designed to allow passage into and  Usable doors are doors within the dwelling unit 

within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow  intended for user passage and must be usable in 

passage by...persons in wheelchairs.” The Fair  terms of clear opening width. Doors within the 

Housing Act Guidelines (the Guidelines) apply the  unit are not required to meet the ANSI 4.13 Doors 

requirements to doors that are part of an accessible  requirements for maneuvering clearances, hard-

route in public and common use areas of multi- ware, and opening force; but because an accessible 

family housing developments, as well as doors into  route must be provided within the unit, thresholds 

and within covered dwelling units.  must be low or nonexistent, see Chapter Four: 

The Fair Housing Act and the Guidelines  “Accessible Route Into and Through the Covered 

cover all doors designed to allow passage into and  Dwelling Unit.” 

within all premises. However, doors in public and  Usable doors include all secondary exterior 

common use areas and primary entry doors of  doors at dwelling units that open onto private 

covered dwelling units must meet more stringent  decks, balconies, and patios. Usable doors also 

requirements for accessibility than doors that are  include all passage doors within the covered 

located inside each dwelling unit. Therefore, to  dwelling unit, such as doors between rooms, doors 

clarify this difference, this chapter refers to doors  into walk-in closets, and doors into utility/storage 

in public and common use areas and primary entry  rooms or rooms that contain washers and dryers. 

doors of covered dwelling units as accessible  Not covered are doors to small closets such as linen 

> doors

. Doors which are interior to the dwelling  closets which typically have shelves within easy 

unit and which are subject to less stringent  reach. Also not covered are access doors to small 

requirements for accessibility are referred to as  mechanical closets dedicated specifically to furnaces  

> usable doors.

or hot water heaters. 

In addition, the Guidelines also require  

> Accessible doors

must meet the ANSI 4.13  that usable doors be provided to areas of the 

requirements for clear width, maneuvering clear- dwelling that may not be accessible at the comple 

ances, thresholds, hardware, and opening force.  tion of construction, such as an unfinished base-

Accessible doors are:  ment or a garage attached to a single-story dwelling  

> 1.

Doors that are part of an accessible route in  unit (in the latter case, another door is used for the 

public and common use spaces. They include,  accessible entrance). Usable doors at these locations 

but are not limited to, doors residents use to  will allow people with mobility impairments to 

enter buildings and doors into and within club- modify their unit later to provide accessibility to 

houses, public restrooms, laundry rooms, and  these areas, such as installing a ramp from the 

rental offices.  dwelling unit into the garage. Usable doors also are  

> 2.

Primary entry doors to covered dwelling units –  important for people with walkers or crutches so 

exterior side only. Entry doors may open from a  they may have improved access to such areas. 

3.3 PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

door is limited to 5 lbs. 3'-6" to 4'-0" 

on push side of 

36" clear accessible ANSI 4.3 clear opening of 32" or 36" clear min. non-slip floor surfaces and/or ANSI 4.5 4'-0" to 5'-0" 32" clear min. 

sidelight or glass panel 

door handles with latches operable without grasping or twisting; mounted no higher than 48" clear floor space and closing door ANSI 4.28 clear floor space beside door 18" min. 

optional auxiliary handle to aid in closing the door if door does not automatically close 

door swings easily with no closer or with a time delay closer -- force to open a for interior doors and 8.5 lbs. for exterior doors 

optional kickplate door to protect surface of door 

min. for route, more when door is open 90 degrees very low or no threshold for accessible route mat recessed into floor, 

in door recommended to allow view of on-coming traffic 

for approach permanent easy-to-read room signage with tactile numbers and Braille recommended, 

Features of ANSI Complying Accessible Doors 

24" preferred 

on pull side so user can get out  ANSI 4.13 

of way of door swing; the actual  Notes in italic type are 

maneuvering clearances required  recommendations only 

depend on the direction of  and are not required by 

approach to both sides of the  ANSI or the Guidelines. 

door, ANSI 4.13.6 

3.4 USABLE DOORS  

> * • 32'' clear minimum for accessible doors
> •32'' nominal clear width for usable doors
> 32'' * 32'' opening leaves room for hands and elbows

Doorway Clear Opening 

D D EPTH 

dwelling units, the wall thickness of all cased   

> X
> ≤24 > 24 X = 36" min. X = 32" min.
> OORWAY

In both public and common use spaces and within openings must be no greater than 24 inches if the width of the doorway or passage is the minimum 32 inches. Doorways with a depth greater than 24 inches must be widened to provide the 36-inch minimum clear width for an accessible route. Doorway Depth 

D OORWAY W IDTH AND D EPTH 

D OORWAY C LEAR O PENING 

The commonly used hinged, folding, or sliding doors installed in the standard manner provide a passage width that is reduced by both the door standing in the doorway and door stops, if present. Thus, the available passage width is less than the size of the door.  

> Accessible doors

in public and common use spaces and primary entry doors of dwelling units must provide a clear opening of 32 inches minimum . This means the clear opening must not be less than 32 inches, but it may be more. The Guidelines allow usable doors (secondary exterior doors and doors that allow passage within the dwelling unit) to be a nominal 32 inches clear width. Usable doors are intended to provide 32 inches of clear width. But because of normal installation practices, adjacent conditions, variation in products such as hinges, and thicknesses of available materials, the doorway may vary from the 32-inch clear width by a nominal or small amount. Tolerances of 1/4 inch to 3/8 inch are considered an acceptable range for usable doors. This tolerance does not apply to accessible doors. 

3.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

T YPES OF D OORS 

H INGED D OORS , S INGLE -L EAF 

At hinged doors the 32-inch opening is measured from the stop on the latch side jamb to the face of the door when standing in a 90-degree open position. Because the door, when open, remains in the doorway, the size of door used for the main entry door must be wide enough so that when open 90 degrees, it provides 32 inches minimum clear width. Main entry doors to dwelling units may be thicker than doors used within the unit, often making it necessary to install a door wider than 34 inches at the main entry. (In addition, most building codes require a 36-inch door at the main entry.) Within the dwelling unit, a 34-inch wide door, hung in the standard manner, is consid ered a usable door because it provides an “accept able” nominal 32-inch clear opening of at least 31-5/8 inches clear. 

Accessible hinged doors in public and common use spaces may be equipped with push bar or panic type hardware even though the bar may protrude into the 32-inch clear width. The hardware should be mounted high enough (approximately 36 inches minimum above the floor) to allow sufficient room for people pushing themselves in manual wheelchairs to get through the doorway without catching their arms, shoul ders, or clothing on the panic hardware. In no case may the bar extend more than 4 inches from the door because it then becomes a hazardous protrud ing object, see ANSI 4.4 Protruding Objects. 

In the interior of dwelling units it is possible for residents or landlords to adapt the nominal 32-inch clear opening to create a wider and more usable doorway by installing offset or swing-clear hinges, by removing the lower portion   

> *minimum for accessible doors, nominal for usable
> doors at public and doors
> common use spaces
> clear opening 32" * 90 °
> stop door
> face of door latch-side jamb swing may be equipped with panic hardware

Measuring Clear Width at Hinged Doors  

> installation of swing-clear hinges is a modification that increases a 32" doorway opening to 34 ±
> approximately 34''

Use of Swing-Clear Hinges 

3.6 USABLE DOORS 

of the door stop, or by doing both. With standard hinges, a door, when open, remains in the door opening; swing-clear hinges allow a door to swing completely out of the doorway and increase the clear opening of the doorway. See Product Re source List, Appendix A, for manufacturers of swing-clear hinges. Builders are cautioned that they may not install a 32-inch wide door (which effec tively yields a 30 to 30-1/2 inch opening) and expect residents to make modifications later to bring the door up to the 32-inch nominal width required at the time of initial construction. 

H INGED D OORS , D OUBLE -L EAF 

Two narrow, double-leaf doors (two hinged doors) mounted in a single frame may be slightly more difficult to open and close than a single door. Double-leaf doors can be a useful choice where space for the door swing is limited and where doors are likely to stand open. If narrow double-leaf doors are used, the nominal 32-inch clear opening must be maintained between door faces when in a 90-degree open position. Where larger double-leaf doors are installed, and if only one leaf is active, that leaf must be usable, i.e., provide the nominal 32-inch clear opening. 

P OCKET , S LIDING , AND F OLDING DOORS 

Pocket, sliding (e.g., automatic sliding doors at a main entrance), and folding doors may be installed in public and common use areas and at those times must meet the technical requirements of ANSI 

4.13  Doors. The following discussion will focus on this category of doors when installed within dwelling units. 

Unlike hinged doors, pocket, sliding, and folding doors, encroach little or not at all upon 

clear floor space and may, therefore, be an advan tage when planning small rooms. This category of doors has additional features pertaining to the amount of space the door occupies within the doorway and the type of hardware installed. Hardware on interior dwelling unit doors is not covered by the Guidelines; however, recommenda tions are made to increase ease of use of the hard 

ware, and thus the door.  minimum * for accessible 

> accessible sliding doors must, and usable sliding doors
> doors, nominal for usable doors
> 32'' clear * open with their handles exposed should, stop fully

Clear Width at Sliding/Pocket Door 

> 32'' clear *

Clear Width at Accordion-Fold Door 

> a 3'- 0'' door is the narrowest bi-fold door that can be installed
> thickness of doors when open 32'' clear * 3''- 4''
> 32'' clear opening

Clear Width at Bi-Fold Door 

> and still provide the accessible minimum

3.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

> Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by ANSI or the Guidelines.
> 36" wide door should be installed at time of initial construction so
> 32'' nominal clear space when door
> other recommended features can be added
> space necessary
> is open
> later by resident
> less clear floor
> because door does not swing into room

Usable Sliding/Pocket Door 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Pocket Doors. The traditional handle and latch installed in pocket doors are difficult for many people to operate because the hardware is recessed into the face of the door so the door can slide completely into the wall pocket. If carefully monitored, it may be possible to install a 32-inch wide pocket door that yields a nominal 32-inch clear opening; however, without modifying the door hardware, the door is still difficult to open and close. 

Lacking complete control of variables such as the specific manufacturer's design of the door track assembly, the builder's installation method, the decision to install door stops (which vary in thickness), and other field conditions, it is recommended that pocket doors wider than 32 inches be installed. If a 36-inch wide door is installed, residents may make the following simple modifications later so the door is easier to operate: add loop handles on the door and a stop at the floor to prevent the door from sliding so far into the wall pocket that the handle is tight against the door jamb. This ensures that when the door is in the open position the handle will remain exposed and 32 inches will remain clear for passage. 

> easy to grasp or push against loop added by resident
> stop (added later by resident) prevents door from sliding so far into the pocket that the handle hits the jamb

3.8 USABLE DOORS  

> Sliding Doors.

Interior sliding doors are generally 

used as closet doors since they avoid problems caused by door swings. If installed, each panel or 

> loop handles
> 32" nominal clear when open
> 32'' nominal clear space
> are the easiest to grasp
> door stop to prevent

door must provide a nominal clear opening of at  outside door from 

least 32 inches. It is recommended that loop  hitting handle of 

handles be installed rather than the more common inside door 

recessed finger cups. Exterior sliding doors are  handles on outside 

discussed on page 3.10. edge of door to facilitate use  

> Folding Doors.

Folding doors typically found in 

dwelling units are either accordion or bi-fold. They are made up of two or more attached or hinged panels that fold together when opened. When either type of door is in the open position, the clear opening is reduced by the thickness of the folded door. Considering this, the smallest doorway in which either a bi-fold assembly or accordion type door assembly can be installed is 36 inches. 

To improve the ease of use of bi-folding doors, loop handles can be installed in the  Usable Sliding Door 

recommended locations as shown in the adjacent drawing. Magnet catches and latches on accordion-folding doors often are difficult to line up with the receiving end of the catch for people with any hand or grasp limitation.  

> handle installed
> close to the hinge line
> Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by ANSI or the Guidelines.

Usable Folding Door 

3.9 PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

D WELLING U NIT D OORS 

P RIMARY E NTRY D OOR 

The exterior of the primary entry door of covered dwelling units is part of public and common use spaces, therefore, it must be on an accessible route and be accessible, i.e., meet the ANSI requirements of 4.13 Doors. This is true both of entry doors opening off interior corridors internal to a building containing multiple dwelling units, and of separate exterior ground floor dwelling unit entrances. 

Because primary entry doors to covered units must be on an accessible route, thresholds at these doors must be no higher than 3/4 inch and must be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2. See additional discussion of thresholds and accessible route at dwelling units on page 4.12. 

S ECONDARY E XTERIOR D OORS 

All secondary exterior doors from the same or different rooms that provide passage onto exterior decks, patios, or balconies must be usable. For example, if a deck is served by French doors or other double-leaf doors, and if only one leaf is active, that leaf must be usable, i.e., provide a nominal 32-inch clear opening. If both leaves are active, one leaf would not have to provide a nominal 32-inch clear opening as long as both leaves, when open, do provide the nominal 32-inch clear opening. 

Since an accessible route must be provided throughout the unit, thresholds at secondary exterior doors also are limited to a maximum height of 3/4 inch. However, secondary doors that exit onto exterior decks, patios, or balcony surfaces are allowed to have a 4-inch maximum step (or more if required by local building code) to prevent 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

water infiltration at door sills only if the exterior surface is constructed of an impervious material such as concrete, brick, or flagstone. If the exterior surface is a pervious material such as a wood deck that will drain adequately, the decking must be maintained to within 1/2 inch of the interior floor level. See Chapter Four: “Accessible Route Into and Through the Covered Dwelling Unit.” 

Sliding glass doors are often installed as secondary exterior doors. The Guidelines state that “the nominal 32-inch clear opening provided by a standard 6-foot sliding patio door assembly is acceptable.” Unfortunately, many of the standard 6-foot sliding glass door assemblies yield only a 28-1/2-inch maximum clear opening in the full open position. Note: 28-1/2 inches is not an acceptable 32-inch nominal dimension. Builders and product specifiers must carefully select door assemblies that yield the 32-inch nominal clear opening (a clear opening from 31-5/8 to 32 inches or more). Some economy suppliers have 6-foot sliding glass doors that will meet the required width. Other assemblies on the market larger than 6 feet also provide the required width. See Product Resource List, Appendix A. 

3.10 4.13.10 

USABLE DOORS 

good general illumination lighted doorbell buttons 

high intensity lighting weather protection color contrast between focused at locks for door and frame people with low vision 

door closer with safe view window (or wide 

sweep period, ANSI angle peep hole) 

low force to open door, ANSI 4.13.11 

clear width of open doorway min. 32", ANSI 4.13.5 

clear, readable, high contrast signage 

lever or other easy to use door hardware, ANSI 4.13.9 

low or no threshold, see Chapter 4 

maneuvering space on exterior side of door next to latch varies depending upon direc tion of approach to door, ANSI 4.13.6 

outside landing 0" to 1/2" below interior floor level depending Accessible Primary Entry Door 

upon construction of at Covered Dwelling Unit 

porch or landing sur- See ANSI 4.13 Doors 

face, see Chapter 4 

adequate slope to prevent ice build-up 

Notes in italic type are recommendations only and 

package shelf are not required by ANSI or the Guidelines. All recommended features are helpful to people with 

and without disabilities. 

3.11 PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Where sliding glass doors are used, it also may be necessary to modify the threshold either by sinking the frame into the floor, or by adding a beveled edge. See Chapter Four: “Accessible Route into and Through the Covered Unit” for additional discus sion of thresholds along accessible routes. Locks and latches on sliding glass doors are often difficult to operate for someone with any hand limitation. Although not required by the Guidelines, but because sliding glass door hardware is more diffi cult to modify at a later time if needed than hardware on hinged doors, it is recommended that locks be installed that can be raised and lowered with a closed fist or that require no finger manipu lation. When sliding glass doors are being selected, doors with loop handles or large blades to push or pull against are the easiest to use. 

In some parts of the country construction  34'' to 36'' 

> wide door

or building code requirements may restrict the size of window or door openings placed in exterior walls. Where it is necessary to have a 5-foot wide maximum opening or if a standard 6-foot wide sliding door assembly does not provide adequate passage width, a passage door must still be pro vided that will yield the 32-inch nominal clear width. One suggested solution is to install a 36 inch wide full glass swinging door coupled with an appropriate width sidelight to provide equivalent or similar glass area for natural light and view. 

> 32'' nominal clear width for secondary exterior door

Substitution of a 36" Hinged Door  

> 5'-0'' 18'' ±
> easy to operate latch
> blade to push against to open and close door

Sliding Glass Door Hardware that Requires No Twisting, Turning, or Fine Finger Manipulation to Operate Recommended 

Plus Sidelight When a 5' or 6' Sliding Door Assembly Cannot Provide a 32'' Door Opening 

3.12 USABLE DOORS 

> after maneuvering to get around the first door, the user cannot open the second door and is trapped

Inadequate Space in Vestibule 

> user is able to maneuver out of way of first door and get into position to open second door
> exterior of primary entry door (ANSI complying)
> 4' - 0'' + width of door

ANSI Complying Vestibule 

> vestibule could be smaller provided both doors swing out of the vestibule; however, since primary entry doors generally swing into the dwelling unit, the size of the vestibule as shown is recommended 48" minimum

D OORS I N S ERIES OR D OUBLE D OOR V ESTIBULE 

Doors in a series are not typically part of an individual dwelling unit but are used at entrances to buildings. As such they are part of public and common use spaces and subject to the design specifications found in ANSI 4.13 Doors. How ever, where doors in a series are provided as part of a dwelling unit (to form an air lock when extremes of climate exist or to create a privacy vestibule), the requirements of an accessible route into and through the dwelling unit would apply. 

If a vestibule is too small, people using mobility aids may get trapped and not be able to open the second door and exit the vestibule. For this reason, even though doors on the interior of the unit only must be usable (or have a 32-inch nominal clear width) the distance between the doors must be sufficient to allow users to maneuver to get the second door open and pass through. This is especially critical for safe egress in emergency situations. Guidance can be found at ANSI 4.13.7. 

3.13 PART TWO: CHAPTER 3 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

C LOSET D OORS 

Closets that require users to pass through the doorway to reach the contents must have doors that provide at least 32 inches nominal clear opening. Closets that permit the user to access the contents from outside the closet have no door width specifications whatsoever. 

Closets for hanging clothes are usually 24 inches deep and of variable width. Small clothes and linen closets should be no more than 48 inches  

> width, best if

long to avoid dead space at the ends that is difficult or impossible for most users to reach, seated or standing, even if a 34-inch door is installed. 

If wider closets are provided it is best that doors be double (hinged or bi-folding preferred) to provide maneuvering space and clear view of contents. If “walk-in” closets are planned, they must have usable doors to provide adequate space for passage of a person using a wheelchair. 

> °
> 32'' nominal 4'- 0'' ±

Small Clothes Closet 

> door may be any
> swings back 180 maximum recommended
> clear opening recommended
> shelves at all reach heights

Small Shallow Storage Closet     

> maximum 18'' recommended
> door may be any width,
> but should swing back so Notes in italic type are
> wheelchair users can make recommendations only
> a close parallel approach and are not required by
> for side reach to contents ANSI or the Guidelines.

3.14 USABLE DOORS 

Wide Closet with Wide Doorway Easy for Everyone to Use 

doors may be any width, 

wider preferred 

double wide doors provide space for angled approach and allow left or right-handed reach to contents 

Double Folding Doors Also Allow Good Access to Closet Contents for All Users 

32'' 

Minimum Suggested L-Shaped 

5'-0'' 5'- 0'' shown any depth 

Walk-In Closet with Usable Door 

in-swinging door permissible, out-swinging preferred 

Notes in italic type are recommendations only 

nominal clear  and are not required by 

width required ANSI or the Guidelines. 

3.15 Chapter Four: 

R EQUIREMENT 4

Accessible Route into and Through the Covered Unit 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such a manner that all premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the covered dwelling unit. 

> Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205

# 4PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Definitions from the Guidelines 

Loft. An intermediate level between the floor and ceiling of any story, located within a room or rooms of a dwelling. 

Multistory dwelling unit. A dwelling unit with finished living space located on one floor and the floor or floors immediately above or below it. 

Single-story dwelling unit. Adwelling unit with all finished living space located on one floor. 

Story. That portion of a dwelling unit between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or the roof of the unit. Within the context of dwelling units, the terms “story” and “floor” are synonymous. 

4.2 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

I NTRODUCTION 

The Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) specify that an accessible route be provided into and throughout the entire covered dwelling unit. The accessible route must pass through the main entry door, continue through all rooms in the unit, adjoin required clear floor spaces at all kitchen appliances and all bathroom fixtures, and connect with all secondary exterior doors. 

Unlike public and common use areas, where a fully accessible route that complies with ANSI A117.1 - 1986, or an equal or more strict accessibility standard is required, the Guidelines designate specific elements of an accessible route that must be provided. The accessible route must be 1. sufficiently wide and 2. lacking in abrupt changes in level so residents with disabilities (and/      

> wood deck with spaces: 1/2'' max. change in level from interior to exterior (with 3/4" max. threshold, see pages
> 4.12 and 4.14)
> both doors into
> bathroom must accessible route be usable adjoining clear floor spaces at all fixtures and appliances
> fully accessible route accessible route at accessible dwelling adjoins all clear unit entrance floor spaces at bathroom fixtures

or their guests with disabilities) can safely use all rooms and spaces, including storage areas and, under most circumstances, exterior balconies and patios that may be part of their dwelling unit. See page 4.11 for exception at balconies and patios constructed of impervious materials. 

An accessible route is not required into a basement or garage. However, doors from the interior of the dwelling unit to an unfinished basement or a garage attached to a single-story dwelling unit must be “usable”; see Chapter 3: “Usable Doors.” Providing an accessible route and a usable door in these circumstances will allow a resident to make later modifications, such as installing a ramp from the dwelling unit into the garage, thereby increasing usability of the unit. 

36-Inch Wide Minimum Accessible Route Through Dwelling Unit 

4.3 PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

A CCESSIBLE R OUTE 

W IDTH 

The 36-inch wide fully accessible route as de scribed in Chapters 1 and 2 must connect with the clear floor space outside the primary entry door of each covered dwelling unit. As the accessible route passes into the unit it may be reduced to 32 inches minimum clear width at the door. Throughout the unit the accessible route must be 36 inches wide or wider, except as it passes through passage doors, 

where it may be reduced to 32 inches nominal clear width. See Chapter 3: “Usable Doors.” 

When specifications for accessible routes are presented in most accessibility standards they contain provisions for minimum height or head room. The Guidelines, with respect to the interiors of dwelling units, do not include a specification for headroom. Protruding objects also are not ad dressed within the interior of the dwelling unit, but they should be avoided in all cases.   

> 36'' min. for accessible route
> hall widths must be at least 36'' wide to allow a person to make a 90 degree turn into or out of 32'' nominal
> a 32'' door opening clear width
> wider hall widths are preferred, especially at long halls, to increase ease of use and reduce damage to door frames and walls caused by bumping and scraping of wheelchair footrests and handrims
> 36'' min. for accessible route

Minimum Width of Accessible Route 

C HANGES IN L EVEL 

Within single-story dwelling units (and on the primary entry level of multistory dwelling units in buildings with elevators) the maximum vertical floor level change is 1/4 inch, except when a tapered threshold is used, the maximum height is 1/2 inch. Even small abrupt changes of level in the 

surface of an accessible route pose a tripping hazard for many people and can be a significant obstacle for people using wheelchairs. People who walk wearing braces and/or who have difficulty main taining balance are particularly susceptible to catching their toes on small changes in level. 

4.4 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

Small abrupt changes in level occur most frequently at floor material changes and at door thresholds. Within the interior of the dwelling unit, thresholds should not be used or they should be thin and installed flush with the flooring surface. If a threshold must be used, it must not have a level change more than 1/4 inch without being beveled or tapered. When a tapered threshold is used, the level change may be a maximum of 1/2 inch. If an interior door threshold represents a change in level greater than 1/2 inch, it must be ramped and must slope at 1 inch in 12 inches maximum (1:12). Thresholds at exterior doors are addressed on page 4.12. 

S PECIAL D ESIGN F EATURES 

Single-story dwelling units are not prohibited from having specific design features, such as a split-level entry, a sunken living room, or a loft area; but the Guidelines do contain restrictions for each of these. Where a single-story dwelling unit has such a design feature, all portions of the unit, except the loft or the sunken or raised area, must be on an accessible route, i.e., the accessible route must be continuous throughout the dwelling unit and not be interrupted by the design feature. 

The Guidelines specify that kitchens and all bathrooms, including powder rooms, must be 

> 1/4'' max.
> 1/2'' max.
> 1:2 max.
> smooth transition is best for everyone

Small Changes in Level Along Accessible Routes 

on an accessible route; therefore, no part of kitch ens or bathrooms may be located in a raised or sunken area unless an accessible route can be provided to that area. However, a wet bar on a loft or in a sunken area that is not equipped with an accessible route is permissible since the wet bar is not a part of a kitchen. The combination of both a loft and a sunken area within the same dwelling unit prohibits residents with mobility impairments from using a significant percentage of their units and is thus not permitted under the Guidelines. 

4.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

S PLIT -L EVEL E NTRIES 

A split-level entry foyer, where the foyer is on one level and the remainder of the unit is down a few steps, does not exempt the unit from coverage by the Fair Housing Act. The entry is critical to providing an accessible route into and through the dwelling unit; therefore, an accessible route to the lower area must be provided by a ramp with a maximum slope of 1:12 or other means of access. It is recommended that the ramp comply with the other ramp requirements of ANSI A117.1 - 1986 or an equal or more strict accessibility standard. See ANSI 4.8.  

> accessible route into and through covered individual dwelling unit entry
> dwelling unit

Units with Split-Entry Foyers Are Covered 

4.6 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

Because a loft is an intermediate level between the floor and ceiling of the unit, it is not considered a second story. Therefore, a dwelling unit with a loft is a single-story unit covered by the Guidelines. Since all primary or functional living spaces must be on an accessible route, secondary living spaces, such as a den, play area, or an additional bedroom are the only spaces that can be on a loft unless an accessible route can be taken to the loft.     

> accessible route into loft spaces above and through covered functional space and dwelling unit within and open to the
> primary entry door at public or common use area
> maximum change in level from inside to outside walking surfaces: 1/2'' for decks with if primary entrance door is an exterior door, the maxi
> loft with spaces

Loft Areas 

> same room need not be on an accessible route wood decking
> mum change in level from
> inside to outside walking
> surfaces is 1/2'' for concrete or
> other impervious material and
> 0'' for pervious material (see
> thresholds, page 4.13)

L OFTS 

Dwelling units containing a loft are distinguished from multistory units in that a loft is open to the surrounding space and does not exceed 33-1/3 percent of the floor area of the room in which it is located. Each story (or floor) in a multistory unit is enclosed and contains finished living space with its own ceiling and floor. See “Accessible Routes in Multistory Dwelling Units” on page 4.9. 

> spaced wood decking and 4'' for concrete or other impervi ous materials, i.e., the acces sible route can be interrupted at impervious decks, balconies, or patios (see also maximum threshold height, page 4.12)

4.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R AISED OR S UNKEN A REAS 

A raised or sunken area is usually limited to a few steps maximum and has less of a change in level than a loft. These “special design features” may not contain a functional space in its entirety. For example, the entire living room must not be sunken; however, an auxiliary feature such as a second sitting area could have several steps down to that level that is not served by an accessible route. 

If there were a door located here leading to any interior or exterior room or space that could not otherwise be reached by the accessible route, then the sunken/raised area would have to be eliminated or made accessible. 

steps and stairs may not be part of an accessible route  or common use area 

sunken area 

door at public primary entry 

the sunken or raised area must not interrupt the accessible accessible route into 

route through the remainder  and through covered 

of the dwelling unit  dwelling unit 

Living/Dining Room with Sunken Area 

4.8 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

A CCESSIBLE R OUTES IN M ULTISTORY D WELLING U NITS 

“Multistory dwelling unit” is defined in the Guide lines as a unit “with finished living space located on one floor and the floor or floors immediately above or below it.” Multistory dwelling units in buildings without one or more elevators are not covered by the Fair Housing Act; however, when multistory dwelling units are in buildings with elevators, the dwelling unit is covered and the story that is served by the building elevator must be the primary entry to the unit and must meet the requirements of the Guidelines. Where the primary entry level of a covered multistory dwelling unit contains either a raised or sunken area, that floor level is subject to the same requirements as discussed at “Lofts” and “Raised and Sunken Areas.” 

Even though many people with significant mobility impairments may choose not to live in such a unit, multistory units, where the primary entry level meets the Guidelines, allow people with disabilities to visit with friends and relatives who may choose to live in a unit with more than one floor. A resident with a disability may choose to live in such a unit and add a lift at his or her own expense. 

In multistory units the story that is served by the elevator must:  

> 1.

be the primary entry to the unit,  

> 2.

comply with Requirements 3 through 7 of the Guidelines for all rooms located on the entry floor level, and  

> 3.

contain a usable bathroom or powder room. 

If there is both a bathroom and a powder room on the entry level of a multistory unit, then the bathroom must meet Requirement 7 of the Guidelines and the powder room needs to meet only Requirements 3, 4, and 5 of the Guidelines. In cases where only a powder room is provided on the entry level, it is treated as a bathroom and must : 1. be on the accessible route, 2. have a door with a 32-inch nominal clear width, 3. meet the maneuvering and clear floor space requirements at toilets and lavatories, 4. allow the user to enter the room, close the door, use the facilities, and reopen the door to exit, 5. have reinforcing around the toilet for future installation of grab bars, and  

> 6.

have switches, outlets, and controls in accessible locations. See page 7.38 and powder room plans starting on page 7.81. 

4.9 PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

4321

stories 1, 2, and 3stories 1 and 3 on door to units 

l

2-story unit 2-story unit 

elevator 

1-story unit story story story story 1-story unit 2-story unit 

elevator serves floor having the primary entry to the dwelling unit entire entry level is covered entire unit primary entry dwelling = covered portion of dwelling unit bathroom or powder room that meets the Guidelines must be on the primary entry leve 

left side of building  is covered  on right side of 

are covered  building are covered 

Single-Story Units and the Primary Entry Level 

of Multistory Units in Buildings 

with One or More Elevators Are Covered 

4.10 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

T HRESHOLDS AND A CCESSIBLE R OUTES AT E XTERIOR D OORS 

The Guidelines allow the change in level between the interior floor level of the dwelling unit and an outside surface or platform to vary somewhat, depending upon 1. whether the door is a primary or secondary door and 2. the construction material of the outside landing surface. If the primary entry door to a dwelling unit has direct exterior access, the landing surface outside the door, as part of the accessible route, must be level with the interior floor, unless the landing is constructed of an impervious material, such as concrete; in which case, the landing may be up to 1/2 inch (but no more than 1/2 inch) below the interior floor of the dwelling unit. However, to prevent water damage, the finished surface outside the primary entry door may be sloped at a maximum of 1/8 inch for every 12 inches. 

When a secondary exterior door exits onto decks, patios, or balcony surfaces constructed of impervious materials, the accessible route may be interrupted. In this case, the outside landing surface may be dropped a maximum of 4 inches below the floor level of the interior of the dwelling unit (or lower if required by local building code) to prevent water infiltration at door sills. If the exterior surface is constructed of pervious material, such as a wood deck that will drain adequately, that surface must be maintained to within 1/2 inch of the interior floor level. Note: When measuring the distance between the floor inside and the outside surface, the interior floor level must be calculated from the finished floor and not from the subfloor. If carpet is to be installed, the measurement should be calculated with a fully compressed carpet and, if present, the pad. In addition to the above changes in floor level, the Guidelines specify the maximum height for the door threshold, which is discussed on page 4.12. 

Maximum Allowable Height Difference Between Interior Floor Level and Exterior Floor Level 

level difference 

0'' 

1/2'' 

level difference 

1/2'' 

4'' 

at primary entry door 

pervious construction (e.g., wood decking with spaces) 

impervious construction (e.g., concrete, brick, or flagstone) 

at secondary door 

pervious construction impervious construction 

4.11 PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

T HRESHOLDS AT E XTERIOR D OORS 

The concept of an accessible route is intended to ensure the maintenance of a continuous path of travel with no abrupt changes in level so people with disabilities who use wheelchairs or scooters and those who walk are not impeded. However, changes in level are inevitable at exterior doors because thresholds and changes in level are needed to control and/or prevent water infiltration. 

The Guidelines allow limited changes in levels at exterior doors along accessible routes. In addition to the change in floor level between the interior floor and exterior landing discussed on page 4.11, the Guidelines specify that thresholds at these exterior doors, including sliding door tracks, shall be no higher than 3/4 inch. The Guidelines further state that changes in level at these locations must be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2. 

In the case of primary entry doors where the exterior landing surface is impervious, the exterior landing surface is permitted to be below the finish floor level by 1/2 inch. Therefore, the Guidelines allow an overall change in level of 1-1/4 inch on the exterior side of the primary entry door. 

> 1-1/2'' min. 2-1/2'' min. at 1:2 1-1/4'' rise when approach ing from outside
> 1 Acceptable
> (Not Preferred: 1-1/4'' Height is Difficult for Many People Who Use Wheelchairs)
> 1-1/2'' min.
> 3/4''
> 2 Acceptable
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Note, however, as already stated, these changes in level must be beveled with a slope no greater than 

1:2.  See the first illustration below. 

Exterior door thresholds of 3/4 inch, even when beveled, can be extremely difficult to navi gate for some persons who use wheelchairs, and the additional change in level when outside landing surfaces are impervious adds to this difficulty. Because of this, it is recommended that other solutions be considered which both provide for less of a change in level at the door threshold and also are designed to prevent water infiltration. One such solution is to use a threshold that rises a maximum of 1/4 inch on the inside and drops 3/4 inch at a slope of 1:2 at the exterior. See illustration two below. An even better solution is to bring the exterior surface up to the same level as the interior floor using an interlocking threshold. See illustra tion 3. 

The illustrations on pages 4.13 through 

4.14  offer design details of door thresholds that meet the requirements of the Guidelines as well as recommended door thresholds that provide for lesser changes in level while still preventing water infiltration to the dwelling unit. 

> allowable 3/4'' threshold
> allowable 1/2'' for water control
> 1-1/2'' min.
> interlocking threshold
> 3 Good
> 3/4'' max.
> 1/4'' 1/2''

Threshold Details at Primary Entry with Impervious Landing Surface 

4.12 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

Swinging Primary Entry Door at Concrete Landing 

showing allowable changes in level at primary entry doors with direct exterior access onto concrete or other impervious landing surface where 1/2-inch maximum changes in level are permitted.    

> 1-1/2" minimum interior
> floor level
> 1:2 slope maximum
> 3/4" maximum 1/4" maximum
> 1/2" maximum 1/8" per foot maximum slope

Swinging Secondary Door at Concrete Landing 

showing allowable changes in level at exterior swinging doors onto concrete or other impervious landing surface where 4-inch changes in level 

> 4-3/4" 4" max.
> local code

are permitted. 

> may be more if required by
> 3/4" maximum threshold
> interior floor level

4.13 PART TWO: CHAPTER 4 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

(1:2 or less) at inactive 

subflooring filler strip this decking is the interior floor accessibility 

lldoor track deck joists l

3/4" max. 

additional recommended continuous filler piece leaf track to eliminate abrupt change in level 

threshold set on pressure treated air and water gap shown at the same level as for maximum pervious surfaces such as wood decking must be no more than 1/2" below interior finished floor leve pressure treated decking at floor leve 

Sliding Secondary Door at Wood Deck 

deck board standard sliding glass 

showing allowable changes in level at exterior sliding glass doors to balcony or patio where 1/2-inch maximum changes in level are permitted. 

bevel at maximum slope of 1:2 required interior floor leve 

> 4" max.

1-1/4" -1-1/2" typical on subflooring 1/4" - 1/2" filler at 1:2 slope ladditional piece (1:2 or less) at eliminate abrupt 

Notes in italic type only and are not 

Sliding Secondary Door at Concrete Landing threshold set interior floor leve 

recommended continuous filler inactive leaf track to change in level 

showing allowable changes in level at exterior sliding glass doors to balcony or patio where 4-inch changes in level are permitted. 

may be more if allowed by local code 

are recommendations required by ANSI or the Guidelines. 

4.14 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE INTO AND THROUGH THE COVERED UNIT 

Accessible Route onto Balcony Constructed of Concrete, Brick, or Flagstone 

> 4" max.

4" step allowable concrete patio 

May Be Interrupted by a 4-Inch Step 

> 3/4" max. threshold

Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by ANSI or the Guidelines. 

Accessible Route onto Balcony Created with the Addition of a Raised Platform (Added by the Resident) 

construction but is a later 

wooden platform to raise floor level of balcony to level of interior of dwelling unit (not required at initial resident modification) 

4.15 Chapter Five: 

R EQUIREMENT 5

Light Switches, Electrical Outlets, Thermostats, and Other Environmental Controls in Accessible Locations 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such a manner that all premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations. 

> Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205

# 5PART TWO: CHAPTER 5 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> 15" min. 48" max.

inaccessible outlet floor permissible 30" X 48" clear floor space perpendicular to to light and fan as thermostat less than 15" above the wall for a forward reach to controls additional outlet in forward reach switches as well 

accessible location 

All Covered Switches, Outlets, and Controls Operated on a Frequent Basis Must be in Accessible Locations 

5.2 SWITCHES, OUTLETS, AND CONTROLS IN ACCESSIBLE LOCATIONS 

I NTRODUCTION 

The ANSI specifications for accessible controls and operating mechanisms require a clear floor space to allow an approach by a person using a wheelchair, specify the height of the operable portion of the control, and require little or no force be exerted to operate the control. The Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) do not require controls to be fully accessible but specify that light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environ mental controls, which are operated on a regular or frequent basis in the daily use of a dwelling unit, be in accessible locations. 

The Guidelines’ specifications for acces sible locations, based on the ANSI (A117.1 - 1986) Standard, address where to position controls and outlets to be within the reach range of a seated user. Force and type of motion required to operate controls are not covered by the Guidelines. 

C ONTROLS AND O UTLETS S UBJECT TO THE R EQUIREMENTS OF THE G UIDELINES  

> Environmental controls

such as thermostats and other heating, air-conditioning, and ventilation mechanisms including ceiling fans and electrically operated skylights must be positioned in accessible locations, as must light switches and electrical outlets for each room. All these covered controls and outlets must be in accessible locations, with a few exceptions. 

The Guidelines allow, for example, con trols or outlets that do not satisfy the requirements, if comparable controls or outlets in accessible locations are provided within the same area. Comparable controls or outlets are those that perform the same function. For example, floor outlets (which are inaccessible) or outlets mounted in the corner of kitchen counters are permitted under the Guidelines, provided other outlets are available to serve the same space or area. 

Controls and outlets not covered by the Guidelines include circuit breakers or electrical outlets dedicated to individual appliances such as refrigerators, built-in microwave ovens, washing machines, and dryers because neither circuit breakers nor these outlets are accessed frequently by residents. Appliance controls are not required to be in accessible locations because the Fair Housing Act is not intended to regulate the design of appliances. 

Thus, when appliance controls are built into or are located on the appliance itself, they are not considered to be covered controls. Range or washing machine controls need not be within the reach range of seated users, although certainly it is preferred that such controls be within reach. Range 

5.3 PART TWO: CHAPTER 5 

hood fan and light controls, when mounted on the hood, are part of an appliance and are, therefore, not covered. However, if the range hood fan and light are wired to a separate switch on a wall or any location other than on the hood, range, or cooktop, then the control must be in an accessible location. 

Garbage disposals do not fall under any of the categories of covered controls. The operat ing switch for a garbage disposal is not mounted on the appliance itself but is wired to another location. Although not a covered control, since garbage disposals are used frequently and since it is relatively simple to place operating switches for 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

garbage disposals in accessible locations, it is recommended that it be done. 

Emergency interrupt switches to mechani cal systems such as furnaces or hot water heaters also are not covered by the Guidelines. However, it is recommended that such switches be in locations that can be reached from a seated position. Even when the mechanical system is located behind a narrow door in a small closet dedicated specifically to that purpose, it is recommended that the interrupt switch be positioned so it can be reached from outside the closet by a person using a wheelchair. 

S WITCHES , O UTLETS , AND C ONTROLS C OVERED BY THE G UIDELINES 

Covered  Not Covered 

• light switches for controlling all room  • circuit breakers 

lights  • appliance controls 

• electrical outlets  • outlets dedicated for specific appliances 

• environmental controls 

thermostats and controls for 

other heating, air-conditioning, 

and ventilation systems 

5.4 SWITCHES, OUTLETS, AND CONTROLS IN ACCESSIBLE LOCATIONS 

A CCESSIBLE L OCATIONS 

The Guidelines contain height specifications for wall-mounted controls and outlets based upon the reach ranges of seated people given in the ANSI Standard. Typically ANSI and other accessibility standards present reach ranges for both forward and side reaches: 1. where the user must reach over an obstruction, and 2. where the user's approach is not restricted by an obstruction. One of these positions, a side reach from a parallel position without an obstruction, requires a 48-inch long clear floor space parallel and close to the wall so a user can get close enough to reach controls and 

switches. Once a dwelling unit is furnished, suffi cient room to execute such a parallel approach usually is not available; thus this specification was omitted from the Guidelines. 

To accommodate all users in situations where there may or may not be a built-in counter, base cabinet, or other obstruction to interfere with reach, the Guidelines include specific requirements for mounting controls and switches so a person using a wheelchair can execute: 1. a forward reach with no obstruction, 2. a forward reach over an obstruction, and 3. a side reach over an obstruction. 

> 48"
> 30" 48"
> 30" X 48"
> space
> user is perpendicular to wall for a forward reach
> clear floor user is parallel
> 48" long expanse of wall 30"
> 48" to wall for a side reach rarely is an unobstructed present in a furnished dwelling unit

Forward Reach From a Perpendicular Approach Side Reach from a Parallel Approach Included in Guidelines Not Included in Guidelines 

5.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 5 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

F ORWARD R EACH WITH N O O BSTRUCTION 

Where there are no obstructions to interfere with the counter/obstruction to allow a person using a the reach of a person using a wheelchair, controls wheelchair to pull up and execute a forward reach and outlets may be mounted in a range from 15 to over the obstruction. 48 inches above the floor. There must be a clear floor space of 30 inches x 48 inches perpendicular to the wall, adjoining a 36-inch wide accessible route, to allow a person using a wheelchair to approach and get into position to execute a for ward reach to the control or outlet. See Chapter 4: “Accessible Route into and Through the Covered Dwelling Unit.” 

Thermostats and other controls that must be read pose additional considerations. Even 

> 48"
> no obstructions
> 15" min. 48" max.

though people using wheelchairs may be able to execute a forward reach of 48 inches at a clear wall, they may have difficulty seeing the small numerals and indicators generally found on thermostats. A person using a wheelchair, when positioned perpendicular to a wall, must lean forward over his or her feet and knees making it difficult to get close enough to read small type. Therefore, it is  to interfere 

critical that thermostats and similar controls that with reach 

must be read are mounted at or lower than 48 

inches above the floor. 

> space

F ORWARD R EACH O VER AN O BSTRUCTION 

Controls and outlets may be positioned above obstructions (e.g. built-in shelves and countertops) and still be mounted in locations that are accessible. A minimum 30-inch wide clear knee space as deep as the reach distance, adjoining a 36 inch wide accessible route, must be available below 

> 30" 30" X 48" clear floor 48"

High and Low Forward Reach Limits From a Perpendicular Approach 

5.6 SWITCHES, OUTLETS, AND CONTROLS IN ACCESSIBLE LOCATIONS 

For obstructions extending from 0 to 20 inches from the wall the maximum height for a control or outlet over the obstruction is 48 inches above the floor. Deeper shelves, extending 20 to 25 inches from the wall, reduce the maximum mount ing height of controls and outlets to 44 inches. Controls and outlets mounted over obstructions 

extending further than 25 inches are outside the reach range of people using wheelchairs and are not considered to be in accessible locations. However, HUD allows an industry tolerance of 1/2 inch to permit the installation of standard countertops that may project from the back wall for a maximum dimension of 25-1/2 inches.  

> 27" min. 48" max. 0"-20"
> vertical
> clear knee space should be as deep as the reach distance
> vertical
> 27" min. 20"-25" 44" max.
> 30" min.
> 20" max. 48" user perpendicular to wall pulled into a 30" min. wide distance clearance at kneespace clearance at kneespace maximum reach

Maximum Forward Reach 

> 48"
> 30" min. 25" max.
> knee space
> 25" indicates

(From a Perpendicular Approach) over an Obstruction 

5.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 5 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

S IDE R EACH O VER AN O BSTRUCTION 

To reach controls and outlets mounted over base cabinets which lack knee space, a person using a wheelchair must be able to approach the cabinet from a position parallel to the cabinet and execute a side reach. This parallel position is made up of a 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space adjoining a 36 inch wide minimum accessible route. When executing a side reach over a cabinet, the upper limit of the range is reduced to 46 inches. 

Cabinet depth is limited to 24 inches. HUD permits use of a standard 24-inch deep cabinet with an additional extension of 1 to 1-1/2 inches for countertops for a maximum depth of 25-1/2 inches. If a built-in shelf, cabinet, or other obstruction must be deeper than 25-1/2 inches, then any switches, outlets, and controls that must be in accessible locations are not permitted to be  

> user in a position parallel to cabinet 24" max. 36" max.
> 46" max. cabinet with

Maximum Side Reach 

> for a side reach to control or outlet Countertop is shown at the typical kitchen height of 36". The drawing in the Guidelines (taken from ANSI Figure 6(c)), on which this drawing is based, gives this dimension as 34". The 34" dimension shown in the Guidelines is in no way intended to dictate counter heights in covered dwelling units.

installed over such deep surfaces.  no kneespace  (From a Parallel Approach) 

Over an Obstruction 

5.8 

> deep counter and base cabinets

Mounting Height for Outlets 

> 48" max. 15" min. 36" electrical outlet mounted

M OUNTING L O UTLETS 

Electrical Outlets on Walls Over Cabinets Must Be a Minimum of 36" from a Corner  

> standard 24" max. 46" AFF
> OCATIONS FOR

For accessible controls and outlets, all operable parts must be within the ranges specified above. When electrical outlets are installed horizontally or vertically, duplex outlets must have both receptacles within the reach range. Measurements are made as illustrated below. SWITCHES, OUTLETS, AND CONTROLS IN ACCESSIBLE LOCATIONS 

R ECOMMENDATIONS FOR I NCREASED A CCESSIBILITY 

The Guidelines do not specify that controls and switches installed in dwelling units be accessible in terms of ease of operation, but that they be in acces-sible locations. For anyone specifying building prod-ucts and appliances and wishing to enhance the accessibility of dwelling units, the following is a brief discussion of the types of switches and controls that increase usability for people with disabilities, as well as other persons who may experience hand limitations. 

The most universally usable switches are rocker switches, toggle switches, and touch type electronic switches because they can be operated by a single touch, require little force, and do not require gripping, twisting, or fine finger dexterity. 

Lever controls are generally usable by people with disabilities because they do not require grasping or significant force, and in some instances, their shape may double as an integral pointer to indicate the control's position. For people with limited strength or hand dexterity, smooth round knobs are especially difficult, as are controls that must be pushed down and turned at the same time. 

> smooth round knobs are difficult for people with hand limitations as well as for people with visual impairments

Poor Choice 

> on appliances
> levers are ideal but rarely found
> blades help indicate position and make turning somewhat easier
> small lever or extended blade provides position pointer and leverage for easy turning without gripping

Better Control Choices   

> rocker toggle touch sensitive

Switches Most People Can Operate 

5.9 Chapter Six: 

R EQUIREMENT 6

Reinforced Walls for Grab Bars 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such manner that all premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain reinforce-ments in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars around toilet, tub, shower stall and shower seat, where such facilities are provided. 

> Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205

# 6PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

where toilets do not have full side walls, reinforcing behind toilet must be enlarged to support a folding grab bar 

reinforcing for horizontal bar at back of toilet must be provided 

minimum reinforced areas at conventional bathtub 

even when a fold up bar is planned, reinforcing should still be provided in short wall to the side of the toilet 

> 15"  18"
> min.

removable base cabinet 

although not required by the Guidelines, for an additional grab bar installed on the short wall beside the toilet to be usable by the largest number of people, this dimension also should be 18" 

> min.

Small Bathroom with Walls Reinforced for Grab Bars 

6.2 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

I NTRODUCTION 

The Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) do not require that grab bars be installed in bathrooms. However, the Guidelines do require that bathroom walls be sufficiently strong to allow for later installation of grab bars for resident use. This requirement applies to all bathrooms, and also to powder rooms when the powder room is the only toilet facility on the entry level of a multistory dwelling unit in an elevator building (see page 4.9). Reinforcing methods are discussed later in this chapter. 

Grab bars are critical for many people with mobility impairments to be able to safely transfer on and off the toilet. Safety for everyone is greatly increased by the addition of grab bars at bathtubs and showers. The Guidelines do not prescribe the type or size of grab bars, nor the structural strength they must exhibit. The Guidelines state only that the necessary reinforcement must be placed “to permit the later installation of appropriate grab bars.” HUD encourages builders to look at the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard, or an equivalent or stricter standard, or their state or local building code in planning for or selecting appropriate grab bars. 

It is recommended that building owners and managers permanently mount directions for installation of grab bars in every dwelling unit where applicable. The type of construction should be described, where reinforcing is located, and suggestions made for the most effective method for installing grab bars. These notices could be lami nated to the inside of a linen closet door or to the inside of a utility or water heater/furnace door. 

R EINFORCING FOR G RAB B ARS AT T OILETS 

The Guidelines specify that reinforcing at least 6 inches wide by 24 inches long, capable of support ing grab bars, be provided behind and beside toilets. These minimal areas to be reinforced are adapted from the 1986 ANSI A117.1 Standard. However, the reinforcing should be both longer and wider so sufficient solid material is available to mount grab bars of differing lengths, mounting configurations, and designs. In fact, the Guidelines encourage longer reinforcing, as shown in the Guidelines Figure 3, “Water Closets in Adaptable Bathrooms,” where the preferred length of 42 inches for side wall reinforcing is given. 

Grab bars, to be within the ranges pre sented in most accessibility standards, are mounted so their centerline is 33 inches to 36 inches above the floor. If the bottom of the reinforced area is at 32 inches, and a resident chooses to mount a bar at 33 inches, the mounting plates will extend below the reinforced area by 1/2 inch or more. To avoid a weak and unsafe connection, it is critical that reinforcing be enlarged. 

> 12" min. 12" min. 18" 32" max. 38" min.  each side and mended to mount 24" long additional 2" min. bottom recom standard grab bar minimum reinforced area
> even larger reinforc ing preferred for greater ease when installing grab bars
> 30" max. preferred

Minimum Reinforcing Behind Toilets Located Beside a Wall 

6.3 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

The leading edge of the reinforcing beside  inches of reinforcing should be increased to 30 

the toilet should be positioned at least 36 inches  inches minimum. Whenever a toilet is next to a 

from the back wall to accommodate a bar that is a  wall that allows for a longer area of reinforcing (42" 

minimum of 24 inches long. If the reinforcing  is preferred), the longer area should be reinforced. 

starts 6 inches from the back wall then the 24 

24" min. 32" max. 38" min. 12" max. 

2" to 4" additional and bottom 

if this dimension is less than 12", then the 24" longer 

42" preferred minimum reinforced area 

reinforcing at sides recommended 

> 30" max. preferred

Minimum Reinforcing to the Side of Toilets 

min. must be correspondingly 

to accommodate a 24" bar, the reinforced area should be 28" to 32" long 

to provide full support for the mounting plates, see explanation below 

mounting plate 2-1/2" – 3" 24" min. 1-1/2" 2" to each side of center to center dimension grab bar 

add approximately 

Escutcheon Plates Extend Beyond the Given Grab Bar Length 

6.4 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

Toilets positioned beside a wall offer the highest degree of safe use since a grab bar can be mounted to the side of the toilet. The dimensions describing the distance from the center of the toilet to a side wall and to the nearest fixture or obstruc tion on the opposite side have been adapted from the ANSI Standard. The 18 inches from the centerline of the toilet to the wall is an absolute measurement and will accommodate a grab bar and the shoulders of a person seated on the toilet. The Guidelines provide for a 15-inch minimum dimen sion on the nongrab bar side, which is more lenient than ANSI (which requires 18 inches minimum). 

In small bathrooms where the door is located in the side wall immediately adjacent to the toilet, full length reinforcing as specified in the Guidelines may not be possible without enlarging the room. While a short grab bar is not preferred, it does work for some people. 

> 18" Guidelines 18" ANSI
> toilet with
> 33" min. Guidelines 36" min. ANSI grab bar side of
> 15" min. Guidelines 18" min. ANSI recommended 42" long reinforcing

Toilet Placement at 

Adjoining Walls and Fixtures   

> elongated reinforcing for possible addition of folding grab bars, see page 6.6
> even in short
> walls reinforcing
> to centerline must be at least
> of toilet 24 " long 42" min. ANSI grab bar length 32" max. 33" – 36" 38" min.
> 18" 12" max. 24" min. 42" preferred
> 24" – 36" 30" max. preferred

Reinforcing at Toilets 

Reinforcing Beside Toilet Shorter Because Door is Located on Same Wall  

> ANSI grab bar lengths
> 2" to 4" additional reinforcing at sides and bottom recommended
> typical to

with Adjacent Walls  

> centerline

(ANSI Grab Bar Lengths  

> of grab bar

Shown for Reference Only) 

6.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

F OLDING AND F LOOR -M OUNTED G RAB B ARS AT T OILETS 

The Guidelines permit the installation of folding wall-mounted, floor-mounted or wall and floor-mounted grab bars where it is not possible to install “appropriate” wall-mounted ANSI, or similar, complying grab bars. This is particularly relevant when there is no wall or a very short wall adjacent to the toilet. 

A wide variety of alternative folding grab bars are available. One of the most versatile is the bar that may be pulled down for support and folded out of the way when not needed. Although not quite as stable as the bar that is securely mounted to a wall at both ends, it provides reasonable support for some people. 

Reinforcing for such folding grab bars must be substantial because of their cantilevered design. See the top illustration in the right column. For a grab bar to be floor-mounted or be hinged and mounted on the wall behind the toilet, larger areas of reinforcing in walls will be necessary and care must be taken to provide for the types of bars that will not encroach upon the necessary clear floor space at fixtures. 

It is recommended that reinforcing for all types of folding grab bars be done strictly as recommended by manufacturers. Information about the exact size and location of reinforcement, and the type and size of bars the reinforcement is engineered to accommodate, should be included in the residents’ information suggested on page 6.3. See Product Resource List in Appendix A for sources of fold-up grab bars. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> reinforcing in walls to receive wall-mounted
> fold-up grab bars may need to be 12" or greater in height and very securely anchored in place
> 12"+

Wall-Mounted Fold-Up Grab Bar 

Floor-mounted fold-up grab bars, because of the stresses exerted upon them, will require an extremely secure floor connection. In frame construction, if access to the underside of the floor is available (i.e., from a crawl space or basement), necessary blocking or other reinforcing might be installed at the time the bar is installed. On con crete floor systems additional reinforcing may or may not be necessary. In either case the advice of the manufacturer and/or a professional structural engineer should be followed. 

Floor-Mounted 

> potential area of additional reinforcing; consult manufacturer or professional engineer

Fold-Up Grab Bar 

6.6 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

When a toilet is positioned in the room away from a side wall, grab bars must be mounted on the wall behind the toilet or be floor mounted. Reinforcing should be long and wide enough so a folding bar can be installed and, when lowered into position for use, its centerline is 15-3/4 inches from the centerline of the toilet. This dimension is consistent with the requirement that 18 inches be provided from the centerline of the toilet to the wall when that wall is to be equipped with a grab bar. 

Advance planning will be necessary to determine on which side of the toilet a folding grab bar will be placed so the necessary 18 inches of space and additional reinforcing can be shifted to the grab bar side of the toilet. Although not required, it is recommended that the toilet be centered in a 36-inch space rather than the 33-inch space specified for usable bathrooms in the Guide lines. Adequate reinforcing could then run the full length behind the toilet to allow fold-up bars to be installed on either side, depending upon the needs and desires of the resident.  

> shifted to the right 3" 15" 18"
> if fold-up grab bar is planned for installation here, door should be reversed to swing out and toilet increased reinforcing for fold-up bars
> wall or adjacent fixture for a grab bar to be usable it must be mounted in the same relationship to the centerline of the toilet regardless of whether the grab bar is attached to a side or rear wall
> 18" 15-3/4" 2-1/4"

Grab Bar Placement 

> bar may be on either
> nongrab bar side of toilet; 18" also of centerline if
> side of the toilet, but must be hinged so it folds against the wall behind the toilet and access to the tub and 18"
> Guidelines require only 15" on preferred this side planned for two bars (18" shown) does not interfere with the controls possible location for resident installation of fold-up grab bars

Toilet Between Tub and Lavatory 

Toilet Between Lavatory and Short Wall 

Recommended Locations for Fold-Up Grab Bars 

6.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Fixed floor and wall-mounted grab bars also can be installed where toilets are not adjacent to full length walls. This type of installation will require little if any additional reinforcing but is a poor choice because the grab bars tend to block access to adjacent fixtures. The fixed floor mount encroaches on clear floor space and interferes with wheelchair maneuvering. 

> one or both grab bars may be added by users with different needs
> reinforcing for this type of bar will require wall reinforcing slightly larger than the Guideline minimums; note, however, that bars can block access to controls

Fixed Floor and Wall-Mounted Bars Not a Good Choice for Many People 

R EINFORCING FOR G RAB B ARS AT C ONVENTIONAL B ATHTUBS 

At conventional bathtubs the Guidelines specify wall reinforcing for grab bars as shown in the accompanying illustrations. The intent is to make it 

easy for a resident to install grab bars similar to those specified in ANSI A117.1 or other equal 

accessibility standard or code. 

For the same reasons as discussed at toilets, the reinforced areas specified at the head and foot of tubs should be enlarged to provide full support for mounting plates and horizontal bars at the lowest position of 33" above the room floor. The 

> 38" min. 30" max.
> 2" 32" max.
> 4" preferred
> some people benefit from a vertical bar here; this is a recommended additional reinforced area
> additional recommended
> reinforced area

Foot (Control Wall) 

enlarged reinforced areas are shown here as recom- Reinforced Areas Required by the Guidelines 

mended additional reinforcing. at Conventional Bathtubs 

6.8 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

24" max. 12" min. so long as dimensioned 

this bar is omitted if a built-33" - 36" all bars 24" min. 24" min. 12" max. bar on the end wall 

Vertical Grab Bar Provides Support for Ambulatory Users ANSI Grab Bar Configurations 

bars can be any length end is fixed the low bar is used by those who climb down into the tub in transfer seat is installed the higher level bars are used by people transferring into the tub and by those who stand to shower except lowest some people may benefit from a vertical vertical or L-shaped grab bar 

at Conventional Tubs (for Reference Only) 

48" min. 38" min. 6" max. 

> 6" max.

24" 38" min. 32" max. 

2" 30" max. preferred additional reinforced area recommended 

Back Wall 

Reinforced Areas Required by the Guidelines at Conventional Bathtubs 

Head 

6.9 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R EINFORCING FOR G RAB B ARS AT N ON -C ONVENTIONAL B ATHTUBS 

The Guidelines do not limit the size or proportion of bathtubs or showers to the configurations shown. Bathtubs may have shelves or benches at either end, or may be installed without surround- shelf 

ing walls, provided alternative methods for mounting grab bars are made. For example, a sunken bathtub placed away from walls could have 

walls and tub deck reinforced areas recommended in both 

Recommended Reinforcing for Grab Bars at Raised or Sunken Tubs 

step at the tub 24" max. depth wing wall should to accept grab bars 

one leg of a handrail; engineering 38" min. 6" max. 

reinforced areas in the floor for installation of floor-mounted grab bars. Whenever walls are adjacent to raised or sunken tubs, reinforcing should be provided that closely matches the sizes given at conventional bathtubs. 

additional reinforcing in floor if there is a be reinforced vertical bar may be useful here standard nonreinforced floor may or may not be able to support 

additional reinforced 

if walls exist around any portion of sunken or raised tubs, reinforcing for grab bars should be provided 

areas recommended – Walls at Special Tubs analysis recommended 

minimum width of 6" to 8" full width of platform 

6.10 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

F LOOR -M OUNTED G RAB B ARS AT S PECIAL B ATHTUBS 

On open sides of raised tubs having decks at tub rim level and at floors surrounding sunken tubs, the deck and other designated floor areas should be reinforced so they are structurally capable of receiving floor-mounted grab bars. The floor or deck must provide secure anchorage and such bars should withstand a 250 pound load applied in any direction and at any point. Although not required, any grab bar installation should be able to meet or exceed ANSI 4.24 Grab Bars. 

Floor-mounted bars in these installations may be from 18 inches to 36 inches above the tub rim. Some have a braced double-footed mount as shown here. 

If designated reinforced floor areas are to be provided, their size should be comparable in length to those required for conventional bathtubs, or proportionally longer if the bathtub is larger than a conventional bathtub. The width of the reinforcing may well need to be wider than other reinforced areas for sufficient strength and space to accept the braced double-footed mounts described above. 

The size and exact location of designated reinforced floor areas should be included in the permanent affixed tenant information for installing grab bars recommended at the beginning of this chapter. The builder/owner/manager also may want to include in that information the height, type of fasteners, type of bar and mount, or even the model number and manufacturer of the bars upon which the adequacy of the structure was engineered. 

Floor-Mounted Grab Bar 

> install handrails at tubs with steps
> additional reinforced areas recommended – minimum width of 6" to 8" full width of platform
> it may be necessary for residents to

No Structural Walls at Special Tubs 

6.11 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R EINFORCING FOR G RAB B ARS AND S EATS AT S HOWERS 

In glass shower stalls, only those walls that are 

solid construction, i.e., wood or metal studs with gypsum wallboard and/or tile or solid masonry, must have reinforced areas. Glass walls are not required to be reinforced, nor are shower stalls required to have the waterproof pan or floor seal 

> 38" min. 32" max. 30" max. preferred

pierced to receive screws/bolts for floor-mounted  Side 

grab bars. 

> 38" min. 32" max.

Back 

> f
> 38" min.

Side 

grab bars for standing users also for grab bars glass walls and 32" max. f

> 30" max. pre erred

are helpful reinforcing in conventional walls wet floor areas not required to receive grab bars 

Reinforcing 

> 30" max. pre erred

Minimum Reinforcing 

in Glass-Walled Shower Stalls for Grab Bars in Showers 

6.12 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

Shower stalls in covered dwellings may be any size or configuration unless they are the only bathing fixture provided in the dwelling unit or on the entry level of a multistory dwelling in a building with one or more elevators. (See clear floor space at shower stalls in Chapter 7, Part B: “Usable Bath rooms.”) Reinforcing for grab bars must be at the height shown in the illustrations on the preceding page and extend the full width of both side walls and the back wall. If shower walls curve, reinforcing must still be provided. 

Because of the commonly accepted need to install horizontal grab bars between 33 and 36 inches above the floor, it is recommended that this reinforcing be enlarged so the bottom edge is 30 inches above the floor as explained previously at toilets and tubs. 

There are certain situations where the shower stall is required to have reinforcing for later installation of a wall-hung bench seat. When this is required is addressed in Part B of Chapter 7, “Usable Bathrooms.” Reinforcing is required in a shower stall that measures a nominal 36 inches x 36 inches. The reinforcing is located on the wall opposite the controls and must run the full width of the stall, starting at the floor, to a minimum height of 24 inches. 

HUD encourages builders to refer to the ANSI Standard or local codes for specifications on grab bars and wall-hung shower benches. The ANSI specified shower seat is an excellent design for safe use by people with disabilities. The builder should attempt to locate several manufacturers and size the reinforced area for the seat to accommodate more than one model. See Product Resource List in Appendix A. Information detailing reinforced areas and location, as well as product choices, should be included in the permanently affixed resident informa tion recommended at the beginning of this chapter. 

> 24"

Required Reinforcing When Shower is Only Bathing Fixture 

> reinforcing for optional seat when shower is only bathing fixture in covered dwelling unit

Seat and Grab Bar 

> optional hand-held shower
> 17"-19", typical seat height as specified in ANSI

in 36 " X 36 " Shower 

> 32" X 48" shower

Other Shower Configurations Permitted 

6.13 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R ECOMMENDED R EINFORCING M ETHODS 

The Guidelines do not prescribe the type of material to use or methods for providing reinforce ment at bathroom walls. Grab bar reinforcing may be accomplished in a variety of ways, some of which are suggested below. 

L IMITED A REA R EINFORCING WITH S OLID W OOD B LOCKING 

Stud Wall. In wood frame construction, the mounting area for grab bars can be reinforced by installing solid wood blocking either between or “let into” the studs and fastening the blocking securely to the studs. In either way, the solid wood reinforcing is installed flush with the face of the stud so finish materials can be applied to the studs and blocking in the normal manner. 

Molded Fixtures. Fiberglass and acrylic bathtubs and showers with integral wall panels are common in both new construction and remodeling. The panels alone are too thin to support grab bars, and because they do not touch the stud wall except at the top, there is a space between the panel and the stud wall. To attach grab bars to these surfaces, an area of solid wood blocking or other solid substance must be installed in the cavity between the fiberglass or acrylic wall and the wall. 

Since the space between the panels and the stud wall gets narrower as it approaches the top of the panels where they are fastened to the studs, this blocking must be cut to fit snugly in the space between the studs and the panel. The blocking must contact the plastic panel over the entire reinforced area. 

> or other back-up finish material
> each designated attached to fram
> fastened into or integral plastic wall panel
> materials and into solid blocking studs; blocking and fill the designated space gypsum board, cement board,

Solid Wood Reinforcing on Wood Stud Walls 

> solid wood blocking over area securely ing to support necessary loads grab bars anchored through plastic tub wall and securely through the blocking grab bars anchored through all finish solid wood blocking “let in” and/or over-laid and securely anchored to must fit snugly

Reinforcing for Grab Bars Behind Fiberglass or Acrylic Tub and Shower Surrounds 

6.14 REINFORCED WALLS FOR GRAB BARS 

Some fiberglass and acrylic tubs, showers, and wall sections are now made with reinforcing already in the walls to stiffen the fixture. If the reinforced fiberglass or acrylic wall is not specifi cally labeled as built for grab bars and meeting the ANSI load requirements, then additional reinforc ing may need to be installed. 

W HOLE W ALL OR L ARGE A REA R EINFORCING WITH P LYWOOD 

Although the location and the limited size of the wall areas that must be reinforced are specified by the Guidelines, it may be necessary or desirable to extend the reinforcing over a larger area or throughout the entire wall. Some people may want to locate grab bars in areas other than those speci fied in the Guidelines and other accessibility standards. Other people may have difficulty finding the minimum reinforced wall areas con cealed inside a finished wall and install the grab bars in an unreinforced area. A larger reinforced area provides greater flexibility in placement and easier installation of grab bars. 

Heavy plywood applied to the studs over a larger area can support grab bars and provide a base for the installation of finish materials such as ceramic tile or plastic wall panels. Plywood can be applied to the face of studs or “let in.” In either case the plywood must be of sufficient thickness and should be securely attached to withstand the forces specified in ANSI 4.24, or an equivalent or stricter standard. Anchors for securing the grab bars to the reinforced walls should be through-the-wall type or another type capable of meeting the ANSI force requirements.  

> or other finish material tile setting bed, and/or other finish material
> gypsum board overlay or “let in” plywood reinforc ing for grab bars concrete board grab bar anchored through plywood reinforcing

Plywood Reinforcing 

on a Wood or Metal Stud Wall 

6.15 PART TWO: CHAPTER 6 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Because of standard stud spacing, reinforced areas often will have to be longer than specified to support necessary blocking. 

24" min. 

horizontal 2" thick solid 12" max. 16" o.c. 16" o.c. wood blocking 

Plan View of Extended Horizontal Blocking Between Conventional Wood Studs 

16" o.c. 16" o.c. 

Additional vertical studs can be placed at ends of each specified reinforced area. This method is more expensive, difficult to install accurately, and more difficult to find after construction. It provides less flexibility in bar  12" max. 24" min. 

placement and is more likely to result in a weak connection. Additional Stud Method of Reinforcing for Grab Bars 

A manufactured, formed metal reinforcing plate can be spot welded or screwed to studs. 

metal plate metal studs 

Reinforcing at Metal Studs 

6.16 Chapter Seven: 

R EQUIREMENT 7

Usable Kitchens and Bathrooms  

> ■

P ART A: Usable Kitchens  

> ■

P ART B: Usable Bathrooms 

# 7■ P ART A: Usable Kitchens 

# 7a 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such a manner that all premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain usable kitchens...such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 

Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

counters may be at the standard height of 36" (counter height of 34" as shown in Fig. 2(c) of the Guidelines does not apply) 

lever hardware, although preferred and more usable by everyone, is not required 

ranges and cooktops may have front-, rear-, or side-mounted controls; for safety reasons and ease of use, front- or side-mounted controls are preferred 

Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by ANSI or Guidelines. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

kitchens in covered units must be on an accessible route and have door open ings at least 32" clear to allow passage; see Chapter 4 “Usable Doors” and Chapter 5 “Accessible Route” 

outlet located beyond reach of seated person permitted if other outlets in accessible locations are provided, see Chapter 6 “Switches, Outlets, and Controls” 

adequate space within the kitchen to provide 30" X 48" clear floor space at each fixture and appliance 

in U-shaped kitchens, if less than 60" between the two legs of the U, then sink base must be removable, see page 7.12 

Guideline Specifications for Kitchens 

7.2 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

I NTRODUCTION 

Kitchens that comply with the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) can be designed to look and function like conventional kitchens typically found in multifamily housing. The Guidelines specify that three specific require ments must be provided to allow people who rely on mobility aids to “use” the kitchen. “Usable” kitchens, as specified in the Guidelines, are not necessarily “accessible” kitchens, but they do provide maneuvering space for a person who uses a wheelchair, scooter, or walker to approach and operate most appliances and fixtures. 

The Guidelines 1) specify minimum clear floor spaces at fixtures and appliances, 2) define minimum clearance between counters, and 3) provide additional specifications when a U-shaped kitchen is planned. Wheelchair turning spaces, described in accessibility standards, are not required in kitchens that meet the Guidelines, except in some U-shaped kitchens, see page 7.9. 

Additional supplemental design infor mation, presented in italic type, is offered for designers/builders who may wish to increase the accessibility of dwelling units. This supplemental information is not required by HUD, the Fair Housing Act, or the Guidelines. 

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT F IXTURES AND A PPLIANCES 

The Guidelines specify that a 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space be provided at each kitchen appliance or fixture, and that each of these clear floor spaces adjoin the accessible route that must pass into and through the kitchen. It is anticipated that in any conventional kitchen plan, the over lapping of the minimum 36-inch wide accessible route with the clear floor spaces at all fixtures and appliances provides the necessary maneuvering space to make it possible for a person using a mobility aid to approach, and then position himself or herself close enough to use the fixture safely. 

The clear floor space must be positioned either parallel or perpendicular to and centered on the appliance or fixture, i.e., the clear floor space must have its centerline aligned with the centerline of the fixture or appliance. This centered position is most critical at corners where an appliance may have to be pulled away from the corner to allow a full centered approach. The two types of ap proaches and where they are necessary are described on the following pages. 

> 30" X 48" clear floor space

Clear Floor Space for Wheelchair Parking at Appliances and Fixtures 

7.3 30" 

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> clear floor spaces adjoining into kitchen
> one 30" X 48" clear floor space

Overlapping Clear Floor Spaces and Accessible Route Provide Maneuvering Space 

> accessible route at each fixture and appliance (not required at sink if base cabinets are removable)

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT R ANGES , C OOKTOPS , AND S INKS 

Unless knee space is provided, space to execute a parallel approach must be provided at ranges, cooktops, and sinks. The clear floor space in this parallel orientation allows the wheelchair user to make a close side approach permitting safer and easier reach to controls and cooking surfaces. A forward approach, on the other hand, is difficult and unsafe, especially when controls are located at the back, because it requires seated users to lean forward over their feet and knees to reach not only hot pots and pans but the controls as well. See pages 7.11 through 7.16 for required clear floor space at cooktop or sink when knee space is provided. 

> 48"
> 30"
> clear floor space for a parallel approach must be centered on fixture
> centerline of clear floor space
> centerline of range
> parallel to range
> user pulls

Space for Parallel Approach Required at Range and Cooktop 

7.4 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

Forward Approach at Range Parallel Approach to Range is Difficult and Unsafe Specified in Guidelines 

> centerline of sink
> clear floor space centered on bowl

A parallel approach also must be provided at sinks so a seated user can reach down into the bowl. A forward approach with kneespace below the sink may be required in some very small U-

> clear floor space

shaped kitchens. See page 7.11.  centered on overall 

The parallel clear floor space at sinks, as at  sink when bowls are 

ranges and cooktops, must be centered on the bowl of unequal size 

or appliance. At single bowl sinks the centerline of the clear floor space must align with the centerline of that bowl. Where there are multiple bowl sinks the clear floor space must be centered on the  clear floor space centered on double overall sink itself.  basin sink 

Faucets usually are placed at the center of or within six inches of the center of the sink, regardless of the number of basins. Since the clear floor space is centered on the sink, users are still afforded access to faucet controls. Space for Parallel Approach Required at Sinks 

7.5 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT O VENS ,D ISHWASHERS , R EGRIGERATORS ,F REEZERS , AND T RASH C OMPACTORS 

The 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space oriented in either one of two positions—parallel or perpen-dicular—is required at the oven, dishwasher, refrigerator, freezer, and trash compactor. Wall-

> clear floor space for at least one type of approach (forward or parallel) must be centered on the refrigerator; this applies to side-by-side as well as over/under models

mounted and microwave ovens, like ovens in ranges, also must have either a parallel or perpen dicular clear floor space adjacent to the appliance. 

Even though this group of appliances has operable doors that require the user to be able to get out of the way of the door swing, for purposes of design and room layout the clear floor space must be centered on the appliance itself. However, the clear floor space for the specific appliance and the clear floor space for adjacent appliances and fixtures, combined with the 36-inch wide accessible route into the room, provide the functional space necessary to open a door and maneuver close to the appliance to be able to reach into it. 

> REF 30" perpendicular or
> 48"

Space for Either a Forward or Parallel Approach Must be Provided 

> forward approach parallel approach
> range

Functional Use of Oven 

> forward approach to oven racks parallel approach to oven racks

Could Be From Any One of These Positions 

7.6 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

C LEARANCE B ETWEEN C OUNTERS AND A LL O PPOSING E LEMENTS 

The Guidelines require a clearance of at least 40 inches between all opposing base cabinets, countertops, appliances, and walls. The 40-inch clearance is measured from any countertop or the face of any appliance (excluding handles and controls) that projects into the kitchen to the opposing cabinet, countertop, appliance, or wall. 

Refrigerators vary greatly in depth and may extend up to eight inches beyond cabinet faces. Standard free-standing and drop-in ranges may project up to three inches. Appliance depths (excluding door handles) must be included when calculating the 40-inch clearances. 

> base cabinet range 40" min.
> dimension must be measured from front face of range or refrigerator to countertop edge (excluding cabinet and appliance handles)

Minimum Clearance between Range and Opposing Base Cabinet 

> base cabinet 40" min. refrigerator

Minimum Clearance between Refrigerator and Opposing Base Cabinet 

7.7 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

In a narrow kitchen the 40-inch minimum clear- wheelchair user must 30" X 48" ance provides an additional five inches on either  leave kitchen to turn  

> around clear floor

side of the required clear floor space of 30 inches x  space 

48 inches at each fixture or appliance, so a user in a wheelchair can maneuver as close as possible to appliances or fixtures. A narrow kitchen such as the one shown to the right meets the Guidelines and is usable, but may be difficult for many people using wheelchairs. Its narrow corridor design requires a user in a wheelchair to exit the kitchen to turn around.  

> REF DW 5" 30" 40" min. 5"

40" Minimum Clearance Between all Counters, Base Cabinets, Appliances, and Walls 

In more elaborate kitchens where an island is planned, the 40-inch clearance must be maintained between the face of the island and all opposing features. Even though an accessible route for a 90 degree turn around an obstruction is 36 inches, to ensure sufficient space for maneuvering within the kitchen, the Guidelines require that the minimum clearance of 40 inches be maintained.  40" min. 40" min. 

40" Must Be Maintained Between Island and all Opposing Features 

7.8 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

machine is planned to be included adjacent to the   

> REF or the clear floor space at the sink
> 30" X 48" clear floor space on sink sink base DW 64" min. range 24" 30" 9"

sink, the distance between the legs of the U must be greater than 60 inches to allow for a full cen tered approach at the sink. See the lower plan in 

> refrigerator must be selected and positioned so it does not encroach upon the 60" diameter turning circle centered

Sink and Dishwasher this dimension may need to be 

U-S HAPED K ITCHENS 

A 60-inch diameter turning circle is required in a U-shaped kitchen that has a sink, range, or cooktop at its base. This turning diameter is necessary to provide adequate maneuvering space for a person using a wheelchair to approach and position themselves parallel to the appliance or fixture at the base of the U. Any appliances, such as refrigerators and ranges (excluding door handles), that project beyond countertops and cabinets must not encroach upon this 60-inch diameter turning space. 

In addition to the turning space, the kitchen must be arranged so there is a 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space for a parallel approach centered on the sink, range, or cooktop. The centerline of the fixture or appliance must be aligned with the centerline of the clear floor space. 

When a sink, even a standard single basin sink, is at the bottom of the U and a dishwashing 

the right column. 

> 60" diameter turning circle
> 60" min.
> 60" diameter range turning circle required
> 30" X 48" clear floor space
> centerline of clear floor space aligned with centerline of range

60" Diameter Turning Circle when Sink (Only), Cooktop, or Range is at Bottom of U-Shaped Kitchen   

> tray base cabinet or
> similar must be wider
> if refrigerator is 1" filler placed closer to sink
> increased slightly for a double

at Bottom of U-Shaped Kitchen  

> basin sink if wider than 30"

Increases Room Width 

7.9 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

In the lower plan on page 7.9, the refrig erator is pulled away from the sink and beyond the turning circle. Since a refrigerator may not overlap the five-foot turning space, if the refrigerator must be located closer to the sink, the distance between the legs of the U must be increased. 

To reduce the need for additional floor space, and because clear floor space at appliances and fixtures may overlap, the clear floor space at the sink can serve as the clear floor space for a forward approach to dishwasher racks when they are pulled out of the dishwasher. Even though the dishwasher door would rest on the feet of the user, the required clear floor spaces are provided and the 

> 64" min.
> dishwasher door to racks to load machine dishwasher overlaps footrests by approximately 4" to 6" when racks are pulled out of dishwasher, user is in a forward approach

Although Tight, This Configuration 

kitchen complies with the maneuvering require ments of the Guidelines. 

Generally Is Usable 

7.10 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

A N E XCEPTION 

The Guidelines permit U-shaped kitchens with a sink or cooktop at the base of the U to have less than 60 inches between the legs of the U only when removable base cabinets are provided under the cooktop or sink. A clearance of at least 40 inches is required. Since knee space cannot be provided below a range, kitchens with a range at the base of the U must have the 60-inch minimum turning diameter. 

Once the base cabinet is removed, the resulting knee space allows a person using a wheel-

> REF 30" min.

U-Shaped Kitchen 

> 40" min.

Sink at Base of Narrow    

> sink with removable base cabinet cooktop with
> and knee removable base space below cabinet and knee space below
> 30" x 48"
> wall-mounted oven
> 30" min. REF DW clear floor 19" of clear floor space under sink or cooktop 40" min. space; only may extend

chair to pull up under the feature to reach controls and perform cooking/cleaning functions. A note of caution: knee space beneath cooktops provides essential maneuvering space for seated people, but it also creates a greater risk from hot food spilled in the lap. If cooktops are to be provided with knee space below, although not required, it is suggested that they be placed in lowered or adjustable height counter segments so they can be used more easily and safely by people using wheelchairs. Knee space configurations are shown on pages 7.14 and 7.15. 

> wheelchair user cannot turn around in either kitchen and must back into space to open refrigerator

Cooktop at Base of Narrow U-Shaped Kitchen (Not Allowed for a Range) 

7.11 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R EMOVABLE B ASE C ABINETS 

Narrow U-shaped kitchens, where knee space must be provided below sinks or cooktops, can appear identical to those kitchens which lack this addi tional feature since knee space can be concealed by a removable base cabinet. When a potential resi 

30" wide x 27" high clear knee space 

removable 

cabinet front 

carry floor, cabinet, and wall finishes under and behind removable cabinets 

dent or owner needs the knee space it can be provided quickly and easily. Specifications for knee space are based on the Guidelines’ requirements for bathrooms and ANSI 4.19 and 4.32. See also pages 

7.14  - 7.15 and 7.52. 

standard sinks acceptable, sinks with rear located drains simplify knee space 

Notes in italic type are recom-mendations only 

and are not required by ANSI 

or Guidelines. 

recommended pipe protection and hinged panel with disposal cover; note pipes and disposal also can be wrapped in insulation, see details page 7.15 

cut away back and frame and reinforce with gussets 

removable cabinet front and bottom 

removable cabinet 

Possible Removable Cabinet Options for Required Knee Spaces at Sinks or Cooktops in Narrow (Less Than 60" Wide) U-Shaped Kitchens 

7.12 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

The Guidelines require that the floor, walls, and cabinet faces of knee space be finished during initial construction so no other work is necessary when the base cabinet is removed. When sinks or cooktops are installed at the bottom of a narrow U-shaped kitchen, regardless of whether the knee space is exposed or concealed by a removable cabinet, hot pipes or exposed sharp edges should be insulated or enclosed at the time of initial construc tion. Protection methods are addressed on page 

7.14  “Knee Space and Pipe Protection.” 

There are no kitchen cabinet manufactur ers that currently offer “removable base cabinets” in their standard lines. The methods for providing removable cabinets presented here are some of the possible solutions. Of those shown, the removable cabinet front is likely to be the easiest to accom plish based upon current manufacturing processes. However, the resident may need to reinstall the cabinet at a later date, therefore, storage needs to be considered. It is recommended that instructions regarding proper storage be taped to the inside of the cabinet, as well as reinstallation instructions, if applicable. Other similar design options include removable cabinet floor and bottom, or, with some modification of rear supports, removal of the entire cabinet. This last option requires the counter to be installed independent of the base cabinet, with storage of the removable portion of the cabinet again a consideration. 

Use of swinging retractable cabinet door hardware provides another excellent method to conceal knee space because the doors are self-storing and no part of the cabinet has to be removed or stored at another location. A special combination hinge allows the doors to swing open in a traditional manner and, when desired, allows the doors to be pushed back into the cabinet. 

> doors opening
> doors closed doors retracted

Use of Self-Storing Door Hardware to Expose Knee Space 

7.13 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

K NEE S PACE AND P IPE P ROTECTION 

Where knee spaces are provided below sinks and cooktops, protecting seated users from burns and abrasions is strongly recommended. While the Guidelines do not specify such protection, the two most common design standards on accessibility (ANSI A117.1, 1986 and UFAS) require that the bottom of cooktops and sink supply lines and drain pipes be insulated or enclosed. Many people who use wheelchairs or scooters have limited sensation in their legs and cannot feel that they are touching a hot pipe or sharp edge and may be unaware that a serious injury has occurred. In addition, the need for protection from burns is an important safety consideration for all persons. 

Pipes at sinks may be wrapped with insulation, but each time the plumbing is serviced the insulation must be removed and reinstalled. If the pipes are rewrapped using the original insula tion (which may have lost much of its adhesion) the resulting application often is ineffective or the 

> ANSI or Guidelines.
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

A more aesthetic and practical method for pipe protection is the installation of a removable panel over the plumbing. This panel shields the seated user and hides the plumbing from view. If such a panel is installed it should not inhibit access by encroaching upon the knee space. The panel should be hinged or otherwise removable so the pipes can be serviced easily. 

The dimensions for the knee space itself must be 30 inches wide (minimum) and should be 27 inches high (minimum). Since there is no specific ANSI figure delineating the requirements for knee space clearance beneath sinks or cooktops in dwelling units, the accompanying illustrations may be used as guidance when providing knee space beneath removable base cabinets. The pipe protection panel is patterned after the ANSI Figure 31 for Lavatory Clearances. See also ANSI 4.32.5.5 Sinks and 4.32.5.6 Ranges and Cooktops. 

> walls and floor of knee to match

Cooktop with Knee Space Below 

insulation may be left off entirely. 

> space must be finished
> insulate or enclose underside of cooktop units to prevent burns
> 27" minimum clear standard 36" acceptable
> cooktop unit with front controls and smooth flush top preferred, not required by the Guidelines
> Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by

7.14 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

> 27" minimum  varies 9" min.

3" 8" standard 36" acceptable 12" pre ferred 

standard 6", 7", 8", and 9" deep sinks with center drain 

Knee Space at Sink with Pipe Protection Panel 

sinks with rear located drain are not required 

pipe protection but are a significant 

and appearance panel advantage when creat-ing usable knee space 

adjacent cabinet, wall, and floor must be finished to match 

min. min. 

> 27" minimum  varies

with Wrapped Pipes 

> standard 36" acceptable

Knee Space at Sink 

> varies 27" minimum 9" min.

3" min. 8" min. 12" wide ±

with Garbage Disposal and 

> standard 36" acceptable 12" pre ferred

open bottom for ventilation and access to reset buttons disposal cover 

Knee Space at Sink Pipe Protection Panel 

standard depth sinks up to 9" permitted, 

rear drain preferred 

although wrapped insulation is acceptable under the Guidelines, this method of pipe protection is discouraged 

adjacent cabinet, wall, and floor must be finished to match 

standard depth sinks up to 9" permitted, 

rear drain preferred 

pipe protection and appearance panel 

adjacent cabinet, wall, and floor must be finished to match 

7.15 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

shallow basin sink and rear drain, although not required by the Guidelines, greatly improve access by wheelchair user 

lever hardware, although preferred, is not required 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

knee spaces must have walls and floor surfaces finished 

plumbing and other elements should be covered by a removable pipe protection and appearance panel, or be wrapped with padded insulating material, see details page 7.15 

knee space 30" wide is required and 27" high is recommended 

under sinks or cooktops located at bottom of U-shaped kitchens when the U is 

less than 60" wide  Knee Space at Narrow U-Shaped Kitchens 

30" X 48" min. clear floor space; must not extend more than 19" into knee space 

30" min. 

40" min. 

face to face 

of a ppliances 

and cabinets 

Notes in italic type are recommenda-tions only and are not required by ANSI or Guidelines. 

7.16 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

P ANTRIES 

Shallow storage closets, such as pantries, may have doors that do not provide a 32-inch clear width since they do not require the user to pass through the door to reach the contents. However, at walk-in pantries that must be entered to reach the stored items, the doorway must provide a 32-inch nominal clear opening. Shelving is not addressed by the Guidelines; however, it is recommended that it be provided at a variety of levels. 

In the small walk-in pantry (below left), if wheelchair users enter the pantry facing the contents, they must back out of the space. In the larger walk-in pantry (below right), if the first shelf is placed at two feet above the floor, a wheelchair user could turn around in the pantry and exit facing out.  

> Notes in italic type are recommenda-tions only and are not required by ANSI or Guidelines.
> 52"
> 32" nominal
> 12" shelving
> door could swing into or out of the pantry; if the door swings into the pantry it obstructs access to potential narrow storage behind clear width the door

Small Walk-In Pantry  

> maximum 18"
> recommended
> shelves at all reach heights doors may have

Small Shallow Pantry  

> less than 32" nominal clear width, but should swing back 180 degrees
> 12" shelving
> preferred that door swing out of pantry
> 64"
> 32" nominal clear width

Larger Walk-In Pantry 

7.17 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> bottom of oven should be positioned so lowest oven rack is at or near countertop height
> 36" max. recommended

R ECOMMENDATIONS FOR I NCREASED A CCESSIBILITY 

A T W ALL O VENS 

Wall-mounted ovens, like ovens in ranges, must have either a parallel or forward clear floor space adjacent to the appliance. When a single wall-mounted oven is installed, it is recommended that the bottom of the oven be mounted at or near counter height so a seated user could reach over a potentially hot door and, at a minimum, pull out the bottom oven rack. Controls also should be within the reach of a seated user. 

If double ovens are installed, a wheelchair user must be able to execute a parallel or a forward approach at the appliance. At least one oven interior and its controls, even though appliance controls are not covered by the Guidelines, should be within the reach range of a seated person. See page 5.5 for reach ranges. 

> lowest oven rack
> 36" high countertop beyond
> 54" max. recommended

36 Inches to Bottom 54 Inches Recommended Reach to of Single Wall-Mounted Oven Controls at Single Wall-Mounted Oven 

7.18 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

A T L AUNDRY E QUIPMENT 

The Guidelines do not require washers and dryers in individual dwelling units to be accessible, which also means that they are not required to have 30-inch x 48-inch parallel clear floor spaces positioned in front of them. However, when located in the kitchen along a row containing other appliances, it is recommended that space be provided for a parallel approach to each machine. The Guidelines permit the installation of stacked washers and dryers. It is recommended that the controls be within the reach of seated users; see the illustration in the upper right column. If the washer and dryer are located behind doors or are in a separate utility room, clear floor spaces in front of the machines are not required. 

However, if the door to the utility room is intended for user passage, the door must provide a 32-inch 

Stacked Washer/Dryer Unit with Dryer and All 

> top-loading 54" max. dryer washer high side reach limit for a parallel approach floor of dryer

Controls Within Reach Range of Seated User 

nominal clear opening. When laundry equipment is located in a common use area, it must conform to the requirements for accessible public and common use facilities, see page 2.26. Note: Non-italic type   

> DWDW

indicates a requirement of the Guidelines.   

> front loading washing machines preferred
> clear floor spaces may overlap clear floor space obstructed by doors, permitted under the Guidelines
> doors may be removed to improve
> DWDW
> access; appliances should be
> positioned as close to the front of

Clear Floor Space at Laundry Equipment 

> the closet as possible

Not Required But Recommended 

7.19 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

A T O THER A PPLIANCES AND F IXTURES 

While not required by the Guidelines, careful consideration should be given to the selection of other appliances and fixtures installed in kitchens so potential residents who may currently, or in the future, have a physical limitation may more completely use and enjoy their dwelling. 

A partial list of additional considerations for kitchens: 

• ranges and cooktops with controls that are front- or side-mounted and have click stops to indicate heat settings, 

• vent hoods with controls mounted at or near countertop level, 

> levers are ideal but rarely found on appliances
> blades help indicate positions and make turning somewhat easier
> small lever or extended blade provides position pointer and leverage for easy turning without grasping

Preferred Control Choices 

Revolving/Extending Shelves at Corner Base Cabinets Are an Advantage Lever Handles on Faucets Are Easy 

Ideal Control Knob 

• shallow sink basins with rear-mounted drains when removable base cabinets are provided, • lever or blade type handle faucets and controls, • revolving/extending semicircular shelves for corner base cabinet storage. 

> high contrast labeling lever handle or blade

for All Users for Most People to Operate 

7.20 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

E XAMPLES OF K ITCHEN F LOOR P LANS THAT C OMPLY WITH THE G UIDELINES 

The plans presented on the following pages are examples of “usable” kitchens that comply with the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guide lines). They range from very small to larger, more elaborate kitchens but are only a small sampling of the layouts possible. The plans are neither required nor even suggested as ideal examples. They are included to illustrate typical applications or inter pretations of specific requirements of the Guide lines under various circumstances. 

The plans may be used as resource material and planning guides when developing new multi family housing designs. Conventional industry standard fixture and appliance sizes have been used consistently when developing these plans. It is important to allow sufficient space for any fixtures that may be larger than those shown here. Although 

designers should rely upon the dimensions indi cated and not scale off the drawings, all plans in this section are reproduced at 1/4 inch scale. 

The plans are presented in pairs, with the first plan showing fixture and appliance placement and key dimensions, such as aisle widths, that are required by the Guidelines. The second plan gives the overall room dimensions which are offered for comparison purposes only and are not required by the Guidelines. The second plan also shows clear floor spaces adjoining individual appliances and fixtures and describes their use, and, to give the reader the “real” space that appliances occupy, appliance doors are shown in their open position. 

Text and notes presented in italic type are comments or recommendations and are not required by the Guidelines. 

7.21 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Very Small Parallel Wall Kitchen (Without Dishwasher) 

In this kitchen design, walls may not continue across either open end because they would obstruct clear floor spaces required at each appliance. Although discouraged because maneuvering space would be severely restricted, the sink end could be closed if a removable cabinet that conceals a mini mum 30-inch wide knee space is provided under the sink; 36-inch wide knee space is preferred. 

> 3'-4" min.

indicates cabinets 3' - 4" min. clear space REF overhead between counter and face of refrigerator 

> 7'-11"

5'-7" REF 

clear floor space at clear floor space at sink refrigerator to allow close parallel approach; also serves as “forward” approach to oven racks when pulled out of the oven 

clear floor space at range cooking surface 

although not required, it is preferred that refrigerator door swings back 180 degrees to permit close parallel approach 

7.22 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

Parallel Wall Kitchen 

> 3'-0" min.

3'-0" min. 

> REF
> DW

Since there is no oppos ing cabinet, counter, appliance, or wall in this location, the refrigerator may encroach on the 3'-4" minimum dimension by 4"; however, the 3'-0" mini mum accessible route must still be maintained. 

indicates overhead cabinets 

3'-4" minimum clear space between counter and face of appliance(s) 

> 10'-2"

7'-7" 

> 7'-0"
> REF

refrigerator provided; the location of the wall to the left of the refrig erator does not permit the door to swing out of the way for a close DW parallel approach, centered on sink, permits a “forward” approach to dishwasher 

forward approach to 

parallel approach 

baskets when pulled out of the dishwasher 

parallel approach to dishwasher counter surface, and “forward” approach to oven racks when pulled out of the oven 

clear floor space for parallel approach to range cooking surface 

7.23 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

Narrow U-Shaped Kitchen (Without Dishwasher) 

indicates overhead cabinets 

3'-4" min. 

> REF

sink or cooktop in this location must have remov able cabinet to provide knee space below 

although not required by the Guidelines, this optional rotating/sliding cabinet 

storage maximizes use of difficult to reach space for all users (see page 7.20) 

# ;;;

7'-11" 

# ; 7'-10" 

> REF

knee space under sink must be a minimum of 30" wide; removable base cabinets may be range cooking surface A typical oven door projects 20" when fully open and must be fairly close to fully open 

used if permanent knee space is not desired 

clear floor space for 

forward approach may extend a maximum of 19" into knee space 

although not required, it is 

preferred that refrigerator door 

swings back 180 degrees to permit close parallel approach 

clear floor space for parallel 

clear floor space for 

parallel approach to 

to pull out lower rack. Enough floor area approach to refrigerator must be available for a clear floor space in this location to permit a “forward” approach to oven racks when pulled out of the oven. 

7.24 ;;

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

5'-0" 5'-4" min. min. DW D W

laundry equipment is easier for person using a wheelchair to reach into if machines are recessed as little as possible and their front faces are flush with door frame 

indicates overhead cabinets 

Wider U-Shaped Kitchen 

> REF

although not required by the Guidelines, optional rotating/sliding cabinet storage maximizes use of difficult-to-reach space 

pantry with narrow door acceptable, maximum 18" 

depth recommended 

# ;;;;;;

9'-7" 

> 12'-6"
> 5'-8"

clear floor space at range cooking surface REF WDDW 

clear floor space for 

parallel approach cen tered on overall sink and “forward” approach to dishwasher baskets when pulled out of the dish washer 

clear floor space at 

refrigerator permits parallel approach; also permits maneuvering into parallel approach at oven 

although not required, it 

is best if refrigerator 

door swings 180 degrees 

to permit close parallel 

approach 

7.25 ;;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

Parallel Wall Kitchen 

> 3'-4" min.

REF DW W/D indicates cabinets built-in table overhead 

# ;;;;;;;; ;8'-8" 

11'-6" 9'-5" 

clear floor space at dishwasher also racks when pulled  W/D DW REF clear floor space range cooktop built-in table 

while not required, clear floor space for parallel approach to stackable washer/dryer is recommended 

permits a “forward” approach to oven out of the oven because of pantry depth, for parallel approach to 

clear floor space for parallel approach at sink; this same clear floor space allows a 

“forward” approach to dishwasher baskets when they are pulled out of the dishwasher 

clear floor space permits parallel approach to refrigerator (although 

not required by the Guidelines, it is best if refrigerator door swings back 180 degrees to permit close parallel approach) 

door must be 32 inches nominal clear width 

7.26 ;;;; ;;

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

Small L-Shaped Kitchen 

> 3'-4" min. REF

DW 

indicates cabinets overhead 

# ;;;6'-9" 9'-6" 

to range cooktop DW REF parallel approach sufficient space in front of the refrigerator to permit a “forward” approach to 

parallel approach centered on sink permits a “forward” approach to dishwasher baskets when they are pulled out of the dishwasher 

both forward and limited parallel approach to pantry permitted 

because pantry is shallow, door may be less than 32" nominal clear width 

forward approach to refrigerator 

oven racks when they are pulled out of the oven 

7.27 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

9'-6" 14'-4" 

> 3'-0" min. shown at 4'-0"

DW REF indicates cabinets 

overhead 

Larger L-Shaped Kitchen 

# ;;;;;;;; ;; 

DW REF 

(although refrigerator, 

Guidelines, it is best if refrigerator door swings 

parallel approach centered on sink permits a “forward” approach to dishwasher baskets 

when pulled out of 

the dishwasher 

forward approach at dishwasher 

the parallel approach at the refrigerator 

permits a “forward” approach to oven racks when they 

are pulled out of 

the oven 

clear floor space for 

a parallel approach 

at range cooktop 

parallel approach at 

not required by the 

back 180 degrees to 

permit close parallel 

approach) 

7.28 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART A: USABLE KITCHENS 

Broken U-Shaped Kitchen  opposed to the cooktop. This is because a cooktop 

If a corner position with knee space below is being  with knee space below at the standard 36-inch 

considered for either the sink or cooktop, it is  height of a kitchen countertop is dangerous for 

preferred that the sink be located in the corner, as  seated users. 

> 3'-4"

3'-4" REF DW min. min. indicates cabinets 

overhead 

10'-9" 

> 10'-9"

DW REF 

to range cooktop sufficient space is 

although not corner sink with 

12" to 18" minimum base cabinet recommended so dishwasher 

parallel approach at refrigerator parallel approach available for either a parallel or forward approach at oven 

required since pantry is shallow, 32" nominal clear door width preferred 

removable cabinet provides knee space below, allows forward approach 

is positioned a sufficient distance to allow user to pull in under sink, lower dishwasher door, pull out racks, and load machine 

7.29 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Spacious U-Shaped Kitchen 

While this kitchen has an overall “U” shape, it functions like a parallel wall kitchen with two points of entry and exit and allows close parallel approach to the fixture at the base of the “U”. 

3'-4" 3'-4" 3'-4" min. min. min. 

indicates overhead cabinets 3'-4" between all opposing features must be maintained REF  FREZ TC DW 

> 9'-4"

16'-3" 

parallel clear floor spaces at the dishwasher and trash compactor permit either a left- or right-handed “forward” approach to oven racks when they are slid out of the oven parallel clear floor spaces at both refrigerator and freezer wide pantry doors provide excellent access to contents REF  FREZ TC DW 

7.30 ■ P ART B: Usable Bathrooms 

# 7b 

...covered multifamily dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed and constructed in such a manner that all premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain usable ...bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 

Fair Housing Act Regulations, 24 CFR 100.205 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Definitions from the Guidelines 

Bathroom. A bathroom which includes a water closet (toilet), lavatory (sink), and bathtub or shower. It does not include single-fixture facilities or those with only a water closet and lavatory. It does include a compartmented bathroom. A compartmented bathroom is one in which the fixtures are distributed among interconnected rooms. A compartmented bathroom is consid ered a single unit and is subject to the Act's requirements for bathrooms. 

Powder Room. A room with only a water closet (toilet) and lavatory (sink). (Definition found in Requirement 6.) 

7.32 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

I NTRODUCTION 

The Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (the Guidelines) provide specifications for bathroom design that make it possible for people who use mobility aids, and who, heretofore, could not even get into conventional bathrooms in multifamily housing, to now use such facilities. Though not fully accessible, when designed to comply with the Guidelines, these “usable” bathrooms provide a person who uses a wheelchair or scooter or who may use a walker or other mobility aid with a bathroom that has enough maneuvering space to allow the person to enter, close the door, use the fixtures, and exit. In some cases, a resident with a disability will find it necessary to make additional modifications to meet his or her specific needs. 

In covered multifamily housing, bathrooms that meet the definition in the Guidelines for a bathroom must then meet the specifications outlined in the Guidelines for usable bathrooms. The Guidelines distinguish between bathrooms and powder rooms and provide different specifica tions (see definitions on facing page).  

> Usable bathroom

specifications include:  

> 1.

an accessible route to and into the bathroom with a nominal 32-inch clear door opening (Requirements 3 and 4),  

> 2.

switches, outlets, and controls in accessible locations (Requirement 5),  

> 3.

reinforced walls to allow for the later installation of grab bars around the toilet, tub, and shower stall; under certain conditions provisions for reinforcing must be made in shower stalls to permit the installation of a wall-hung bench seat (Requirement 6),  

> 4.

maneuvering space within the bathroom to 

permit a person using a mobility aid to enter the room, close and reopen the door, and exit (Requirement 7), and  

> 5.

maneuvering and clear floor space within the bathroom to permit a person using a mobility aid to approach and use fixtures; fixture dimen sions and placement are specified only under certain conditions (Requirement 7). 

> Powder rooms

, except as noted below, are only subject to the following specifications:  

> 1.

they must be on an accessible route with a nominal 32-inch clear door opening (Require ments 3 and 4) and  

> 2.

they must have switches, outlets, and controls in accessible locations (Requirement 5). 

There is an exception , however, with respect to multistory dwelling units in buildings with one or more elevators. The level served by the building elevator must be the primary entry level for the dwelling unit and there must be either a usable bathroom or a usable powder room on the entry level. If there is both a bathroom and a powder room, then the bathroom would be required to be usable and meet Requirements 3 through 7 of the Guidelines. In cases where only a powder room is provided, then it must meet, in addition to Requirements 3, 4, and 5, the appli cable provisions of Requirements 6 (Reinforced Walls) and 7 (Maneuvering and Clear Floor Spaces) of the Guidelines. The chart on page 7.35 summarizes the requirements for usable bathrooms and usable powder rooms. 

Accessible route, usable doors, controls in accessible locations, and reinforced walls for later installation of grab bars are covered in other chapters of this manual. Maneuvering and clear 

7.33 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

floor space requirements are explained in the first part of this chapter, followed by a presentation of a variety of bathroom floor plans that comply with the requirements of the Guidelines. 

T WO B ATHROOM S PECIFICATIONS 

To satisfy the maneuvering and clear floor space requirements for usable bathrooms, Requirement 7 of the Guidelines gives two sets of specifications to design bathrooms, referred to in this manual as Specification A and Specification B. Although not the only difference between the two specifications, a bathroom designed to meet Specification B has greater access to the bathtub than a bathroom designed to meet Specification A. The two specifi cations and their differences will be described in the following discussions of maneuvering and clear floor space requirements. 

H OW M ANY B ATHROOMS AND F IXTURES M UST C OMPLY WITH THE G UIDELINES ?

In dwelling units containing more than one bathroom, if Specification A is selected as the basis for designing a bathroom, all bathrooms in the dwelling unit also must comply with the A Specifi cations. If Specification B is selected, only one bathroom in the dwelling unit must meet those requirements; all other bathrooms in the dwelling unit must be on an accessible route (Requirement 4), have doors with a nominal 32-inch clear opening (Requirement 3), have switches, outlets, and controls in accessible locations (Requirement 5), and have reinforced walls around toilets, tubs, and shower stalls (Requirement 6). However, maneuvering space as specified in the Guidelines’ Requirement 7 is not required in other bathrooms 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

within the dwelling unit when one bathroom is designed to meet the B Specifications. 

However, any powder room provided in a dwelling unit, regardless of which set of specifica tions the bathroom(s) meets, is still subject to Requirements 3 (Usable Doors), 4 (Accessible Route), and 5 (Controls in Accessible Locations). The exception that requires certain powder rooms also to meet Requirements 6 (Reinforcing) and 7 (Maneuvering and Clear Floor Space) is discussed on page 7.33. 

In bathrooms where several of each type of fixture are provided, e.g., a separate shower and tub or two lavatories, all fixtures must be usable in Specification A bathrooms while only one of each type of fixture must be usable by a person with a disability in a Specification B bathroom. 

W HICH B ATHROOM S HOULD M EET THE R EQUIREMENTS OF THE G UIDELINES ?

When a builder or developer is deciding whether to use the A or B Specifications when designing bath rooms, it is important to consider the number of bathrooms in the dwelling unit. If there is only one bathroom, the builder may follow the Specifications for either A or B. However, while not required by the Guidelines, it is recommended that Specification B, which provides the higher level of accessibility, be used. 

In multiple bathroom dwelling units the issue is somewhat more complex. If the B Specification is selected for use in a two-bathroom dwelling, which bathroom should comply? The master or the hall bathroom? If the hall bathroom is selected to be the usable bathroom and the family member who has a disability would normally occupy the master bedroom, then he or she would have to go down the hall to that bathroom. If, on the other hand, the master bath is 

7.34 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

the usable bathroom and the family member with a disability is one of the children, then it will be necessary for the child to continually enter the master bedroom suite. 

Where there are two or more bathrooms, the ideal situation would be to have at least one bathroom 

meet Specification B, and the other bathrooms meet Specification A. However, it is acceptable under the Guidelines to have only one bathroom meet Specifica tion B, and the other bathrooms meet Requirements 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the Guidelines, but not Requirement 7. This discussion is advisory only. 

Bathroom Requirements for Covered Dwelling Units 

> All bathrooms as defined in the
> Guidelines must:

1.  be on an accessible route (Requirement 4), 

2.  have 32-inch nominal clear width doorways (Requirement 3), 

3.  have switches, outlets, and controls in accessible locations (Requirement 5), 

4.  have reinforcing around toilets, tubs, and showers (Requirement 6), and 

5.  meet Requirement 7, Specification A or B: 

> Specification A

If Specification A is used it applies to all bathrooms, and all fixtures in those bathrooms must be usable. 

> Specification B

If Specification B is used, it applies to one bathroom, and only one of each type of fixture must be usable; additional bathrooms in the 

unit are exempt only from maneuvering and 

clear floor space requirements at fixtures. 

Powder Room Requirements for Covered Dwelling Units 

> Powder rooms must:

1.  be on an accessible route (Requirement 4), 

2.  have 32-inch nominal clear width door-ways (Requirement 3), and 

3.  have switches, outlets, and controls in accessible locations (Requirement 5). 

> Exception

When the powder room is the only toilet facility on the entry level of a multi-story unit in a building with one or more elevators, it must, in addition to Requirements 3, 4, and 5, 

> meet the reinforcing specifications of Requirement 6 and the maneuvering and clear floor specifications of Require ment 7.

7.35 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

reinforced wall areas for additional inaccessible  future installation of grab bars receptacle permitted  around toilet and bathtub 

receptacle required in an accessible location 

lever handles 

> 32" nominal width

30" X 48" clear floor acceptable since parallel basin is possible 

fixed base cabinet approach centered on 

not required, but recommended 

space for parallel 

approach  Example “A” Bathroom 

9'- 4" X 5'- 2" 

(See plan page 7.66) 

clear floor space at each fixture required 

30" X 48" min. clear floor space outside swing of door required; in this plan the clear floor space doubles as the space for access to bathtub. Toilet beside and close to bathtub allowed in “A” bathroom only. Provides less access to bathtub and controls. 

Notes in italic type are recommendations only and are not required by the Guidelines. 

7.36 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

> 32" nominal width

clear floor space at bath to the bathtub and its clear floor space at each 30" X 48" min. clear 30" X 48" clear floor acceptable since parallel basin is possible an accessible location lspecifically designated tub allows greater access controls, see page 7.55 fixture required floor space outside swing of door required fixed base cabinet approach centered on receptacle required in 

ever handles not required, but recommended 

reinforced wall areas for future installation of grab bars around toilet and bathtub additional inaccessible receptacle permitted 

space for parallel 

approach  Example “B” Bathroom Greater Access to Bathtub  Notes in italic type are 

6'-10" X 7'- 9" (Similar to Plan on Page 7.67) 

recommendations only and are not required by the Guidelines. 

7.37 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

an accessible location additional inaccessible 32" nominal width (Requirement 3) 48" X 66" clear floor receptacle required in receptacle permitted for future installa- accessible route to and into powder room (Requirement 4) 

lever faucet handles, although not required by the Guidelines, are recommended (Requirement 5) 

reinforced areas 

tion of grab bars (Requirement 6) 

removable base cabinet required since close parallel approach centered on basin not possible (Requirement 7) 

30" X 48" clear floor space at lavatory outside swing of door (Requirement 7) 

space at toilet  Notes in italic type are 

(Requirement 7)  recommendations only 

Usable Powder Room  and are not required by 

5'-6" X 5'-8"  the Guidelines. 

(See Plan Page 7.81) 

Powder Room in Single-Story  Powder Room Must Meet Requirements 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 

Dwelling Unit Must Meet Only  When It Is the Only Toilet Facility on the Entry Level of a 

Requirements 3, 4, and 5  Multistory Unit in a Building with One or More Elevators 

7.38 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

M ANEUVERING S PACE IN B ATHROOMS 

The Guidelines offer two different wordings for the maneuvering space requirements for bathrooms complying with Specification A and Specification 

B.  When applied, the requirements yield almost identical results. Neither Specification requires that the space for a five-foot circular turn or a T-turn (see page 19) be available so a user in a wheelchair would have the space necessary to turn around in the bathroom. However, there are very specific clear floor space requirements that have been adapted from the ANSI A117.1 - 1986 Standard to make it possible for many people with mobility disabilities to be able to use bathrooms designed to meet the requirements of the Guidelines. 

When the maneuvering space requirements of both Specification A and B are analyzed care fully, the primary difference is that a clear floor space must be provided adjacent to the foot of the tub in Specification B bathrooms to increase access to the bathtub and the bathtub controls. To assist the reader in understanding the other differences in the two specifications, this manual will describe in detail bathroom elements and features as required by the Guidelines. 

B OTH S PECIFICATION A AND S PECIFICATION B B ATHROOMS R EQUIRE THE F OLLOWING :  

> 1. A 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space outside the swing of the door as it is closed.

In bath rooms where the door swings out of the room all the clear floor spaces at fixtures still must be provided. In addition, the user must be able to reopen the door to exit.   

> 2. Usable bathroom fixtures.

Making bathroom fixtures usable in both Specification A and B 

bathrooms involves providing certain clear floor space dimensions at each fixture and meeting certain requirements for the shower if the shower is the only bathing facility in the covered dwelling unit. In addition, Specification B sets additional requirements for bathroom fixtures such as provid ing clear floor space at the bathtub in a manner that allows greater access to the bathtub and meeting certain specifications on the installation of vanities and lavatories. 

The maneuvering space necessary for usable bathrooms is thus made up of the combina tion of the designated clear floor spaces at fixtures and the presence of clear floor space outside the swing of the door. Clear floor spaces may overlap each other and the maneuvering space also may include knee or toe space under lavatories or toilet bowls. See the illustration at the top of page 7.40. 

> 48"
> 30"

Minimum Clear Floor Space for Person Using a Wheelchair 

The Guidelines contain no requirements for location or type of controls except in Specification B bath rooms, the controls must be located at the foot of the tub. There generally are no fixture specifications, except size of showers when they are the only bathing fixture in the unit and when knee space must be provided under lavatories. If the bathroom has sufficient space to allow a parallel approach centered on the lavatory, then standard base cabinets may be used below a lavatory. If not, a removable vanity cabinet is required so necessary knee space for a forward approach is available at the lavatory. 

7.39 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7    

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> 30" X 48" clear floor doubles as clear floor space at bathtub 7'- 9" 48" X 56" clear floor space at toilet space for maneuvering outside swing of door
> 6' - 10"
> 5' - 0"
> 30" X 48" clear floor the clear floor space at doors may swing into
> space parallel to and fixtures, provided there
> centered on basin is space to position a wheelchair outside the swing of the door so it can be closed

Maneuvering Space in Bathrooms  3'-0" wide (min.) acces sible route to bathroom 

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT T OILET F IXTURES complete right, left, or front transfers. The tech-The clear floor space at toilets varies in size and is nique used depends on which approach is most larger than the clear floor space for wheelchairs familiar, easiest, and safest to complete. shown at other fixtures. Different amounts of clear The unobstructed clear floor space re-floor space must be maintained around a toilet quired by the Guidelines allows a wheelchair user fixture depending upon the direction of approach, to approach the toilet and transfer onto the fixture either front or side, to allow ease of use by persons using a variety of independent and assisted transfer using wheelchairs. techniques. The transfer techniques most com-

Many people who use wheelchairs are monly used are the forward, perpendicular, diago unable to stand while transferring from a wheel- nal, reverse diagonal, and parallel. Whenever chair to the toilet. Some people can transfer to and possible, it is best to position the toilet to allow from the toilet from only one side. Others can forward, perpendicular, and diagonal approaches. 

7.40 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

side and pulls chair close user swings footrest to to toilet to transfer 

Forward Approach (Front Transfer) 

armrest removed from 

wheelchair so user 

Perpendicular Approach 

can make a sliding side transfer more easily 

(Side Transfer) 

;

Diagonal Approach 

armrest vanity cabinet could prevent this type of common transfer if cabinet were removed 6" to 8" of rear wheels will fit under lavatory 

(Probably Most Frequently Used Unassisted Transfer Technique) 

7.41 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Reverse Diagonal Approach (Diagonal Transfer) 

sliding board 

Parallel Approach (Side Transfer Using Sliding Board) 

7.42 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

O NE OF T HREE C LEAR either a wall-hung lavatory or a countertop lava-

F LOOR S PACES R EQUIRED IN tory. Depending upon the placement of the other 

B OTH A AND B B ATHROOMS bathroom fixtures and the clearances in that room, When planning both Specification A and B bath- any vanity cabinet may be fixed or may be required rooms, one of the following three clear floor spaces to be removable. must be provided at toilets to allow people using The Guidelines allow a countertop lava-wheelchairs and walkers to maneuver, approach the tory, with either a removable or fixed base cabinet, seat, and make a safe transfer onto the toilet. The to be a maximum depth of 24 inches. A wing or clear floor space dimensions are to be applied or privacy wall also may overlap the clear floor space; superimposed over a plan during the design process however, it, too, is restricted to a length of 24 to determine if space requirements at toilets are inches and must be at least 33 inches from the being met. opposite wall. In a compartmented bathroom, the 

In the plans shown below to illustrate the 33-inch dimension would have to be increased. See clear floor space options at toilets, the arrows the example on page 7.71. pointing in toward the clear floor space are indicat- In terms of accessibility or usability of the ing the direction of approach to the toilet by a toilet, from left to right, diagram number one person using a wheelchair. In plans one and two, offers a middle level of usability, number two offers the incomplete box at the right of the toilet may be the lowest level, and number three, the highest. 

> wall-hung lavatory or
> 66" min.
> 33" min. 15" 18"

1

> 48" X 66"
> cabinet 48" min. fixed or

7.43  

> 18" 33" min. 18" 15"
> 56" min. 60" min. 56" min.

3

> 60" X 56"

2

> 48" X 56"
> wall-hung vanity with cabinet vanity with 48" min. lavatory or fixed or removable removable

Clear Floor Space at Toilets (One of the Three Must be Provided in “A” and “B” Bathrooms) PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

lavatory, any other a shower installed 

33" min.  adjacent to the toilet 

is not acceptable under the Guidelines 18" 15" 36" shower 

Not Acceptable 

33" min. 18" 15" 24" max. fixture, or wing wall must not project into room any more than 24" 

Acceptable 

Some Features May Overlap Clear Floor Space at Toilet 

48-I NCH X 66-I NCH C LEAR F LOOR S PACE 

To provide space for a forward approach when a lavatory is adjacent to the toilet, the clear floor space must be a minimum of 66 inches long. The door is located opposite the toilet to provide the maneuvering space necessary to execute a forward approach to the toilet (see bottom right illustration). 

The user may slide the wheelchair footrests under the toilet bowl or will swing them to either 

side of the toilet to pull in closer to the bowl to execute a front transfer. The space for a perpen dicular approach is actually wider than in clear floor space number two. An added benefit of the 48-inch x 66-inch clear floor space is that a limited version of the commonly used diagonal approach to the toilet also is possible. 

> 66" min.

size and position of base cabinet, if installed 33" min. 

18" 15" 48" min. perpendicular approach forward approach 

lavatory with knee space below 

allow full forward approach 

1

48" X 66" Clear Floor Space (with Overlapping Lavatory) 

door located here to diagonal approach improved if knee space is available below lavatory for forward approach 

many users can execute a forward, a perpendicular, and a limited diagonal approach in a 48" X 66" clear floor space 

position 

7.44 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

48-I NCH X 56-I NCH C LEAR F LOOR S PACE 

The 48-inch x 56-inch clear floor space enclosed on three sides is the minimum space in which a person using a wheelchair will be able to get close enough to make a side or perpendicular approach to the toilet. The 48-inch dimension is consistent with the length of the minimum clear floor space for wheelchairs. A person wishing to make a right transfer will approach the toilet head on as shown in the lower right illustration, or depending upon preference, the user may wish to back into the clear floor space to execute a left transfer. 

The 56-inch dimension may allow some users to angle their wheelchair slightly to execute a 

safer transfer onto the toilet. This angled position is improved if the lavatory is open below. The Guide lines do not require that this additional maneuver ing space be provided for access to toilets, but it can be accomplished with the installation of a lavatory with a removable base cabinet. As much as six to nine inches of the large wheels on a manual wheelchair (somewhat less for power wheelchairs) can be positioned under the lavatory. Removable base cabinets are required in other situations and will be discussed in the next section on “Clear Floor Space at Lavatories.” See page 7.47.    

> the primary approach
> that can be executed in
> a 48" X 56" clear floor lavatory with space is perpendicular knee space below
> 56" min. 33" min. 18" 15" 48" min.
> size and position of base cabinet, if installed position for side transfer
> perpendicular approach

2

48" X 56" Clear Floor Space (with Overlapping Lavatory) 

7.45 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

60-I NCH X 56-I NCH C LEAR F LOOR S PACE 

This clear floor space, minus the lavatory, is the same length as at toilet clear floor space number two, but its width is increased by 12 inches. Its shape and size permit a large variety of transfer positions to be assumed by someone using a wheelchair or scooter, including parallel, perpen dicular, and diagonal approaches. However, a forward approach as shown at clear floor space number one is not possible unless the depth of this space is increased to 66 inches. The 60-inch x 56 inch clear floor space has added value in that it has sufficient space so someone could assist a person using a wheelchair in making a transfer. 

> position for a parallel
> 56" min. perpendicular 60" min. parallel 60" X 56" clear floor space

3

60" X 56" Clear Floor Space  

> 18" approach approach approach many users can execute a parallel, a perpendicular, and a diagonal approach in a

(with No Overlapping Elements) 

7.46 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT L AVATORIES 

A 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space is required at the lavatory so a person who uses a wheelchair or scooter can get close enough to the basin and controls to use the fixture. When knee space is not provided for a forward approach, this 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space must be parallel to the cabinet or counter front and centered on the basin. 

Either a countertop lavatory with a vanity cabinet or a wall-hung lavatory may be installed in Specification A and B bathrooms. There are no specifications for control location or type nor for drain location. The lavatory type and width, plus the available maneuvering space in the room, determines whether or not a vanity cabinet must be removable. 

To economize on floor space the basin may be offset so the length of the countertop may be less than 48 inches. In 36-inch wide countertops, the basin may be offset provided it remains centered on the required 48-inch long clear floor space. 

If a lavatory must be installed where space does not permit a close parallel approach with the 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space centered on the basin, the centerline of the basin must be at least 15 inches from an adjoining wall or fixture. It must have knee space at least 30 inches wide to allow a user to execute a forward approach into clear floor space beneath the fixture. 

Knee space must be provided below narrow lavatories lacking this parallel and centered approach, because, if not, the user must make an awkward and often impossible, painful twisting motion over the side of the wheelchair to reach the faucet handle that is positioned somewhat behind one shoulder. In addition, it is difficult from this position to wash both hands, lean over the basin to clean teeth, etc. Information on removable base cabinets and knee space is given on page 7.49. 

> 48"

Removable Base Cabinet 

> centerline of basin and clear floor space aligned
> 30" X 48" clear floor space flush with vanity front

Not Required Because Clear Floor Space Centered on Basin (Applicable in A and B Bathrooms) 

> 24" 36"

Use of Offset Basin 

> 48"
> 30" X 48" clear floor space permits a parallel approach centered on the basin

to Reduce Lavatory Length (Applicable in A and B Bathrooms) 

> 15" min.
> 30"
> 30" wide (min.) lavatory with removable vanity cabinet is necessary
> 30" X 48" clear floor space for a parallel approach can not be centered on basin; therefore, knee space and clear floor space for for ward approach is required

## X Not Acceptable for Parallel Approach 

Removable Base Cabinet Must Be Provided Because Clear Floor Space Can Not Be Centered (Required in A and B Bathrooms) 

7.47 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> Double Basin and Pedestal Lavatories

It is also possible to install double basin lavatories and pedestal lavatories so they meet the require ments of the Guidelines. Countertops for double basin lavatories vary in length and may be as short as 60 inches. 

Where two basins are planned for installa tion in a 60-inch long countertop, and especially where obstructions such as a wall and bathtub (as shown in the illustration at right) enclose the available maneuvering space, a forward approach with a removable vanity cabinet should be used. However, in this illustration the countertop is 72 inches long and the person using a wheelchair can be parallel and centered on the basin. 

Pedestal lavatories are manufactured with a variety of pedestal widths and depths. They can be installed in bathrooms covered by the Guidelines, provided a parallel approach centered on the basin can be made. Giving the appearance of having knee space, unlike a removable base cabinet where the knee space can be constructed to specific design parameters, pedestal lavatories have no removable element. 

> 30" X 48" clear floor space

at Double Lavatory 

> if this wall were not located here and more floor area were available behind the user, the basin may not be required to be offset or the counter as long
> 72" min.

Offset Basin 

> 24"

space to allow a user to make a head-on or forward approach. If pedestal lavatories are installed with the 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space centered on the basin, a user may execute a variety of approaches. Angled approaches are possible provided adjacent fixtures do not interfere. 

> centerline of basin aligned 24" 24"

Usable Pedestal Lavatory 

> centered on basin with centerline of lavatory

As they are currently manufactured, most pedestal lavatories do not provide adequate knee 

7.48 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

> Removable Vanity Cabinets

Knee spaces are particularly important in bath rooms that are small and have limited maneuvering space. It is especially critical where a close parallel and centered approach cannot be provided at the lavatory basin. When knee space is necessary for a bathroom to be usable, that space must be provided at the time of initial construction. However, it may be concealed by a vanity cabinet that, when removed, will expose knee space. When the cabinet is in place a more common appearance is main tained and storage is provided. As in kitchens, finishes on the floor and walls in the knee space must be installed during initial construction so no additional finish work is required when the vanity cabinet is removed. 

When a removable vanity cabinet is installed, the countertop and lavatory can be supported by wall-mounted brackets that fit inside the cabinet. These brackets are hidden when the base cabinet is in place; once the cabinet is removed, the brackets are exposed. 

Unfortunately, removable vanity cabinets are not yet part of manufacturers off-the-shelf product lines. With growing demand, some of the commercial manufacturers are beginning to pro duce prototypes that should result, in the near future, in mass marketed lavatories with removable base cabinets. 

Standard vanity cabinets may be modified and used as removable cabinets. The cabinet back or back supports may need to be cut down to clear the support system and to provide clearance for water lines, valves, and drain pipes. If the back of the cabinet is removed or significantly modified, the sides may have to be reinforced. 

> back and cross member may need to be removed for plumbing and lavatory clearance
> plywood gussets may be needed for stiffening sides

Standard Base Cabinet Modified to Be Removable 

> vanity cabinet wall-mounted countertop lavatory removable countertop support brackets

Removing Vanity Cabinet to Expose Knee Space 

7.49 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

Any brackets used to support countertop lavatories should not interfere with maneuvering space within the bathroom; this is especially critical in small bathrooms where maneuvering space is at a minimum. The angled bracket shown in this series of illustrations is held away from the floor and is based on the ANSI knee space requirements. Use of a similarly designed bracket is strongly recommended. 

Supports that are the full depth of the counter that go to the floor are discouraged at narrow lavatories but are acceptable for wider lavatories where it is assumed that more floor area will be available for maneuvering. Where supports extend to the floor, at least 30 inches must be provided between them to allow maneuvering space for a forward approach to the lavatory. This may require that some vanity cabinets be wider than 30 inches, so when the cabinet is removed and the concealed supports are exposed, 30 inches is provided between them. 

> Pipe Protection at Knee Space

Plumbing below the lavatory should be covered to prevent burns and abrasions. This can be done by using removable insulation to cover the hot water pipe and the drain, or by adding a fixed, one-piece cover. 

The most economical method of providing protection from hot pipes and sharp surfaces is to wrap them with insulation. Although this solution is effective, it is often difficult to maintain the insulation; it may be removed when repairs are made and either is difficult to rewrap due to loss of adhesion or is not replaced at all. 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> depth of the counter and pipes should be insulated or
> exposed knee space
> recommended supports that are the full come to the floor interfere with maneuvering and are discouraged, especially in small bathrooms covered with removable panel bracket profile

Exposed Knee Space Under Bracket-Supported Countertop Lavatory 

> foam or fiber insulation with protective overwrap on drain, hot water supply, and sharp edges

Lavatory with Removable Insulation Pipe Protection 

7.50 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

A reasonably priced aesthetic and func tional improvement is possible with the installation of a commercially available or custom-made pipe cover. These pipe covers should be designed and 

> ankles maneuvering space for feet and removable protection and appearance panel
> brackets held
> away from floor

installed so they are easy to remove and replace provide needed 

when the drain trap or valves need repair. 

For countertop lavatories, an appearance and protection panel that covers the water pipes and drain can be mounted directly to the support brackets. Such a panel can be removed easily to service pipes, and unlike wrapped insulation, retains a more aesthetically pleasing appearance. It is recommended that the insulation or protection be installed at the time of construction. The shape of the knee space influences the design of any pipe protection method and is considered in the 

next section.  Countertop Lavatory with Wall Brackets and Appearance and Protection Panel 

> easy to remove and replace commercial cover cover mounted directly on support brackets

Lavatory with Removable Cover for Preferred Appearance and Pipe Protection Protection Panel 

7.51 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7  

> 40" max. 27" min. 29" min. 9" min. 19" max. 8" min. 6" max. 17" min. 48"
> (ANSI 1992 34" max.) not in ANSI 1986
> Knee Space Design

Knee space dimensions are specifically delineated in the Guidelines for lavatories in Specification B bathrooms. However, in Specification A bath rooms, “if parallel approach is not possible within the space, any cabinets provided would have to be removable to afford the necessary knee clearance for forward approach.” [Guidelines Requirement 7 (2) (a) Note] 

In Specification A bathrooms, knee space must be at least 17 inches deep, but only 19 of the 48 inches of clear floor space required for the perpendicular approach may extend under the lavatory. While the Guidelines do not provide further specifications for knee space, it is recom mended that ANSI A117.1 be followed. The specific requirements given in the Guidelines for knee space in Specification B Bathrooms include: centerline of the fixture at least 15 inches from an adjoining wall or fixture, top of fixture rim a 

maximum of 34 inches above the floor, apron 

at least 27 inches above the floor, and 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

In both ANSI and the Specification B bathroom requirements, only 19 inches of the 30 inch x 48-inch clear floor space may extend under a lavatory. Seventeen inches is the minimum depth allowed for either a wall-hung or a countertop lavatory. This ensures that the basin extends sufficiently so a wheelchair user’s feet do not strike the wall on which the fixture is mounted before his or her torso is close enough to the front of the lavatory to be able to reach the controls and use the basin. 

The dimensions given in the Guidelines for Specification B bathrooms are consistent with those found in the ANSI Standard. They do not completely define the shape of the knee space, and it is recommended that builders/developers follow the ANSI Standard when knee space must be provided in either Specification A or Specification B bathrooms.  bracket-supported 

> countertop
> lavatory

kneespace a least 17 inches deep.  

> 48" 17" min. 27" min. 34" max.
> 19" max. clear knee space support brackets

ANSI 1986 Requirements at Knee Space  Knee Space at Lavatories that Meets the  

> (Guidance for Knee Space in A Bathrooms)

Requirements for B Bathrooms 

7.52 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT B ATHTUBS /S HOWERS 

The following discussion of bathtubs focuses on bathing fixtures that are a combination of bathtub and shower. It does not cover showers that are separate bathing fixtures; these will be addressed starting on page 7.56. 

The Guidelines require that one of three different clear floor spaces be provided at bathtubs so people who use wheelchairs or scooters can get close enough to execute transfers into and out of bathtubs. The diagrams below, taken from the Guidelines, show the clear floor space requirements for bathtubs; numbers one and two apply to Specification A bathrooms and number three to Specification B bathrooms. 

In all three clear floor spaces, the shaded areas must remain clear, except that in clear floor space diagram number 2, a lavatory that meets all applicable clear floor space requirements for lavatories may be located next to the toilet. In Specification A bathrooms, either a lavatory or a toilet may encroach upon the clear floor space next to the bathtub. 

In clear floor space diagram number one, the arrow indicating direction of approach is relevant only if the lavatory is wall-hung and has knee space below. The user pulls forward into the knee space to transfer and/or operate controls, see illustration on the top of the next page. 

> 30" min. knee space
> 48" min.
> 18" min. 60" min. 60" min. 30" min. 48" head head head

3

> Specification “B” 30" X 48"

1 

> Specification “A”
> clear floor space could be located beside toilet direction of approach direction of approach lavatory with below foot foot foot
> Bathrooms
> lavatory with proper
> Bathrooms 30" X 60"

2

> Specification “A” Bathrooms 48" X 60"

Clear Floor Space at Bathtubs/Showers Shaded Areas Must Remain Unobstructed (Taken from Guideline Figures 7(b) and 8) 

7.53 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

19" max. 30" X 48" clear floor 21" to bathtub 

space for a forward approach must not extend more than 19" beneath lavatory parallel approach despite the availability of knee space below the lavatory, some users may find it difficult to stretch and reach controls wall-hung or countertop lavatory (24" deep max.) with knee space below 

Parallel Approach to Bathtub at Lavatory with Knee Space Permitted in Specification A Bathrooms 

If a countertop lavatory with a vanity cabinet is located adjacent to the bathtub, a person using a wheelchair must be able to execute a close parallel approach centered on the basin. If the lavatory does not afford a full parallel approach to the basin, knee space and clear floor space for a forward approach are required, and any cabinets would have to be removable. 

When the lavatory with vanity is adjacent to a bathtub, reach to the controls is possible only from a perpendicular approach which may be difficult for some wheelchair users. To improve access to controls, a resident who uses a wheelchair could have a new vanity with knee space installed or have controls repositioned closer to the tub rim. 

typical 21" deep lavatory with vanity cabinet below in this location must permit clear floor space to be centered on lavatory basin 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

When a lavatory with vanity cabinet is adjacent to tub, a person using in a wheelchair must make a perpen dicular approach to the tub rim to be sufficiently close to operate the controls. The user will have to 

60" min. perpendicular approach remove footrests, place feet in tub, and execute a stretch which may be difficult for some people. 

Perpendicular Approach 

to Bathtub at Vanity Cabinet Permitted in Specification A Bathrooms Only 

7.54 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

> Toilets typically protrude into the room farther than vanity cabinets, making it necessary for a person using

In Specification A bathrooms , the Guidelines  a wheelchair to perform, what may be 

also allow a toilet to occupy the space next to the for some people, a difficult stretch to 

bathtub. The approach by a person using a wheel- operate tub controls. 

chair is perpendicular to the bathtub. This arrange ment of fixtures also makes it difficult to reach the controls, but reach can be improved if users can remove their footrests and position their feet in the tub to get closer to the tub rim. 

Perpendicular Approach 

> 48" min. 18" min. perpendicular 60" min.
> approach

user to be immersed in water for a soaking bath.  to Bathtub at Toilet 

In Specification B bathrooms , a 30-inch Permitted in Specification A 

x 48-inch clear floor space is required adjacent to  Bathrooms Only 

the bathtub to provide greater access for transfer-

> parallel
> 15" min. 30" min.
> 30" X 48" clear floor approach The only permissible overlapping element is a 17" to 19" wall-hung lavatory with knee space below.

Parallel Approach at Bathtub 

> 19" max.

A second option for some users is to transfer onto the toilet to reach the controls. The user then must transfer back into his or her wheel chair and maneuver to get sufficiently close to the bathtub rim to make a transfer down into the bathtub. Other users may add a bathtub seat that allows them to remain at the height of the tub rim while bathing. Transfers back into a wheelchair may be easier from a tub seat rather than from the floor of the bathtub, but this option does not allow the 

ring into and out of the bathtub. The controls must be on the wall at the foot of the bathtub, as shown in the Guidelines’ Requirement 7, Figure 8. The edge of the clear floor space should be flush with the control wall surface. 

Neither a vanity cabinet nor a toilet may encroach on this clear floor space. However, a wall-hung lavatory with a depth of 17 to 19 inches and with knee space below is the only fixture that may overlap the clear floor space at bathtubs in Specifi cation B bathrooms. A lavatory that is deeper than 19 inches only may be installed if it is recessed into the wall to allow the edge of the 30-inch x 48-inch 

clear floor space to begin flush with the control  space flush with control  with Small Wall-Hung Lavatory 

wall surface at the foot of the bathtub. wall surface  Applies to Specification B 

> Bathrooms Only

7.55 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

C LEAR F LOOR S PACE AT S HOWERS 

Shower stalls in covered dwelling units may be of  30" X 48" clear floor 

any size or configuration and are not limited to the  space flush and parallel 

> control

Guideline Requirements for Clear  

> wall 30" min. 36" min. 36" 48" with control wall

Floor Space at Showers 

36-inch x 36-inch stall shown in the diagram on the right, taken from the Guidelines, that illustrates clear floor space requirements for showers. An ex ception regarding minimum stall size is made when a shower stall is the only bathing fixture in the covered dwelling unit; this is discussed on page 7.58. 

A 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space must be provided at shower stalls, parallel to the fixture and flush with the control wall. In 36-inch x 36-inch 

showers, the clear floor space must be positioned exactly as shown in the upper right diagram, with 12 inches offset behind the wall opposite the control wall. The Guidelines require this clear floor space beside the shower fixture primarily to ensure that adequate maneuvering space is available outside the stall for a person using a mobility aid to get suffi ciently close to enter and exit the stall safely. The 36-inch x 48-inch shower in the center is generally not intended for use with a wall hung bench seat because a user seated on the bench could not reach the controls. However, because some users may elect to add their own seat, an additional 12 inches of clear floor space is, as well as reinforcing for such a seat, recommended (see page 6.13). 

In Specification A bathrooms, where all fixtures must meet the Guidelines, if the room is equipped with both a bathtub and a separate shower, both fixtures must be provided with the required clear floor space. In Specification B bath rooms, only one bathing fixture must be provided with the required clear floor space. All shower stalls must have reinforced walls for later installation of grab bars (see Chapter 6). The Guidelines contain no specifications that limit the curb height, nor do they 

> 48" 32" 36" 60" 30" X 48" clear floor space flush with the 30" X 48" clear floor space flush with the
> 32" X 60" 36" X 48"
> control wall control wall
> shower shower

address control type or location. Other Shower Sizes Meet the Requirements of the Guidelines 

7.56 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS   

> vanity so user can pull
> 1/2" max. at 1:2
> 48" 48" size and position of vanity cabinet, if installed pedestal or countertop lavatory with removable up close to shower to reach controls
> preferred location for controls – reachable from outside the stall as well as from the optional bench threshold beveled clear floor space goes under the lavatory 12"
> optional free standing bench 32" nominal clear width for stall door

Glass Shower Stall with These Features May Work Well for Many People Who Use Wheelchairs 

Fixtures that May Overlap Clear Floor Space at Showers 

In both Specification A and B bathrooms, no other fixture may overlap the clear floor space at showers when the shower is only 36 inches long. However, if the shower is 42 inches long and a lavatory is mounted on the control wall beside the shower, it may overlap the clear floor space by six inches. The portion of the lavatory that overlaps the clear floor space must have knee space below or a removable vanity cabinet. Thirty-six inches of the stall entrance must always remain clear for maneuvering and transfers. These limita tions ensure that if a wall-mounted transfer seat or a free-standing shower bench or stool is placed in the shower, sufficient space to make a transfer is available. Lavatory Must Not Encroach on Clear Floor Space 

> some users will need to
> lean forward to transfer

at 36-Inch X 36-Inch Shower 

7.57 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7   

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL
> Lavatory may be wall-hung
> or countertop with vanity
> below. If a vanity cabinet is
> present then cabinets must 36" X 42" shower is be removable.
> 30" min. 36" min. 48" min.
> 36" min.
> optional seat
> although users could place a bench in the stall to sit while bathing clear floor space offset so user can position wheelchair floor space of vanity or wall-hung line with 6" max. 42" 36"
> optional portable shower bench
> not a transfer shower, to make a safe transfer 6" max. may overlap clear front face lavatory in control wall 36" min. must remain clear

Lavatory at 36-Inch X 36-Inch Shower Applicable in Specification A and B Bathrooms Lavatory at 36-Inch X 42-Inch Shower Applicable in Specification A and B Bathrooms 

Shower as Only Bathing Fixture 

In both Specification A and B bathrooms, when a stall shower is the only bathing fixture in the covered dwelling unit it must be at least 36 inches x 36 inches in size. This also applies to any planned bathrooms on the primary entry level of covered multistory dwelling units in buildings with one or more elevators. Shower stalls of larger sizes and configurations are permitted, even when the shower stall is the only bathing fixture in the covered unit. 

While reinforced walls for later installation of grab bars are required in all bathrooms, Specifi cation A bathrooms do not require reinforcing to 

support a wall-mounted shower seat in the shower stall. However, it is strongly recommended that appropriate reinforcing for shower seats be installed in Specification A bathrooms. See Chapter 6: “Reinforced Walls for Grab Bars.” 

In Specification B bathrooms, however, in addition to the reinforcing required for grab bars, the shower stall must have reinforcing to allow for later installation of an optional wall-mounted seat in a shower stall measuring a nominal 36 inches square. By adding this requirement the Guidelines are setting the framework for a shower that could evolve into the ANSI accessible 36-inch x 36-inch transfer shower. 

7.58 USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

The 36-inch x 36-inch transfer shower with a low curb and L-shaped seat is a versatile and successful bathing fixture for people who use wheelchairs or have difficulty walking. If a seat is installed that can be folded up against the wall, an ambulatory user also can stand in the shower. The illustration below on the right shows the primary features found in a transfer shower. The 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space beside the shower provides access to the control wall, and because it extends beyond the back of the stall, it allows a person using a wheel-

> In Specification B bathrooms, when shower is only bathing fixture and is a nominal 36" X 36", it must have reinforcing for

chair to position his or her chair in line with the wall-hung seat to make a safe sliding transfer. 

Reinforcing for a shower seat is not re quired in stalls of larger sizes, e.g., 30 inches x 60 inches because the stall is so long that the user is not able to reach the controls from a seat at the opposite end of the stall. However, it is recom mended that reinforcing be installed in stalls of different configurations and that thought be given to placing controls within reach of this potential seat as well as from outside the stall.   

> 36" min. 36" min.
> 1/2" max. curb L-shaped seat
> grab bars and a wall-mounted
> optional sloping floor
> clear floor
> small lip floor area beveled at 1:2 recommended folding.
> shower seat.
> shower seat or raised

When Shower Stall  space  36-Inch X 36-Inch Shower 

Is the Only Bathing Fixture It Must Be  with Folding Seat 

at Least 36 Inches X 36 Inches 

7.59 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

R ECOMMENDATIONS FOR I NCREASED A CCESSIBILITY 

While the builder or developer of multifamily housing is not required to address all the design concerns faced by people with disabilities who may live in a develop ment, there are certain aspects of bathroom design which should be considered when selecting fixtures. 

Toilet Seat Height 

There is no single seat height which would suit all users. Low toilet seats are difficult for people who have trouble getting up on their feet and for people who use wheelchairs who may be able to transfer onto the seat but not get back into their chairs without assistance. High seats may be difficult for some wheelchair users to get onto and for shorter people because their feet do not touch the floor, making it difficult to maintain balance. 

ANSI 4.32.4.2 specifies that toilet seats in dwelling units “shall be at least 15 inches and no more than 19 inches measured to the top of the toilet seat.” Standard toilets with 15-inch high seats are widely available in the marketplace and offer the best flexibility for adaptation for a wider range of people. For a user who may require that the seat be higher, it is relatively simple to install a seat spacer or thick seat. By contrast, to lower a toilet usually requires replacing the entire toilet fixture. It is recommended that standard low 15-inch toilets be installed in all dwelling units covered by the Guidelines. 

Handles, Faucets, and Controls 

Many people have difficulty using faucets and controls that require grasping and twisting of symmetrical shapes such as round, cylindrical, or square handles. It is preferable to install lever or blade handles which 

> 15" 18" seat spacer standard seat

Elevated Seats at Conventional Toilets 

> single lever handle

Ideal Faucet Control 

7.60 min. clear floor space outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars ;;;;;;; 

> ;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;

Legend: min. clear floor space at each fixture 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

can be used without gripping or twisting. If a faucet can be operated with a closed fist and requires less than five pounds of force to operate, then it is a usable control for most people with disabilities. 

Control location also can greatly improve ease and safe use of the fixture. When bathtub controls are offset toward the outside of the bathing fixture, the need to bend and stretch to reach the controls from outside the fixture is greatly reduced - a help for any user with limited flexibility. 

Auxiliary Handles at Doors 

Suggestions to increase the accessibility and usability of bathrooms are made in the following section, “Ex ample Bathroom Floor Plans that Comply with the Guidelines.” One enhancement frequently highlighted is the installation of auxiliary handles on bathroom doors. Not required by the Guidelines, this additional hardware works well for many people with mobility impairments who have difficulty closing doors. With the installation of a second handle (such as a 4-inch loop handle similar to those used on drawers and 

kitchen cabinets) on the pull side of the door, near the hinge edge, the user is provided with an additional, and often easier, method of closing a door. 

> blade handles

Another Usable Faucet Control 

Preferred Offset Control Location 

> 6" max. to close door

on Pull Side of Door 

> auxiliary handle makes it easier

Auxiliary Handle 

7.61 min. clear floor space outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;
> Legend: min. clear floor space at each fixture
> PART TWO: CHAPTER 7
> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

E XAMPLES OF B ATHROOM F LOOR P LANS THAT C OMPLY WITH THE G UIDELINES 

The plans presented on the following pages are examples of “usable” bathrooms and powder rooms that comply with either Specification A or Specifi cation B or both. These plans are only a sampling of possible layouts that would conform to the specifications and are not intended to limit design ers’ options; certainly other layouts are feasible. The plans are neither required nor even suggested as ideal examples. They are included to illustrate typical applications or interpretations of specific requirements of the Guidelines under various circumstances. 

The plans may be used as resource material and planning guides when developing new multi family housing designs. Conventional industry standard fixture sizes have been used consistently when developing these plans. 

The toilets used measure 29 inches from the back wall to the front edge of the bowl. As toilets vary in size, with some being as long as 30 inches, it is important to allow sufficient space for doors to clear the toilet bowl. Wall-hung lavatories are 19 inches deep and countertop lavatories with base cabinets below are 21 inches deep unless noted otherwise on the plans. Doors 

are 34 inches wide to provide the required nominal 32-inch clear opening. Rooms may need to be enlarged if a 36-inch door is installed. Bathtubs in the small bathrooms are 60 inches long and, along with showers, vary as the rooms become less conventional. 

It is important to allow sufficient space for any fixtures that may be larger than those shown here. Although designers should rely upon the dimensions indicated and not scale off the drawings, all plans in this section are reproduced at 1/4-inch scale. 

Some of the plans are more usable than others by people with disabilities and comments are included to describe where improvements could be made. The plans are divided according to bathing fixture type: bathtub/showers, showers, and multiple bathing fixtures. The plans are pre sented in pairs, with the first showing the overall room shape while the dimensioned plan describes the clear floor spaces at fixtures and indicates minimum wall and/or floor areas to be reinforced. 

Text and notes presented in italic type are comments or recommendations and are not required by the Guidelines. 

7.62 ;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

B ATHROOMS WITH B ATHTUB B ATHING F IXTURE 

“A” Bathroom with Bathtub 

no leg or support should be present on right out side corner so user can pull in under the lavatory 

reinforcing may be required in floor depending on type of grab bars planned for 

countertop lavatory with knee space below to allow forward approach to fixture 

# ; 5'-6" 

# ;; ;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

8'-0" 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

since parallel approach centered on basin not possible, cabinet below lavatory must be removable 

where a removable cabinet is provided below a countertop less than 32'' in width, care must be taken to prevent support method or brackets from encroaching upon required kneespace, see page 7.50 

door must swing out (see note below) 

reinforcing must be located in this area to provide support for a drop-down grab bar or a floor-mounted bar similar to those shown on page 6.6; the bar must swing out of the way so access to the tub and controls is available 

A person using a wheelchair would back into the room to use the bathtub but must be able to close the door and have an unblocked forward 

approach to the bathtub; therefore, to comply with the Guidelines, the door must swing out. 

min. clear floor space 

;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;  min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.63 PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

“A” Bathroom with Bathtub 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

vanity with clear floor space centered on basin to permit parallel approach 

24'' minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

> 5'-0"

9'-8" 

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

door and countertop sized so they do not conflict 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

clear floor space at lavatory doubles as clear floor space at bathtub 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.64 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; 

> ;;;;;;;;

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

“A” Bathroom with Bathtub 

The Guidelines do not require space for a five-foot turn or a T-turn in bathrooms; see page 7.39. In this bathroom, most persons using a wheelchair will not be able to turn around and may have to back into or out of the room. This, combined with 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

reinforcing may be required in floor, depending on type of grab bars planned for 

space centered on basin to permit parallel approach 

the lack of space to the latch side of the door, makes this room difficult to use by many people. Therefore, it is recommended that the 5'-2" dimension be increased and/or that knee space be provided under the lavatory. 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

if room has a 21" deep lavatory countertop and 60" long tub, depending on size of door trim, a narrow gap may result at one end of the tub; the wall could be “furred” out at the control end or a tile ledge could be added 

> 5'-2"

9'-4" 

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;

reinforcing must be located in this area to provide support for a drop-down grab bar vanity with clear floor  or a floor-mounted bar similar to those shown on page 6.6; the bar must swing out of the way so access to the tub and controls is available 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.65 ;;;;;;;;;; 

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

“B” Bathroom with Bathtub 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

24'' minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

vanity with clear floor space centered on basin to permit parallel approach 

> ;;;;;;;;; ;
> 6'-10"

7'-9" 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;
> ;
> ;

if tile area is a shelf, reinforcing should be located in the vertical wall to support future grab bar mounted 33" to 36" above the floor 

tile area could be either a seat or a shelf 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

if tile area is a seat at back of bathtub, reinforcing at least 6" to 8" wide must be located here 

no reinforcing required in this wall 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.66 ;; 

> ;;;;;;;;

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

“B” Bathroom with Bathtub 

Only 19 inches of the required 30-inch x 48-inch clear floor space can go under a lavatory. A deeper lavatory would require that the clear floor space be positioned away from the plumbing wall and closer 

> 5'-0"

to the tub, causing it to overlap with the door swing. If a deeper lavatory is desired the room must be lengthened. 

8'-3" 

19" maximum deep wallhung lavatory with knee space  

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.67 ;; 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

“B” Bathroom with Bathtub 

storage 

alternate door location 

clear floor space of door to meet the Guidelines be located on this wall end of knee space flush with bathtub because knee space is not the full depth, 

can be located on a common plumbing wall shelves for maneuvering outside swing because lavatory has no knee space below, bathtub controls must control wall permits access to controls; user must still be able to execute a parallel approach to lavatory if lavatory has knee space below, bathtub controls 

Option 1: Plumbing on Opposite Walls Lavatory With Base Cabinet Below (No Knee Space) 

Option 2: Plumbing on Common Wall Lavatory With Shallow Knee Space 

> 6'-0"

8'-6" 5'-0" 

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

6'-0" 

> ;;;;;;;;

36" wide vanity with offset basin to permit parallel approach centered on basin 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.68 ;;;;;;;; 

;; ;;;;;;;;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

“B” Bathroom with Bathtub 

shallow linen closets may have doors that do not provide a nominal 32" clear opening 

controls located within reach of seated user 

whirlpool tub 

reinforcing for deck-mounted grab bars 

> 5'-0"  2'-8" 8'-0"

5'-0" 2'-11" 8'-3" 

1'-8" 

;;;;;;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

# ;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; ;; 

whirlpool tub 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door (extends into knee space at lavatory) 

24" long max. partition wall 

removable base cabinet at knee space 

24'' min. reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

24" deep max. countertop lavatory with removable vanity cabinet below to allow a forward approach, see page 7.47 for more detailed discussion 

min. clear floor space 

;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;  min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.69 ;;;;;;;; 

> ;;;;;;;;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

Compartmentalized “A” Bathroom with Bathtub 

base cabinet at knee space 

open to bedroom removable clear floor space for maneuvering within tub/toilet area 

if 6" of space were added between bathtub and toilet, bathroom also could be a  24" deep vanity with 

“B” bathroom  clear floor space for 

parallel approach to 

6'-6"  5'-0"  right basin plus knee space below left basin for a forward 

> 5'-6"

approach ;;;;;;;;        

> ;;;;;;;; ;;
> ;;;;;;;; ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;
> ;; ;;
> ;; ;;
> ;; ;;
> ;;

in “A” bathrooms ;;  

> ;;
> ;;

all fixtures, including ;;  

> ;;

both lavatories, must ;;  

> ;;
> ;;

be usable 

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.70 ;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

B ATHROOMS WITH S HOWER B ATHING F IXTURE 

“A” and “B” Bathroom with Shower 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

linen closets may have doors that do not provide a nominal 32" clear width if they do not require the user to pass through the door to reach the contents 

36" x 36" min. shower with clear floor space offset to provide access to optional seat 

optional shower seat 

> 6'-10"
> ;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;; ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;

8'-0" 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;
> ;
> ;

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

vanity with clear floor space centered on basin to permit parallel approach 

24'' min. reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

transferring onto toilet may be difficult for some people, recommend increasing this dimension 6" 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.71 ;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

“A” and “B” Bathroom with Shower  clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

where a removable cabinet is provided 

below a countertop less than 32'' in width, care must be taken to prevent support method or brackets from encroaching upon required knee space, see page 7.50 

36" x 36" min. shower with clear floor space offset to provide access to optional seat 

optional shower seat 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;;; ;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

> 5'-6"

8'-7" 

# ;; ;; ;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

removable base cabinet at knee space 

no leg or support should be present on left outside corner so user can pull in under the lavatory 

30" wide countertop lavatory with knee space below to allow forward approach to fixture 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;  min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.72 ;;;;;;;;;;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;; 

;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

“A” and “B” Bathroom with Shower 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

alternate door location 

36" wide vanity with offset basin to permit parallel approach centered on basin 

# ; 6'-6" 6'-0" 3'-0" 3'-0" 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

# ;;

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;  24'' min. reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

optional shower seat 

36" x 36" min. shower with clear floor space offset to provide access to optional seat 

min. clear floor space 

;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;  min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.73 ;; ;; 

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

“A” and “B” Bathroom with Shower 

24'' min. reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

36" x 36" min. shower with clear floor space offset to provide access to optional seat 

3'-0" 6'-0" 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;; 

> 9'-6" 6'-6"

# ;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

storage shelves 

36" wide vanity with offset basin to permit parallel approach centered on basin 

optional shower seat 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;  min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.74 ;;;;;;;;  ;;;;;;;;;;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

“A” Bathroom with Large Shower 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

storage shelves 

pedestal lavatory with clear floor space centered on basin to permit parallel approach 

24'' minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

# ;; 6'-6" 9'-4" 

;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

# ;

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; ;; 

;;;;;;;;;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

oversized shower with glass door enclosure 

sliding glass doors may have to be removed to provide opening large enough to allow a transfer from outside the shower 

optional additional set of controls and shower head for use from seat 

optional built-in seat 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars ;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;; 

Legend: min. clear floor space at each fixture 

7.75 ;;  ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; 

> ;;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

Single Room Occupancy Unit with Roll-In Shower 

sleeping/dressing area 

clear floor space for maneuvering within 

roll-in shower has  shower/toilet room 

no lip or curb 

door must swing out bathroom floor is waterproofed and sloped so entire room acts as shower/wet area 

24'' minimum 42" preferred 

reinforcing required,  8'-0" 2'-6" 6'-6" 4'-0" 

4'-6" 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;
> ;
> ;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

6' 

vanity with clear floor space to permit parallel approach centered on basin 

optional folding shower seat 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars ;;;;;;; 

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

Legend: min. clear floor space at each fixture 

7.76 ;;;;;;;; 

> ;;

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

B ATHROOMS WITH T WO B ATHING F IXTURES 

“B” Bathroom with Two Bathing Fixtures (Accessible Shower/Inaccessible Bathtub) 

although not required, since the toilet is in an alcove, it is recommended that the alcove width be increased from the Guidelines min. of 33'' to 36'' (shown at 33") 

24" long max. partition wall 

step 

36" x 36" minimum shower with clear floor space offset to provide access to seat 

optional shower seat 

24'' minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred  ;;;;;;;; 

> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> 8'-6"

8'-4" 

> ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

step 

inaccessible raised or sunken whirlpool bathtub 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

because bathtub is inaccessible, clear floor space at that fixture is not required; however reinforcing for grab bars is required 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.77 ;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;  ;;;;;;; ;;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;;;; 

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

“A”and “B” Bathroom with Two Bathing Fixtures (Accessible Bathtub/Accessible Shower) 

whirlpool bathtub 

removable base cabinet at knee space 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door (extends into knee space at lavatory) 

deck or floor-mounted grab bar reinforcing should be 6" to 8" wide min. 

reinforcing for grab bars may be installed in the floor when whirlpool bathtub is not surrounded by walls 

controls located within reach of seated user 

30" x 48" shower with clear floor space 

24'' minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

# ;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

10'-0" 4'-0" 

> 7'-0"

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

;; 

2'-6" 

;;;;;;; ;;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; 

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; 

custom corner countertop lavatory with knee space below to allow forward approach to fixture 

24" long maximum partition wall, 

shorter preferred 

although not required, since the toilet is in an alcove, it is recommended that the alcove width be increased from the Guidelines min. of 33'' to 36'' (shown at 33") 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;; 

;;;;;; ;

;;;;;;;  min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.78 ;; 

> ;; ;;

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

“B” Bathroom with Two Bathing Fixtures (Accessible Bathtub/Inaccessible Shower) 

step 

less than 32" nominal clear 

clear floor space of door 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle 

some people using wheel linen closet 

shower controls located within reach of seated user linen closet doors may be width if user is not required to pass through the door to reach the contents 

this room could be improved by omitting the closet to allow additional maneuvering space 

for maneuvering outside swing chairs will have to leave the sliding door open in order 

grab bars can be deck-mounted if solid construc tion, wall-mounted if tub is prefabricated 

deck or floor-mounted grab bar reinforcing should be 6'' to 8'' wide min. 

to position their chair to  is installed 

make a transfer onto toilet 

inaccessible 

step 5'-0"  1'-6" 6'-10" 4'-0" 5'-0" 2'-8" 12'-4" 4'-0" 4'-0" 

> 9'-9"

8'-0" 1'-9" 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

shower still must have reinforcing for grab bars 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.79 ;;;;;;;; 

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

P OWDER R OOMS 

Powder rooms must meet the requirements for clear floor space at fixtures and reinforcing in walls only when they are on the accessible level of multistory units in buildings having one or more elevators.  removable base cabinet at knee space 

while not required, access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed 

24'' minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

> 5'-6"

5'-8" 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door (extends into knee space at lavatory) 

where a removable cabinet is provided below a countertop less than 32'' in width, care must be taken to prevent support method or brackets from encroaching upon required knee space, see page 7.50 

24" deep countertop lavatory with knee space below to allow forward 

approach to fixture 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.80 ;; ;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

Powder Room 

Powder rooms must meet the requirements for clear floor space at fixtures and reinforcing in walls only when they are on the accessible level of multistory units in buildings having one or more elevators. 

removable base cabinet at knee space 

clear floor space for maneuvering 

to comply with the Guidelines, door must be outswinging so there is a clear floor space outside the swing of door 

24'' min. reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

> 5'-3"
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;

5'-3" 

countertop lavatory with knee space below to allow forward approach to fixture 

where a removable cabinet is provided below a countertop less than 32'' in width, care must be taken to prevent support method or brackets from encroaching upon required knee space, see page 7.50 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.81 ;;;;;;;; 

> ;;

PART TWO: CHAPTER 7 

FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL 

Powder Room 

Powder rooms must meet the requirements for clear floor space at fixtures and reinforcing in walls only when they are on the accessible level of multistory units in buildings having one or more elevators. 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

While an inswinging door is allowed, it is difficult to open door once inside the room unless the user backs into the space. Access is improved if door swings out and an auxiliary door handle is installed. 

6'-10" 5'-3" 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;

vanity with clear floor space to permit parallel approach centered on basin 

24'' min. reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

min. clear floor space outside swing of door ;;;;;;;  

> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.82 ;; 

USABLE KITCHENS AND BATHROOMS  ■ PART B: USABLE BATHROOMS 

Powder Room 

Powder rooms must meet the requirements for clear floor space at fixtures and reinforcing in walls only when they are on the accessible level of multistory units in buildings having one or more elevators. 

clear floor space for maneuvering outside swing of door 

removable base cabinet at knee space 

4'-0" 

storage shelves 

to comply with the Guidelines, door must be outswinging so there is a clear floor space outside the swing of door 

> 6'-9"

24" minimum reinforcing required, 42" preferred 

> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;;;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;;
> ;; ;;

countertop lavatory with knee space below to allow forward approach to fixture 

30" is insufficient space to make a 90-degree turn under the lavatory, therefore 36" is recommended 

min. clear floor space  

> ;;;;;;;
> ;;;;;; ;
> ;;;;;;;

min. clear floor space  outside swing of door reinforcing in walls or floors for grab bars Legend: at each fixture 

7.83 Part Three 

A PPENDICES 

Appendix A  ■ Product Resources and Selected References 

Appendix B  ■ Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines 

Appendix C  ■ Supplemental Notice: Fair Housing 

Accessibility Guidelines: Questions and Answers 

About the Guidelines A PPENDIX A

Product Resources 

# Aand Selected References PRODUCT RESOURCE LIST 

P RODUCT R ESOURCES 

The following list of products is provided to assist owners/builders and potential residents to adapt Fair Housing covered units to suit individual needs and requirements. They are examples only and the list is not complete; other products with similar features also are available. No endorsement of the products or recommendation for use of the products is given nor implied. 

Other compilations of building products are available, but few if any specifically address the issues exclusive to compliance with the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines. Going beyond the requirements of the Guidelines, the National Association of Home Builders Research Center publishes a Directory of Accessible Building Products 

in an effort to increase accessible housing for people with disabilities. The Directory is available from the NAHB Research Center, 400 Prince George's Boulevard, Upper Marlboro, Maryland, 20772-8731, phone: (301) 249-4000. 

Few if any manufacturers presently offer “adaptable” or removable cabinets as part of their stock line. No individual cabinet manufacturers are cited in this product resource list; however, several have indicated that providing kitchen cabinets with removable fronts currently is possible using existing materials and methods. 

A.1 PART THREE: APPENDIX 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

P RODUCT R ESOURCE L IST 

A PPLIANCES 

G.E.  Appliances Appliance Park Louisville, KY 40225  washers and dryers with front-mounted 502-452-4311  controls are more (stacking front-loading coin operated residential  usable for everyone 

dryers with front-mounted controls) 

Sears, Roebuck, and Company Sears Tower Chicago, IL 60684 312-875-3000 (under-counter front-loading washers and dryers with front-mounted controls)  Stacked Coin Operated Dryers 

Note: Most companies have space saving and stacking models with front-mounted controls. 

A SSISTIVE D EVICES 

adaptAbility reachers and grab-

P.O.  Box 515 bers can increase the 

Colchester, CT 06415-0515 reach for people who 

1-800-243-9232 

Maddak, Inc. 6 Industrial Road Pequannock, NJ 07440 201-628-7600 Sears, Roebuck, and Company  Grabber/Reacher 

Sears Tower Chicago, IL 60684 1-800-948-8800 

> are short in stature, are seated, or have limited reach range

B ATHROOM P RODUCTS 

Grab Bars 

Bobrick Washroom Equipment, Inc. Northway 10 Industrial Park Clifton Park, NY 12065 518-877-7444 (folding grab bars and reinforcing) 

A.2 PRODUCT RESOURCE LIST 

Bradley Corporation Washroom Accessories Division 804 East Gate Drive Mt. Laurel, NJ 08054 609-235-7420 (grab bar reinforcing) 

Dryad Jebron Suite 202 249 Ayer Road Harvard, MA 01451 1-800-445-5388 508-772-4167 (colored and folding grab bars) 

Elcoma Metal Fabricating Ltd. 1929-36 Street N.E. Canton, Ohio 44705 216-588-8844 1-800-352-6625 (colored and folding grab bars and reinforcing) 

Franklin Brass Manufacturing Company 

P.O.  Box 5226 Culver City, CA 90231 213-306-5944 1-800-421-3375 (grab bar reinforcing) 

Hewi, Inc. 6 Pearl Court Allendale, NJ 07401 201-327-7202 (colored and folding grab bars) 

Normbau 

P.O.  Box 548 Shepherdsville, KY 40165 502-538-7388 1-800-358-2920 (colored and folding grab bars) 

Pressalit Inc. 1259 Rt. 46, Bldg. 2 Parsippany, NJ 07054 1-800-346-2380 201-263-8533 (colored and folding grab bars) 

> grab bars are manu-factured in a variety of shapes, sizes, textures, colors, and metallic finishes

Standard Grab Bars 

> many folding grab bars also come in a variety of shapes, sizes, and colors

Folding Grab Bar 

> manufactured, formed metal reinforcing plate can be spot welded or screwed to studs

Reinforcing at Metal Studs 

A.3 PART THREE: APPENDIX 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

SafeTec International, Inc. 

P.O.  Box 23 Melbourne, FL 32902 407-952-1300 (colored grab bars) 

Tubular Specialties Mfg., Inc. 13011 S. Spring Street Los Angeles, CA 90061 1-800-421-2961 (colored and folding grab bars) 

Lindo 1090 McCallie Avenue Chattanooga, TN 37404 615-698-4200 (folding grab bars) 

Hand-Held Shower Heads 

Brass-Craft Mfg. Co. 27700 Northwestern Highway Southfield, MI 48034  wall-mounted slide 

313-827-1100 bar allows hand-held 

> shower head to be

Alsons  positioned at any 

525 E. Edna Place  convenient height 

P.O.  Box 311 Covina, CA 91723 818-966-1668 

Moen Incorporated 377 Woodland Avenue Elyria, OH 44036-2111 216-232-3341 

Hand-Held Shower Head 

Odine  On a Slide-Bar Mount 

Division of Interbath, Inc. 427 N. Baldwin Park Boulevard City of Industry, CA 91746 818-369-1841 

Grohe America 900 Lively Boulevard Wood Dale, IL 60191 708-350-2600 

A.4 PRODUCT RESOURCE LIST 

L-Shaped Shower Seats 

Bobrick Washroom Equipment, Inc.  many L-shaped 

Northway 10 Industrial Park  shower seats fold up, 

Clifton Park, NY 12065  increasing available 

518-877-7444  space in showers 

Tubular Specialties Mfg., Inc. 13011 S. Spring Street Los Angeles, CA 90061 1-800-421-2961 L-Shaped Shower Seat 

Manufactured Pipe Protection 

I & S Insulation Co., Inc. 1819 So. Central Avenue, 38 Kent, WA 98032  insulated pipe 

206-859-1830  surround to protect seated users from 

> burns and sharp edges

Truebro Inc. 

P.O.  Box 429 Ellington, CT 06029 203-875-2868 Manufactured Pipe Protection 

Raised Toilet Seats 

Beneke 

P.O.  Box 1367 when standard low 

Columbus, MS 39703 toilets are installed, 

1-800-647-1042 raised toilet seats 

601-328-4000  and spacers can be added to increase the height from 2" to 6" Church Seat Company  if necessary Sheboygan Falls, WI 53085 1-800-233-SEAT 414-467-2664  increase 

Olsonite  14" to 15" standard 

8801 Conant Avenue  height 

Detroit, MI 48211  Raised Toilet Seat 1-800-521-8266 313-075-5831 

A.5 PART THREE: APPENDIX 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

D OORS AND D OOR H ARDWARE 

Accessible Thresholds 

Stanley Hardware 

P.O.  Box 1840 New Britain, CT 06050 1-800-622-4393 

National Guard Products, Inc.  accessible thresholds 

540 North Parkway  are never more than 

P.O.  Box 7353  Accessible Threshold 1/2" in height, except 

Memphis, TN 38107  at exterior doors at 

1-800-NGP-RUSH  dwelling units where 

> they may be up to

Zero International, Inc. 3/4" in height 

415 Concord Avenue Bronx, NY 10455-4898 1-800-635-5335 212-585-3230 

Note: Most threshold companies have accessible thresholds. 

Add-On Lever Handles 

Lindustries, Inc.  add-on handle clamps 

21 Shady Hill Road  to existing knob 

Weston, MA 02193 617-235-5452 

Extend Incorporated 

P.O.  Box 864 Moorhead, MN 56561-0864 218-236-9686 

> round smooth knobs

Schlage  are difficult for many 

2401 Bayshore Boulevard people to use 

San Francisco, CA 94134 Add-On Lever Handle 

415-467-1100 

A.6 PRODUCT RESOURCE LIST 

Bi-Fold Door Hardware 

Ezyfold The Kiwi Connection 82 Shelburne Center Road Shelburne, MA 01370 413-625-2854 

> wall out of the path of a seated user hardware allows bi-folding door to swing back against

Bi-Fold Door Hardware 

6'-0" Sliding Glass Doors with 32" Nominal Clear Opening 

Bennings Building Products 210 Walser Lexington, NC 27292 1-800-222-3861 

Kolbe and Kolbe Millwork, Co., Inc. 1323 S. Eleventh Avenue Wausau, WI 54401 715-842-5666 (no 6'-0" sliding door; do have 6'-6" door with nominal 33" clear width opening) 

Moss Supply Company 5001 North Graham St. Charlotte, NC 28213 1-800-438-0770 

> 32" nominal clear opening

Sliding Door with Nominal 

32" Clear Opening 

Note: While these doors provide the 32" nominal clear width, thresholds may need to be modified or altered to provide full access 

A.7 PART THREE: APPENDIX 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

Swing-Clear Hinges 

Stanley Hardware 

P.O.  Box 1840 New Britain, CT 06050 1-800-622-4393 

Ply Gems Barrier Free Philron Corporation 6948 Frankford Avenue Philadelphia, PA 19135 215-331-3434 Swing-Clear Hinges 

Mont-Hard Inc. 2415 Lifehaus Drive New Braunfels, TX 78130 512-625-7795 

> installation of swing-away hinges allows door to swing fully out of opening to increase the clear width of an existing door opening

K ITCHEN S TORAGE 

> slide out shelves
> provide easy access for all users

Revolving/Extending Shelves 

Hafele America 203 Feld Avenue 

P.O.  Box 1590 High Point, NC 27261 Revolving/Extending Semicircular Shelves 

910-889-2322 

V ISUAL S IGNALS AND A LARMS 

HITEC Group Int'l., Inc. fire alarm with 

P.O.  Box 187 strobe light to alert 

Westmont, IL 60559  people with hearing impairments 708-963-5588 1-800-288-8303 

Nutone Madison and Red Bank Roads Cincinnati, OH 45227-1599 513-527-5100  Visual and Audible Alarm 

Aiphone Corporation 1700 130th Avenue. N.E. 

P.O.  Box 90075 Bellevue, WA 98009 206-455-0510 (video door signal) 

A.8 SELECTED REFERENCES 

S ELECTED R EFERENCES 

American National Standards Institute (1986). 

American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities - Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People (ANSI A117.1-1986). New York, NY. * 

American National Standards Institute (1992). 

Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities 

(ANSI/CABO A117.1-1992). New York, NY. * 

Barrier Free Environments, Inc. (1987). Adaptable Housing. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research. ** 

Barrier Free Environments, Inc. (1991). The Accessible Housing Design File. New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 

Center for Accessible Housing (1992). Technical Design Bulletin #1, Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines Requirement 1: Analyzing Site Impracti-cality on Difficult Sites. Raleigh, NC. 

Davies, Thomas D. Jr., and Kim A. Beasley (1992). 

Fair Housing Design Guide for Accessibility. 

Washington, DC: Paralyzed Veterans of America, National Association of Home Builders, National Multi-Housing Council, and the National Apart-ment Association. 

* Available from the American National Standards Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, telephone: 1-212-642-4900 

**Available from HUD Distribution Center, 451 Seventh Street S.W., Washington, D.C. 20410; telephone: 1-800-767-7468 

A.9 PART THREE: APPENDIX 

Leibrock, Cynthia, with Susan Behar (1992). 

Beautiful Barrier-Free: A Visual Guide to Accessibility. 

New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 

Raschko, Bettyann Boetticher (1982). Housing Interiors for the Disabled and Elderly. New York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 

Salmen, John P. S. (1985). The Do-Able Renewable Home. Washington, DC: American Association of Retired Persons. 

Steven Winter Associates, Inc., Tourbier and Walmsley, Inc., Edward Steinfeld, and Building Technology, Inc. (1993). Cost of Accessible Housing. 

Washington, DC: Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research. ** *** 

**Available from HUD Distribution Center, 451 Seventh Street S.W., Washington, D.C. 20410; telephone: 1-800-767-7468 

***Available from the Fair Housing Information Clearinghouse, P. O. Box 9146, McLean, VA 22102, telephone: 1-800-343-3442 (voice); 1-800-290-1617 (TTY). 

> FAIR HOUSING ACT DESIGN MANUAL

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Develop-ment, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity. 24 Code of Fed-eral Regulations (CFR) Chapter 1: Subchapter A. 

Appendix I, Final Fair Housing Regulations, 

January 23, 1989.*** 

Appendix II, Final Fair Housing Accessibil-ity Guidelines, March 6, 1991.*** 

Appendix III, Preamble to the Final Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines, March 6, 1991.*** 

Appendix IV, Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines, Questions and Answers, Supplement to the Notice , June 28, 1994. *** 

U.S.  Department of Housing and Urban Develop-ment, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (1992). Washing-ton, DC. HUD Accessibility Seminars Workbook. 

Wylde, Margaret, Adrian Baron-Robbins, and Sam Clark (1994). Building for a Lifetime: The Design and Construction of Fully Accessible Homes. 

Newtown, CT: the Taunton Press. 

A.10 A PPENDIX B

Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines 

# BA PPENDIX C

Supplemental Notice 

Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines: Questions and Answers about the Guidelines 

# CRevised April 1998 HUD.  E Q UA L H O U S I N G O P P O RT U N I T Y
