Title: 

URL Source: https://assets.newrepublic.com/assets/issues/october-2025.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 08 Sep 2025 15:06:53 GMT

Markdown Content:
OCTOBER 2025 

FOURTEEN 

INSPIRING STORIES 

OF PEOPLE WHO 

HAVE STOOD UP 

TO THE MAD KING 

PLUS: 

PUBLIC  HOUSING, 

REALLY? 

YES, REALLY. 

> MONICA POTTS

THE DESTRUCTIVE 

LEGACY OF 

JOHN ROBERTS 

> MATT FORD

ARUNDHATI ROY’S 

REVOLUTIONS 

> SARAH WANG

# “What kind of a person doesn’t support eliminating waste, fraud, and abuse in government spending…?” 

—The White House, March 2025 

The Trump Administration plans to destroy $9.7 million worth of life‑saving birth control that has already been paid for by U.S. taxpayers. 

MSI Reproductive Choices offered to pay for the shipment and 

distribution of this foreign assistance to people who need it. The Administration said, “No thanks.” They would rather spend more taxpayer money to destroy it. Please donate to replace these contraceptive supplies and help women with no other options for care. 

msiunitedstates.org/emergency 

CHOOSE CHOICE 

msiunitedstates.org/emergency 1

October 2025 

Cover illustration by Paul Rogers 

STATE OF THE NATION 

4 House of Lords 

After 20 years of increasingly illiberal rulings, 

the Roberts Supreme Court is winning its war 

on American democracy. 

Matt Ford 

8 Get Real 

The realist foreign policy case for shifting 

America’s relationship with Israel 

Jonathan Guyer 

5 Buried in the Doom Scroll 

BOOKS & THE ARTS 

48  Gift of Darkness 

In Arundhati Roy’s remarkable memoir, art and 

politics emerge from the giant shadow cast by 

her mother. 

Sarah Wang 

52  Can Solar Power Save Us? 

Bill McKibben’s case for electrifying everything 

and changing nothing 

Alexander Zaitchik 

56  The Promise of Pan-Africanism 

A biography of Kwame Nkrumah recasts the 

post-WWII era as a Black liberation epic. 

Lovia Gyarkye 

60  How a Word Turns Into a Weapon 

An intellectual history of antisemitism 

becomes a history of Zionism. 

Lily Meyer 

64  From On High 

Spike Lee’s new thriller is also a meta 

reckoning with his success. 

Beatrice Loayza 

66  Chestbursters and Headbangers 

The heavy metal vibes of  Alien: Earth 

Phillip Maciak 

POETRY 

50  Sleep Next to Me Where No One Does 

Elizabeth Metzger 

55  The Fly  Luke Dunne 

62  Anamnesis  Aaron Fagan 

RES PUBLICA 

68  Genocide in Gaza? 

Why it is increasingly difficult to deny 

Win McCormack 

FEATURES 

10  Heroes of the 

# Resistance 

Fourteen inspiring stories of people 

who have stood up  to  Trump 

12  Ketanji Brown Jackson  by Harry Litman 

14  Jennifer Vasquez Sura  by Greg Sargent 

15  The Eric Adams Refuseniks  by Michael Tomasky 

16  Mahmoud Khalil  by Felipe De La Hoz 

18  The EPA 144  by Malcolm Ferguson 

19  Bishop Michael Pham  by Pablo Manríquez 

20  Everett Kelley  by Emily Cooke 

22  Betty Osceola  by Melissa Gira Grant 

23  Paula Xinis  by Edith Olmsted 

24  Chris Kluwe  by Susan Milligan 

25  Tom Harrington  by Timothy Noah 

26  Alfredo Juarez Zeferino  by Kate Aronoff 

27  Erez Reuveni  by Matt Ford 

28  Nicolas Talbott  by Timothy Soseki Kudo 

30  Like a Bad Neighbor 

Skyrocketing rates, denied claims, dropped policies, paltry 

payouts—and hidden profits. Property insurance is facing its 

climate reckoning. 

Aaron Gell 

40  Public Housing Again, 

# Really? Yes, Really 

The mid-twentieth-century versions were seen as sociological 

and fiscal nightmares. But where is it written that all public 

housing has to be like that? It’s time to reimagine and 

destigmatize the whole idea. 

Monica Potts 

> ILLUSTRATION BY PAUL ROGERS

October 2025 2

# THIS WAS INEVITABLE  in our sick, cruel age: A new community 

in northeast Arkansas is open to whites only. Eric Orwoll and 

Peter Csere are among the leaders of a company that bought 

160 acres in tiny Ravenden in September 2023 devoted to a devel -

opment they call Return to the Land. Those wishing to reside in 

the community or join its association must “present as white,” Orwoll recently 

told  The New York Times,  or their applications can be denied. They must also 

be heterosexual. 

The two men’s life journeys that brought them to this point are, to put it 

mildly, not what you’d expect. Orwoll is a classically trained French horn 

player who fashioned himself into a Plato “scholar” who makes YouTube 

videos. Happily, he had some prior experience on the video front—he and his 

ex-wife once livestreamed pornographic videos of themselves (the ex, Caitlin 

Smith, lives in the compound with her new man, along with her and Orwoll’s 

four children). Csere, a jazz pianist, once lived in 

Ecuador, where he was arrested for (but not charged 

with) stabbing a man and accused of stealing tens 

of thousands of dollars from a vegan community of 

which he was a member. He posted on X that “the 

Holocaust “didn’t happen” but “should have.” 

Disgusting. And obviously illegal, right? Not so, 

say the duo. They argue that there’s a line in the 

Fair Housing Act of 1968 that allows private asso -

ciations to give preference to their own members 

when offering housing. Experts say the intent 

behind that provision was to ensure, for example, 

that churches could offer clergy a place to live. 

But these days, with the federal courts we have now 

in this country, that line could be the act’s Achilles’ heel, permitting groups 

like this to discriminate openly based on race. 

The group bought the property and started this effort while Joe Biden 

was president. But let’s be clear. They were inspired to do this because of a 

climate created in this country by one man, and one movement. Orwoll 

told the  Times:  “I would rather the precedent is set and the discussion is had 

while there’s a relatively favorable cultural and legal climate for it.” 

Arkansas sits in the Eighth Federal judicial circuit. According to a 2022 sur -

vey by the liberal Alliance for Justice, the Eighth has the highest proportion 

of Republican-appointed judges of all 13 circuits. So it’s hardly crazy to think 

that Return to the Land can withstand legal scrutiny there. Then, presumably, 

it will someday move to the Supreme Court. Can we really anticipate a day 

when the court declares such a blatantly racist scheme constitutional? 

Surreal. Dystopian. We might say positively Orwollian. 

The New Republic 

> ILLUSTRATION BY HAISAM HUSSEIN; WHITTEN SABBATINI/THE NEW YORK TIMES/REDUX

THE ELEVENTH HOUR 

Chairman and Editor in Chief  Win McCormack 

Editor  Michael Tomasky 

Magazine 

Editorial Director  Emily Cooke 

Literary Editor  Laura Marsh 

Managing Editor  Lorraine Cademartori 

Contributing Literary Editor  Cora Currier 

Senior Editor  Alex Shephard 

Design Director  Andy Omel 

Photo Director  Stephanie Heimann 

Production Manager  Joan Yang 

Poetry Editor  Rowan Ricardo Phillips 

Contributing Copy Editor  Howery Pack 

newrepublic.com 

Digital Director  Mindy Kay Bricker 

Executive Editor  Ryan Kearney 

Deputy Editors  Heather Souvaine Horn 

Jason Linkins 

Tori Otten 

Adrienne Mahsa Varkiani 

Art Director  Robert A. Di Ieso Jr. 

Staff Writers  Kate Aronoff 

Perry Bacon 

Matt Ford 

Melissa Gira Grant 

Timothy Noah 

Monica Potts 

Greg Sargent 

Grace Segers 

Associate Writers  Malcolm Ferguson 

Ellie Quinlan Houghtaling 

Robert McCoy 

Edith Olmsted 

Hafiz Rashid 

Copy Editor  Kirsten Denker 

Lead Developer  Tom Fletcher 

Product Manager  Carla Nudel 

Reporter-Researchers  Kate Mabus 

Indigo Olivier 

Sam Russek 

Interns  Rachel Kahn 

Molly Wright 

Contributing Editors  Rumaan Alam 

Nina Burleigh 

Alexander Chee 

Ana Marie Cox 

Siddhartha Deb 

Felipe De La Hoz 

Jan Dutkiewicz 

Liza Featherstone 

Ted Genoways 

Patrick Iber 

Kathryn Joyce 

Simon Lazarus 

Harry Litman 

Phillip Maciak 

Pablo Manríquez 

Susan Milligan 

Osita Nwanevu 

Aaron Regunberg 

Susan Rinkunas 

Melody Schreiber 

Meredith Shiner 

Jacob Silverman 

Jordan Michael Smith 

Interim Publisher  Bryan Groves 

Chief Financial Officer  David Myer 

Sales Director  Anthony Bolinsky 

Marketing Director  Kym Blanchard 

Director of Engagement  Dan Pritchett 

Engagement Associate  Matthew Liner 

Sales and Marketing  Michelle Tennant-Timmons 

Manager 

Lake Avenue Publishing 

1 Union Square West 

New York, NY 10003 

For subscription inquiries or problems, call (800) 827-1289. 

For reprints & licensing, visit www.TNRreprints.com. 

# Do the White Thing To Your Most Adventurous Self, Cuba is quite simply one of the most amazing places in the world. And we should know! The New Republic has been reporting on Cuba’s fascinating history and personalities since 1917. Now we’re inviting you to take advantage of our expertise and join a special group of readers and supporters on a lovingly designed, all-inclusive tour of this fantastic destination. Drawing on our special contacts among local historians, artists, and chefs, we’ve created a first-class experience that will immerse you in Cuba’s colorful and unique history, politics, and culture. You’ll hear about the island’s fascinating history from renowned political scientists. You’ll visit the private studios of famous Cuban artists. You’ll hear stories of struggle and triumph from activists in the Afro-Cuban and LGBTQ communities. But no tour of Cuba is complete without the island’s iconic food and music. You’ll dine at the best paladars (private restaurants) in Havana, Cienfuegos, and Trinidad. You’ll attend exclusive performances at the country’s famed ballet and flamenco studios. You’ll drink where Hemingway drank and see where Michael Corleone kissed his brother Fredo on New Year’s Eve in The Godfather Part II .Please join us on this very special trip through Cuba’s rich history and culture. 

## “The plan of this trip was so imaginatively thought through and done with such efficiency that it all now seems a bit of a miracle.” —Stanley, TNR traveler For more info December 13–20, 2025 

## New dates 

## Hosted by Charles Bittner 

Charles Bittner has taken more than 50 groups to Cuba over the last 15 years. A professor of sociology who has taught at the University of Texas, Southern Methodist, and St. John’s University, Charles is a wide-ranging expert on Cuba’s social, medical, cultural, and political institutions. Plus, he’s not a bad salsa dancer. 

# Explore Cuba! 

## Cost 

per person for single occupancy 

## $4,485 

For further information or to register, contact Charles Bittner at charlesbittner@verizon.net 

or call Charles at 617-833-1435. per person for double occupancy 

## $3,985 4 October 2025 

# House of Lords After 20 years of increasingly illiberal rulings, the Roberts 

# Supreme Court is winning its war on American democracy. 

TWENTY YEARS AGO,  Chief Justice John 

Roberts took the oath of office and ushered in a 

new era for the Supreme Court. His 2005 con-

firmation vote marked the transition from the 

Rehnquist court—where a narrow majority 

of conservatives and moderates had largely 

maintained the status quo on abortion, af -

firmative action, and voting rights—into 

something much more reactionary. 

At his swearing-in ceremony, the new 

chief justice spoke eloquently about the 

immense weight of the court’s duty to pre -

serve the U.S. constitutional order. “What 

Daniel Webster termed ‘the miracle of our 

Constitution’ is not something that hap -

pens every generation,” Roberts said in his 

remarks. “But every generation in its turn 

must accept the responsibility of supporting 

and defending the Constitution, and bearing 

true faith and allegiance to it.” 

“That is the oath that I just took,” he con -

tinued. “I will try to ensure, in the discharge 

of my responsibilities, that, with the help of 

my colleagues, I can pass on to my children’s 

generation a charter of self-government as 

strong and as vibrant as the one that Chief 

Justice Rehnquist passed on to us.” 

# NATION OF THE STATE 

By Matt Ford 

> TOM WILLIAMS/CQ-ROLL CALL/GETTY

5State of the Nation 

> SCREEN GRAB/CNN

ICE Agent Fires 

At Civilians 

On August 16, three men—a 43-year-

old man, his 18-year-old son, and 

23-year-old son-in-law—were driving 

to work in San Bernardino, Califor -

nia, when their car was surrounded 

by masked U.S. Customs and Border 

Protection agents 

who emerged from 

unmarked vehicles. 

When the agents 

asked the driver—the 

43-year-old who they 

later claimed was the 

subject of a “targeted operation”—to 

roll down his window, he refused. In 

a video of the incident, you can hear 

one of the passengers ask, “What do 

you want?” 

The agents didn’t answer. Instead, 

they smashed the windows of the car. 

“Once the glasses were shattered, my 

father-in-law feared for his life from 

his perspective … he drove the ve -

hicle away from where those agents 

were at,” the driver’s son-in-law told 

kabc , a local TV news station. As the 

car skittered away, one agent fired 

three shots at the vehicle. 

“Thank God the bullets didn’t go 

through the truck,” the son-in-law 

continued. “They just went in, got 

stuck into the door, but they were 

aimed at my brother-in-law, who 

was in the passenger front.” But their 

ordeal wasn’t over. About two hours 

after the incident, around 11 a.m., 

agents surrounded the family’s home. 

There they remained, without produc -

ing a warrant, for five hours. 

A Department of Homeland Se -

curity spokesperson later said that 

the shots were fired in self-defense 

after the vehicle “wounded two CBP 

officers”—a claim not supported by 

video of the encounter. 

Over 90 percent of the more than 

200,000 individuals booked into ICE 

custody since last October have nev -

er been convicted of a violent crime, 

per a study from the conservative 

Cato Institute. As masked ICE agents 

roam American cities, and pressure 

from the Trump administration 

to increase deportations continues to 

grow, it seems increasingly likely that 

people will be seriously hurt or killed— 

including, as almost happened in San 

Bernardino, bystanders. 

BURIED IN THE 

DOOM SCROLL 

By that standard, the Roberts court has 

failed. The United States is less democratic, 

less self-governing, more dysfunctional, 

and more corrupt than it was 20 years 

ago, thanks in large part to the Supreme 

Court’s rulings. Many of its most important 

decisions—on campaign finance, on voting 

rights, on gerrymandering, and on the sep -

aration of powers—have left us less able to 

resolve political questions and issues than 

any previous generation has been. 

“Umpires don’t make the rules,” Roberts 

said, when describing his judicial approach 

at his 2005 confirmation hearings. “They 

apply them.” If Roberts is rarely depicted 

as a firebrand or a zealot, few would deny 

his unmistakable ideological tilt. And yet, 

Roberts is often portrayed as a moderating 

force. His Republican-appointed colleagues 

may be working to covertly advance an ideo -

logical project, but Roberts was different: an 

arch-institutionalist willing to cast aside his 

own leanings to preserve the legitimacy of 

the Supreme Court in a hyper-partisan era. 

If that was his goal, then he has failed 

miserably. Public confidence in the Su -

preme Court as an institution has also 

collapsed. When Roberts was inaugurated, 

Gallup found in a September 2005 poll that 

56 percent of Americans approved of the 

court’s job. In July this year, that number 

had dropped to 39 percent—the first sub-40 

result in the survey’s history. 

Some of that decline can be attributed to a 

shift in the court’s makeup: Roughly 10 per-

cent of Democrats and around one-third of 

independents approve of the work of a Su -

preme Court that now boasts a conservative 

supermajority. But Roberts shares much of the 

blame himself. Over the course of two decades, 

he has overseen an effort that has steadily 

chipped away at many of the twentieth centu -

ry’s pivotal decisions, made government less 

responsive and effective, and handed enormous 

power to corporations and the extremely rich. 

HOW DID WE  get here? Any survey of the 

Roberts court’s impact on American political 

life must begin with  Citizens United v. FEC. 

The 2010 ruling overturned key portions 

of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, 

which limited how corporations and unions 

could spend money on political campaigns 

during an election cycle. In doing so, the 

court limited earlier campaign finance rul -

ings that had allowed Congress to constrain 

donors’ influence and thus prevent the ap -

pearance or reality of corruption. 

Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing for 

the 5–4 majority, argued that “favoritism 

and influence” were an inevitable feature of 

democratic governance. He concluded that 

Congress could only act in cases of quid pro 

quo corruption, limiting its ability to act more 

broadly to promote public confidence in the 

electoral system. Kennedy justified this out -

come both on First Amendment grounds and 

on his own assumptions about the public. 

When past Supreme Court rulings “iden -

tified a sufficiently important governmental 

interest in preventing corruption or the ap -

pearance of corruption, that interest was 

limited to quid pro quo corruption,” he wrote. 

“The fact that speakers may have influence 

over or access to elected officials does not 

mean that these officials are corrupt.” 

The last 15 years have proved him wrong. 

Public sentiment remains largely hostile 

to the decision and its subsequent effects 

on campaign spending. Shortly after the 

decision came out, one survey found that 

eight in 10 Americans opposed the move. 

Between the 2008 election—the last federal 

election held before  Citizens United —and the 

2024 election, spending on presidential and 

congressional campaigns doubled to nearly 

$15 billion, even after adjusting for inflation. 

In the 2024 election, for example, South 

African-born billionaire Elon Musk donated 

almost $300 million to bolster Donald Trump’s 

reelection bid. The Tesla CEO’s massive 

contributions flowed not to Trump’s cam -

paign coffers, but to allied super PACs and 

other formally unaffiliated groups. Under the 

Supreme Court’s view of campaign finance, 

this is acceptable because those groups are 

technically independent of a candidate’s 

campaign and pose a lower risk of corruption. 

By the end of the first week of his second 

term, Trump made it abundantly clear just 

how wrong it was. Soon after taking office, he 

created the Department of Government Effi -

ciency and set Musk in charge of it with carte 

blanche to reshape the federal government 

to his whims. Musk used that power to fire 

thousands of federal civil servants, blocked 

congressionally appropriated funds from 

being sent to states and nonprofit groups, 

and dismantled congressionally mandated 

agencies. His abrupt scorched-earth closure 

of the U.S. Agency for International Devel -

opment, or  usaid , will likely kill millions of 

people in developing countries in the next 

decade—all with power Musk accrued via 

massive campaign donations that would 

have been impossible before  Citizens United. 

At the same time that it has expanded 

the influence of money in politics, the court 

has also substantially narrowed federal laws 

that criminalize corruption. In the 2016 case 6 October 2025 

McDonnell v. United States,  the justices 

unanimously overturned the conviction of a 

former Virginia governor who had performed 

a variety of services—setting up meetings, 

making introductions, pressuring other 

officials—in exchange for tens of thousands 

of dollars in luxury gifts and loans. 

The average American would probably 

consider that to be bribery. The high court 

disagreed by ruling that none of the activities 

counted as an “official act,” and therefore 

they were protected by the First Amend -

ment. “There is no doubt that this case is 

distasteful; it may be worse than that. But our 

concern is not with tawdry tales of Ferraris, 

Rolexes, and ball gowns,” Roberts wrote for 

the court. “It is instead with the broader legal 

implications of the Government’s boundless 

interpretation of the federal bribery statute.” 

The court has also positioned itself as an 

implacable enemy of political reform in other 

spheres. The 2019 decision  Rucho v. Common 

Cause —written by Roberts himself—allowed 

state GOP lawmakers to give themselves 

supermajorities even if a majority of voters 

cast their ballot for a Democratic candidate. 

For Americans, the result is a less 

democratic and less stable society. Of the 

435 House seats that were contested in 

the 2024 election, only about 30 of them 

were actually competitive races between 

Democratic and Republican candidates. 

Americans who lived in the other 400 or 

so districts effectively faced a preordained 

choice. Entrenched partisan gerrymandering 

also encourages more extreme candidates, by 

making party primaries—where compromise 

and moderation are often dissuaded in favor 

of ideological purity—the decisive factors in 

an election’s outcome. 

Americans now enjoy fewer protections 

for their right to vote in 2025 than they did 

in 2005. The year after Roberts and Justice 

Samuel Alito were sworn in, Congress re -

authorized the Voting Rights Act of 1965 

for an additional 25 years. The renewed 

and amended act received overwhelming 

support in the House and unanimous ap -

proval in the Senate. President George W. 

Bush commemorated its passage at the 

National Convention for the  naacp  and 

invited civil rights leaders to see him sign it 

at the White House, reflecting the nation’s 

post-1960s consensus on civil rights laws 

In the 2013 case  Shelby County v. Holder, 

the Roberts court broke that consensus. Un -

der the Voting Rights Act, certain states and 

counties could make changes to their voting 

laws only with approval from a Federal Dis -

trict Court in D.C. or the Justice Department. 

The court’s five conservative justices struck 

down the formula in the law, ending that 

practice but leaving open the possibility 

that Congress could enact a new one. Repub -

licans have uniformly opposed any attempt to 

do so, a response that is unlikely to have sur -

prised any of the conservatives on the court. 

As the Supreme Court was making the 

nation less democratic, it was also working 

to make its government less responsive and 

effective. Since the early twentieth century, 

Congress has created and relied upon spe -

cialized agencies like the Environmental 

Protection Agency and the Food and Drug 

Administration to regulate complex aspects 

of the national economy. Americans who 

grew up or lived in the twentieth century 

saw those agencies vanquish widespread 

air and water pollution, unsafe foods and 

drugs, a wide range of deadly infectious 

diseases, abusive and fraudulent business 

practices, and so on. 

For the Roberts court, however, those 

agencies represent a fundamental threat to 

the separation of powers. The court’s conser -

vative majority has overturned precedents 

that required judges to defer to agencies’ 

interpretations in some cases and has struck 

down statutory protections that insulate 

some department heads from at-will dis -

missal. Congress’s intent in creating the 

agencies is sidelined in favor of stronger 

control by the executive branch and closer 

scrutiny from the conservative-led courts. 

One of the Supreme Court’s most per -

nicious tools in recent years is the major 

questions doctrine. Under this doctrine, the 

court could overturn new regulations if it 

thought that Congress’s authorizing statute 

did not “speak clearly” enough to allow the 

agency to regulate a matter of “vast ‘econom -

ic and political significance.’” Those terms 

are subjective enough to give the court a free -

wheeling veto over matters as wide-ranging 

as student debt forgiveness, regulating car -

bon emissions, and vaccine mandates. 

In  Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial 

Protection Bureau , one of the cases on the 

president’s power to remove agency leaders, 

Roberts came close to rejecting the concept 

of three coequal branches of government by 

arguing that the legislative branch warranted 

special scrutiny. “The Framers viewed the 

legislative power as a special threat to indi -

vidual liberty, so they divided that power to 

ensure that ‘differences of opinion’ and the 

‘jarrings of parties’ would ‘promote delibera -

tion and circumspection’ and ‘check excesses 

in the majority,’” Roberts wrote, quoting 

selectively from the  Federalist Papers.  “By 

contrast, the Framers thought it necessary 

to secure the authority of the Executive so 

that he could carry out his unique respon -

sibilities,” he continued. “As Madison put it, 

while ‘the weight of the legislative author -

ity requires that it should be [...] divided, 

the weakness of the executive may require, 

on the other hand, that it should be fortified.’” 

Roberts’s misconception, to put it mildly, 

comes from relying on what the framers 

said over what they actually did. The fram -

ers indeed created a presidency to address 

one of the principal defects of the Articles 

of Confederation. But they also created 

a much more powerful Congress under 

the Constitution than had existed under the 

Confederation. For the first time, the nation’s 

legislature could raise taxes, fund armies and 

navies, regulate commerce, and establish 

courts. It can even remove presidents and 

Supreme Court justices from office. 

In addition to weakening Congress, the 

Roberts court has laid the groundwork for an 

authoritarian presidency. Its ruling in  Trump 

v. United States  last year, where the court cre -

ated the doctrine of “presidential immunity” 

out of thin air, allows presidents to commit a 

wide range of crimes without fear of future 

prosecution. The 6–3 ruling concluded that 

presidents should have “presumptive im -

munity” for their official acts in general. For 

acts that fall within the presidency’s “core 

> STATE OF THE NATION

## The United States is less democratic, 

## less self-governing, more dysfunctional, 

## and more corrupt than it was 20 years 

## ago, thanks in large part to the Supreme 

## Court’s rulings. 7State of the Nation 

> AL DRAGO/BLOOMBERG/GETTY

constitutional powers,” like issuing pardons 

or commanding the military, presidents now 

enjoy absolute immunity. 

There is no constitutional basis whatsoever 

for that framework, or for the concept of 

“presidential immunity” in general. The 

Constitution itself only explicitly gives im -

munity to members of Congress in certain 

circumstances, such as travel to and from the 

Capitol and when participating in speeches 

and debates. The courts have also long rec -

ognized judicial immunity as an irreducible 

feature of the Anglo-American legal system. 

Presidential immunity, on the other hand, 

did not exist until Donald Trump asked for 

it and the Roberts court gave it to him. 

It is hard to overstate the decision’s rad -

icalism. While the forms of legislative and 

judicial immunity that exist in our system 

are narrow in scope, presidential immunity is 

not. Members of Congress and federal judges 

can still be prosecuted for taking bribes to 

perform an official act. Trump, on the other 

hand, could issue pardons in exchange for 

personal payments of $1 million and still fall 

within the immunity ruling’s bounds. The 

Roberts court’s ruling is not merely a shield 

against overzealous prosecutors; it is a blank 

check for corruption and abuse of power. 

Justice Sonia Sotomayor warned in her 

dissent that, under the ruling’s own terms, a 

president could lawfully order  seal  Team Six 

to assassinate his political rivals and still 

retain immunity. Roberts replied that his 

colleague was “fear mongering on the basis 

of extreme hypotheticals.” Beyond that, he 

did not seriously dispute her interpretation. 

The collective impact of the Roberts 

court’s ruling is far more disastrous than 

the sum of the individual parts. For almost 

250 years, Americans defined themselves 

by their civic republicanism—their cultural 

and philosophical inclination toward self-

government, their ability to address problems 

and issues through democratic means, their 

opposition to despotic or hereditary leader -

ship, and their respect for the rule of law. 

The Roberts court has not extinguished 

these traditions altogether, but it has made 

them much harder to maintain. It is harder 

to keep faith in the nation’s political system 

when anti-corruption laws go unenforced. 

It is harder to maintain the rule of law when 

the nation’s highest court says the president 

can commit crimes. Self-government is im -

possible when elected officials know their 

power comes from gerrymandered districts 

and wealthy donors instead of the people. 

Americans are historically reluctant to 

meddle with the Supreme Court as an insti -

tution. Since the founding era, Americans’ 

basic respect for the courts has run deeply 

in our civic culture. Reformers have suc -

cessfully pushed through constitutional 

amendments to reshape Congress, the presi -

dency, and the federal-state balance of power 

over the last 250 years. And yet the high court 

has been basically untouched since it was last 

expanded in 1869. This sense of continuity 

is an added hurdle to reform. Americans are 

not only accustomed to the court; they find 

it difficult to imagine it changing—an under -

standable challenge, given it hasn’t in over 

150 years. As a result, any effort to alter the 

court is depicted as a radical, un-American 

effort to rig the system on behalf of one party 

at the expense of the other. That is, more or 

less, what has happened without reform, 

however. The only way to restore a sense 

of balance and faith in the court—and to 

make it actually responsive to the needs of 

the citizenry—is reform. 

Life tenure is often seen as the corner -

stone of U.S. judicial independence. In recent 

decades, some drawbacks have emerged. 

The sole means by which Americans can 

currently influence the court’s ideological 

makeup is through indirect and gradual 

measures: Presidents nominate candidates 

to replace vacancies when they occur, and 

the Senate approves them after an exhaustive 

confirmation process. 

Strategic retirements fray that already 

threadbare bond between the court and 

the American people. By choosing to retire 

only when certain presidents and parties 

are in power, the justices can ensure that 

their successor has a similar ideological tilt. 

The result is a quasi-hereditary institution, 

one where members actively work to ensure 

that the people’s views will not change the 

court’s ideological balance. 

By usurping and second-guessing 

Congress’s judgment so often and so enthusi -

astically in a particular direction, the Roberts 

court no longer resembles a judicial body as 

much as it resembles the old House of Lords 

that used to dominate British politics. Our 

cousins across the Atlantic finally remedied 

the problem in 1911 by compelling the lords 

to accept strong limits on their own power— 

not through persuasion, but by threatening 

to pack the lords with as many new dukes 

and earls as would be necessary to break the 

aristocratic grip on democratic governance. 

If Democrats retake the White House and 

both chambers of Congress at some point in 

the future, they should not make that same 

threat—they should simply do it. The Roberts 

court has spent the last 20 years dismantling 

liberal democracy as Americans have known 

it. Its rulings have paved the way for the first 

quasi-dictatorship in the republic’s history. 

Congress should add as many justices to the 

Supreme Court as it takes to produce a bench 

that believes in basic American values once 

more: self-government, civic virtue, and the 

rule of law.   

> Matt Ford is a staff writer at The New Republic .

President Donald Trump greeted John Roberts, chief justice of the Supreme Court, on 

March 4, before Trump’s address to a joint session of Congress. 8 October 2025 

THE CEASEFIRE CELEBRATIONS  in 

Gaza last January were so exhilarating 

that Palestinian Al-Jazeera journalist Anas 

Al-Sharif could barely be heard on air over 

the shouts of his countrymen. “Now I can 

finally remove this helmet, which has ex -

hausted me throughout this period, and this 

vest, which has become part of my body,” he 

said as he shed the protective equipment 

he had been wearing almost constantly for 

15 months. Al-Sharif was then lifted upon 

the shoulders of the jubilant crowd. 

The ceasefire had produced something 

rarely felt in the region in the aftermath 

of Hamas’s October 7, 2023, attacks that 

killed 1,200 Israelis: hope. Although the 

tentative agreement emerged from a rare 

bit of bipartisan collaboration—a team of 

advisers appointed by America’s outgoing 

president, Joe Biden, worked together with 

an envoy from its incoming one, Donald 

Trump, to secure it—its announcement was 

auspicious, coming on January 15, 2025, 

five days before the inauguration. Under 

Biden, there had been more than a year 

of bloodshed and suffering. Now, Trump’s 

disruptive approach to politics, both domes-

tic and international, had come to Palestine, 

and it seemingly had helped halt the war. 

More than six months later, Al-Sharif was 

killed alongside his colleagues in a targeted 

Israeli airstrike on August 10. And the situa -

tion in Gaza is arguably worse today than it 

has been at any point since October 7. 

The two-month ceasefire did not move the 

needle on a poisonous status quo that 

has enabled Israel’s most destructive ten -

dencies. Famine is now widespread—as of 

mid-August, around 250 people had died 

of starvation, many of them children—and 

Palestinians queuing for meager rations 

provided for them are routinely slaughtered 

by Israeli bombs, bullets, and shells. Israeli 

leaders have nevertheless only been embold -

ened; Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 

has reportedly been echoing calls from the 

far right in meetings with his security cabinet 

to seize and fully reoccupy the entirety of 

the Gaza Strip. 

# The realist foreign policy case for shifting 

# America’s relationship with Israel 

By Jonathan Guyer 

# Get Real 

As a result, a growing international 

consensus has emerged that Israel is 

committing war crimes and acting with 

genocidal intent. Several countries, many 

of them once steadfast backers of Israel’s 

war—France, the United Kingdom, Cana -

da, and Australia, to name just four—have 

said that they will recognize Palestine as 

an independent nation. The distancing of 

Israel by its former allies is the result not 

just of public outcry and moral outrage. It 

also reflects the realization that the West’s 

attempt to inhibit Israel’s war crimes has 

been an abject failure—and that the United 

States, specifically, seems no longer able, 

or even willing, to flex its might in service 

of moral or strategic goals. 

The Trump administration, meanwhile, 

has doubled down on its full-throated sup -

port of Israel, joining strikes on Iran’s nuclear 

facilities on June 22, but was caught off-guard 

by Israel’s bellicose military operations in 

Syria, all while restricting criticism of Israeli 

policy here at home. The State Department 

still has not seen fit to condemn the killing of 

Al-Sharif. In fact, a spokesperson has sought 

to justify it. 

MUCH OF THE  blame for the diplomatic 

failure in Gaza has been laid at the feet of 

the two elderly men who have led the United 

States since October 7, Biden and Trump. But 

the Gaza War has exposed America’s larger 

foreign policy as fundamentally broken—not 

only out of step with public opinion, it seems 

increasingly unable to advance the nation’s 

long-term interests. 

To wit: While the moral case for chang -

ing policy in Gaza is indisputable, so is the 

overlapping strategic one. Why then is it so 

difficult to move forward with either? 

After all, the daily starvation of hundreds 

of Palestinians in Gaza while the United 

States provides weapons and diplomatic 

backing to Israel is not only a moral stain 

but represents a serious security threat to the 

United States and U.S. interests in the world. 

And while Democrats and Republicans 

have adopted increasingly divergent ap -

proaches to foreign policy since the start of 

this century, there has been broad agreement 

about its fundamental aims: Great-power 

competition and countering China in a 

variety of domains have been the nation’s 

top priorities. 

But backing Israel while it starves Gaza will 

make it that much more difficult for the Unit -

ed States to partner with countries in the Arab 

world. The Trump and Biden administra -

tions both aimed to expand normalization 

agreements between Israel and Arab states, 

notably Saudi Arabia. But it’s more and more 

difficult to imagine that Crown Prince Mo -

hammed bin Salman could take the risk of 

recognizing Israel while it engages in such 

brazen war crimes against Palestinians; as 

popular as he is among a new generation of 

Saudis, this may be too much to wager on. 

Indeed, as anti-Americanism related to its 

support for Israel rises, it could also lead 

to new threats from the region, including 

resurgent terrorism against the United States. 

Fourteen years after Barack Obama pulled 

troops out of Iraq, and four years after Biden 

withdrew the U.S. military from Afghanistan, 

complicity in Gaza has once again inflamed 

Arab opinion against the United States. 

Meanwhile, Israel behaves with impunity, 

launching strikes on the capitals of Iran, 

Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen, and has become 

a liability to the United States, sapping not 

only its power and bandwidth but also its 

costly, rare missile defense systems. If the 

United States should find itself in conflict 

with Russia, China, or another foe, it will 

do so with a reduced stockpile of expensive 

equipment. Above all, Israel has shown the 

world that, at least in its relationship with 

the United States, the tail is wagging the dog. 

Some analysts now assert that Israel is in 

the strongest position in the Middle East that 

## The moral case for changing policy in Gaza is 

## indisputable; so is the strategic one. Why 

## is it so difficult to move forward with either? 9State of the Nation 

> STATE OF THE NATION

it’s ever been in. As evidence, they cite its 

assassinations of Hamas’s and Hezbollah’s 

leadership, the airstrikes on Iran, and the fall 

of Syria’s Bashar Al Assad. But whether such 

aggressive moves harm or help the cause of 

Middle East peace in the long run is open 

to question. As Emma Ashford, author of 

First Among Equals: U.S. Foreign Policy in 

a Multipolar World , summed it up, “Israel’s 

wars are potentially setting up the Middle 

East for further destructive conflict. Is this 

really good for the U.S.?” 

Indeed, despite battlefield wins and the 

weakening of Hamas and Hezbollah, Israel 

appears to lack any sense of how to translate 

those victories into actual statecraft that 

will help promote eventual stability in the 

region. Instead, the country lurches from 

crisis to crisis: The strangulation of Gaza is 

why ragtag rebels in Yemen launched mis -

sile strikes on Israel that led to such severe 

shipping disruptions that the port of Eilat in 

Israel is now bankrupt, and why the Iranian 

government launched missile strikes that 

were likely much more damaging to Israel 

than has been publicly acknowledged—and 

have led the United States to use up about 

a quarter of its expensive and not easily 

replenishable  thaad  missiles protecting 

Israel. None of this has brought an end to 

the conflict, nor even returned any of the re -

maining 50 or so hostages taken by Hamas on 

October 7. Israeli civil society is increasingly 

gripped by instability, with calls from the far 

right to seize all Palestinian lands, protests 

demanding Netanyahu and military leaders 

do more to bring the hostages home, and the 

prime minister’s approval rating falling as 

the public questions his handling of the war. 

And where instability reigns, the bipartisan 

global priority of countering China by any 

means is threatened. Previously, the United 

States has sought buy-in from allies and 

partners who we can reasonably assume are 

now questioning American leadership, or 

even, perhaps, quietly deciding to go their 

own way—a situation that is exacerbated 

by the Trump administration’s handling 

of the Russia-Ukraine War and approach 

to global trade. 

Still, it’s the moral stain that may linger 

the longest. An emphasis on democracy 

and human rights has long been a second -

ary consideration in U.S. foreign policy but 

has remained central to America’s narra -

tive about itself and how it distinguishes 

itself—to its own citizens as well as to other 

nations—from China and Russia. Now, at 

least with regard to Gaza, that moral high 

ground has been ceded. 

WHILE MUCH OF  the world has shifted in 

its views of the Israel-Hamas war and the 

occupation of Gaza, and American voters 

have shifted, too, the gatekeepers of the 

Democratic Party remain largely unmoved, 

The party’s inertia was summed up in this 

comment in August from Pete Buttigieg, 

who consistently comes in the top three in 

polling on the 2028 Democratic presidential 

primary: “I think that we, as Israel’s strongest 

ally and friend, you put your arm around 

your friend when there’s something like 

this going on, and talk about what we’re 

prepared to do together.” As one Democrat 

strategist told  Politico , “When your friend 

kills 60,000 people and starves an entire 

population for months at a time, shouldn’t 

the question be: Why the fuck am I friends 

with this guy?” 

By contrast, Zohran Mamdani won New 

York’s Democratic mayoral primary and 

provided an emphatic message on Gaza: 

End U.S. military and diplomatic support for 

the war. He was pilloried by the Democratic 

establishment for it, but his full-throated 

embrace of the Palestinian cause contrasted 

him with an establishment that aggressive -

ly tried—and conclusively failed—to turn 

that support into a liability: He won a clear 

plurality of Jewish voters in the primary 

and, as of mid-August, continues to a hold 

a double-digit lead with Jewish voters. And 

it’s not just New York: Sixty-six percent of 

registered Democrats believe Israel is per -

petuating a genocide in Gaza, according to a 

Data for Progress poll fielded in early August. 

And, per Gallup, only 8 percent of Democrats 

approve of Israel’s military actions in Gaza. 

But the party still doesn’t get it. Only in July 

did 27 senators vote for arms sanctions on Isra -

el, and few lawmakers—notable among them 

is Chris Van Hollen of Maryland—have been 

consistent in their pursuit of accountability 

for Israel. With the Democratic presidential 

primary set to ramp up after the 2026 mid -

terms, the war in Gaza will almost certainly 

quickly emerge as a wedge issue—perhaps 

even one comparable to the pivotal role that 

support for the Iraq War played in 2008. 

In the meantime, Trump will focus on 

splashy “deals” and may, simply by balking 

at convention, somehow get some elements 

of Middle East policy right. But it won’t be 

enough to address the gravity of catastrophe, 

and he may face growing criticism from 

maga  firebrands like Marjorie Taylor Greene 

who see Israel as a threat and a liability. 

Mainstream Democrats, meanwhile, risk 

ceding the issue to their younger and more 

progressive counterparts who have been 

outspoken on it. For a party that has hemmed 

and hawed about the need to embrace more 

popular positions, ending military support 

for Israel is an easy win—and it’s a good for -

eign policy plank as well. It will also provide 

an opening for Democrats who can press the 

realist case for shifting policy on Gaza and 

Israel, even if they’re still unwilling to fully 

make the moral one.  

> Jonathan Guyer is program director at the
> Institute for Global Affairs at Eurasia Group.
> EYAD BABA/AFP/GETTY
> Following overnight Israeli airstrikes in April, a Palestinian boy held a book as he sat in the
> rubble of a house at the Nuseirat refugee camp in the central Gaza Strip.

11 

IT’S EASY TO BE CYNICAL ABOUT THE WORD “HERO,” 

a descriptor that gets thrown around so much it can feel devoid of mean -

ing. But if those who display courage in defense of others—sometimes at 

great risk to themselves—count as heroes, then many fit the bill among 

the thousands of Americans who are loudly and boldly opposing Donald 

Trump and his corrupt, senselessly cruel administration. 

We’ve chosen to feature a group of such individuals, people who 

have displayed admirable integrity in finding ways to say “no more” to 

Trumpism. Some have stood up singly; others, as a group. Some have 

stood up while others have opted not to do so; some have stood up to 

set an example for others; and some have stood up because, sometimes, 

the right thing to do is the  only  thing to do. 

These individuals’ actions have often put them at substantial risk, 

and many have experienced consequences—to their families, their 

livelihoods, their public standings, even their physical well-being. In 

all cases, their lives have likely been forever altered by Donald Trump, 

and how they chose to fight against a lawless presidency. 

# HEROES 

# OF THE 

# RESISTANCE 

ILLUSTRATION BY PAUL ROGERS THE SUPREME COURT OPERATES ON 

rigid custom and protocol. The court begins 

its term every first Monday in October and 

ends (“rises”) around the end of June. It 

votes in conferences that only the justices 

attend, and in strict order from most to 

least senior. Opinions are assigned by the 

senior justice on that side of the decision. 

The decisions themselves are worked out 

on written drafts that messengers circulate, 

walking the quiet carpets of the court. 

In this hidebound atmosphere, even 

heated disagreements between factions of 

the court play out in largely decorous terms 

in the form of legal analyses that are direct -

ed toward one another’s arguments, not 

the political sphere or the outside world. 

Special rules apply to the most junior 

of the justices. They are typically under 

pressure to go along rather than write 

solo opinions. Chief Justice John Roberts 

didn’t write his first lone dissent until his 

sixteenth year on the court. 

So when Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson 

took the bench as the junior justice in 2022, 

after eight-plus years on the D.C. District 

Court, she might have been expected to 

be a quiet presence, biding her time and 

waiting her turn. 

But Jackson arrived at the court at a 

particularly perilous time for the law and 

American society, when the conservative 

supermajority was issuing a series of contro -

versial opinions that shifted the law sharply 

rightward. The stakes turned dire when 

Donald Trump returned to the presidency 

and pushed the justices to accede to a form 

of executive power bordering on autocracy. 

With little hope of altering the court’s 

decisions on these hyper-consequential 

cases, Jackson chose to depart from the 

model of the passive, go-along junior justice. 

More than speak up, she has chosen— 

even more than her progressive colleagues, 

Justices Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor— 

to call out to the American people the 

grave consequences of the court’s most 

far-reaching opinions. 

Jackson has perceived those cases— 

accurately—as emergency break-glass 

moments, and she has broken the glass. 

So in the court’s catastrophic 2024 im -

munity decision,  Trump v. United States, 

which continues to empower Trump’s 

serial lawlessness and disregard of the 

Constitution, Jackson joined Sotomayor’s 

dissent but also wrote separately to explain 

what the decision “means for our Nation 

moving forward.” 

She explained, “The Court has now de -

clared for the first time in history that the 

most powerful official in the United States 

can … become a law unto himself.” Turning 

to the decision’s “practical consequences,” 

Jackson added that they were “a five-alarm 

fire that threatens to consume democratic 

self-governance and the normal operations 

of our Government.” 

The intervening year has only served 

to prove her case. 

Jackson brought the same sense of 

urgency and appeal to the people in her 

dissent in the final case of this term,  Trump 

v.  casa  Inc. , the ruling on universal injunc -

tions in the birthright citizenship order. 

The case is a disaster for constitutional 

rule, rivaled only by the immunity decision. 

Justice Sotomayor pointedly removed 

the traditional “respectfully” from her 

opinion, saying only “I dissent.” In the 

brandy-parlor world of the court, that’s a 

seismic rebuke. But it doesn’t register that 

strongly in American society. Jackson, by 

contrast, coupled her legal takedown of the 

court with a call to recognize its sweeping 

impact on history and the decline of democ -

racy: “The decision … gives the Executive 

the go-ahead to sometimes wield the kind 

of unchecked, arbitrary power the Found -

ers crafted our Constitution to eradicate.” 

And she added, most memorably: “The 

Court’s decision to permit the Executive to 

violate the Constitution with respect to any -

one who has not yet sued is an  existential 

threat to the rule of law .” (Emphasis mine.) 

That’s strong stuff, and if written in an 

important but not democracy-threatening 

case, it might seem over the top. What 

marks Jackson’s valor is that the cases in 

which she sounds the alarm are precisely 

the rarest of cases, in a uniquely fragile 

moment for the country, in which the court 

is more than playing with fire—it’s enabling 

Trump in ways that may prove cataclysmic 

for the rule of law. 

Her senior colleagues found her opin -

ion irksome. Justice Amy Coney Barrett 

upbraided Jackson superciliously for ad -

vancing arguments “tethered neither to 

[legal] sources nor, frankly, to any doctrine 

whatsoever.” But Jackson, while friend -

ly to her colleagues and of good cheer, 

is uncowed. She declines to stay in her 

assigned role and voice when the court is 

issuing cases that are hacking away at the 

foundations of our constitutional system. 

Like the child in the fable “The Em -

peror’s New Clothes,” she is the youngest 

justice, bringing not just analytic rigor but 

moral clarity, driving home the broader 

importance of the court’s demolition job. 

Where the stakes are existential, she calls 

it true. 

Harry Litman  is a senior legal columnist at  The 

New Republic , a senior fellow at the USC Center 

on Communication Leadership and Policy, 

and the creator of  Talking Feds , a Substack and 

podcast on legal and political issues. 

# The Conscience 

# Of the Resistance Supreme Court Justice  Ketanji Brown Jackson  is not 

hanging back and waiting her turn. And thank God for that. 

By Harry Litman 

12 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

> MICHELLE V. AGINS/THE NEW YORK TIMES/REDUX

October 2025 14 

# Nevertheless, She Persists 

FOR MONTHS AND MONTHS, THE FULL WEIGHT OF THE 

White House’s propaganda and legal operation has been brutally 

bearing down on the family of one day laborer from Maryland. 

Kilmar Abrego Garcia has been shipped off to a megaprison in 

El Salvador, falsely depicted as a violent gang member, smeared 

by federal government agencies, and—now that he’s back in the 

United States—is being criminally prosecuted. He has faced 

perhaps the most crazed vendetta ever waged by a president of 

the United States against a single individual. 

That has thrust Jennifer Vasquez Sura, a young mother of three 

who is Abrego Garcia’s wife, into her own unique role: Amid Donald 

Trump’s lawless, cruel, arbitrary, and increasingly violent immigration 

crackdown, Vasquez has emerged as the public face of perseverance. 

For months throughout this saga, Abrego Garcia himself has 

been out of sight, allegedly getting tortured in a foreign maxi -

mum-security prison. It was only when Senator Chris Van Hollen 

showed up outside its gates in April that we glimpsed him ever so 

fleetingly. When the Trump administration finally relented and 

agreed to bring him home—only to dubiously prosecute him for 

trafficking in migrants— we saw him again. He received bail and 

was released, but ICE has  detained him yet again and is trying to 

deport him to Uganda. 

Jennifer Vasquez Sura , the wife of Kilmar Abrego Garcia, 

has become the public face of perseverance. 

By Greg Sargent 

> CHIP SOMODEVILLA/GETTY

15 Features 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

It was about 500 outrages ago, but the 

dropping of all charges against New York City 

Mayor Eric Adams, a move that was ordered 

just three weeks into the new administration, 

still ranks up there as among the lowest 

moments of the Trump 2.0 regime. The 

Southern District of New York, after a lengthy 

investigation, persuaded a grand jury to indict 

Adams in September 2024. The indictment laid 

out a pattern of bribes and gifts that, over 

nearly a decade, totaled more than $100,000. 

Sometimes, it was alleged, Adams took cash. 

At other times, he took the graft in forms such 

as being charged $300 a night for the normally 

$2,500-a-night Bentley Suite at the St. Regis 

Istanbul, where the curved leather sofa has 

two built-in champagne coolers. 

Adams was still a Democrat at that point. 

Three weeks later, though, at the white-tie Al 

Smith Dinner, there came a hint that friendlier 

winds were blowing in from other directions. 

“I know what it’s like to be persecuted by the 

DOJ for speaking out against 

open borders,” Donald Trump 

said from the dais. “We were 

persecuted, Eric. I was persecut -

ed, and so are you, Eric.” 

Fast-forward to February 10, 

when Emil Bove, a Justice 

Department official who had been 

a defense lawyer for Trump, 

ordered that the charges against 

Adams be dropped. The reason? 

Having to defend himself, Bove argued, would 

eat into the precious time Adams needed to 

enforce the president’s immigration policies. 

Bove also admitted that the move had nothing 

to do with the merits of the allegations. It was a 

nakedly political maneuver by a man who has 

since been accused by two whistleblowers of 

saying in a private meeting that he could ignore 

court orders to carry out Trump’s deportation 

plans—and by a third whistleblower of 

mischaracterizing his actions during the 

Adams affair. 

Specifically, Bove tried to order the acting 

head of the Southern District, Danielle 

Sassoon, to drop the charges. Sassoon 

refused and resigned. Bove placed her 

deputies Hagan Scotten and Derek Wikstrom, 

who also refused the order, on administrative 

leave. (Scotten quickly resigned.) Then, Bove 

# The Eric Adams 

# Refuseniks 

> ILLUSTRATION BY JOEL KIMMEL; SOURCE PHOTO: COURTESY OF RYAN CROSSWELL FOR CONGRESS

Ryan Crosswell  was one of 

11 Justice Department attorneys 

who quit jobs they loved over 

the corrupt handling of the New 

York mayor’s case. 

By Michael Tomasky 

All throughout, it has fallen on Vasquez to speak publicly 

about the ordeal her family has endured and to keep the media 

spotlight trained on his case. After Van Hollen’s trip surfaced 

photos of Abrego Garcia in the national media, Vasquez went on 

Good Morning America  and declared, “The most important thing 

for me, my children, his mom, his brother, his sibling, was to see 

him alive, and we saw him alive.” 

In so doing, Vasquez has become a kind of national symbol of 

the suffering now being experienced by countless other family 

members of those getting caught up in Trump’s dragnet. Born and 

raised in Virginia, Vasquez had two children, one with epilepsy 

and one with autism, with another man who reportedly physi -

cally abused her. She then met Abrego Garcia (a Salvadoran who 

in 2011 had come here illegally) in 2016 and became pregnant again 

a few years later. It’s at this point that Abrego Garcia was arrested 

the first time—they married while he was in detention. Then 

in 2019 a judge granted him a form of protected status barring his 

removal to El Salvador, which is what made the administration’s 

rendition of him illegal. 

Appallingly, Vasquez confirmed what had happened to her 

husband when she saw news media images of him in El Salvador -

an detention. And precisely because Trump and Stephen Miller 

calculated that correcting their error would show unacceptable 

weakness—and because bureaucratic subjugation would excite 

the  maga  base—Vasquez and the family have since had to endure 

a monthslong, whole-of-government campaign of state-sponsored 

barbarism and malicious propaganda. The infuriating bad-faith 

claim that only El Salvador could return Abrego Garcia, the 

dim-witted use of the bureaucracy to produce fake “evidence” 

of his MS-13 status, the nonsensical excuses for not offering him 

due process—in many cases these came from the very top, from 

the vice president and president themselves. 

After Vasquez gained national exposure amid multiple media 

appearances drawing attention to her family’s plight, media or-

ganizations dug deeply into the family’s private lives. They 

discovered that she had sought orders of protection against 

Abrego Garcia. Here again it fell on Vasquez—who had been 

juggling disabled children amid the horrifying uncertainty of not 

knowing what will become of her husband—to speak to the media 

about what had happened. 

Vasquez allowed that their marriage had seen rough patches. But 

she added: “We were able to work through this situation privately 

as a family, including by going to counseling. Our marriage only 

grew stronger in the years that followed. No one is perfect, and 

no marriage is perfect.” Regardless, it’s an absolute outrage that 

their marital problems were blared forth through the government’s 

propaganda apparatus, as if this spectacle somehow constitutes 

an excuse to wrongfully rendition someone to a foreign country 

to face apparent torture. 

If Abrego Garcia is not deported first, an American jury will now 

decide his fate. In the meantime, countless people like Vasquez 

right now are watching loved ones get deported, or snatched off 

the streets, or thrown into hastily erected detention centers with 

horrifically inhumane conditions and a deliberate mission of 

maximizing misery. Vasquez’s suffering is their suffering. And 

her perseverance is their perseverance. 

Greg Sargent  is a staff writer at  The New Republic .October 2025 HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

IN EARLY MARCH, IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCE -

ment arrested Mahmoud Khalil—a Palestinian Columbia 

University graduate student, campus organizer, and legal perma -

nent resident—and detained him for more than three months, as 

the Trump administration worked to strip him of his status and 

deport him. (Khalil has since graduated.) For many, Khalil’s arrest 

marked a terrifying inflection point. Here was a legal permanent 

resident thrown in detention for what Secretary of State Marco 

Rubio plainly acknowledged were political reasons. Khalil was 

transparently and definitionally a political prisoner. His detention 

was an early marker that even the legal and political conventions 

that had held throughout Donald Trump’s first term were on the 

chopping block for an administration run by people like Stephen 

Miller, whose main takeaway from that first turn at the helm was 

they were too deferential to laws and norms. 

Khalil had known that he incurred some risk from his campus 

advocacy, particularly given the so-called Palestine exception to 

liberal support for political speech, but he figured that he might, 

at most, suffer university harassment or discipline. Neither he 

nor, frankly, longtime political and immigration policy observers 

like myself expected that his actions would attract not just the 

attention of but direct intervention from the federal government. 

“My understanding of the U.S. was that they have a robust Con -

stitution, robust rule of law,” Khalil told me from his apartment, 

right near the behemoth institution that recently itself bent the 

knee to Trump in the form of a settlement that gives the admin -

istration a hand in admissions and curriculum. “I never hid my 

face; I didn’t care if I would be doxed … but at no point I felt that 

the government would go that low in targeting free speech.” 

In June, a federal judge ordered that Khalil be released, and he 

was finally able to return to his wife and infant son, who had been 

born while he was detained. Most people, in a situation where 

the government had already imprisoned them for their speech 

and was angling desperately to do so again, might opt to keep 

a low profile. That’s not been the case for Khalil. “In a time like 

this, remaining silent is complicity,” he said. “Remaining silent 

is not just neutral, because it has a cost, and the cost of it is that 

the atrocities would continue, the complicity—whether it’s from the 

U.S. government or Columbia University—would also continue.” 

Rather than hanging back, Khalil went on a whirlwind trip in July 

to the U.S. Capitol, where he turned heads and met almost 20 law-

makers, largely to urge the passage of the Block the Bombs Act, 

In the wake of his extraordinary arrest and detainment, 

Mahmoud Khalil  refuses to lie low. 

By Felipe De La Hoz 

# The Palestinian 

# Organizer 

# Who Wouldn’t 

# Be Silenced 

transferred the case to “Main Justice,” as 

the central Washington office is known, and 

to the Public Integrity Section. He tried to 

order acting head John Keller to drop the 

charges. Keller also refused and resigned, 

as did four other officials. 

Ryan Crosswell had been an attorney in the 

Public Integrity Section since 2020. He’d 

helped prosecute the former governor of 

Puerto Rico and a New Mexico election 

denier. He was not among those summoned 

by Bove at first. But the next day—a Friday, 

and, as fate would have it, Valentine’s Day—he 

was part of the summoned group. “We were 

called in and told to find someone to dismiss 

the case,” he recalled. 

Crosswell wrote his letter of resignation 

to Attorney General Pam Bondi that day. It 

went viral after  The Washington Post 

published it on March 6. “I cannot fathom,” 

he wrote of Bove’s order, “how anyone would 

do this to the public servants he is supposed 

to be leading.” He asserted that the order had 

appalled DOJ colleagues and alumni—and 

then he acerbically observed that he wasn’t 

sure if Bondi would “view this as a compli -

ment or a criticism.” 

The next Monday, Crosswell officially 

resigned. “But I was clearing out my office 

that weekend,” he said. “My mind was made 

up. I couldn’t work for people like that.” 

Today, the career Republican prosecutor is 

running for Congress in his native eastern 

Pennsylvania as a Democrat. 

As of late April, a total of 11 attorneys 

had left the department over the Adams case: 

Kevin Driscoll, Jennifer Clarke, Robert 

Heberle, and Marco Palmieri left in February, 

along with Crosswell, Keller, Sassoon, and 

Scotten. Derek Wikstrom resigned in April, 

along with Celia Cohen and Andrew 

Rohrbach, who had been placed on adminis -

trative leave after they refused to take part in 

dropping the Adams charges. Crosswell’s 

letter got attention, and deservedly so. But 

all 11 of these people answered history’s call 

and did the right and courageous and 

difficult thing. 

And Bove? Naturally, in Donald Trump’s 

America, he’s now a federal judge. 

Michael Tomasky  is the editor of  The New 

Republic .

> THE NEW REPUBLIC/SCREEN GRAB FROM NBC

17 Features 

all stems from … ignoring the public, ignoring human rights,” he 

said. “So to have this cross-movement work, solidarity, absolutely 

helps.” According to Khalil, some of the people who wrote him 

letters of support during his detention in Louisiana said they’d 

been aware of the conflict, but that his arrest had brought it home 

for them. The federal immigration enforcement apparatus, now 

given a practical blank check by Trump’s  maga  budget, is Trump’s 

attempt to create, in Khalil’s words, “his own militia that would 

act extrajudicially, because the immigration system is so loose, 

and it’s under the full control of the executive branch.” 

One question Khalil can’t answer is what exactly is next, be -

cause there will be an after—after the removal proceedings and 

the lawsuit and the courtrooms. Before his arrest and detainment, 

he had an advocacy job lined up, putting his fresh graduate degree 

to work, but now everything is up in the air. “I’m taking it day 

by day,” he told me. “The killing is still happening. It’s not that I 

can take a break from that because the genocide does not take a 

break.” Whatever comes in the long term, Khalil at least has the 

certainty that it will have something to do with advocating for his 

people, to use his unexpected platform to help ensure that there 

is a long term for them, too.   

> Felipe De La Hoz is a contributing editor of The New Republic .

which would curtail military shipments to Israel, and additional 

action to address the Gaza humanitarian crisis, which had by then 

extended to the threat of imminent mass starvation. Days earlier, 

he had filed a federal lawsuit seeking $20 million in damages 

against the administration that was still angling to detain him. 

Khalil is aware of the contrast between his pushback and the 

capitulation of far more powerful people and institutions, includ -

ing not just his university but Congress and the courts: “It’s like 

a stain on their history, on their morals, on just everything, what 

they stand for.” The Trump administration, he said, bullies people 

so they won’t fight back; these institutions are doing the same. 

All of this has left Khalil in a somewhat bizarre situation: He 

is at once advocate  and  cause. People have come out to protest 

on his direct behalf, and he’s a recognizable figure worldwide, 

a fame that seems to leave him a bit bewildered and a bit un -

comfortable. Yet the fact that he didn’t choose his role doesn’t 

change his conviction that he must rise to the challenge. “It’s a 

huge responsibility,” he told me, “to see yourself as a ‘symbol’ of 

the movement, of this attack on freedom of speech.” 

Khalil’s case has also had the effect of more concretely connect -

ing Israel’s actions in Gaza to creeping authoritarianism at home, 

a nexus he says is real and useful to establish. “It’s all the same. It 

> TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES/REDUX

18 

Talk to any federal worker for long enough 

and you’ll eventually hear them say the word 

“mission.” Regardless of who’s in office, 

those on the ground floor of these agencies 

and departments always seem to maintain 

a crystal-clear vision of what their 

institution’s objectives are, and what their 

individual role is in achieving them. 

The Environmental Protection Agency 

is like that and even more so, as it’s stocked 

with more than its share of highly trained 

engineers, scientists, and other experts 

who have been working to realize the 

agency’s goals–clean air, clean water, 

environmental justice—under Democratic 

and Republican presidents alike since it 

opened its doors under Richard Nixon. 

That all ended in January, when the 

Trump administration deemed that mission 

inherently political, too “woke.” As at many 

agencies, any mention of diversity, equity, 

and inclusion was stripped from grants and 

projects in an effort to keep them from being 

slashed by  doge  or Donald Trump’s flurry of 

executive orders. Staff were told to change 

every mention of the Gulf of Mexico to the 

Gulf of America. Pride flags were removed 

from desks. The administration had made a 

concerted effort to frame EPA employees as 

mindless, robotic, woke bureaucrats who 

were contributing to the rampant “waste, 

fraud, and abuse” in the federal government. 

The job, said one anonymous EPA 

worker, had never been the kind of thing 

you just clock in and out of every day. 

“You’re doing it because you believe in it. 

And all of that even feels like it’s been taken 

from us. You know, we’ve been demoral -

ized. It’s demotivating,” the employee said. 

“They have, like, stripped all of that 

workplace culture and all of that identity 

from us when they muddy the mission, and 

all of a sudden, we’re promoting AI and 

the auto industry, and we’re deregulating 

things, and we’re saying greenhouse 

emissions shouldn’t be regulated. You 

identify so much with that mission, and 

now it’s just like, it makes you feel lost. 

You’re like, what are we even doing here?” 

On the last day of June, 144 EPA workers 

decided to do something. After countless 

hushed office whispers, weekend meetups, 

and Signal group chats, the workers 

produced a Declaration of Dissent against 

EPA Administrator Lee Zeldin and the Trump 

administration, putting their very livelihoods 

at risk in the process. The letter outlines five 

of the workers’ most pressing concerns: 

an undermining of public trust; a preference 

for polluters over scientific facts; the 

rescinding of allegedly woke environmental 

justice measures for poor communities; the 

dismantling of the Office of Research and 

Development, which provides the scientific 

backup for the agency’s rulings; and, 

perhaps most importantly, the administra -

tion’s promotion of a culture of fear at the 

agency. These workers were courageous 

enough to sign the letter with their full 

names. All 144 of them were promptly 

placed on administrative leave while the 

EPA conducted an “investigation.” 

# Hail the EPA 144 

The EPA’s response to the letter only 

serves to prove the workers’ point. 

Hundreds of employees signed onto the 

statement to report a culture of fear in 

the workplace. The administration 

squashed that basic First Amendment 

expression aggressively and instead 

investigated every signer to try and nail 

them for the misdeed of planning and/or 

signing the letter on company time or with 

company tech—something none of the 

seasoned employees at the EPA were 

foolish enough to do. The situation as of 

this writing is highly fluid, with no new 

information or updates from the EPA’s 

so-called investigation. Some employees 

plan on returning; some have fully moved 

Dozens of  EPA employees  put their careers at risk with 

the “Declaration of Dissent” they signed in June. 

By Malcolm Ferguson 

> E. JASON WAMBSGANS/CHICAGO TRIBUNE/
> TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICE/GETTY

19 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

on. But each of the declaration’s signatories 

has likely come away from this retribution 

with a new perspective, as they realize that 

the neutrality of the EPA’s old mission is 

long gone. 

“We knew nobody was coming to save 

us. Nobody is coming to defend EPA and 

federal employees, we have to take action 

ourselves…. I am disillusioned with the 

whole system,” a declaration signee said. 

“Clean air, clean water, protecting our 

environment, that’s bipartisan. So why has 

it become such a divided thing? We should 

unite over all of our commonalities and 

take back our power.” 

Malcolm Ferguson  is an associate writer at 

The New Republic .

ON MOST MORNINGS IN THE EDWARD J. SCHWARTZ FEDERAL 

Building in San Diego, the fourth-floor hallway feels like a gauntlet. 

Eight immigration courtrooms, their doors spaced evenly along 

off-white walls, open onto a corridor where masked Immigration 

and Customs Enforcement agents lean and wait, arms crossed, 

boots pressed against the walls—marks of habitual occupation. 

Immigrants step off the elevator into a narrow passage that can 

end with a van ride to Otay Mesa Detention Center. 

But on June 20, World Refugee Day, the walls still bore the 

boot marks—and the agents were gone. They had been there, at 

first, the masks and the posture of authority. Then a delegation 

appeared: 10 clergy in collars, one in vestments, an imam in a 

kufi, two Roman Catholic bishops, and one Episcopal bishop—all 

from California—walking behind Catholic Bishop Michael Pham 

of San Diego. As they approached, the agents broke apart, one by 

one, and disappeared. 

“Like the story of Moses and Exodus,” said observer Scott 

Reid of the immigrant-aiding San Diego Organizing Project. 

“The Red Sea parted.” 

Pham moved through the hallway quietly. He let others enter 

the courtrooms first. He offered nods, not speeches. A government 

lawyer introduced himself in the men’s room. “He feels conflicted 

with the situation,” Pham recalled later. “He knows his morals 

and his values.” On that day, not a single person was detained. 

Lawyers whispered thanks. Immigrants walked out the front door 

instead of through the back. 

This was the soft launch of the  faith  (Faithful Accompaniment 

in Trust & Hope) program—an experiment in walking with the 

downtrodden, as old as the church and as new as this summer. 

Its premise is as simple as it is subversive: place volunteers in the 

immigration courts, not to argue the law but to bear witness. More 

than 50 have signed on so far—clergy and laypeople, Protestants, 

Catholics, Muslims, Jews. They sign up for shifts: morning, mid -

morning, afternoon. They sit in courtrooms, stand in hallways, 

walk with immigrants past the places where agents wait. Their 

presence changes the equation. 

For Pham, the courthouse is not an abstraction. Born in Da Nang 

in 1967, he was 13 when his parents decided that survival required 

escape. He, his sister, and his younger brother boarded a boat with 

116 others. His parents and five other siblings had been dispersed 

# The Bishop 

# Who Made ICE 

# Melt Away 

Bishop Michael Pham  launched a program 

in which clergy and laypeople accompany 

immigrants into their court hearings—not to 

argue the law but to bear witness. 

By Pablo Manríquez October 2025 20 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

elsewhere. Three days and four nights without food or water in the 

South China Sea, then rescue by an oil tanker and a refugee camp 

in Malaysia. In 1983, a sponsoring family in Minnesota reunited 

the Phams in Blue Earth, a small town where his father worked as a 

parish janitor and the children learned English in the public schools. 

From Minnesota to San Diego in 1985, from aeronautical en -

gineering at San Diego State University to the seminary, Pham’s 

life has been a slow accrual of the skills and responsibilities of 

leadership. Ordained in 1999, he served parishes from Oceanside 

to Lemon Grove, founded a multicultural Pentecost festival, and, 

as vicar for ethnic and intercultural affairs, stitched together a 

diocese that runs the length of California’s border with Mexico. 

This July, he became its seventh bishop—and the first Vietnamese 

American to head a U.S. diocese. 

He is, by nature, reserved. He prefers listening to talking, small 

acts to grand gestures. “Bishop Michael is a quiet man who does 

not toot his own horn,” said Kevin Eckery, his communications 

director. “But he always steps into the moment.” In the mornings, 

he works the StairMaster and listens to Spanish-language tapes, 

determined to speak fluently to the Mexican and Central American 

Catholics who fill his pews. 

Pham does not frame his actions as the result of partisan politics. 

“Cruelty should never be government policy,” he told me through 

a spokesman. He affirms the federal right to control the border, but 

insists that the Constitution’s guarantees of warrants, due process, 

and dignity are not reserved for citizens. “None of those rights 

are restricted,” he said. “The Constitution makes it very clear.” 

The  faith  program, led day-to-day by a team that includes the 

Rev. Scott Santarosa, is still finding its form. “We’re trying to make 

the plane as we fly it,” Santarosa said. 

But the results, even in the early days, 

are undeniable. When the clerics ap -

pear, the spirit in the hallway changes. 

“Your presence made a difference,” 

one lawyer told Santarosa. 

On World Refugee Day, before 

walking to the courthouse, Pham 

celebrated Mass at St. Joseph Cathe -

dral. In his homily, he told his own 

refugee story, expressed gratitude 

to the United States for the chance to 

start anew, and described the fear of 

seeing people taken away without 

reason—first in Vietnam, now in the 

country that took him in. “We are a 

human family,” he said. “We stand in solidarity with our refugees, 

migrants, and immigrants. We are God’s children.” 

By midmorning, the hearings had ended. No arrests. In the 

first-floor lobby, the delegation formed a circle and prayed. Then 

they walked back out into the San Diego sun, past the idling vans, 

their side doors still locked. 

In the weeks ahead, the  faith  volunteers will return. The boot 

prints on the walls will remain. But for some who step off the ele -

vator into that hallway, there will also be something else: the sight 

of a bishop who once arrived in the United States with nothing, 

standing beside them as they face the machinery of removal. 

It is not, in Pham’s telling, an act of defiance. It is a fulfillment 

of a debt. 

Pablo Manríquez  is a contributing editor for  The New Republic. 

> ILLUSTRATION BY JOEL KIMMEL

# Kelley’s 

# Heroes 

For  afge  president  Everett Kelley 

and his 800,000-odd workers, 

what was once a safe career choice 

has become a high-wire act. 

By Emily Cooke 

It used to be that a government job was the 

very definition of bland security. Land a role 

with the feds, and you knew you’d be safe. 

Your duties wouldn’t be subject to the 

whims of some capricious new CEO; 

your benefits were unlikely to 

suddenly double in price; you 

wouldn’t get axed when your company 

was sold to a multinational corpora -

tion. Sure, the bureaucratic 

machine might occasionally 

lag, you might find yourself 

tangled in the proverbial red 

tape, but the private sector’s 

blithe, cold surprises were nothing 

you had to fear. 

In the space of months, Donald Trump 

changed all that, destroying the symbolic 

associations of the civil service along with 

thousands upon thousands of actual jobs. 

Trump decimated the U.S. Agency for 

International Development, the Consumer 

Financial Protection Bureau, the Agency for 

Global Media, the Small Business Adminis -

tration, and the Department of Education, 

among other agencies. In July alone, the 

government dropped 12,000 employees. As 

of early August, the Trump administration 

was paying no fewer than 154,000 people to 

do nothing, at least until September 30 or 

December 31, depending on the contract, 

when the pay will stop. 

In this eerie new reality, no federal 

worker is safe. Not analysts, researchers, or 

scientists; not librarians, forensic account -

ants, or judges. Not Erika McEntarfer, the 

highly respected commissioner of the 

Bureau of Labor Statistics, who was fired 

after her agency produced a jobs report 

whose findings Trump deemed insufficient -

ly flattering. Even top-ranking officials 

appointed during Trump’s reign—such as 

Vinay Prasad, the former director of the 

Food and Drug Administration’s Center for 

Biologics Evaluation and Research, who left 

after less than three months on the job— 

have been shown to be vulnerable, as have 

other Trump loyalists. Next year is likely to 

bring more of the same. In 2026, the 21 Features 

Defense Department intends to shed 

60,000 civilian employees. The Fish and 

Wildlife Service aims to lose 19 percent of 

its personnel. The National Park Service 

promises 27 percent. The U.S. Geological 

Survey, 32 percent. The list goes on. 

Everett Kelley, the president of the Ameri -

can Federation of Government Employees, 

characterized the government’s unprece -

dented attack on its own as phenomenally 

“aggressive,” “adversarial,” and “inhumane.” 

The largest union of federal workers in the 

country,  afge  represents some 800,000 

federal employees across a wide range of 

fields. Public servants, Kelley told me, have 

been “threatened everywhere you turn.” 

They have been called names. Their honor 

and their work ethic have been impugned. 

These staunch, reliable people, who took 

oaths to serve without bias, who simply want 

to do the labor they were hired to do— 

they’ve been turned into nervous wrecks. 

“They sit down and they shed tears,” Kelley 

recounted, “just thinking about what I gotta 

go through tomorrow.” 

As government jobs went from being 

symbols of drab dependability to a 

metonym for all the pointless violence of 

Trump’s second term, Kelley’s union 

responded to the president “with a battle 

cry,” he said. When the Department of 

Government Efficiency tried to “optimize” 

the federal workforce by making mass 

layoffs,  afge  sued. When the Office of 

Personnel Management let go of thousands 

of probationary employees,  afge  sued. 

When Trump tried, in an executive order, to 

strip government employees of their collec -

tive bargaining rights,  afge  sued. When 

agencies affected by the order stopped 

withdrawing union dues automatically from 

paychecks, the union signed members up 

to its new dues system—100,000 in less 

than three months. 

The Trump administration has contin -

ued to press ahead, of course, despite the 

roadblocks erected by  afge  and others. 

A Supreme Court decision in July, for 

instance, allowed cuts to advance at 

the Department of Education and the State 

Department, among other agencies. 

But Kelley, who believes his role as national 

president of  afge  is to “fight like hell,” 

treats the defeats with equanimity. “I truly 

believe there’s hope,” he told me.  afge , he 

pointed out, has been around for more than 

90 years. It has managed to work with 

administration after administration, and it 

always comes out “bigger, better, and 

stronger.” It intends to continue repelling 

Trump’s war on federal workers. The 

stereotypes, meanwhile, have been turned 

on their heads. You can’t enter public 

service to avoid excitement. At this point, 

these jobs have all the stability of a 

high-wire act. Thanks to Trump, the civil 

service has become a circus.  

> Emily Cooke is the editorial director of The
> New Republic.
> AMANDA ANDRADE-RHOADES/BLOOMBERG/GETTY

“I’M GOING TO PRAY,” BETTY OSCEOLA 

said, near the entrance to the Florida Ever-

glades concentration camp three miles 

from her home. “I’m not doing a protest.” 

Around her neck, next to her reading glass -

es, the 58-year-old Native activist wore 

strands of tiny beads in black, white, red, 

and yellow. She was speaking in July, at an 

interfaith prayer gathering that took place 

under small canopies not far from the fence 

marking the camp perimeter. Inside the 

fence, four enormous tents held hundreds of 

prisoners, each outfitted with a color-coded 

wristband. All had been recently rounded 

up by immigration enforcement officers. 

Outside, smiling into their cameras like 

the president, tourists posed for ghoulish 

photos in front of a blue sign with white 

lettering:  alligator alcatraz .

Osceola is a member of the Miccosukee 

Tribe of Indians of Florida, which has joined 

a federal lawsuit brought by the environ -

mental groups Friends of the Everglades 

and the Center for Biological Diversity, 

challenging the “unlawful construction” of 

Alligator Alcatraz. On August 21, a federal 

judge blocked all new detentions immedi -

ately, and ordered much of the facility be 

removed within 60 days. In a motion, the 

Miccosukee asserted that its members “have 

lived in and cared for the land” where the 

camp is located “since time immemorial.” 

Osceola was among the first to observe 

trucks moving equipment and trailers onto 

the site, at a moment when local officials 

said they were still mostly in the dark about 

the project. She was among the Miccosukee 

who gathered there in the days leading up 

to President Donald Trump’s July 1 visit 

and the camp’s grand opening. She was 

there again nearly two weeks later, when 

a group of Democratic lawmakers tried 

to inspect the site, as is their right by law. 

One night some weeks after that, she was 

across the road from the camp’s sign, 

streaming live on Facebook with her laptop 

and a generator. She has kept returning, as 

have other activists, who have over these 

months offered both protest and prayer. 

The activists’ focus on the land is inten -

tional. Osceola is of the last generation, she 

has said, who “knew some form of subsis -

tence living” in the Everglades, which she 

describes as having become “a skeleton of 

its former self.” And the land is central to the 

story told by the camp’s boosters. Florida 

Attorney General James Uthmeier speaks 

of the swamp as if it’s a wasteland, invok -

ing the animals as a kind of natural guard 

force. “If people get out, there’s not much 

waiting for them other than alligators and 

pythons,” Uthmeier said in June. “Nowhere 

to go, nowhere to hide.” But the Miccosukee 

# The Native Activist 

# Who Keeps Going Back 

# To Alligator Alcatraz 

Betty Osceola ’s tribe, the Miccosukee, has joined a federal 

lawsuit challenging the “unlawful construction” of the 

detention camp on land tribal members consider their own. 

By Melissa Gira Grant 

> JOE RAEDLE/GETTY

23 Features 

# Here Comes the Judge 

Paula Xinis  of Maryland has been one of a handful of federal judges 

who have held the administration’s feet to the legal flame. 

By Edith Olmsted 

Awful as things are under Trump 2.0, they’d 

be far worse still without the courage of 

some federal judges willing to rule against 

the administration. James Boasberg ruled 

that Trump administration officials could 

face criminal charges for deporting 

migrants. John McConnell ruled that the 

administration had overstepped its bounds 

in freezing a variety of federal grants. These 

so-called activist judges have stood strong 

in the face of threats against them and their 

families. In truth they’re not activists, but 

jurists who insist that the law still matters 

in this country. 

Probably none have been stronger, or 

more high-profile, than Judge Paula Xinis 

of the U.S. District Court for Maryland. 

She has emerged as a staunch defender of 

American law amid the administration’s 

campaign to undermine the judiciary so it 

can stuff immigrants in foreign gulags. A 

judge for whom she clerked once described 

her as a “model” for how judges should act. 

Xinis first became a target for conserva -

tives around a decade ago, after she was 

nominated for her current position by 

former President Barack Obama, because 

her law firm had represented the family of 

Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old Baltimore man 

who had died from a spinal cord injury after 

receiving a “rough ride” by that city’s police. 

She ultimately won the support of 10 Senate 

Republicans for confirmation, including 

Lindsey Graham and Mitch McConnell. 

During the first Trump administration, 

Xinis blocked rules that would have made it 

harder for asylum-seekers to receive work 

authorization. When issuing her preliminary 

injunction in  casa  de Maryland v. Wolf  in 

2020, Xinis argued that the government had 

“simply paid lip service” to the immense 

economic hardship the provisions would 

inflict on immigrants. A discerning eye for 

the government’s bullshit is the very skill that 

marks Xinis as a fixture in the resistance 

against the second Trump administration. 

The president’s brutal, theatrical 

crackdown on immigration flourishes in 

that insidious space between the govern -

ment’s claims and reality. In March, the 

administration deported three planeloads 

of immigrants it claimed were dangerous 

gang members to El Salvador under the 

Alien Enemies Act, knowing that around 

half of them had no criminal record at all. 

Among the deported was Kilmar Abrego 

Garcia, a father of three living legally in 

Maryland who had been boarded onto one 

of the planes to El Salvador as the result of 

an “administrative error,” and in violation 

of a prior order preventing his removal. 

Xinis ordered that the government 

correct its “grievous error” and “facilitate 

and effectuate” the return of Abrego 

Garcia. But despite the Supreme Court’s 

approval, it quickly became clear that the 

Trump administration had no intention of 

complying with her order, claiming it could 

not “effectuate” Abrego Garcia’s return 

because he was no longer in the custody of 

the United States. 

The Trump administration claimed 

privilege upon privilege to evade the 

judge’s requests for information. Xinis 

refused to simply take the government at 

its word, batted aside lawyers’ weak 

excuses, and demanded actual answers. 

In one excoriating filing, she accused the 

government of a “bad faith refusal to 

comply with discovery obligations,” 

and said lawyers had relied on “vague and 

unsubstantiated assertions of privilege” 

to “obstruct discovery and evade 

compliance.” As the government stalled, 

she declared from the bench: “It is a 

fact now of this record that every day 

Mr. Garcia is detained in  cecot  is a day of 

irreparable harm.” 

Months later, Abrego Garcia was 

miraculously returned to the United States 

to face charges related to illegally 

transporting undocumented immigrants 

for cash. But Xinis is still hounding 

government lawyers. When the government 

moved to deport Abrego Garcia to Uganda 

in late August, Xinis forbade his immediate 

removal, and said that federal law may 

require him to be removed to a country of 

his choice. 

Through her tireless efforts, Xinis has 

exposed the government’s pitiful response 

to its own mistakes, which vary from 

simple ineptitude to willful noncompliance. 

The government’s handling of Abrego 

Garcia has highlighted the depravity of 

Donald Trump’s blatant campaign to 

undermine the courts. Throughout it all, 

Xinis has consistently held the govern -

ment’s feet to the flame. 

Edith Olmsted  is an associate writer at  The 

New Republic .

> ILLUSTRATION BY JOEL KIMMEL; SOURCE PHOTO: FEDERAL BAR ASSOCIATION

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

survive in the area just fine, Osceola said. 

“I’m out here,” she told an NBC outlet in 

South Florida. “My family’s out here.” 

In fact there are 15 traditional villages 

in the area, where people live to this day, 

the majority of them within three miles 

of the camp. Mad Bear Osceola, another 

local who has spoken out against Alligator 

Alcatraz, grew up in a village close by, he 

told  The  News-Press  of Fort Myers . For the 

Micco sukee, he said, “any type of prison or 

where you’re caging people up, it’s some -

thing that you don’t do.... We are not in favor 

of putting people in chains like animals.” 

Later in July, at a local gallery, Betty 

Osceola and photographer Clyde Butcher 

told stories about what the land is really 

like. It was held by the Miccosukee through 

decades of resistance to forced removal. 

It is home to some of the darkest sky in 

the Eastern United States. People hike 

through the cypress, deep into the swamp; 

on nights with a new moon, the stars draw 

out photographers. Now a halo of light pol -

lution spreads above the camp. Some of it 

may issue from the fluorescent lights hung 

over the bunks, always on. “I no longer 

know when it’s daytime or when it’s night -

time,” said Juan Palma Martinez, who was 

detained at the camp and spoke to press 

from inside. “It’s a type of torture.” 

At the interfaith event, Osceola spoke to 

this suffering. “I can feel it in the trees—the 

uncertainty of what’s going on with all 

these people coming and going,” she said. 

“They’re taking in all the anguish from the 

people who are kept here.” 

Melissa Gira Grant  is a staff writer at  The New 

Republic .October 2025 24 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

ASK A PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL PUNTER: THEY DON’T GET 

no respect. Kick a ball downfield 45 yards so the punt can’t be 

returned—in other words, do your job well—and there’s a col -

lective yawn from the stadium. But mess up and give the other 

team great field position, then everybody knows your name. And 

not in a good way. 

Chris Kluwe, whose pro-equality activism dates back to his days 

with the Minnesota Vikings, is feeling the punter’s curse even in 

retirement from professional ball. Disturbed that the City Council 

in his hometown of Huntington Beach, California, approved the 

placement of a coded  maga  plaque at a local public library, Kluwe, 

43, decided a simple objection wasn’t enough. He went to a City 

Council meeting in February to fight the plaque (which cheekily 

included the phrase “Magical Alluring Galvanizing Adventurous”) 

as well as a more explicitly pro-Trump line: “Through hope and 

change our nation has built back better to the golden era of Making 

America Great Again!” 

Kluwe ticked off a list of what  maga  stands for, including 

“trying to erase trans people from existence,” “resegregation 

and racism,” “censorship and book bans,” and cuts to air traffic 

# The  Angr y Citizen 

Former NFL punter  Chris Kluwe  exemplifies the engaged 

civil disobedience we desperately need in this time. 

By Susan Milligan 

Former NFL 

player Chris 

Kluwe in front of 

the Huntington 

Beach Central 

Library in August 

Photograph by Ted Soqui 25 Features 

> ILLUSTRATION BY JOEL KIMMEL; SOURCE PHOTO: MARCUS HUFF/NORTHERN WYOMING NEWS

safety and education. “ maga  is profoundly corrupt, unmistakably 

anti-democracy, and most importantly,  maga  is explicitly a Nazi 

movement,” Kluwe said at the City Council meeting, winning 

applause from onlookers. 

Kluwe then approached the council members themselves, 

placed his hands behind his back, and fell to the floor. He was 

quickly arrested and detained by local police. But it didn’t stop 

there: Edison High School, in the enviable position of having a 

former professional athlete as its freshman football coach, fired 

Kluwe. Like nearly anonymous punters everywhere, Kluwe wasn’t 

quite famous enough for the high school to fear a public national 

outcry over his dismissal. But he was just well-known enough to 

make the school skittish about what Kluwe said he was told was 

“too much attention” for their comfort level. 

The library had been a target of conservative political activism 

for some time, Kluwe said, such as efforts to ban  lgbtq -themed 

books and another to privatize the collection. The  maga  plaque 

was what made him decide to conduct civil disobedience. 

Kluwe said he thought, “I’ve been waiting for one of my elected 

officials to do something about this. I’ve been waiting for some -

one to get arrested for causing trouble, and no one has done it.” 

And then he thought, “I can’t ask them to do something I’m not 

willing to do myself.” 

Kluwe’s acts are being replicated across the country by throngs 

of Americans protesting Trump administration policies. During a 

June wave of protests against immigration raids, several hundred 

were arrested in California, Texas, and at Manhattan’s Trump 

Tower. Others have filmed the masked Immigration and Customs 

Enforcement agents and posted the videos online. At least five 

elected officials have been arrested or confronted by law enforce -

ment as they challenged Donald Trump’s immigration agenda. 

Senator Alex Padilla, a California Democrat, was handcuffed and 

forced to the ground after he attempted to ask a question of Home -

land Security Secretary Kristi Noem during a news conference. 

Kluwe has a history of activism and speaking out, on matters 

football-related and beyond. He very publicly called out leading 

NFL colleagues for being “greedy” in what Kluwe thought was 

holding up a contract between the NFL and players. He slammed 

NFL brass for putting substandard replacement referees on the 

field to squeeze concessions from experienced refs. 

Kluwe’s vocal support for same-sex marriage in 2012 — three 

years before the Supreme Court made such unions legal—led, 

he believes, to his release from the Minnesota Vikings in 2013. 

Kluwe said that special teams coordinator at the time, Mike 

Priefer, taunted him with homophobic comments. Kluwe threat -

ened to sue, and the case ended with the Vikings agreeing to 

donate to several  lgbtq  rights groups, including a charity run 

by Wade Davis, an openly gay former NFL player. 

Kluwe never punted in a regular season NFL game again. 

Now 43, he writes the occasional op-ed and books and is running 

for a state legislative seat in California. “I don’t really want to be 

a politician, but we’re at the point in our nation’s history where 

it’s all hands on deck,” Kluwe said. “Are we going to act to save 

democracy or not? That really is the fundamental question we 

have to ask ourselves.” 

Susan Milligan  is a contributing editor for  The New Republic. 

The anti-Trump resistance won’t get very far 

unless it brings the fight to the red states, 

and states don’t come any redder than 

Wyoming. Fully 77 percent of Wyoming’s 

voters are registered Republicans, and 

in 2024 Donald Trump beat Democrat 

Kamala Harris there by 46 percentage 

points. No Democrat has held statewide 

office in Wyoming since 2010; no Democrat 

has represented Wyoming in Congress 

since 1978; and no Democratic presidential 

candidate has carried Wyoming since 1964, 

when Tom Harrington was 12 years old. 

Harrington, now 73, is a leader of 

Wyoming’s anti-Trump resistance. “I’ve 

always been a registered Republican,” 

Harrington told me. In the 1990s, Harrington 

was twice elected—as a Republican— 

prosecuting attorney for Washakie County. 

He voted for Ronald Reagan, George H.W. 

Bush, John McCain, and Mitt Romney, 

but in 2016, Harrington couldn’t stomach 

Trump, so instead he voted for the 

Libertarian Party 

candidate, Gary Johnson. 

Harrington has little 

experience in politics. For 

11 years it wasn’t an option, 

because he was a state 

judge on Wyoming’s circuit 

court, which handles 

misdemeanors, small civil 

disputes, and the initial 

filing of felony charges, and 

he had to remain above 

politics. Still, he looked askance at the 

GOP’s capture by the Tea Party during 

the Obama administration, and by  maga 

after that. “I don’t consider them conserva -

tives,” he said. “They’re more radical than 

that.” But he kept his mouth shut until 

he retired from the bench in 2019 at age 66, 

and even for a few years afterward. 

In 2020, Harrington pulled the lever for 

Joe Biden, and in 2022 he put up a sign on 

his lawn for Representative Liz Cheney, 

who’d doomed her Republican primary 

fight against Harriet Hageman with her 

principled leadership as vice chair of the 

House’s January 6 committee. “You’ve got 

a lot of nerve putting that up around 

here,” a friend told Harrington half in jest. 

Two years later, “I just got despondent” 

watching Joe Biden lose his debate against 

# The Red 

# Brigades 

Wyoming’s  Tom Harrington 

fights Trump in the nation’s 

reddest state. 

By Timothy Noah 26 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

Trump. So Harrington went online and 

ordered 500 postcards to get out the vote 

in swing states. Pretty soon, Harrington 

was de facto co-chair of an anti-maga 

group called Concerned Citizens of Big 

Horn County. About 50 people showed up 

at the first meeting in March 2025, and 

about as many have come every month 

since. The group has no officers, and its 

other de facto co-chair does not wish to be 

identified (“she has good reason”), so 

Harrington is the group’s public face. 

Such reticence is not uncommon. Mary 

Whalen, 70, is a retired schoolteacher and 

leads the Cheyenne chapter of Indivisible, 

a national anti-Trump resistance network. A 

registered Republican for most of her adult 

life, Whalen told me many in her family are 

pro-Trump, and that’s created tension. In 

one instance, a family member vandalized 

some protest signs in her garage. Whalen 

has participated in five anti-Trump rallies, 

but she said she is protesting policies, not 

individuals, because “I don’t want to go 

there by name.” 

Harrington’s group has participated in 

numerous anti-Trump rallies and flooded a 

Hageman town hall in Greybull (“some of 

them were a little rude to her, but it was 

well-deserved”). Utah Republican Senator 

Mike Lee’s brief attempt to insert a sell-off 

of public lands into the budget reconcilia -

tion bill was perhaps the biggest flashpoint, 

prompting “a big protest in Cheyenne with 

several hundred people.” Lee withdrew the 

amendment, but Wyoming’s congressional 

delegation “didn’t do squat” to oppose it. 

Harrington thinks that will be an issue in 

the 2026 midterms, because in Wyoming, 

“Everybody uses the public lands.” 

Another major issue is Trump’s 

immigration crackdown, because most 

of the people who dig irrigation ditches on 

the big ranches to grow cattle feed are 

Latino. “The ranchers know these guys,” 

Harrington said. “They depend on them.” 

Meanwhile, the budget reconciliation’s 

Medicaid cuts will hit hard in Wyoming, 

where 12 percent of the population is 

on Medicaid. 

The Concerned Citizens of Big Horn 

County will likely exert its greatest impact 

on Wyoming’s  maga -dominated state 

legislature, which in recent years has cut 

funding for mental health (Wyoming has 

the third-highest suicide rate in the 

country) and shifted scarce funds from 

public schools to homeschooling and 

private education. “We’re actively looking 

for some candidates” to represent Bighorn 

County, Harrington said. Because this is 

Wyoming, “It has to be a Republican,” but 

“a less crazy Republican.” 

Timothy Noah  is a staff writer for  The New 

Republic .

# The Union Organizer 

# Held in a Clandestine 

# Detention Center 

# He Helped Expose 

The government claims that  Alfredo Juarez 

Zeferino’s  work organizing farmworkers 

had nothing to do with why ICE targeted him. 

By Kate Aronoff 

> COURTESY OF EDGAR FRANKS

ON A TUESDAY MORNING IN MARCH, IMMIGRATION AND 

Customs Enforcement agents pulled over Alfredo “Lelo” Juarez 

Zeferino, who was driving his partner to her job at a tulip farm 

in rural Skagit County, Washington. When a plainclothes ICE 

officer approached his vehicle, Zeferino rolled down his window 

a few inches, he said, and asked if the man had a warrant. The 

agent responded by smashing Zeferino’s window, handcuffing 

him, and taking him to an unmarked warehouse. The warehouse 

happened to be one that Zeferino, who has been organizing with 

fellow farmworkers for well over a decade, had helped expose 

as a clandestine ICE holding facility back in 2022. From there, 

the 25-year-old was transferred to the Northwest ICE Processing 

Facility in Tacoma, Washington. 

He was held there for months. After an immigration judge 

ruled that she didn’t have jurisdiction to issue a bond that would 

have allowed Zeferino to be released while he was awaiting 

trial, he applied for and was granted a voluntary departure in 27 Features 

July. Now he’s back in Guerrero, Mexico, for the first time since 

he was a kid. The outpouring of support he received while in 

custody—including protests outside the facilities where he was 

held, and a letter from members of Washington state’s congres -

sional delegation—is a testament to the ambition and bravery 

of his organizing work. Zeferino helped win statewide overtime 

pay, wage increases, and workplace protections against wildfire 

smoke and extreme heat. Throughout, he’s been fighting to 

change a draconian, exploitative immigration regime that has 

been supercharged by the Trump administration. 

Edgar Franks—the political director of Familias Unidas por 

la Justicia, the independent farmworker union Zeferino helped 

found as a teenager—and others who have worked closely with 

Zeferino over the years believe that his arrest was politically 

motivated. The Department of Homeland Security denies this 

claim and Zeferino’s account of his arrest, contending both that 

the organizer failed to comply with law enforcement in March 

and defied a 2018 deportation order; Zeferino has said he was 

unaware that it had been issued. In May, his lawyers signed him 

onto a class-action lawsuit filed by the Northwest Immigrant 

Rights Project, alleging that judges with the Tacoma Immigration 

Court have consistently denied bond to immigrants over the last 

two years. The court granted just 3 percent of bond requests made 

in the fiscal year preceding September 2023—the lowest rate in 

the country. While the suit wasn’t able to keep Zeferino in the 

country, it could help the estimated hundreds still sitting in legal 

limbo at the processing facility where he was held. 

Franks told me that Zeferino was wary of going into too much 

detail about conditions at the Tacoma facility while he was there. 

But Franks learned enough from him to paint a grim picture. The 

lights were kept on all day and night. It was cold. People didn’t get 

medications if they were sick and often wouldn’t receive dinner 

until the early hours of the morning. Other detainees told Franks 

that the guards were always yelling at people to urge them to sign 

on for voluntary departures. They were “trying to break people 

down mentally,” Franks explained. (ICE did not respond to a 

request for comment about these allegations.) 

Franks met Zeferino when, as a kid, he volunteered 

to translate for fellow berry pickers between Spanish 

and his native Mixteco language. Franks said that his 

friend is in good spirits and adjusting to life back with 

his family in Guerrero. “He still has a sense of humor 

about everything,” Franks told me. “That makes us 

all feel good,” he added, at least in light of far worse 

alternatives—a reference to those sent to El Salvador’s 

sprawling, hellish Terrorism Confinement Center, or  cecot .

In the future, Zeferino may still be able to apply for legal status 

in the United States. In the meantime, the changes he fought for 

at the state and local level—from higher wages, to state-mandated 

breaks when temperatures in the fields soar above 80 degrees 

Fahrenheit—are already keeping farmworkers safer on the job. 

The union he founded is empowering them to enforce those pol -

icies, fight for more, and defend themselves against both abusive 

bosses and the Trump administration’s war on working-class 

immigrants. “I have very limited options but I want everyone to 

know no matter where I end up,” Zeferino wrote in July, “I will 

continue fighting for justice along side all of you.” 

Kate Aronoff  is a staff writer at  The New Republic .

In February, when Attorney General Pam 

Bondi took over the Justice Department, 

she immediately informed its 10,000-odd 

lawyers that they would have to “zealously” 

advocate for the United States. What she 

actually meant was that, under her watch, 

the department would have to zealously 

advocate for Donald Trump. DOJ lawyers, 

she said in her February 5 memo, are 

required to “aggressively” enforce civil and 

criminal laws and “vigorously” defend all 

“presidential policies and actions.” While 

those lawyers have a certain amount of 

discretion in their duties, Bondi warned that 

it “does not include latitude to substitute 

personal political views or judgments for 

those that prevailed in the election.” 

In past Democratic and Republican 

administrations alike, DOJ lawyers had 

the informal right to decline to affix their 

names to the signature block at the end of 

a court filing—the lawyerly equivalent 

of a screenwriter changing his credit to 

Alan Smithee when he disagrees with the 

studio’s choices. They could also 

decline to participate in some cases on 

conscience grounds. 

Bondi ended that practice, treating it as 

an anti-constitutional act. DOJ lawyers 

who “refuse to advance good-faith 

arguments by declining to appear in court 

or sign briefs,” she claimed, undermine the 

constitutional order and deprive Trump “of 

the benefit of his lawyers.” Any DOJ 

attorneys who sought such exemptions 

“will be subject to discipline and potential -

ly termination.” 

This year, in response to Bondi’s 

dictates, hundreds of lawyers have left the 

department. Erez Reuveni was not one of 

them—at least, not at first. Reuveni began 

his tenure at the Justice Department in 

# The Attorney 

# Who Refused 

# To Help Trump 

# Break the Law 

Justice Department lawyer 

Erez Reuveni  admitted that 

the Trump administration 

had made a mistake when it 

deported Kilmar Abrego Garcia 

to El Salvador. He was fired. 

By Matt Ford October 2025 28 

NICOL AS TALB OT T STO OD AT 

attention, fists tight to his trouser seams, 

avoiding the eyeballs of the first sergeant 

asking why he’d joined the Army. “I’m here 

because I’m transgender,” he sounded off. 

“And I want to prove that people like me 

can do this. And frankly, can do it better 

than some of the people standing around 

me right now.” 

Afterward, the other 64 trainees huddled 

around him in an “incredible moment of ca -

maraderie” that Talbott says brought them 

together as a unit. After basic training, he 

would be selected as an honor graduate and 

earn his commission this year as a second 

lieutenant, 17 days before his commander 

in chief, Donald Trump, issued a January 27 

executive order banning transgender peo -

ple from military service. The following day, 

Talbott became lead plaintiff in  Talbott v. 

Trump  (now  v. USA ), the first of two cases 

challenging the policy headed to the Su -

preme Court. 

If the plaintiffs succeed, more than 

4,000 transgender service members may 

continue serving openly and honorably, as 

they have been since a long-standing ban 

was first lifted in 2016, and as transgender 

people now do in 18 other countries. But if 

Trump’s ban stands, it will legalize trans -

gender discrimination and trigger a witch 

hunt that tears military units apart, forces 

out combat veterans with distinguished 

careers, and wastes billions in taxpayer 

dollars invested in their training. (Disclo -

sure: I circulated an open letter opposing 

Trump’s policy in coordination with the 

legal organizations arguing Talbott’s case.) 

Talbott is proof this policy is in error. 

Raised in Lisbon, Ohio (pop. 2,567)—a 

pro-Trump area where, he said, people 

“cared much more about the content of 

somebody’s character, their work eth -

ic … and how they treated others” than 

about their politics—the self-proclaimed 

nerd-Swiftie-crime junkie grew up baling 

hay, milking cows, and herding sheep on 

his family’s homestead farm. Before he 

could speak, his mother tells of how he’d 

pull his long hair so she’d trim it short, 

preferred Tonka trucks to Barbie dolls, 

and prayed every night to wake up a boy. 

At 16, when he first opened up to friends 

and family about being transgender, “Not 

a single person was surprised by this 

‘grand revelation.’” 

# On e Soldier’ s Brave  Battle Second Lt.  Nicolas Talbott  was selfless, patriotic—and transgender. 

Now he’s the lead plaintiff in a lawsuit against Trump. 

By Timothy Soseki Kudo 

Memories of 9/11, patriotism, and a 

desire to protect others made military 

service a childhood dream first deferred 

in 2012 when, seeking to enlist in high 

school, Talbott discovered that a trans -

gender ban had been in place since 1963. 

When it was lifted in 2016, Talbott leaped at 

the chance to serve. But after a year spent 

working with a military recruiter to submit 

an enlistment package, Talbott was driving 

a delivery truck outside Chicago when his 

phone started “buzzing like crazy.” At a rest 

stop, he learned Trump had announced his 

plan to reinstate the ban via Tweet. “It was 

this moment of, ‘oh my gosh, I can finally 

live this childhood dream of mine,’” he 

said. “And then it’s gone.” 

A legal challenge,  Stockman v. Trump, 

quickly arose. Talbott signed on, and, as it 

made its way through the courts, he joined 

Kent State University’s  rotc  program while 

pursuing a master’s degree in criminology. 

When guidelines changed again in 2019, 

grandfathering in existing transgender 

service members but banning new trans -

gender civilians from joining, Talbott asked 

the  rotc  commander to process his induc -

tion paperwork before the policy went into 

HEROES OF THE RESISTANCE 

Photograph by Michael F. McElroy 

2010 as a trial attorney, and across three 

presidencies worked his way up through 

the Office of Immigration Litigation. He 

was not a political appointee; he was a civil 

servant expected to represent the United 

States in court regardless of the presi -

dent’s party or ideology, and he did. 

Then something happened that made it 

untenable to go on. In March, a federal 

immigration agent detained Kilmar Abrego 

Garcia—who had entered the United 

States without authorization after fleeing 

El Salvador when he was 16 years old— 

outside a Home Depot in Hyattsville, 

Maryland. Three days later, a U.S. govern -

ment flight sent him and dozens of other 

men to the Terrorism Confinement Center, 

or  cecot , a Salvadoran-run prison where he 

would be held indefinitely. 

Federal officials later learned that Abrego 

Garcia had been deported in error: An immi-

gration judge had barred his removal in 2019, 

and the Department of Homeland Security 

had given him a work permit. Though Trump 

administration officials would later claim 

that Abrego Garcia had ties to international 

gangs, they have provided little evidence to 

support the allegations. 

When Abrego Garcia’s lawyers chal -

lenged his continued detention in  cecot  in 

U.S. federal courts, it was Reuveni who 

represented the United States. By this point, 

he was the acting deputy director of his 

office, giving him the discretion to do so. He 

later told Congress that he “took the case 

on personally so that more junior attorneys 

would not have to work on such a high-profile 

and sensitive matter.” During a hearing 

in April, he conceded to a federal judge that 

Abrego Garcia’s removal had been in error. 

That admission was not remarkable in 

and of itself. Lawyers are supposed to 

notify courts of their mistakes when they 

happen, as part of their duty of candor. 

But widespread news coverage of 

Reuveni’s contrition prompted a wave of 

blowback against him, both from within 

the department and from the White House. 29 Features 

effect. The commander denied the request: 

“The words he used were: ‘I don’t want 

transgenders in my military.’” 

Discrimination on top of 4 a.m. wake-

up, a nearly two-hour commute to  rotc 

training, work as a substitute teacher, and 

caring for his ailing grandmother proved 

overwhelming. Talbott quit the program. 

His grandmother—who’d encouraged him 

to be a named plaintiff by arguing, “If you 

don’t believe in this enough to put your 

name on it and accept all that comes with 

it, then don’t do this at all”—died in 2020, 

never having seen her grandson in uniform. 

After Trump’s ban was lifted in 2021, 

Talbott reapplied to become a military 

police officer and was accepted. At his 

swearing-in ceremony, he struggled with 

words he’d wanted to say for roughly a 

decade until the third try, when he raised 

his right hand and said: “I, Nicolas Kamer -

on Talbott, do solemnly affirm that I will 

support and defend the Constitution of the 

United States …” 

He now faces involuntary separation 

while awaiting a D.C. Circuit Court rul -

ing. Regardless of the outcome, Talbott’s 

courageous resistance to Trump’s unjust 

order bears allegiance to the constitutional 

promise of liberty and justice for all—if we 

are willing to fight for it.  

> Timothy Soseki Kudo writes about the
> intersections of war, identity, and moral conflict.
> He is a Marine combat veteran of Afghanistan .

Reuveni refused to add his name to the 

signature block of a court filing on the case 

that would claim for the first time—and 

without sufficient evidence or legal 

backing, in his view—that Abrego Garcia 

had “terrorist” connections. 

The next day, Reuveni was placed on 

leave, and he was fired from the depart -

ment a few days thereafter. Bondi told  The 

New York Times  in a statement that DOJ 

lawyers would “face consequences” if they 

did not “zealously advocate on behalf of the 

United States.” For many people, this might 

be where the story ends. But Reuveni went 

further. In late June, he filed a formal 

whistleblower complaint with the Senate 

Judiciary Committee, where he told the full 

story from his point of view. 

The government’s errors were not 

inadvertent, Reuveni explained, but part of 

a willful effort to mislead federal judges 

and defy their orders while carrying out 

deportations. In one notable exchange, he 

described how Emil Bove, a top DOJ 

official who was recently confirmed to a 

lifetime seat on the U.S. Court of Appeals 

for the Third Circuit, told other department 

lawyers that they would need to consider 

telling the courts “fuck you” if they stood 

in the way of deportations. 

This is not a story of a hardened pro-

Biden leftist or an embittered never-Trump 

conservative fighting the administration 

from within as part of some “deep 

state,” as Trumpworld loves to imagine. 

Reuveni did not set out to oppose 

Trump’s policies in general or even in 

the specifics; he sought merely to do his 

job honorably. Only when the administra -

tion broke the law did he speak up. 

Bondi, in seeking to destroy the DOJ’s 

independence, drew no distinction 

between “the president” and “the Unit-

ed States” in court. As Reuveni’s 

actions showed, it may be the most 

important distinction to make for the 

next four years.   

> Matt Ford is a staff writer at The New Republic .

Skyrocketing rates, denied 

claims, dropped policies, paltry 

payouts—and hidden profits. 

Property insurance is facing its 

climate reckoning. 

# LI KE A

# BADNEIGHBOR

By Aaron Gell 

In September 2022, 

Hurricane Ian destroyed 

the only road into the 

Matlacha neighborhood 

of Fort Myers, around 

15 miles northeast of Fort 

Myers Beach. October 2025 32 

> PREVIOUS SPREAD: RICARDO ARDUENGO/AFP/GETTY

A lifelong resident, she was inclined to ride out the Category 

4 storm. “Floridians are like, ‘Fours are bad, but, like, how bad?’” 

she explained. Fortunately, her terrified dogs were less sanguine, 

and she ultimately evacuated, returning a few days later to find 

that Ian had laid waste to much of Estero Island. “I don’t cry easy,” 

she recalled. “But the day that I walked over that bridge and I saw 

what was left of my life, I literally hit my knees. It was life-altering.” 

In pursuit of a commercial loan, Bahan had forked over $40,000 

for just her first year of property insurance. Coverage was provided 

by two separate underwriters: the state-run Citizens Property Insur -

ance Corp. for wind damage (private insurers generally decline to 

offer such policies), and a private,  fema-backed company for flood. 

But as the storm subsided, the haggling began. Citizens paid 

promptly, Bahan recalled. But her private insurer, after issuing a 

check, canceled payment before it was deposited. Then it denied 

the claim entirely, on the logic that honoring its agreement would 

somehow constitute paying her twice for the same event. (Never 

mind that both policies put together wouldn’t come close to cover -

ing her costs.) Bahan lost a lawsuit in federal court and is appealing. 

Bahan’s insurance nightmare was one of many related to me 

during a visit to southwestern Florida, where residents have 

endured three major hurricanes—Ian, Helene, and Milton—in 

as many years. Each tale turns on its own particular outrages and 

ironies, but common themes aren’t hard to spot: eye-watering 

rate hikes, dropped policies, shady adjusters, paltry payouts, 

and claims denied for dubious reasons. State Farm, for instance, 

closed 46 percent of 2023 claims after issuing no payment what -

soever, and it was hardly an outlier. Meanwhile, even as they 

were doing everything possible to limit payouts, insurance 

companies were socking away massive profits, according to a 

# UNTIL MID-MAY,  when Suzi Bahan 

decided she was done fighting with 

fema  and getting the runaround from 

the Fort Myers Beach Town Council, 

Suzie Q’s Tiki Bar—an alfresco joint 

a few blocks from the beach offering a 

bucket of Busch (five bottles on ice) 

for just $13—was one of the more 

congenial watering holes in town. 

“Tiki Bar” was probably a stretch. 

The makeshift saloon was really just 

a patch of sand, ringed with cattle fencing, onto which Bahan, the 

owner, had dragged some outdoor furniture, a plastic outhouse, and 

two trailers. From one trailer, she operated the business, checking 

IDs and dispensing beverages and salty wisecracks. The other trailer, 

just steps away, was her home. 

This was never the plan, Bahan told me one night in February, 

pausing now and then to adjust the stereo (all yacht rock, all the 

time) and keep her clientele well-lubricated. She was just two weeks 

from opening a more conventional establishment when Hurricane 

Ian blew into town, on September 28, 2022. 33 Features 

secret state report that became public just a few weeks before my 

trip. While Florida’s situation is extreme, it represents an early 

warning sign in a troubled property insurance system that is, 

as U.S. Senator Sheldon Whitehouse put it in a 2024 committee 

hearing, “swirling the drain.” 

# ADECIDEDLY UNGLAMOROUS  business that mostly 

draws attention when it fails, property and casualty 

insurance, or P&C, has for decades quietly powered 

the economy and bolstered the American picket-

fence dream. “Insurers are the foundational layer 

for most homeownership,” Abrahm Lustgarten, author of  On the 

Move: The Overheating Earth and the Uprooting of America,  told 

me, “and thus for most American middle-class wealth.” 

In recent years, however, the insurance industry has begun to 

look notably shaky, staggering from one crisis to the next on its 

way to what some observers say could become a meltdown. As 

extreme weather events—an apocalyptic laundry list including but 

not limited to floods, windstorms, hailstorms, wildfires, droughts, 

mudslides, and heat waves—grow more frequent and intense 

due to the heedless destabilization of the climate, premiums 

are rising, payouts are shrinking, and, increasingly, carriers are 

bailing on markets deemed too risky. Millions of policyholders 

received nonrenewal notices in recent years, and many are now 

taking their chances without any protection. 

Before too long, they may have no other choice. Some locations 

are already becoming essentially uninsurable, according to a 

report by the climate risk nonprofit First Street Foundation— 

forcing state governments to step in with so-called insurers of 

Suzi Bahan established a 

makeshift bar in Fort Myers 

Beach, Florida, after 2022’s 

Hurricane Ian destroyed 

her business two weeks 

before she planned to open. 

PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSH RITCHIE FOR THE NEW REPUBLIC October 2025 34 

No mortgages crashes the property markets. Crashed property 

markets trash the economy.” 

The early stages of such a scenario may already be taking 

shape in Florida’s storied condo market, where, in the wake of the 

2021 collapse of a condominium due to deteriorated structural 

supports, owners have been hit not only with higher insurance 

premiums but with new assessments for maintenance and repairs 

and skyrocketing homeowners’ association fees. Many are now 

“desperate to sell,” per  The Wall Street Journal.  “I do think that 

the Florida insurance system is extremely rickety and insubstan -

tial, barely even able to be properly called an insurance system,” 

Whitehouse told me. “It’s like a simulacrum of an insurance 

system. It looks like one until there are claims.” 

Of course, governments will inevitably step in. But this, too, 

has its perils. Per Thallinger, “If multiple high-cost events happen 

within short time spans—as climate projections expect—then no 

government can realistically cover the damages without either 

austerity or collapse.” 

# THE INSURANCE CRISIS IS  national in scope, but 

thanks to the 1945 McCarran-Ferguson Act, which 

bafflingly exempted the industry from federal over -

sight, it is mostly being felt on the state level. In 

California, the recent wildfires have led to a pitched 

battle over a rate increase. In Colorado, the government is scram -

bling to mitigate costs by considering subsidies for fortifying 

roofs against increasingly destructive hailstorms. In Nebraska, 

premiums have more than doubled in a decade, while in Texas, 

they rose 22 percent last year alone. And in Idaho, nearly a quarter 

of insurers have bailed since 2023, and experts are forecasting an 

average rate hike of 30 percent. 

But it’s the Sunshine State where the effects have been most 

dramatic. In 2010, journalist Paige St. John dubbed Florida’s hous -

ing stock “the largest catastrophe risk in the insured world.” Her 

Pulitzer-winning reporting in the  Sarasota Herald-Tribune  brought 

the challenges—and the petty corruptions—that characterize 

the local market to widespread attention. The series’ impact was 

likely softened, however, by a run of miraculously placid weather; 

between 2006 and 2015, the state wasn’t hit by a single hurricane. 

Insurers collected premiums nevertheless and should theo -

retically have banked billions in reserves. But even before Ian, 

last resort, like Florida’s Citizens or California’s  fair  Plan. More 

than 30 states now have such plans, and most flood insurance is 

provided through  fema . But government-backed plans are sub -

ject to the same unforgiving scientific principles as their private 

counterparts. After all, among the fundamentals of the property 

insurance business is the long-standing premise that, however 

unpredictable the weather, it adheres to certain probabilities, 

allowing us to make reasonable guesses about its behavior, and 

costs, over time. Unfortunately, a heating climate is swiftly up -

ending that logic, as the more frequent occurrence of “100-year 

floods” amply demonstrates. And risk assessment will only become 

more difficult as atmospheric “feedback loops” kick into action. 

(Recent budget cuts to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 

Administration and other research programs—even as annual 

spending on climate-related damage approaches $1 trillion—will 

presumably exacerbate the problem.) 

“I don’t think we’re in imminent risk of the whole system 

collapsing tomorrow,” said Carolyn Kousky, the acting chief 

economist at Environmental Defense Fund and founder of the 

nonprofit Insurance for Good, “but risk is growing dramatically 

year on year, and we have not done any of the necessary decarbon -

ization to stabilize that increasing risk.” As Whitehouse put it in a 

recent interview, “There’s no Band-Aid big enough to paper this 

over if you don’t deal with the fundamental underlying danger.” 

In March, Günther Thallinger, who serves on the board of Al -

lianz, one of the world’s largest insurance companies, published 

a LinkedIn post describing the bleak future that awaits us. “The 

economic value of entire regions—coastal, arid, wildfire-prone— 

will begin to vanish from financial ledgers,” Thallinger predicted. 

“Markets will reprice, rapidly and brutally. This is what a cli -

mate-driven market failure looks like.” 

Given that banks generally decline to issue mortgages on un -

insured property, it’s not hard to imagine the potential economic 

impact on high-risk regions. Tighter credit means fewer buyers. 

Faced with a shrinking tax base, municipalities will cut their 

budgets. Some will privatize utilities and other core functions 

in a bid to head off bankruptcy. Alarmed by unfilled potholes, 

ballooning class sizes, and other indications of disarray, wealthier 

residents will relocate, creating what Lustgarten calls “a spiral of 

economic decline.” 

Or as Whitehouse put it in the hearing, “Climate risk makes 

things uninsurable. No insurance makes things unmortgageable. 

# As Senator Whitehouse put it, “Climate risk makes As Senator Whitehouse put it, “Climate risk makes 

# things uninsurable. No insurance makes things things uninsurable. No insurance makes things 

# unmortgageable. No mortgages crashes unmortgageable. No mortgages crashes 

# the property markets. Crashed property markets the property markets. Crashed property markets 

# trash the economy.” trash the economy.” 35 Features 

Doug Quinn is inclined to agree. A lumbering former Marine 

with a hoarse Jersey accent and a trim blond goatee, Quinn is 

the founder and executive director of the American Policyholder 

Association, in which capacity he travels the country organizing 

homeowners and pressing the case that the industry’s complaints 

about “insurance fraud” obscure a considerably more vast crime, 

what he dubs “ insurer  fraud.” Quinn came to this realization 

through hard personal experience. In 2012, he lost his house in 

Toms River, New Jersey, to Superstorm Sandy, then fought an ex -

pensive legal battle with his carrier before finally moving back into 

the rebuilt home—now jacked up 10 feet—after seven long years. 

Judging by Quinn’s tendency to cite Noam Chomsky on the 

subject of regulatory capture, the experience seems to have rad -

icalized him. He created the American Policyholder Association, 

or APA, in 2018, and ditched his lucrative career as a financial 

adviser. He now moonlights as a disaster recovery specialist and 

a Lyft driver to make ends meet. “I had to learn from the ground 

up how to recover from a disaster for seven fucking years, right?” 

he recalled, while taking me on a tour of Fort Myers Beach, point -

ing out the spot where the shrimp boats had piled up as if tossed 

aside by a giant toddler. Quinn’s crusade is “probably a trauma 

response,” he allowed, “but it’s really important for me to make 

sure that what I learned gets carried on.” 

Lesson one: Insurance underwriters are no longer the good 

folks he remembers from his years at MetLife, “who took pride 

in being the person that shows up with a check at your lowest 

moment.” Instead, he said, the industry is becoming a system 

to extract “wealth from working-class families and transfer it 

up to wealthy individuals and large corporations.” 

Renegade roofers aside, Quinn believes that most of the Florida 

lawsuits against insurers—the rationale for tort reform—were justi -

fied. “Why is an attorney who works on contingency, who only gets 

paid if they win, why would they take a bullshit case?” he asked. 

Skeptical about Altmaier’s lawsuit stats, Quinn commissioned 

his own study, which showed that Florida’s top insurers were also 

responsible for 52 percent of consumer complaints nationwide. 

Those grievances, Quinn said, represent an industry that has 

failed its customers. The policies of the insurance carriers “are 

putting me in business,” Breier agreed. “If they paid their clients 

… they don’t need an attorney.” 

That said, by ending one-way legal fees, the legislature made it 

all but impossible for the typical consumer to fight back, essentially 

handing insurers a green light to stiff homeowners. “Companies 

absolutely will win by nickel and diming people on smaller cases,” 

explained Chip Merlin, a prominent Florida plaintiff’s attorney. 

“Because there’s not enough money at stake to get lawyers involved. 

And those people are just gonna have to suck it up.” According 

to George Quintero, who spent more than a decade working for 

Florida insurance companies before taking them on as a public 

adjuster, “Now the carriers have a mentality of, ‘You know what 

it’s gonna cost you now to hire your own attorney? How about I 

pay you 40 cents on the dollar.’” 

The problem with the tort reform legislation, critics say, is not 

only that it represented what one Florida state rep called “the 

holiday wish list of the insurance industry,” but that it seems to 

have failed in its central goal. “They first started saying, give us 

a year, premiums will go down,” Quinn told me. “And then they 

said, ‘Give us 18 months.’ And then they said, ‘Give us two years.’ 

And they haven’t gone down.” They haven’t gone down because 

more than a dozen had become insolvent, and major carriers were 

exiting. With rates rising to four times the national average in some 

areas, policymakers were eager to identify a culprit—ideally, one 

that didn’t place too much emphasis on the changing climate. 

They found it in one of the few professional classes more reviled 

than insurance executives: lawyers. Carriers were being sued out 

of business, it was explained, by a network of shady law firms 

and unscrupulous roofers. The state insurance commissioner at 

the time, David Altmaier, bolstered the claim with a much-cited 

study suggesting that Florida had accounted for 8 percent of 

the nation’s insurance claims in 2019 and 76 percent of lawsuits 

against insurers. 

A good number of those suits carry Mordechai Breier’s signature. 

“This firm, by definition, would be what was being demonized,” 

Breier told me when I visited him at the modest North Miami 

office of the Insurance Litigation Group, where he is managing 

partner. “When they’re talking about abusive attorneys, they’re 

talking about me.” Breier is a colorful figure, a spirited, compact 

Orthodox Jew who wears his side curls tucked behind his ears. “I 

walk into a courtroom, and the first question is ‘Who’s that wacko?’” 

he told me. “I tend to make a splash, just my personality.” In some 

rural backwaters, Jews are a rarity, which is one reason why, as he 

put it, “I also carry wherever I go, openly and proudly.” Another 

possible reason: Being smeared as one of the supervillains of 

Florida’s insurance crisis can have safety implications. 

Breier acknowledges that some of his competitors took ad -

vantage of the system. “Any process where there could be abuse, 

you’re gonna have bad actors stepping in and abusing,” he said. 

“That’s true in any industry.” 

The state legislature responded with a bundle of tort reform 

measures that, among other things, did away with one-way at -

torneys’ fees. It also made it harder to sue an insurer for acting 

in “bad faith,” or prioritizing its own financial interest over its 

obligations to claimants. The new legislation was signed into law 

on December 16, 2022. 

Not everyone applauded the new rules, however. Donald Trump 

excoriated Governor Ron DeSantis on Truth Social for “delivering 

the biggest insurance company  bailout  to Globalist Insurance 

Companies,  in history .” Trump was then gearing up to battle 

“DeSanctimonious” for the Republican presidential nomination 

and eager to downplay his rival’s apparent triumph, but he had a 

point. It didn’t help that just the day after the bill passed the state 

House, Altmaier, the insurance commissioner who’d championed 

it, tendered his resignation, eventually announcing a new job 

helping “insurance and insurance-adjacent entities navigate 

the complex world of regulation and regulatory policy,” per his 

LinkedIn. (It was a well-timed move. Days after he left the post, 

Florida’s new “revolving door” standards, which would have 

forbidden him from lobbying for six years, took effect.) 

Meanwhile, as months went by without a decrease in premiums, 

Floridians began to wonder if they’d been had. 

“Were there some problems? Yes,” Kousky of the Environmental 

Defense Fund said of litigation abuse. “Have some of them been 

addressed? Yes. Were they addressed too well, in the sense that 

they’ve actually hurt consumers? Probably.” Said Whitehouse, “If 

you don’t deal with the underlying cause, it really is deck chairs 

on the Titanic, and that’s why you get these silly things like the 

insurance industry trying to blame its predicament on its tradi -

tional nemesis, the trial lawyers.” October 2025 36 

> SUZI BAHAN (X6)

Analysis Executive Summary,” the document runs to just seven 

pages, but its contents were explosive. 

The study found that even as Florida’s insurance companies 

were dropping policyholders, increasing rates, complaining about 

losses, and in some cases going into receivership or becoming in -

solvent, they were transferring enormous sums to sister companies, 

known as affiliates. According to the report, between 2017 and 2019, 

insurers claimed a net loss of $432 million while somehow paying 

out $680 million in dividends to their stockholders. During the 

same period, their affiliates pocketed roughly $14 billion in profits. 

“There’s a hole in the bucket,” Quinn said. “They’re leaking 

all this money out. Nobody’s begrudging them a profit. But don’t 

be shifting billions of dollars out the back door and then claim 

poverty and triple people’s premiums.” 

The report, labeled a draft, had never been made available to 

lawmakers, let alone consumers. Nobody seems to know whether 

insurance fraud wasn’t actually the primary cause of high prices. 

The real reason for Florida’s skyrocketing premiums, Quinn 

said, was hiding in plain sight all along. Indeed, it was outlined 

in a 2022 report—a $150,000 study commissioned by the state’s 

Office of Insurance Regulation, then quietly buried for years. 

# IN MID-MARCH,  former state Insurance Commissioner 

Alt  maier was reunited with some of his old friends in the 

state legislature. The occasion, a meeting of the House In -

surance and Banking Subcommittee, was not a cordial one. 

Lawmakers had some pointed questions about a blockbuster 

exposé that had recently appeared in the  Miami  Herald  and the 

Tampa Bay Times . Via a public records request filed two years 

previously, reporter Lawrence Mower had obtained a copy of 

a “secret study,” as the headline put it. Entitled “Affiliated Fee 

Suzi Bahan photographed the damage 

Hurricane Ian did to her property and 

submitted the documentation to her 

insurance carriers. She is still fighting to 

get payment from her private insurer. 37 Features 

Philadelphia Contributionship for the Insurance of Houses From 

Loss by Fire in 1752. 

The contributionship emphasized prevention. Safety upgrades 

were often required before a property could be insured. Among 

other things, homeowners were obligated to remove trees from the 

perimeter of their dwellings, an approach that wildfire-plagued 

Californians are now belatedly adopting as well. 

Following the lead of the Philadelphia Contributionship, which 

was operated for the collective benefit of its members, property and 

casualty insurance was for years based on the idea of interdepen -

dence. Often established by tightly knit ethnic or religious groups, 

insurance pools gradually evolved into mutual benefit corporations. 

Owned by the policyholders themselves, they used surplus funds to 

keep premiums low or distributed them in the form of dividends. 

Gradually, however, the mutual model was supplanted by 

stock insurance, in which companies prioritize the enrichment of 

shareholders. For years, such firms managed to make reasonable 

profits even while paying claims fairly. The trick was to wisely 

invest the money they took in via premiums—known as float—in 

other businesses. Among the exemplars of this strategy is Warren 

Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway, which owns Geico,  usli , and a 

number of other insurance companies (as well as companies that 

underwrite insurers, known as reinsurers). As Buffett explained 

in a 2010 shareholders’ letter, owning insurance companies lets 

Berkshire “enjoy the use of free money—and, better yet, get paid 

for holding it.” Noting that Berkshire’s float had grown from 

$16 million to $62 billion in 42 years, he compared the setup to a 

massive interest-free loan. 

The covenant at the heart of insurance is simple: The customer 

pays in regular installments, often with the sincere hope they will 

never see their money again, but confident that, should it become 

necessary, the insurer will cover their loss. Unfortunately, not 

every insurance company benefits from the investing acumen of a 

Warren Buffett, and a few decades ago, carriers discovered a more 

reliable profit center—in the claims department. In the late 1980s, 

Allstate, for instance, paid out 71 cents for every dollar collected 

in premiums. But by 2006, in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, less 

than half of customer premiums went to cover claims. The rest, 

for the most part, was gravy. 

Credit for the shift goes to McKinsey & Co. Allstate hired the 

business consultancy in 1992, perhaps impressed with its work 

helping to turn Enron into a global energy powerhouse. As de -

tailed in David Berardinelli’s 2008 book,  From Good Hands to 

Boxing Gloves,  McKinsey’s advice, although presented in technical 

jargon, was very simple: quietly break the covenant. According 

to thousands of pages of internal documents that came to light 

under court order, McKinsey proposed a new business model, 

dubbed Claims Core Process Redesign, which reframed the pay -

ing of claims not as an essential function of the company—the 

actual product, in fact, that its customers were purchasing—but 

as “leakage.” After all, every dollar that went to policyholders, the 

consultants pointed out, came off the bottom line. 

In a way, McKinsey’s strategy makes perfect sense, observed 

Tom Baker, an expert in insurance law at the University of Penn -

sylvania. “You’re used to running a shareholder-maximization, 

by-the-numbers type of business, and then you come into the 

claims department, and you see all this money going out, right? 

I mean, the money going out is the whole idea! But it has to be 

tempting to kind of control that part of it.” 

DeSantis was aware of it. And despite a clear recommendation by 

the author, the study was never updated or repeated in subsequent 

years. It wasn’t even finalized. During the hearing, Altmaier was 

asked about the findings. “I think what we said was, ‘There’s a lot 

of smoke here, and we need to make sure we go and see if there’s a 

fire burning or not,’” he replied. “And that was the effort I thought 

was underway when I left the office.” 

This answer wasn’t particularly satisfying, given that nine 

months had transpired between the receipt of the draft report and 

Altmaier’s departure—nine months during which he, DeSantis, 

and lobby groups continued hyping tort reform as the solution 

to Florida’s insurance crisis. In any case, no such effort to see if 

there was a fire burning was undertaken. 

If Altmaier and his successor, Michael Yaworsky, intention -

ally buried the report, they arguably had good reason to do so. 

Underwriters’ fees are overseen by state regulators, but if they 

aren’t able to make a significant profit, nothing obliges them to 

keep writing policies. Increasingly, Florida and other high-risk 

states are confronted with an almost impossible choice: keep the 

carriers happy, at the expense of consumers, or kiss insurance 

goodbye altogether and set off the kind of “climate-driven market 

failure” predicted by Allianz’s Thallinger. 

Yaworsky said as much during the hearing. “The fundamen -

tal fact of our marketplace is that it is not one that companies 

inherently, naturally want to be involved with,” he explained, 

adding that “this current structure” was the only way regulators 

had managed to keep investors interested. 

“If I asked for a call of hands, if anyone here in this room had 

$100 million, how many of you would like to invest that in a Florida 

domestic property insurance company that you may never get 

back,” he said, “not a lot of hands would go up.” 

# INSURANCE IS A PLAN  by which the many make good the 

losses of the few,” John Bainbridge wrote in his 1952 history 

of the field,  Biography of an Idea.  “It scatters the effects of 

the hazards which beset human affairs so widely among the 

whole community that no member is heavily burdened.” 

Bainbridge was writing in a different era, when the postwar 

boom was in its infancy and one could still extol the innate 

beneficence of the insurance industry with a straight face. But 

for anyone seeking to understand how the field lost its way, it’s 

worth revisiting the communitarian sense of optimism, the spirit 

of solidarity in the face of misfortune, that animated insurance 

in its original form. 

Insurance was developed as a response to the hazards inherent 

in maritime trade. Histories of the field often point to Chinese 

merchants’ practice of distributing their grain among multiple 

riverboats, so that the loss from a wrecked vessel would be borne 

by multiple participants. 

The emergence of property insurance as we know it dates to the 

late seventeenth century, after the Great Fire of London took out 

13,000 houses. But while its originator, a doctor, economist, and 

homebuilder named Nicholas Barbon, saw it as a profit-making 

venture, insurance rediscovered its origins as a form of genuine 

mutual assistance when Benjamin Franklin helped establish 

the first successful property insurance company in America. 

Having already organized a volunteer fire brigade and invented 

a safety-oriented wood stove, he spearheaded the launch of the October 2025 38 

Scientists were disheartened last year when Governor DeSantis 

erased most references to climate change from state law, but for 

the Environmental Defense Fund’s Kousky, that kind of old-school 

climate denial is just a small part of a more widespread societal 

challenge. “I don’t think that our public or private institutions, 

or just our individual psychology, has really grappled with what 

it means to be in an environment of constantly increasing risk,” 

she told me. “Like, it’s not going to ever get better, right? And so 

that requires massive investments in risk reduction and climate 

adaptation to maintain insurability, but also to keep people safe 

and lower all the uninsured losses. And those investments can’t be 

done quickly. We’re talking about major infrastructure, changing 

our building stock, changing our land use patterns. We need to 

be making all those decisions now. But we can point to a million 

examples of where we are really bad at thinking long term as a 

society or as an individual.” 

Whatever the fate of the planet, the Florida insurance market 

at least has been looking up. A dozen new regional carriers have 

launched since the reforms were implemented. Last year, more 

than 400,000 policyholders were “depopulated” from Citizens, 

the state-backed insurer, in favor of private carriers—a clear sign, 

it was claimed, that the crisis was over and that tort reform had 

delivered. (Indeed, prodded by the insurance industry, other 

states are contemplating similar legislation.) 

Despite the dearth of raised hands in that March committee 

hearing, launching an insurance startup in Florida has become 

a highly attractive proposition. For one thing, you don’t need to 

pass the rigid economic stress tests and other financial evaluations 

administered by trusted ratings agencies like S&P or AM Best. 

Demotech, a ratings company with considerably looser standards, 

has become the new industry leader, with nearly 60 percent 

of the Florida market. According to a 2024 academic study, in -

surers rated by Demotech were nearly 25 times more likely to go 

insolvent than those rated by a more established competitor. 

Meanwhile, you won’t need to hire a sales team, since under 

the takeout program, the state of Florida will simply hand you 

a stack of paying customers from its massive Citizens stockpile 

and let you choose the least risky among them. Policyholders 

have no choice in the matter. As Bruce Lucas, the CEO of one of 

Florida’s biggest insurance startups, Slide, put it in a 2022 podcast 

interview, “You send out these notices, and it gets mixed in with 

everybody’s junk mail in the trash can. And next thing you know, 

you’ve got 200,000 customers.” And should you want to pocket a 

bit more money, you might consider fraudulently altering field 

reports by third-party adjusters—an accusation leveled by several 

whistleblowers in 2024. (Heritage Insurance, which Lucas ran 

until 2020, is among the carriers alleged to have edited adjuster 

reports as a way of lowering claims; it recently filed a libel suit 

against one of the adjusters who appeared in a  60 Minutes  segment 

about the allegations.) 

When these smaller insurers go out of business, as they regu -

larly do—often after handsomely compensating their officers and 

shareholders and letting affiliates bank the profits—consumers are 

shuffled back to Citizens, and the cycle continues. It will come as 

little surprise that, according to  The Washington Post,  Lucas and 

his companies have given millions to Florida Republicans, includ -

ing $350,000 to the state’s former CFO and freshly minted U.S. 

representative, Jimmy Patronis. (Also, fun fact: Lucas previously 

did legal work for Enron.) 

Under the new model McKinsey proposed, claimants would be 

offered just 60 percent of what they were entitled to. Nine out of 

10 would take the deal, McKinsey estimated. Those who fought for 

fair recompense would be worn down through litigation—what 

the consulting firm called “boxing gloves”—inducing “the very 

anguish and distress policyholders were trying to avoid when 

they bought insurance in the first place,” Berardinelli wrote. And 

since only a fraction of customers actually make a claim in any 

given year, only the unlucky few would ever realize they’d been 

paying for inferior coverage. 

McKinsey identified one major obstacle to the plan’s suc -

cess: Allstate’s employees, who were justly proud of a reputation 

for good service. So it introduced a computer model, branded 

IntegriClaim, which would replace the long-standing method for 

determining a payout—sending a trained adjuster to determine 

the genuine cost incurred—with an estimate based on similar 

claims, one that could of course be tweaked by the home office as 

desired. Employees were directed to suspend their own judgment 

in favor of IntegriClaim’s recommendations. (Many companies 

have since further refined this model by farming the work out to 

third-party contractors.) 

The plan worked as advertised, ultimately helping Allstate 

increase its average annual pretax operating income by more 

than 3,335 percent in a decade. And in subsequent years, as one 

major carrier after another hired McKinsey to redesign their 

business models as well, it became the industry standard. “It’s 

the new norm,” plaintiff’s attorney J. Drew Houghton told me. 

“Just business as usual. They fully integrated it.” (The American 

Property Casualty Insurance Association opted not to comment 

for this story.) 

Insurers understood perfectly well that by offering what Berar -

dinelli called “an inherently defective insurance product,” they’d 

be inviting lawsuits. But McKinsey had a solution for that as well. 

In one slide produced for Allstate, it proposed that the company 

undertake a campaign to “shift advantage away from claimants 

and plaintiffs’ attorneys.” Among its suggestions: “modify bad 

faith laws” and “targeted tort reform.” 

# IF YOU WANT TO MAKE  things awkward in southwest 

Florida, ask folks how they feel about climate change. There 

may be no less popular subject, even among those, like Suzi 

Bahan, who have direct experience of its impacts. She doesn’t 

deny that fossil fuels might play a role in the extreme weather 

plaguing Fort Myers Beach, she said, but she preferred not to speak 

on an issue when she hadn’t done her research. 

Merlin, the plaintiff’s attorney, was also careful with his lan -

guage. “For some reason,” he told me, “we’re having a lot more 

environmental incidents happen, whether it be wildfires or hur -

ricanes or everything else that are going on.” 

Wait, I thought.  For some reason? 

“I do believe it’s, you know,  that, ” he said, “but whenever I say 

it, it shuts all my conservative friends down. If I just say, ‘There’s 

a lot more wildfires and a lot more windstorms, and the hail 

balls at three inches are coming in a lot more,’ they go, ‘They are, 

yeah.’ If I was to say it’s climate change, it’s, ‘I can’t listen to you, 

Chip.’ So yeah, I am intentionally changing the rhetoric, calling 

it ‘environmental incidents.’ But don’t kid yourself. The water is 

rising. I mean, go outdoors, you’d have to be an idiot not to see it.” 39 Features 

His proposal called for the establishment of a global mutual 

insurance pool, funded by participating nations and overseen by 

an international board of trustees, that would indemnify member 

states against catastrophe, pestilence, and, ultimately, war. 

Royce’s idealism can sound almost farcical a century later, 

when the spirit of mutual aid at the core of insurance has been 

so thoroughly vanquished by the imperatives of capital. But as 

the world stumbles toward a global crisis sure to make the shell 

shock and mustard gas of World War I look mild in comparison, 

Royce’s framework may begin to sound more practical. 

The calamities and costs of an overheating planet will touch 

every corner of the globe, albeit unequally. It’s not hard to imag -

ine an updated Roycean scheme designed not only to provide 

compensation for those most harmed but also to subject wealthy, 

Western nations to the heftiest premiums. A sizable tax on carbon 

emissions could provide further funding. 

There is an appealing measure of justice in forcing climate 

criminals to compensate their victims, but the real genius of 

the insurance framework, as Royce saw, is the way it tends to 

focus attention on the mitigation of risk. “In its efforts not only 

to alleviate but to prevent pestilence and famine,” he predicted, 

“the board of trustees ... would inspire all the nations actually to 

work together ... in a charitable and in a businesslike way, as they 

have never worked before.” It would engender “a fecundity, an 

ingenuity, and a wisdom of which we shall know nothing until we 

... teach the nations, by the potent devices of mutual insurance, 

the art of loyalty to the community of mankind.” 

The notion that capitalism might yet save us from the nightmare 

that the system itself has wrought is probably a stretch. Royce 

died in 1916, well before McKinsey taught Allstate to put on its 

“boxing gloves.” But it is, at least, an idea, a starting point, and 

we will soon need all the ingenuity and wisdom we can muster. 

# WHEN SUZI BAHAN TOLD ME,  as we sat in her 

government-supplied trailer surrounded by 

cases of beer and hard seltzer, that she hadn’t 

done enough research to have an opinion on 

climate change, we’d already finished the 

formal interview. My notebook and phone were stowed in my 

pockets, and, if I’m being honest, I was a few tequilas in. 

“Fair enough,” I said, “but I have done a shitload of research.” 

I told her to think of me not as a reporter but as a friendly blow -

hard who likes to read and has talked to a lot of experts. “There’s 

a very good chance that, 10 years from now, this entire island will 

be underwater,” I predicted. “The place might not even exist.” 

She took this better than I expected, so I pressed on, suggesting 

she forget about rebuilding, forget the permitting delays and 

the ever-increasing material costs, forget the tiki bar, and move 

on with a new life, in a new, relatively safer location. Maybe 

not on a barrier island. 

“Take whatever you can squeeze out of your insurance com -

pany, sell to whatever big chain wants it,” I said, “and seriously, 

Suzi, just get the fuck out.” 

She took this in for a second. “You think so?” she asked. I 

nodded. “I really hope I’m wrong,” I told her. “And if I am, great. 

You can come back and visit anytime.” 

Aaron Gell  is a journalist who lives in upstate New York. 

Politics aside, property insurers have long understood that 

the climate is changing. It’s their business to know. And if they 

don’t, the reinsurers—well-capitalized multinationals, usually 

based in tax havens like Bermuda, that indemnify insurance 

companies against major catastrophes—are happy to explain. 

(While insurers’ rates are often capped by state officials, reinsurers 

charge what they like.) Indeed, it’s hard to think of another sector 

of the economy that is better attuned to the cascade of disasters 

the oil and gas industry has virtually guaranteed by mindlessly 

pumping ever more CO2 into the atmosphere. 

And yet, it turns out that some of these same insurers are 

actively making the problem worse. Many invest their “float” 

in major oil producers, and underwrite fossil fuel development 

projects that couldn’t happen at all without insurance. “By un -

derwriting and investing in new and expanded fossil fuel proj -

ects,” Whitehouse said in a press release announcing a 2023 

investigation, “U.S. insurers are helping Big Oil bring us closer 

to the worst runaway climate scenarios, which threaten lives, 

livelihoods, and the federal budget.” In 2023, Allianz announced 

it would cease underwriting or funding such projects in line with 

commitments made with the Net-Zero Insurance Alliance, a 

group of insurers convened by the U.N. to address climate change 

issues. A month later, after 23 right-wing U.S. attorneys general 

challenged the alliance on antitrust grounds, it was disbanded. 

(A new group, the Forum for Insurance Transition to Net Zero, 

launched in the interim.) 

Remarkably, most major carriers still support fossil fuel pro -

duction, knowing full well that their actions will hasten the 

demise of their own industry and so much else. Kousky thinks 

there’s “a collective action problem” at work. “Like, if one insurer 

gives up that profitable business, then that fossil fuel company 

will go to the insurer who doesn’t care,” she explained. “Unless 

you can somehow get all of the companies to agree to withhold 

insurance and all the banks to withhold financing, which is just 

a really difficult problem when you can make a ton of money off 

it,” she added, “it’s not going to happen.” 

One wonders what Ben Franklin, who spent his life working 

to mitigate fire risk (and not only for policyholders of the Phila -

delphia Contributionship), would make of this brazen stampede 

toward oblivion in pursuit of profit. A hint might be found in 

the story of his “Pennsylvanian Fire-Place,” now better known 

as the Franklin Stove. According to Bainbridge, when the gov -

ernor of Pennsylvania offered him a patent on the invention, 

Franklin declined, noting, “As we enjoy great advantages from 

the inventions of others, we should be glad of the opportunity 

to serve others by any invention of ours, and this we should do 

freely and generously.” 

# ONE DAY IN AUGUST 1914,  as the Great War 

threatened to envelop Europe, the American philos -

opher Josiah Royce delivered a lecture at Berkeley’s 

Philosophical Union outlining a bold scheme by 

which the nations of the world might usher in a 

new era of peace and mutual respect. Insurance, he thought, 

could save the world. 

In his address, Royce framed the “insurance principle” as a 

powerful tool of social relations. “It discourages recklessness and 

gambling,” he claimed. “It contributes to the sense of stability.” PUBLIC HOUSING AGAIN, REALLY? 

The infamous Robert Taylor Homes 

in Chicago in 1973 The mid-twentieth -century versions were seen as sociological 

and fiscal nightmares. But where is it written that all public 

housing has to be like that? It doesn’t—and it’s time to reimagine 

and destigmatize the whole idea of public housing. 

By Monica Potts 

# YES,  REALLY. 

A modular unit built by the Minneapolis 

Public Housing Authority in 2023 October 2025 42 

Powderhorn is a center of activism in a city known for it in 

recent years. And it’s also home to Centro de Trabajadores Uni -

dos en la Lucha, or  ctul , a tenants rights organization, where 

members of the city’s growing Hispanic population fight for 

more and better housing. Recently, it’s where I met Laura Perez 

and Alibella Rodriguez, who have been in Minneapolis nine and 

23 years, respectively. 

The two came to  ctul  separately, after organizers knocked 

on their doors and told them about tenants rights, and ways 

they could fight back against unfair landlords. Now, they knock 

on doors, too. When Perez first came to the city, she visited her 

sister and thought she might stay for a week or two. But then 

she decided she wanted to stay in Minneapolis for good. “I liked 

the area, and I loved the close community,” she said in Spanish, 

through a translator. 

Perez decided to rent an apartment in the building where her 

sister lived. She learned she could have an apartment for $750 a 

month and a $750 deposit, which she was willing to pay, and she 

filled out the full application. After she filled it out, though, her 

sister’s management company realized the sister’s apartment was 

full of guests. Accusing her of housing too many family members, 

even though their stay was temporary, the building served her 

with an eviction notice. That left both sisters scrambling, looking 

for new apartments for them and their families. Perez and her 

kids bounced around for years trying to find a good apartment; 

Rodriguez and her husband lucked out with affordable, small 

studios in their early years, less than $500 a month, but after they 

had their daughter, they needed more. Their rent doubled and 

doubled, and the deposits grew to two months’ rent. 

Their experiences made both women want the city to do more to 

protect renters and make housing affordable. In the past five years, 

Minneapolis has made national news for many of its reforms, 

including a unique planning document passed in 2019 that elim -

inated single-family zoning on residential lots in the city limits. 

Minneapolis has become a leader for the Yes in My Backyard, or 

yimby , movement—predating by five years New York’s “City of 

Yes” reforms. Minneapolis aims to use zoning and land use reforms 

to build 80,000 new housing units by 2040. 

But Perez and Rodriguez say it is not enough. There’s still a 

shortage of affordable housing for families in their community, 

there’s a rising homelessness problem, and nothing stops corporate 

owners of buildings from raising rents, charging unfair fees, and 

kicking families out. “They’re building more buildings supposedly 

at affordable prices, which isn’t true,” Rodriguez said, through a 

translator, “because those are amounts that we can’t afford to pay.” 

yimby : Good, but Not Enough 

THE GREAT RECESSION FROM 2007 TO 2009 EXPOSED 

massive problems with America’s housing policy, problems 

that are even worse today, after the recession that followed the 

Covid-19 crisis. 

Before the Great Recession, almost all federal housing policy 

focused on building single-family homes and encouraging home -

buying among as many families as possible, both to give them a 

place to live and as a vehicle for wealth-building. After the crisis, 

mortgage lending slowed down and, despite a massive bump 

The Powderhorn neighborhood of Minneapolis is home to George Floyd Square. 

Memorials and murals line the main thoroughfare, Chicago Avenue, lending a 

vibrant, colorful background for what would otherwise be ordinary neighborhood 

life. People stop to say hi on the sidewalk or talk on their cell phones as they pace 

in front of the low-rise, one-story buildings, while the smell of barbecue from 

neighboring restaurants called Smoke in the Pit and Just Turkey fills the air. The 

store where George Floyd bought his last pack of cigarettes, Cup Foods, is still 

here, though it’s now called Unity Foods. 

Raised fist statues crafted from steel—the emblem of the Black Lives Matter 

movement—stand above the cars in the middle of conjoining traffic circles in the 

neighborhood, and the names of those killed by police are written in chalk along 

the asphalt of Chicago Avenue. Nearby, in Powderhorn Park, an encampment 

popped up in the summer of 2020, the summer of the uprisings, when more than 

200 people were made homeless after they were evicted from a hotel. The park 

became one of the largest homeless encampments known in the city’s history. 

> PREVIOUS SPREAD: SMITH COLLECTION/GADO/GETTY (LEFT);
> COURTESY OF MINNEAPOLIS PUBLIC HOUSING AUTHORITY (RIGHT)

43 Features 

during Covid, remains lower than it was before the crash. At the 

same time, more and more Americans born into the millennial 

generation were growing up, starting families, and trying to 

buy their first homes. By some estimates, the housing shortage 

doubled in the years before the pandemic, to 3.8 million units 

in 2019. The real estate site Zillow estimates that the shortage 

in 2025 is 4.5 million, and the National Low Income Housing 

Coalition puts the gap between needed and available affordable 

housing even higher, at 7.1 million. 

The places with the most and highest-paying jobs—especially 

on the coasts—are generally the most expensive places to live. 

But the shortages have led to increased housing costs across the 

country. The median sales price of homes in the entire country 

has nearly doubled since 2010. During and after the pandemic, 

rural areas and small metros have seen disproportionate increases 

in home prices, according to the Joint Center for Housing Studies 

at Harvard University, leaving families everywhere worse off. 

Even prices in deindustrialized cities from Buffalo to St. Louis 

are rising fast. 

At the same time, tightening in mortgage lending practices has 

meant that fewer and fewer people can buy homes. Last year, the 

median age for the first-time homebuyer was 38, up from 35 

the year before, and nearly a decade older than in the 1980s, when 

people in their twenties were buying homes. Today’s first-time 

homebuyers also earn more money and often have help from their 

parents, which means homeownership is increasingly reserved 

for the upper-middle-class and upper-income families. 

But with federal policy focused on pushing people into homes, 

the rental market hasn’t been built up enough to continue to 

house families who weren’t ready or able to buy their own homes. 

In cities where homebuying prices increased, so did rents. The 

number of families who are considered “rent-burdened”—that 

is, spend more than 30 percent of their income on rents—has 

soared, according to the center at Harvard, and the rates of those 

paying more rent than they can comfortably afford have increased 

fastest for middle-income families. At the same time, evictions 

and homelessness have increased: The number of people stay -

ing in shelters grew by nearly half from 2015 to 2023, according 

to the center. “Not being able to afford housing is no longer just 

affecting the so-called poor or the elderly.... But ... it’s creeping 

into the middle class,” said Susanne Schindler, an architect and 

historian who is a research fellow at the Harvard center. 

Because so much of the affordability crisis is attributable 

to a lack of housing supply, much advocacy in recent years 

has focused on simply building more. The Yes in My Backyard 

movement started in California in the 2010s, largely in response 

to  nimby ism or the reluctance of current homeowners to allow 

new and denser development in their established neighborhoods, 

especially in those dominated by single-family housing.  yimby s

wanted to change zoning laws and review processes to make it 

easier to build new units. In 2016, President Barack Obama’s 

administration released a tool kit to help local advocates reform 

their cities’ land use policies, and the movement spread to ex -

pensive cities like New York and Seattle. 

The  yimby  movement and the zoning reforms and pro-building 

movements it inspired are encouraging developments. But that 

usually means relying on large-scale developers. It’s a private 

endeavor, not a public one. But the crisis is so big, and affects so 

many already vulnerable people, that we need a more ambitious 

solution, one that revives an idea too many people have dismissed 

as a failure of the past. 

Minneapolis: Center of 

Progressive Reforms 

> MINNEAPOLIS MIGHT NOT SEEM LIKE AN OBVIOUS SITE

for a big  yimby  movement, but the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro 

area totals more than 3.7 million people, and Minneapolis is 

the biggest and densest city in Minnesota, with a long history 

of progressivism in the Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor 

Party. The  yimby  movement there coalesced around a planning 

document that a regional authority requires the city to produce 

every 10 years—what became known as the 2040 plan. In response 

to community concerns about housing affordability, walkability, 

and other quality-of-life measures, the city had already eliminated 

parking minimums that required developers to provide a certain 

number of parking spaces for each unit of housing and banned 

new drive-through restaurants, longtime targets of urbanists who 

want cities to deemphasize accommodations for cars to encourage 

biking and walking in city centers instead. 

At the same time, the Minneapolis planning department and 

the University of Minnesota had both been working on projects 

showing the lasting effects of historical racial segregation in the 

city. “The University of Minnesota had started a program called 

Mapping Prejudice, and they had students that were going in and 

reading restrictive racial covenant deeds and mapping them,” said 

Meg McMahon, planning director for the city. “[We] were able to 

utilize some of their research to really help explain to our policy -

makers that, you know, these historic policies and practices and 

capitalism and all these other factors have really created pretty 

segregated communities that really were producing disparate 

income outcomes for our community members.” 

With that data in hand, alleviating those injustices became a 

focus of the 2040 plan. “That was what got folks really interested in 

saying that … the Minneapolis 2040 plan was really going to center 

racial equity and create more opportunities in more neighbor-

hoods to unlock the amenities that we had for everyone, and to 

make those communities accessible to all,” McMahon told me. 

A grassroots group called Neighbors for More Neighbors 

sprang up to aggressively support aspects of the plan, especially 

the elimination of single-family housing zoning, and to counter 

opposition to the 2040 plan. “There were community members … 

[who] were opposed to the inclusion of duplexes and triplexes,” 

McMahon said. The group put up signs that said  developers 

win , with pictures of bulldozers. “So the Neighbors for More 

Neighbors group got on their bicycles, and they rode through 

the whole city, and they mapped where every single sign was, 

and were able to overlay it with demographic information about 

the city to show that the neighborhoods that were opposed 

to the Minneapolis 2040 plan were predominantly white, pre -

dominantly wealthy, single-family homeowners,” she continued. 

In other words, the opposite of groups that might be helped by 

building more housing. 

Ultimately, the 2040 plan would allow for duplexes and tri -

plexes on any residential plot by right, and it created even more 

density along busy thoroughfares and transportation corridors 

that McMahon said had been traditionally under-zoned anyway. October 2025 44 

However, that growth has already slowed—through May 2025, 

multifamily permit issues were down by half from the previous 

year. In part, this happened because the costs of construction have 

gone up, a trend likely to continue as the reality of tariffs under 

the Trump administration settles in. But another problem is the 

simple existence of the profit motive: Developers build to make 

money, and making money requires that rents rise and stay high 

enough for them to make a profit. They’re not concerned with af -

fordability, and they won’t build if their investments don’t pay off. 

And this is precisely the rock upon which reforms like Min -

neapolis’s often crash. Affordability describes the limit to the 

kind of  yimby  reforms cities have made and want to make. 

The goal of zoning reforms and other changes, like removing red 

tape and limiting permitting requirements and environmental 

reviews, may entice more developers to build more housing, but 

it won’t ensure affordability on its own, particularly for low- and 

middle-income families. “I am a supply skeptic in the sense that 

I don’t think just building more will automatically bring prices 

down, especially in certain markets like Boston or New York or 

San Francisco,” Schindler said. “Prices follow what people can pay, 

so if incomes are so high in these places, and people are willing 

to pay absurd amounts for an apartment, that’s what the market 

is going to charge.” 

Noëlle Porter, director of government affairs at the National 

Housing Law Project, put it even more bluntly. “It’s hard for me 

to accept any sort of premise that says, if we just make developers 

happy, we’ll solve our problems,” she said. “Making profiteers 

happier does not satisfy the profiteers; profiteers will want more if 

they get more. And so, this idea that affordability, or the affordable 

housing crisis, can be solved by happy profiteers, is insane, because 

you really can’t make a profit off of deeply affordable housing.” 

The clearest solution is to remove the need for a profit, which 

means the solution won’t be found in the marketplace. Non -

profits across the country are stretching to try to meet the need, 

but they’ve never been able to operate at the scale of the federal 

government. That’s how other countries ensure there’s enough 

housing up and down the income scale to see to it that everyone 

After the plan passed, a nonprofit sued, arguing for environmental 

review and temporarily halting projects, but the lawsuit was 

ultimately dismissed. 

Building for the Future Requires More 

> IN THE PAST, NEARLY EVERY DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL IN

the city went through a rigorous approval process, and McMahon 

said the city had learned that those processes had encountered 

strong opposition, especially from well-resourced neighborhoods, 

that resulted in inequality in the ways neighborhoods were devel -

oped. Now, the process front-loads public commentary to create 

a plan with hard-and-fast rules that treat every neighborhood 

the same and limit the ways individual projects in individual 

neighborhoods can be challenged or altered. It helps that elected 

officials in the city are generally pro-housing, and now when 

neighbors oppose any individual project, their representatives 

can point to the 2040 plan and say their hands are tied. If a project 

follows the rules, it’s allowed. 

The city hasn’t been totally remade by the new reality of the 

2040 plan, but the progress has been substantial. 5,692 permits 

were issued for 10,638 units in 2023, down from the previous 

four years, and slightly higher but still behind in 2024, with 

2,330 multifamily permits issued. The city is still behind on its 

goal of creating 18,000 new units per year. Many of the new con -

structions are mid-rises along major transportation corridors, but 

throughout the city, duplexes and triplexes are also filling a gap 

that advocates call “missing middle housing,” which allows up to 

three families to live on a lot that formerly housed one, often in 

buildings that don’t seem out of place among the lower-profile, 

older single-family homes in residential neighborhoods. The 

new apartments helped slow rent growth to only about 1 per -

cent in the city in 2024, compared to 14 percent in the state as a 

whole, according to the Pew Charitable Trusts. “Land use takes a 

long time,” McMahon said. “It took us 100 years to develop the 

community we have today. It’s going to take 100 years to reshape.” 

> BETTMANN/GETTY
> Demolition of part
> of St. Louis’s massive
> Pruitt-Igoe housing
> complex in 1972

45 Features 

couldn’t charge enough rent to provide upkeep. Most of the city 

agencies that ran the developments couldn’t keep up with needed 

repairs. Last year, an estimated backlog of needed capital repairs 

on existing public housing was $70 billion. Congress has never 

authorized enough funding to catch up. 

It didn’t help that a number of city agencies had been rife 

with disorder and corruption in the middle of the last century, 

and some cities, like Chicago, were notorious for building as 

cheaply as possible to begin with. The developments were also 

mapped onto existing prejudices and injustices, which led to 

public housing complexes being built in already racially and 

economically segregated neighborhoods, and on land near in -

dustrial uses that people paying market rates didn’t want to live 

near. In some cases, building in distressed neighborhoods led 

numerous neighborhoods to spiral even further into disrepair, 

and white flight in the 1970s and 1980s left many public buildings 

in a permanent ghetto. 

Some developments became synonymous with crime. Pruitt-

Igoe in St. Louis allegedly housed muggers in stairwells waiting to 

rob residents, and the Robert Taylor Homes in Chicago recorded 

some of the highest rates of violent crime in the city. Cabrini Green, 

also in Chicago, housed more than 15,000 people at its peak, was 

described as a “virtual war-zone” by NBC News when it was finally 

closed in 2010, and was the fictional site of the 1992 horror film 

Candyman.  Jay-Z, who grew up in the Marcy Projects in Brooklyn, 

called his home “Murda Marcyville” in a song. 

The disrepair that many city housing authority buildings fell 

into led to even more disinvestment, until the federal government 

completely stopped promoting public housing. Rather than reck -

on with the legacy of public housing and all of its promises and 

failures, the United States simply stopped building it. In 1998, 

the Faircloth Amendment passed, named for North Carolina 

Republican Senator Lauch Faircloth, essentially prohibiting 

any new public housing units from being built. In the 1990s, the 

most notorious public housing high-rises in cities like Chicago, 

St. Louis, and Boston were torn down. Federal programs sought 

to replace them with mixed-income, mixed-used developments 

can get a home—through public housing. In the United States, 

our relatively brief—and wildly underfunded—foray into public 

housing is often viewed as a disaster. But could it be part of the 

future solution, without making the same mistakes that we did 

in the past? 

We Never Fully Committed 

to Public Housing 

> THE IDEA THAT THE GOVERNMENT COULD AND SHOULD

build housing arose during the New Deal, when the primary mo -

tivation was to create a jobs program to get builders back to work. 

Like many other New Deal spending projects, it became essentially 

an anti-poverty program. It was meant to help low-income fam -

ilies, especially mothers with children, find safe housing when 

the marketplace wouldn’t take care of them. 

Large-scale development intended for people with limited 

incomes wasn’t entirely new. The Carl Mackley Houses in Phil -

adelphia had been built by the Full-Fashioned Hosiery Workers 

of America in the 1930s to house hosiery workers. And mining 

companies and other entities had long built workforce housing in 

the cities and towns where they dominated, so that their workers 

could live close by. But the large-scale government intervention to 

guarantee a basic level of housing was new, and it mimicked the 

design of other programs at the time: It created a floor through 

which the very poorest couldn’t fall. They wouldn’t be homeless. 

But the homes were also intended in many cases to be a stepping 

stone to stability, not necessarily homes forever. In fact, the Trump 

administration has proposed time limits on public housing and 

rental assistance based on this idea. “It’s broken and deviated 

from its original purpose, which is to temporarily help Ameri -

cans in need,” HUD Secretary Scott Turner told the Associated 

Press in July. “HUD assistance is not supposed to be permanent.” 

In the beginning, the homes were intended to be self-sustaining, 

earning enough through rents to keep up with maintenance. Un -

surprisingly, homes set aside for those with the lowest incomes 

> COURTESY OF MINNEAPOLIS PUBLIC HOUSING AUTHORITY
> A piece of modular
> public housing was
> hoisted into place in
> Minneapolis in 2023.

October 2025 46 

owns more than 9,400 units. Voters in Seattle just passed a payroll 

tax on employers with employees earning more than $1 million a 

year. In theory, the promotion of developments that would include 

the middle class would help the projects be more self-sustaining 

by being able to charge higher-income families more. 

In Minneapolis, social housing is beginning to gain a foot -

hold.  ctul , the renters organization, has advisory committees 

composed of members who decide what policies to push for at 

the local and state levels. Perez, Rodriguez, and other members 

of the group had watched over the years as their rents went up, 

but their incomes didn’t. They watched as the city transformed 

zoning laws, and rents still weren’t affordable for many in their 

community, who were especially vulnerable because they were 

often new immigrants who didn’t speak English as a first language 

and were unfamiliar with the cities’ and state’s laws about housing. 

That led to a shift. “Social housing is more for the community,” 

Perez said. “We can see a lot of buildings, but no stable housing. 

We need established, stable housing for everybody, and people 

can decide where to live.” 

Critics of the programs that exist now argue that they could 

lead to focusing solely on the middle class rather than those most 

in need. Montgomery County’s program relies on a bond issue 

that could lead to paying back that debt becoming a priority. Many 

advocates and researchers want the federal government to focus on 

the long-neglected needs of those already living in public housing, 

who are now overwhelmingly elderly, disabled, and living on fixed 

incomes, before trying to reinvent something new. “A lot of the 

discussion has been focused around Vienna, which is completely 

different from the United States housing market,” said Susan J. Pop -

kin, a researcher at the Urban Institute who has surveyed and in -

terviewed families living in public housing in Chicago for 30 years. 

“Our public and assisted housing altogether is about 5 percent 

of our housing stock right now. That would take a huge cultural 

change.” If such a change is possible, she said, she hasn’t seen it. 

A yimby  Dream 

> LAST YEAR, MINNESOTA DEMOCRATIC SENATOR TINA SMITH

introduced a bill, with New York Representative Alexandria Ocasio-

Cortez, that would have created social housing in the United 

States, among other changes. It would have repealed the Faircloth 

Amendment and allowed for the possibility of new public hous -

ing, while also creating funding streams that would allow for the 

kind of mixed-income developments by both governments and 

nonprofits to create permanently affordable housing. 

“The market for housing in this country is not working for 

many, many people,” Smith said in an interview. “Certainly, it’s 

not working for people working in low-wage jobs. It’s not work -

ing for seniors on fixed incomes, but it’s not working for young 

people who are trying to get started. It’s not working for families 

with kids that are trying to find an affordable place to live. It’s not 

working for a lot of people.” 

The bill did not go anywhere before November’s election. 

In February, Smith announced she wouldn’t seek reelection, 

which means the bill would need a new champion in the Senate. 

Under President Donald Trump, such a program would be even 

less likely, and already existing housing programs, like Section 

8, are under threat by Republicans who want to impose time 

spread throughout cities, but the total number of units fell overall, 

and the redevelopment programs had mixed results. 

Instead, helping low-income families find housing has con -

centrated on housing vouchers, commonly called Section 8, that 

aid in finding homes on the private market, and tax credits and 

other incentives at the federal, state, and city levels to encourage 

private developers to set aside some units in new buildings for 

families making under the median income. Almost all of those 

incentives have fallen short. New construction fueled by the tax 

credits hasn’t kept up with the need, and Section 8 waiting lists 

both for vouchers and for project-based construction are so long 

that, in many cities, they’ve been closed. Moreover, these aids rely 

on the private market. Many of them are funded by development 

and real estate transactions built for market-rate housing. That 

means that building affordable units actually relies on market 

rates going up, so that more money can go toward funding them. 

Amid the  yimby  debates and zoning reforms and arguments 

for abundance, some policymakers are revisiting and reimaging 

what public housing could be. The government, this argument 

goes, should simply build affordable units itself rather than try to 

convince developers to do it. The challenges would be formidable: 

to overcome public housing’s past, along with voter reluctance to 

trust the government to do anything. Then there’s adequately 

funding such a big building program. But perhaps the largest 

challenge of all is to define the project in a way that provides 

housing to a broad enough population that it would create more 

political support for it and not leave behind the very low-income 

families who rely on old-school public housing to this day. 

The Government Can Fix This 

> TO ADDRESS THE STIGMAS AGAINST PUBLIC HOUSING,

advocates for bringing it back say it should be expanded up the 

income scale and offer mixed-income apartments, in part to keep 

poverty from being concentrated in certain neighborhoods. This 

could also ensure that more people become politically invested 

in the support and upkeep of these developments. It’s also gotten 

a new name: social housing. 

Social housing is not a new idea, but progressive policy advo -

cates started focusing on it in the United States in 2018, after the 

publication of a paper from the People’s Policy Project by Saoirse 

Gowan and Ryan Cooper. Social housing has taken on many defi -

nitions, but at an event on the topic in April, the Center for Joint 

Housing Studies at Harvard defined it as, fundamentally, hous-

ing that is taken off the rental market to be permanently affordable. 

That can mean that it’s owned publicly or by nonprofits, but in 

general it’s insulated from the private market. It could also further 

other goals, like green and fair-labor building practices, racial and 

socioeconomic equity, and community control. The owning entities 

would cap rents at an affordable level, usually around 30 per-

cent of a household’s income. Many point to models like those in 

Vienna, which has owned and developed almost half of the city’s 

residential housing since it began rebuilding after World War II. 

What makes social housing different from traditional public 

housing is that it would be meant for a wider range of incomes, up 

into the middle classes, and could find unique funding streams. 

Social housing projects exist in Montgomery County, Maryland, 

where a public entity, the Housing Opportunities Commission, 47 Features 

units with four or five bedrooms so that they could house their 

multi generational families more easily, thus the housing authority 

is trying to build more of those. The new apartments still smell 

like paint, the light floors and bright walls wouldn’t be out of 

place on design TikTok, and this building, along with others like 

it, comes with its own property manager and maintenance team, 

so that any problems can be dealt with quickly. 

Because it’s in a neighborhood full of private homes, it faces 

different community issues than a taller, high-rise public housing 

building would. But its superpower is that the new zoning rules 

could help mute community opposition to the redevelopment. 

Many of the homes that the authority currently owns around 

the city need improvements and repairs, and rezoning the lots 

to house even more families could move more and more of those 

in need off the waiting lists. But they don’t have easy access to 

funding, though Smith’s bill would have provided it. 

This kind of medium-size development in the middle of a 

single-family housing neighborhood is a  yimby  dream, and it’s 

probably years away. But this is public housing that is perma -

nently affordable, and it and others like it will serve some of the 

lowest-income families in the city. 

The 2040 plan has been so accepted in city politics that many of 

the mayoral candidates—the election is in November—are running 

on its successes and promising to do more. “Minneapolis deserves 

a future that’s more equitable, more sustainable, and more con -

nected,” the city’s current mayor, Jacob Frey, said in a statement. 

Mayoral candidate Omar Fateh, a state senator representing the 

district including the Powderhorn neighborhood, said he would 

support rent stabilization—laws that would require landlords to 

offer to sell to their tenants first, laws that would prevent private 

equity from buying developments in the city, and direct investment 

in housing as well. “Minneapolis is in a housing crisis, and Mayor 

Frey is not doing nearly enough to provide safe and affordable 

housing for all its residents,” he told me. 

State legislators have introduced bills encouraging more cities to 

adopt zoning reforms, though they haven’t gained enough support 

to pass. Which is to say, Minneapolis is trying every approach to 

building more affordable housing, and it’s still not enough. The 

residents want more and are pushing for their elected officials to 

protect them even more. And what social housing advocates want 

is a massive, committed investment from the federal government, 

one that would acknowledge housing as a need for people and 

not just a source for profit for developers. 

I asked Alexander Deng, a 30-year-old volunteer with Neigh -

bors for More Neighbors, if he’d seen anyone lose out, or the city 

lose anything, by trying to build more affordable housing and 

advocate for the changes the city hopes to see more of. “I’m a 

little scared for the cute little houses and the cute little historic 

areas in town,” he said. He described how, when he first moved to 

the city, he’d lived in a building near where single-family homes 

had dominated. These had since all been bulldozed to make way 

for big buildings. He was a little sad to see those disappear, but 

he also recognized that they’d made way for hundreds of new 

residents. “If people want the cute house and they want a cute 

yard, then you don’t have to be downtown,” he said. “We have to 

keep a city as a city where lots of people can live and work and 

have their full life.”   

> Monica Potts is a staff writer at The New Republic .

limits and work requirements on the people who receive those 

benefits, or to block grant those programs to the states in ways 

that will reduce funding over time. Popkin thinks that makes it 

especially important to focus on the low-income population who 

aren’t served by the private market in any way. “There’s no one 

else who’s going to make that investment,” she said. 

In the second Trump administration, progressives may find 

themselves in the position they’re often in: defending inadequate 

programs that already exist from the relentless onslaught of Re -

publican attacks and attempts at defunding and dismantling them. 

“I don’t think that progressives should be defending the status 

quo,” Smith said, when I asked her about that tendency. “I think 

we should be developing ideas that get after the core problems 

that make housing such a big problem for so many Americans. 

And I don’t think now is the time to be sort of retrenching and 

saying, ‘We need to, you know, protect what we have.’ We should 

be defining a new world.” 

The Minneapolis Public Housing Authority has nearly 6,000 hous-

ing units, much smaller than the housing authorities in New 

York City or Chicago, but still sizable. The city has 42 high-rise 

buildings that are what people traditionally think of when they 

think of public housing. Recently, the city started the largest 

public housing redevelopment in its history at a development 

called Spring Manor, where funds are available to build 15 new 

units and rehabilitate existing ones in the current tower. 

Somewhat unusually, however, the authority has a portfolio of 

700 “scattered-site family homes,” or houses in neighborhoods 

around the city. I toured one recently that had taken advantage of 

the city’s new zoning rules to turn what had been a single-family 

home into a new unit that will house six families. 

It was built from modular units, and the exterior has the long, 

narrow look of homes made from recycled shipping containers or 

tiny homes, but stacked side by side, painted blue. The modular 

units were built off-site, which meant that the neighborhood 

construction was minimized and was the least disruptive to 

neighbors it could possibly be. While the block it’s on consists 

of mostly older single-family homes, it’s next to a community 

center that faces a broader thoroughfare. It doesn’t look out 

of place. Representatives from the housing authority told me 

that residents wanted more storage, bigger kitchens, and more 

> COURTESY OF MELISSA OLSON/MINNEAPOLIS PUBLIC HOUSING AUTHORITY
> Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey and community leaders cut a
> ribbon at a new affordable housing complex in August.

October 2025 48 

> Books & the Arts
> ILLUSTRATION BY TARA ANAND

49 Books & the Arts 

MARY ROY LAY  in a temperature-

controlled coffin with a glass top in the 

dining room of her house in Kottayam in 

September 2022. Press photographers and 

a group of mourners gathered around her 

body. Many knew her as the founder of a 

progressive school and as a feminist who 

had challenged inheritance law, winning 

equal rights for Christian women in the 

state of Kerala after a protracted, decades-

long battle in the Supreme Court of India. 

Arundhati Roy knew her as a tormentor and 

abuser, a “local mafia don,” a cult leader, 

a jealous and vindictive mother, and the 

writer’s most “enthralling subject.” 

Mrs. Roy—as the matriarch instructed 

her son and daughter to address her—left a 

unique inheritance for them, a gift of dark -

ness. “I learned to keep it close, to map it, to 

sift through its shades, to stare at it until it 

gave up its secrets,” Roy writes in her new 

memoir,  Mother Mary Comes to Me.  It is a 

statement that could very well be about the 

process of writing itself, especially for Roy. 

Since her Booker Prize–winning novel,  The 

God of Small Things,  was published in 1997, 

earning her global fame, Roy has written 

more than 10 works of nonfiction—on en -

vironmentalism, nuclear weapons, the rise 

of Hindu nationalism, the war on terror -

ism, and more—along with a second novel, 

2017’s  The Ministry of Utmost Happiness. 

These days, she is considered as much an 

activist as a writer—though she dislikes 

the term writer-activist, which sounds, 

she says, “like a sofa bed.” 

In 1969, when she was nine years old, a 

newspaper photo of a severed head made 

an impression on young Roy. The head be -

longed to a landlord near Kottayam whom 

the Naxalites had slain. The far-left Maoist 

insurgents were proponents of armed rev -

olution and believed in the annihilation 

of class enemies. Four decades later, Roy 

would go into the Dandakaranya forest with 

the Naxalites to write about land taken from 

Indigenous tribes and given to corporate 

mining companies by the government. 

The day before she went, Mrs. Roy, who 

didn’t know about the trip, called to say, 

“I’ve been thinking … what this country 

really needs is a revolution.” Darkness, 

in this memoir, is not merely relegated to 

Mrs. Roy’s treatment of her daughter. It 

is a value system from which politics and 

writing emerge. And for Roy, that “turned 

out to be a route to freedom, too.” 

The image of Mrs. Roy in her glass-top 

coffin is one of many that are as striking as 

she was singular: she, bedridden in a high 

iron cot, covered by a thick metallic-pink 

quilt and heaving from asthma attacks 

when Roy was a child; fast-forward to the 

matriarch in her seventies, her hefty body 

being carried on a stretcher from the ICU 

to another floor like the steamship “from 

Werner Herzog’s  Fitzcarraldo ”; and then 

perched again atop a lofty bed, “swinging 

her legs like a schoolgirl, wearing an oxygen 

nasal cannula, her diamond earrings, a size 

44DD lilac lace bra”—which John Berger 

(yes, that John Berger, of  Ways of Seeing )

helped Roy shop for in Italy—“adult dia -

pers, and a pair of high-top Nike basketball 

shoes.” Sitting beside her, Roy wonders 

how her life could ever be normal. This, 

too, is a complicated gift, but a gift none -

theless. Being basic, in this day and age, 

is an epithet. 

Yet for all Mrs. Roy’s charms, the trans -

ference of indignity and anger she suffered 

from others onto her children was a choice 

she too often made throughout her life. She 

mocked Roy, called her a bitch in public, 

blamed the child for her asthma and, con -

sequently, her imminent death; she often 

kicked her out of the house or left her on 

the side of the road. She ordered Roy’s old -

er brother to go kill himself. She told Roy 

that, when someone asked her after  The 

God of Small Things  was published if she 

was Arundhati Roy’s mother, she felt as 

though she had been slapped, and she did 

her best to sabotage an event for the book’s 

launch. It’s no wonder she is endowed with 

the appellation  Mrs. Roy  instead of  moth -

er  throughout the memoir. Roy, as a little 

girl, would tell her asthmatic and wheezing 

mother that she would breathe for her, that 

she would become one of her lungs. Roy 

became a hostage who took on the burdens 

of another, her whole body given over to 

exist as one charged organ responsible for 

two lives. If Mrs. Roy died, she would, too. 

In one uncanny scene, Mrs. Roy’s sister-

in-law, Jane, nearing 90 and showing signs 

of dementia, mistakes Roy for her long-ago 

pregnant mother and says, “I know you 

don’t want that baby, Mary, but, really, it’s 

too late for anything now.” Mrs. Roy had 

been miserable upon the discovery of her 

# Gift of 

# Darkness In Arundhati Roy’s remarkable memoir, 

# art and politics emerge from the 

# giant shadow cast by her mother. 

## By Sarah Wang 

> SOURCE PHOTO: NASIR KACHROO/NURPHOTO/GETTY

Mother Mary 

Comes to Me 

by Arundhati Roy 

Scribner, 

352 pp., $30.00 October 2025 50 

second pregnancy and had not hidden this 

despondency but instead described to her 

daughter her varied attempts to abort the 

fetus by eating green papaya and using a 

wire coat hanger. “I wish I had dumped you 

in an orphanage,” she’d say. This casting by 

Jane, of Roy as her own pregnant mother, 

could be an episode of  Black Mirror  called, 

“What if you were pregnant with yourself 

and wanted an abortion?” Darkness turns 

to black. Perhaps Roy’s own successful 

abortion as a young woman was influenced 

by her mother’s warnings about “drifting 

into a life of marriage and children without 

thinking it through carefully.” 

The darkness that beget darkness: As a 

child, Mrs. Roy endured her father’s whip -

pings and was habitually kicked out the 

house. Her father once split her mother’s 

scalp open with a brass vase. The quickest 

escape route was to marry the first man who 

proposed to her. Micky, who fathered Roy 

and her older brother, Lalith Kumar Chris -

topher (known as LKC), was a drunk whose 

habit of drinking bootleg liquor mixed with 

varnish “burned through his intestines and 

turned them to lace.” He died from internal 

hemorrhaging. Mrs. Roy remarked with dis -

interest upon hearing of his death, “Poor 

fellow. He was such a Nothing Man.” They 

had separated when Roy was about three. 

She wouldn’t see him again until nearly 

two decades later. The Nothing Man was 

less a father than an image from a photo in 

a gray album that the Roy children would 

look at, a man who was known for sitting 

and blowing spit bubbles for hours on end 

while staring into space, who was so frail 

and malnourished he resembled, accord -

ing to Roy, the people in U.N. pamphlets. 

When reunited with his adult children, he 

begged them for money, presumably to buy 

more varnish-hooch. 

A Nothing Man, however, was surely 

better than another kind of man whom Roy 

had known—fathers who wielded power 

with fists and humiliation. She recalls a 

friend’s mother bending down, her dia -

mond earrings beaming, in front of the 

family patriarch to pick up a letter he had 

thrown on the floor for her to retrieve. In 

this scene, Roy locates the utter loneliness 

of dehumanization—a pure spectacle of 

shame. And in recollecting other friends’ 

mothers who always seemed frightened, 

tentative, awaiting instructions, Roy knew 

that the difference between them and Mrs. 

Roy retained some value. 

Another heirloom of darkness was be -

stowed when Mrs. Roy and her two young 

children left the Nothing Man and shel -

tered in the cottage that had belonged to 

Roy’s maternal grandfather. Her grand -

mother and uncle arrived a few months 

later to evict the three under the banner 

of the Travancore Christian Succession 

Act, the state law that governed, at the 

time, the rules of property distribution 

for Christians in Kerala. The act entitled 

daughters to one-fourth of the estate or 

5,000 rupees (approximately $57 in today’s 

currency), whichever amounted to less. It 

took years, but Mrs. Roy challenged the 

act in court and won equal rights for in -

heritance, branding her as an influential 

feminist in India’s history book. 

In the meantime, however, she was cast 

out, divorced, and totally broke, carrying 

an “invisible begging bowl.” After being 

terrorized by the patriarchal laws that sub -

jugated women, Mrs. Roy became a fearless 

warrior who championed women’s rights. 

She empathized with those who suffered 

and were oppressed. At school, she dressed 

Roy, then 11 years old, as a Vietcong girl for 

a school debate. She educated her about the 

Sleep Next to Me Where No One Does 

by Elizabeth Metzger 

Now that I sleep across the yard 

no longer waiting for you to switch 

off the light 

I light a candle 

to see where I’m going 

prop open the skylight with a pole 

All the olive blossoms piled on the glass 

float into the room 

and before I can bend to sweep 

them away 

I float up 

like a second moon 

watching the candle and 

its reflection sway in all directions 

two trikes on the gravel 

tilting nowhere 

sprinklers turning on 

the whole yard 

overflowing     

> Elizabeth Metzger is the author of Lying In and The Going Is Forever ,
> which is forthcoming from Milkweed Editions in fall 2026.

51 Books & the Arts 

ongoing Vietnam War, the devastation of 

the landscape by Agent Orange; she told 

her how the jungles, rivers, rice fields, and 

communists there were just like Kerala’s, 

and that what Americans called the Viet -

namese, gooks, were what they were, too. 

Roy practiced her enraged speech denigrat -

ing counterrevolutionaries and American 

imperialists while her voice shook. Child -

hood—as does the history that precedes 

you—encodes a brain, body, and spirit. Last 

year, Roy took the stage in London to accept 

the PEN Pinter Prize and speak against “ un -

flinching  and ongoing televised genocide in 

Gaza.” She refused to condemn Hamas or 

Palestinians for celebrating Hamas’s at -

tack on Israel: “I do not tell oppressed 

people how to resist their oppression or 

who their allies should be.” Her 11-year-old 

self, dressed in Vietcong gear, was there, 

too, speaking. So was Mrs. Roy. 

This identification with derogation 

unfurls backward in time, pinging the invis -

ible begging bowl and brass vase, marking 

Roy for the future. She leaves home, goes 

to architecture school, stars as a young 

tribal woman in a film about the dangers 

of aligning too closely with colonial rule, 

doesn’t speak to Mrs. Roy for seven years, 

becomes an off-grid drifter, writes screen -

plays and falls in love with her filmmaker 

collaborator, gets an abortion without gen -

eral anesthesia because only a man or her 

mother could sign the form permitting 

it, publishes her bestselling debut novel 

and earns enough money to set up a trust 

to give a portion of the royalties away to 

progressive causes, writes political essays 

criticizing development and corporate pow -

er destroying Indigenous communities and 

land, faces sedition charges, spends a day 

in jail for being in contempt of court, and 

becomes a self-professed hooligan by way 

of outspoken critique in the country she 

finds herself in opposition to for its eco -

nomic and social policies and treatment 

of marginalized communities. 

Leaving home, writing into existence a 

life of her own, Roy begins to transmute her 

childhood role of being Mrs. Roy’s organ 

to breathe for her, to relieve her of suffer -

ing, and save her from death. A process of 

replacing the organ that serves another 

with her own desire. Perhaps this is called 

selfhood. But what makes a self cannot be 

parsed from the history it is made of. 

Roy leaves the filmmaker and buys 

an apartment of her own in Delhi on a 

street that she used to bike down as an 

architecture student. From the balcony, 

she imagines waving to her younger self 

passing below. The past is always alive, al -

ways there to meet you. There, she begins 

writing her second novel,  The Ministry of 

Utmost Happiness.  Where does fiction come 

from? Roy poses this question early in her 

memoir, after recalling a scene from  The 

God of Small Things  where the protagonist 

twins, Esthappen and Rahel, are pushed 

in a volley of rejection from their mother 

to father, neither of whom wants to take 

their children. Roy believed the scene to 

be a work of fiction, but Mrs. Roy corrected 

the record after reading the novel. It had 

actually happened. Memory protects, yet 

it persists: Roy had repressed this event 

from her childhood, but it emerged from 

her unconscious through the act of writing. 

How can one cope with trauma? Believe it 

is fiction and write it as such. Trauma in -

sists on finding expression. 

These days, Roy is “a well-known and 

now-wealthy writer in a country of very 

poor people, most of whom do not or cannot 

read books.” In that context, “What was the 

meaning of being me?” she asks in  Moth -

er Mary Comes to Me.  Indeed, what  does 

it mean to inhabit one’s own subjectivity 

and position in the particular context of 

their world? Inheritances, of property and 

darkness alike, must be reckoned with. 

Stories are another thing we inherit, 

whether their origins are personal, historical, 

or cultural. Roy considers the Malayalam 

films she grew up watching, where hero -

ines were often raped: They convinced her 

all women were destined for the same fate. 

Stories can be used to instill fear and con -

trol and set our expectations for what we 

deserve. On a drive through a national park 

in her thirties, Roy passes a man lying on 

his back atop a buffalo cart with a lantern 

tied to it, singing under the stars, perfectly 

assured that the animal would take him 

home. The sight evokes both wonder and 

jealousy in Roy, for a woman in India would 

never feel so safe and carefree on a lonely 

highway. But writers have the ability to tell 

stories that create the world we want to live 

in. In  The God of Small Things,  different 

castes transgress predetermined borders. 

The Ministry of Utmost Happiness  protests 

on the behalf of Kashmiri independence. 

With every book, every essay, every speech, 

Roy builds worlds that are revolutionary, 

made from the darkness that she spins into 

purpose. She may never lie on her back in a 

buffalo cart singing to the stars, entrusting 

her safety to the world around her, but she 

can write about another world that offers 

the same freedoms to women, men, and 

to hijras alike. 

Revolution, however, is molecular. It 

is not only political; it also happens with -

in. After Mrs. Roy died, the home she had 

built was in disrepair. Roy restored it, 

replacing rusted steel inside filler slab, re -

placing doors and window frames, ripping 

out floors and replacing them, replacing 

wiring and pipes. She likens the process 

to the Ship of Theseus. If every part of 

a house is replaced, is it the same house 

or a different one? I cannot help but under -

stand Roy’s years studying architecture as 

training for her to later rebuild her moth -

er’s house, plank by plank, especially since 

this seems to be the only house that she’s 

ever built. If a daughter begins as a lit -

tle girl who was her mother’s organ and 

remakes herself bit by bit to become her 

own person, is she still the same person 

or a different one? 

Sarah Wang ’s novel  New Skin  is out in 2026. 

# With every book, every essay, 

# every speech, Roy builds 

# worlds that are revolutionary, 

# made from the darkness that 

# she spins into purpose. October 2025 52 

THE HOUR ON  the climate clock has always 

been late. By the time  nasa  scientist James 

Hansen delivered his landmark Senate tes -

timony in 1988, bringing “the greenhouse 

effect” to public attention for the first time, 

the atmospheric carbon count had sur -

passed 350 parts per million, considered the 

“safe” upper limit to avoid catastrophic cli -

mate change. Twenty years later, the count 

was sailing past 380 when Bill McKibben 

launched 350.org, a name chosen to bring 

attention to the urgent task of slowing and 

possibly reversing the clock’s wildly racing 

minute hand. Seventeen years after that, 

the count has struck 430. Beyond midnight 

metaphors, the climate clock is now deep in 

a.m. territory, the folkloric hour of the wolf. 

McKibben is not one to sugarcoat this. 

His first book, 1989’s  The End of Nature,  ap -

peared one year after Hansen’s testimony, 

inaugurating a career dedicated to reporting 

the Holocene’s careen into the Anthro -

pocene. After 36 years, millions of words, 

and several protest-related misdemeanor 

arrests, he is climate journalism’s elder 

statesman, sainted to some, whose books 

serve as temperature checks, strategy docu -

ments, and sources of movement funding. 

Here Comes the Sun,  his new survey and 

defense of solar energy and its scaling po -

tential, fits this mold; McKibben used part 

of the advance to support an upcoming na -

tional day of action called “Sun Day.” The 

book begins with an acknowledgment of his 

long-held apprehension that the window 

for meaningful action may be closed. After 

decades of covering the science and politics 

of climate change, he describes the sorry 

state of things as “the summation and the 

vindication of all that angst.” 

Yet angst is not his register here. The 

hour of the wolf is associated with night -

mares and death, but also with birth and, 

eventually, dawn. Like the song it’s named 

after,  Here Comes the Sun  is a major-key 

invocation of a salvational sunrise. “Right 

now, really for the first time,” he writes, “I 

can see a path forward. A path lit by the sun.” 

Neither the sunlit path of a renewable 

“transition” nor McKibben’s advocacy are 

new, of course. He has been staking his 

name and reputation on this transition for 

the better part of two decades. What’s new 

is the mix of aggressive offense, scrappy de -

fense, and oversize confidence he brings to 

it.  Here Comes the Sun  is the most program -

matic of McKibben’s more than 20 books, 

a collection of good-news headlines and 

data points arranged to bolster faith in the 

supposition that we can solarize electricity 

and electrify the global economy, all with -

out reducing global energy demand, in 

time to attain net-zero emissions by 2050. 

Every prong of this remains controversial, 

including across the broad spectrum of 

those who support phasing out fossil fuels 

and building out renewable energy with all 

deliberate speed. But McKibben treats these 

matters as all but settled, and he punctu -

ates his lawyerly pitch to the general reader 

with gavel-rapping requests for order in the 

climate movement court. 

“There’s a great global machine under -

girding our civilization, and at the moment 

it runs on hydrocarbons,” he writes. “Our 

task is to rip out the guts of that machine 

and replace them with sun and wind and 

batteries, and to do it while the machine 

is running.” 

Under this pragmatic directive, ques -

tions about the size and purpose of the 

machine are distractions, intellectual luxu -

ries we cannot afford. Bothering ourselves 

with evidence that climate change is the 

symptomatic fever of a larger ecological 

crisis—driven by centuries of growing 

resource demands and pollution that 

now exceed the biosphere’s capacity for 

renewal—will only “divert us from the work 

we must quickly do.” 

MCKIBBEN’S SOLAR STORY  begins 

in 1954, when a trio of Bell Labs researchers 

discovered that exposing sheets of silicon 

to sunlight unsettled their electrons, creat -

ing a steady voltage that could be captured 

with tiny wires. Jimmy Carter devised new 

energy policies around this American in -

vention after the oil shocks, but was denied 

reelection, and his plans died in the crib. The 

German Greens managed to do what Carter 

could not in the early 1990s, using tariffs 

and pricing power to incentivize the adop -

tion of rooftop panels that fed the national 

grid. In the 2010s, Angela Merkel’s policy 

of  Energiewende , or “energy turnaround,” 

further spurred demand for Chinese-

made panels, pushing prices downward, 

and expanding global adoption. 

In telling the story of solar’s global 

spread, McKibben leans heavily on energy 

reporting by Bloomberg and  The Economist, 

as well as reports published by renewable 

advocacy and research organizations, no -

tably the Rocky Mountain Institute. Many 

of the headline milestones achieved in re -

cent years are indeed remarkable, arriving 

ahead of most estimates. In July 2023, the 

world began installing a gigawatt of solar 

panels every day—roughly the same output 

as a coal or nuclear plant. A year later, de -

veloped nations were installing a gigawatt 

of solar electricity every 18 hours, using 

panels four times more efficient than those 

developed in the 1950s. In the United States, 

more than 80 percent of new electric gen -

eration in 2025 is expected to come from 

renewables, mostly from solar. 

McKibben’s showcase of the future is 

China, “the Saudi Arabia of sun.” He details 

## By Alexander Zaitchik 

# Can 

# Solar Power 

# Save Us? 

# Bill McKibben’s case for electrifying 

# everything and changing nothing 53 Books & the Arts 

> ILLUSTRATION BY ALEX NABAUM

how China’s $329 billion investment into 

clean technology supply chains between 

2019 and 2023—11 times more than the 

United States and Europe combined—has 

resulted in its domination of the world’s 

new renewable energy capacity, account -

ing for 60 percent and rising. In 10 years, 

China’s renewable technology exports will 

be worth more than the oil exported by 

Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates 

in 2024. Its seven leading renewable firms, 

McKibben writes, “are by some measures 

… producing more energy than the Seven 

Sisters of the oil industry.” 

An increasing share of cheap Chinese 

solar panels are purchased by the global 

south, where renewable energy is grow -

ing two times faster than the global north. 

In Pakistan, McKibben reports, solar is 

producing a third as much energy as the 

dirty national grid and is beginning to re -

place the diesel generators long used in 

irrigating agriculture. In sub-Saharan Af -

rica, the proliferation of micro-solar and 

community grids is even more dramatic 

and transformative. McKibben cites a Ma -

lawian energy researcher who estimates 

solarizing the entire continent could be 

done for $90 billion. 

McKibben believes that all of this 

amounts to a historic global quickening. 

It will require some skilled midwifing by 

policymakers, corporations, and activists, 

but the crown of a new energy system is 

visible, about to be born. “We’re still in the 

early days of this transformation…. But ex -

ponential growth changes numbers very 

fast,” he writes, and “there’s no longer a 

technical or financial obstacle in the way.” 

Sweeping statements like these are de -

livered with bracing confidence throughout 

Here Comes the Sun.  Nothing would be nicer 

than to believe them. Unfortunately, the 

global energy picture is a lot foggier, and 

the light of dawn almost certainly more 

distant, than this book’s bright melodies 

would lull us to believe. 

IT’S TRUE THAT  important trend lines 

have begun to bend in the right direction. 

The share of renewable electricity is up 

(10 percent in 10 years), while the share of 

electricity produced by fossil fuels is down 

(8 percent in 10 years). However, electricity 

only accounted for roughly 20 percent 

of total energy use as of 2023. The other 

80 percent—which powers everything from 

manufacturing to shipping to mining— 

produces the overwhelming majority of 

emissions. This means that, even as solar 

surges as a share of electricity, growing over -

all energy demand reduces these gains to a 

wash. “We saw renewables continuing to 

scale at pace,” write the authors of the En -

ergy Institute’s 2024 report. “But fossil fuels 

grew as well to meet the rising demand for 

energy globally. As a result, the share of fos -

sil fuels in world energy demand remained 

stubbornly stuck around the 80% mark.” 

This fact does not lessen the need to 

promote renewables and reject fossil fuels. 

But it does indicate that the central prem -

ise and promise of McKibben’s maximalist 

renewable program—that renewables can 

achieve net-zero without any contraction of 

economic activity and reduction of global 

energy demand—are delusional. Instead 

of frankly acknowledging the quixotic na -

ture of his trumpeted agenda, McKibben 

sometimes writes as if he inhabits anoth -

er world, where the coast is totally clear. October 2025 54 

In one bizarre instance, he writes that he 

visited Mark Jacobson, a Stanford engineer 

and controversially Panglossian renewable 

transition theorist, because he “just wanted 

to hear him gloat.” 

Here Comes the Sun  does not ignore the 

distinction between electricity and energy, 

nor does it belabor it, and most of its pages 

concern electrified sectors of the economy 

where solar is most easily applied. When 

McKibben writes of “days when rooftop 

solar power alone is supplying more than 

100 percent of power across South Austra -

lia,” he is referring to the home electricity 

needs of 1.8 million Australians, not the 

total energy needs of a country that—even 

after increasing solar capacity elevenfold 

in a decade—continues to produce around 

90 percent of its energy and more than 

60 percent of its electricity using fossil fuels. 

Elsewhere, he asserts we “could supply all 

the energy the US currently uses by cov -

ering 30 million acres with solar panels.” 

This invites readers to imagine greening 

the country’s footprint with a single, mas -

sive, Works Progress Administration–style 

construction project. The reality is that 

covering an area equal to the size of New 

York state with solar panels merely sets 

up the still-unanswerable question of how 

to store, transport, and apply that energy 

across tens of thousands of miles and thou -

sands of (mostly industrial) uses. 

McKibben’s answers are drawn from 

the playbook of eco-modernism, a phi -

losophy that argues we can innovate our 

way to a green and sustainable version of 

the growth-based consumer paradigm, in 

which resource use is “decoupled” from 

ever-expansionary economic activity. Citing 

researchers associated with eco-modernist 

think tanks like the Breakthrough Insti -

tute, he proffers evidence that we can 

electrify everything with renewable ener -

gy, at full gallop, without addressing rising 

demand or its causes. In chorus with the 

eco-modernists, he assures us that we will 

soon be able to keep everything humming 

with highly efficient, recyclable batteries 

that employ novel chemistries. Though 

these remain speculative, there is en -

couraging research into new-generation 

batteries that replace lithium with sodium 

and do not require minerals such as cobalt, 

70 percent of which is produced under a 

brutish throwback model of the colonialist 

exploitation in the Congo, an environmen -

tal and social catastrophe that investigative 

journalist Siddharth Kara memorably 

exposes in 2023’s  Cobalt Red. 

On the nonelectric energy question— 

the elephant taking up 80 percent of the 

room—McKibben marshals what good 

news he can. He discusses the potential 

for the global home heating sector, cur -

rently 90 percent reliant on fossil fuels, to 

be transformed with electric heat pumps 

(up to five times more efficient than gas 

boilers) and induction stoves (which use 

magnets to heat stovetops). On the tricky 

matter of retrofitting thousands of smoke-

stacked factories, he cites an EU report that 

claims 95 percent of thermal energy used 

for manufacturing on the continent could 

be electrified by 2035: “It turns out that if 

you superheat bricks with solar electricity, 

they’ll store that warmth for weeks, allow -

ing it to be released as needed for making 

glass or chemicals, metal or cement.” On 

the high seas, where diesel still rules and 

fossil fuels account for 40 percent of mar -

itime cargo, McKibben reports that some 

shipping companies have added modern 

sails. “We can do everything,” he concludes, 

“but long-range aircraft.” 

We can also, theoretically, create worm -

hole shortcuts through space-time. But 

that doesn’t mean we can actually do it, 

never mind by 2050. Even those forms of 

electrification within reach will require 

an unprecedented build-out of grids and 

lithium-ion batteries, currently the most 

efficient way to store and transport renew -

able electricity. These batteries will, in 

turn, require excavating millions of tons 

of heavy metals, notably nickel, copper, 

and, not least, cobalt from the Democratic 

Republic of Congo. While expressing “no 

small sympathy for those who groan at 

the [prospect of] yet more mining,” he de -

fends the renewables mining scramble by 

calling climate displacement “the greatest 

colonizing scheme of all time”: 

We should work hard to temper the 

tragedies that come with every kind of 

extraction. But we don’t live in a fair 

world—we live in a world that’s very 

rapidly tipping toward hell, a hell that 

will be hardest on precisely the people 

with the least power. Only moving fast 

can head off that hell, but moving 

fast means, inevitably, carelessness. 

It’s a hard call; I’m so scared of the 

climate crisis that I may bend too far. 

McKibben also may bend too far in his as -

surances that we “have the stuff” necessary 

Here Comes the Sun: 

A Last Chance for the 

Climate and a Fresh 

Chance for Civilization 

by Bill McKibben 

W.W. Norton & Company, 

224 pp., $29.99 

# His eco-modernist electrification 

# agenda fits on the family tree of 

# “abundance liberalism,” 

# the latest iteration of the idea 

# we can zone, unleash, and 

# grow our way out of a collapsing 

# planet on fire. 55 Books & the Arts 

to build the panels, grid infrastructure, 

and batteries required by the renewable 

program. “We may be a little short of tellu -

rium, but I predict we’ll find it,” he writes. 

He quotes a 2023 study—whose lead au -

thor, Seaver Wang, directs the Climate 

and Energy program at the Breakthrough 

Institute—purporting to show that the 

crucial minerals needed for net-zero 

“do not exceed geological reserves,” but 

omits countervailing research, such as 

a 2024 Cornell-University of Michigan 

study that found just one of those crucial 

minerals—copper—cannot be mined fast 

enough to electrify the United States, never 

mind the planet. 

IN 2007, JUST  one year before he launched 

350.org, McKibben published a bio-

regionalist tract called  The Deep Economy: 

The Wealth of Communities and the Dura -

ble Future,  which challenged the scale and 

ideology of the growth-oriented consum -

er economy that has propelled humanity 

into a state of overshoot. In it, he laced into 

“tech-driven high-growth economics” as 

an “empire of the mind” that “allowed us 

to avoid hard choices” and ignored the 

basic biophysical reality that “we do not 

have the energy needed to keep the mag -

ic [of growth] going.” That book is not an 

outlier in his corpus, but one of several that 

understand our civilization’s problem as 

less a matter of transplanting its viscera 

than of taming its hormone glands and 

conquering its addictions. 

What to make, then, of his pivot to selling 

full electrification of the expansionary 

economy as the only credible path to net-ze -

ro? McKibben addresses the evolution of 

his stance in two ways. The first is to sug -

gest his adopted eco-modernist politics 

are really a Trojan horse for a more radical 

transformation. “Conversion,” he writes, “is 

the most subversive possible step toward 

a more localized and modest world…. For a 

species that has become almost fatally dis -

connected from the natural world, the sun 

offers a way back into a relationship with 

reality.” Elsewhere he claims agreement 

with Andrew Nikiforuk, a degrowth-

oriented Canadian energy writer and critic 

of eco-modernism, who has written that 

“responsible green energy advocates” must 

also advocate for localized economies and 

banning the “decadent waste” of materials 

and energy. “Those are mostly things I’ve 

worked on,” says McKibben. “But they’re 

hard…. Hopefully a clean energy transition 

will buy us some time to do these things.” 

Which takes us to McKibben’s second 

argument: The climate clock has super -

seded the concerns of what might be called 

Early McKibben, and we no longer have the 

time for talk about civilizational values, 

consumption patterns, or their relation -

ship to the bigger-than-climate problem 

of ecological overshoot. And here McKib -

ben’s impatience with people who diverge 

on this important matter comes through. 

Despite the olive branch to folks like Nikifo -

ruk, McKibben cannot hide his annoyance 

with those who persist in advocating for an 

intentional, socially just economic contrac -

tion led by the major economies—a cohort 

he dismisses as “(vaguely) left” nuisances, 

as “equally unrealistic” as “oil companies 

with their algae ads and centrist politicians.” 

“This is an emergency, and it can’t be 

solved by wishful thinking,” he writes, lik -

ening his intervention to an emergency 

room doctor, who doesn’t “waste a lot of 

time worrying about their patients’ poor 

lifestyle choices. They do what they must 

to save their lives, perhaps with the hope 

that given a second chance their patients 

will choose more wisely.” 

In a closing chapter called “A Subtly New 

World,” McKibben describes the society we 

might inhabit once we’re out of the climate 

ER. This solar-powered world looks very 

much like our own, with a twist of New 

England communitarian garnish. “We just 

need to be a tiny bit less individualistic, just 

bend a bit in the direction of community,” 

he writes. “The battery on my Kia can cool 

my neighbor’s beer before the Red Sox 

game.” McKibben lightly jabs journalist 

Matt Yglesias for his climate sanguinity, but 

his eco-modernist electrification agenda 

fits on the family tree of “abundance lib -

eralism,” the latest iteration of the idea we 

can zone, unleash, and grow our way out 

of a collapsing planet on fire. Activists have 

a supporting role in McKibben’s schema, 

but it’s largely a matter of technological 

innovation and industrial know-how. 

“Renewable energy relies less on resourc -

es than it does on brainpower,” writes 

McKibben, but the kind of brainpower 

that Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos can love. 

The irony of McKibben’s eco-modernist 

stridency in favor of the renewable agenda 

is that promoting solar does not require 

abandoning energy realism or the related 

degrowth politics that he once embraced. 

One can advocate for building renewable in -

frastructure and rejecting fossil fuels while 

also engaging in hard conversations about 

the larger problem of overshoot and the 

obvious limits of electrification. There is 

no conflict here. Fighting fossil fuels, ad -

vocating for renewables, and using one’s 

influence to force an honest reckoning with 

the nature, causes, and consequences of 

our crisis—together these amount to an 

emergency treatment that serves us well. It 

is not a mystery why people would choose 

to release themselves to the fantasy of a 

solar-powered status quo. What’s baffling 

is McKibben’s decision to join them.   

> Alexander Zaitchik is the author of Owning
> the Sun: A People’s History of Monopoly
> Medicine From Aspirin to Covid-19 Vaccines.

The Fly 

by Luke Dunne 

The fly, which draws invisibly, cuts left, 

then left, then left, then fails to complete 

the pattern only it can see, an imperfect iteration 

of the ideal, a shape which, for it, 

may be nothing more than broken strings 

of chemical fire, unevenly lit 

along the nerve strands of its wings.  

> Luke Dunne ’s first chapbook, Techne , will be published by
> Ravenna Press in 2026.

October 2025 56 

IN 1957, AS  Cold War paranoia gripped the 

world, African Americans trudged toward 

greater freedoms. That year, Martin Luther 

King Jr. and his comrades founded the 

Southern Christian Leadership Conference 

and launched a major campaign to register 

disenfranchised voters. Congress strength -

ened the federal government’s ability to 

protect civil rights, and a group of nine 

Black boys and girls successfully integrated 

Little Rock Central High School. The civil 

rights movement—defined by boycotts, 

large-scale demonstrations, and strategic 

local organizing—was well underway and 

yielding promising results. 

Halfway across the world, a similarly 

progressive energy permeated the air. 

On the night of March 5, 1957, minutes to 

midnight, Kwame Nkrumah, then prime 

minister of the Gold Coast and soon to 

be first prime minister of the indepen -

dent nation of Ghana, stood before a 

buzzing crowd. “At long last the bat -

tle has ended,” he declared to the tens 

of thousands present, “and thus Ghana, 

your beloved country is free forever.” Not 

only did this momentous occasion mark 

a dramatic shift in the nascent country’s By Lovia Gyarkye 

# The Promise of 

# Pan-Africanism 

> GETTY (X4)
> ILLUSTRATION BY DAKARAI AKIL

# A biography of Kwame Nkrumah 

# recasts the post-WWII era as a Black 

# liberation epic. 57 Books & the Arts 

development, but it also signaled a new era 

for other colonial entities. Capitalizing on 

the crowd’s enthusiasm and undivided at -

tention, Nkrumah reminded his audience 

that Ghana’s singular “independence is 

meaningless unless it is linked up with 

the total liberation of the African conti -

nent.” The world was on the cusp of change, 

and the only way to ensure Africa’s place in 

it was to embrace Pan-Africanism. 

In his captivating new book,  The Second 

Emancipation: Nkrumah, Pan-Africanism, 

and Global Blackness at High Tide,  the jour -

nalist and scholar Howard W. French recasts 

the story of the post–World War II global 

order as a Black liberation epic instead 

of a psychodrama between Washington 

and Moscow. His chief characters are 

not Kennedy and Khrushchev but rather 

Nkrumah, his fellow postcolonial leaders, 

and Black intellectuals and organizers in 

the United States. French considers the 

dawn of the Cold War alongside the devel -

opment of Pan-Africanism, a movement 

committed to the self-determination of 

African nations and political unity between 

Black people across the diaspora. 

He also examines how global efforts 

to end fascism in Europe fundamentally 

altered the consciousness of conscripted 

African and African American troops now 

caught in a peculiar twentieth-century con -

tradiction. How could Black people in the 

United States be asked to fight on behalf of a 

country built on their disenfranchisement? 

Similar questions arose on the continent, as 

European colonial powers extracted from 

their subjects through military drafts, under-

paid labor, and theft of natural resources. 

The blatant exploitation ignited a period 

of intense organizing in the United States, 

Africa, and the Caribbean, portending a de -

cade of domestic civil rights advancements 

and successful decolonization movements. 

French proposes that this period—which 

he calls a “second emancipation”—marked 

the true end of slavery, and that its emerg -

ing Pan-Africanist theories offered a path 

for free nations to “fend for themselves in 

a world dominated by imposing powers.” 

The Second Emancipation  arrives at an 

energizing time for contemporary Pan-

Africanist thinking. It joins a recent slate 

of works resuscitating conversations about 

the movement’s political history, cultural 

present, and practical future. Last year, crit -

ics celebrated the Belgian filmmaker Johan 

Grimonprez’s Oscar-nominated documen -

tary  Soundtrack to a Coup d’Etat,  which 

investigates how the United States deployed 

jazz “ambassadors” like Louis Armstrong 

to Africa to distract from its covert oper -

ations on the continent. Grimonprez not 

only reexamines Belgian and U.S. com -

plicity in the harrowing assassination of 

the Congolese leader Patrice Lumumba; 

he also draws connections between the 

struggles of African revolutionaries and anti-

imperialist Black organizers in the United 

States. Soon after  Soundtrack to a Coup 

d’Etat  landed in theaters , “ Project a Black 

Planet: The Art and Culture of Panafrica” 

opened at the Art Institute of Chicago. The 

exhibition, which has now closed, surveyed 

the cultural history of Pan-Africanism, from 

material propaganda to artists inspired by 

the movement’s ideas. Both “Project a Black 

Planet”  and  Soundtrack  gestured to Pan-

Africanism’s contemporary manifestations 

and utility for movement work. 

French, a longtime journalist and author, 

most recently, of  Born in Blackness,  a cru -

cial text that reaffirmed the important role 

sub-Saharan Africa played in the develop -

ment of modern civilization, takes a similarly 

forward-looking approach. He challenges 

lazy theories that attribute Africa’s current 

economic precarity and political instability 

to incompetence and wonders what the 

continent might look like if today’s intellec -

tuals and organizers readopted Nkrumah’s 

Pan-African ideals. What could Africa— 

and the broader Black diaspora—achieve 

if her people focused on building materi -

al connections across national and ethnic 

identities? These questions frame French’s 

biography of Nkrumah, which blends rigor -

ous archival research, vivid on-the-ground 

reporting, and poignant personal anecdotes 

to construct an admiring portrait of Gha -

na’s first leader. While French never shies 

away from  Nkrumah’s flaws, he remains a 

sympathetic biographer, acknowledging the 

pressures the Pan-Africanist faced and 

the antagonistic forces abetting his eventual 

downfall. Although  The Second Emancipa -

tion  aims to be a wide-ranging survey of a 

singular revolutionary moment, it is most 

persuasive and propulsive when French 

homes in on Nkrumah’s almost mythic jour -

ney from a village son to a nation’s hope. 

The Ghanaian leader’s story is an opportu -

nity to reconsider Africa’s current destiny. 

THERE ARE FEW  details available about 

Nkrumah’s origins outside of his own writ -

ing, which French relies on in the early 

chapters of  The Second Emancipation. 

Nkrumah was born in the Nzima village 

of Nkroful as Francis Nwia Kofi Nkrumah, 

to parents of modest means. His mother, 

Elizabeth Nyaniba, wanted her son to suc -

ceed, so when Nkrumah was young, she 

moved to a larger town and enrolled him in 

a Roman Catholic mission school. Although 

Nkrumah disliked the experience—he ran 

away on his first day—it opened doors that 

led the way toward his brilliant future. 

There’s an apocryphal sheen to parts of 

Nkrumah’s biography, which can be at -

tributed to the political leader’s propensity 

for self-invention and the messianic role he 

would eventually play in Ghanaian history. 

After roughly eight years of school, Nkru -

mah entered the newly formed Achimota 

College, where he studied to become a 

teacher. There, he met one of his men -

tors, James Aggrey, the college’s first Af -

rican faculty member and vice principal, 

who later convinced Nkrumah to study in 

the United States. 

The young Ghanaian set off for this 

country in 1935. French describes the voy -

age as “an odyssey in three parts,” which 

included soliciting money from a relative, 

hiding among crew members on a ship, and 

making a stop in Liverpool, where he was 

briefly hosted by Paa Grant, the first presi -

dent of the United Gold Coast Convention, 

or  ugcc —a political party that would play 

a significant role in Nkrumah’s return to 

Ghana and early days as a political leader. 

Nkrumah was an ambitious but socially 

reserved figure: Though charming and 

beloved, he seemed fundamentally lonely. 

French ruminates on Nkrumah’s romantic 

life (or lack thereof, until his unexpected 

marriage to Fathia Halim Rizk in 1957) 

and wonders how this charismatic leader 

could be so awkward—occasionally bor -

dering on juvenile—around women. These 

kinds of details, though clumsily deployed 

by French at times, effectively human -

ize  Nkrumah, grounding a figure who is 

so often spoken of as more of a prophet 

than a man. 

In the United States, where he would 

spend nearly a decade, Nkrumah majored 

in sociology at Lincoln University, enrolled 

in the theological seminary, and earned 

master’s degrees in education and philos -

ophy from the University of Pennsylvania. 

While he studied, taught, and spoke in var -

ious public forums, Nkrumah’s “compass 

was fixed on the liberation of his continent, 

and most of his intellectual pursuits were 

bound up in his busy search for answers 

to the challenges of ending colonial rule 

and economic dependence on the West,” 

French writes. Nkrumah devoured every -October 2025 58 

thing about Pan-Africanism, which in its 

initial form (posited by intellectuals like 

James Beale Horton, Martin Delany, and 

J.E. Casely Hayford) explicitly respond -

ed to Western imperialism and focused 

on the development of a free state. Some 

scholars proposed a regional university in 

West Africa that could serve as a hub for a 

new imperial core, while others suggest -

ed Africans return to Indigenous forms 

of self-government, in which otherwise 

autonomous communities formed a unit -

ed federation. Later versions, especially 

the kind promulgated by W.E.B. Du Bois, 

focused on intellectual unity, moral ques -

tions, and diplomatic relations between 

Africa and her diaspora. Both schools of 

thought emphasized an idea that Nkrumah 

found deeply compelling: the interdepen -

dence of Black people across the world. 

By the early 1940s, French writes, Nkru -

mah was fully invested in the notion “of a 

shared past in racial domination between 

Africans and African Americans” and “a 

closely paired future.” 

In May 1945, at the tail end of World 

War II, he left the United States for London, 

where he met the Trinidadian journalist 

George Padmore by way of C.L.R. James. 

Both men were critical to Nkrumah’s intel -

lectual development; they took him under 

their wing and helped him to fortify and 

clarify his positions. Through Padmore, 

especially, Nkrumah came to appreciate 

the urgency with which Africa’s colonies 

needed to seize “the levers of government.” 

Armed with these experiences, Nkru -

mah returned to Ghana in 1947. This was 

a pivotal period in global politics, when 

colonized peoples were “increasingly alive 

to the injustice and humiliation” of the 

current system. Nkrumah dove headfirst 

into organizing. He joined the  ugcc  (the 

organization headed by Grant, who hosted 

him in Liverpool) and quickly took to its re -

vitalization. He gave speeches around the 

country and launched local party offices, 

which helped galvanize once disparate 

colonial subjects under a single banner of 

unity. He became a sensational force and 

a thorn in the side of the British. 

AS NKRUMAH BREEZES  through the 

ranks of colonial government, French 

maintains a reverent yet clear-eyed per -

spective of the upstart’s journey. There’s 

an instructive focus on the details of or -

ganizing, with French highlighting how 

Nkrumah extended his political outreach 

through education and media. In 1948, he 

opened a small school called the Ghana 

National College and staffed it with vol -

unteer teachers; later that year, he started 

the  Accra Evening News,  which built a large 

readership. Nkrumah also formed a nation-

wide association of young people, and 

before long, much to the dismay of the old 

guard  ugcc , he and these new followers 

broke away to form their own party, called 

the Convention People’s Party. It’s with the 

CPP that Nkrumah rose to power and se -

cured the nation’s independence. 

French describes Ghana’s independence 

movement and the U.S. civil rights struggle 

as “linked and intertwined like a double 

helix,” in large part because of the “spir -

it of Pan-Africanism.” He explores how 

international Black activists inspired the 

civil rights movement and how African 

Americans influenced U.S. politicians to 

engage seriously with Nkrumah’s govern -

ment in Ghana. Stateside publications like 

Jet  and  Ebony  as well as local Black papers 

covered the former British colony’s strug -

gle in detail and kept African Americans 

informed about progress in the region. This 

drummed up domestic support, which 

played a huge, but historically overlooked, 

role in “creating space for Nkrumah amid 

the stark and hostile East-West competition 

of the early Cold War” and even forced an 

unwilling Richard Nixon to attend Ghana’s 

independence ceremonies in 1957. African 

Americans would show a similar level of 

advocacy a few years later when Lumum -

ba helped wrest Congo from Belgian rule, 

a saga French recounts in the book. 

Yet Nkrumah’s Pan-Africanist dreams 

were not simply realized by severing from a 

colonial power. Local leaders and the ruling 

classes of these newly freed nations “were 

as disinclined to surrender their power and 

privilege to a larger and untested entity as 

they were to remain under colonial domina -

tion,” French writes. It’s a concern that the 

activist and political leader Andrée Blouin 

articulated in her 1983 autobiography,  My 

Country, Africa,  which was republished by 

Verso earlier this year. While helping Lu -

mumba organize Congo’s independence 

process, Blouin worried about the new 

nation being undone by parties more in -

terested in power than people. “There are 

politicians among us who serve neocolo -

nialism for their own interests, and they sell 

out their black brothers and sisters to do so,” 

she wrote. “They are our worst enemies.” 

Blouin’s concerns about the selfish -

ness of the elite class periodically came 

to mind as I read French’s account of 

Nkrumah’s struggle to realize his am -

bitious projects in Ghana. For years, 

Nkrumah tried implementing a socialist 

scheme—which required cocoa farmers 

to invest a percentage of their earnings 

into government—to help fund his Volta 

River Project, a hydroelectric dam that 

he hoped would spur an industrial revo -

lution and modernize the young nation. 

Instead, he was forced to seek help from 

an “international economy dominated by 

big Western companies whose structure of -

fered poor nations almost no chance at real 

prosperity.” These obstacles only fueled 

Nkrumah’s obsession with the Volta project 

and distracted the leader from address -

The Second Emancipation: 

Nkrumah, Pan-Africanism, 

and Global Blackness at 

High Tide 

by Howard W. French 

Liveright, 

512 pp., $39.99 

# The Second Emancipation 

# arrives at an energizing time 

# for contemporary 

# Pan-Africanist thinking. 59 Books & the Arts 

Lovia Gyarkye  is an editor at Hammer & Hope 

and culture critic based in New York. 

ing domestic issues. Inflation was out of 

control and the price of cacao—a major 

export—remained low, further upsetting 

an already disgruntled populace. 

For the most part, French offers a char -

itable analysis of Nkrumah’s eventual 

downfall. He doesn’t defend the president’s 

increasingly authoritarian decision-

making, but he does provide a generous 

amount of context, including examining 

how a 1962 assassination attempt made 

Nkrumah more reclusive and paranoid. 

These conditions set the stage for his even -

tual overthrow in 1966 by the Ghanaian 

military. That year, he fled to Guinea, where 

he spent the rest of his life before he died 

of cancer in Bucharest in 1972. 

STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION 

1. Publication Title: THE NEW REPUBLIC 2. Publication number: 382-020 3. Filing Date: Sep -

tember 1, 2025, 4. Issue Frequency: Monthly, with 2 double issues published. 5. Number of Is -

sues Published Annually: 10 6. Annual Subscription Price: $79.97 7. Complete Mailing Address 

of Known Office of Publication: The New Republic, 1 Union Square West, 6th Floor New York, 

NY 10003 8. Complete Mailing Address of Headquarters or General Business Offices of Pub -

lisher: The New Republic, 1 Union Square West, 6th Floor New York, NY 10003 9. Full Names 

and Complete Addresses of Publisher, Editor, and Managing Editor: Publisher: Bryan Groves, 

1 Union Square West, 6th Floor New York, NY 10003 Editor: Michael Tomasky, 1 Union Square 

West, 6th Floor New York, NY 10003. Managing Editor: Lorraine Cademartori, 1 Union Square 

West, 6th Floor New York, NY 10003 10. Owner: TNR II, LLC, 1 Union Square West, 6th Floor 

New York, NY 10003 11. Known Bondholders, Mortgagees, and Other Security Holders Own -

ing or Holding 1% or More of Total Amount of Bonds, Mortgages, or Other Securities: None 

12. Tax status: n/a 13. Publication Title: THE NEW REPUBLIC 14. Issue Date for Circulation 

Data Below: October 2025 15. Extent and nature of circulation: Average of Copies Each Issue 

During Preceding 12 months: a. Total number of copies (Net pressrun): 47,941 b. Paid Circula -

tion (By Mail and Outside the Mail): (1) Mailed Outside-County Paid Subscriptions Stated on 

PS Form 3541: 41,665 (2) Mailed In-County Paid Subscriptions Stated on PS Form 3541: 1,095 

(3) Paid Distribution Outside the Mails Including Sales Through Dealers and Carriers, Street 

Vendors, Counter Sales, and Other Paid Distribution Outside USPS: 0 (4) Paid Distribution by 

Other Classes of Mail Through the USPS: 0 c. Total Paid Distribution: 42,761 d. Free or Nominal 

Rate Distribution (By Mail and Outside the Mail): (1) Free or Nominal Rate Outside-County 

Copies Included on PS Form 3541: 331 (2) Free or Nominal Rate In-County Copies Included on 

PS Form 3541: 0 (3) Free or Nominal Rate Copies Mailed at Other Classes Through the USPS: 0 

(4) Free or Nominal Rate Distribution Outside the Mail (Carriers or other means): 1,652 e. To -

tal Free or Nominal Rate Distribution: 1,984 f. Total Distribution (Sum of 15c and 15e): 44,745 

g. Copies not Distributed: 3,197 h. Total (Sum of 15f and 15g): 47,942 i. Percent Paid (15c/15f x 

100): 95.6% Electronic Copy Circulation: a. Paid Electronic Copies: 27,236 b. Total Paid Print 

Copies (Line 15c) + Paid Electronic Copies (Line 16a): 69,997 c.  Total Print Distribution (Line 

15f) + Paid Electronic Copies (Line 16a): 71,979 d. Percent Paid (Both Print and Electronic Cop -

ies) (16b/16c x 100): 97.2% Number of Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 

a. Total number of copies (Net pressrun): 46,643 b. Paid Circulation (By Mail and Outside the 

Mail): (1) Mailed Outside-County Paid Subscriptions Stated on PS Form 3541: 40,257 (2) Mailed 

In-County Paid Subscriptions Stated on PS Form 3541: 0 (3) Paid Distribution Outside the 

Mails Including Sales Through Dealers and Carriers, Street Vendors, Counter Sales, and Other 

Paid Distribution Outside USPS: 1,122 (4) Paid Distribution by Other Classes of Mail Through 

the USPS: 0 c. Total Paid Distribution: 41,379 d. Free or Nominal Rate Distribution (By Mail 

and Outside the Mail) (1) Free or Nominal Rate Outside-County Copies Included on PS Form 

3541: 0 (2) Free or Nominal Rate In-County Copies Included on PS Form 3541: 0 (3) Free or 

Nominal Rate Copies Mailed at Other Classes Through the USPS: 0 (4) Free or Nominal Rate 

Distribution Outside the Mail (Carriers or other means): 1,639 e. Total Free or Nominal Rate 

Distribution: 1,639 f. Total Distribution (Sum of 15c and 15e): 43,018 g. Copies not Distributed: 

3,625 h. Total (Sum of 15f and 15g): 46,643 i. Percent Paid (15c/15f x 100): 96.2% 16. Electronic 

Copy Circulation: a. Paid Electronic Copies: 29,373 b. Total Paid Print Copies (Line 15c) + Paid 

Electronic Copies (Line 16a): 70,752 c. Total Print Distribution (Line 15f) + Paid Electronic Cop -

ies (Line 16a): 72,391 d. Percent Paid (Both Print and Electronic Copies) (16b/16c x 100): 97.7% 

Total circulation includes electronic copies. 17. Publication of Statement of Ownership: Octo -

ber 2025 18. I certify that all information on this form is true and complete. I understand that 

anyone who furnishes false or misleading information on this form or who omits material or 

information requested on the form may be subject to criminal sanctions (including fines and 

imprisonment) and/or civil sanctions (including civil penalties) (signed) David Myer, Chief 

Financial Officer, September 1, 2025 

WHAT FRENCH DOES  well in  The Second 

Emancipation  is remind readers that whatev -

er the struggles faced by individual leaders, 

credit for African nations’ present-day pre -

carity can only go to plundering empires. 

That the world was (and is) organized to 

benefit Western powers made Nkrumah’s 

persistence in realizing even a sliver of 

his goals all the more impressive. In May 

1963, a few years before the coup, Nkrumah 

held the first summit of the Organization 

of African Unity in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 

It was one of the first times that African 

countries gathered to discuss their own 

fate. Sadly, the ideas presented to the con -

vention of 32 African leaders never gained 

traction. They gently rejected proposals for 

a federal structure, a common currency, 

the abolition of current borders, or any of 

Nkrumah’s other radical ideas. What could 

have been achieved had his visions been 

given a chance? 

Today, as the global majority finds it -

self once again navigating the turbulence 

of fractious superpowers, this question 

gains new urgency. On the one side of 

the world order stands the United States, 

still collaborating with Israel to annihilate 

Palestinians. On the other side is Russia, 

whose war on Ukraine continues unabated. 

Climate change is another arena in which 

the world’s non-superpowers have found 

themselves effectively abandoned: The 

global north is responsible for roughly 

92 percent of excess carbon emissions 

while countries in the global south suffer 

most from the damage. 

But when South Africa brings a

genocide case against Israel before the 

International Court of Justice, or when 

Zambia, Tanzania, the Democratic Re -

public of Congo, and Burundi unite to 

protect vital natural resources around 

Lake Tanganyika, it’s evidence of a shifting 

global consciousness, and an occasion to 

think about the role Pan-Africanism can 

play right now. 

This past summer, I went to Nairobi 

for the launch of the first print edition 

of  Africa Is a Country  magazine . The is -

sue surveyed how the past 15 years have 

been defined by mass mobilizations, 

such as the Arab uprisings in the Middle 

East and North Africa (and, I would add, 

the early Black Lives Matter protests in the 

United States). Each contributor tried to 

understand Africa’s place in these move -

ments and how, as William Shoki wrote 

in an editor’s note, we transition from 

“eruption to organization, from euphoria 

to endurance.” 

The launch event was only days re -

moved from protests against Kenya’s 

President William Ruto, and the ener -

gy from those demonstrations animat -

ed the room and the conversations be -

tween a range of people—from Kenyans 

and South Africans to Comorians and 

Nigerians. As we exchanged ideas, 

asked questions, and shared histories, 

it occurred to me that this convening 

drew on the spirit of Pan-Africanism, 

and that the future of the continent, 

much like its past, depended on that 

movement’s survival. October 2025 60 

NOT LONG AFTER  Hamas’s October 7, 2023, 

assault on Israel and the start of that coun -

try’s brutal and ongoing war of retaliation, 

students at Columbia University—as well as 

many other colleges—set up an encampment 

to protest against Israel’s bombardment 

of Palestinian civilians. Both Columbia’s 

administration and New York City’s elites 

panicked. A group of billionaires began 

lobbying the mayor to get rid of the encamp -

ment. So did many outside commentators, 

who insisted that the students involved 

were antisemites, though many of them were 

Jews. Before long, the city’s riot squads 

had stormed the campus, and the school 

locked its gates against its own students. 

By that point, “the community of learning 

I knew and loved had vanished,” writes 

Mark Mazower, an eminent historian of 

twentieth-century Europe who has taught 

at Columbia for decades, in his new book, 

On Antisemitism: A Word in History. 

As the school year limped on, Mazower 

found himself struggling to understand 

what had happened. But “if one thing was 

clear to me,” he writes, “it was that the lines 

dividing antisemitism from opposition to 

Israeli policies and criticism of Zionism 

had become hopelessly blurred.” And dan -

gerously so:  On Antisemitism  begins by 

establishing that “antisemitism” is both a 

powerful word—a “word weapon,” as Ma -

zower puts it—and a troublingly ill-defined 

one. It was coined by a German in 1879, 

entered the common vocabulary during 

World War II, and is now used to describe 

anything from calls to boycott Israeli hum -

mus to white-supremacist demagogues 

who tell their followers that “the Jews” are 

conspiring to replace them. Clearly, it is in -

coherent to lump wholesale racial hatred 

in with a targeted protest technique, and 

incoherence of this sort is exactly what in -

tellectual history—the genre to which  On 

Antisemitism  belongs—is built to address. If 

most history chases what happened, intel -

lectual history chases the ideas that  made 

it happen; if the former helps explain why 

we live how we live, the latter addresses 

why we think what we think and feel what 

we feel. At a moment when many people’s 

thoughts and feelings about antisemitism 

are intense without necessarily being in -

telligible to others, and when accusations 

of antisemitism are tremendously forceful, 

Mazower’s book makes an immense contri -

bution. In tracing the evolving meaning of 

“antisemitism,” he demonstrates persua -

sively how we might turn it from a weapon 

back into a word. 

It helps that Mazower, as a scholar of 

nationalism, is used to negotiating the risk 

that his research and arguments may turn 

into what the legendary English histori -

an Eric Hobsbawm called “a politically or 

ideologically explosive intervention” in 

# How a Word Turns 

# Into a Weapon 

# An intellectual history of antisemitism 

# becomes a history of Zionism. 

## By Lily Meyer 

ILLUSTRATION BY MONA EING & MICHAEL MEISSNER 61 Books & the Arts 

the present. From the beginning, he’s clear 

that  On Antisemitism,  though it isn’t strict -

ly about nationalism, will deal at length 

with Israeli nationalist—that is, Zionist— 

ideology. It has to. The intellectual arc 

Mazower traces is the transformation of 

antisemitism’s meaning from persecution 

of Jews on ethnic or religious grounds to 

any criticism of anything Jews do, even if 

the Jews in question are the government 

and defense forces of the state of Israel. 

That transformation is intertwined with 

the historical evolution of Zionism, and 

Mazower does not think that it’s good for 

the Jews. 

Growing up, I understood antisemitism 

as a form of discrimination that nearly 

killed my great-grandparents. My grand -

parents faced it in serious ways, my parents 

in smaller ones, and I, an American Jew 

born in 1991, hardly ever encountered it at 

all. When I did, the experiences were mi -

nor, almost laughable. But during Israel’s 

2014 assault on Gaza, when I was in my 

early twenties, I repeatedly found myself 

in conversations where my interlocutor re -

ferred to Israel as “you” or “you guys,” as if 

I were directly involved in its choices and 

campaigns. I thought this was antisemitic. 

I still do. Over the course of that invasion, 

though, I came to understand that my con -

cept of antisemitism wasn’t universal. It 

seemed to be the inverse of what some 

others believed. According not only to the 

acquaintances I thought were antisemitic, 

but to a good number of the Jews around 

me and to the Israeli government itself, my 

Jewishness meant I was automatically as -

sociated with Israel. My ethnicity roped me 

into its nationalist program, even though 

I had no desire to live there and was po -

litically opposed to Zionism. In fact, that 

opposition, which frequently manifested 

as critique of Israel, was, according to the 

Zionists around me, itself antisemitic. I’d 

thought I was an American Jew, but appar -

ently, I was an Israeli antisemite. 

All of this was immensely confusing 

in 2014. In the last two years, it’s gotten 

much, much worse. Mazower writes in his 

introduction to  On Antisemitism,  “Anyone 

who takes antisemitism seriously as an 

ongoing problem must surely therefore 

be dismayed by the confusion that exists 

around the term, not to mention the over -

use that threatens to strip it of meaning.” 

In part, this is a rhetorical strategy for cre -

ating consensus, since many readers who 

do consider criticism of Israel antisemitic 

also take antisemitism seriously as an issue. 

It’s a clear way to assert the full stakes of 

his work, which Americans are now seeing 

in real time. Since returning to the presi -

dency, Donald Trump has harassed and 

tried to defund universities—starting, not 

coincidentally, with Columbia—on the 

spurious grounds that they foster anti-

semitism. His Department of Homeland 

Security has illegally detained foreign stu -

dents for supporting Palestinian rights. 

Powerful Democrats, meanwhile, have 

smeared New York City mayoral candidate 

Zohran Mamdani with groundless claims 

that he’s an antisemite. It doesn’t help “Jews 

or anyone else,” Mazower writes, “when the 

ongoing struggle against discrimination 

and prejudice is used opportunistically to 

try to destroy the autonomy of universities, 

political freedoms, and liberty of thought 

itself.” In short, if we don’t agree on what 

antisemitism is, we—no matter who we 

are—risk having it used against us. 

MAZOWER HAS DEVOTED  his career to 

studying Europe, and  On Antisemitism, 

like antisemitism itself, begins there. At 

the start of chapter one, he quotes an 

anonymous French journalist who, in 1881, 

reported that in Germany an “anti-Jewish 

party formed … and was called the  anti-

semitic  party.” In Mazower’s estimation, 

this is the beginning of antisemitism prop -

er: that is, as an ideology that names itself 

and that manifests not only through “at -

titudes, symbols, or stereotypes, but with 

political actions, theories, organizations, 

and outcomes.” Already, this is a useful dis -

tinction in two ways. First, it is a reminder 

that an antisemitic individual’s presence in 

a movement or institution does not make 

that movement or institution antisemitic. 

Second, it underscores a truth I know from 

experience: Hearing somebody express an 

antisemitic attitude may unsettle me or 

make me unhappy, but unless that person 

decides to harm me physically or has the 

power to turn their ideas into policy, their 

attitude cannot limit my life. 

On Antisemitism  covers antisemitism 

in all of pre–World War II Europe, but it’s 

especially interested in what Mazower 

calls “the German lands”—Germany and 

the Austro-Hungarian Empire. In those 

territories, the nineteenth century was 

a time of intense nationalism, often of 

nation-founding. As new countries were 

established, the question of whether their 

resident Jews should receive full citizen -

ship loomed large. Enlightenment values of 

equality and liberalism said yes; ingrained 

bias and antisemitic politics both said no. 

In Germany, the government tried to split 

the difference with a gradual, assimila -

tionist approach, launching educational 

reforms designed to create a “new kind of 

Jew” who, while not actively worshipping, 

would be indistinguishable from a Chris -

tian. Reform and Conservative Judaism 

date back to this historical moment. As 

far as the history of antisemitism goes, 

so does the distinction between discrimi -

nation against Jews on religious grounds 

and discrimination on ethnic ones. By the 

end of the nineteenth century, many Ger -

man Jews had “cease[d] to differ from their 

Christian fellow-citizens except in the mat -

ter of private faith.” Forty years later, their 

fellow-citizens exterminated them anyway. 

Not all Jews in the German lands were 

enthusiastic about the assimilationist pro -

gram. In the view of the very religious, it 

was a greater threat to their way of life than 

the overt discrimination to which they 

were accustomed. Among early Zionists, 

meanwhile, it was a project that could 

not mitigate Christians’ hatred of Jews—not 

that they necessarily wanted it to. Ma -

zower situates Zionism, which emerged 

as an organized nationalist movement 

at the very tail of the nineteenth centu -

ry, among other European nationalisms 

of the time. Like them, it “thought about 

the future with and through history. It 

saw the Jews not merely as those who 

shared a common faith but as a national 

unit, a People who had been plunged into 

exile.” But unlike its fellow nationalisms, 

Zionism had to reckon with a linguistical -

ly and geographically scattered flock. It 

did so, Mazower argues, by claiming that 

“miraculous combination of a positive 

and negative force had kept [the Jews] 

together through their many centuries of 

wandering and misery: The positive force 

was the promise of Israel’s return to Zion; 

the negative was antisemitism.” 

On Antisemitism: A Word 

in History 

by Mark Mazower 

Penguin Press, 

352 pp., $29.00 October 2025 62 

In this analysis, Jews needed to be hated 

in order to remain Jewish. Accordingly, 

Zionists refused to believe that non-Jews 

would ever accept them—a view that 

trickled even into my highly assimilated 

twenty-first-century childhood. Among 

early Zionists, Mazower writes, there 

was debate over whether antisemitism was 

“merely another form of national animos -

ity” or something “unique and timeless,” 

even biblical. Some suggested that it was 

God’s way of balancing the scales for his 

chosen people. A group of early Israeli 

historians, called the Jerusalem School, 

attached themselves to this vision, which 

became dominant. (More than dominant, 

really: It’s an apparent influence on the 

Jerusalem School historian Benzion Net -

anyahu’s son Benjamin, the current prime 

minister of Israel.) Mazower has no patience 

for it. With uncharacteristic sharpness, he 

writes that history, “as a secular discipline 

that seeks to explain events by reference to 

human action, is fundamentally incompat -

ible with a theological worldview.” 

Mazower’s scholarly objection to this 

semimystical vision of antisemitism 

isn’t the only one in  On Antisemitism . He 

writes that left-wing and liberal Jews in the 

nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 

worried that not only was hatred of Jews 

not timeless, it was a phenomenon that 

the creation of a Jewish state was likely to 

manufacture. Mazower quotes Jews from 

Poland to England expressing fears that the 

Zionist project would both create antisem -

itism in the Arab world and give non-Jews 

in every country but Israel grounds to treat 

Jews as aliens. When the Balfour Declara -

tion was signed in 1917, expressing British 

support for a Jewish state in Palestine, the 

Anglo-Jewish economist J.H. Levy worried 

that “one thing which Zionism seems like -

ly to attain is the manufacture of a logical 

basis for anti-semitism.” Mazower argues 

that it did precisely that. 

But first, of course, there was World War 

II. Mazower has written several books deal -

ing, in full or part, with the Holocaust, and 

in  On Antisemitism,  he focuses on its colos -

sal redistribution of both world Jewry and 

the world’s ideas about Jews. Before the war, 

most Jews lived in Europe. After, the surviv -

ing ones flocked to the United States and to 

the land that, in 1948, became Israel. In the 

United States, Mazower argues, stark nine -

teenth-century ideas about race were largely 

good for Jews, who were generally classified 

as white. (Contemporary American fascists 

have fixated on this classification, which 

they reject, but since their ideology contains 

but is not limited to antisemitism, it would 

seem to fall outside  On Antisemitism ’s re -

mit.) Antisemitism rose in the twentieth 

century along with other reactionary fears 

about modernity, but after World War II, it 

was associated with Nazism and started to 

wane. At the same time, American Jewish 

organizations began to fight antisemitism 

by commissioning and disseminating re -

search into the cause of racism of all forms. 

It was a strategy that both worked well in 

and of itself and led to significant left-wing 

Jewish involvement in civil rights coali -

tions through the 1960s. Jewish leftists in 

the United States also tended, after World 

War II, to be anti-Zionists. Because they 

saw antisemitism as a version of racism, 

they didn’t see how it could “be solved by 

turning another people—the Palestinian 

Arabs—into a homeless minority in turn.” 

Additionally, they disliked the idea that 

the United States wasn’t the right place for 

Jews, which they feared would give rise to a 

new American antisemitism. (They weren’t 

quite wrong, in that American Christians’ 

support for Israel often comes with the im -

plication that Jews are better off there.) But 

the first problem they identified turned out 

to be the bigger one. 

Here, Mazower turns to Jew-hatred in 

the Arab world, which he argues emerged 

largely from the transformation of Pales -

tine into Israel. Sometimes, the fury this 

unleashed transmuted into what he calls 

“conspiratorial antisemitism,” as it did in 

the United States— The  Protocols of the El -

ders of Zion  gained traction in both parts of 

the world as their Jewish populations grew. 

But more often, it was rooted in anti-colonial 

anger or hostility over land. Mazower does 

not consider those sentiments antisemitic, 

even if they have turned some people who 

feel them into antisemites. Interestingly, 

he demonstrates that David Ben-Gurion, 

Israel’s founding prime minister, did not un -

derstand Arab hatred of Israel as inherently 

antisemitic either. Mazower quotes Ben-

Gurion telling a colleague in 1956, “If I was 

an Arab leader, I would never make terms 

with Israel…. There has been antisemitism, 

the Nazis, Hitler, Auschwitz, but was that 

their fault? They see only one thing: we 

have come here and stolen their country.” 

And yet in public, Ben-Gurion cast Is -

rael’s Arab enemies as the new Nazis, their 

dislike of Jews as a new form of the unique 

and timeless hatred that had dogged the 

Anamnesis 

by Aaron Fagan 

Holding up my cyanide cap to the sun I said, 

A prison becomes a home if you have the key. 

It is not the pill but the pink light glinting off 

That has me thinking I am in the company 

Of God in the form of the pharmacy delivery 

Girl standing at my door with a silver ichthys 

Necklace also shining a pink beam convincing 

Me the Russians have perfected communication 

With aliens and I was now standing in the line 

Of their transmission like a flashbulb going off. 

To say there is no explanation for this is not 

An understatement, it is the only explanation. 

Put another way: I am the only person to never 

Have a mystical experience and remain sane.  

> Aaron Fagan is the author, most recently, of the collection
> Atom and Void , forthcoming from Princeton University Press.

63 Books & the Arts 

Lily Meyer  is a writer, translator, critic, and 

author of the novel  Short War .

Jewish people for all time. He did not 

distinguish between different forms of Arab 

objection to Israel’s existence or policy; 

nor did he distinguish between different 

Arab and Muslim nations’ objections. 

Mazower doesn’t either, since his main 

interest is tracking the transformation 

of Ben-Gurion’s rhetoric into an official 

stance taken by the Israeli state. By the 

mid-’70s, Israel was describing all its 

opponents as antisemites and all public 

opposition to its behavior as antisemitism. 

Mazower presents this stance as, to some 

degree, a defensive one. Even as Israeli 

leaders called Arab leaders such as Egypt’s 

Gamal Abdel Nasser the heirs to Hitler, Arab 

nationalists “traced a connection between 

Nazi racism and Zionism [and] consistently 

argued that Palestine should not be asked 

to pay the price for Nazi anti-Jewish perse -

cution.” In 1975, the year after the Palestine 

Liberation Organization’s Yasser Arafat first 

addressed the U.N. General Assembly, that 

body adopted a resolution describing Zion -

ism as racism and analogizing it to South 

African apartheid. In Mazower’s estimation, 

“racism” and “apartheid” are words as wea -

ponized as “antisemitism”; by insisting its 

opponents were antisemites, then, Israel 

was fighting fire with fire. 

It was also cynically recruiting American 

Jews to its cause. In the ’70s, antisemitism 

was no longer the force it had once been 

in the United States, and the institutions 

designed to counter it, rather than happily 

declaring their obsolescence, became in -

creasingly interested and invested in the 

idea that criticism of Israel was what they 

called “the new antisemitism.” They con -

tinued to promote the idea that American 

Jews were continual victims of discrimi -

nation and even hate crimes, though data 

did not support this vision. The state of 

Israel, however, did. Mazower argues that 

Israeli politicians who sought to expand 

their population—and, crucially, to attract 

young, educated immigrants who were 

not traumatized by World War II or Soviet 

antisemitism—insisted that Jews could 

only live in true peace and freedom if they 

made Aliyah. 

In the ’70s, Holocaust remembrance be -

came a greater priority in both the United 

States and Israel. American Jews began to 

attach their identity increasingly to it, as well 

as to the state of Israel. Relatedly, they ex -

pressed an increasing sense of vulnerability, 

instability, and unease, although Mazower 

notes that, objectively, their conditions had 

never been better. In fact, they had become 

more successful and influential than any 

of the country’s other minority groups. By 

the end of the twentieth century, Ameri -

can Jews were the most powerful ones in 

the world and, likely, also in world history. 

Still, many of them were convinced that the 

United States was not a safe home for Jews. 

As this idea gained traction, Israel be -

gan to argue more and more overtly that it 

was the only true defender of Jewish life. 

In 2018, it passed a Basic Law declaring 

itself the official nation-state of all Jews. 

Mazower describes this law, to which many 

Israelis objected strenuously, as “almost de -

signed to encourage a confusion between 

Israel and Jews in general.” It seemed de -

signed to replace “the traditional diaspora 

paradigm of antisemitism—understood 

as prejudice or bigotry against Jews as an 

ethnicity—with one [in which] an attack on 

Israel was by definition antisemitic because 

it implied criticism of ‘ the  Jewish people.’” 

Mazower does not believe in this new 

paradigm. All the many threads in  On 

Antisemitism  come together to demonstrate 

why. Almost since antisemitism appeared 

as a political concept, Zionists have used 

it to argue that Jews can only flourish in a 

Jewish state. Once established, that state 

has invoked antisemitism not only to make 

the same claim, but also to shut down op -

position and, at times, diplomacy. It has 

repeatedly manipulated Holocaust remem -

brance to serve its cause and to diminish 

the validity of Palestine’s. On this front, 

Israel is not alone. Germany is paranoically 

supportive of Israel as a result of Holo -

caust-memory rhetoric. The United States, 

Mazower writes, treats the Holocaust as 

“a guarantee of America’s commitment 

to Israel.” And the most commonly used 

definition of antisemitism today, one that 

many nations have adopted and that Ma -

zower objects to strenuously, was generated 

by the intergovernmental International 

Holocaust Remembrance Alliance in 2016. 

According to the  ihra , antisemitism 

is a “certain perception of Jews, which 

may be expressed as hatred.” This unclear 

definition comes with several examples, 

including the claim that it may be anti-

semitic to call the state of Israel racist. What 

this has to do with Holocaust memory is 

not specified. It is more broadly baffling, 

as Mazower points out, to “exempt [Israel] 

from normal free speech concerns,” given 

that “many other countries today are also 

decried as racist in their very origin.” It 

would seem, in fact, that treating Israel 

differently in this regard is applying a dou -

ble standard to it—but that’s something 

else the  ihra  says may be antisemitic. All 

these mays, Mazower writes, are all too 

easy to exploit. They have “become very 

useful to politicians who wish to use the 

issue of antisemitism to clobber dissent 

and assail civil liberties. For them, its flaws, 

confusions, and internal contradictions […] 

are in fact helpful, offering them cover to 

pursue their larger goals.” 

On Antisemitism  is the precise opposite 

of the  ihra  definition. It is rigorous and 

lucid, and, like any good work of history, 

it absolutely bristles with primary sources. 

Even when Mazower’s writing is explicitly 

opinionated, he always shows the reader 

precisely what documents or events he’s 

basing his opinion on. In a book that deals 

so intensely with the manipulation of ideas 

and emotions, this transparency is an in -

tense relief. Mazower knocks away decades 

of obfuscation of what antisemitism actual -

ly is to demonstrate, at the very least, what 

it is  not : a unique prejudice, unchanging 

no matter its context, that affects all Jews 

equally while rendering the state of Isra -

el above international law and immune 

to critique or protest. Perhaps that idea, 

elementary though it may seem, is where 

a good-faith conversation can start. 

# If we don’t agree on what 

# antisemitism is, we— 

# no matter who we are—risk 

# having it used against us. October 2025 64 

his stories of Black lives to the broader arc 

of Black American history,  Highest 2 Low -

est ’s glossy demonstration of prestige and 

success feels unique. We’re no longer in the 

sweaty, working-class Brooklyn of  Do the 

Right Thing  (1989),  Crooklyn  (1994), and 

He Got Game  (1998), but in present-day 

Dumbo—one of the borough’s most afflu -

ent neighborhoods, a tech company hub 

and commercial district that embodies the 

lifeless upscale aesthetics of gentrification. 

David and Pam are like Beyoncé and Jay-Z, 

Barack and Michelle—Black icons, yes, 

but also unapologetic capitalists; money, 

of course, being the most efficient means of 

achieving the American dream. 

The same day that David is set to buy out 

one of Stackin’ Hits’ board members, allow -

ing him to regain control of the company, he 

receives an anonymous call informing him 

that Trey is being held for ransom. The de -

mand? $17.5 million in Swiss francs, around 

the sum David needs to execute his busi -

ness plan. The Kings prepare to hand over 

the cash, but when it turns out that Trey is 

safe, and Kyle (Elijah Wright)—Trey’s best 

friend and the son of Paul (Jeffrey Wright), 

David’s driver and confidant—is the one in 

danger, David slackens. 

Highest 2 Lowest  is an adaptation of Akira 

Kurosawa’s 1963 film,  High and Low  (which 

is itself based on Ed McBain’s 1959 de-

tective novel  King’s Ransom ), and it mirrors 

the moral conflict, class divisions, and 

anxieties about mechanization and mod -

ern technology in the Kurosawa. David 

balks at a potentially lucrative deal with 

an AI company because good music needs 

“heart” and “soul,” while the kidnapping, 

and his initial refusal to pay Kyle’s ransom, 

lay bare his own callous individualism. A 

devastated Trey, swarmed by online haters 

decrying his family’s inaction, accuses his 

father of having the “coldest heart.” 

Though Kurosawa’s classic features the 

great Toshiro Mifune in the equivalent of 

Washington’s role, it doesn’t rely on its 

lead actor’s stardom to build out its ideas 

about the economic stratification of post -

war Japan. Casting Washington as David, 

however, and featuring him alongside the 

unofficial Black hall of fame on the pent -

house’s walls, call attention to the actor’s 

celebrity and decades-spanning career. And 

to those of Lee, who rose to prominence 

on a similar timeline to Washington’s, and 

whose work in the 1990s, in particular, was 

defined by their partnership. In this sense, 

Highest 2 Lowest,  Lee and Washington’s 

fifth collaboration, is a quintessential “late” 

IN THE OPENING  credits of Spike Lee’s 

Highest 2 Lowest,  the camera glides over 

the East River, admiring an Elysian New 

York City skyline against a peachy sunrise. 

Skyscrapers parade like diamond obelisks 

across the screen, while the booming bari -

tone of Gordon MacRae, singing “Oh, What 

a Beautiful Mornin’” from Rodgers and 

Hammerstein’s  Oklahoma!,  augments this 

dreamy decadence:  Everything’s going my 

way.  Indeed. At the very top of the tallest 

building in the neighborhood, the camera 

settles on David King (Denzel Washington), 

a powerful music executive taking a busi -

ness call on his penthouse’s balcony. He’s 

a tower among towers, quite literally, his 

reflection on his dwelling’s glazed exterior 

cast against Manhattan’s silhouette. This 

rapturous introduction swiftly establishes 

a kind of epic context—a grand city, a great 

man, played by one of the movie world’s 

most virtuosic stars—and we haven’t even 

stepped inside yet. 

Once we do, we find David’s two-story 

loft, filled with Basquiats and Kehinde Wi -

leys; artistic renderings of Toni Morrison 

and Frederick Douglass; framed portraits 

of David on the covers of  Rolling Stone  and 

Time.  There are his adoring queen, Pam 

(Ilfenesh Hadera), and teenage heir, Trey 

(Aubrey Joseph), who aspires to carry on 

his pop’s legacy. David is the founder of 

Stackin’ Hits Records, an eminent music 

label that has signed over 50 Grammy-win -

ning artists; call him the Quincy Jones of 

the new millennium. 

Signifiers of Black excellence aren’t un -

usual in Lee’s films—think of the archival 

montage of Black leaders like Muham -

mad Ali, Malcolm X, and Tommie Smith 

that kicks off  Da 5 Bloods  (2020). But for a 

writer-director who has always anchored 

# From On High 

# Spike Lee’s new thriller is also a meta 

# reckoning with his success. 

## By Beatrice Loayza 

> ILLUSTRATION BY CLAY RODERY

65 Books & the Arts 

film, entwining the source narrative’s social 

issues with a meta-reckoning on inheri -

tance and memory, especially as it relates 

to high-profile Black artists charged with 

representational responsibility. David is 

caught between doing the right thing and 

revamping his career, which brings to mind 

the ultimatums faced by popular artists in 

profit-oriented creative industries: speak 

out on a politically divisive issue, for in -

stance, and risk slashing your fan base 

and hemorrhaging sales. An expressly po -

litical filmmaker who has also been called 

a “corporate populist,” and who embraces 

commercial genres and lucrative product 

placements (the Nike swag is ubiquitous), 

Lee is certainly attuned to the difficulties 

of honoring one’s principles while main -

taining the hustle. 

Unfortunately, this first hour of do -

mestic drama and soul-searching is also 

tonally bewildering. Its overt symbolism 

(David’s Mount Olympus is Dumbo’s Olym -

pia Building); broad, theatrical performance 

styles; and hyper-expressive score by How -

ard Drossin betray a camaraderie with the 

conventions of the classic melodrama. Yet 

the script’s blunt sincerity, coupled with the 

eerie artificiality of the Kings’ hyper-curated 

abode, make its big emotions feel stale and/ 

or unintentionally kitschy. In other words, 

it sort of feels like a Lifetime movie—more 

soap opera than psychodrama. The leonine 

Washington, at the very least, is infinitely 

watchable; his cocky swagger and sharp 

shifts to dagger-eyed intensity lend these 

conversational scenes a certain grit and 

sense of humor. There’s a moment when, 

racked by indecision and pacing around 

his home office, David cries out and in -

vokes his forebears:  What would you do, 

James  [Brown]?  What would you do,  Stevie 

[Wonder]?  Jimi  [Hendrix]?  Aretha  [Frank -

lin]? It’s rather silly, but I can’t deny that 

Washington delights. 

When David finally agrees to pay Kyle’s 

ransom, his decision is fueled by both 

moral and practical considerations: The 

boy is an unofficial member of the family, 

sure, but failure to act also means back -

lash that could jeopardize Stackin’ Hits 

already plummeting rep. Aided by a team 

of cops (LaChanze plays a brainy sleuth; 

Dean Winters, the meatheaded muscle), 

David descends from his perch to carry out 

the ransom exchange, and the change of 

scenery—from glossy high-rise to street-

level scramble—is demarcated by a switch 

to a moody, grainier format. Here, Lee’s sig -

natures pop out: An ethereal double-dolly 

shot captures Detective Bridges (John 

Douglas Thompson) in close-up as he ex -

plains the plan to seize the kidnappers. 

Drossin’s score turns jazzy and percussive 

as David and two of the detectives take the 

4 subway line up through Manhattan and 

into the Bronx, where the kidnapper and his 

lackeys await the drop-off. As demonstrat -

ed with his previous Washington collab, 

the bank-heist thriller  Inside Man  (2006), 

Lee has a gift for harmonizing the thrills of 

multilocation set pieces. With  Highest 2 

Lowest,  he puts his New Yorker and avid 

sports-fan credentials to work, introducing 

the city’s communal rhythms and public 

gatherings as unforeseen hurdles. The 

Puerto Rican Day Parade is in full swing, 

clogging the streets around which the 

drop-off is meant to take place; the Yan -

kees are playing a home game, and rabid 

Boston-hating fans are packed into the 

4 train. The kidnapper, a paragon of street 

smarts, plays these factors to his advantage, 

securing the money bag with a few decoys 

and motorbikers that breeze through the 

crowds. Brooklynite though David may be, 

his potty-mouthed rival proves he’s flown 

too high and forgotten how to fight on land. 

But if David has lost touch with the New 

York of his youth—the same New York that 

a much younger Washington inhabited 

in his early films with Lee, like  Mo’ Better 

Blues  (1990) and  He Got Game —he’s still 

got his talent. As Pam sagely points out, 

however, corporate interests threaten to 

distract him from what really matters: the 

music. Dubbed the “best ears in the busi -

ness,” a line so frequently repeated in the 

film it becomes something of a joke, David 

licks the wounds left by his hefty financial 

loss by reconnecting with his past. As in 

the old days, he walks the length of the 

Brooklyn Bridge while listening to new 

music. A trap single by the conspicuously 

named “Yung Felon” grabs his attention; 

the rapper’s voice resembles that of the kid -

napper’s crude pronouncements, and Kyle, 

now safe in the hospital, confirms it’s the 

same song that had been playing on loop 

throughout his confinement. Naturally, 

the cops refuse to prioritize David’s lead, 

claiming they’ll verify the connection, if 

there is one, by running the song and the 

kidnapper’s call recordings through AI 

technology. Police incompetence, ever the 

motivation for vigilante justice, is joined by 

gratuitous automation—a poor substitute 

for human expertise. 

Lee’s films tend to work through themes 

dialectically. See the pair of quotes by 

Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X that 

appear at the end of  Do the Right Thing, 

which serve to muddle the arguments for 

and against their conflicting philosophies 

on violence.  Highest 2 Lowest,  too, stakes out 

sundry dichotomies to create ambiguities, 

ultimately pitting David against the rough-

edged yet unexpectedly charismatic Yung 

Felon (A$AP Rocky) in a Stygian showdown. 

Paul, a reformed criminal, hits up the amor -

phous network referred to simply as “the 

streets” to locate Yung Felon’s whereabouts, 

kicking off the film’s loosest and most plea -

surable section. David and Paul behave like 

chums gearing up for one last rumble, and 

a weirdly charming encounter with Yung 

Felon’s clueless baby momma (Princess 

Nokia) reveals that Mr. Felon is but a dis -

gruntled fan of David’s desperate to grab his 

attention; a passionate yet largely invisible 

musician whose tracks are buried in music 

streamers’ algorithms. A mesmerizing face-

off (and partial rap battle) between David 

and Yung Felon in the younger man’s un -

derground recording studio plays out like an 

intergenerational powwow between Black 

artists—Black men with competing ideas 

about everything, including women, power, 

and what makes a sick beat. 

Lee’s own convictions take center stage 

in David’s final stand. Once arrested, Yung 

Felon goes viral, his notoriety bringing him 

the attention—and record deal offers—he’d 

always dreamed of. But even now, he wants 

David’s validation, and in a split screen con -

frontation in the prison visiting room, he 

offers himself to Stackin’ Hits Records—a 

proposition he’s sure will rake in the dough. 

In films like  Bamboozled  (2000), about a 

modern-day minstrel show, Lee calls out 

the exploitation of Black identities by me -

dia narratives, underscoring a career-long 

fixation with the reclamation of Black repre -

sentation. By this logic, Yung Felon’s trendy, 

social media–bolstered fame, premised on 

stereotypes of Black criminality, is destined 

to fade. Meanwhile, David, in the film’s con -

cluding scene, leaves Stackin’ Hits behind 

to start a new family-owned business: steer 

clear of stupid spectacle, stick to your roots, 

and follow your gut. I can’t say that  Highest 

2 Lowest  stands among Lee’s greatest hits, 

but it certainly preserves the idiosyncrasies 

that distinguish his filmmaking, proving at 

the very least that Spike continues to abide 

by his own rules—and that’s something to 

be celebrated.   

> Beatrice Loayza is a critic and historian
> with work in The New York Times , the Criterion
> Collection, and elsewhere.

October 2025 66 

FX’S  ALIEN: EARTH  shreds. In making 

the first-ever television show based on the 

Alien  film franchise, creator Noah Hawley 

seems to have had one insight that over -

whelmed all the rest: that  Alien ’s got kind 

of a heavy metal vibe. This sounds like a 

criticism, but I don’t necessarily mean it 

that way. Hawley’s televisual take on the 

Alien  universe is faithful and unfaithful 

to the canon by turns. It sticks to the ba -

sic idea—a group of hapless humans and a 

handful of charmingly malevolent androids 

come into contact with a Xeno morph, a 

parasitic, nigh-unkillable alien bioweapon 

with a head so overtly phallic that you’d 

laugh if you weren’t being eviscerated— 

while ambitiously expanding the scope. 

It advances strong, strongly asserted ideas 

about where the most compelling corners 

of that universe are and how a television 

show, working at a different scale than 

film, might illuminate them. Hawley seems 

quite interested, for instance, in exploring 

unexplored aspects of the  Alien  aesthetic. 

Emerging from H.R. Giger’s perverse, byz -

antine, industrial Goth artwork, the  Alien 

franchise is full of complex and malevo -

lent piping, snaking alloys, machinelike 

humans, and humanlike machines. 

Alien: Earth  obviously draws upon 

Giger’s blueprint, but, in visual style and 

thematic spirit, Hawley trades in the fran -

chise’s gloom and doom for something a 

bit more aligned with metal’s more the -

atrical aesthetics. This is most evident in 

each episode’s closing needle drop, many 

of which are heavy metal classics, includ -

ing the pilot’s eerily timed Black Sabbath 

cue. But those are only the most super -

ficial nods. Like the musical genre that 

inspires the show,  Alien: Earth  can be grisly 

and grim as well as occasionally ponder -

ous and plodding—Hawley’s incessant 

dissolves wouldn’t look out of place in a 

Metallica video. The show thinks about 

violence and death in ways that can be 

bleakly insightful and trite within the space 

of a scene. It’s dead serious to the point of 

comedy, but its unembarrassed sincerity is 

also somehow admirable. And shooting the 

iconic Xenomorph at length in full light, as 

the show often has occasion to do, empha -

sizes the way these aliens look as if they’re 

clad head-to-toe in black leather. Even from 

the moment they explode out of the poor 

human rib cages they’ve been gestating in. 

Chestbursters and headbangers. 

The latent thrash of  Alien: Earth  is only 

one of several crannies of the  Alien  cos -

mos into which Hawley extends a curious 

tentacle. The new show is more minutely 

interested, for instance, in the complex bi -

ology and reproductive cycle of the iconic 

Xenomorph alien than any film in the se -

ries, and it spends a tremendous amount 

of time explicitly explaining and clinical -

ly exploring that topic. It is fascinated by 

the franchise’s depiction of androids, and 

it situates these beings within a kind of 

politicized class hierarchy of synthetic, 

humanoid AI on the planet of their man -

ufacture. It wants to know way, way more 

about the Earthbound economic environ -

ment that led Weyland-Yutani Corp. to put 

Sigourney Weaver on that ill-fated space -

ship in the first place. 

Alien: Earth , in other words, has a lot 

of ideas. So, too, did  Alien, Aliens,  and all 

the rest, up through the recent reboots and 

reimaginings. But all of those films—seven 

in the canon, along with two crossovers 

with the  Predator  universe—shared a kind 

of brutal simplicity and cutting restraint, 

the space of the ship serving as a literal 

representation of the movie’s compulsory 

narrative economy. The pictures had lots 

to say about AI and humanity and God 

and science and bodies and machines, but 

the language they used was the bloody 

and direct language of a slasher set on an 

intergalactic submarine. Even the most phil -

osophically minded of the films, like 2012’s 

Prometheus,  work dirty. (When an enfeebled 

trillionaire finally meets his alien creator 

to ask the meaning of life, the giant alien 

just smacks him so hard he dies.) Given an 

epic canvas, Hawley introduces new moods 

and modes to investigate  Alien ’s endur -

ing themes and images, from boardrooms 

to futuristic cities to jungle laboratories. 

But the series often feels as though it’s miss -

ing the ruthless, rigid organization of the 

tin can hurtling through space, its rumi -

nations grander but, given new room to 

breathe, less urgent. In ways both good and 

bad,  Alien: Earth  is not such a tight ship. 

THERE’S A SCENE  in the fourth episode of 

Alien: Earth  when what’s colloquially called 

a “chestburster” alien infant breaks out of its 

containment. The creature initially has no 

legs or arms, and it slithers on its tail like a 

cobra as it stands, making eye contact with 

one of our characters.  Were chestbursters al -

ways snaky guys?  In the moment, as I ogled 

the slippery beast staring from the screen 

in front of me, I couldn’t quite remember. 

And the reason for that is that the  Alien 

films have always been defined by speed 

and darkness. The original chestburster 

scampers away before you really get a good 

look at him. The fully grown Xenomorphs 

dodge in and out of the shadows. In this 

show, the aliens are well-lit and fully fea -

tured. We see them closely, and at length. 

We probe their strange life cycle, ask and 

answer questions about them, even hear 

and try to understand their voices. Some of 

this makes for fascinating drama. It scratch -

es an itch I have, as a fan, for answers. But 

part of what made the films so itchily bril -

liant was their mystery, their play with the 

dark, their slinking and scampering. Can an 

extended look at these creatures in the light 

match the experience of being sideswiped 

by them in the dark? Are greater mysteries 

to be found the deeper we go? Can the TV 

show’s slaking our curiosity replace the vis -

ceral thrill of the Xenomorph on the hunt? 

Noah Hawley wants to find out. The first 

moments of the premiere episode—which 

we encounter in brief snippets and return 

to at length in a stand-alone episode later 

in the series—set up our situation quite 

## By Phillip Maciak 

# Chestbursters 

# And Headbangers 

# The heavy metal vibes of  Alien: Earth 67 Books & the Arts 

clearly. A gargantuan spaceship from the 

Weyland-Yutani Corp., which also char -

tered most of the vessels we’ve encoun -

tered in the film series, has traveled to the 

far reaches of outer space to bring back five 

alien species for study and, presumably, 

profit. One of these fellas is obviously the 

Xenomorph—contained, however briefly, 

in an oil-black egg—but there is other com -

pellingly murderous fauna as well, includ -

ing a scene-stealing octopus monster that 

looks like a giant eyeball and threatens to 

become the show’s breakout star. 

At the series’ start, the ship has become 

compromised, as all creatures have bro -

ken containment and only one surviving 

crew member—the cyborg Morrow (Babou 

Ceesay)—remains to alert the corporate 

overlords that the ship is about to crash to 

Earth. It lands in a city controlled by the 

megacorporation Prodigy, which is run by 

a young genius named Boy Kavalier, played 

by Samuel Blenkin as Timothee Chalamet 

as Willy Wonka on ketamine. Earth, it turns 

out, is run peaceably if dictatorially by five 

major corporations, which have divvied 

up the land masses among them. Prod -

igy controls large swaths of Asia, while 

Weyland-Yutani takes the Americas. The 

crash of the smuggled bioweapons, then, 

is both an alien invasion and an interna -

tional business incident. 

It’s an R&D boon for Prodigy—which 

quickly moves to confiscate the cargo—if a 

poorly timed one. For just as the ship plum -

meted through the atmosphere, Prodigy was 

preparing to release its greatest product yet: 

immortality. In a secret research island far 

off the coast of the city, Kavalier has man -

aged to download the consciousnesses of 

six terminally ill children into fully synthetic, 

superhuman adult bodies, which, provid -

ed they charge up regularly in whimsically 

Apple-coded chargers, ought to live forever. 

Kavalier calls the squad the Lost Boys, even 

though half are girls, and all are named af -

ter characters from Peter Pan, including the 

first of them, their de facto leader, Wendy 

(Sydney Chandler). Again, this alone is an 

engaging concept, even without the  Alien 

mythology. The actors in these roles have a 

great time playing little children suddenly 

operating twentysomething bods that can 

lift enormous objects and leap high into the 

sky. The gimmick could easily become tire -

some, but it’s a credit to the talent—starting 

with Chandler—that it doesn’t. The show 

invents a variety of ways to think about how 

children might deal with this strange power 

and stranger loss, and their tenuous balance 

between humanity and post-humanity is 

one of the show’s most captivating dramas. 

The Lost Boys also, predictably, be -

come the primary adversaries of the titular 

aliens. The agnostic relationship between 

androids and Xenomorphs is a recurring 

theme of the films, and Timothy Olyphant 

more than ably follows in the tradition of 

Ian Holm and Michael Fassbender as this 

show’s resident morally mischievous robot 

man. But pitting the acid-blooded, parasitic 

Xenomorphs against a band of unfathom -

ably strong synthetic humans who, for that 

very reason, cannot become Xenomorph 

hosts is a fun and fruitful twist. Most  Alien 

films, by necessity, have to deal with the 

simple question of whether the aliens can 

be defeated. This show asks loads more 

questions, including, possibly, improba -

bly: Can they be friends? 

ON ITS OWN,  almost every narrative space 

Hawley’s built out for  Alien: Earth  is more 

than enough to hold my interest. The corpo -

rate espionage, the AI stuff, the existential 

philosophizing, and, of course, the good, 

old-fashioned blood and acid and guts— 

everything works. But, in thinking bigger 

than the hull of a compromised ship and 

the run time of a feature film for this televi -

sion series, Hawley may not have thought 

big enough. Eight episodes is certainly 

more than a two-hour movie, but it’s also 

not that much space. Cramming together 

all of these new settings and intrigues while 

paying homage to the original mythology, 

Alien: Earth  manages to suggest a wid -

er set of questions without really having 

the time to dig too far into them. And 

rather than contrive a uniquely televisual 

set of constraints—like  Andor ’s three-

episode arc structure or  The Pitt ’s real-time 

immersion—to replace the cinematic ones 

that define the film series,  Alien: Earth  feels 

oddly, surprisingly loose. 

As this new show hurtled by, I felt the 

visceral excitement of its creator, the ex -

plosion of his ideas, his genuine love for 

the material. At times, it electrified me the 

way the best of the  Alien  films do. At other 

times, the barrage of sounds and sensa -

tions began to blur together. Xenomorphs, 

like heavy metal musicians, live off of speed 

and darkness, but the only way they can 

do that is through uncanny precision. 

The fathomless noise and the flawless ex -

ecution wash over you. Sometimes, at a 

heavy metal show, the transcendent tangle 

of the mosh pit makes you feel at one with 

the people around you, the community of 

fans and fanatics, the fellow devotees to 

this violent beauty. Sometimes you’re just 

getting pushed around.    

> THE NEW REPUBLIC (ISSN 0028-6583), Vol. 256, No. 10,
> Issue 5105, October 2025. Published monthly (except for
> two double issues of Jan/Feb and Jul/Aug 2025) by TNR
> II, LLC, 1 Union Square West, 6th Fl, New York, NY 10003.
> Telephone (646) 779-8000. Back issues, $8.00 domestic and
> $10.00 Canada/int’l (includes postage and handling). © 2025
> by TNR II, LLC. Periodicals postage paid at Washington, D.C.
> and additional mailing offices. For reprints, rights and per -
> missions, please visit: www.TNRreprints.com. Postmaster:
> Send changes of address to THE NEW REPUBLIC, P.O. Box
> 5180, Boone, IA 50950-0180. Canadian Subscriptions: Canada
> Post Agreement Number 7178957. Send letters and unsolic -
> ited manuscripts to letters@tnr.com. Poetry submissions
> must be emailed to poetry@tnr.com. For subscription in -
> quiries or problems, call (800) 827-1289, or visit our web
> site at newrepublic.com/customer-service.

Phillip Maciak  is  The New Republic ’s TV critic 

and the author of  Avidly Reads Screen Time .

> PATRICK BROWN/FX

October 2025 68 

Res Publica 

by Win McCormack 

# Genocide 

# in Gaza? 

# Raphael Lemkin, a Polish Jewish lawyer, introduced 

the concept of genocide in his 1944 book,  Axis 

Rule in Occupied Europe,  probably in response to 

Winston Churchill’s statement in 1941 as the Nazis 

were embarking on the mass murder of the Jewish 

population of Europe: “We are in the presence of 

a crime without a name.” Lemkin covered not only the Jewish 

Holocaust but also past examples of systematic attempts to erase 

defined groups of people, and there have been clear attempts at 

genocide in recent times as well. 

Lemkin led a successful effort to have genocide recognized as 

an international crime, and it was so certified under international 

law in 1946 by the United Nations’ General Assem -

bly and then codified as an international crime 

in the U.N.’s 1948 Convention on the Preven -

tion and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. 

The convention defines genocide as “acts com -

mitted with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, 

a national, ethnical, racial or religious group.” 

There is an ambiguity in this definition: What 

does “in part” mean, exactly? The Israeli mili -

tary has so far killed over 60,000 Palestinians, 

about 2.8 percent of the Gaza Strip’s population 

(although  Arab News  has reported that the pop -

ulation of Palestinians in Gaza decreased by 

6 percent in 2024). If you combine the Palestin -

ian population of the Gaza Strip and the West 

Bank, 60,000 people is approximately 1 percent of the total. Can 

these small percentages establish genocidal intent on the part of 

the Israeli government? 

Of course, the situation in Gaza is dynamic, and due to ac -

tions on the part of the Israeli government and its military, much 

of the population there is now on the verge of mass starvation. 

At the start of Hitler’s reign, which killed some six million Jews, 

the Jewish population of Europe was approximately 9.5 million. 

That was 60 percent of the Jewish population in the world at the 

time, but percentages do not tell the whole story, which revolves 

around basic intent and not just how much of a genocidal mission 

has been accomplished. In an opinion piece in the July 15  New 

York Times  titled “ i’m a genocide scholar. i know it when 

i see it ,” Omer Bartov, the Brown University professor of Holo -

caust and Genocide Studies, who is Jewish, wrote that right at 

the beginning of its retaliation against Hamas, he thought Israel 

was committing war crimes and potentially crimes against hu -

manity; but in May 2024, when the Israel Defense Forces, or IDF, 

compelled some one million Palestinians (who had fled south to 

the city of Rafah, the only part of Gaza left relatively unscathed) 

to trek to a beach area with virtually no shelter, and proceeded to 

raze the city almost to the ground, he realized that the pattern 

of IDF operations was “consistent with the statements denoting 

genocidal intent made by Israeli leaders in the days after the 

Hamas attack.” 

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had urged Israeli 

citizens after October 7 to “remember what Amalek did to you,” 

a statement many surmised as referring to a passage in the Bible 

calling for the Israelites to “kill alike men and women, infants, 

and sucklings” of an ancient enemy group. Government and mil -

itary officials, Bartov related, said they were fighting “human 

animals,” and the deputy speaker of Parliament asserted on X 

that “Israel’s task must be ‘erasing the Gaza Strip from the face 

of the earth.’” Bartov wrote, “I believe the goal was—and remains 

today—to force the population to leave the Strip altogether or, 

considering that it has nowhere to go, to debilitate the enclave 

through bombings and severe deprivation of food, clean water, 

sanitation and medical aid to such an extent that it is impos -

sible for Palestinians in Gaza to maintain or reconstitute their 

existence as a group.” Bartov summarized: “My inescapable con -

clusion has become that Israel is committing genocide against 

the Palestinian people.” 

A week after Bartov’s piece appeared, the  Times  published an 

article by Opinion columnist Bret Stephens titled “ no, israel is 

not committing genocide in gaza .” He offered this riposte to 

Bartov (without mentioning his name and exper -

tise on the subject): “It may seem harsh to say, 

but there is a glaring dissonance to the charge 

that Israel is committing genocide in Gaza. To 

wit: … if it is so malevolent that it is committed 

to the annihilation of Gazans—why hasn’t it 

been more methodical and vastly more deadly? 

Why not, say, hundreds of thousands of deaths, 

as opposed to the nearly 60,000 that Gaza’s 

Hamas-run Health Ministry … has cited so far 

in nearly two years of war?” A sensible riposte to 

that would be: A system of genocide is not built 

in a day, or two years. Hitler began creating con -

centration camps in Germany upon taking office 

in 1933, but it wasn’t until eight years later (the 

year of Churchill’s statement on the matter) that the systematic 

mass executions of Jews and other minority outcasts commenced. 

Israel was subjected to a savage attack by the Islamist group 

Hamas, which took control of the Gaza Strip in 2007, on October 7, 

2023, that caused the slaughter of some 1,200 people and the 

capture of some 250 hostages. Israel responded with an aerial 

bombardment of Gaza infrastructure and a major ground inva -

sion designed to neutralize Hamas.  American officials and Israel’s 

negotiators thought a truce with Hamas to end the war and bring 

the hostages home was feasible, especially in May 2024 when the 

Saudi crown prince sought to help mediate one, but Netanyahu 

demurred, as he has whenever a chance for a settlement of the 

war has emerged . Recently, his government abruptly terminated 

a ceasefire with Hamas and expelled the U.N. agency providing 

food for deprived Gazan residents, unleashing a disastrous fam -

ine in the territory. The prime minister has said Israel will seize 

military control of Gaza City, which could exacerbate the food 

deprivation there and reinforce the accusations of genocide. The 

Israeli experiment is tottering. 

Why it is increasingly difficult to deny 

> HANI ALSHAER/ANADOLU/GETTY

# Every morning, TNR’s Greg Sargent takes a critical look at the day’s political news, gives you the rundown on the top stories from NewRepublic.com, and speaks to leading journalists and newsmakers. 

# Subscribe where you get your podcasts.
