Title: MedlinePlus Magazine Volume 18 Issue 1

URL Source: https://magazine.medlineplus.gov/pdf/Volume18Issue2-508.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 24 Jul 2023 16:41:19 GMT

Markdown Content:
NIH MedlinePlus M A G A Z I N E 

V O L U M E 1 8 , I S S U E 2

Trusted Health 

Information from the 

National Institutes 

of Health 

IN THIS ISSUE 

The science of pain 

Weathering a rare 

childhood disorder 

Teens and stress: 

When it’s more than worry 

MEET NIH DIRECTORS 

Dr. George F. Koob, NIAAA 

Dr. Eliseo J. Pérez-Stable, NIMHD 

COVER STORY 

## NBA legend  Kareem Abdul-Jabbar 

## speaks out about heart health 

# HEART DISEASES In this issue  Rett syndrome: 

An overview of this 

rare genetic disorder 

# 22 

WELCOME TO VOLUME 18, ISSUE 2 

OF NIH MEDLINEPLUS MAGAZINE. 

This issue includes articles about rare diseases, 

mental health, atrial fibrillation (AFib), and the 

impact of health disparities. We also feature 

interviews with celebrities who share their own 

health experiences and with NIH Directors about 

their institutes’ work. 

This issue’s cover star, NBA Hall of Fame legend 

Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, tells us about his experience 

with AFib. He explains why he’s advocating that 

everyone, but especially Black men, understand 

their risks for cardiovascular disease and talk with 

their doctor about protecting their health. 

We also hear from NBC reporter Richard Engel, 

who shares his family’s difficult journey with 

Rett syndrome. This rare disease took the life of 

his young son two years ago, and now Engel wants 

other parents facing this incurable disease to know 

they are not alone. 

Continuing our “Meet the Director” series, we 

talk to George F. Koob, Ph.D., of the National 

Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. He 

details how he began researching alcohol and its 

effect on human health, and he talks to us about 

what his institute is doing to improve treatment 

for substance use disorders. We also interview 

Eliseo J. Pérez-Stable, M.D., about leading the 

National Institute on Minority Health and Health 

Disparities. He describes how the COVID-19 

pandemic changed our awareness of social 

determinants of health and how the attention to 

diversity in biomedical research is growing. 

Plus, we continue our reporting on groundbreaking 

pain research at NIH and the evolution of prosthetic 

limb technology. We also hear from teenagers about 

coping with mental health struggles before and 

since the pandemic and how they found the help 

they needed. 

Learn all about these and many other vital health 

topics in this issue of NIH MedlinePlus Magazine!  T

WHO WE ARE 

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is the  nation’s 

premier medical research agency , with 27 

different Institutes and Centers. The National Library 

of Medicine (NLM) at NIH is a leader in biomedical 

informatics and data science research and the world’s 

largest medical library. 

NLM provides  free, trusted health information  to 

you at  MedlinePlus.gov  and in this magazine. Visit us at 

www. magazine.medlineplus.gov .

Thanks for reading! 

CONTACT US 

Email 

NLMCommunications@nlm.nih.gov 

Phone 

301-496-6308 

CONNECT WITH US 

Follow us on Facebook 

www.facebook.com/ 

nationallibraryofmedicine 

Follow us on Twitter 

@NLM_NIH 

Articles in this publication are written by professional 

journalists. All scientific and medical information 

is reviewed for accuracy by representatives of the 

National Institutes of Health. However, personal 

decisions regarding health, finance, exercise, and 

other matters should be made only after consultation 

with the reader’s physician or professional advisor. 

Opinions expressed herein are not necessarily those 

of the National Institutes of Health or the National 

Library of Medicine. VOLUME 18 

ISSUE 2 

# inside 

# 04 

Basketball legend Kareem Abdul-Jabbar promotes timely detection of atrial fibrillation. 

F E AT U R E S 

04  Ka reem Abdul-Jabbar  sp eaks out 

about heart health 

Basketball legend promotes timely detection 

of atrial fibrillation 

19  We athering a rare childhood disorder 

Reporter Richard Engel shares his 

family’s experience with Rett syndrome 

28  Te ens are talking about mental health 

High schoolers’ stories give a glimpse into 

the national crisis 

38  Pr osthetics through the ages 

A look at how prosthetics have changed 

over time and how NIH supports innovation 

D E P A R T M E N T S 

9 “O uch, that hurts!” 

Le arn about the science of pain 

Meet the Directors 

George F. Koob, Ph.D., NIAAA, p. 23 

Eliseo J. Pérez-Stable, M.D., NIMHD, p. 31 

33  Dr . Shuai Xie is building a 

bridge between engineering 

and public health 

Dr. Xie explores pesticide exposures among 

farmers and their families 

41  Contact us 

NIH is here to help 

12  Shedding light on 

facial pain 

> IMAGE CREDITS: COVER AND ABOVE,  "NO TIME TO WAIT CAMPAIGN"  BY BRISTOL MYER S SQUIBB AND PFIZER; BOT TOM, GET T Y IMAGES

4 Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

# speaks out about heart health 

# Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  5

H E A R T D I S E A S E S 

# Basketball legend promotes 

# timely detection of atrial fibrillation 

# K areem Abdul-Jabbar is a master of 

rebounds. On the basketball court, the 

six-time NBA Most Valuable Player’s 

offense made history. But two years ago, he faced 

a new kind of opponent: atrial fibrillation, or AFib. 

This common form of heart arrhythmia (an 

abnormal heart rhythm) can lead to serious and 

potentially fatal health conditions. 

Thanks to a timely diagnosis and a doctor’s 

treatment plan, Abdul-Jabbar is bouncing back. 

He spoke to NIH MedlinePlus Magazine about his 

experience and why he advocates for regular 

health screenings. 

Tell us about your diagnosis with 

atrial fibrillation. 

When I first started to experience shortness of breath, 

fatigue, and lightheadedness, I dismissed the symptoms 

because they would come and go. I assumed they were 

signs of aging. But I was wrong. Over time, I experienced 

the symptoms more frequently, and they would interfere 

with activities that didn’t cause me any problems before, 

like walking through an airport. 

In 2021, I was leaving a Los Angeles Dodgers game 

and could not stand up without feeling so lightheaded 

that I thought I would collapse. I was eventually 

diagnosed with atrial fibrillation after my symptoms 

sent me to the hospital. 

What was your reaction when you 

received the diagnosis? 

I was surprised because before my diagnosis, I didn’t 

know what AFib was. I’ve since learned that AFib is the 

most common type of irregular heart rhythm that prevents 

your heart’s lower chambers from filling completely or 

pumping enough blood. Blood can pool in your heart, 

which increases your risk of forming blood clots and 

can lead to stroke and other heart-related complications. 

In fact, people with AFib are at about a five times greater 

risk of stroke [compared to the general population]. 

I also had to accept that I cannot do everything 

I did before. It's scary knowing that AFib increases 

your risk of stroke, but that’s why it is so important to 

take your symptoms seriously and to speak with a health 

care professional. 

What do you do to maintain your heart 

health and overall wellness? 

Being diagnosed with AFib has changed my life in a big 

way. I have to closely follow the regimen provided by my 

doctors and make sure I stay on top of my medications and 

appointments. Because of my AFib diagnosis, I pay much 

closer attention to my health than I did before. 

The risk of AFib increases with age, as do the risks of 

other chronic heart conditions such as hypertension, 

coronary artery disease, and heart failure. AFib can 

also increase the risk of stroke. The number of strokes 

attributable to AFib increases from  1.5% in people 

ages 50 to 59  to  more than 23% in people ages 

80 and older . Your risk of stroke and heart-related 

complications can be greatly reduced with proper 

treatment. If you have risk factors for AFib or stroke, 

it’s important to have a health care professional follow 

your condition. 

SOURCE:  NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE   

> IMAGE CREDITS: ABOVE, GET T Y IMAGES; PREVIOUS PAGE,  "NO TIME TO WAIT CAMPAIGN"  BY BRISTOL MYER S SQUIBB AND PFIZER 6Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

## “Seeking medical attention early 

## may help reduce the risk of AFib 

## contributing to a more serious 

## condition such as stroke.” 

Why did you begin speaking up about 

your personal health challenges, and 

why do you advocate for addressing 

health disparities? 

Black Americans are diagnosed with AFib at lower 

rates than White Americans. This is despite the fact that 

Black Americans are at a disproportionately higher risk 

for the health conditions that increase the risk for AFib. 

What’s more, Black Americans with AFib are also at a 

significantly higher risk of stroke compared to White 

Americans with AFib. This shows why diagnosis and 

treatment are important. 

I’m teaming up with Bristol Myers Squibb and Pfizer for 

the  No Time to Wait  campaign* to help raise awareness of 

AFib and its symptoms. We want everyone, but especially 

Black Americans, to learn more about the symptoms of 

AFib and the increased risk of AFib-related stroke. 

What is your advice to others about 

AFib and getting regular check-ups 

and health screenings? 

It is crucial to listen to your body and pay attention to 

your symptoms. If you experience an irregular heartbeat, 

heart racing, chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, or 

lightheadedness, it’s important to discuss it with a health 

care professional. Only they can determine whether the 

symptoms indicate AFib or another medical condition. 

Seeking medical attention early may help reduce the 

risk of AFib contributing to a more serious condition such 

as stroke. You need to do what’s best for you and your 

health, now. 

I know firsthand the impact AFib can have on your life, 

and I can’t stress enough how important it is to learn about 

the symptoms and talk to your health care professional. 

What are your goals for raising awareness 

about AFib? 

More than 2 million people in the United States have AFib, 

and that is estimated to increase to 12 million by 2030. 

However, many people ignore their symptoms because 

they can come and go. Since many people in the United 

States may have AFib but remain undiagnosed, I want to 

encourage others to speak with a health care professional 

if they experience symptoms.  T

*NIH was not involved in the creation of the project, and reference to it 

does not constitute or imply endorsement by any federal agency. 

> Kareem Abdul-Jabbar played in the NBA for
> 20 years and, upon retiring in 1989, was the
> league’s highest career scorer.
> H E A R T D I S E A S E S

FAST FACT:  Atrial fibrillation, also known as AFib or AF, affects  more than 2 million adults  in the 

United States and is one of the most common types of arrhythmias (irregular heart rhythms). The risk of 

developing AFib increases with age, so as the average age in the United States increases, more people 

will be affected by this condition.  

> SOURCE: NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE
> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, NBA PHOTOS; BOT TOM, GET T Y IMAGES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  7

# Atrial fibrillation: What you need to know 

Atrial fibrillation is also known as AFib or AF. AFib is the most common type of arrhythmia disorder 

(when your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern) in the world. AFib is 

specifically the rapid, irregular beating of the heart’s left atrium or upper chamber. 

What is AFib? 

According to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 

Institute, the heart’s electrical system sends signals to 

the different chambers of the heart. These signals make 

the chambers beat regularly and ensure the heart pumps 

enough blood to the rest of the body. AFib causes the 

chambers to beat irregularly, which makes it harder for 

the heart to pump enough blood. 

AFib can occur in brief or infrequent episodes. It can 

last for more than a week at a time, last for more than 

a year, or become permanent. 

What causes an irregular heart beat? 

Changes to the heart’s tissue or electrical signaling affect 

its ability to contract in rhythm. Some factors that can 

cause these changes include: 

ɠ High blood pressure 

ɠ Coronary heart disease 

ɠ Inflammation 

ɠ Stretching, thinning, or thickening of the heart’s walls 

ɠ Fibrosis 

ɠ Reduced blood flow to the heart 

ɠ Buildup of proteins, cells, or minerals in the 

heart tissue 

What are the symptoms? 

ɠ Feeling tired, lightheaded, or dizzy 

ɠ Feeling like your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, 

pounding, or beating too hard or fast 

ɠ Chest pain 

ɠ Low blood pressure 

ɠ Anxiety 

ɠ Shortness of breath 

It’s also important to know that many people with AFib 

do not experience any symptoms. 

AFib can cause heart attacks and heart failure. It also 

increases the risk of ischemic  stroke , which occurs when a 

blood clot blocks a blood vessel in the brain. This prevents 

blood flow to the brain, causing brain cells to start dying. 

## FAST FACT 

In 2030, an estimated  12.1 million people 

in the United States will have atrial fibrillation.  

> SOURCE: CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION

H E A R T D I S E A S E S   

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES 8Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine
> In AFib, the beating in the upper chambers of the heart (the left and
> right atria) becomes irregular. This makes it harder for blood to flow
> from the atria to the lower chambers of the heart (the left and right
> ventricles) and to the rest of the body.

What raises your risk for AFib? 

Possible risk factors for AFib include: 

ɠ Aging.  Risk increases with age, especially if you’re 

over 65 years old. 

ɠ Family history.  If someone in your family has had 

AFib, that could increase your risk. 

ɠ Genetics.  Some genes that influence fetal organ 

development or heart cells can increase your risk. 

ɠ Surgical history.  Your risk increases if you have had 

surgery for another condition of the heart, lung, 

or esophagus. 

ɠ Lifestyle habits.  These include a wide range of factors, 

including drinking alcohol, using certain drugs, or 

regularly participating in endurance sports. Stress and 

panic disorders are also risk factors for AFib. 

ɠ Race.  People of European ancestry are more likely to 

develop the condition, but Black or African American 

people with AFib are more likely to have serious 

complications such as stroke, heart failure, and 

heart disease. 

ɠ Certain health conditions.  Sleep apnea, obesity, 

diabetes, and chronic kidney disease are some of the 

conditions that can increase your risk for AFib. 

How is AFib diagnosed and treated? 

A health care provider may recommend screening for AFib if you 

have symptoms or if you have certain risk factors for the condition. 

The provider may assess your family history of AFib and any prior 

history of heart disease. They may conduct a physical exam to 

check your heartbeat or to see whether you have swelling in 

your legs and feet. 

Other common tests for AFib include: 

ɠ An electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG)  to record your 

heart’s electrical activity 

ɠ Blood tests  for levels of, for example, potassium and 

thyroid hormones 

ɠ An echocardiogram (echo)  to show the size and shape 

of the heart and how well it pumps blood 

ɠ Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  to see the 

structure of your heart’s left atrium and how it’s working 

To treat AFib, your doctor may call for lifestyle changes such as 

limiting or avoiding alcohol and stimulants, quitting smoking, or 

increasing physical activity. Your doctor may prescribe medicine 

to treat AFib or prevent complications such as stroke. In rare 

cases, cardioversion (an electrical shock to the heart) may be 

used to restore the normal heart rhythm. A procedure called 

catheter ablation (when a thin, flexible tube is inserted through 

veins or arteries into the heart) may also be used to treat AFib. 

A doctor may recommend surgery to restore your heart’s 

regular rhythm if other methods have not worked. 

NIH-funded research on AFib 

The Rhythm Evaluation for Anticoagulation with 

Continuous Monitoring of Atrial Fibrillation Trial 

(REACT-AF) 

This clinical trial will compare two treatments for 

preventing stroke in AFib. Researchers will test whether 

taking anticoagulant drugs (which prevent blood clotting) 

only when signaled by an AFib-sensing smartwatch is more 

effective than continuously taking them. If successful, this 

trial could lead to more individualized and cost-effective 

anticoagulant use in AFib patients.  Learn more about 

this research .

Machine Learning in Atrial Fibrillation 

Current therapies for AFib have limited success in part 

because researchers are not sure why a specific treatment 

works for a given patient. Machine learning (when a computer 

uses data to predict and perform processes without a person 

directly programming it) can improve our understanding of 

AFib. This project will use machine learning to recommend 

personalized therapies for patients with AFib.  Learn more 

about this research . T

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES
> H E A R T D I S E A S E S

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  9

# , that hurts 

# The science of pain 

## Almost all of us have experienced pain of some kind. It’s the most common 

## reason why people seek medical care. But because people feel pain differently, 

## there’s no single treatment that will work for everyone. 

# H ave you ever stepped on a sharp rock, 

accidentally rubbed your eyes after 

cutting a hot pepper, or struggled 

through a long workday with a throbbing 

headache? It may feel like the pain is happening 

in your foot, your eye, or your head, but your 

brain shapes how you experience pain and 

how you respond to it. 

Scientific research funded, conducted, 

and supported by NIH has changed our 

understanding of pain —what it is, how it 

works, and how we experience it. 

The many faces of pain 

People experience pain in many different ways. Pain can range 

from the sharp feeling you get from a paper cut or a bee sting to 

the dull, persistent feeling of a sore muscle. In some cases, it’s 

constant. In other cases, it comes and goes. 

Pain can be acute or chronic: 

ɠ Acute pain  is the pain you feel when you get hurt or injured. 

You may have experienced acute pain from an injury such as a 

cut or a broken limb or from disease or inflammation in the 

body. Acute pain can be intense and severe, but it typically 

resolves as your body heals from whatever caused it. 

ɠ Chronic pain  is pain that lasts much longer—usually 

months and sometimes even years. Chronic pain sometimes 

has a clear cause such as an acute injury, a long illness, 

or damage to and dysfunction of your nervous system. 

Sometimes it even happens without any obvious reason.   

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES 10 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

Different kinds of pain have different causes: 

ɠ Nociceptive pain  is pain caused by tissue damage. 

Most acute pain is nociceptive. 

ɠ Neuropathic pain  is caused by nerve damage or 

dysfunction. You can experience neuropathic pain 

from injuries or illness that affect the spinal cord and 

brain (for example, a slipped disc in your spine) or the 

peripheral nervous system (the nerves throughout the 

rest of your body). This kind of pain often feels similar to 

burning, shooting, or stabbing. 

ɠ Inflammatory pain  is pain that happens when your 

immune system activates in response to injury or 

infection. In addition to causing redness or swelling, it 

can also make you more sensitive to feelings of pain. 

How we experience pain 

When you are in pain, it’s because your nervous system 

thinks that a part of your body is injured or in danger of 

getting injured (by accidentally touching a hot stove, for 

example). Pain is a normal sensory signal that something 

might be wrong and that you should do something 

about it. You don’t become aware of pain until your 

brain processes it. 

When a part of your body is injured, special pain 

receptors from that area release chemicals called 

neurotransmitters, which send messages to your brain. 

The messages travel along nerves to the spinal cord 

and eventually to the brain, telling it, “Something might 

be wrong here, pay attention!” 

Your brain receives and processes these 

messages, evaluates them, and decides what 

to do. 

Your brain sends messages back to your body to react. 

Depending on the situation, this could mean rapidly 

triggering the muscles in your body to move you away 

from whatever is causing your pain. This reaction can feel 

instantaneous! If you are injured, your brain might also 

release natural painkillers called endorphins or tell your 

immune system to start healing the injury. 

To see how this works, check out  this MedlinePlus video  on 

feeling pain. 

How acute pain turns chronic 

Most of the time, pain is a useful alarm system designed 

to keep us safe. But sometimes pain signals keep firing 

even after the body’s tissues have healed. 

When pain continues for a long time —such as during a 

long illness or after a serious injury —it can cause changes 

to your nervous system, which make you more sensitive 

to pain. This means that certain stimuli make you feel 

pain more quickly, and the pain can be more intense 

and last longer. 

## By the numbers 

The estimated yearly national cost of pain, 

including medical treatments, disability, and lost 

productivity, is  $560 billion to $635 billion 

More than  1 in 5  adults in the United States 

experience chronic pain 

Rates of chronic pain, including pain that severely 

limits work or life activities, are highest among 

adults  ages 65 and older 

Chronic pain conditions such as low back pain and 

migraine are  the leading cause  of disability 

around the world   

> SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ,National
> Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

## FAST FACT 

Pain is the  most common medical complaint 

of older Americans . Causes of pain in older adults 

include joint pain, postsurgical pain, chronic disease, 

and conditions associated with aging.     

> SOURCE: THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
> NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS AND STROKE
> PA I N
> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES Volume 18, Issue 2 magazine.medlineplus. gov 11

Treatment 

Your experience of pain is influenced by a complex set of 

factors that are unique to you, including your genes and 

biology, past experiences, emotions, and environment. 

That means that everyone’s pain feels differently. There 

isn’t a way to measure it objectively, and there isn’t one 

single treatment that will work for everyone. 

Working with your health care provider to understand 

and treat pain safely and effectively is the best approach. 

Your pain management will depend on the kind of pain 

you’re experiencing and what’s causing it. It often involves 

a combination of treatments, which may include: 

ɠ Over-the-counter and prescription medications (such 

as pain relievers and drugs that reduce inflammation) 

ɠ Physical and occupational therapy to improve function 

and limit pain 

ɠ Counseling and therapy to teach skills for coping 

with pain 

ɠ Medical treatments (such as medications and 

injections) to interrupt pain signals or change how 

nerves process pain 

ɠ Neuromodulation therapies (devices that stimulate 

nerves or the spinal cord) to reduce pain 

ɠ Complementary and integrative therapies  (such as 

acupuncture and mindfulness meditation)  T

## FAST FACT 

People born with an extremely rare genetic condition 

called  congenital insensitivity to pain  can’t feel 

pain. They are able to tell the difference between 

hot and cold or sharp and dull, but they can’t feel 

the pain caused by a burn or a cut.  

> SOURCE: THE GENETIC AND RARE DISEASES INFORMATION CENTER

NIH research efforts 

Many NIH institutes and centers are part of the 

NIH Pain Consortium , which works to advance pain 

research and promote collaboration among researchers. 

The  NIH Pain Research Center  works to identify 

specific mechanisms and causes of pain in a range 

of conditions. The goal is to help researchers develop 

more effective, personalized ways to manage and 

treat pain, prevent chronic pain conditions, and 

reduce unwanted side effects such as opioid misuse 

and addiction. 

The  Helping to End Addiction Long-term ® Initiative ,

or NIH HEAL Initiative ®, funds  research in pain 

and addiction to address the national opioid public 

health crisis . HEAL programs are led by institutes and 

centers across NIH. They look for scientific solutions 

to prevent and treat opioid misuse and addiction. 

They also seek to better understand and treat pain by 

studying the biology of pain to identify new treatment 

targets, conducting clinical studies to test new 

treatments, and working with communities to make 

safe, effective treatments available to everyone who 

needs them. 

The  Back Pain Consortium (BACPAC) Research 

Program  is funded by the HEAL Initiative. The program 

conducts studies to better understand chronic low back 

pain, which is one of the most common chronic pain 

conditions. BACPAC is studying the multiple complex 

factors that contribute to low back pain. 

The  Brain Research Through Advancing Innovative 

Neurotechnologies ® Initiative , or BRAIN Initiative ®, is 

an NIH-supported collaboration that aims to develop 

and apply new tools for understanding how the brain 

works. Scientists funded by the BRAIN Initiative are 

studying pain circuits in the brain to discover new ways 

to understand pain processing and to treat pain. 

> PA I N

12  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

Researchers at the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research used an innovative 

technique to visualize pain signals in mice’s facial nerves in real time. Their findings could 

help scientists develop safer ways to treat pain in the face, mouth, and jaw. 

# Shedding light on facial pain 

Joining forces to tackle facial pain 

Pain is your body’s way of telling you that something might 

be wrong and is the most frequent reason people seek 

medical care. 

Facial and oral pain (in the face, mouth, and jaw) can be 

a symptom of injury, illness, or infection. It is one of the 

most common causes of pain complaints after neck, back, 

and knee pain. 

Researchers at the National Institute of Dental and 

Craniofacial Research (NIDCR) wanted to explore new 

ways to treat facial pain without unwanted side effects. 

Two research teams joined forces to learn how nerves in 

the face send and receive information about pain. One 

team studies the biology of sensations such as pain, and 

the other has expertise in cell imaging. 

Caught on camera 

Ashok B. Kulkarni, Ph.D., has spent years studying a protein 

called  cyclin-dependent kinase 5  (Cdk5). Cdk5 is involved in 

pain signaling in other parts of the body, and Dr. Kulkarni 

and his team wanted to understand its role in facial pain. 

To find out, they took mice and exposed parts of their 

faces to different kinds of stimuli: gentle brushing, poking, 

heat, and chili extract. 

# DID YOU KNOW? 

Allodynia  means “other pain.” 

It is a symptom of nerve pain. 

It is linked to certain conditions 

that target the nerves such as 

migraine and fibromyalgia. 

A burn, cut, or other painful stimuli like spicy food 

activates receptors on the skin’s nerve endings. This 

triggers an influx of calcium, which acts as a message to 

the brain. The technique they used—called “fluorescence 

microscopy”—allowed the research team to watch this 

happen in real time as the individual cells in the mice’s 

facial nerves responded to each of the stimuli. 

“You see calcium go up and that [looks like] a flash 

of light,” explained Kenneth M. Yamada, M.D., Ph.D., 

an NIH Distinguished Investigator. Dr. Yamada, who is 

Chief of the NIDCR Cell Biology Section, has expertise in 

developmental biology. 

NIDCR scientists 

used fluorescence 

microscopy to 

visualize pain 

signaling in mice’s 

facial nerves. 

Here, the flickers 

show how calcium 

surges in response 

to a painful 

stimulus. 

See animation at  National Institute of Dental 

and Craniofacial Research 

PA I N 

> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP RIGHT, GET T Y IMAGES; BOT TOM LEF T, MINGHAN HU AND ANDREW DOYLE

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  13 

Dr. Ashok Kulkarni, left, and Dr. Kenneth Yamada, right. 

Protein increases sensitivity to painful  and 

nonpainful stimuli 

Under the microscope, the team saw that mice who had 

high levels of Cdk5 showed larger calcium surges, indicating 

that their pain responses were intensified. Not only that, 

they were also more sensitive to  all  stimuli, not just the 

painful ones. The nerve cells responded the same way to 

light brushing as they did to heat and chili extract. 

Dr. Yamada explained that this heightened pain sensitivity 

is similar to a condition called  allodynia . Allodynia causes 

pain in response to something that isn’t typically painful 

(such as light touch). The research team was able to reduce 

pain signaling in those oversensitive mice by blocking 

their Cdk5. 

The trigeminal nerve is part of the nervous system. It helps 

you bite, chew, and swallow. It also sends information about 

pain, touch, and temperature from your face to your brain. 

This nerve is involved in common orofacial pain disorders. 

## FAST FACT 

Temporomandibular disorders (TMDs) 

include  more than 30 conditions 

that cause pain and dysfunction 

in the jaw joint and muscles that 

control jaw movement.  

> SOURCE: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DENTAL
> AND CRANIOFACIAL RESEARCH

Implications 

Most pain medications work by interrupting pain signals 

between the brain and the body or by changing how our 

brains interpret those signals. These drugs can cause 

serious side effects because they act on multiple tissues 

and organs in the body. For example, narcotic drugs like 

opioids attach to certain receptors in brain cells. These 

block feelings of pain and increase feelings of pleasure, 

which can lead to dependence. 

A drug that acts directly on the sensory neurons in 

the face rather than by suppressing pain signaling in the 

brain could offer a more direct, effective, and safer way 

to treat facial pain, Dr. Yamada said. 

But Dr. Kulkarni explained that there’s still a long 

way to go before scientists can start thinking about 

researching these techniques in larger animals and 

eventually in humans. They’ll first need to identify 

additional compounds that act directly on Cdk5 and 

could be used therapeutically. One of the collaborators 

on the team is currently analyzing promising options. 

Eventually, these efforts could lead to new, safer 

treatments for facial pain.  T

PA I N 

> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP LEF T, COURTESY OF ASHOK B. KULK ARNI; TOP RIGHT, NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH; BOT TOM, PATRICK J. LYNCH, MEDICAL ILLUSTRATOR  CC BY 2.5  , VIA WIKIMEDIA COMMONS

14  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

# Audio analgesia: 

# How sound blunts pain—at least in mice 

Music can make you feel better on a bad day, but can it 

literally take your pain away? Research suggests that 

music—and sound in general—may have the power to do 

just that. An international team of scientists, led in part 

by investigators from the National Institute of Dental and 

Craniofacial Research, studied mice to understand how 

this process works. Their findings could open the door to 

new, safer ways to treat pain in humans. 

PA I N 

Music can take your pain away 

Since the 1960s, music and other sounds have been found 

to ease pain from a range of different health conditions and 

procedures. Research shows that sound can reduce the pain 

of dental extractions, sickle cell disease, and childbirth, 

among others. 

According to Yuanyuan “Kevin” Liu, Ph.D., an investigator 

for the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 

Research (NIDCR), music can grab our attention and 

help us relax. But his team’s recent findings suggest the 

analgesic (pain-reducing) effect is from sound rather 

than music specifically. Dr. Liu studies sensory biology 

and pain. He is especially interested in the relationship 

between the mind and body and the role that perceptions 

play in this relationship. 

To find out how sound dulls pain, Dr. Liu and a group 

of researchers in the United States and China turned to 

unlikely research subjects: mice with inflamed paws. 

Playing Bach for mice 

For three days in a row, Dr. Liu and his team exposed the 

mice to three different sounds: 

ɠ Harmonious classical music (composed by Bach) 

ɠ Inharmonious music (an unpleasant rearrangement 

of the same Bach piece) 

ɠ Background/white noise 

The researchers used a technique to measure and compare the 

mice’s pain sensitivity before and after hearing the sounds. 

All three kinds of sound reduced the mice’s pain. 

Surprisingly, the harmonious music was no more or less 

effective than the other sounds. The sounds also only reduced 

pain when played at very low intensities —just above a whisper. 

When the intensity increased, these effects disappeared. 

Signal to the sound 

Dr. Liu explained that it was not the sound’s volume itself 

but rather the signal-to-noise ratio —the sound’s intensity 

compared to the background noise. The sweet spot for pain 

relief was just above the level of the background noise. 

Dr. Liu compared this to using background music 

played at a low volume, which he does when he needs 

to concentrate: “Just a little bit of sound, not too loud. 

Maybe that’s the magic?” 

NIDCR researchers found that low-intensity sound makes mice less 

sensitive to pain by disrupting pain signaling in the brain’s pathway 

between the auditory cortex and thalamus.    

> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, GET T Y IMAGES; BOT TOM, WENJIE ZHOU Volume 18, Issue 2 magazine.medlineplus. gov 15
> PA I N

## Just a little bit of sound, 

## not too loud. Maybe 

## that’s the magic? 

> Dr. Yuanyuan “Kevin” Liu
> studies sensory biology and
> pain at NIDCR.

Pain reduced for days 

Stress, attention, and emotions are all involved in pain 

perception. When you hear music, for example, your 

attention temporarily shifts toward the sound and 

away from your pain. The mice heard the sounds for just 

20 minutes a day for three days. But the pain-reducing 

effect lasted for several days after, which Dr. Liu said 

can’t be explained by a shift in attention alone. 

Stress reduction is another possible explanation, but 

the researchers did not see changes in the mice’s stress 

hormones and behaviors after hearing the sounds. This 

suggested that something else was happening. 

Pathways in the brain 

Brain imaging studies in humans show that music can 

affect areas in the brain related to pain processing but 

not which specific neural networks are involved. 

To find out, the researchers used imaging to trace 

neural activity in the mice’s brains when they heard the 

sounds. They discovered a direct pathway between the 

part of the brain that receives and processes information 

about sound (called the auditory cortex) and the thalamus, 

which also receives information about sensations such 

as pain. 

Dr. Liu described the thalamus as the brain’s sensory 

information hub. All kinds of sensory information from 

inside and outside the body —including sound —come 

together in the thalamus, which affects how we experience 

or perceive that information. The low-intensity sound 

appeared to disrupt pain signaling in this pathway, making 

the mice less sensitive to pain. 

Because the brain has a hard time processing input from 

different sensory systems at the same time, Dr. Liu said 

that lowering activity in the neurons in this pathway may 

be a way to manage some of these competing messages. 

HOW IT WORKS 

Sound comes in through your ear to your 

auditory cortex, which has a direct line of 

communication with the thalamus. 

Similarly, pain receptors in the body send 

messages about sensations like pressure 

and temperature through the spinal cord 

to the thalamus. 

The thalamus takes in information from 

different senses and sends messages 

about them to other parts of the brain. 

What it all means 

Understanding how processes in the brain regulate pain 

could help researchers develop new pain therapies in the 

future. Will your doctor start prescribing bluegrass, jazz, 

or classic rock tunes to ease your pain? Probably not any 

time soon. While these findings show how mice’s brains 

regulate pain in response to sound, our brains may process 

and regulate pain in different ways. For example, Dr. Liu 

explained that humans have emotional connections to 

sounds such as music, and those connections are different 

for each person. Mice may also respond emotionally to 

different kinds of sound, but they do not have the language 

to tell us. 

Dr. Liu said he wonders what roles other sensory 

processes might play in how we experience pain. If sound 

can affect our perception of pain, can light do the same 

thing? Researchers are exploring these questions and more, 

leading us closer to exciting new pain relief strategies.  T

> Neurons located in different layers in a mouse brain’s auditory
> cortex show as green (layer V) and magenta (layer VI) under a
> fluorescence microscope. Researchers from NIDCR discovered that
> sound reduces pain in mice by lowering activity in these neurons,
> which connect to the thalamus in the brain.
> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, DR. YUANYUAN “KEVIN” LIU; BOT TOM, WENJIE ZHOU

16  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

# Music and health 

## Find out what the research says about 

## music therapy for pain and other health conditions 

Music and pain 

Research suggests that listening to music can help reduce acute and chronic pain. Music-based interventions may 

also help people with certain kinds of pain. This includes pain from fibromyalgia, multiple sclerosis, osteoarthritis, 

sickle cell disease, pregnancy and childbirth, and other health conditions, experiences, and treatments. 

Other areas of health 

Music-based interventions could also benefit other mental and physical health conditions. 

Mental health and emotional well-being.  Though more research is needed, music-based therapies 

may improve symptoms of depression and anxiety related to a range of health conditions. Music may 

also improve emotional well-being and quality of life in people with certain kinds of dementia or 

cognitive impairments such as difficulty with thinking, learning, memory, and decision-making. 

Movement and speech.  Certain music-based interventions 

show promise for some symptoms related to Parkinson’s 

disease and multiple sclerosis, including motor 

function and balance. 

Stroke.  Some kinds of music-based therapies 

may be helpful during rehabilitation after 

stroke. For example, a technique called 

“rhythmic auditory stimulation” can help 

people improve their gait and balance after 

stroke by synchronizing their physical 

movement with rhythmic music or sounds. 

The ways that music affects other areas of health are less 

clear. The evidence is mixed, limited, or uncertain for autism 

spectrum disorder, cognitive functioning among people with 

Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, chronic obstructive 

pulmonary disorder, and sleep disorders. 

PA I N 

SOURCE:  National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health 

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  17 

## NIH-supported research 

## lays the groundwork 

## for understanding and 

## treating pain 

There’s still a lot to learn because 

each of us feels pain differently 

# Uncovering a cure: 

Pain affects millions of Americans. It’s hard to measure, and there isn’t a one-size-fits-all treatment approach. NIH conducts and supports basic, translational, and clinical research on pain, as well as strategies for treating it. Here are just a few recent examples. 

From the lab to the bedside 

Basic research 

Conducted in labs by scientists who 

study the most fundamental building 

blocks of life, including genes, 

proteins, and cells. This kind of 

research helps us better understand 

living systems and processes. 

Translational research 

Takes information learned from basic research and studies how it can help improve health and treat diseases. 

Clinical research 

Studies different treatments 

and interventions to find out 

whether they are safe and 

effective in humans. 

Basic pain research 

Taking a closer look at facial pain 

Researchers at the National Institute of Dental 

and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR) hoped to 

explore new ways to treat facial pain without 

unwanted side effects. To discover how nerves 

in the face send and receive information about pain, researchers 

used an innovative technique to visualize pain signals in mice’s 

facial nerves in real time. Their findings could lead to safer 

ways to treat pain in the face, mouth, and jaw.  Read about 

this research .

Learning how sound reduces pain in mice 

An international team of researchers, including some from 

NIDCR, studied mice to understand how sound can blunt pain. 

They discovered a direct pathway between two areas of the 

mice’s brains: the auditory cortex, which receives and processes 

information about sound, and the thalamus, which receives and 

sends information about sensations such as pain. Understanding 

how processes in the brain regulate pain could help researchers 

develop new pain therapies in the future.  Find out more .

PA I N   

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES 18 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

Finding how our brains process pain differently 

An international group of researchers, including some from 

the National Center for Complementary and Integrative 

Health, analyzed data from functional magnetic resonance 

imaging (fMRI) scans. They found that people’s brains 

process pain in different ways, with some areas of the brain 

showing more variation than others. These results could 

lead to more personalized pain management approaches. 

Read more about these findings .

Translational pain research 

Building a living pain circuit 

Developing new medications is challenging, costly, and time consuming. Researchers must screen large numbers of possible medications if they want to identify even one 

promising molecule. To address this, scientists funded by the Helping to End Addiction Long-term ® Initiative, or the NIH HEAL Initiative ® , developed a system to quickly screen medication candidates. This “living pain circuit” is a 3D model of nerve cells that connect to each other the same way they do in the body. This tool can rapidly identify compounds that don’t work in humans. This research is a step toward identifying new and effective pain relief treatments. Read more about this work. 

Clinical pain research 

Personalizing pain management 

after cesarean delivery 

Cesarean birth is the most common 

major surgery done in the United States. 

The Opioid Prescription After Cesarean Trial 

(PACT), which is supported by the NIH HEAL 

Initiative, aims to reduce opioid use in people who had 

a cesarean delivery. PACT is a randomized clinical study 

that tests individualized pain management approaches for 

new mothers who deliver by cesarean. Half of the study 

participants will receive the current standard treatment 

(which is a prescription for a fixed number of opioid tablets) 

when they are discharged from the hospital. The other 

half will get a new patient-centered approach that allows 

participants to choose how many opioid tablets they 

are given and includes pain management and opioid 

use counseling.  Find out more about PACT .

Ways to get involved 

There are lots of ways you can contribute to pain 

research. Visit  ClinicalTrials.gov  to find out about 

acute and chronic pain research happening around 

the world and learn how to participate in clinical 

studies. 

Current trials recruiting participants include 

research about: 

ɠ Low back pain.  The BEST (Biomarkers for 

Evaluating Spine Treatments) Trial is part of 

the BACPAC Research Program. This study, 

sponsored by the National Institute of Arthritis 

and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, tests 

four different evidence-based treatments 

for low back pain. The goal is to learn which 

treatments are most effective for people based 

on their unique traits, such as heart rate and 

blood pressure. Learn more and sign up to 

participate on the  BEST website .

ɠ Pain perception.  NIH researchers are trying 

to better understand the different factors that 

affect pain and how people experience it. They 

also hope to learn more about how people’s 

relationships with each other affect these 

experiences. This study is looking for healthy 

volunteers between the ages of 18 and 60 in 

the Washington, DC, metro area to participate. 

Find out how to participate .

> PA I N

Using virtual reality to treat real pain 

Researchers from the NIH HEAL Initiative’s Back 

Pain Consortium (BACPAC) are studying ways to 

use “therapeutic virtual reality” to ease chronic pain. 

Virtual reality allows people to experience immersive 

3D environments —swimming with dolphins, for example —

which takes the brain’s attention away from the experience 

of pain. This three-part research study is testing how 

effective virtual reality is for improving pain, reducing 

opioid use, and improving quality of life among people with 

chronic low back pain.  Learn more about this research . T

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  19 

# Weathering a 

# rare childhood 

# disorder 

Richard Engel and his wife Mary lost their son Henry, right, in 2022 to Rett syndrome. Their younger son Theo was born in 2019. 

# Reporter Richard Engel 

# shares his family’s experience 

# A s a chief foreign correspondent for 

NBC News over the past 15 years, 

Richard Engel has covered wars and 

conflicts around the world. The Peabody and 

Emmy Awards winner has faced dangerous and 

tense conditions to bring viewers reporting from 

Ukraine, Syria, Iran, and Afghanistan. Multiple 

journalism organizations have honored Engel 

for his courageous reporting in war zones. But in 

August 2022, he faced a different life challenge 

that proved even more difficult: He and his wife 

lost their 6-year-old son Henry, who was born 

with a rare genetic disorder called Rett syndrome. 

They have since become advocates for others 

facing similar challenges. Engel talked with NIH 

MedlinePlus Magazine about his family’s journey 

and the importance of rare disease research that 

organizations like NIH support. 

# “We wanted to reach 

# other parents facing 

# similar challenges 

# and let them know that 

# they aren’t alone.”   

> IMAGE CREDITS: NBC NEWS 20 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

Getting a diagnosis for a rare disease or disorder can sometimes be very difficult. What was your experience? 

We knew almost as soon as Henry was born in 2015 that something was wrong, but what? He looked healthy and beautiful. His skin glowed. His eyes were open and bright. His organs and bodily functions ticked along. He cried, he wriggled, and he slept. He was an angel. But he seemed a little too angelic, a bit too quiet. He didn’t have the strength to suckle. He could roll over but struggled more than other babies. 

After repeated checkups and routine tests, our 

pediatrician was baffled and suggested we make sure 

Henry did plenty of tummy time to strengthen his core 

and neck. We knew that and had been doing it. The 

problem was far more profound. 

It was only after speaking to several doctors at 

different hospitals around the world that Henry 

eventually had a DNA test, which gave us a blueprint 

of his genetic code. The process took months, and even 

still, the geneticists were left scratching their heads. 

They found a disorder that they thought only occurred 

in girls—a genetic variant that causes Rett syndrome, 

a devastating disease that leads to severe cognitive and 

physical impairments. We learned that boys can also have 

a variant of the same gene and have their own version 

of Rett syndrome, and it can be even more severe. 

How  did Henry’s condition progress? 

Our angel kept missing milestones. He could crawl 

a bit and feed himself, and he loved to giggle and 

play. He recognized us and could say a few words. 

He said “Dada” and “I love you.” I will never 

hear sweeter words for the rest of my life. Henry’s 

condition worsened over time; his development 

regressed and sharply declined in 2022. He passed 

away last August. 

Why did you decide to speak out and 

tell your family’s experience? 

My wife Mary and I decided early on we wanted to 

share our experience so more doctors and families 

knew that boys could have a version of Rett syndrome. 

We wanted to reach other parents facing similar 

challenges and let them know that they aren’t alone. 

And we wanted them to know they now had two more 

advocates among their ranks trying to do whatever we 

could to help. 

> Richard Engel has been a foreign correspondent for
> NBC News for 15 years.
> IMAGE CREDITS: NBC NEWS
> R A R E D I S E A S E S

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  21 

What is it like it to be a parent or loved 

one facing a rare disorder like Henry’s? 

It is a long ride. It beats you up emotionally. Every holiday 

reminds you how different and more difficult your child’s 

life is from many others. Every conversation with friends 

and other parents reminds you how different your lives 

are, too. But you have a purpose. You’ve seen behind the 

curtain. You don’t have time for the small stuff. You have 

the double-edged gift of perspective. Our children are 

loved no matter how difficult their condition is—they 

matter most. 

How can we fight the stigma associated 

with childhood rare disorders? 

The only way to tackle the stigma is through visibility and 

awareness. These kids are out there. Their parents are 

out there. They need to go to the park as much as—and 

probably more than—any child. They want to laugh and 

play with other children, so play with them and be kind. 

You’ve said that your son Henry gave 

you a gift. Could you speak to that? 

For more than 25 years, I’ve worked as a foreign 

correspondent, bouncing between war zones. All wars 

are floods of disaster, with the occasional drop of selfless 

bravery and heroism. I surfed the tide of human misery, 

and it hardened me. It’s called “compassion fatigue.” 

Henry broke through all of that. He cracked the armor, 

and it slid off. I connected with him in a way I’d never felt 

before. His vulnerability and the pure love in his eyes left 

me vulnerable, too, and restored my compassion, especially 

for those who have to work harder in life, which is already 

pretty tough for everyone. 

What’s the importance of research like 

the studies supported by NIH? 

Research is the way out of this. Henry wasn’t sick; he had 

a genetic typo that limited him and ultimately took 

everything from him. But it’s not an easy fix. You cannot 

just correct the glitch in his genetic code like you can in 

a software code and “Presto, problem solved!” We’ll get 

there, or at least partly there, but only through research.  T

## FAST FACT 

Rett syndrome is named after 

Andreas Rett , an Austrian physician 

who published the first description of 

the condition in 1966.  

> SOURCE: INTERNATIONAL RETT SYNDROME FOUNDATION

# “Henry wasn’t sick; 

# he had a genetic typo that 

# limited him and ultimately 

# took everything from him.” 

R A R E D I S E A S E S 

> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP,  MEDIA WIEN, VIA WIKIMEDIA COMMONS ; BOT TOM, GET T Y IMAGES

22  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

# Rett syndrome: 

# An overview of this 

# rare genetic disorder 

Rett syndrome can begin 

as early as 6 months of age, 

with symptoms being so 

subtle that parents may 

not even notice the 

change in their child’s 

development. 

What is Rett syndrome? 

Rett syndrome is a rare genetic disorder in which a 

child’s early growth and development regresses after 

initially meeting their  developmental milestones . It is a 

neurodevelopmental disorder, which means it affects how 

the brain and nervous system develop. As a result, the child 

can have severe communication or coordination problems. 

Children with Rett syndrome may behave or move similarly 

to children with  autism spectrum disorder , which is 

another neurodevelopmental disorder. 

Symptoms 

Symptoms of Rett syndrome usually do not appear right away. 

Children with the disorder may meet age-appropriate milestones 

for the first 6 to 18 months before they start showing symptoms. 

Some common symptoms are: 

Loss of 

speech 

Loss of hand 

movements such 

as grasping 

Compulsive 

movements such 

as hand wringing 

Balance 

problems 

Breathing 

problems 

Social or behavior 

problems 

Learning problems or 

intellectual disability 

Who is more likely to have Rett syndrome? 

Although Rett syndrome is a genetic disorder, most cases 

occur randomly—the chance that someone will inherit 

Rett syndrome is less than 1%. Children from all racial and 

ethnic groups may develop Rett syndrome, with most cases 

diagnosed in girls. It is caused by a mutation in the MECP2 (methyl CpG binding protein 2)  gene, which is located on 

the X chromosome and contributes to brain development. 

Some girls with Rett syndrome also have female family 

members with the MECP2 gene mutation. 

Not everyone with a MECP2 gene mutation will develop 

Rett syndrome. 

How can doctors find out whether a child 

has Rett syndrome? 

There are prenatal screenings available to find a MECP2 

gene mutation, but the same gene mutation in Rett syndrome 

can be found in other conditions. It is important to notify 

a doctor if a child shows behavioral changes or physical 

problems, especially if these changes happened after 

previously age-appropriate development. That can help a 

pediatric neurologist, clinical geneticist, or developmental 

pediatrician screen for and diagnose the disorder. 

Is there a cure? 

Not at this time.  Treatments are being developed  to help 

patients with Rett syndrome manage their symptoms. These 

may include medications, occupational therapy, special 

equipment to help children with physical movement, 

nutritional programs, and educational and social support. 

At NIH, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders 

and Stroke, the 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver  National Institute 

of Child Health and Human Development, the National 

Institute of Mental Health, and the  Division of Rare Diseases 

Research Innovation  at the National Center for Advancing 

Translational Sciences all support research on Rett syndrome. 

The Rett Syndrome Research Trust supports clinical 

research into treatments and cures for the disorder. 

The Trust also maintains a digital  Rett Syndrome Global 

Registry  for parents and caregivers to share data with 

doctors. The goal is to help track treatment results and 

research discoveries around Rett syndrome.  T

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES

R A R E D I S E A S E S Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  23 

# Meet the Director: 

# George F. Koob, Ph.D. 

Even after decades of research in the field, George F. Koob, Ph.D., is 

still learning new things about alcohol, its overall effects on human 

health, and alcohol use disorder. He has been Director of the 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) since 

2014, and he wants everyone to know what the institute has to offer. 

Dr. Koob talked to NIH MedlinePlus Magazine about his career, the 

neuroscience of alcohol use disorder, different NIAAA resources 

used to understand and treat this condition, and what he wishes 

more people knew about alcohol’s effect on the body. 

Tell us about your background and 

what brought you to the field of alcohol 

and drug addiction research. 

A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away, I wanted to be an 

ethologist (someone who studies animal behavior). I went 

to the Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health 

to study ethology, but my advisor was working on brain 

stimulation reward. 

If you’ve ever seen a rat press a lever 100 times per 

minute to stimulate its medial forebrain bundle (the part of 

the brain that generates pleasure sensations)…I was hooked. 

I like to say that I spent the first half of my career studying 

why we feel good and the second half of my career trying to 

understand why we feel bad. I became interested in alcohol 

and other drugs of addiction and how it affects the brain. 

How did you become Director of NIAAA? 

Fast forward a few years to 1977, when I worked as a staff 

scientist at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies and 

joined the NIAAA-funded alcohol research center led by 

Dr. Floyd Bloom. We then moved to Scripps Research 

in 1984 where we expanded to a major program on the 

neurobiology of alcohol use disorder that is still ongoing 

there. I became Director of the Alcohol Research Center at 

Scripps and Director of a branch of the NIAAA-supported 

Integrative Neuroscience Initiative on Alcoholism. This 

initiative seeks to understand the molecular basis of alcohol 

use disorder. Then, when the search for the Director of 

NIAAA was announced in 2013, I applied. 

I had reached a stage in my career where I felt like 

we could do more to translate the basic research into 

[information that] people need. That was probably one of 

the guiding forces that moved me to want to work at NIH. 

And then when I interviewed with the fantastic institute 

Directors that were already at NIH—that was another plus. 

I met  Dr. Anthony Fauci , and  Dr. Nora Volkow  and I already 

knew each other. There were just so many wonderful, 

unbelievably smart people, and I thought, “Wow, this has 

got to be really exciting!”   

> IMAGE CREDITS: NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH 24 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

I had reached a stage in my career where I felt 

like we could do more to translate the basic 

research into [information that] people need.” 

How is NIAAA communicating more 

alcohol addiction research to the public? 

In the last few years, we’ve really put a focus on making 

evidence-based information about alcohol available to 

the public. There’s a big gap between what we know 

scientifically about alcohol and the public’s understanding 

about alcohol, and even health care professionals’ 

understanding about alcohol. It took me a little while 

as Director to get my head around what we knew, and 

I realized the extent of what we know and how little of that 

had been translated [to the public]. That includes screening 

and intervention, referring someone to a primary care 

doctor’s office or any other health professional’s office 

for treatment, and even understanding what a standard 

drink is. Those are the things that we have been missing 

and are the things that we’ve basically addressed since 

I became Director. 

Translating evidence-based information about alcohol 

remains a challenge. We have learned an enormous amount 

about where alcohol works in the brain and what circuits are 

activated in different stages of the addiction cycle. I think, 

slowly but surely, we’re using that information to develop 

better treatments for alcohol use disorder. 

NIAAA is writing a new 2023–2027 

Strategic Plan. How will this continue 

the work of the previous plan? 

In the last five years, we created websites such as the  NIAAA 

Alcohol Treatment Navigator , which provides people with 

not only information about what an alcohol use disorder is, 

but also the spectrum of treatment for alcohol use disorder. 

You can also type in your ZIP code and find the closest 

treatment facility. 

Prior to my arrival at NIAAA, they developed the 

CollegeAim Alcohol Intervention Matrix  to help universities 

address alcohol use issues among students. I suggested that 

we do similar things in other areas, including for other age 

groups, so that will continue in the new strategic plan. 

Last year, we launched the  Healthcare Professional’s Core 

Resource on Alcohol . It explains everything you wanted to 

know about alcohol. It’s aimed at primary care doctors, but 

it can be used by everyone, from a pharmacist to a nurse 

practitioner, a clinical psychologist to a board-certified 

addiction medicine specialist. 

We’re going to be promoting that in the new strategic plan. 

We want everyone to know about this core resource on 

alcohol, and not just in health care—we’ve also sent it to 

every medical school in the country. We hope that we can 

influence medical school training and residency training. 

Those are some things that can directly help the public, 

and they’re some of the things I’m most proud of. 

How is NIAAA addressing health disparities 

in its research? How is NIAAA promoting 

diversity, equity, and inclusion in the 

biomedical workforce? 

We’ve always had an emphasis on diversity, equity, and 

inclusion, but that’s become an overriding theme at the 

institute—as it is for all of NIH. And we’re working hard 

to expand our work in this area. We really believe that it 

will increase creativity, increase our relevance, and help 

people get better treatment. 

Our mission is to provide evidence-based information 

about the diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and evaluation 

of alcohol use disorder and about the overall health 

consequences of alcohol. To only study one cultural group 

or type of individual or one sex or one gender is just not 

acceptable. There are so many individual differences in how 

we respond to alcohol and our vulnerability to the [harmful] 

effects of alcohol. That’s one area that has shifted in priority 

for us. 

Another is training young people and moving young people 

along in our field. That’s another big area that we put a lot of 

emphasis on, and we will continue to do so. 

To read more of Dr. Koob’s insights on alcohol research, and 

how he unwinds from work, check out his full interview online 

at  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine ! T

> M E E T T H E D I R E C T O R
> Dr. Koob, back row, fourth from left, stands with his lab group in
> the Neurobiology of Addiction Section of the Intramural Research
> Program at the National Institute on Drug Abuse, in 2022.
> IMAGE CREDITS: NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON ALCOHOL ABUSE AND ALCOHOLISM

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  25 

Listening to music or 

setting aside alone 

time can help teens 

manage stress. 

# Teens and stress: 

# When it’s more 

# than worry 

# Advice to help adolescents cope with anxiety 

# and other mental health struggles 

# Stress—and sometimes feeling anxious— 

is a natural and normal experience 

for everyone, including children and 

teenagers. But when those feelings last a long 

time or occur frequently, that’s cause for concern. 

According to Krystal Lewis, Ph.D., a licensed 

clinical psychologist in the National Institute of 

Mental Health Intramural Research Program, it’s 

important to  know the difference  between stress 

and anxiety. 

Stress is the body’s reaction to danger or excitement, 

including about positive things such as an upcoming 

party or a vacation. Stress causes the body to release 

hormones that can raise blood pressure, heart rate, or 

blood sugar. 

Anxiety is the body’s or mind’s response to stress, even 

when there are no current stressors. Dr. Lewis said this 

often comes from the fear of a future outcome that may 

not even happen. For example, you may be worried about 

getting into college or an important exam: “You already 

had the test, but you’re still feeling anxious…You’re 

worried about the next test now.”   

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES 26 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

If you think a teen is experiencing a mental health 

crisis, the  988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline 

is a  national, 24/7 hotline  that can connect 

you with a trained crisis counselor by phone 

or online chat.  TTY users can contact the 

Lifeline via their preferred relay service 

or by dialing 711, then 988. 

She said it’s important to remind adolescents that it 

is normal to feel pressure to be perfect or perform well. 

However, failure is a part of life. If a teen is so concerned 

with not making mistakes that anxiety gets in the way 

of them enjoying life or causes prolonged physical 

symptoms, that could become a clinical problem. 

Physical symptoms of stress and anxiety include 

headaches, trouble sleeping, digestive issues, or muscle 

pain. If left untreated, these symptoms can damage the 

body and lead to other mental health issues, including 

anxiety disorders. 

A mental health professional can diagnose an anxiety 

disorder, which may require  treatment  such as therapy 

or medication. 

We don’t know what causes anxiety disorders, but 

risk factors include a family history of the condition or 

other mental illness and a person’s brain biology and 

chemistry. Some physical health conditions such as 

thyroid problems or arrhythmia can also lead to anxiety 

disorders. Experiencing traumatic events is a risk factor 

as well. 

For adolescents, stress and anxiety can be hard to 

talk about. Some signs that a teen is struggling may 

include noticeable changes in appetite and sleep, 

aggression, irritability, difficulty concentrating, avoiding 

social activities, and engaging in self-harm or having 

thoughts of suicide. 

Having a schedule or routine is also important for 

adolescents. Sometimes it’s less about creating a schedule 

and more about modifying the schedule you already have. 

> A N X I E T Y

At-home stress coping 

strategies for teens 

A teen’s environment can contribute to them 

developing an anxiety disorder, so in addition to 

exploring treatment options, it’s important to take 

simple steps to decrease their risk. 

Sleep.  Make sure they are getting enough! 

Eight to 10 hours of sleep per night are 

recommended for teens ages 13 to 18. 

Stick to a regular bedtime and make their 

sleep space as calm as possible. 

Physical activity.  This can be gentle, 

such as yoga or walking, or more intense, 

like running or playing team sports. Exercise 

causes the body to release endorphins, 

which are hormones that can relieve pain 

and reduce symptoms of anxiety. It also 

helps take their mind off whatever is 

causing them stress. 

Balanced diet and hydration.  Eating 

regular, healthy meals and drinking plenty 

of water can improve energy and focus 

throughout the day. They may want to limit 

caffeinated beverages such as soft drinks 

or coffee and other foods that can cause 

physical symptoms of stress or discomfort. 

Meditation and breathing exercises. 

These don’t have to be complicated or take 

a lot of time. They can spend a few minutes 

being still and quiet, listening to their 

breathing, and letting their mind clear. 

They can also download a mobile app 

or listen to meditation playlists to guide 

them in a relaxation exercise. 

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  27 

Teens experience stress and anxiety, but talking about it with parents 

and teachers can help. 

“When you’re able to create a schedule 

and you know what’s upcoming, that 

can help you to manage stress and 

anxiety by minimizing the unknown.” 

–Dr. Krystal Lewis, licensed clinical psychologist 

at the National Institute of Mental Health 

“Schedules are useful in that they help create a routine 

and give them something to look forward to,” Dr. Lewis 

said. “When you’re able to create a schedule and you 

know what’s upcoming, that can help you to manage 

stress and anxiety by minimizing the unknown.” 

Just make sure that schedule also includes time for 

fun and relaxation! 

Resources and hotlines 

for teen mental health 

ɠ TrevorSpace . Online chat community, forums, and 

resources for LGBTQ+ youth, moderated by  The 

Trevor Project  nonprofit staff. The organization’s 

website has a “quick exit” safety feature: Users can 

press their ESC key three times and it will exit the site 

as well as erase it from their browsing history. 

ɠ Disaster Distress Helpline . Operated by the 

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 

Administration, this 24/7/365 helpline provides 

disaster crisis counseling for experiences such 

as natural disasters, health emergencies, incidents 

of mass violence, and the anniversaries and trigger 

events of those experiences. Users can call toll free 

or text 800-985-5990. This service is confidential 

and multilingual.  T

Other resources 

ɠ Children and Mental Health: Is This Just a Stage? 

ɠ Helping Children and Adolescents Cope With 

Traumatic Events 

ɠ I’m So Stressed Out! 

ɠ Let’s Talk About Eating Disorders 

ɠ The Teen Brain: 7 Things to Knows 

ɠ Caring for Your Mental Health 

A N X I E T Y 

> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, GET T Y IMAGES; BOT TOM, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH

28  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

# Teens are talking about mental health 

# High schoolers’ stories give a glimpse into the national crisis 

# The prevalence of mental health issues is hard to 

measure, but federal data show how widespread 

the challenges are. The Centers for Disease 

Control and Prevention (CDC) said we need to address 

threats to mental health in young people—especially 

adolescents. 

More than one third (37%) of high schoolers in the 

United States reported experiencing poor mental health 

during the COVID-19 pandemic, according to a  2021 

CDC study . Almost half (44%) of high schoolers reported 

feeling persistently sad or hopeless in the last year. Some 

of these feelings were also linked to experiences of 

racism, social stigma around gender and sexual identity, 

and sexual violence. 

Studies like these can help shed light on issues 

that teens may be hesitant or unable to discuss with 

parents, doctors , and school staff. 

Stigma and a lack of information or access to care also 

keep many teens from getting help. But sharing personal 

stories about mental health can offer encouragement 

and connection. This can help teens feel like they are 

not alone. That’s why NIH asked high schoolers to 

describe these challenges in their own words for the 

2022 Speaking Up About Mental Health!  essay contest .

According to the Centers for Disease 

Control and Prevention, in 2021: 

ɠ 36% of high school students perceived or experienced 

racism before or during the pandemic 

• Asian (non-Hispanic): 64% 

• Black (non-Hispanic): 55% 

• Multiracial (non-Hispanic): 55% 

• Hispanic or Latino: 42% 

• American Indian/Alaska Native (non-Hispanic): 27% 

• Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (non-Hispanic): 55% 

• White (non-Hispanic): 23% 

ɠ 18% of female high schoolers and 5% of male high 

schoolers experienced sexual violence 

• Up from 15% and 4%, respectively, in 2017 

ɠ 57% of female high schoolers and 29% of male high 

schoolers had persistent feelings of sadness or 

hopelessness 

• Up from 41% and 21%, respectively, in 2017 

ɠ 69% of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and questioning (LGBQ+) 

high schoolers* and 35% of heterosexual students had 

persistent feelings of sadness or hopelessness 

• 14% of LGBQ+ high schoolers and 7% of heterosexual 

students did not go to school because of safety 

concerns 

*Although this data set did not account for gender identity, previous research 

has shown that transgender youth experience more stigma and are more 

likely to have more suicidal thoughts or behaviors compared to their peers. 

SOURCES:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ; Morbidity and 

Mortality Weekly Report Supplement, Vol. 71, No. 3 ; CDC report shows 

concerning increases in sadness and exposure to violence among teen girls 

and LGBQ+ youth ; LGBQ + Teens 

## FAST FACT 

In 2018–2019, among adolescents in the 

United States ages 12 to 17,  15.1% had 

a major depressive episode .

SOURCE:  CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION 

M E N TA L H E A LT H 

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  29 

“I was also having issues 

with my friendships at 

school and an increased 

level of stress when it came 

time for tests, projects, 

and other assessments … 

the feeling of isolation, lack 

of appetite, and absolute 

hatred of school were 

not normal.” 

— Morgan, New Jersey 

The contest was sponsored by the National Institute of 

Mental Health (NIMH), the National Institute on Minority 

Health and Health Disparities (NIMHD), and the  Eunice 

Kennedy Shriver  National Institute of Child Health and 

Human Development (NICHD). They wanted to start 

conversations around youth mental health and highlight 

different aspects of this national health crisis. 

In their essays, many students talked about feeling lost, 

embarrassed, or frustrated by their mental health struggles. 

Others wrote about going from being confident in early 

childhood to feeling alone or unseen in adolescence. 

NIH-funded researcher Tamar Mendelson, M.A., Ph.D., 

Bloomberg Professor of American Health and Director for 

the Center for Adolescent Health at the Johns Hopkins 

Bloomberg School of Public Health, says that’s not 

surprising. Depression rates tend to increase around puberty, 

especially among girls but also in boys. Dr. Mendelson said 

this can be caused by a combination of hormonal changes, 

new social relationships, and new pressures from academic, 

athletic, and other activities. 

“Since I started high 

school in an LGBTQ-

accepting school where 

LGBTQ issues are 

discussed and anti-

discrimination measures 

are taken, my depression 

has decreased 

significantly.” 

— Leila, Ohio 

“That young, fragile boy 

seemed so mentally 

strong. He knew how to 

get out, how to solve 

problems … I now realize 

that a teenager’s plights 

and a child’s plights are 

usually very different.” 

— Melvin, Massachusetts 

“Young people who are feeling overwhelmed or are not 

sure how to cope with emotions may be more likely to 

use substances to kind of help with that,” Dr. Mendelson 

said. Such substances could include alcohol, tobacco, or 

prescription or illicit drugs. 

Puberty is also when many young people become more 

aware of their sexual orientations and gender identities. 

For some, this can lead to being unaccepted or bullied. 

Rates of substance use and misuse also tend to increase 

during puberty. 

In addition to navigating the typical stressors that 

teens face, they've recently had to cope with the 

COVID-19 pandemic and related family losses or 

financial struggles. They’ve experienced or witnessed 

racial- and identity-based discrimination, gun violence, 

political unrest, natural disasters, and climate change. 

These challenges, coupled with other risk factors, 

including some parenting styles, can lead to mental 

health issues such as anxiety and depression. 

“For many Asian American 

youths, getting help for mental 

health can be hindered by 

stereotypes. Asian American 

boys, in particular, may not seek 

therapy since their cultures 

expect them to be more resilient 

than girls. After all, as the older 

brother, how can I let my little 

sister know when I am not 

feeling well emotionally?” 

— Evan, Texas 

M E N TA L H E A LT H    

> IMAGE CREDITS: NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON MINORIT Y HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITIES 30 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine
> “By changing the way
> eating disorders are
> taught in all school
> levels, it is possible to
> change the false
> assumptions the
> public often has
> about individuals
> who struggle with
> eating disorders.”
> —Evelyn, Virginia

Even though environmental triggers have changed 

over time, adolescent anxiety was rising even before 

the pandemic. 

Michele Ybarra, Ph.D., an adjunct professor of mental 

health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 

Health as well as an NIH-supported researcher, said that 

not long ago, it was widely believed that youth could 

not have depression because people thought, “What do 

[they] have to be depressed about?” 

But in the last several decades, Dr. Ybarra said, mental 

health professionals have realized that depression can 

happen to anyone at any age. 

Several students wrote about schools with limited, 

outdated, or no education on the topic. Some said they 

could not speak to a therapist or school counselor when 

they needed to. 

The issue is worse for students in  rural areas , in 

schools with limited financial resources, or who need 

culturally appropriate care such as bilingual mental 

health information.  

> “After [my cousin’s]
> diagnosis, he was
> subjected to ever-changing
> medications until they
> found one that numbed his
> emotions while still
> allowing him to function.
> Finding the right therapist
> required being put on
> multiple waitlists, and
> several therapists didn’t
> accept insurance.”
> —Rohan, California

But  digital tools  can connect youth to information about 

their mental health. For example, Dr. Ybarra said, the 

rise of telehealth and teletherapy since the pandemic has 

helped increase access for some. 

Dr. Ybarra said that while technology (including social 

media) can have both positive and negative effects on 

mental health, it can also be a force for good. The nature 

of relationships has changed in the internet age, and 

connecting online is natural for adolescents . Options like 

crisis lines or online therapy can get help to teens quickly. 

Multiple students said when they could not find 

resources from their schools or communities, they 

started their own. Some also said their experiences have 

inspired them to study mental health and treatments 

after high school. 

One student said they  began volunteering for a teen 

crisis hotline  after a relative used the same service for help. 

The student also joined a youth advisory group for their 

state governor’s office and offered help as a peer-to-peer 

counselor at their school. 

“My passion towards becoming a researcher on 

psychiatric disorders is stronger than ever,” they wrote. 

The way people talk about mental illness could also 

be better,  one student wrote . They preferred the phrase 

“living” with a mental illness rather than “suffering” from 

one. This small change in language signals it’s possible for 

people with such conditions to live happy and fulfilling 

lives. This student also said their own school began 

marking mental health-related absences as excused 

and holding an annual mental health week to encourage 

open conversation. 

Get the full story and learn about NIH-supported research 

on adolescent mental health online at  NIH MedlinePlus 

Magazine ! T

If you think a teen is experiencing a mental health 

crisis, the  988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline  is a 

national, 24/7 hotline  that can connect you with 

a trained crisis counselor by phone or online chat. 

TTY users can contact the Lifeline via their 

preferred relay service or by dialing 711, then 988. 

> M E N TA L H E A LT H
> IMAGE CREDITS: NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON MINORIT Y HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITIES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  31 

# Meet the Director: 

# Eliseo J. Pérez-Stable, M.D. 

Eliseo J. Pérez-Stable, M.D., served in the medical and research communities 

for decades before becoming the second Director of the National Institute on 

Minority Health and Health Disparities (NIMHD) in 2015. His path to NIH was 

guided by his unique experiences and partnerships, which prepared him to lead 

NIMHD in its mission to reduce health disparities and improve the health of 

minority and disadvantaged populations. 

He also oversees  his lab  at the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 

(NHLBI), where his research explores health differences among racial and 

ethnic groups and how social factors such as migration and the environment 

affect health. 

Dr. Pérez-Stable shared highlights from his career and discussed advancing 

the science of minority health and health disparities with NIH MedlinePlus 

Magazine. He talked about NIMHD’s unique role within NIH, how the landscape 

for health disparities research changed with COVID-19, and what he’s most 

excited about moving forward. 

Can you tell us about your background 

and what brought you to this field? 

I was born in Cuba, and I spent the first eight and a half 

years of my life there. After the Cuban Revolution, my 

parents decided that they didn’t want to risk staying there, 

so in 1960, we immigrated to the United States. I guess my 

journey starts there because as a Cuban American, I’m an 

immigrant and I’m a minority individual. We moved to 

Pittsburgh, where I learned English. 

The second big thing is that I became a physician. 

My father was a physician, but he never really pushed 

it on me. I think I opted for medicine because it was a 

noble profession and I would always have a job. 

I was originally a history major in college, and I always 

had a strong interest in politics and current affairs, 

particularly around Latin America but in the United States 

as well. I quickly realized if I wanted to be a physician––and 

a good one––I wouldn’t have time for much else. Medical 

residency brought me to the West Coast, and I went to the 

University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), for training 

in primary care general internal medicine. I fell in love with 

the area and lived in San Francisco for 37 years, where I 

built my career. 

Can you describe your career progression 

from clinical practice to research? 

I learned research methods during a two-year [clinical] 

fellowship, which turned me on to academic research. 

There were people around me who encouraged and 

supported me. Dr. Steve Schroeder [Director of the UCSF 

Division of General Internal Medicine] was a mentor 

and my first boss at UCSF. He was an influential leader 

in general internal medicine, which didn’t really exist in 

many academic centers at the time. 

I began to collaborate with behavioral and social 

scientists. I worked first on depression prevention 

in primary care and in tobacco use and smoking 

cessation among Latinos, and then moved more 

toward population science. 

A lot of my clinical work had very little to do with my 

research. I got funding from NIH very early on, but I also 

really enjoyed my role as a leader in research and as a 

clinician, a generalist, and an educator at UCSF.   

> IMAGE CREDITS: NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON MINORIT Y HEALTH AND HEALTH DISPARITIES 32 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

I followed a path in academics that was not traditional…I didn’t focus on a narrow area and become an 

expert in that area. I was an expert in minority and Latino health. It wasn’t specific to just one topic. 

How did you first become interested in 

minority health and health disparities? 

My interest in minority health began in my third year as a 

resident when all of the residents in my year were asked 

to do a talk [on a topic of our choice]. I did two: one on 

Cuba and one with another resident on cultural factors in 

communicating with patients who are American but not 

White. I focused on Latinos, and the other resident, who is 

Vietnamese American, focused on Southeast Asians. 

That was the beginning of my thinking about, “What is it 

about me being Cuban and able to speak Spanish that made 

it different [for me] to take care of these patients who did 

not  speak English?” An obvious thing was language, but 

I felt there was something else going on, and I wanted to 

study that. I called it “cultural factors” in communicating. 

I followed a path in academics that was not traditional. 

I never spent time in a lab or worked with animals. I didn’t 

focus on a narrow area and become an expert in that area. 

I was an expert in minority and Latino health. It wasn’t 

specific to just one topic. 

How did that interest shape your 

career path? 

Once I became an associate professor at UCSF, my 

role became more defined, and I started to connect 

with others and do more collaborative work. I went from 

mostly working only on my own projects to now having 

networks, both local and national, which created the 

platform to make progress in my research. I partnered 

with Dr. Eugene Washington, who worked in a similar role 

to mine in the UCSF obstetrics and gynecology department. 

Gene is African American and got grant funding to create 

what we named the Medical Effectiveness Research Center 

for Diverse Populations (now called the  Multiethnic 

Health Equity Research Center ). It was the first center for 

minority health research at UCSF. We had different clinical 

backgrounds and were connected to different people. 

Combining forces was a huge step in the right direction 

in terms of what we were able to accomplish at UCSF. 

Because we were focused on minority health, we attracted 

people from different disciplines. A pediatrician who was 

interested in studying birth outcomes by race and ethnicity 

came to me and said, “I want you to be my mentor.” I was 

an internist, and I didn’t have any experience with kids at 

the time. I said, “Tell me how I can help you.” It turned out 

that she trusted me, and I knew about Latino health, and she 

taught me about the issues she was interested in. I realized 

I could be a mentor for someone in a different discipline, 

and I never again accepted the excuse (that I still hear), “I’m 

not an expert in that area so I can’t say anything about it.” 

To read Dr. Pérez-Stable’s path to NIMHD and what he 

finds most challenging and motivating in his role as 

Director, check out his full interview online at 

NIH MedlinePlus Magazine ! T

What are determinants of health? 

Determinants of health are the various factors that influence a person's overall health and well-being and include social, structural, biological, behavioral, and health care system influences. Recent findings from research supported and conducted by NIMHD highlight the importance of these determinants. Examples include: 

Geographic location. 

Residents of rural counties in the United States are more likely to die from diabetes than those living in urban areas. This shows that health disparities are not limited to race or ethnicity but also extend to geographic location and access to health care. 

Systemic racism. 

A study conducted by NIMHD researchers found that Black college students reported better mental health outcomes when their school’s administration acknowledged institutional racism on campus and took steps to address it. 

Access to health care. 

A study supported by NIMHD found that pregnant women were more likely to receive treatment for gestational diabetes if they were enrolled in Medicaid. 

> M E E T T H E D I R E C T O R
> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES

Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  33 

Dr. Shuai Xie brings a unique perspective to her work at NCI. 

# Dr. Shuai Xie is building a bridge between 

# engineering and public health 

As an engineering student, she studied how indoor building materials may contribute to indoor air pollution. Now she 

uses her training to discover how pesticides used outdoors may enter homes, particularly in agricultural areas. 

# A s a postdoctoral fellow at the National 

Cancer Institute (NCI)  Occupational 

and Environmental Epidemiology 

Branch , Shuai Xie, Ph.D., M.P.H., collaborates 

with experts in exposure science and cancer 

epidemiology to explore pesticide exposure 

among farmers and their families. Her research, 

which uses data from the  Agricultural Health 

Study  (a government-funded study about health 

in farming populations), could improve our 

understanding of how pesticides enter homes. 

To evaluate exposure to indoor pollutants 

such as pesticides, researchers collect and 

analyze dust samples from inside people's 

homes and test them for pesticide residue. 

Dr. Xie compares pesticide measurements from 

these dust samples to the farmers’ responses to a 

questionnaire. She looks at the number of days the 

farmers reported using different types of pesticides 

and other information about work practices and 

home habits and characteristics. If she finds a strong 

relationship between them, scientists and public 

health professionals could use similar questionnaires 

to estimate potential levels of pesticide exposure 

within a home. This could save time and reduce some 

of the logistical challenges of collecting and analyzing 

dust samples. 

Dr. Xie spoke with NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

about how her research connects engineering and 

public health.   

> IMAGE CREDITS: HEAD SHOT, DR. SHUAI XIE; TOP IMAGE, GET T Y IMAGES 34 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine

How did you first become interested 

in environmental health? 

[In my engineering Ph.D. program,] my research focused 

on measuring how indoor building materials adsorb 

pollutants (adsorption is when a substance gathers or 

accumulates on a surface) and release them. I studied 

trichloroethylene  (a volatile liquid chemical that can cause 

kidney cancer). Trichloroethylene can be found in indoor 

and outdoor air and in the airspaces of contaminated soil. 

I collected things like carpet, dust, and drywall and did 

experiments to measure their adsorption capacity—how 

much of the chemical gathers on their surfaces. 

Studying the indoor environment and seeing the 

detectable measurements made me feel like our living 

environments could potentially impact our health. 

I became interested in environmental and occupational 

health and wanted to understand how to measure indoor 

contaminants and identify where they come from. In doing 

that, I worked with epidemiologists to understand if those 

exposures may impact our health. 

How do you use your chemical and 

environmental engineering skills in 

your current research? 

In my current work at NCI, we are looking at pesticide 

levels adsorbed in house dust in farming communities. 

Dust samples are collected from vacuum cleaners and 

analyzed by a laboratory. My job is to interpret those 

measurements. I use statistical models to link them to 

pesticide information provided by the farmer. My goal is to 

understand how a farmer’s pesticide use outside the home 

contributes to pesticide concentrations inside the home. 

I feel like my current work is a bridge between my 

training in engineering and public health. [My engineering 

background] helps me understand the lab report quickly. 

I know the instruments they used and the basic ideas 

behind the analysis, even though I didn’t do it myself. 

I also know the limitations of the lab technologies. 

As engineers, we measure samples and get a number, but 

we don’t always know how to best interpret it. Engineering 

on its own cannot explain if that number means there is 

a risk for people. As a multidisciplinary team of exposure 

scientists and epidemiologists, we collaborate to interpret 

the findings as they relate to public health. 

## “[My engineering background] 

## helps me understand the lab report 

## quickly. I know the instruments 

## they used and the basic ideas 

## behind the analysis, even though 

## I didn’t do it myself.” 

> E N V I R O N M E N TA L H E A LT H

Why is this work important for public health? 

People mostly think about farmers getting exposed 

to pesticides because they have a lot of direct contact 

[in their work]. But research also shows that the dust in 

their houses has higher pesticide levels than the dust in 

non-farming houses. This means that other people who live 

on the farm—their spouses, their children—may also have 

potential pesticide exposure even when they are not 

directly participating in farming activities. Their exposure 

to pesticides also needs to be studied. 

We also want to know where those chemicals are coming 

from. When the farmers work in the field, do they bring 

[the pesticides] home with them? We are exploring how 

their activities at work and at home may contribute to 

indoor pesticide concentrations. This includes how 

frequently they use pesticides, how old their carpets and 

homes are, and if the farmers take off their shoes before 

coming inside their houses. 

My research focus is on measuring the amount of 

a contaminant that’s in a home and evaluating factors 

that might influence those levels. My work can be used 

by other researchers to help identify possible mitigation 

strategies (changes that minimize or prevent risk). Volume 18, Issue 2  magazine.medlineplus. gov  35 

## “Other people who live on the farm—their spouses, their children— may also have potential pesticide exposure even when they are not directly participating in farming activities.” 

Are there any early findings or 

takeaways that you can share? 

Generally, we found that the more a farmer uses a 

pesticide, the higher the concentrations of it are in their 

homes. Houses that are near fields treated with pesticides 

also have higher pesticide concentrations than ones that 

are farther away. 

We also found other activities that can be related to higher 

pesticide concentrations in homes. These include when 

they use a pesticide within the home (for example, to treat 

ants or termites), on their cats or dogs (as in flea and tick 

treatments), or in their yard (to treat insects and weeds). 

What part of your research are you 

most excited about? 

First, I enjoy doing research at the intersection of 

engineering and public health. Engineering and public 

health are quite different disciplines, and the link isn’t 

always obvious. Working in exposure science makes me 

feel like I can apply what I’ve learned from both disciplines 

and bring them together. There are a lot of challenging 

questions in [exposure science], and it’s exciting to learn 

skills that I can use to help answer them. 

How has your research changed 

your behavior at home? 

In my Ph.D. program, I measured how much 

trichlorethylene could be adsorbed in different building 

materials. Even though they were only found at low levels, 

it makes me more cautious. I clean much more frequently 

than I used to. It makes me cautious about the chemicals 

that I choose to use in my home as they may stick to our 

furniture and building materials. 

What is your favorite thing about 

working at NCI? 

NCI is a very supportive, interdisciplinary-friendly 

environment. There is a lot of collaboration across 

different groups—it is a great place for trainees to 

learn from many different perspectives. I’ve learned 

how to work with multiple collaborators on the same 

project. It’s not hierarchical—we call each other by 

our first names. 

At NCI, I get a lot of support from my mentor 

[Senior Investigator] Melissa Friesen, Ph.D. She taught 

me so much about exposure science, and she really 

cares about me not only as a scientist but also as a 

person. She cares about my ideas and what direction 

I want to go with my career. She understands how 

important this career stage is [for young researchers].  T

> IMAGE CREDITS: GET T Y IMAGES
> E N V I R O N M E N TA L H E A LT H

36  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

# Engineer and athlete 

# Rory Cooper, Ph.D., draws 

# from personal experience to 

# design new technologies for 

# people with disabilities 

Dr. Rory Cooper, Director of the Human Engineering Research Laboratories 

at the University of Pittsburgh. 

# R ory Cooper, Ph.D., is a Paralympian, 

Army veteran, world-renowned 

inventor and engineer, and disability 

advocate. In 1994, he founded the  Human 

Engineering Research Laboratories (HERL) , a 

collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh 

and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 

(VA) Office of Research and Development. 

HERL has advanced engineering and clinical 

research for mobility impairments around 

the world. 

Dr. Cooper and HERL’s work empowers 

people with disabilities through innovative 

technology. While talking with NIH 

MedlinePlus Magazine, Dr. Cooper told us 

about his contributions and why accessibility 

matters to those with mobility challenges. 

What is the purpose of HERL? How does 

the lab give back to those with disabilities? 

Everything we do is meant to give back to and improve 

the lives of people with disabilities. The whole purpose 

of HERL is to advance engineering and clinical research 

for their rehabilitation and community living. We give 

back through the technologies we create, the results we 

generate, and educational materials and programs. We 

work to change policies and practices for resources such 

as Medicare or for VA coverage. Most importantly, we’ve 

trained people with disabilities or people who have family 

members with disabilities who are passionate about our 

mission. We’ve used their knowledge to improve both 

products and health care. 

I thought it would be unique and effective to create a 

lab or center where different academic disciplines worked 

together as a team on a shared mission and maybe make a 

greater impact. 

The creation of HERL, the people that we’ve trained, 

and the lives of the people with disabilities that we’ve 

positively influenced are my proudest contributions. We’ve 

done several things that have made a significant impact, 

including creating the first powered wheelchair that is 

entirely submersible to make water parks more accessible. 

P E R S O N A L S T O R Y    

> IMAGE CREDITS: UNIVER SIT Y OF PIT TSBURGH Volume 18, Issue 2 magazine.medlineplus. gov 37

We also created a more useful computer mouse for people 

who use prosthetic hook end-effectors. We’ve contributed 

to several global wheelchair design standards. 

[Thanks to HERL’s work,] millions of people have 

independent mobility again. 

I started HERL because I also have a disability. When 

I started doing wheelchair sports [after leaving the 

Army], specifically basketball in college, I saw a lot of 

the challenges that people with various disabilities were 

facing. I knew there was a potential for technology to help 

improve mobility and function. 

What inspired you to try adaptive sports? 

Can you describe your experience as a 

Paralympian? 

I became involved in the Paralympics because of running. I 

started running in the fifth grade, I think, and I enjoyed the 

sport. I wasn’t quite sure that I would make the Olympics, 

although when I joined the Army and started running, I 

became faster. If I hadn’t been injured [during my Army 

service in 1980], I may have had an opportunity. After 

taking up adaptive sports, I fell in love with wheelchair 

racing, hand cycling, and swimming. I focused on 

wheelchair racing because of the technical and athletic 

aspects. There was a growing interest in wheelchair racing 

among people with disabilities at the time, so there was a 

lot of innovation and competition. 

My experience as a Paralympian was awesome. I first 

competed in 1988, and I was very fortunate to be in the 

first Paralympics that used the same facilities and venues 

in Seoul, South Korea, as the Olympic athletes. That was 

amazing. Asia is a continent that really embraces the 

Paralympics, and they’ve always done a wonderful job. 

And for that, I’m fortunate. I’ve since been a coach and 

an organizer or member of several committees for 

Paralympic teams. 

One of the greatest experiences was making connections. 

I made friends through training and competing in the 

Paralympics, even from teams of other countries. They’re 

still friends of mine all these years later. It wasn’t just 

a once-in-a-lifetime experience—it turned out to be a 

lifelong experience. 

What current research or innovations is 

HERL working on? 

We’re excited that we have several projects related to 

robots. We have robotic manipulators (similar to arms) for 

mobility and for improving independence to perform daily 

tasks such as making meals, cleaning up, and eating. And 

we’re developing a robotic wheelchair for crossing over 

uneven surfaces. The lab is also working on new prosthetics 

and new systems to help prevent or reduce the risk of 

pressure injuries and other seating-related disabilities. We 

have about 50 ongoing projects. 

To learn more about Dr. Cooper’s accessibility engineering 

research and to watch his talk as part of the NIH Director’s 

Wednesday Afternoon Lecture Series, find his full interview 

online at  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine ! T

## “I made friends through training and 

## competing in the Paralympics, even from 

## teams of other countries. They’re still friends 

## of mine all these years later.” 

> Dr. Rory Cooper, bottom, at the start of the 2022 Army Ten-Miler Race in Washington, DC.
> P E R S O N A L S T O R Y
> IMAGE CREDITS: ROSEMARIE COOPER

38  Volume 18, Issue 2  NIH MedlinePlus Magazine 

M E D I C A L T E C H N O L O G Y 

An example of a modern bionic prosthetic arm. 

# Prosthetics 

# through 

# the ages 

# A look at how prosthetics have 

# changed over time and how 

# NIH supports innovation 

# Millions of people in the United States 

are currently living with limb loss. 

This number is expected to grow as 

the population ages and rates of diseases such 

as diabetes that can cause dysvascularity (poor 

blood circulation in the legs) increase. 

For people with limb loss, prosthetic devices 

improve quality of life by providing movement 

and independence. Early prosthetics were 

uncomfortable to wear, but they may have helped 

people return to work and feel accepted in their 

daily lives. We’ll explore how these devices have 

changed over time, from clunky, early designs 

and materials to modern innovations—some of 

which NIH-supported researchers are developing. 

When were prosthetics invented, and 

what were they used for? 

Historians don’t know for certain if the first prosthetics 

were functional or for appearances. According to 

Katherine Ott, Ph.D., curator for the Division of Medicine 

and Science at the Smithsonian Institution’s National 

Museum of American History, this is partly because 

different cultures have their own ideas about what 

makes a person whole. 

A wood and aluminum prosthetic arm 

invented by William Robert Grossmith in 

the mid-19th century. 

The oldest known prosthetics are two different artificial 

toes from ancient Egypt. One prosthetic toe, known as 

the “Greville Chester toe,” was made from cartonnage, 

which is a kind of papier-mâché made from glue, linen, and 

plaster. It is thought to be between 2,600 and 3,400 years 

old, though its exact age is unknown. Because it doesn’t 

bend, researchers believe it was cosmetic.    

> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, GET T Y IMAGES; BOT TOM,  WELLCOME IMAGES, WIKIMEDIA COMMONS Volume 18, Issue 2 magazine.medlineplus. gov 39
> M E D I C A L T E C H N O L O G Y
> An artificial leg from
> the American Civil War.

The other prosthetic, a wooden and leather toe, known 

as the “Cairo toe,” is estimated to be between 2,700 and 

3,000 years old. It is thought to be the earliest known 

practical artificial limb due to its flexibility and because 

it was refitted for the wearer multiple times. 

Approximately 300 years later—300 B.C.—in Italy, 

an ancient Roman nobleman used a prosthetic leg known 

as the “Capua leg.” The leg was made of bronze and 

hollowed-out wood and was held up with leather straps. 

Other known early prosthetics include artificial feet from 

Switzerland and Germany, crafted between the 5th and 8th 

centuries. These were made from wood, iron, or bronze and 

may have been strapped to the amputee’s remaining limb. 

How war—and the U.S. military— 

inspired prosthetic advances 

Soldiers who lost their limbs in battle often used early 

artificial limbs made of wood or iron. For example, about 

2,200 years ago, the Roman general Marcus Sergius Silus 

lost his right hand during the Second Punic War. He had 

it replaced with an iron one that was designed to hold his 

shield. Knights of the Middle Ages sometimes used wooden 

limbs for battle or to ride a horse. And in the 16th century, 

the French surgeon Ambroise Paré designed some of the 

first purely functional prosthetics for soldiers coming 

off the battlefield. He also published the earliest written 

reference to prosthetics. 

Then came the American Civil War in 1860. The record 

number of amputees from the war caused the number of 

patents for prosthetics to almost quadruple. One of these 

patents was for a wooden leg called the “Hanger limb.” 

It was the first to use rubber in the ankle and cushioning 

in the heel, showing that inventors understood they needed 

to make prosthetics less painful for amputees to wear. 

Today, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is a major 

provider of prosthetics and a leader in rehabilitation 

treatments for veterans who lose their limbs during their 

service. These patients are at risk for polytrauma, meaning 

they have injuries on multiple parts of their bodies, usually 

from blast-related events. 

When this happens, these veterans need multifaceted 

clinical care and a support network. The  Rehabilitation 

Medicine division  at the NIH Clinical Center and the 

National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research  at the 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver  National Institute of Child Health 

and Human Development help treat prosthetic users and 

conduct research about limb loss. 

Improvements in design 

While prosthetics were still made of combinations of wood, 

metal, glue, and leather even up to the 20th century, they 

were becoming more functional. From the late 15th century 

to the 19th century, France and Switzerland were making 

artificial limbs that could rotate and bend using cables, 

gears, cranks, and springs. However, these devices still 

needed to be adjusted manually. For example, an artificial 

hand could be cranked shut around a fork, but the person 

still needed another hand to operate the crank. 

During the 1900s, manufacturers started to build more 

functional prosthetics by swapping wood and leather for 

plastics and other artificial materials. Still, some of the best   

> A young man having his
> right leg fitted with a
> prosthetic leg.
> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, ARMY MEDICAL MUSEUM (U.S.); BOT TOM, NLM HISTORY OF MEDICINE DIVISION 40 Volume 18, Issue 2 NIH MedlinePlus Magazine
> M E D I C A L T E C H N O L O G Y

## FAST FACT 

Due to demand from soldiers injured in the 

American Civil War, the number of patents filed 

for prosthetics in the United States went from 

34 in 1860  to  133 in 1873 . 

> SOURCE: CARE OF THE COMBAT AMPUTEE
> (BORDEN INSTITUTE)

prosthetics were out of reach for most people, including 

veterans. Many of these devices were only designed for 

specific tasks such as piano playing. They would not 

become more accessible to veterans until World War I, 

when prosthetic manufacturing for soldiers with limb loss 

increased in Great Britain. According to Jeffrey S. Reznick, 

Ph.D., Chief of the National Library of Medicine History 

of Medicine Division, such wartime manufacturing 

(and repair) sometimes occurred in military hospitals. 

Soldiers recovering in those facilities were fitted with 

artificial limbs as part of their care. 

Today’s prosthetics look and work very differently from 

those made before the late 20th century. More lightweight 

and durable materials such as plastic, aluminum, titanium, 

and silicone are common in today’s prosthetic devices. 

They also fit closer to the person's remaining limb. The 

Walter Reed National Military Medical Center will even 

tattoo service members’ prosthetics to help them look 

and feel more natural. 

But what if a prosthetic could move without the person 

consciously controlling it? That is what the next generation 

of artificial limb technology aims to do. 

NIH-supported innovations in prosthetics 

Scientists are developing robotics,  3D printing , artificial 

intelligence, virtual reality, and motion-sensing 

technologies for prosthetics. Over the last decade, 

NIH has funded  several projects  that harness the 

brain’s electrical activity to move prosthetic limbs 

using electrodes implanted in a person’s remaining 

muscles. These electrodes send signals to the brain 

and allow the prosthetic limbs to move more freely. 

One example of research funded by the National 

Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering is 

a robotic lower leg prosthesis that creates a more natural 

walking motion. Researchers at Vanderbilt University 

created the device with powered knee and ankle joints 

and with software that can anticipate how the person 

wants to move. 

In addition to these technological advances, it’s also 

important to track how many people use prosthetics and 

what treatments work best for these patients. That’s why 

NIH, together with the U.S. Department of Defense and the 

Mayo Clinic, helped create the  Limb Loss and Preservation 

Registry  in 2020. This registry uses electronic health 

records to measure how many people in the United States 

have limb loss and to understand the costs and treatment 

outcomes for these patients.  T

> Two men, each with a prosthetic arm, sit at
> a table and play checkers.
> IMAGE CREDITS: TOP, ARMY MEDICAL MUSEUM (U.S.); BOT TOM, NLM HISTORY OF MEDICINE DIVISION

# NIH  is here to help 

The National Institutes of Health  (NIH)—the nation’s medical research agency—includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is 

a part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. It is the primary federal agency for conducting and supporting 

basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and it investigates the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and 

rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit  www.nih.gov .

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 

www.nih.gov 

Ask NIH:  www.nih.gov/about-nih/ask-nih 

Institutes 

National Library of Medicine (NLM) 

www.nlm.nih. gov 

888-FIND-NLM 888-346-3656 

National Cancer Institute (NCI) 

www.cancer . gov 

800-4-CANCER 800-422-6237 

National Eye Institute (NEI) 

www.nei.nih . gov 

301-496-5248 

National Heart, Lung, and Blood 

Institute (NHLBI) 

www.nhlbi.nih . gov 

301-592-8573 

National Human Genome Research 

Institute (NHGRI) 

www.genome . gov 

301-402-0911 

National Institute on Aging (NIA) 

www.nia.nih . gov 

Aging information: 800-222-2225 

Alzheimer’s information: 800-438-4380 

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 

and Alcoholism (NIAAA) 

www.niaaa.nih . gov 

301-443-3860 

National Institute of Allergy and 

Infectious Diseases (NIAID) 

www.niaid.nih . gov 

301-496-5717 

National Institute of Arthritis and 

Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases 

(NIAMS) 

www.niams.nih . gov 

877-226-4267 

National Institute of Biomedical 

Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) 

www.nibib.nih . gov 

301-451-6772 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver  National 

Institute of Child Health and Human 

Development (NICHD) 

www.nichd.nih . gov 

800-370-2943 

National Institute on Deafness and 

Other Communication Disorders 

(NIDCD) 

www.nidcd.nih . gov 

Voice: 800-241-1044 

TTY: 800-241-1055 

National Institute of Dental and 

Craniofacial Research (NIDCR) 

www.nidcr.nih . gov 

301-480-4098 

National Institute of Diabetes and 

Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) 

www.niddk.nih . gov 

NIDDK Health Information Center 

800-860-8747 

National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) 

www.nida.nih . gov 

301-443-1124 

National Institute of Environmental 

Health Sciences (NIEHS) 

www.niehs.nih . gov 

919-541-3345 

National Institute of General Medical 

Sciences (NIGMS) 

www.nigms.nih . gov 

301-496-7301 

National Institute of Mental Health 

(NIMH) 

www.nimh.nih . gov 

866-615-6464 

National Institute on Minority Health 

and Health Disparities (NIMHD) 

www.nimhd.nih . gov 

301-402-1366 

National Institute of Neurological 

Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) 

www.ninds.nih . gov 

800-352-9424 

National Institute of 

Nursing Research (NINR) 

www.ninr.nih . gov 

301-496-0207 

Centers & Offices 

Division of Rare Diseases Research 

Innovation 

www.ncats.nih.gov/about/center/org/drdri 

Genetic and Rare Disease 

Information Center: 

888-205-2311 

Fogarty International Center (FIC) 

www.fic.nih . gov 

301-496-2075 

National Center for Complementary 

and Integrative Health (NCCIH) 

www.nccih.nih . gov 

888-644-6226 

National Center for Advancing 

Translational Sciences (NCATS) 

www.ncats.nih . gov 

301-435-0888 

NIH Clinical Center 

clinicalcenter.nih . gov 

301-496-2563s 

Office of AIDS Research (OAR) 

www.oar.nih . gov 

301-496-0357 

Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences 

Research (OBSSR) 

www.obssr.od.nih . gov 

301-402-1146 

Office of Communications & Public Liaison 

(OCPL) 

www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nih-office-director/ 

office-communications-public-liaison 

301-496-5787 

Office of Research on Women’s Health 

(ORWH) 

orwh.od.nih . gov 

301-402-1770 National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research 75 Year Ad
