Title: Ben Carson Says Reflecting on Slavery Made Him Pro-Life on Abortion - LifeNews.com

URL Source: https://www.lifenews.com/2015/06/19/ben-carson-says-reflecting-on-slavery-made-him-pro-life-on-abortion

Published Time: 2015-06-19T18:57:56+00:00

Markdown Content:
During the era of slavery, black people were treated like property and pro-life people, despite false accusations of racism, have made the same sort of comparison when it comes to how unborn children are treated vis-a-vis abortion.

Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson says that exact comparison and understanding that unborn babies are being treated today in the same shoddy manner as black Americans generations ago led him to ultimately form a pro-life opinion on abortion. Here’s more from LiveAction on a 2012 video that has been unearthed showing Carson’s line of thinking:

> “The slave owners felt that they should be able to do whatever they wanted to do. And there were some people who were not slave owners who said, ‘You can do what you want to do, but I don’t,” he continued, alluding to the popular-sovereignty stance espoused by Abraham Lincoln’s Senate opponent, Stephen Douglas.
> 
> 
> However, Carson came to see the ethics of abortion as more analogous to the abolitionists’ view of slavery as “such an evil that they want to make sure that it is rooted out of our nation.”
> 
> 
> To the view that “I can do anything I want” with a baby because “it is in my uterus,” Carson responded: “Does that convey the right to terminate it? It doesn’t convey that right anymore than a slave owner had the right to terminate a slave.”

**Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com**

Since becoming pro-life earlier in his life, Carson has been an outspoken pro-life advocate.

Earlier this year, Carson took on the so-called war on women and said it as ridiculous that pro-life people are tagged with the inaccurate and derisive label of opposing women’s rights just because they support protecting unborn babies from abortion. At that event, the Conservative Political Action Conference, Carson came in fourth in the straw poll, getting the support of 11% of attendees.

“I refuse to give into the PC police,” he said.

“If you’re pro-life, you’re ‘anti-woman.’ If you’re pro-traditional family, you’re a ‘homophobe.’ If you’re white, and you oppose a progressive black person, you’re ‘racist.’ If you’re black and you oppose a progressive agenda, you’re ‘crazy.’ And if you’re black and you’re pro-life and you’re pro-traditional family, they don’t even know what to call you. You end up on some kind of watch list for extremists!” he said.

“We shouldn’t submit to the PC Police, and to people who are trying to control us by intimidation and by IRS audits and by messing with your job,” the retired neurosurgeon said Thursday. “The only reason they can do that is because we sit silently by. That’s what they want us to do.”

In 2013, Carson shared what he believes about the supposed “war on women” at the Voters Value Summit. He said, “You know, there are those of us in this society who have told women that there’s a war on them because that cute little baby inside of them, they may want to get rid of it and there are people that are keeping you from doing that,” Carson continued. “And women say, ‘No, no, they’re not doing that to me! No!’ And they get all riled up.”

“There is no war on them, the war is on their babies, Babies that cannot defend themselves. Over the past few decades, we have destroyed 55 million of them. And we have the nerve to call other societies of the past heathen. What we need to do is re-educate the women to understand that they are the defenders of these babies.”
