Title: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.report.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 10 Jul 2023 00:47:30 GMT

Markdown Content:
# Program Chairs’ Report on Peer Review at ACL 2023 

Anna Rogers } Marzena Karpinska ~ Jordan Boyd-Graber  Naoaki Okazaki |

> }

IT University of Copenhagen ~University of Massachusetts Amherst 

> 

University of Maryland |Tokyo Institute of Technology 

arog@itu.dk mkarpinska@cs.umass.edu 

jbg@umiacs.umd.edu okazaki@c.titech.ac.jp 

Abstract 

> We present a summary of the efforts to improve conference peer review that were implemented at ACL’23.
> This includes work with the goal of improving review quality, clearer workflow and decision support
> for the area chairs, as well as our efforts to improve paper-reviewer matching for various kinds of non-
> mainstream NLP work, and improve the overall incentives for all participants of the peer review process.
> We present analysis of the factors affecting peer review, identify the most problematic issues that the authors
> complained about, and provide suggestions for the future chairs. We hope that publishing such reports
> would (a) improve transparency in decision-making, (b) help the people new to the field to understand how
> the *ACL conferences work, (c) provide useful data for the future chairs and workshop organizers, and
> also academic work on peer review, and (d) provide useful context for the final program, as a source of
> information for meta-research on the structure and trajectory of the field of NLP.

1 Introduction 

With the continued growth of our field and the rising number of conference submissions, peer review 

draws more and more attention from the community—as an application area ( Hua et al. , 2019 ; Anjum 

et al. , 2019 ; Stelmakh et al. , 2019 , inter alia), in meta-research ( Rogers and Augenstein , 2020 ; Church ,

2020 , inter alia), in initiatives to organize and release peer review data ( Kang et al. , 2018 ; Jecmen et al. ,

2022 ; Dycke et al. , 2022 , inter alia), and, of course, in the regular heated social media discussions during 

submission deadlines, review release dates, and acceptance notifications. It is unlikely that peer review 

will ever be perfect – it remains ‘the least bad system’ we have for ensuring the quality of scientific 

publications ( Smith , 2010 ). Still, with each iteration we should learn a little more about what works better 

for organizing peer review at such scale, and in a community so diverse in expertise and experience. 

As a step in that direction, ACL’23 makes its peer review report public and an official part of the 

conference proceedings, complementing the introduction and other administrative materials. The goal is 

to increase the visibility of the results of the conference process, as well as any incidental findings from 

conference organizations and the lessons learned the hard way that may be useful to the future chairs and 

workshop organizers. Such publications also provide extra incentives for the future program chairs to 

invest more effort in the analysis of their process, and they provide a useful background to the composition 

of the final program that may be useful for meta-science research (since they essentially document the 

selection process for that program). Last but not least, such publications will improve the transparency of 

the *ACL conference process, which may be useful to the researchers who are new to the field. 

We present the core statistics per track (§ 2), analysis of resubmissions (§ 3) and core demographics (§ 4), 

our efforts for improving peer review quality (§ 5), improving decision support for the chairs (§ 6), out 

analysis of various factors contributing to review scores and final decisions (§ 7), ethics review and best 

paper selection (§ 8), and our efforts towards improving incentives for the authors, reviewers and chairs 

(§ 9). We conclude with overall recommendations for future conference organizers (§ 10 ). The materials 

we developed will be available at a dedicated repository 1.

The results presented here are based on the analysis of internal data of ACL’23, as well as exit surveys 

that we sent to the chairs, authors and reviewers. We received responses from 25 senior area chairs (SACs) 

> 1https://github.com/acl-org/acl-2023-materials

xl Direct submissions ARR submissions 

Track Submitted Main Findings Submitted Main Findings 

Computational Social Science and Cultural Analytics 113 22.12 19.47 10 90.00 10.00 

Dialogue and Interactive Systems 269 24.54 15.24 19 21.05 42.11 

Discourse and Pragmatics 52 21.15 34.62 1 100.00 0.00 

Ethics and NLP 54 22.22 31.48 7 42.86 42.86 

Generation 175 25.71 20.57 6 66.67 16.67 

Information Extraction 279 25.45 16.13 33 24.24 36.36 

Information Retrieval and Text Mining 94 14.89 21.28 9 44.44 0.00 

Interpretability and Analysis of Models for NLP 189 24.34 28.04 20 35.00 55.00 

Language Grounding to Vision, Robotics, and Beyond 147 24.49 21.77 5 40.00 40.00 

Large Language Models 252 28.17 21.03 10 50.00 30.00 

Linguistic Diversity 18 27.78 22.22 1 0.00 100.00 

Linguistic Theories, Cog. Modeling & Psycholinguistics 38 23.68 23.68 8 50.00 37.50 

Machine Learning for NLP 313 21.09 23.32 37 56.76 2.70 

Machine Translation 198 25.25 18.18 7 0.00 57.14 

Multilingualism and Cross-Lingual NLP 85 20.00 30.59 12 25.00 16.67 

NLP Applications 354 22.88 19.77 25 52.00 8.00 

Phonology, Morphology, and Word Segmentation 21 28.57 19.05 0

Question Answering 197 18.78 18.78 22 45.45 18.18 

Resources and Evaluation 213 28.17 19.72 23 56.52 0.00 

Semantics: Lexical 54 25.93 25.93 3 66.67 33.33 

Semantics: Sentence-level Semantics 81 27.16 11.11 9 22.22 22.22 

Sentiment Analysis, Stylistic Analysis, Arg. Mining 107 17.76 30.84 10 30.00 0.00 

Speech and Multimodality 72 27.78 36.11 7 57.14 14.29 

Summarization 139 23.02 21.58 12 33.33 8.33 

Syntax: Tagging, Chunking, and Parsing 69 23.19 21.74 5 20.00 20.00 

Theme: Reality Check 110 26.36 30.91 1 100.00 0.00 

Total 4559 20.73 18.36 305 42.30 20.98 

Table 1: Number of submissions and acceptance rates per track for direct and ARR submissions to ACL’23. 

(35.7% response rate), 134 area chairs (ACs) (30.5% response rate), 510 reviewers (11.4% response rate), 

and 556 authors (4.07% response rate of all authors 2). 

2 Tracks and Acceptance Statistics 

ACL’23 had 26 tracks, most of which have also been offered at other recent NLP conferences. At the 

suggestion of EMNLP 2022 chairs, we kept their separation of “ Large Language Models ”3 track from 

“Machine Learning for NLP ” track. At community requests we added the following tracks: “ Linguistic 

Diversity ” and “ Multilingualism and Cross-lingual NLP ”. Each track had at least two Senior Area Chairs 

(SACs), who then recruited area chairs (ACs) for that track. The full list of senior chairs per track is 

available at the conference website. 4

Internally, in the START system there were also two special tracks: “ Ethics review ” track (which 

handled the reviews of papers that were flagged for ethical issues), and “ Conflicts of interest ” (COI) track, 

which handled the papers with which the SACs of the relevant tracks had a COI. 

ACL’23 implemented a hybrid process, in which it was possible to submit papers either directly to 

the START system (to be reviewed through ACL’23 internal peer review process to be described in this 

report), or commit it through ACL ROlling Review (ARR) with reviews already performed at ARR. Most 

submissions to ACL’23 were direct submissions (4559), and 305 more came through ACL Rolling Review 

(ARR). Table 1 shows acceptance for each type of submission and in each track. 

> 2

Assuming that in most cases at most one author per paper responded to the survey, the upper bound on the response rate for 

author feedback per paper would be 11.4% of all direct and ARR submissions that were reviewed. 37.9% of the authors who 

responded to the survey indicated that they disagreed with the outcome for their submission. 

> 3

The EMNLP original name was Language Modeling and Analysis of Language Models. . In our version it was simply Large 

Language Models , as they are the most frequent topic currently, but in retrospect the original version is preferable as it is more 

inclusive. 

> 4

https://2023.aclweb.org/committees/program/ 

xli (a) Submissions vs resubmissions (b) Prior venues of resubmissions (c) The fate of resubmitted papers 

Figure 1: Resubmissions at ACL’23 

ACL Rolling Review (ARR). Table 1 shows that in most tracks, ARR submissions had a much higher 

acceptance rate, sometimes twice higher. This is to be expected because ARR submissions self-select for 

high scores and positive reviews before committing to ACL. 

Since in the hybrid process ARR submissions and direct submissions directly compete for acceptance, a 

question arises to what extent this is a fair competition. We asked that question to our SACs. 58.3% believe 

that this process is fair enough, 12.5% - that it is unfair to the direct submissions, and 29.6%—that it is 

unfair to the ARR submissions. Of 17 SACs who believed that this situation is unfair in some way, 23.5% 

suggested that they should have separate acceptance rate, 41.2%—that they should have a separate process 

and acceptance criteria, and 47.1%—that there should be some other solution (many comments pointing 

to the confusion, the apples-to-oranges comparisons of reviews performed with different evaluation, the 

less-than-ideal import of openreview data into START (browsing attachments takes more time). Many 

expressed a preference for a non-hybrid process. 

As program chairs, our biggest challenge with ARR was that by design it provides reviews and meta-

reviews, but the acceptance decisions are then made by our SACs—who generally do not provide extra 

feedback to either direct submissions or ARR submissions (nor can they be expected to: some tracks 

had over 300 papers per 3 SACs). For direct submissions, nobody expects SAC-level feedback. But 

to ARR authors, who likely self-selected for high scores and positive reviews, to be rejected without 

explanation is more frustrating, and we received a lot of angry emails demanding extra feedback (even 

though neither we nor ARR promised that). It seems that by design, a process where there are acceptance 

quotas, and decisions are fully decoupled from feedback, will necessarily leave the majority of authors 

rejected without explanation—and hence disappointed and unsure what they could do to improve their 

work (and we agree that this would indeed be frustrating to the authors). 

The above factors could transform into a bigger problem in the future. We only had 305 ARR 

submissions, but if a majority of our submissions came with high scores and positive reviews—this just 

would not be a useful signal anymore. The acceptance odds of direct submissions would decrease (as 

compared to a process where everyone starts at the same stage of peer review). The SAC-ing would 

become harder (since selecting among high-quality papers is less easy than among papers of varying 

quality), and the authors would be disappointed because many would be rejected with high scores and no 

idea what they could do differently. 

3 Resubmissions 

Among the 4559 direct submissions to ACL’23, 754 indicated that they were resubmissions (see fig. 1a ). 

The biggest “donors” were EACL 5 (296), EMNLP (258), ICLR (103), AAAI (52), and ACL Rolling 

Review 6 (39). Although the selectivity of top-tier conferences means that the majority of papers are  

> 5Because our submission deadline was shortly before EACL and ICLR notification deadlines, we made an exception to no-
> cross-submission policy and allowed their submissions to be also submitted to ACL. After their respective notifications many
> such papers withdrew from our pool, which explains the high withdrawal rate in Figure 1c .
> 6There were 11 resubmissions from October 2022, 6 from September, and 1-3 from many other months of 2022.

xlii (a) Affiliation types distribution (b) Gender distribution 

> (c) Top 30 countries listed in the ACL author and reviewer profiles

Figure 2: Author and reviewer pool at ACL’23* 

> * All information is self-reported, not independently verified, and does not correspond to any specific definition of affiliation,
> gender, or country (e.g., some authors from Edinburgh may elect to list their country as “Scotland” rather than “UK”.)

rejected, the bulk of the ACL’23 submissions are new, which means that at this point the burden of 

re-reviewing is relatively low . It is possible that this is due to the wider acceptance of Findings as a 

publication channel, as more *ACL conferences continue to offer this option. 

Moreover, ACL’23 authors had the option to submit previous reviews as an attachment, but only 243 

submissions used this option, which suggests that most resubmitters preferred to have a completely new 

set of reviewers. ARR allows that option within ARR, but the ARR submissions themselves did not have 

a high rate of revise-and-resubmit (only 8/305), as shown in fig. 1b .

Intuitively, one could expect that resubmissions have a higher chance of acceptance, since these are the 

papers that have received feedback and had a chance to revise. But fig. 1c suggests otherwise. See more 

analysis in § 7.3 .

4 Authors and Reviewers at ACL’23 

We received a record 4864 submissions (4559 direct, 305 from ARR) from the total of 13,658 authors, 

reviewed by 4490 reviewers. This section reviews our recruitment process and the three demographic 

variables (country, affiliation type, and gender) to which we had access in the global START profiles of all 

participants of ACL peer review process. 

Reviewer recruitment. We initially sent review invitations to the reviewer list which we had received 

from the organizers of previous conferences. We also required the authors of all submissions to nominate 

at least one experienced reviewer, whom we also sent invitations. 

As we elicited reviewer data, we found that for a quarter of our reviewers 7 there is no reliable 

Semantic Scholar publication history data that can be used for paper-reviewer matching . For 

conferences that fully rely on automated paper–reviewer matching based on publication history, this factor 

obviously sets a bound on their possible performance. Often the author pages exist because Semantic 

Scholar automatically created them, but the authors did not claim them and did not clean them up, which 

> 7Out of the reviewers who filled in our sign-up forms, only 75.4% confirmed that their Semantic Scholar profile is accurate and
> can actually be used to estimate their areas of interest and expertise. In addition to that, 8.9% reviewers listed in START did
> not specify their Semantic Scholar IDs in their profiles.

xliii may result in the addition of publications by namesake authors (e.g. the automatically created profile 

for “Anna Rogers” originally had contributions from at least three researchers with that name.) This is 

particularly worrying because at this point many venues have used this information for paper-reviewer 

matching, and urged the NLP community to maintain their Semantic Scholar profiles. We also specifically 

reminded about this, but still a quarter of our sign-up pool stated that their publication history is not 

accurate. In addition to this problem, matching based on publication history has the issue with establishing 

expertise of different authors on on multi-author publications. Hence, we developed an alternative 

matching approach described in § 5.2 .

Affiliation types. Figure 2a presents the overall distribution of the affiliations of our authors and 

reviewers (as stated in START profiles). The biggest group of authors, reviewers, and chairs are academic 

faculty. The second biggest group (by absolute numbers) in all three categories is industry, which is 

relevant to the recent concerns about the influence of industry on academic NLP research ( Abdalla et al. ,

2023 ). Furthermore, students form at least 26% of reviewer pool (Ph.D. 22.7%, M.Sc. 3.3%). This was 

also our experience as area chairs at other recent conferences, and it highlights the need to continue the 

reviewer training efforts .

Gender distribution. Based on the information in softconf profile, about 20% of ACL peer review 

participants in all roles did not answer the question about their gender ( Figure 2b ). For a part of this 

population this is likely a deliberate choice, but judging by how many other fields in the START profiles 

were not accurately filled in or updated, in many cases this likely signals simply the lack of desire to fill 

in forms, especially for the new authors who had to register in START last minute in order to make a 

submission. Considering only those profiles that responded to this question, we see a heavy imbalance for 

“male”, in agreement with the reports on under-representation of women in Computer Science ( Jaccheri 

et al. , 2020 ; Pantic and Clarke-Midura , 2019 ), where a lot of NLP research is currently happening. This 

underscores the need to continue the Diversity and Inclusion efforts .

Top contributing countries. The analysis of the countries of all authors and reviewers suggests that the 

balance between reviewing and submitting papers is considerably off for many locations, and particularly 

China. 8 We believe that this is at least partly due to the fact that our recruitment efforts started with 

the pool of the previous conferences. That pool needs to be deliberately expanded by more active and 

targeted reviewer recruitment efforts among Chinese institutions .

Church (2020 ) estimates that at 20% acceptance rate the authors of published papers “owe” the 

community at least 15 reviews per each publication (3 for their own paper, and 4x3 for the papers that 

didn’t get in). While some dis-balance between the author and reviewer list is to be expected (e.g., since 

many junior authors are not yet qualified to review, and many senior authors perform other organization 

roles)—we clearly need to decrease it in order to decrease the reviewer load. Our default quota was six 

papers 9 per reviewer, in line with most recent conferences. This is a significant workload, and it can 

hardly be expected to improve the quality of reviews. Moreover, the more reviewers are in the pool, the 

smaller the trade-off between optimizing for best matches or smaller workload per reviewer. 

5 Efforts towards improving review quality 

This section describes the following steps that ACL’23 proposed and implemented within its peer review 

process to improve review quality: review tutorials (§ 5.1 ), Area-Contribution-Language paper-reviewer 

matching (§ 5.2 ), flagging of review issues by the authors (§ 5.3 ). The efforts to improve the overall 

incentives are decribed in § 9.2 and § 9.3 .

> 8In absolute numbers: 3881 authors vs 1271 reviewers for China (ratio 3.05, absolute difference 2610). For the US: 2608
> authors, 1809 reviewers (ratio 1.4, absolute difference 799. While the reviewer:author ratios are also high for India (2.6) and
> Korea (2.64), from the point of view of a conference organizer China stands out due to the sheer volume of submissions.
> 9We gave the reviewers a chance to request a lighter load at sign-up, and respected those quotas in our automated assignments,
> but there were still some over-assignments due to manual corrections of assignments by the chairs.

xliv 5.1 Reviewer training 

As part of reviewer training, we prepared the following public materials (as a revision of an earlier 

tutorial 10 , developed by Anna Rogers and Isabelle Augenstein for ARR): 

• ACL’23 Peer Review Process : the general tutorial about review process for novice reviewers, that 

covers the basic structure of *ACL peer review process, author response, and discussion period, as 

well as tips for planning the time, reporting conflicts of interest and assessing whether to ask for 

reassignment. These materials were optional for experienced reviewers, and could be used across 

different *ACL venues as is. 

• ACL’23 Peer Review Policies : the tutorial explaining our review form and responsible NLP checklist 

(§ 9.1 ), as well as our peer review policy: specific, professional reviews with scores supported by 

the text. Our list of reviewer heuristics such as “reject if not SOTA” currently contains 14 heuristics 

(continued from the original eight heuristics pioneered at EMNLP 2020 ( Cohn et al. , 2020 )). We 

asked even experienced reviewers to read this tutorial. The future chairs could reuse parts of this 

tutorial, with necessary updates to the review form description and review policies. 

Feedback. The exit survey indicates that the reviewers found the materials clear (43% respondents rated 

them as at 4 out of 4 and 40.5% - as 3 out of 4 on 4-point scale). One avenue of improvement suggested 

in many free comments was adding examples of good reviews. 

We also asked the reviewers about their preferences for alternative formats, and the self-paced text-based 

tutorial was the majority choice (62.5% vs 13% preferring video tutorials and 9.6% preferring interactive 

tutorial with quizzes). But 13.4% respondents said that they would probably never be able to spend time 

on reviewer training, no matter what format it is offered in. This suggests that reviewer training, while 

valuable, will not help in all cases, and could perhaps be interpreted as an upper bound on the effect of 

any reviewer training. 

5.2 ACL paper-reviewer matching: Area-Contribution-Language 

One of the peer review issues that authors (and chairs) often complain about is “meh” reviews: the 

reviewer does not really find any significant problems with methodology or execution of the paper, but the 

overall recommendation is middling. This could be a symptom of paper-reviewer mismatch: the reviewer 

just is not sufficiently interested in the overall topic or approach, and hence no matter how good the paper 

is, it would not elicit much enthusiasm. In a recent survey ( Thorn Jakobsen and Rogers , 2022 ) of authors, 

reviewers and ACs about their prior experience at NLP venues, many reviewers stated that “ the area 

match was right, but... the subject of the paper was not interesting to me (e.g. I would prefer another NLP 

task, model, or data) ” (54%), or the paper was not asking a research question that would be interesting 

for me ” (45%). At the same time, over 27% of the author respondents in that survey reported that they had 

experience of reviews where the reviewer was not interested in the subject of the paper. 

Most recent *ACL conferences and ARR work with some version of an automated paper-reviewer 

matching system that computes affinity scores between the abstract and title of the submission and the 

candidate reviewer, based on their publication history. Interestingly, the same survey by Thorn Jakobsen 

and Rogers (2022 ) found that both authors, reviewers, and ACs generally considered these scores to be 

the least important factor for paper-reviewer matching. Besides the limitations of the current systems, 

one factor here is probably the noise in the reviewer publication history data (only 75% of our reviewers 

indicated that their Semantic Scholar profiles were accurate enough to use for review assignments, see 

§4). Then there is also the inherent difficulty with establishing level of expertise on a particular topic in 

multi-author papers. 

A traditional alternative to affinity scores, that also addresses the issue with reviewer interest, is bidding: 

the reviewers explicitly say which papers they would be interested in. But this process is rather laborious: 

for a big track, a reviewer would need to indicate their interest for hundreds of papers. It also opens up the 

possibility of collusion rings ( Littman , 2021 ). In our experience, many reviewers do not even respond to 

bidding calls on time, which once again leads to some part of assignments being essentially random. 

> 10 https://aclrollingreview.org/reviewertutorial

xlv Match by area Match by contribution Match by language Review count Review %                                         

> 33English 8996 71.36
> n/a* n/a n/a 1052 8.35
> 73English 691 5.48
> 37English 558 4.43
> 333476 3.78
> 337345 2.74
> 733164 1.3
> 77English 142 1.13
> 77352 0.41
> 37350 0.40
> Table 2: The number of reviews matched to submission by different combinations of ACL ( Area-Contribution-
> Language) criteria. The ’n/a’ row corresponds to manual assignments by ACs, for which we do not have the match
> information.

Thus, we experimented with a new workflow that we dub ACL (Area-Contribution-Language) paper-

reviewer-matching . It is a keywords-based matching process that explicitly targets three dimensions 

of submissions: track sub-areas (topical match), contribution types (match by focus/methodology), and 

target language (for submissions not focusing on English). To the extent possible, the paper-reviewer 

matching aimed to provide matches across all these dimensions. This approach further enabled us to 

provide the ACs with explanations for the specific matches (see § 6.3 ). 

Track sub-areas. Each track at ACL 2023 had an associated set of keywords describing its potential 

sub-areas. The goal was to describe the biggest expected sub-areas, and hopefully provide the authors 

with a better idea of the kind of work that the track was inviting. The full list of our keywords is publicly 

available in our blog post. 11 Our keywords were provided by the SACs of all tracks independently, but 

the future chairs may wish to take a more top-down approach to editing this list, and to ask their SACs 

to check that the list still describes the sub-areas for which the most submissions are expected, and the 

individual keywords are sufficiently clear for the authors. 

Language(s). Due to the “default” status of English ( Bender , 2019 ), submissions targeting other 

languages may be perceived as “niche” by reviewers. Additionally, the lack of expertise in a language may 

make it harder for reviewers to spot potential issues. Hence, for papers on languages other than English, 

we endeavoured to also maximize reviewer matches along this dimension. 

Contribution types. The contribution types cross-cut tracks, and we hope they would help to decrease 

the amount of cases where the reviewer just fundamentally does not recognize a certain type of work 

(Bawden , 2019 ) and hence scores it down, or has unreasonable expectations (e.g. experimental results in a 

position paper). For example, the category of compute/data-efficiency creates a de-facto equivalent of 

efficiency track spread across all tracks. 

Our contribution types are based on COLING 2018 classification ( Bender and Derczynski , 2018 ), which 

we extended as follows: (1) NLP engineering experiment (most papers proposing methods to improve 

state-of-the-art), (2) approaches for low-compute settings, efficiency, (3) approaches for low-resource 

settings, (4) data resources, (5) data analysis (6) model analysis & interpretability, (7) reproduction studies, 

(8) position papers, (9) surveys, (10) theory, (11) publicly available software and pre-trained models. 

Implementation. To collect the information for this kind of matching, we asked the authors at submis-

sion time to specify their preferred track (up to two), the best-matching keywords in that track (multiple 

selection possible, or “other” option with free text entry), the best matching contribution type(s) and 

target language(s). Correspondingly, at reviewer recruitment stage we asked the reviewers to fill in a form 

specifying their preferences for the tracks, keywords, contribution types, and the language(s) the work 

on which they could review. The matching itself was based on Integer Linear Programming, aiming to 

maximize matches across the three keyword types (with more types of matching being more valuable than 

> 11 https://2023.aclweb.org/blog/reviewer-assignment/

xlvi e.g. more matches only by area). As a fallback, we also retrieved Semantic Scholar profile data for the 

reviewers and computed the similarity between submission abstracts to the abstracts in the publication 

history of candidate reviewers, but this factor was given the lowest priority in the assignment strategy. 

The Area-Contribution-Language matches, as well as the most similar paper of the reviewer, then also 

became the basis for the rationales for the match (see § 6.3 ). The SACs were given the opportunity to 

selectively check and adjust the matches as described in § 6.2 (although few of them did), and the ACs and 

SACs were able to see the rationales for the matches when considering the reviews. 

From the analysis of the final 12606 reviews in START, 1052 (8.3%) did not have the match information 

(due to manual reviewer reassignment by the chairs, most likely emergency reviewers). Of the remaining 

93.7% reviews made by our criteria, only 1.13% reviews with automated assignment were assigned based 

on the similarity scores from publication history, after exhausting the possible keywords-based matches in 

the reviewer pool. 82.9% reviews had at least one match by the type of area, 84.97% - by contribution 

type. Importantly for DEI efforts and development of NLP for languages other than English, we had 1167 

reviews for submissions that specified at least one target language other than English – and we were able 

to provide a reviewer matching by (at least one) language in 63.58% such reviews. 

Feedback. When asked to rate on 4-point scale how well the paper-reviewer matching worked for them, 

85.5% ACL’23 reviewers rated it positively (35.7% at 4/4, 49.8% at 3/4). When asked for the kinds of 

mismatch, if any, 28.4% pointed at the topic, 13.7% at the methods, 10.4% at the type of contribution, 

4.5% at languages, and 5.7% at other kinds of mismatch. 

We conclude that Area-Contribution-Language assignments are overall a promising direction that 

can contribute to DEI efforts in the field and diversity of its contributions (see also § 7). The matches 

could be further refined by (a) revising the area keywords 12 , and (b) more targeted reviewer recruitment 

to include speakers of various languages. One of our SACs suggested providing a glossary together 

with the list of keywords. We also recommend investing effort into a dedicated interface for checking 

reviewer assignments that would enable ACs to help with reviewer assignment checks while seeing the 

up-to-date reviewer availability information, and highlighting the possible problems with the current 

assignments (such as imperfect matches, rare types of contributions or languages that may need extra 

attention, insufficient pool for a area or a contribution that turns out to be more popular this year). 

5.3 Review issue flagging 

Even with all the above efforts, we anticipated that there would still be problematic and mismatched 

reviews. Given that the only people with the incentive to read the reviewer guidelines and enforce them 

are the authors, we developed a way for them to flag reviews for specific issues, which the ACs could be 

given specific instructions about, and be able to address more systematically. 

Unfortunately, the START system does not have an editor for the author response form or meta-review 

form. Hence we had to provide the authors and ACs with the list of possible issues, and ask them to 

specify their type and rationale in plain text form, as shown in Figure 3 . As could be expected, even with 

a template there were many format errors. We recommend that the future conferences use a form with a 

multi-selector, per each reviewer. 

The authors actively used this feature at ACL’23, flagging 12.9% of all reviews. This is reassuring: 

judging by the intensity of online discussions of peer review at each review release day, most reviews are 

bad). The frequency of various reported issues is shown in Table 3 . The biggest reported problem is the 

heuristics such as “not novel”, “not surprising”, “too simple”, and “not SOTA”. Particularly concerning 

are the rude/unprofessional reviews: even though there are only 1.69%, they have the most potential to 

impact the mental health of the authors, and we should strive for that number to be 0. 

The author-reported issues should be interpreted as a lower bound on the number of review issues, 

because of 100 papers were reviewed but withdrew before the final decisions. It is possible that they 

did because they (a) agreed with the criticism and wished to revise the paper, or (b) that they disagreed 

but did not see a chance to persuade the reviewers. Assuming the latter, and that all their reviews were 

problematic, this would raise the upper bound of problematic reviews to 15.3%. But it is unlikely that all 

> 12 In particular, our Language Grounding SACs indicated that their keywords should be revised and clarified.

xlvii Figure 3: Review issue flagging: minimal plain-text implementation in START 

withdrawn papers were of the (b) type, and the comments from ACs also suggest that many issues were 

not fully justified. 

Feedback. When asked to rate the utility of this system at ACL’23 on 4-point scale, with 4 being the 

highest score, 42.1% of the authors in our exit survey rated it at 4/4, and 40.3% - at 3/4. We interpret it as 

overwhelming support, and recommend that this feature is maintained in the future conferences. However, 

the qualitative analysis of the authors’ comments suggests that in some cases the ACs did not respond to 

the flagged issues properly, which entails the need for further training and monitoring by the SACs. 

Our follow-up analysis suggests that ACs reported addressing the author-flagged issues in at least 

30.59% submissions (judging by their using a similar template to Figure 3 in the “confidential notes to 

chairs” in the meta-review. This should be interpreted as a lower bound: since the interface was very 

clunky, it is possible that some ACs did consider the flagged issues, but did not report their actions. But, 

clearly, many issues were not properly addressed, and there is much room for improvement and further 

training of ACs. Still, given that this is the first implementation of this system, this is a promising approach 

and it should improve in the future. 

5.4 Reviewer discussion 

Similarly to most of the recent *ACL conferences, we implemented the author response period: a week 

during which the authors have the opportunity to read the reviews and send their response. The goal of 

this process is improving the quality of the reviews, and we supplemented that goal with the above new 

option for the authors to flag specific types of review issues (§ 5.3 ). The authors could (but didn’t have to) 

provide a response and flag review issues; this was done for 88.3% of reviewed submissions. In 57.3% 

review forms the reviewers indicated that they read the response (it is possible that more did read the 

response but did not fill in the form). 

Those comments were seen by the ACs, not the reviewers. The ACs had the option to initiate reviewer 

discussions for the cases where they saw significant disagreements, quality issues, or misunderstand-

ings. Each paper had an associated “forum” on START, where the reviewers could communicate in an xlviii Type of issue Number                      

> of reviews % of reviews
> A: The review is not specific enough 272 2.16
> B: Review heuristics such as “not novel”, “not surprising”, “too
> simple”, “not SOTA” 678 5.38
> C: The scores do not match the review text 448 3.55
> D: The review is rude/unprofessional 213 1.69
> E: The review does not evince expertise 542 4.3
> F: The review does not match the paper type 98 0.78
> G: The review does not match the type of contribution 152 1.21
> H: The review is missing or too short 205 1.63
> I: The review was late 12 0.1
> J: Other 162 1.29

Table 3: Review issue statistics 

anonymized fashion (as R1, R2, R3). The ACs were provided with instructions and suggested starter 

message template. 

In total, out of 4559 direct submissions to ACL, 4069 had received reviews, and for 2901 out of those 

the ACs initiated discussions. In total, ACL review process generated 8553 messages (3879 by the ACs). 

However, only 2107 discussions (72.63%) had at least one response from at least one reviewer. Somewhat 

consistently, the discussions were overall initiated by 77.4% of all ACs. We conclude that both AC and 

reviewer involvement have room for improvement. 

We reviewed one case of a strong paper that ended up being rejected. The AC could have been 

persuaded by a “champion” reviewer, and there was one such expert in the set who was surprised by the 

final outcome—but they did not engage in the forum discussion. We followed up with the reviewer, and 

they explained that since their review was already positive, they did not feel that they needed to be “on the 

case” anymore. We cannot establish how common this misconception is, but we would urge all reviewers 

to always read all reviews and author response, and when certain of the merit of a paper—to try to make 

sure that the AC is convinced. 

6 Improving decision support for the chairs 

In addition to the efforts for improving the quality of peer review (§ 5), we implemented the following 

steps for facilitating the decision support by ACs and SACs: revised SAC and AC guidelines (§ 6.1 ), 

guidance for assignment checking (§ 6.2 ), match rationales (§ 6.3 ), Soundness/Excitement scores (§ 6.4 ). 

6.1 Updated SAC and AC guidelines 

We updated the SAC/AC guidelines that we received from the program chairs of ACL’21 in following ways. 

We reformatted it to Markdown to utilize the ecosystem of GitHub (e.g., version control, asynchronous 

collaboration among PCs, automated deployment). The guides were built by Sphinx 13 with MyST 

extension 14 , which enables to use Markdown and variables (making it easy to keep the consistency of 

dates and external URLs between SAC and AC guides and for the future chairs to adapt to their timeline). 

We also adjusted the existing instructions and created new instructions to incorporate everything we 

developed, from the new reviewer guidelines to guidelines for making recommendations. We shared the 

guides before the review process so that SACs and ACs can be prepared for the tasks and workloads. 

Feedback. 83.3% SACS and 90.3% ACs rated the clarity of instructions at 3/4 or 4/4. Some of the 

free-text comments indicated a preference for shorter guidelines, but since the process is complex, and 

the guidelines need to serve both new and experienced chairs, there are limits to how much they can be 

shortened. 

> 13 https://www.sphinx-doc.org/
> 14 https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/

xlix 6.2 Support for checking assignments 

As mentioned above, the usual workflow in large conferences is that the assignments are made automati-

cally based on affinity scores between candidate reviewers’ publication history and submissions. Usually, 

the automated assignments are then shown to the ACs and SACs to check manually, but this is very 

difficult in practice: SACs cannot process such a large volume on their own, so they need to rely on ACs. 

But ACs, at least on START, do not have access to the list of possible reviewers together with their current 

number of assignments and all their COIs, which means that even if they spot an error—it is difficult 

for them to identify and recommend an available alternative. Providing the up-to-date quota and COI 

information on all reviewers in track to the ACs is not possible in the current START platform. There 

are also no detailed guidelines for this step, which means that even if ACs had the reviewer information, 

everybody would be suggesting alternatives based on different criteria. 

In our experience as SACs in previous conferences, although the automated assignments are not perfect, 

very few ACs actually report the problems or propose alternatives. To see whether this was widespread, 

we asked our SACs in the exit about whether, in their experience, the ACs asked to check the automated 

assignments usually recommend many changes. Only 9 of our respondents previously served as SACs 

in this set-up, but most of them (6/9) concurred with our experience, reporting that ACs adjust very few 

assignments. When asked why the ACs do not recommend more changes, 33.3% SACs stated that there 

are no adjustments because the ACs don’t really check, 29.9%—that it happens because the automated 

assignments are already good enough, 29.2%—because of the difficulty with sharing up-to-date reviewer 

availability information with them, and 20.8%—that there are no better candidates even if the ACs check. 

37.5% indicated that there are also other issues contributing to the ACs not recommending more changes. 

We interpret these results as pointing to the fundamental issue of systematically sharing up-to-date 

reviewer availability information together with their preferences, experience, and profile information, in a 

way that would make it easy for the ACs to perform such checks and recommend alternatives. 

Given that the above factors make it unrealistic to adjust assignments with help of ACs, and that the 

volume of assignments to check was too large for SACs, we experimented with an alternative approach: 

since we had the “explanations” for the matches and also the quantitative information about different 

types of contributions, languages and area keywords, this information would make it possible for SACs 

to identify the types of submissions most in need of extra checks, and to focus on those. This way the 

workload would remain manageable, and the SACs would be able to do that while having full access 

to the latest reviewer availability data. To assist in this process, we developed Jupyter notebooks with 

quantitative analysis per track (identifying which keywords, types of contributions and languages were 

rare and could need extra attention)—as well as reviewer lookup functionality by preferred keywords, 

languages or types of contribution (or any combination thereof). This solution was better than nothing, 

but admittedly clunky and could be much improved. 

Feedback. 66.7% of SACs stated that they believed selective checking to be overall sufficient given 

sufficiently strict reviewer pool criteria (although in our specific case not all reviewers in our pool were up 

to all SAC’s standards). 

Caveat: we encountered difficulty with uploading the final automated assignments due to dynamic 

computation of conflicts-of-interest in START. Because of that, several hundred automated assignments 

had to be redone manually at the last minute. For the conferences based on START, we strongly recommend 

that this computation is frozen after the main part of reviewers and chairs are added to the tracks. 

6.3 Paper-reviewer match rationales 

Given the information for the paper-reviewer matches that we had collected (§ 5.2 ), we were able to 

provide the ACs with a list of rationales for each match (except for those reviewers who were added 

manually by the chairs, and for whom we did not have this information.) A sample “explanation” for a 

match is shown in Figure 4a . The idea was to provide the AC with not only the general information about 

the reviewer, but also what are their interests that match this submission. Importantly, we highlighted 

the cases where the author-stated type of contribution or language was not among the reviewer’s stated 

> l(a) Example of paper-reviewer match rationales. The most similar paper titles directly link to the
> papers (based on Semantic Scholar). For contributions and languages, the rationales either show
> the match, or alert to the lack of the match, so that the AC could take that into account.
> (b) Chair feedback on which features of the match explanation they found the most useful.

Figure 4: Example explanation for paper-reviewer matches, and AC utility ratings for individual features displayed. 

interests, which would ideally provide the AC with grounds to check potential bias against certain kinds 

of work. 

Feedback. This feature received overwhelming support from the chairs: 87.5% SACs and 73.9% ACs 

rated its utility at 3 or 4 out of 4 ( Figure 4b ). Among the suggestions for the future improvement, the 

SACs suggested indicating whether the reviewer was an emergency reviewer, and how late the review 

was, as well as some elements of reviewer history (e.g. whether they were late for other conferences). The 

numerical similarity scores were less useful than the titles of the most similar papers. While predominantly 

the ACs were very positive about easily accessible links to reviwer profiles ( Figure 4b ), some ACs raised 

fair concerns about the effect of this feature on reviewer deanonymization: the reviewers are already 

visible to ACs since they need this information for chasing late reviews, but providing links to reviewer 

profiles increases the saliency of the reviewers’ identities, and hence may by itself increase bias against, 

for instance, student reviewers. 

6.4 Soundness/Excitement scores 

While most of the experimental aspects of the ACL 2023 process was focused on matching reviewers to 

papers more effectively, a larger change visible to authors and reviewers was the introduction of two new 

scores on the review form to replace the Overall Recommendation that was previously the centerpiece of 

*CL review forms. 

We asked reviewers for two scores: Soundness and Excitement .15 Our goal was that any sound paper 

would be accepted to some ACL affiliated venue (i.e., Findings), but that the “main conference” distinction 

(limited by space) would be focused on the most exciting papers. Our hope was that Soundness , as a more 

specific rubric with more objective criteria, would be less noisy than a single Overall Recommendation 

score, which would help reduce the randomness of decisions. The AC guidelines had explicit instructions 

for how these scores should map to their recommended status. 

One more factor motivating our proposal was that the Soundness/Excitement distinction could help with 

the author-reviewer communication during the author response. When a reviewer points out issues with    

> 15 See our definitions and rubrics for the review form and extra explanation here .

li Soundness , the authors generally have a fair chance to clear any misunderstandings or issues with review 

quality, and the chairs are interested in this kind of discussion. The Excitement , however, is subjective, 

and the authors do not have a fair chance to convince reviewers that their general views or research agenda 

are wrong. The Soundness/Excitement distinction helps to focus the response on the Soundness issues, 

and hence have a more productive discussion. 

Feedback. Judging by the exit surveys, this change was overall well received: over 80% of the chairs, 

reviewers and authors either expressed support or did not object to this change. 38.1% authors, 35.1% 

reviewers and 29.9% ACs indicated that while the idea was good, it could be better executed. Among 

the named issues was the clarity of communication about what these scores meant, the difference in 

granularity (our scale for Excitement had 9 points, and Soundness only 5), and the wording could be 

adjusted to remove the semblance to Overall recommendation score. We made these recommendations to 

the program chairs of EMNLP 2023, who decided to keep this system. 

From the communication with the authors who expressed dislike for this system, our impression is that 

one of the factors here is the mistaken impression that the final decisions are overall based on scores, and 

the papers with similar scores should be guaranteed the same outcome—whereas in reality the chairs 

know that scores can be noisy and miscalibrated, and hence the final decisions are made on case-by-case 

basis, with the full view of the reviews and meta-review, and also taking into account the acceptance 

quotas and their editorial priorities. 16 The Soundness/Excitement scores were rather intended to make it 

harder for the chairs to just sort by the scores. 

7 What Factors Contribute to ACL Peer Review Outcome? 

Here we present the results of statistical analysis of ACL’23 data, with the goal of explicating what factors 

contributed to the final decisions and to the quality of individual reviews. We hope that this process both 

improves the transparency around chair decision-making, and highlights the potential biases and points of 

improvement for future conferences. 

For the new authors, we should explain the general process for the acceptance decisions at ACL’23. 

First, the reviewers contribute their reviews. At the author response the authors see the reviews and have 

an opportunity to respond: a process mostly intended to clarify any misunderstandings (we disallowed 

submitting new results). Then the ACs initiate the reviewer discussion, with the goal to clarify misunder-

standings and improve the quality of the reviews. Based on the final reviews and their own expertise, they 

write the meta-reviews and make recommendations for acceptance (Main track or Findings) or rejection. 

They are not concerned with the acceptance quotas. Their recommendations and meta-reviews (as well as 

reviews and author response if necessary) are then considered by the SACs, who have the constraint of 

the target acceptance quota (which we set at about 22% for the main track and 35% for Findings). Their 

decisions are based on three main factors: meta-reviews, quotas, and editorial priorities (with case-by-case 

consideration as needed). If they run out of their quota, they may additionally rank more papers by priority 

that may be accepted to main/track Findings if there is space (e.g., because some tracks did not use their 

quota fully). The final step is that the program chairs confirm the SAC decisions, and try to fit in as many 

papers of the ranked “maybes” as possible. In our case, that resulted in accepting more Findings papers 

than we originally planned based on prior conferences. 

7.1 Review Scores: Overall Distribution 

We start by exploring the overall distribution of the new Excitement and Soundness scores (described in 

§6.4 ) and how they mapped to the three possible decision outcomes (Rejection, acceptance to the Main 

track, or Findings). Both Excitement and Soundness are ordinal variables, and we use the mean as a rough 

estimate of the central tendency. Figure 5a shows that for both scores the means are higher for main track 

than for Findings, and for Findings they are higher than for rejections. For Excitement this is fully in line 

with our instructions to the chairs. For the main track, this suggests that higher (above 3) Soundness scores       

> 16 This is a general problem, and we imagine this would have also happened in the case of an Overall recommendation score.
> The drawback of the Soundness plus Excitement system is that less noisy decision cutoffs make outliers more salient

lii 1

> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Main
> Findings
> Reject
> Soundness
> Rating
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Main
> Findings
> Reject
> Excitement
> Rating

(a) Distribution of mean scores             

> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 12345
> Soundness
> Count
> Accept −Main Accept −Findings Reject
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 12345
> Excitement
> Accept −Main Accept −Findings Reject

(b) Distribution of individual scores 

Figure 5: Soundness and Excitement scores per acceptance status 

Findings Coeff Main Coeff Findings SE Main SE 

(Intercept) -1.48 3.77 0.79 1.43 

Soundness Mean 0.71 0.76 0.22 0.37 

Excitement Mean 0.61 0.03 0.23 0.42 

AC Recommendation (L) 2.66 4.50 0.50 0.94 

AC Recommendation (Q) -1.16 -0.05 0.43 0.81 

AC Recommendation (C) -0.04 0.10 0.31 0.58 

AC Recommendation ( ^4) 0.04 -0.27 0.19 0.37 

SAC Recommendation (L) 5.84 28.26 0.47 0.71 

SAC Recommendation (Q) -1.06 13.59 0.34 0.77 

SAC Recommendation (C) 1.18 7.82 0.60 0.82 

SAC Recommendation ( ^4) 1.52 4.48 0.64 0.74 

Table 4: Coefficients and Standard Errors (SE) for the Multinomial Logistic Regression Model predicting the final 

acceptance decisions given the mean scores and AC/SAC recommendations. Each row corresponds to a predictor 

in the model, with separate coefficients reported for each level of the outcome variable (Findings and Main). The 

‘L‘, ‘Q‘, ‘C‘, and ‘ ˆ4‘ subscripts for AC_ordinal and SAC_ordinal represent linear, quadratic, cubic, and quartic 

polynomial terms, respectively, reflecting the assumed shape of the relationship between these ordinal predictors 

and the log-odds of the outcomes. 

also played a role in main vs Findings decisions, although the difference is less than between Findings 

and rejection. The overall score distribution is shown in Figure 5b .

7.2 Factors Impacting the Final Acceptance Decisions 

7.2.1 Reviewer Scores and Chair Recommendations 

To establish the odds of a paper being accepted into Findings or the Main track vs it being Rejected, based 

only on reviewer and chair recommendations, we fit a multinomial log-linear model with multinom() 

function from the NNET package in R (Venables and Ripley , 2002 ). 18 The dependent variable (DV) is 

the Outcome coded as a three-layer categorical variable (Main track, Findings, or Reject) with Reject 

being set as the reference level. The independent variables (IVs) are AC Recommendation (ordinal), SAC 

Recommendation (ordinal), mean Soundness score (interval), and mean Excitement score (interval). 19 

The analysis is performed on the papers submitted directly to the conference as the ARR submissions 

were reviewed through a different process and had different scores. The model coefficients are shown in 

Table 4 . The model is a good fit for the data with McFadden’s pseudo-R2 of 0.777 ( McFadden , 1973 ). 20 

> 17

Signif. codes: ‘ p < 0.001’ ‘***’, ‘ p < 0.01’ ‘**’, ‘ p < 0.05’ ‘*’, ‘ p < 0.1’ ‘.’, ‘ p > 0.1’ ‘ ’. 

> 18

While ordinal regression would be more fit to represent the ordinal order of the possible outcome (Main track > Findings > 

Reject) we use the multinomial model as it does not have the proportional odds assumption. 

> 19

Note both, the Excitement and Soundness are ordinal variables. Here, we employ the mean to obtain a rough estimate of the 

central tendency. 

> 20

Please note the pseudo-R2 for logistic models cannot be directly interpreted as the proportion of variance explained as in 

linear models. Nevertheless, the high value observed here signifies a good fit to the data. We also report Cox and Snell 

liii LR Chisq Df Pr( >Chisq)                   

> Soundness Mean 10.88 20.0043 **
> Excitement Mean 9.67 20.0080 **
> AC Recommendation 209.71 80.0000 ***
> SAC Recommendation 1438.12 80.0000 ***

Table 5: Type III Analysis of Deviance for Multinomial Logistic Regression in Table 4 .17 

To obtain the significance values for each IV ( Table 5 ), we use the ANOVA () function in R on the 

fitted model (Type III Anova). As expected, all four IVs are significant ( p<0.05) but at different levels. 

The SAC Recommendation ( 2(8) = 1438 .12 , p< 0.001 )21 and AC Recommendation ( 2(8) = 209 .71 ,

p< 0.001 ) significantly predict the Outcome with the SAC Recommendation appearing to be a better 

predictor (as expected, since AC recommendation are made without regards to the acceptance quotas). 

The mean Soundness score (  2(2) = 10 .88 , p= 0 .0043 ) and mean Excitement score (  2(2) = 9 .67 , p

= 0 .0080 ) are also significant at p<.05. 

To establish the exact contributions of mean Soundness and Excitement scores to acceptance decisions 

for the Main track and Findings, we can look at Table 4 again. Note that since it is a multinomial regression 

model, the coefficients indicate an increase in log odds rather than directly interpretable odds (for which 

the coefficients need to be exponentiated). The “Findings Coeff” and “Main Coeff” correspond to the 

log-odds of being accepted into the Findings and Main track as opposed to being rejected. 

Soundness. In the case of the mean Soundness score the coefficient is positive for both Findings (0.71) 

and the Main track (0.76). This means that for one unit increase in the mean Soundness score the log-odds 

of being accepted as opposed to being rejected increase by 0.71 for Findings and 0.76 for the Main track. 

By taking the exponential of these values, we see that for one unit increase in the mean Soundness score 

the odds to be accepted increase 2.03 times for Findings and 2.14 times for the Main track. 

Excitement. Similarly, both coefficients are positive for the mean Excitement score for both Findings 

(0.61) and the Main track (0.03). This means that for one unit increase in the mean Excitement score the 

log-odds of being accepted vs rejected increase by 0.61 for Findings and 0.03 for the Main track. By 

taking the exponential of these values we see that for one unit increase in the mean Excitement score the 

odds of being accepted increase 1.84 times for Findings and 1.03 times for the Main track. While the 

values are still positive, this increase is much lower 22 than for the mean Soundness scores, especially for 

the Main track. The overall distribution of these scores per acceptance status is shown in Figure 5b .

AC Recommendations. Since AC Recommendation is an ordinal variable, it is coded using polynomial 

contrast, so the L indicates linear effect, Q a quadratic effect, C a cubic effect, and so on. Here we look 

mostly at the linear effect since it has a direct (linear) effect on the outcome. We see that both coefficients 

are positive, indicating that with an increase of one unit, the log-odds of being accepted vs being rejected 

increase by 2.66 units for Findings and 4.50 units for the Main track. By taking the exponential of these 

values we see that one unit increase in AC Recommendation corresponds to a 14.30-fold increase in the 

odds of being accepted into Findings (vs being rejected) and 90.02-fold increase in the odds of being 

accepted into the Main track (vs being rejected). 

SAC Recommendations. SAC Recommendation is also an ordinal variable, hence we see the same 

types of coefficients. However, the magnitude of the SAC’s decision appears to be much greater with 

a greater effect on the final outcome. With one unit increase in SAC Recommendation the log-odds of 

being accepted vs being rejected increase by 5.84 units for Findings, and 28.26 units for the Main track.          

> pseudo-R2=0.794 ( Cox and Snell ,1989 ) and Nagelkerke pseudo-R2=0.913 ( Nagelkerke ,1991 ).
> 21  2denotes likelihood ratio chi-square statistic.
> 22 This latter finding seems counter-intuitive, given that our AC guidelines stressed that Findings is a venue for all sound work,
> while “sound& exciting” would be the basis for recommendations to the main track—but even among the papers accepted to
> the main track 39% have at least one “negative” Excitement score ( Figure 7b ). At the same time, even among the Findings
> papers, only 49% have predominantly negative Excitement ratings, so there is a preference for at least some Excitement . This
> could be related to the confusion about the meaning of the scores in the initial iteration (see subsection 6.4 ).

liv LR Chisq Df Pr( >Chisq)                                        

> Paper Type 12.47 20.0020 **
> Review Issues 43.61 20.0000 ***
> Preprinted 47.96 20.0000 ***
> Previous Submissions 4.38 20.1120
> Languages Number 0.57 20.7528
> Languages not only English 3.53 20.1711
> Contribution: Efficiency 1.18 20.5540
> Contribution: Resource 4.34 20.1139
> Contribution: Reproduction 16.59 20.0002 ***
> Contribution: Theory 7.70 20.0213 *
> Contribution: Software 19.62 20.0001 ***

Table 6: Type III Analysis of Deviance for Multinomial Logistic Regression, predicting submission Outcome (Main, 

Findings, Reject) conditioned on the variables listed in the table. 24 

Converting these values to their exponentials, we see that one unit increase in SAC Recommendation 

corresponds to a 343.78-fold increase in the odds of being accepted into the Findings (vs being rejected) 

and a massive increase of 1.88 ⇥ 10 12 for the odds of acceptance into the Main track (vs being rejected). 

The model hence shows that the SAC recommendation is a much stronger predictor than the AC 

recommendation, which helps to explain why it is possible for a paper to be rejected even with a positive 

meta-review. AC recommendations are made without regards to the acceptance quotas, and SACs 

necessarily have to override them in many cases. 

7.3 The Impact of Other Submission Properties 

There are many properties of submissions that could systematically make a difference to their final 

outcome. In this section we investigate the possible effect of the type of contribution, the target languages, 

whether the reviews were problematic (as reported by the authors), and whether the paper was available 

as a preprint. To establish the importance of these factors, we fit another multinom() model, similarly 

to what we did in Table 4 , and obtain the significance levels for each variable using Type III Anova. 

While the ordinal model would potentially better preserve the natural order of the final outcome (rejection 

being the worst and acceptance to the main track being the best outcome), the fitted model violated the 

assumptions of the ordinal model. 

Since this model does not include strong predictors such as reviewer scores and chair recommendations, 

the fit of this model is relatively poor 23 compared to the model in Table 4 , which has a McFadden’s 

pseudo-R2 of approximately 0.80 (indicating a substantial improvement over the null model). In contrast, 

this model has a McFadden’s pseudo-R2 of approximately 0.01, suggesting that it barely improves upon 

the null model. Nevertheless, this model can still be used to establish the individual contributions of the 

submission-level properties, which likely interact in complex ways in the scores and recommendations. 

Statistically significant factors are also not necessarily strong predictors by themselves. 

The results of this experiment are shown in Table 6 . According to this analysis, the following factors 

have a statistically significant impact on submission outcome: low-quality reviews, preprinting, short/long 

paper type, and three types of contributions (software, reproduction, and theory). 

To also assess the relative importance of our predictors in forecasting the final outcome, we employed a 

Random Forest algorithm ( Liaw and Wiener , 2002 ). The results are shown in Figure 6 . The most crucial 

predictor was Review Issues (i.e., author complaints about reviews 25 ) with a Mean Decrease Gini value of 

46.09. This suggests that this predictor played the most significant role in reducing the Gini impurity, and 

therefore, in improving the precision of our model. The second factor with the biggest Mean Decrease 

Gini is Preprinting (22.84). This analysis does not state the absolute importance of any factor (e.g., that       

> 23 Its 3-class accuracy is 52%, vs 90% for the model shown in Table 4 . This is the accuracy of the model on the withheld test set
> when the model is fitted with 70% of the data. The accuracy of the model on all data is about 1% higher.
> 24 Signif. codes: ‘ p< 0.001’ ‘***’, ‘ p< 0.01’ ‘**’, ‘ p< 0.05’ ‘*’, ‘ p< 0.1’ ‘.’, ‘ p> 0.1’ ‘ ’.
> 25 The number of author complaints likely reflects (at least) two factors: the reviews that were truly problematic, and simply
> negative reviews since the authors are more likely to complain about those. In the latter case the leading cause for rejection is
> the negative review.

lv Languages not only english     

> Contribution theory
> Contribution efficiency
> Contribution reproduction
> Previous Submissions
> Paper Type
> Contribution resource
> Languages number
> Contribution software
> Preprinted
> Review issues
> 010 20 30 40

Mean Decrease Gini 

> Significance
> Not Significant
> Significant

Variable Importance 

Figure 6: The importance of predictors in predicting the Outcome , ranked by mean decrease in Gini impurity. 

Predictor significance is indicated by color, with dark purple for not significant and dark green for significant 

predictors as per levels of significance indicated in Table 6 .

Contribution type % submissions Match Mismatch Match-Mismatch 

Efficiency 9.62 50.27 46.56 3.71 

NLP engineering experiment 61.5 46.66 47.33 -0.67 

Software and pre-trained models 12.14 56.75 45.56 11.19 

Data resources 19 49.25 46.37 2.88 

Data analysis 10.48 48.14 46.78 1.36 

Reproduction studies 2.08 66.25 46.51 19.74 

Approaches for low-resource settings 18.22 49.79 46.28 3.51 

Surveys 1.64 44.44 46.96 -2.52 

Interpretability 25.29 51.8 45.27 6.52 

Theory 3.8 56.85 46.53 10.32 

Position papers 2.57 53.54 46.74 6.8 

Table 7: Acceptance rate among direct submissions that were reviewed and considered for acceptance, with ( Match )

and without ( Mismatch ) given contribution types. The average acceptance rate in this pool is 46.92%. 

Preprinting increases the chances of acceptance by X%), and we are not claiming that these effects are 

independently large—but they do appear to be statistically significant. We will discuss these factors 

further: short/long papers in § 7.3.1 , contribution types in § 7.3.2 , review issues in § 7.5.5 , preprints in 

§7.5.7 .

7.3.1 Short/long papers 

Short papers have had significantly lower acceptance rates at most recent *ACL conferences. To mitigate 

that, we highlighted the problem in the reviewer instructions, had a separate Soundness formulation 

for short papers, and asked the SACs to consider the short and long papers separately, with their own 

target acceptance quotas. Despite all that, the significant effect of paper type ( Table 6 ) is obvious: the 

long papers had 23.50% acceptance rate to main track vs 16.53% for short, and for Findings, the rate 

was respectively 41.89% vs 35.58%. The core reason seems to be that the source reviewer scores are 

systematically lower, despite all calls to not expect 120% thoroughness of short papers. 

7.3.2 Types of contribution 

We were pleasantly surprised to find a significant positive effect for the contributions of theory, reproduc-

tions, and pre-trained models and software ( Table 6 ). The two latter types are in line with the findings 

by ( Magnusson et al. , 2023 ) who report that reproducibility efforts are rewarded. This effect is also 

visible from simply considering the differences in acceptance rates for papers with and without these 

contribution types, shown in Table 7 . In fact, the “average” acceptance rate of 46.92% is the closest to 

the most “mainstream” type of contribution (NLP engineering experiment, 61.5% submissions) – and all 

other contribution types except surveys have the acceptance rate at least slightly higher than that. 

lvi Submissions subset Contribution type % submissions Match Mismatch Match-Mismatch 

Resources & Evaluation Resource 5.48 48.39 48.21 0.18 

All tracks without Resources & Evaluation Resource 94.52 49.48 46.34 3.14 

Interpretability and Analysis of Models Interpretability 4.89 52.69 57.14 -4.45 

All tracks without Interpretability Interpretability 95.11 51.61 45.18 6.43 

Table 8: Acceptance rate among direct submissions inside and outside tracks that targeted a resources and inter-

pretability contributions, with ( Match ) and without ( Mismatch ) given contribution types. The average acceptance 

rate in this pool is 46.92%. 

Accepted papers only Rejected papers only All papers 

% ↵[CI ] % ↵[CI ] % ↵[CI ]

Ordinal Soundness 20.72 0.093 [0 .047 ,0.137] 17.68 0.116 [0 .076 ,0.156] 19.10 0.318 [0 .294 ,0.340] 

Excitement 12.68 0.120 [0 .075 ,0.169] 10.65 0.134 [0 .094 ,0.173] 23.23 0.311 [0 .287 ,0.334] 

Categorical Soundness 77.28 0.032 [ 0.052 ,0.112] 37.39 0.092 [0 .064 ,0.119] 53.80 0.221 [0 .194 ,0.248] 

Excitement 37.11 0.087 [0 .055 ,0.120] 49.60 0.074 [0 .039 ,0.114] 43.74 0.233 [0 .212 ,0.255] 

Table 9: Inter-reviewer agreement on soundness and excitement scores, measured as raw % agreement (%) and 

Krippendorff’s alpha ( ↵) with 95% confidence interval [CI]. 26 We consider only direct submissions to ACL’23 that 

were fully reviewed, and for which the final decisions were made: 3847 in total, 1805 “accept” (to either Main track 

of Findings), and 2042 “reject”. 

The lack of a visible disadvantage in acceptance rates for non-mainstream types of contributions is a 

very positive finding. Consider the case of efficiency-oriented papers: they did not have a dedicated track, 

but their acceptance rate was not lower (and even a bit higher) than for the average in the pool (where 

the majority of engineering-oriented submissions focuses on performance). In effect, every track was 

an efficiency track, allowing both access to the area expertise and reviewers with interest in this type of 

contribution. We cannot establish to what extent this is due to Area-Contribution-Language matching or 

an overall increased interest in the need for efficient NLP solutions. But as long as such contributions are 

in the minority, we would recommend ensuring the matches by this criterion. 

A complication for our analysis arises for two contribution types that also had large associated tracks: 

resources and interpretability. In this case, it is possible that the lack of difference in acceptance rate is 

due to the extra effort of ensuring the reviewers with matching interests through the track mechanism. 

To check for that, we compare the acceptance rates for these types of contributions inside and outside of 

the dedicated tracks ( Table 8 ). We find that in all cases the match between tracks and contribution types 

yields a 3-6% increase above the average acceptance rate of 46.92%. An interesting case is interpretability 

and model analysis, which has a 4.45% higher acceptance rate outside of its dedicated track (probably 

indicating an appreciation for papers that perform analysis in addition to some other type of contribution). 

7.4 How Much do ACL Reviewers Agree? 

The issues with consistency of peer review were recently highlighted in the ML community by the 

two NeurIPS experiments ( Price , 2014 ; Cortes and Lawrence , 2021 ; Beygelzimer et al. , 2021 ). By 

treating peer review as an annotation problem ( Rogers and Augenstein , 2020 ), we can apply the existing 

methodology for analyzing inter-annotator agreement (IAA). We consider three reviewers (annotators) per 

paper, discarding the rare cases of 4 reviews (from emergency assignments). We compute Krippendoff’s 

↵ (Krippendorff , 2011 ) on the Soundness and Excitement scores ( Table 9 ). We treat these scores as 

ordinal data. We also experiment with mapping both scores to binary “positive/negative” categories (3–5 

> “sound" for Soundness and 3.5–5 > “exciting” for Excitement , since the borderline scores were 2 for 

Soundness was 2 and 3 for Excitement ). 

> 26

“Ordinal” refers to the ↵ coefficient computed using raw scores treated as ordinal variables. The percentage agreement for 

Soundness was computed using the raw scores (5-point scale). In order to match the scale length the percentage agreement 

for Excitement was computed on the rounded scores (i.e., 3.5 was treated as 4.0, etc.). “Categorical” denotes scores converted 

into either positive or negative decisions based on the given threshold (3.0 for Soundness and 3.5 for Excitement ). 

lvii 6% 16% 27% 29% 18%           

> 5% 15% 31% 39% 6%
> 6% 18% 27% 24% 17% 7%
> 13% 49% 35%
> 4% 30% 59% 8%
> 5% 39% 44% 11%
> Excitement Soundness
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Main
> Findings
> Reject
> Ratings
> 1
> 1.5
> 2
> 2.5
> 3
> 3.5
> 4
> 4.5
> 5

(a) Ratio of review scores per acceptance status                

> 12% 39% 48%
> 13% 37% 40% 11%
> 47% 37% 13% 3%
> 11% 88%
> 5% 30% 65%
> 11% 29% 38% 22%
> Excitement Soundness
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Main
> Findings
> Reject
> Reviews
> −−−
> −−+
> + + −
> + + +

(b) Ratio of positive (+) and negative (-) score combinations per acceptance status 

(c) Total number of submissions with 

different combinations of positive (+) 

and negative (-) scores 

(d) Number of accepted submissions 

with different combinations of 

positive (+) and negative (-) scores 

Figure 7: Review scores vs acceptance outcome. “Positive” scores (+) refer to the above-borderline scores 

(Soundness >=3, Excitement >=3.5), and “negative” (-) - to the number of scores below borderline. 

Consistent with the general perception of inconsistency in peer review, ↵ shows a level of IAA that 

seems far too low (the rule of thumb is that “substantial” agreement is in the range of 0.6-0.8 ( Artstein 

and Poesio , 2008 ; Paun et al. , 2022 )). However, the raw agreement for the accepted papers (in the 

categorical view, i.e. as sound/unsound, exciting/unexciting) is almost twice higher for Soundness 

than for Excitement . We interpret this as an indication that although the scores are still noisy, it helps 

to ask more specific questions with more objective criteria. The much lower raw agreement on the 

Excitement is also in line with our point that this is overall a less relevant direction for the author response 

and reviewer discussion. Arguably we do not even want a high agreement on Excitement : everybody 

interested in the same thing could indicate that the field is ossifying and stagnating. 

As a sanity check, we also analyzed IAA for the raw reviewer scores of EMNLP 2022 and EACL 

2023. Both of these conferences used a single “overall recommendation” score, formulated differently for 

short and long papers. In EMNLP 2022, for 3092 observations for 3 reviewers (discarding R4 data), with 

scores treated as ordinal data, we got ↵ 0.316 for the short papers, 0.31 for long, and 0.318 for the whole 

distribution – which is almost exactly the same as our ↵ for both our scores (in the ordinal case). In EACL 

2023, for 1121 subjects for 3 reviewers we got ↵ 0.317 for the short papers, 0.34 for long, and 0.348 for 

the whole distribution. 

lviii A related question is “what kind of disagreements do we actually have?” Figure 7a shows the distribution 

of individual score values for all papers in a given acceptance status, which suggests that even papers 

accepted to the main conference had some very negative reviews. Figure 7b breaks down the scores into 

“positive” ( Soundness >= 3, Excitement >= 3.5) and “negative”, and considers the combinations of three 

reviews as “all positive” (+ + +), “all negative” (- - -), “2 positive, 1 negative” (+ + -) and “2 negative, 1 

positive” (- - +). We can see that despite disagreements on the exact scores, the papers accepted to the 

main track have a high ratio of “positive” review combinations for Soundness (88%, only 11% papers with 

one negative Soundness score). But for Excitement our SACs accepted to the main track 39% papers with 

one negative Excitement score, and 37% papers with a single “champion” reviewer. For Findings, they 

even accepted 37% papers which only 1 reviewer was excited about. Figure 7c shows the total number of 

submissions with various combinations of positive and negative Soundness and Excitement scores, and 

Figure 7d shows the same categories, but with the number of accepted papers with that score combination. 

Our data indicates that despite noisy scores and high disagreement, the mechanism of ACs and SACs 

does “rescue” many papers with one negative review, and at least the raw agreement does improve for the 

more specific Soundness score. Judging by the community feedback (§ 5), in this first implementation 

there was a lot of confusion about what the scores meant, and we expect that in future iterations the 

agreement could improve further. 

7.5 Analysing Reviews and Review Scores 

In this section, we take a step back from the final acceptance decisions and look only at the individual 

reviews and their scores, rather than the final outcome of the submission. 

7.5.1 Do the Area-Contribution-Language matches impact reviewer scores? 

To answer this question, Figure 8 shows the distributions of the individual reviewer scores for Soundness ,

Excitement , reviewer Confidence , and Reproducibility for all cases where the reviews were or weren’t 

matched by the area, contribution type, or language. The biggest visible impact is in reviewer Confidence ,

where the contributions are not matched by area: the ratio of reviews with high scores (4+) is decreased 

by about 14%. A worrying observation is that there is a 5% increase in high Confidence scores for the 

submissions where the reviewer is not matched by language and could be expected to feel less rather than 

more confident. We also observe an 11% increase in Soundness ratings 3+ from reviewers matched by 

language vs those mismatched, and 7% in Reproducibility .

7.5.2 Do the Area-Contribution-Language matches impact the reviewer activity? 

To establish whether Area-Contribution-Language matching had any effect on reviewer activity, we 

counted the reviewers as “active” if they had at least one forum message or more than one review edit. The 

distributions of active/inactive reviewers that are/aren’t well-matched to submissions by Area-Contribution-

Language criteria are shown in Figure 9 . At a glance, there are a lot more matched & active reviewers, but 

since generally a lot more reviewers were matched than mismatched (see Table 2 ), we would generally 

expect that to be the case even by chance. 

To establish whether there are any statistically significant effects, we first fit a generalized linear 

model (GLM) using the glm() function in R.27 The dependent variable was binary (the activity of the 

reviewer). The predictors were a contribution match (binary variable), a studied language match (three-

layer categorical variable), 28 and an area match (binary variable), all of which were treated as categorical 

variables (at least one matching keyword of the correct type). The link function was logit, corresponding 

to a binomial distribution of the response variable (logistic regression).          

> 27 To validate the assumptions of the GLM, we examined the variance inflation factors (VIFs) using the vif() function in Rto
> assess multicollinearity among predictors. The VIFs were all close to 1, suggesting that multicollinearity was not a concern.
> We also visually inspected residual plots to assess the model fit and did not find any obvious deviations from homoscedasticity
> or linearity.
> 28 For the language we consider three categories: (1) non-English language match, (2) non-English language mismatch, and (3)
> match only by English; under the assumption that all reviewers will be familiar with English.
> 29 Signif. codes: ‘ p< 0.001’ ‘***’, ‘ p< 0.01’ ‘**’, ‘ p< 0.05’ ‘*’, ‘ p< 0.1’ ‘.’, ‘ p> 0.1’ ‘ ’.

lix 3% 25% 40% 29% 3% 

> 3% 26% 42% 27% 2%
> 4% 26% 41% 27% 2%
> 3% 25% 41% 27% 3%
> 7% 33% 34% 22% 4%
> 3% 26% 44% 24% 3%
> 3% 25% 42% 28% 2%

Match area Match contribution Match language               

> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%

False 

True 

English 

False 

True 

False 

True Soundness 

> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5

(a) Soundness 

> 10% 22% 19% 22% 19%
> 12% 19% 22% 22% 16%
> 12% 21% 21% 21% 17%
> 12% 19% 22% 22% 16%
> 8% 17% 18% 16% 18% 16%
> 12% 21% 22% 21% 15%
> 12% 19% 22% 22% 17%

Match area Match contribution Match language               

> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%

False 

True 

English 

False 

True 

False 

True 

Excitement 

> 1
> 1.5
> 2
> 2.5
> 3
> 3.5
> 4
> 4.5
> 5

(b) Excitement 

> 11% 35% 45% 7%
> 5% 29% 55% 11%
> 7% 28% 53% 11%
> 6% 29% 54% 11%
> 5% 27% 53% 14%
> 6% 32% 54% 8%
> 6% 29% 54% 11%

Match area Match contribution Match language               

> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%

False 

True 

English 

False 

True 

False 

True Rev. Conf. 

> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5

(c) Reviewer confidence 

> 10% 30% 45% 13%
> 10% 30% 46% 12%
> 9% 27% 49% 13%
> 10% 31% 46% 12%
> 18% 30% 39% 11%
> 10% 31% 47% 10%
> 9% 30% 46% 13%

Match area Match contribution Match language               

> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%

False 

True 

English 

False 

True 

False 

True Reproducibility 

> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5

(d) Reproducibility 

Figure 8: Area-Contribution-Language Matches impact on reviewer scores. In each plot, True/False refers to the 

reviews where the submissions were/weren’t matched by area, contribution or language. 

The results of the GLM (see Table 10 ) suggest that contribution match is a significant predictor of the 

reviewer’s activity (   = 0 .16 , SE = 0.08 , z = 1 .97 , p = 0 .048 ). Since the estimates relate to log-odds we 

consider the exponential of the reported value (1.178) which suggests that the odds of the reviewer being 

active when the contribution type is well-matched are 1.178 times higher than when the contribution does 

not match the reviewer’s expertise. The remaining variables, that is language match and area match, are 

not significant predictors in this model ( p > 0.05 ). 30 

Finally, we considered the language match as a binary variable, excluding English language papers. We 

conduct a Chi-square test (  2) to examine the association between the language match (excluding English) 

and reviewer activity Table 11 . The test reveals no significant association between the language match 

and reviewer activity (  2(1)=0.73432, p = 0 .3915 ). The chi-square test was performed using Pearson’s 

Chi-squared test with Yates’ continuity correction with the chisq.test() function in R. 

We conclude that of the Area-Contribution-Language matching rubrics, only the contribution type 

contributes to improvement in reviewer activity. Although the effect is modest (1.178 times increase 

in likelihood of reviewer activity), given that reviewer activity post-submission is very important, and 

its level needs to be improved (§ 5.4 ), we would urge the future chairs to consider this criterion in the 

assignments. It also provides a quick and interpretable way to consider the variety of the types of work 

> 30

McFadden‘s pseudo-R2 of the model is 0.0008231973, which is very low. This suggests that our model does not explain 

much of the variability in the data. However, it is important to note that in the context of generalized linear models, the inter-

pretation of pseudo-R2 is not as straightforward as it is in ordinary least squares regression. The pseudo-R2 is not necessarily 

a measure of the proportion of variance explained by the model in the data. Instead, it is a measure of the likelihood improve-

ment per observation relative to the null model. Despite the low pseudo-R2, our model could still provide valuable insights 

into the relationships between the independent variables (match type) and the reviewer‘s activity. 

lx 239    

> 860
> 2446
> 8009
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> False True
> Area Match
> Count
> Reviewer Active FALSE TRUE

(a) Match by area    

> 217
> 626
> 2468
> 8243
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> False True
> Contribution Match
> Count
> Reviewer Active FALSE TRUE

(b) Match by contribution       

> 2409
> 7978
> 107 318 169
> 573
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> English False True
> Language Match
> Count
> Reviewer Active FALSE TRUE

(c) Match by language 

Figure 9: Area-Contribution-Language matches vs reviewer activity. In each plot, True/False refers to reviews 

where the reviewers weren’t matched to the submission by area, contribution or language 

Estimate Std. Error z value Pr( >|z|)

(Intercept) 1.1511 0.1012 11.38 0.0000 *** 

Match Contribution (True) 0.1638 0.0830 1.97 0.0484 *

Match Language (False) -0.1076 0.1142 -0.94 0.3461 

Match Language (True) 0.0114 0.0921 0.12 0.9015 

Match Area (True) -0.1151 0.0786 -1.46 0.1432 

Table 10: Generalized linear model (GLM) estimates for predicting reviewer activity using match categories. Each 

row represents a different predictor. 29 

Test Chisq df p-value 

Pearson’s Chi-squared (Yates’ correction) 0.73432 1 0.3915 

Table 11: Results of Pearson’s Chi-squared test with Yates’ continuity correction for the effect of language match 

(excluding English) on the reviewer’s activity 

that are being submitted, and to provide extra attention to the assignments for the non-mainstream kinds 

of work. 

7.5.3 Do reviewer confidence scores reflect their experience? 

START profiles contain self-reported reviewer experience labels (“never”, “first time”, “3 or fewer events”, 

“4 events and more”. We explored the relationship between this data and reviewer Confidence scores 

but found no strong effect. We do observe a small (about 4%) increase in the volume of 4+ Confidence 

scores for the most experienced reviewers, and it’s significant according to the ordinal logistic regression 

model 31 . But the effect is quite small, and judging by this data we don’t recommend relying on confidence 

as a proxy for reviewer experience. Moreover, we observe no relation between this reviewer experience 

data and the number of review issues reported by the authors. This is a rather depressing finding from the 

perspective of reviewer training, and we hope that it is rather due to START profiles not being updated by 

the reviewers. 

7.5.4 Do the reviewer scores correlate with length of the reviews? 

The ACL review form had the following text input fields: summary, reasons to accept, reasons to reject, 

questions to the authors, missing references, suggestions&typos, and confidential notes to the chairs. We 

roughly estimated the length of these inputs by splitting on the whitespace, and computed Spearmans 

correlation ( Spearman , 1987 ) between these variables and reviewer scores for Soundness , Excitement ,

> 31

We fit model in R using the polr() function from the MASS package ( Venables and Ripley , 2002 ) with reviewer’s confidence 

as an ordinal DV and experience as a three-layer categorical IV. We compare this model to an intercept-only model using 

the Anova() function. While the difference between these models is significant, McFadden’s pseudo-R2 is extremely low 

(4.247533 ⇥ 10  4). 

lxi 1           

> −0.08
> −0.11
> 0.09
> −0.02
> 0.14
> 0.03
> 0.15
> −0.03
> 0.01
> 1
> 0.68
> 0.29
> 0.28
> −0.36
> −0.01
> −0.08
> −0.04
> −0.03
> 1
> 0.26
> 0.37
> −0.35
> 0.04
> −0.08
> 0.03
> −0.03
> 1
> 0.15
> −0.11
> −0.02
> −0.01
> −0.03
> −0.04
> 1
> 0.17
> 0.12
> 0.03
> 0.14
> −0.01
> 1
> 0.06
> 0.15
> 0.14
> 0.04
> 1
> 0.14
> 0.27
> 0.04
> 1
> 0.16
> 0.05
> 1
> 0.09 1
> −1−0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
> Confidence
> Soundness
> Excitement
> Reproducibility
> Reasons to Accept
> Reasons to Reject
> Questions
> References
> Suggestions
> Confidential
> Confidence
> Soundness
> Excitement
> Reproducibility
> Reasons to Accept
> Reasons to Reject
> Questions
> References
> Suggestions
> Confidential

Figure 10: Spearmans’ correlation between reviewer scores, confidence, and the length of review text fields. The 

insignificant correlation was left blank ( p>0.05). 

Confidence , and Reproducibility . The results are shown in Figure 10 .

As could be expected, we observe a significant negative correlation (-0.35-0.36) between the length 

of Reasons to Reject and both Soundness and Excitement scores, and the opposite trend for the Reasons 

to Accept (0.28-0.37). Interestingly, the length of Reasons to Accept also correlates positively with the 

Reproducibility score, indicating that the community appreciates this factor (0.15). Confidence has a 

similar correlation with the length of missing references. Finally, there is a high correlation between the 

length of “questions to the authors” and “suggestions”, indicating that the reviewers who engage with the 

submission deeply use both of these fields. 

The highest positive correlation is between our Soundness and Excitement scores 32 (0.68), which is in 

line with the intuition that unsound work would probably not be found exciting either. 

7.5.5 What factors are associated with review issues? 

As discussed in § 5.3 , we introduced a mechanism for the authors to flag specific types of issues with 

reviews, and we received such flags for 12.9% of the reviews. Figure 11 shows the ratio of reviews with 

complaints (True) and without (False). For both Soundness and Excitement there is a clear trend towards 

more complaints with lower scores, but there are also complaints for high scores (e.g., 43.1% of reviews 

which the authors complained about had Soundness 4). This makes more sense if we consider the figure 

Figure 11d , which shows that 95% complaints are made about reviews where at least one of the scores is 3 

or less. This suggests that reported review issues are associated with negative reviews, even for Excitement 

(although we tried to make it clear that this score is subjective and does not need arguing). 

To explore other possible factors that could make the reviews more likely to be reported we fit a GLM 

model using the glm() function in R. The dependent variable is the presence or absence of reported 

issues (binary variable), and the predictors are the Excitement score (ordinal), Soundness score (ordinal), 

Confidence score (ordinal), Reproducibility score (ordinal), length of Reasons to Reject (interval), length 

of Reasons to Accept (interval), the Contribution Match (binary), Area Match (binary), Language Match 

(three-layer factor), Reviewer’s Experience (three-layer factor), and Reviewer’s Activity (binary). The link 

> 32

This finding is important for the model reported in Table 4 : the acceptance decisions are indeed based on both factors, and 

they are meant to capture different information, but the high correlation between these two variables suggests that the esti-

mates obtained in Table 4 should be interpreted with caution. 

lxii 2.9% 23% 41.2% 29.9% 2.9% 

> 5.5% 42.3% 43% 9%

FALSE 

TRUE     

> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> Review Issues

Soundness 

> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5

(a) Soundness     

> 3.8% 10.8% 18.2% 21.6% 23.5% 18.3% 2.6%
> 2.2% 7.8% 19.8% 27.7% 25.5% 12.9% 3.8%
> FALSE
> TRUE
> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> Review Issues  Excitement
> 1
> 1.5
> 2
> 2.5
> 3
> 3.5
> 4
> 4.5
> 5

(b) Excitement     

> 5.8% 29.5% 53.7% 10.5%
> 4.5% 28.8% 53.9% 11.8%
> FALSE
> TRUE
> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> Review Issues
> Confidence
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5

(c) Reviewer confidence     

> 3% 2% 24% 10% 33% 10% 16%
> 6% 5% 43% 13% 29% 3%
> FALSE
> TRUE
> 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> Review Issues  Lowest Score
> 1
> 1.5
> 2
> 2.5
> 3
> 3.5
> 4
> 4.5
> 5

(d) Min( Soundness , Excitement )

Figure 11: Reviewer scores vs the amount of issues reported with reviews. In each plot, True/False refers to the 

reviews which were or were not flagged for review issues by the authors. 

function was logit, corresponding to a binomial distribution of the response variable (logistic regression). 33 

The coefficients of the fitted model are presented in Table 12 .

We further employ the type III Anova using the ANOVA () function in R in order to obtain significance 

levels for each factor which are presented in Table 13 . While McFadden’s pseudo-R2 of the fitted model 

is only 0.067, several variables of this model are significant predictors of the review issues. 

The most significant factors are Soundness , Excitement , and the length of Reasons to Accept . All of 

these variables have a negative relationship with the reviewer issues, perhaps unsurprisingly, with higher 

scores the review is less likely to be reported. Similarly, longer text in the Reason to Accept field leads to 

less chance of the review being reported. Counter-intuitively, the positive coefficient associated with the 

reviewer being active suggests that when the reviewer is active (i.e. with at least one review revision or a 

forum message) the log-odds of the review issue increase by about 0.32, all else being equal. That is, the 

more active reviewers (putting in more effort) are actually receiving more complaints. 

Other significant factors are Language Match and the reviewer’s confidence; both associated with 

negative coefficients. This suggests that when the reviewer is familiar with the non-English language 

investigated in the study, the log-odds of a review issue decrease by approximately 0.26 (i.e., the review 

is 1.29 times less likely to be flagged for issues). Similarly, the negative coefficient of the reviewer’s 

> 33

We inspect the residuals plots and compute the variance inflation factor to assure that the assumptions of GLM are not vio-

lated. 

> 34

Signif. codes: ‘ p < 0.001’ ‘***’, ‘ p < 0.01’ ‘**’, ‘ p < 0.05’ ‘*’, ‘ p < 0.1’ ‘.’, ‘ p > 0.1’ ‘ ’. 

> 35

Signif. codes: ‘ p < 0.001’ ‘***’, ‘ p < 0.01’ ‘**’, ‘ p < 0.05’ ‘*’, ‘ p < 0.1’ ‘.’, ‘ p > 0.1’ ‘ ’. 

lxiii Estimate Std. Error z value Pr( > |z|)                                                                

> (Intercept) 0.5999 0.2570 2.334 0.0196 *
> Soundness -0.3816 0.0479 -7.967 1.63e-15 ***
> Excitement -0.4584 0.0549 -8.349 < 2e-16 ***
> Confidence -0.0855 0.0393 -2.176 0.0295 *
> Reproducibility 0.0609 0.0335 1.816 0.0693 .
> Reasons to Reject 0.0004 0.0002 1.508 0.1315
> Reasons to Accept -0.0052 0.0011 -4.748 2.06e-06 ***
> Match Contribution (True) 0.0763 0.1148 0.664 0.5066
> Match Area (True) -0.1352 0.1030 -1.313 0.1892
> Match Language (False) 0.0270 0.1476 0.183 0.8550
> Match Language (True) -0.2639 0.1275 -2.070 0.0384 *
> Experience (Experienced) -0.0744 0.0684 -1.087 0.2769
> Experience (Zero) -0.0274 0.1164 -0.235 0.8143
> Reviewer Active (True) 0.3172 0.0737 4.303 1.69e-05 ***

Table 12: Coefficients of the Generalized Linear Model predicting the review issues. The table includes the 

coefficient estimate, standard error, z-value, and p-value for each predictor. 34                                           

> LR Chisq Df Pr( >Chisq)
> Soundness 64.65 10.0000 ***
> Excitement 70.45 10.0000 ***
> Confidence 4.71 10.0300 *
> Reproducibility 3.31 10.0688 .
> Reasons to Reject 2.23 10.1353
> Reasons to Accept 24.17 10.0000 ***
> Match Contribution 0.45 10.5035
> Match Area 1.69 10.1940
> Match Language 4.61 20.0998 .
> Experience 1.24 20.5386
> Reviewer Active 19.35 10.0000 ***

Table 13: Type III Analysis of Deviance for the variables in the Generalized Linear Model predicting whether issues 

were reported for the given review. 35 

Confidence suggests that with an increased Confidence score the likelihood of the review to be reported 

decreases though by a small margin. 

7.5.6 Do we have bad actors? 

To explore the possibility that many reported review issues are due to individual unprofessional reviewers, 

let us consider the fact that 1,620 reviews with reported issues were authored by 1311 reviewers, i.e. about 

a third of our total pool. But most of these reviewers had more than three reviews, and 1060 of them were 

only reported once. Of the remaining reviewers, 201 were flagged twice, and 50 reviewers had more than 

3 complaints. We conclude that while there are indeed some unprofessional reviewers, and conferences 

need to systematically share such information and develop a system to address this problem, there are 

few such cases (6.2% if we consider all reviewers with more than 2 flags, and 1.2% with more than 3 

flags). An interesting takeaway from Figure 11c is that the reviews that are problematic according to 

the authors, do not have lower confidence scores, so these are unlikely to be the new reviewers or the 

reviewers unfamiliar with the area. 

According to folk wisdom, the bad reviewer is usually Reviewer2 (sometimes Reviewer3). We clear 

their good name: at ACL’23, the most issues were reported for Reviewer1, as shown in Figure 12 .

7.5.7 Can the reviewers tell who the authors are? 

In 567/12606 (4.5%) reviews the reviewers indicated that they have seen the paper, either by seeing a 

preprint (533) or by other means (34). Additionally, 513 (4.1%) reviewers indicated that they had a good 

guess of the author identity based on the paper content. 11460 (90.9%) ACL’23 reviews were reported as 

fully anonymous. 

The community “recall” on the preprinted submissions is as follows: we had 628 submissions (13.8% 

lxiv Figure 12: The number of review issues reported for R1, R2, and R3 

of all direct submissions) for which the authors had disclosed preprints. The reviewers identified 306 

(49%) of them. Hence, we estimate that although in our sample the number of “guesstimates” based on 

content is about the same as the number of preprinted papers, if the current 1-month embargo period was 

to be lifted, and the volume of preprints were to increase – the latter would also increase, while the volume 

of “guessed” authorship cases should stay the same (at about 4-5%). Interestingly, our reviewers reported 

another 102 submissions, for which preprints were not disclosed by the authors. We recommend that the 

future chairs investigate at earlier stages whether such cases are due to false memories of similar preprints, 

or preprint policy violations. 

7.5.8 Do preprints affect the peer review process? 

Having established that reviewers do have a high recall for preprints (§ 7.5.7 ), we investigate the possible 

connection between the reviewer’s awareness of the author identity on their Soundness , Excitement , and 

Confidence scores by fitting Cumulative Link Mixed Effect models with the Laplace approximation using 

the clmm() function for the ordinal package in R (Christensen , 2022 ). The response variable is the given 

score and the predictor is the Anonymity answer (fixed effects). We also employ random intercepts for the 

paper (SubmissionID) and reviewer (ReviewerID) to account for this variability (random effects). 36 

Soundness. The results of the model fitted for the effect of Anonymity on the Soundness scores are 

present in Table 14 . The Anonymity has five possible values: (1) the reviewer does not know the authors 

(reference level), (2) the reviewer may know the authors, (3) the reviewer knows the authors via means 

other than online posting, (4) the reviewer knows the authors via online posting prior to the anonymity 

period, and (5) the reviewer knows the authors via online posting post to the anonymity period. Estimates 

for different answers to the anonymity question presented in Table 14 suggest that the reviewers were 

1.59 times more likely to assign higher Soundness scores when they thought they may know the authors, 

and 1.75 times more likely to assign higher Soundness scores when they have seen the preprint online. 37 

Excitement. The results of the model fitted for the effect of Anonymity on Excitement are present in 

Table 15 . Estimates for different answers to the anonymity question presented in Table 15 suggest that the 

reviewers were 1.49 times more likely to assign higher Excitement scores when they thought they may 

know the authors, and 1.73 times more likely to assign higher Excitement scores when they have seen the 

preprint online. 

Confidence. The results of the model fitted for the effect of Anonymity on reviewer’s Confidence are 

present in Table 16 . Estimates for different answers to the anonymity question presented in the table 

suggest that the reviewers were 1.29 times more likely to report higher Confidence scores when they 

> 36 We validate the model fit by examining residual plots and convergence criteria. The residual plots showed no clear patterns
> or extreme outliers, and the satisfactory convergence indicates a reasonable model fit. We further observe that, perhaps
> unsurprisingly, both SubmissionID and ReviewerID account for a substantial portion of the variability in each of the response
> variables.
> 37 We take the exponential of each coefficient.

lxv Estimate Std. Error z-value Pr(>|z|)                       

> Random effects:
> SubmissionID (Intercept) 2.2427 1.4976
> ReviewerID (Intercept) 0.7806 0.8835
> Fixed effects:
> Anonymity (2) 0.46037 0.11744 3.920 8.85e-05 ***
> Anonymity (3) 0.02567 0.41291 0.062 0.9500
> Anonymity (4) 0.55947 0.13081 4.277 1.90e-05 ***
> Anonymity (5) 0.36749 0.27565 1.333 0.1820

Table 14: Cumulative Link Mixed Model Results for the effect of Anonymity on the Soundness scores. The reference 

level is Anonymity (1) (i.e., not knowing the authors).                          

> Estimate Std. Error z-value Pr(>|z|)
> Random effects:
> SubmissionID (Intercept) 1.6675 1.2913
> ReviewerID (Intercept) 0.5163 0.7185
> Fixed effects:
> Anonymity (2) 0.39828 0.10629 3.747 0.000179 ***
> Anonymity (3) 0.13179 0.37724 0.349 0.726816
> Anonymity (4) 0.54498 0.11816 4.612 3.98e-06 ***
> Anonymity (5) 0.08329 0.24708 0.337 0.736049

Table 15: Cumulative Link Mixed Model Results for the effect of Anonymity on the Excitement scores. The reference 

level is Anonymity (1) (i.e., not knowing the authors). 

thought they may know the authors, and 1.80 times more likely to assign higher Confidence scores when 

they saw the preprinted online. 

We thus conclude that submissions with preprints, as well as submissions where the reviewers believe 

they could guess the authors, systematically receive higher ratings for both Soundness and Excitement ,

as well as higher Confidence scores. We further note that preprinted papers are disproportionately 

recommended for consideration for best paper awards (and without such a recommendation from at least 

one reviewer the submissions are not considered by the best paper committee). In total, only 1.6% papers 

received any reviewer nominations at all, and for 30% of those papers, the authors had disclosed preprints. 

While our data shows the pattern of higher scores, acceptance chances, and best paper nominations 

for preprinted submissions, the causal mechanism remains a question: is it because such papers are 

inherently higher quality, or because of the benefits of community feedback they may receive, or because 

of the well-documented reviewer biases towards towards famous names and institutions ( Peters and 

Ceci , 1982 ; Tomkins et al. , 2017 , among many others)? Since these possibilities necessitate different 

actions on the part of the chairs who strive for higher-quality program, the causal question needs to be 

answered for informed policy decisions. Since we observe an increase in likelihood of higher scores 

both for real preprints and for submissions where the reviewers only thought that they might know the 

authors (although the effect is smaller in that case), we can conclude that the social factor is definitely 

present—but more research is needed to establish its exact contribution. But the fact that we only had 

13.8% preprints suggests that the current 1-month embargo policy is effective in at least reducing the 

volume of the problem. 

8 Special Review Processes 

8.1 Ethics review 

Following the practice started at NAACL 2021, we formed an Ethics Committee (EC) dedicated to ethical 

issues. The review process was based on work in prior conferences and further developed by ARR and 

recommendations from the ACL ethics committee. Initially there were 235 technical reviews flagging 218 

papers for ethics concerns, and the SACs narrowed down the list based on the guidelines developed by the 

ethics chairs ) to 75 papers, 6 of which did not make it to the ethics review (either withdrawn or cleared). 

lxvi Estimate Std. Error z-value Pr(>|z|)                       

> Random effects:
> SubmissionID (Intercept) 0.416 0.645
> ReviewerID (Intercept) 3.413 1.847
> Fixed effects:
> Anonymity (2) 0.2576 0.1227 2.099 0.0358 *
> Anonymity (3) 0.4210 0.4194 1.004 0.3155
> Anonymity (4) 0.5874 0.1342 4.376 1.21e-05 ***
> Anonymity (5) 0.3413 0.2864 1.192 0.2334

Table 16: Cumulative Link Mixed Model Results for the effect of Anonymity on the Confidence scores. The 

reference level is Anonymity (1) (i.e., not knowing the authors). 

20 papers under ethics review were labeled accept as-is, 43 received conditional accepts, and 6 were 

recommend for rejection. Of those recommended for rejection, 1 was accepted nonetheless, 1 was rejected 

as a result, and 4 were rejected on technical grounds. Of the conditionally accepted ones, 26 were rejected 

on technical grounds, and 1 was withdrawn. 16 passed the technical review and were conditionally 

accepted, meaning the ethics issues had to be addressed in the camera-ready version, to be verified by the 

SAC (based on EC guidance) prior to final acceptance. 

The authors of all conditionally accepted papers submitted the camera-ready version and a short 

response that explained how they had made the changes requested. The SAC double-checked these revised 

submissions and responses, and confirmed that the ethical concerns had been addressed. As a result, all 

conditionally accepted papers were accepted to the main conference or Findings. 

8.2 Best paper selection 

ACL’23 implemented the new ACL award policy, aiming to expand the pool of work that is recognized as 

outstanding. In total, only 73 papers, i.e. 1.6% of all direct 38 submissions were nominated by the reviewers 

or ACs for consideration for awards. These papers were assessed by the Best Paper Award Committee , and 

with their help we selected 4 best papers, 4 special awards (social impact, resource, reproduction, theme 

paper), and 39 outstanding papers. The best and outstanding papers will be announced in a dedicated 

plenary session for Best Paper Awards on July 10 2023. 

We encountered several issues with implementing the best paper policy as described in the wiki. With 

73 nominated papers, to keep it down to 10 papers per judge and have 2 reviews per paper, we had to 

recruit 15 judges. At this scale, the workload is compatible with organizing a separate track: recruitment, 

paper assignments, chasing late reviews – only this time recruiting exclusively very senior and busy 

people, and it is very important to upheld diversity considerations (which we weren’t able to do full 

justice). For the future, we recommend that a separate chair role is created for managing this process, 

similar in scope to the role of the ethics review chairs. 

Furthermore, since the diversity considerations in the committee selection entail incompatible time 

zones, we found it impractical to require the judges to meet and jointly decide on the cases where they 

disagree (as recommended in the policy). Hence, after the judges cast their votes 39 , the PCs made the final 

decisions on the basis of their recommendations (in particular, in the cases where one judge recommended 

outstanding paper and the other recommended not considering it further), we upheld the objections to 

flaws in the papers, shallowness of analysis, and ethical issues, which left us with 39 papers (a little short 

of the 1-1.5% total submissions policy target for the outstanding papers). 

Finally, the ACL award policy described an Area Chair Award: the award that the SACs of a given 

track can give to one paper in their track, fully on their own authority. This was part of the guidelines 

for the final SAC recommendations, but we did not require them to be made at the same time. We 

sent out reminders after that, but received such nominations from only 12/26 tracks (with the theme 

> 38 This is only for the direct submissions to ACL. Due to the difficulty of seeing ARR nominations in START, we did not notice
> the 2 nominations out of 305 ARR submissions until it was too late.
> 39 We found the agreement on the best paper committee votes to also be not very high: only 24/73 nominated papers received a
> unanimous vote to either consider for (any) award or not consider further.

lxvii track nomination transformed into the special Theme paper award). We recommend batching these 

recommendations with the final SAC recommendations as a single task. 

9 Improving the Incentives 

9.1 Improving Reporting Incentives for the Authors: Responsible NLP checklist 

Following the effort started by NAACL 2022 and continuted at ACL Rolling Review ( Carpuat et al. ,

2021 ), we used the Responsible NLP Checklist as a way to ensure that all submissions conform to a 

certain minimum standard of reporting on their reproducibility efforts, data collection principles, and 

consideration of broader impacts. However, at NAACL 2022 and ACL Rolling Review, these checklists 

are only used internally during peer review. 

To improve the transparency of NLP research and create a stronger incentive to invest effort in this 

work, we made the Responsible NLP Checklists an official part of all published papers. The authors filled 

out the checklist information in a special form, and we later used that form to generate pdf versions of the 

checklist, which was appended to every paper pdf for the ACL Anthology. 

This change was announced in our Call for Papers, and we additionally communicated it to the authors. 

The authors had the opportunity to update the checklist form during the preparation of the camera-ready 

version of their papers. 

One modification to the checklist was introducing a mandatory question about AI writing assistance. 

This was motivated by the introduction of OpenAI’s ChatGPT ( OpenAI , 2022 ), the precedent of AI-

assisted scientific paper writing of Meta’s Galactica ( Taylor et al. , 2022 ), and, more importantly, a massive 

wave of promotion for AI “writing assistants” shortly before our direct submission deadline. We did not 

aim to completely ban AI-assisted writing (which does have legitimate use cases such as assistance to 

non-native English speakers), but to improve transparency: just like with the other ethics-related questions 

in the checklists, our posted policy required authors to explicitly state what they did. Our question and 

policy were subsequently adopted by ACL Rolling Review. 

Magnusson et al. (2023 ) have reported that the higher rate of “yes” responses to the Reproducibility 

checklist at 4 NLP conferences. Given that our checklist includes reproducibility questions, and repro-

ducibility positively correlates with both Soundness and Excitement , we would expect the Responsible 

NLP checklist to perform the same role. The reviewers themselves were predominantly positive about it: 

66.99% rated it as “somewhat useful”, 18.13% as “very useful”, and only 14.35% — as “not useful”. 

Table 17 shows the ratios of submissions answering ‘yes’ to the questions of the checklist, and the 

acceptance rates for the submissions that answered ‘yes’ vs those that didn’t. For most questions of 

the checklist, there is a small increase in acceptance rate for submissions that answer ‘yes’. The most 

significant increases are for reporting limitations (so we recommend that the conferences keep mandating 

this section), reporting hyperparameters and computation budget (in line with the high correlation between 

reproducibility ratings and reviewer scores § 7.5 ), citing relevant work, contributing scientific artifacts 

such as models and software (in line with our finding of a significant effect for this contribution type 

discussed in § 7.3 ). 

An interesting case is the “catch question” A3 (does your abstract accurately summarize your work?). 

It drew some criticism as “meaningless bureaucracy”, since all submissions should respond “yes” to it. It 

was actually intended to see that the responders were not just clicking through the checklist. Most authors 

did respond ‘yes’, but those 2.24% that didn’t saw a -25.4 decrease in acceptance rate. We interpret this as 

suggesting that the sloppiness in filling out the checklist correlates with sloppiness elsewhere in the work. 

Finally, our new question about the use of writing assistants is the only one where the response ‘Yes’ is 

associated with a decrease in acceptance rate, although not very large. 

9.2 Improving Incentives for Reviewers: Reviewer Awards 

Arguably the biggest source of issues with peer review quality is the lack of incentives to invest more 

work in invisible service labor. One direction is reputational awards, eg via creating reviewer profiles, as 

in Publons . Another is material awards, such as monetary prizes similar to the best paper awards. Yet 

lxviii Checklist question % submissions Yes Not Yes* Yes-Not_yes                                                                                         

> A1 (limitations) 46.92 47.62 17.05 30.57
> A2 (risks) 56.23 49.28 43.88 5.4
> A3 (catch question) 97.76 47.49 22.09 25.4
> A4 (AI-assisted writing) 7.3 41.28 47.36 -6.08
> B (artifacts) 72.45 50.09 38.58 11.51
> B1 (cite) 71.02 49.96 39.46 10.5
> B2 (license) 37.8 52.48 43.54 8.94
> B3 (intended use) 45.28 49.48 44.8 4.68
> B4 (PII) 22.02 49 46.33 2.67
> B5 (documentation) 48.95 50.93 43.08 7.85
> B6 (statistics) 70.47 49.76 40.14 9.62
> C (computation) 92.31 47.76 36.82 10.94
> C1 (parameters) 78.58 48.96 39.44 9.52
> C2 (hyperparams) 85.5 48.49 37.63 10.86
> C3 (stats) 81.02 48.19 41.51 6.68
> C4 (packages) 76.01 47.16 46.15 1.01
> D (humans) 28.98 52.11 44.8 7.31
> D1 (instructions) 20.95 53.85 45.08 8.77
> D2 (payment) 21.19 53.5 45.15 8.35
> D3 (consent) 17.31 51.2 46.02 5.18
> D4 (IRB) 9.62 53.24 46.25 6.99
> D5 (demographics) 14.61 54.27 45.66 8.61

Table 17: The ratio of ‘Yes’ responses to checklist questions vs the responses other than ‘yes’ (i.e. both ‘no’ and ‘no 

response’). The average acceptance rate in this pool is 46.92%. 

another is punitive incentives, such as penalizing the late reviewers by delaying the reviews for their own 

submissions ( Hauser and Fehr , 2007 ), or even blocking them from reviewing at future conferences. 

All of these approaches are not without issues. Punitive incentives generally shift the focus to not 

getting penalized, rather than delivering high-quality reviews. Material awards may introduce the wrong 

incentives ( Squazzoni et al. , 2013 ), and, depending on the institution and the country, the prize may be 

taxed or not even make it to the recipient. Conference fee waivers also may also reward the reviewer’s 

institution rather than the reviewer, since the institutions usually bear the registration costs. While a survey 

found that reviewers generally prefer reputational awards over material ( Warne , 2016 ), their value also 

depends on whether the reviewer’s institution rewards such work. 

We proposed to the ACL exec (and received their approval for) an initiative to match the new ACL best 

paper award policy with recognizing about 1-1.5% of outstanding reviewers and chairs. This combines 

reputational and material incentives. Instead of monetary prizes, we proposed awarding vouchers for 

virtual attendance of any *ACL (ACL, NAACL, EACL, AACL, EMNLP) conference of the awardee’s 

choice, to be used within a year of the award date. Since many institutions do not support the attendance 

of conferences without accepted papers (or even with papers accepted to workshops and Findings), we 

hope that this measure will increase the overall number of conferences that the awardees can attend. 

We asked the area chairs to nominate the reviewers in their pool who provided extra helpful reviews, 

high-quality emergency reviews, “champion” reviews, reviewers who were particularly active in the 

discussion phase, or demonstrated exceptional open-mindedness or expertise. We received 51 such 

nominations. We also asked the Senior Area chairs to nominate exceptional area chairs, receiving 13 

nominations. Finally, we as the program chairs also nominated the (3) SACs of the track who were 

the most on-time, provided the most helpful feedback, and followed our instructions the most closely. 

Excluding the duplicates, this resulted in 67 total nominations. All awards will be announced on the 

conference website 40 .

Since the total number of nominations was within our target number of awards (1-1.5% of total 

reviewers and chairs), we were able to award all 66 nominations (out of 4998) without creating a selection 

committee. In the future, we recommend that an extra volunteer role is created for managing the selection 

of awardees and managing the awards. 

> 40 https://2023.aclweb.org/program/best_reviewers

lxix Caveats: despite our calls to nominate reviewers and chairs, relatively few ACs and SACs did that: only 

7/70 SACs and 28/438 ACs. We recommend that the AC/SAC guidelines are expanded with a section 

about these awards, and that ACs are asked to start keeping track of potential outstanding reviewers at the 

(a) review quality check stage, (b) discussion stage, rather than only during meta-reviews (as we did). The 

SACs could be asked to start keeping track of outstanding ACs at the (a) assignment checks, if that is the 

process used by the venue, (b) meta-reviews, (c) nominating on the basis of quantitative analysis of the 

activity in the discussion forum and the number of author-reported review issues that the AC addressed. 

9.3 Improving Incentives for Chairs: Peer Review Reports 

Our final proposal for improving the incentives for peer review work was to increase its visibility by 

placing the program chair reports and any findings from their analysis of the internal conference data as an 

official part of the proceedings for the respective conference. This report is aiming to create a precedent 

for that. In the past, there have been two options for publishing such work: standalone research papers 

that undergo their own peer review, and miscellaneous blog posts and reports published in ACL wiki. But 

the former is not appropriate for reporting on incidental findings (since most of the program chairs work 

is not executed as a research project targeting a specific research question). The latter is unfortunately too 

difficult to discover, especially for the people outside of our field or new organizers who may not know 

which blog posts and wikis to search. 

This initiative aims to improve the transparency of the overall process, and lets the younger members of 

the community have more insight into how the *ACL conferences work. Moreover, given the increasing 

attention to peer review in NLP community ( Gao et al. , 2019 ; Caragea et al. , 2019 ) and more broadly 

in ML conferences ( Price , 2014 ; Stelmakh , 2020 ; Beygelzimer et al. , 2021 ), it would be useful to make 

the incidental findings from the conferences more easily discoverable, incl. to the researchers in the ML 

community and other fields. 

The main difficulty for the program chairs and the publication chairs with implementing this proposal 

is that the full report needs to be prepared before the conference, when there is a lot of other work. To 

implement this, the set of volunteer roles would need to be expanded (see section 10 ). We also recommend 

that to the extent possible, the future chairs start documenting their workflow for the report early on 

(perhaps during the main review cycle). 

10 Recommendations 

Improving logistics. There are several sources of papers to the ACL main conference that the program 

chairs have no control over: TACL, CL, Industry Track Papers, SRW papers. This means that the PCs 

need to ingest four different sources of information with potentially little means of interacting with the 

relevant authors (in contrast to direct submissions). ARR is in a liminal space between direct submissions 

and these other papers. The timing and format of how the papers enter ACL should be standardized. 

Desk rejections. Desk reject requirements should be clearly stated in the call for papers or in the ACL 

Paper formatting guidelines. The guidelines omit rules or lack clear thresholds for rejection. For example, 

there is no minimum separation between captions and tables/figures nor between section titles and the text 

above and below. Nor are there minimum text sizes for text within tables or figures. Adding clear rules 

would make the first pass reviewing more efficient and fair. ACL also needs to communicate more clearly 

about the role of the aclpubcheck script: it’s a necessary but not sufficient check. Many authors assume 

that if they pass the aclpubcheck script, then they have followed all formatting guidelines. 

Soundness/Excitement scores. With predominantly positive feedback in the exit survey (§ 6.4 ), and 

evidence of significant improvement in raw agreement (§ 7.4 ), we believe this experiment was successful 

and should be continued. The formulation of the scores and the review form should be improved, and care 

should be taken to reduce the overall complexity of the form. 

Review issue flagging. This feature received overwhelming support from the authors, and should be 

continued and standardized (i.e., cleanly incorporated into author response form)—especially since it 

lxx is likely to improve after several iterations, when everybody is more familiar with it and the reviewer 

guidelines. More AC training is needed to address the flagged issues. 

Continued reviewer policy publications. 12.9% of all ACL’23 reviews were flagged by the authors 

for various issues, with the most frequent problem being reviewer heuristics such as “too simple” and 

“not SOTA”. It is reassuring to know that the ratio of bad reviews is already not very high, but of course 

we should strive to further decrease it. The reviewer guidelines, in combination with the review issue 

flagging mechanism, serve a double purpose: even if the reviewers do not read them, the authors will 

(since they have the incentive to call out problematic reviews), and then the area chairs also will (to 

handle the author-flagged issues). Hence, eventually, these policies will become widely known across the 

community, and enforced by it. We urge the future chairs to continue publishing their reviewer policy or 

simply re-use ours, and explicitly point to it in review, author response, and meta-review forms. 

Reviewer assignment check support. There is currently no convenient interface for the ACs to look up 

the assigned reviewers and browse the alternatives with up-to-date availability information. Its lack is a 

major hurdle for the chairs, and it may cause either delays in the process or skipping the checks. 

Reviewer match explanations. Our area chairs were very positive about this feature. For venues not 

using an interpretable assignment algorithm such as our keywords-based process, at the very least, the 

reviewer profiles and relevant papers should be provided directly with the review, without any extra search. 

Post-acceptance decision litigation. Having increased the acceptance rate for Findings, we were 

surprised to still receive a large volume of emails from the authors who, considering their scores and 

meta-review, argued that either their paper should have been accepted to the main track, or that it shouldn’t 

have been rejected. It appears that some subcommunities share their scores with each other, under the 

mistaken impression that if one paper with certain scores was accepted, others with similar scores should 

be too. We had no capacity for anything beyond checking for clerical errors. The peer review process 

is by no means perfect, and there was certainly some noise in the decisions—but it is also certain that 

many authors who disagree with their decisions would try to argue their case if given the chance. If such 

litigation is not an announced an official part of the conference process—doing so for the select few 

would not be fair to all the other authors who also disagree with their decisions. We recommend that the 

future chairs either build this into their process and dedicate time and resources to it, or pre-announce that 

decisions are final and will not be reconsidered, beyond the cases of clerical errors. 

Area-Contribution-Language matching. The results of our experiment with exactly matching the 

reviewers with submissions by these areas allowed us to establish that it is possible to ensure a fair 

acceptance rate for most “non-mainstream” contribution types, and for the 63.8% of the submissions that 

had target languages other than English, we were able to provide a reviewer competent in that language. 

These results are by no means perfect, and it is important that the future venues improve on them, perhaps 

with other methods. But Area-Contribution-Language matching could be considered a fair baseline for the 

future conferences, when considering the success rates for different types of submissions and languages. 

All that is needed from the chairs is to include in submission forms the checkboxes for different types 

of contributions, and input fields for the target languages other than English. At the very minimum, the 

chairs would then be able to analyze the acceptance rates of different types of submissions, and compare 

it with ours ( Table 7 ). One step further would be to also solicit this information from the reviewers, and 

estimate the quality of automated matches by the explicit keyword matches (see Table 2 ). 

One more practical takeaway for future work is that if we used a solution relying purely on publication 

history from Semantic Scholar—25% of our matches would have been made on unreliable information. 

For embeddings-based solutions to work better, we would first need to provide them with better data, and 

this will take a bigger Semantic Scholar cleaning campaign than what we were able to elicit. 

Reconsidering the acceptance rate for Findings. The initial iterations of Findings starting with 

EMNLP 2020 had the Findings acceptance rate at about 35%. This is the target rate we gave to our 

SACs, and then we tried to accommodate as many of their ranked preferences as we could. Although 

> lxxi

we had over 40% rate with Findings, still, in many SAC comments we saw that they were overriding 

acceptance recommendations of ACs only to meet the quotas. While the quota for the Main track will 

stay at 20-25% for venue ranking reasons, we do not see why Findings could not be further extended 

to have room for most sufficiently sound work. About 60% of our direct submissions had at least two 

positive (above-borderline) reviews for Soundness and at least one for Excitement . Assuming some noise 

in the negative reviews for Soundness , it would be only reasonable to expect that at least 45%-50% 

submissions are Findings-worthy. Of course, the track SACs would not have to accept that many (the 

ratio of high-quality papers may vary between tracks and years), but when they do not see good reasons to 

reject — they should not be constrained by the Findings quota. This step would presumably also further 

decrease the burden of re-reviewing for resubmissions. We also recommend developing a standard process 

for Findings authors to apply for presentation at topically matching workshops, and for at least virtual 

poster presentation slots at the main conference. 

Further research on the effect of preprinting on peer review. We find that the preprinted papers 

have consistently higher ratings (for both Soundness , Excitement , and reviewer confidence), get more 

recommendations for awards, and a higher acceptance rate. There are several possible underlying causes 

(from reviewer biases to higher initial paper quality and benefits of community feedback), which likely all 

contribute to this effect. Since these factors necessitate different actions if they were the major contributor 

to the observed effect, for informed policy decisions it is necessary to establish how they intermix. We 

observe however that although the present 1-month embargo policy does not solve this problem, it is 

effective at mitigating it, since we only had 13.8% such papers. 

Consistently working to improve peer review concistency. Our analysis shows that the inconsistency 

in numerical reviewer score ratings is remarkably consistent across *ACL conferences (at about ↵ 0.3 

across EMNLP’22, EACL’23, and ACL’23). Among the likely culprits are miscalibrated scales, different 

interpretations of scales, at least some reviewers not even reading the guidelines, and reviewer biases. 

That said, we do see almost twice the raw agreement for our Soundness score (that is supposed to be 

more objective) over Excitement (more subjective), when the scores are mapped to the sound/unsound vs 

exciting/unexciting categorical variables. This suggests that asking more concrete questions does help (as 

long as the reviewer form does not become too complicated), and we can continue improving peer review 

on the basis of the general NLP methodology for iterating on guidelines and measuring agreement. 

Ethics review. The innovation of the ethics review is useful and necessary, but it should be explicitly 

built into the timeline. We particularly struggled with the conditional accepts. 

Responsible NLP Checklist. With predominantly positive reviewer feedback and evidence of improved 

acceptance rates for submissions that follow the best reporting practices, we believe that this is an 

important instrument for creating the right incentives for better science. We also recommend continuing 

to make it public, to strengthen these incentives. 

AI-assisted reviews. We did not expect this happen so soon, but already at ACL’23 some chairs reached 

out to us with questions about reviews that they suspected to be at least partly generated. The reviewer 

guidelines will need to be updated with respect to that as well, including how sending papers to cloud-based 

language models may violate confidentiality. 

Review policy updates. The rise of popular commercial systems such as ChatGPT that are claimed to 

be general-purpose, made an unfortunate match with our field’s tendency to expect the popular systems in 

all papers as universal baselines. We did not consider this at ACL’23, since ChatGPT fell out of scope of 

3-month policy for considering contemporaneous work, but we did already have at least one precedent of a 

reviewer asking for a comparison with ChatGPT. We recommend that future chairs develop a clear policy 

in the reviewer guidelines about requests for comparisons with “closed” systems, to avoid numerous 

issues with evaluation methodology and benchmark data contamination ( Rogers , 2023 ). 

Expanding the set of volunteer roles. Our experience suggests that PC-ing a conference of ACL’23 

size is a job that can no longer be realistically done by 3 volunteers. Early on, we introduced a visa 

> lxxii

support team 41 to start early with issuing the letters of invitation for Canada. We also had crucial help 

from two PC assistants : Youmi Ma, an administrative assistant who handled much of the conference 

email, and Marzena Karpinska, who helped with analysis of peer review data in this report. In the future, 

we recommend that a dedicated role of a peer review chair is created, whose responsibility will be to 

supplement PC report with analysis of the data of the respective conference and comparing it with any 

records from previous conferences (so as to establish the effect of any new policies), and to coordinate the 

peer review awards selection and logistics (see § 9.2 ). The growing volume of nominations for best papers 

requires a best paper chair , handling in effect the organization of a separate track and review process. 

Finally, we could have used a lot of help in the conference schedule: ideally there would be a dedicated 

schedule chair , ideally serving at several conferences so as to reduce friction and reuse the skill set as 

much as possible, as well as incorporate feedback from several events. Given that ACL had papers from 

SRW, Industry, ARR, TACL, CL, Findings, and the Main Conference, it’s not necessarily feasible that the 

main track PCs can effectively coordinate scheduling all of these papers. 

Another option would be for each conference to have two sets of PC chairs, one remaining from the 

previous year and one new . This would lighten the workload and ensure a smoother process (since people 

do not learn how to do everything from scratch each time). The first-year PCs would do the bulk of the 

work after the paper notifications are sent, and the second-year PCs would concentrate on the review 

process, analysis and the report. The first-year PCs would observe that and have better knowledge for 

designing the review process (CFP, SAC nominations, review criteria, etc).The second-year PCs would 

observe the COI requirements. 

11 Acknowledgements 

ACL’23 was the result of an incredible effort of 70 SACs, 438 ACs, 4490 reviewers, and 13,658 authors. 

We also thank our 2 ethics chairs and their 21 reviewers, as well as 15 judges on the best paper committee. 

We thank the ARR team, and particularly Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Thamar Solorio and Mausam, for 

their help with integrating ARR submissions and analyzing them. 

We had a chance to learn from the past chairs Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov and Aline Villavicencio 

(ACL 2022), Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, Yue Zhang (EMNLP 2022), and Anna Rumshisky, Luke 

Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur (NAACL 2021). We also thank EMNLP 2022 and EACL 2023 (Isabelle 

Augenstein, Andreas Vlachos) for sharing their score distribution data for our analysis. 

Our work is built on many iterations of previous *ACL conferences, including the AC and SAC 

guidelines developed at ACL 2021, and peer review tutorials developed by Anna Rogers and Isabelle 

Augenstein for ACL Rolling Review. 

Our paper-reviewer matching relied on Semantic Scholar data, kindly provided by Kyle Lo (AI2). The 

Semantic Scholar team also provided extra support to numerous authors working to clean up their profiles. 

Emma Strubell, Ian Magnusson, and Jesse Dodge helped us to prepare publishable versions of Respon-

sible NLP checklist. 

We were only able to devote that much effort to peer review and its analysis thanks to the help of our 

brilliant assistants Youmi Ma and Marzena Karpinska. 

Richard Gerber (START) responded to numerous issues and implemented several changes at our request, 

including the possibility to include “explanations" for the paper-reviewer matching. 

We deeply thank the ACL Executive (especially Iryna Gurevych, Tim Baldwin, David Yarowsky, 

Yusuke Miyao, and Emily M. Bender) for their support of many of our crazy ideas, including the reviewer 

awards and the publication of this report. 

Last but not least, we thank our publication chairs and ACL Anthology team, in particular, Ryan 

Cotterell and Matt Post — for their infinite patience with this last-minute publication. 

> 41 https://2023.aclweb.org/blog/visa-info/

lxxiii References 

Mohamed Abdalla, Jan Philip Wahle, Terry Ruas, Aurélie Névéol, Fanny Ducel, Saif M. Mohammad, and Karën 

Fort. 2023. The Elephant in the Room: Analyzing the Presence of Big Tech in Natural Language Processing 

Research .

Omer Anjum, Hongyu Gong, Suma Bhat, Wen-Mei Hwu, and JinJun Xiong. 2019. PaRe: A Paper-Reviewer 

Matching Approach Using a Common Topic Space . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical 

Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language 

Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 518–528, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Survey article: Inter-coder agreement for computational linguistics .

Computational Linguistics , 34(4):555–596. 

Rachel Bawden. 2019. One paper, nine reviews .

Emily M. Bender. 2019. The #BenderRule: On Naming the Languages We Study and Why It Matters .

Emily M. Bender and Leon Derczynski. 2018. Paper Types .

Alina Beygelzimer, Yann Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2021. The NeurIPS 2021 

Consistency Experiment .

Cornelia Caragea, Ana Uban, and Liviu P. Dinu. 2019. The Myth of Double-Blind Review Revisited: ACL vs. 

EMNLP . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 

9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2317–2327, Hong 

Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz. 2021. Responsible NLP research 

Checklist .

Rune Haubo Bojesen Christensen. 2022. ordinal—Regression Models for Ordinal Data . R package version 

2022.11-16. 

Kenneth Ward Church. 2020. Emerging trends: Reviewing the reviewers (again) . Natural Language Engineering ,

26(2):245–257. 

Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, Yang Liu, and Bonnie Webber. 2020. Advice on Reviewing for EMNLP .

Corinna Cortes and Neil D. Lawrence. 2021. Inconsistency in Conference Peer Review: Revisiting the 2014 

NeurIPS Experiment . arXiv:2109.09774 [cs] .

D.R. Cox and E.J. Snell. 1989. Analysis of Binary Data, Second Edition . Chapman & Hall/CRC Monographs on 

Statistics & Applied Probability. Taylor & Francis. 

Nils Dycke, Ilia Kuznetsov, and Iryna Gurevych. 2022. Yes-Yes-Yes: Proactive Data Collection for ACL Rolling 

Review and Beyond .

Yang Gao, Steffen Eger, Ilia Kuznetsov, Iryna Gurevych, and Yusuke Miyao. 2019. Does My Rebuttal Matter? 

Insights from a Major NLP Conference . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter 

of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short 

Papers) , pages 1274–1290, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Marc Hauser and Ernst Fehr. 2007. An Incentive Solution to the Peer Review Problem . PLOS Biology , 5(4):e107. 

Xinyu Hua, Mitko Nikolov, Nikhil Badugu, and Lu Wang. 2019. Argument Mining for Understanding Peer Reviews .

In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 2131–2137, Minneapolis, 

Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Letizia Jaccheri, Cristina Pereira, and Swetlana Fast. 2020. Gender Issues in Computer Science: Lessons Learnt 

and Reflections for the Future . In 2020 22nd International Symposium on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for 

Scientific Computing (SYNASC) , pages 9–16. 

Steven Jecmen, Minji Yoon, Vincent Conitzer, Nihar B. Shah, and Fei Fang. 2022. A Dataset on Malicious Paper 

Bidding in Peer Review .

lxxiv Dongyeop Kang, Waleed Ammar, Bhavana Dalvi, Madeleine van Zuylen, Sebastian Kohlmeier, Eduard Hovy, 

and Roy Schwartz. 2018. A Dataset of Peer Reviews (PeerRead): Collection, Insights and NLP Applications .

In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1647–1661, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Klaus Krippendorff. 2011. Computing Krippendorff’s Alpha-Reliability .

Andy Liaw and Matthew Wiener. 2002. Classification and Regression by randomForest . R News , 2(3):18–22. 

Michael L. Littman. 2021. Collusion Rings Threaten the Integrity of Computer Science Research . Communications 

of the ACM , 64(6):43–44. 

Ian Magnusson, Noah A. Smith, and Jesse Dodge. 2023. Reproducibility in NLP: What Have We Learned from the 

Checklist? 

Daniel McFadden. 1973. Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behaviour. In P. Zarembka, editor, 

Frontiers in Econometrics , pages 105–142. Academic Press New York, New York, NY, USA. 

Nico Nagelkerke. 1991. A note on a general definition of the coefficient of determination . Biometrika , 78(3):691– 

692. 

OpenAI. 2022. Introducing ChatGPT .

Katarina Pantic and Jody Clarke-Midura. 2019. Factors That Influence Retention of Women in the Computer 

Science Major: A Systematic Literature Review . Journal of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering ,

25(2). 

Silviu Paun, Ron Artstein, and Massimo Poesio. 2022. Statistical Methods for Annotation Analysis . Springer 

International Publishing. 

Douglas P. Peters and Stephen J. Ceci. 1982. The Fate of Published Articles, Submitted Again . Behavioral and 

Brain Sciences , 5(2):199–199. 

Eric Price. 2014. The NIPS experiment .

Anna Rogers. 2023. Closed AI Models Make Bad Baselines .

Anna Rogers and Isabelle Augenstein. 2020. What Can We Do to Improve Peer Review in NLP? In Findings of 

EMNLP , pages 1256–1262, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Richard Smith. 2010. Classical Peer Review: An Empty Gun . Breast Cancer Research , 12(4):S13. 

Charles Spearman. 1987. The Proof and Measurement of Association between Two Things . The American Journal 

of Psychology , 100(3/4):441. 

Flaminio Squazzoni, Giangiacomo Bravo, and Károly Takács. 2013. Does Incentive Provision Increase the Quality 

of Peer Review? An Experimental Study . Research Policy , 42(1):287–294. 

Ivan Stelmakh. 2020. Experiments with the ICML 2020 Peer-Review Process .

Ivan Stelmakh, Nihar B. Shah, and Aarti Singh. 2019. PeerReview4All: Fair and Accurate Reviewer Assignment 

in Peer Review . In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory , pages 

828–856. PMLR. 

Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia, Andrew 

Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. 2022. Galactica: A Large Language Model for Science .

Terne Thorn Jakobsen and Anna Rogers. 2022. What Factors Should Paper-Reviewer Assignments Rely On? 

Community Perspectives on Issues and Ideals in Conference Peer-Review . In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference 

of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,

pages 4810–4823, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Andrew Tomkins, Min Zhang, and William D. Heavlin. 2017. Reviewer Bias in Single- versus Double-Blind Peer 

Review . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(48):12708–12713. 

William N. Venables and Brian D. Ripley. 2002. Modern Applied Statistics with S , fourth edition. Springer, New 

York. ISBN 0-387-95457-0. 

Verity Warne. 2016. Rewarding reviewers – Sense or Sensibility? A Wiley Study Explained . Learned Publishing ,

29(1):41–50. 

lxxv
