Title: PHAK Chapter 17

URL Source: https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/phak/19_phak_ch17.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 25 Mar 2022 19:37:27 GMT

Markdown Content:
17-1 

## Introduction 

It is important for a pilot to be aware of the mental and 

physical standards required for the type of flying performed. 

This chapter provides information on medical certification and 

on a variety of  aeromedical factors related to flight activities. 

# Aeromedical 

# Factors 

# Chapter 17 17-2 

## Obtaining a Medical Certificate 

Most pilots must have a valid  medical certificate to exercise 

the privileges of their airman certificates. Glider and free 

balloon pilots are not required to hold a medical certificate. 

Sport pilots may hold either a medical certificate or a valid 

state driver’s license. Regardless of whether a medical 

certificate or drivers license is required, 14 CFR 61.53 

requires every pilot not to act as a crewmember if they know, 

or have reason to know, of any medical condition that would 

make them unable to operate the aircraft in a safe manner. 

Acquisition of a medical certificate requires an examination 

by an  aviation medical examiner (AME), a physician 

with training in aviation medicine designated by the Civil 

Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI). There are three classes 

of medical certificates. The class of certificate needed 

depends on the type of flying the pilot plans to perform. 

A third-class medical certificate is required for a private or 

recreational pilot certificate. It is valid for 5 years for those 

individuals who have not reached the age of 40; otherwise it 

is valid for 2 years. A commercial pilot certificate requires at 

least a second-class medical certificate, which is valid for 1 

year. First-class medical certificates are required for airline 

transport pilots and are valid for one year if the airman is 40 

or younger; 40 and older it is valid for 6 months. 

The standards are more rigorous for the higher classes of 

certificates. A pilot with a higher class medical certificate 

has met the requirements for the lower classes as well. Since 

the required medical class applies only when exercising the 

privileges of the pilot certificate for which it is required, a 

first-class medical certificate would be valid for 1 year if 

exercising the privileges of a commercial certificate and 2 or 5 

years, as appropriate, for exercising the privileges of a private 

or recreational certificate. The same applies for a second-class 

medical certificate. The standards for medical certification 

are contained in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations 

(14 CFR) part 67 and the requirements for obtaining medical 

certificates can be found in 14 CFR part 61. 

Students who have physical limitations, such as impaired 

vision, loss of a limb, or hearing impairment may be issued 

a medical certificate valid for “student pilot privileges only” 

while learning to fly. Pilots with disabilities may require 

special equipment to be installed in the aircraft, such as 

hand controls for pilots with paraplegia. Some disabilities 

necessitate a limitation on the individual’s certificate; for 

example, impaired hearing would require the limitation 

“not valid for flight requiring the use of radio.” When all the 

knowledge, experience, and proficiency requirements have 

been met and a student can demonstrate the ability to operate 

the aircraft with the normal level of safety, a “statement of 

demonstrated ability” (SODA) can be issued. This waiver, 

or SODA, is valid as long as the physical impairment does 

not worsen. Contact the local Flight Standards District Office 

(FSDO) for more information on this subject. 

The FAA medical standards, 14 CFR part 67, specify fifteen 

medical conditions that are considered disqualifying by 

“history or clinical diagnosis.” Regardless of when one of 

these conditions was diagnosed and treated, an airman may 

not be issued a medical certificate except through a process 

called a “Special Issuance Authorization,” as explained 

in 14 CFR part 67, section 67.401. A special issuance is a 

discretionary issuance by the FAA Federal Air Surgeon and 

requires satisfactory completion of special testing determined 

by the FAA to demonstrate that an airman is safe to fly for 

the duration of the medical certificate issued. The specific 

disqualifying conditions include: 

• Diabetes mellitus requiring oral hypoglycemic 

medication or insulin 

• Angina pectoris 

• Coronary heart disease that has been treated or, if 

untreated, that has been symptomatic or clinically 

significant 

• Myocardial infarction 

• Cardiac valve replacement 

• Permanent cardiac pacemaker 

• Heart replacement 

• Psychosis 

• Bipolar disorder 

• Personality disorder that is severe enough to have 

repeatedly manifested itself by overt acts 

• Substance dependence (including alcohol) 

• Substance abuse 

• Epilepsy 

• Disturbance of consciousness and without satisfactory 

explanation of cause 

• Transient loss of control of nervous system function(s) 

without satisfactory explanation of cause 

However, this list includes only the mandatory disqualifying 

conditions. There are many other medical conditions that fall 

into the General Medical Condition section of the regulations 

that are considered by the FAA to be disqualifying even 

though they are not stated in the regulations. Conditions 

such as cancer, kidney stones, neurologic and neuromuscular 

conditions including Parkinson’s disease and multiple 

sclerosis, certain blood disorders, and other conditions that 17-3 

may progress over time require review by the FAA before a 

medical certificate may be issued. 

The important thing to remember is that with very few 

exceptions, all disqualifying medical conditions may 

be considered for special issuance. If you can present 

satisfactory medical documentation to the FAA that your 

condition is stable, the chances are good that you will be 

able to qualify for an Authorization. 

## Health and Physiological Factors 

## Affecting Pilot Performance 

A number of health factors and physiological effects can be 

linked to flying. Some are minor, while others are important 

enough to require special attention to ensure safety of flight. 

In some cases, physiological factors can lead to inflight 

emergencies. Some important medical factors that a pilot 

should be aware of include hypoxia, hyperventilation, 

middle ear and sinus problems, spatial disorientation, motion 

sickness, carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning, stress and 

fatigue, dehydration, and heatstroke. Other subjects include 

the effects of alcohol and drugs, anxiety, and excess nitrogen 

in the blood after scuba diving. 

Hypoxia 

Hypoxia means “reduced oxygen” or “not enough oxygen.” 

Although any tissue will die if deprived of oxygen long 

enough, the greatest concern regarding hypoxia during 

flight is lack of oxygen to the brain, since it is particularly 

vulnerable to oxygen deprivation. Any reduction in mental 

function while flying can result in life-threatening errors. 

Hypoxia can be caused by several factors, including an 

insufficient supply of oxygen, inadequate transportation of 

oxygen, or the inability of the body tissues to use oxygen. 

The forms of hypoxia are based on their causes: 

• Hypoxic hypoxia 

• Hypemic hypoxia 

• Stagnant hypoxia 

• Histotoxic hypoxia 

Hypoxic Hypoxia 

Hypoxic hypoxia is a result of insufficient oxygen available 

to the body as a whole. A blocked airway and drowning 

are obvious examples of how the lungs can be deprived of 

oxygen, but the reduction in partial pressure of oxygen at high 

altitude is an appropriate example for pilots. Although the 

percentage of oxygen in the atmosphere is constant, its partial 

pressure decreases proportionately as atmospheric pressure 

decreases. As an aircraft ascends during flight, the percentage 

of each gas in the atmosphere remains the same, but there are 

fewer molecules available at the pressure required for them 

to pass between the membranes in the respiratory system. 

This decrease in number of oxygen molecules at sufficient 

pressure can lead to hypoxic hypoxia. 

Dangers of Transporting Dry Ice 

Sublimation is a process in which a substance transitions 

from a solid to a gaseous state without passing through 

an intermediate liquid state. Dry ice sublimates into large 

quantities of CO 2 gas, which can rapidly displace oxygen-

containing air and potentially cause hypoxia via carbon 

dioxide intoxication. Case studies have shown that both illness 

and death can be caused by occupational and/or unintentional 

exposure when transporting dry ice in small, confined 

spaces such as a flightdeck or airplane. Exposure to high 

concentration of CO 2 gas may lead to increased respiration, 

tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmia, and unconsciousness. 

Exposure to concentration of CO 2 gas in excess of 10 percent 

may cause convulsions, coma, and/or death. 

The tendency of dry ice to rapidly sublimate also means that 

without proper ventilation, it can rapidly pressurize. For 

this reason, dry ice should never be placed inside a sealed 

transport container (i.e., leak-proof secondary container) 

and must be placed within an outer shipping container or 

storage container that allows adequate ventilation to release 

the CO 2 gas and avoid pressurization. Sealing dry ice within a 

leak-proof container may result in explosion of the container 

potentially leading to serious physical injury or death. 

Hypemic Hypoxia 

Hypemic hypoxia occurs when the blood is not able to take 

up and transport a sufficient amount of oxygen to the cells 

in the body. Hypemic means “not enough blood.” This type 

of hypoxia is a result of oxygen deficiency in the blood, 

rather than a lack of inhaled oxygen, and can be caused by 

a variety of factors. It may be due to reduced blood volume 

(from severe bleeding), or it may result from certain blood 

diseases, such as anemia. More often, hypemic hypoxia 

occurs because hemoglobin, the actual blood molecule that 

transports oxygen, is chemically unable to bind oxygen 

molecules. The most common form of hypemic hypoxia is 

CO poisoning. This is explained in greater detail later in this 

chapter. Hypemic hypoxia can also be caused by the loss 

of blood due to blood donation. Blood volume can require 

several weeks to return to normal following a donation. 

Although the effects of the blood loss are slight at ground 

level, there are risks when flying during this time. 

Stagnant Hypoxia 

Stagnant means “not flowing,” and stagnant hypoxia or 

ischemia results when the oxygen-rich blood in the lungs 

is not moving, for one reason or another, to the tissues that 17-4   

> Figure 17-1. Time of useful consciousness.
> Altitude Time of useful consciousness
> 45,000 feet MSL 40,000 feet MSL 35,000 feet MSL 30,000 feet MSL 28,000 feet MSL 25,000 feet MSL 22,000 feet MSL 20,000 feet MSL 9 to 15 seconds 15 to 20 seconds 30 to 60 seconds 1 to 2 minutes 2½ to 3 minutes 3 to 5 minutes 5 to 10 minutes 30 minutes or more

need it. An arm or leg “going to sleep” because the blood 

flow has accidentally been shut off is one form of stagnant 

hypoxia. This kind of hypoxia can also result from shock, 

the heart failing to pump blood effectively, or a constricted 

artery. During flight, stagnant hypoxia can occur with 

excessive acceleration of gravity (Gs). Cold temperatures 

can also reduce circulation and decrease the blood supplied 

to extremities. 

Histotoxic Hypoxia 

The inability of the cells to effectively use oxygen is defined 

as histotoxic hypoxia. “Histo” refers to tissues or cells, and 

“toxic” means poisonous. In this case, enough oxygen is being 

transported to the cells that need it, but they are unable to make 

use of it. This impairment of cellular respiration can be caused 

by alcohol and other drugs, such as narcotics and poisons. 

Research has shown that drinking one ounce of alcohol can 

equate to an additional 2,000 feet of physiological altitude. 

Symptoms of Hypoxia 

High-altitude flying can place a pilot in danger of becoming 

hypoxic. Oxygen starvation causes the brain and other vital 

organs to become impaired. The first symptoms of hypoxia 

can include euphoria and a carefree feeling. With increased 

oxygen starvation, the extremities become less responsive and 

flying becomes less coordinated. The symptoms of hypoxia 

vary with the individual, but common symptoms include: 

• Cyanosis (blue fingernails and lips) 

• Headache 

• Decreased response to stimuli and increased reaction 

time 

• Impaired judgment 

• Euphoria 

• Visual impairment 

• Drowsiness 

• Lightheaded or dizzy sensation 

• Tingling in fingers and toes 

• Numbness 

As hypoxia worsens, the field of vision begins to narrow and 

instrument interpretation can become difficult. Even with all 

these symptoms, the effects of hypoxia can cause a pilot to 

have a false sense of security and be deceived into believing 

everything is normal. 

Treatment of Hypoxia 

Treatment for hypoxia includes flying at lower altitudes and/ 

or using supplemental oxygen. All pilots are susceptible 

to the effects of oxygen starvation, regardless of physical 

endurance or acclimatization. When flying at high altitudes, 

it is paramount that oxygen be used to avoid the effects of 

hypoxia. The term “time of useful consciousness” describes 

the maximum time the pilot has to make rational, life-saving 

decisions and carry them out at a given altitude without 

supplemental oxygen. As altitude increases above 10,000 

feet, the symptoms of hypoxia increase in severity, and the 

time of useful consciousness rapidly decreases.  [Figure 17-1] 

Since symptoms of hypoxia can be different for each 

individual, the ability to recognize hypoxia can be greatly 

improved by experiencing and witnessing the effects of it 

during an altitude chamber “flight.” The Federal Aviation 

Administration (FAA) provides this opportunity through 

aviation physiology training, which is conducted at the FAA 

CAMI in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and at many military 

facilities across the United States. For information about the 

FAA’s one-day physiological training course with altitude 

chamber and vertigo demonstrations, visit the FAA website 

at www.faa.gov. 

Hyperventilation 

Hyperventilation is the excessive rate and depth of respiration 

leading to abnormal loss of carbon dioxide from the blood. 

This condition occurs more often among pilots than is 

generally recognized. It seldom incapacitates completely, but 

it causes disturbing symptoms that can alarm the uninformed 

pilot. In such cases, increased breathing rate and anxiety 

further aggravate the problem. Hyperventilation can lead to 

unconsciousness due to the respiratory system’s overriding 

mechanism to regain control of breathing. 

Pilots encountering an unexpected stressful situation may 

subconsciously increase their breathing rate. If flying at 

higher altitudes, either with or without oxygen, a pilot may 

have a tendency to breathe more rapidly than normal, which 

often leads to hyperventilation. 

Since many of the symptoms of hyperventilation are similar 

to those of hypoxia, it is important to correctly diagnose and 

treat the proper condition. If using supplemental oxygen, 

check the equipment and flow rate to ensure the symptoms are 17-5  

> Figure 17-2. The Eustachian tube allows air pressure to equalize
> in the middle ear.
> Opening to throat Middle ear Outer ear Auditory canal Eustachian tube Eardrum

not hypoxia related. Common symptoms of hyperventilation 

include: 

• Visual impairment 

• Unconsciousness 

• Lightheaded or dizzy sensation 

• Tingling sensations 

• Hot and cold sensations 

• Muscle spasms 

The treatment for hyperventilation involves restoring 

the proper carbon dioxide level in the body. Breathing 

normally is both the best prevention and the best cure 

for hyperventilation. In addition to slowing the breathing 

rate, breathing into a paper bag or talking aloud helps to 

overcome hyperventilation. Recovery is usually rapid once 

the breathing rate is returned to normal. 

Middle Ear and  Sinus Problems 

During climbs and descents, the free gas formerly present in 

various body cavities expands due to a difference between 

the pressure of the air outside the body and that of the air 

inside the body. If the escape of the expanded gas is impeded, 

pressure builds up within the cavity and pain is experienced. 

Trapped gas expansion accounts for ear pain and sinus pain, 

as well as a temporary reduction in the ability to hear. 

The middle ear is a small cavity located in the bone of the 

skull. It is closed off from the external ear canal by the 

eardrum. Normally, pressure differences between the middle 

ear and the outside world are equalized by a tube leading 

from inside each ear to the back of the throat on each side 

called the Eustachian tube. These tubes are usually closed but 

open during chewing, yawning, or swallowing to equalize 

pressure. Even a slight difference between external pressure 

and middle ear pressure can cause discomfort.  [Figure 17-2] 

During a climb, middle ear air pressure may exceed the 

pressure of the air in the external ear canal causing the 

eardrum to bulge outward. Pilots become aware of this 

pressure change when they experience alternate sensations 

of “fullness” and “clearing.” During descent, the reverse 

happens. While the pressure of the air in the external ear 

canal increases, the middle ear cavity, which equalized with 

the lower pressure at altitude, is at lower pressure than the 

external ear canal. This results in the higher outside pressure 

causing the eardrum to bulge inward. 

This condition can be more difficult to relieve due to the 

fact that the partial vacuum tends to constrict the walls of 

the Eustachian tube. To remedy this often painful condition, 

which also causes a temporary reduction in hearing 

sensitivity, pinch the nostrils shut, close the mouth and lips, 

and blow slowly and gently into the mouth and nose. 

This procedure forces air through the Eustachian tube into the 

middle ear. It may not be possible to equalize the pressure in 

the ears if a pilot has a cold, an ear infection, or sore throat. 

A flight in this condition can be extremely painful, as well as 

damaging to the eardrums. If experiencing minor congestion, 

nose drops or nasal sprays may reduce the risk of a painful 

ear blockage. Before using any medication, check with an 

AME to ensure that it will not affect the ability to fly. 

In a similar way, air pressure in the sinuses equalizes with 

the pressure in the flight deck through small openings 

that connect the sinuses to the nasal passages. An upper 

respiratory infection, such as a cold or sinusitis, or a nasal 

allergic condition can produce enough congestion around an 

opening to slow equalization. As the difference in pressure 

between the sinuses and the flight deck increases, congestion 

may plug the opening. This “sinus block” occurs most 

frequently during descent. Slow descent rates can reduce the 

associated pain. A sinus block can occur in the frontal sinuses, 

located above each eyebrow, or in the maxillary sinuses, 

located in each upper cheek. It usually produces excruciating 

pain over the sinus area. A maxillary sinus block can also 

make the upper teeth ache. Bloody mucus may discharge 

from the nasal passages. 

Sinus block can be avoided by not flying with an upper 

respiratory infection or nasal allergic condition. Adequate 

protection is usually not provided by decongestant sprays 

or drops to reduce congestion around the sinus openings. 

Oral decongestants have side effects that can impair pilot 

performance. If a sinus block does not clear shortly after 

landing, a physician should be consulted. 17-6   

> Figure 17-3. The semicircular canals lie in three planes and sense motions of roll, pitch, and yaw.
> YAW ROLL YAW PITCH PITCH ROLL
> The semicircular tubes are arranged at approximately, right angles to each other in the roll, pitch, and yaw axes. Vestibular nerve Endolymph fluid Ampulla of semicircular canal Hair cells Cupola Semicircular canals Otolith organ

Spatial Disorientation and  Illusions 

Spatial disorientation specifically refers to the lack of 

orientation with regard to the position, attitude, or movement 

of the airplane in space. The body uses three integrated 

systems that work together to ascertain orientation and 

movement in space. 

• Vestibular system—organs found in the inner ear that 

sense position by the way we are balanced 

• Somatosensory system—nerves in the skin, muscles, 

and joints that, along with hearing, sense position 

based on gravity, feeling, and sound 

• Visual system—eyes, which sense position based on 

what is seen 

All this information comes together in the brain and, most 

of the time, the three streams of information agree, giving 

a clear idea of where and how the body is moving. Flying 

can sometimes cause these systems to supply conflicting 

information to the brain, which can lead to disorientation. 

During flight in visual meteorological conditions (VMC), 

the eyes are the major orientation source and usually prevail 

over false sensations from other sensory systems. When 

these visual cues are removed, as they are in instrument 

meteorological conditions (IMC), false sensations can cause 

a pilot to quickly become disoriented. 

The  vestibular system in the inner ear allows the pilot to 

sense movement and determine orientation in the surrounding 

environment. In both the left and right inner ear, three 

semicircular canals are positioned at approximate right angles 

to each other.  [Figure 17-3]  Each canal is filled with fluid 

and has a section full of fine hairs. Acceleration of the inner 

ear in any direction causes the tiny hairs to deflect, which 

in turn stimulates nerve impulses, sending messages to the 

brain. The vestibular nerve transmits the impulses from 

the utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals to the brain to 

interpret motion. 

The somatosensory system sends signals from the skin, joints, 

and muscles to the brain that are interpreted in relation to the 

Earth’s gravitational pull. These signals determine posture. 

Inputs from each movement update the body’s position to the 

brain on a constant basis. “Seat of the pants” flying is largely 

dependent upon these signals. Used in conjunction with visual 

and vestibular clues, these sensations can be fairly reliable. 

However, the body cannot distinguish between acceleration 

forces due to gravity and those resulting from maneuvering 

the aircraft, which can lead to sensory illusions and false 

impressions of an aircraft’s orientation and movement. 

Under normal flight conditions, when there is a visual 

reference to the horizon and ground, the sensory system in the 

inner ear helps to identify the pitch, roll, and yaw movements 

of the aircraft. When visual contact with the horizon is lost, 

the vestibular system becomes unreliable. Without visual 

references outside the aircraft, there are many situations in 

which combinations of normal motions and forces create 

convincing illusions that are difficult to overcome. 

Prevention is usually the best remedy for spatial disorientation. 

Unless a pilot has many hours of training in instrument flight, 

flight should be avoided in reduced visibility or at night when 

the horizon is not visible. A pilot can reduce susceptibility 

to disorienting illusions through training and awareness and 

learning to rely totally on flight instruments. 17-7   

> Figure 17-4. Human sensation of angular acceleration.
> No turning No sensation. Start of turn Sensation of turning as moving fluid deflects hairs. Constant rate turn No sensation after fluid accelerates to same speed as tube wall. Turn stopped Sensation of turning in opposite direction as moving fluid deflects hairs in opposite direction.
> Endolymph Cupola Tube
> Figure 17-5. Graveyard spiral.
> Graveyard spin Graveyard spiral

Vestibular Illusions 

The Leans 

A condition called the leans, is the most common illusion 

during flight and is caused by a sudden return to level flight 

following a gradual and prolonged turn that went unnoticed by 

the pilot. The reason a pilot can be unaware of such a gradual 

turn is that human exposure to a rotational acceleration of 2 

degrees per second or lower is below the detection threshold 

of the semicircular canals.  [Figure 17-4]  Leveling the wings 

after such a turn may cause an illusion that the aircraft is 

banking in the opposite direction. In response to such an 

illusion, a pilot may lean in the direction of the original turn 

in a corrective attempt to regain the perception of a correct 

vertical posture. 

Coriolis Illusion 

The “coriolis illusion” occurs when a pilot has been in a turn 

long enough for the fluid in the ear canal to move at the same 

speed as the canal. A movement of the head in a different 

plane, such as looking at something in a different part of the 

flight deck, may set the fluid moving, creating the illusion 

of turning or accelerating on an entirely different axis. This 

action causes the pilot to think the aircraft is performing a 

maneuver it is not. The disoriented pilot may maneuver the 

aircraft into a dangerous attitude in an attempt to correct the 

aircraft’s perceived attitude. 

For this reason, it is important that pilots develop an 

instrument cross-check or scan that involves minimal head 

movement. Take care when retrieving charts and other objects 

in the flight deck—if something is dropped, retrieve it with 

minimal head movement and be alert for the coriolis illusion. 

Graveyard Spiral 

As in other illusions, a pilot in a prolonged coordinated, 

constant-rate turn may experience the illusion of not 

turning. During the recovery to level flight, the pilot will 

then experience the sensation of turning in the opposite 

direction causing the disoriented pilot to return the aircraft 

to its original turn. Because an aircraft tends to lose altitude 

in turns unless the pilot compensates for the loss in lift, 

the pilot may notice a loss of altitude. The absence of any 

sensation of turning creates the illusion of being in a level 

descent. The pilot may pull back on the controls in an attempt 

to climb or stop the descent. This action tightens the spiral 

and increases the loss of altitude; this illusion is referred to 

as a “graveyard spiral.”  [Figure 17-5]  This may lead to a 

loss of aircraft control. 

Somatogravic Illusion 

A rapid acceleration, such as experienced during takeoff, 

stimulates the otolith organs in the same way as tilting the 

head backwards. This action may create what is known as 

the “somatogravic illusion” of being in a nose-up attitude, 

especially in conditions with poor visual references. The 

disoriented pilot may push the aircraft into a nose-low or 

dive attitude. A rapid deceleration by quick reduction of the 

throttle(s) can have the opposite effect, with the disoriented 

pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose-up or stall attitude. 17-8      

> Figure 17-6. Sensations from centrifugal force.
> Skid, slip, and uncoordinated turns feel similar. Pilots feel they are being forced sideways in their seat. Level Coordinated turn Pull out Level skid Forward slip Uncoordinated turn

Inversion Illusion 

An abrupt change from climb to straight-and-level flight can 

stimulate the otolith organs enough to create the illusion of 

tumbling backwards, known as “inversion illusion.” The 

disoriented pilot may push the aircraft abruptly into a nose-

low attitude, which may intensify this illusion. 

Elevator Illusion 

An abrupt upward vertical acceleration, as can occur in an 

updraft, can stimulate the otolith organs to create the illusion 

of being in a climb. This is known as “elevator illusion.” 

The disoriented pilot may push the aircraft into a nose-low 

attitude. An abrupt downward vertical acceleration, usually 

in a downdraft, has the opposite effect with the disoriented 

pilot pulling the aircraft into a nose-up attitude. 

Visual Illusions 

Visual illusions are especially hazardous because pilots rely 

on their eyes for correct information. Two illusions that lead 

to spatial disorientation, false horizon and autokinesis, affect 

the visual system only. 

False Horizon 

A sloping cloud formation, an obscured horizon, an aurora 

borealis, a dark scene spread with ground lights and stars, 

and certain geometric patterns of ground lights can provide 

inaccurate visual information, or “false horizon,” when 

attempting to align the aircraft with the actual horizon. 

The disoriented pilots as a result may place the aircraft in a 

dangerous attitude. 

Autokinesis 

When flying in the dark, a stationary light may appear to 

move if it is stared at for a prolonged period of time. As 

a result, a pilot may attempt to align the aircraft with the 

perceived moving light potentially causing him/her to lose 

control of the aircraft. This illusion is known as “autokinesis.” 

Postural Considerations 

The postural system sends signals from the skin, joints, and 

muscles to the brain that are interpreted in relation to the 

Earth’s gravitational pull. These signals determine posture. 

Inputs from each movement update the body’s position to 

the brain on a constant basis. “Seat of the pants” flying is 

largely dependent upon these signals. Used in conjunction 

with visual and vestibular clues, these sensations can be 

fairly reliable. However, because of the forces acting upon 

the body in certain flight situations, many false sensations 

can occur due to acceleration forces overpowering gravity. 

[Figure 17-6]  These situations include uncoordinated turns, 

climbing turns, and turbulence. 

Demonstration of Spatial Disorientation 

There are a number of controlled aircraft maneuvers a pilot 

can perform to experiment with spatial disorientation. While 

each maneuver normally creates a specific illusion, any false 

sensation is an effective demonstration of disorientation. 

Thus, even if there is no sensation during any of these 

maneuvers, the absence of sensation is still an effective 

demonstration because it illustrates the inability to detect 

bank or roll. 17-9 

aircraft to approximately 45° bank attitude while maintaining 

heading and pitch attitude. This creates the illusion of a strong 

sense of rotation in the opposite direction. After this illusion 

is noted, the pilot should open his or her eyes and observe 

that the aircraft is in a banked attitude. 

Diving or Rolling Beyond the Vertical Plane 

This maneuver may produce extreme disorientation. While 

in straight-and-level flight, the pilot should sit normally, 

either with eyes closed or gaze lowered to the floor. The 

instructor pilot starts a positive, coordinated roll toward a 

30° or 40° angle of bank. As this is in progress, the pilot 

tilts his or her head forward, looks to the right or left, then 

immediately returns his or her head to an upright position. 

The instructor pilot should time the maneuver so the roll is 

stopped as the pilot returns his or her head upright. An intense 

disorientation is usually produced by this maneuver, and the 

pilot experiences the sensation of falling downward into the 

direction of the roll. 

In the descriptions of these maneuvers, the instructor pilot is 

doing the flying, but having the pilot do the flying can also 

be a very effective demonstration. The pilot should close his 

or her eyes and tilt the head to one side. The instructor pilot 

tells the pilot what control inputs to perform. The pilot then 

attempts to establish the correct attitude or control input with 

eyes closed and head tilted. While it is clear the pilot has no 

idea of the actual attitude, he or she will react to what the 

senses are saying. After a short time, the pilot will become 

disoriented and the instructor pilot will tell the pilot to look 

up and recover. This exercise allows the pilot to experience 

the disorientation while flying the aircraft. 

Coping with Spatial Disorientation 

To prevent illusions and their potentially disastrous 

consequences, pilots can: 

1.  Understand the causes of these illusions and remain 

constantly alert for them. Take the opportunity to 

experience spatial disorientation illusions in a device, 

such as a Barany chair, a Vertigon, or a Virtual Reality 

Spatial Disorientation Demonstrator. 

2.  Always obtain and understand preflight weather 

briefings. 

3.  Before flying in marginal visibility (less than 3 miles) 

or where a visible horizon is not evident, such as flight 

over open water during the night, obtain training and 

maintain proficiency in aircraft control by reference 

to instruments. 

4.  Do not fly into adverse weather conditions or into 

dusk or darkness unless proficient in the use of flight 

instruments. If intending to fly at night, maintain 

There are several objectives in demonstrating these various 

maneuvers. 

1.  They teach pilots to understand the susceptibility of 

the human system to spatial disorientation. 

2.  They demonstrate that judgments of aircraft attitude 

based on bodily sensations are frequently false. 

3.  They help decrease the occurrence and degree 

of disorientation through a better understanding 

of the relationship between aircraft motion, head 

movements, and resulting disorientation. 

4.  They help instill a greater confidence in relying on 

flight instruments for assessing true aircraft attitude. 

A pilot should not attempt any of these maneuvers at 

low altitudes or in the absence of an instructor pilot or an 

appropriate safety pilot. 

Climbing While Accelerating 

With the pilot’s eyes closed, the instructor pilot maintains 

approach airspeed in a straight-and-level attitude for several 

seconds, then accelerates while maintaining straight-and-

level attitude. The usual illusion during this maneuver, 

without visual references, is that the aircraft is climbing. 

Climbing While Turning 

With the pilot’s eyes still closed and the aircraft in a straight-

and-level attitude, the instructor pilot now executes, with a 

relatively slow entry, a well coordinated turn of about 1.5 

positive G (approximately 50° bank) for 90°. While in the 

turn, without outside visual references and under the effect of 

the slight positive G, the usual illusion produced is that of a 

climb. Upon sensing the climb, the pilot should immediately 

open the eyes to see that a slowly established, coordinated 

turn produces the same sensation as a climb. 

Diving While Turning 

Repeating the previous procedure, but with the pilot’s 

eyes should be kept closed until recovery from the turn is 

approximately one-half completed, can create the illusion of 

diving while turning. 

Tilting to Right or Left 

While in a straight-and-level attitude, with the pilot’s eyes 

closed, the instructor pilot executes a moderate or slight skid 

to the left with wings level. This creates the illusion of the 

body being tilted to the right. 

Reversal of Motion 

This illusion can be demonstrated in any of the three planes 

of motion. While straight and level, with the pilot’s eyes 

closed, the instructor pilot smoothly and positively rolls the 17-10 

night-flight currency and proficiency. Include cross-

country and local operations at various airfields. 

5.  Ensure that when outside visual references are used, 

they are reliable, fixed points on the Earth’s surface. 

6.  Avoid sudden head movement, particularly during 

takeoffs, turns, and approaches to landing. 

7.  Be physically tuned for flight into reduced visibility. 

Ensure proper rest, adequate diet, and, if flying at 

night, allow for night adaptation. Remember that 

illness, medication, alcohol, fatigue, sleep loss, and 

mild hypoxia are likely to increase susceptibility to 

spatial disorientation. 

8.  Most importantly, become proficient in the use of 

flight instruments and rely upon them. Trust the 

instruments and disregard your sensory perceptions. 

The sensations that lead to illusions during instrument 

flight conditions are normal perceptions experienced by 

pilots. These undesirable sensations cannot be completely 

prevented, but through training and awareness, pilots can 

ignore or suppress them by developing absolute reliance 

on the flight instruments. As pilots gain proficiency in 

instrument flying, they become less susceptible to these 

illusions and their effects. 

Optical Illusions 

Of the senses, vision is the most important for safe flight. 

However, various terrain features and atmospheric conditions 

can create optical illusions. These illusions are primarily 

associated with landing. Since pilots must transition from 

reliance on instruments to visual cues outside the flight 

deck for landing at the end of an instrument approach, it 

is imperative that they be aware of the potential problems 

associated with these illusions and take appropriate corrective 

action. The major illusions leading to landing errors are 

described below. 

Runway Width Illusion 

A narrower-than-usual runway can create an illusion that the 

aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually is, especially 

when runway length-to-width relationships are comparable. 

[Figure 17-7]  The pilot who does not recognize this illusion 

will fly a lower approach, with the risk of striking objects 

along the approach path or landing short. A wider-than-

usual runway can have the opposite effect with the risk of 

the pilot leveling out the aircraft high and landing hard or 

overshooting the runway. 

Runway and Terrain Slopes Illusion 

An upsloping runway, upsloping terrain, or both can create an 

illusion that the aircraft is at a higher altitude than it actually 

is.  [Figure 17-7]  The pilot who does not recognize this 

illusion will fly a lower approach. Downsloping runways and 

downsloping approach terrain can have the opposite effect. 

Featureless Terrain Illusion 

An absence of surrounding ground features, as in an 

overwater approach over darkened areas or terrain made 

featureless by snow, can create an illusion that the aircraft is 

at a higher altitude than it actually is. This illusion, sometimes 

referred to as the “black hole approach,” causes pilots to fly 

a lower approach than is desired. 

Water Refraction 

Rain on the windscreen can create an illusion of being at a 

higher altitude due to the horizon appearing lower than it is. 

This can result in the pilot flying a lower approach. 

Haze 

Atmospheric haze can create an illusion of being at a greater 

distance and height from the runway. As a result, the pilot 

has a tendency to be low on the approach. Conversely, 

extremely clear air (clear bright conditions of a high attitude 

airport) can give the pilot the illusion of being closer than 

he or she actually is, resulting in a high approach that may 

result in an overshoot or go around. The diffusion of light 

due to water particles on the windshield can adversely affect 

depth perception. The lights and terrain features normally 

used to gauge height during landing become less effective 

for the pilot. 

Fog 

Flying into fog can create an illusion of pitching up. Pilots 

who do not recognize this illusion often steepen the approach 

abruptly. 

Ground Lighting Illusions 

Lights along a straight path, such as a road or lights on moving 

trains, can be mistaken for runway and approach lights. Bright 

runway and approach lighting systems, especially where 

few lights illuminate the surrounding terrain, may create the 

illusion of less distance to the runway. The pilot who does 

not recognize this illusion will often fly a higher approach. 

How To Prevent Landing Errors Due to Optical 

Illusions 

To prevent these illusions and their potentially hazardous 

consequences, pilots can: 

1.  Anticipate the possibility of visual illusions during 

approaches to unfamiliar airports, particularly at night 

or in adverse weather conditions. Consult airport 17-11 

Figure 17-7.  Runway illusions. 

> 25
> Normal Approach
> 25
> Normal Approach
> 25
> 25
> 25
> Normal Approach
> 25
> Normal Approach

Downsloping runway Upsloping runway Upsloping runway Downsloping runway Wider runway Narrower runway Wider runway Narrower runway 

Normal approach Approach due to illusion 

Runway width illusion 

• A narrower-than-usual runway can create an illusion that the aircraft is higher than it actually is, leading to a lower approach. 

• A wider-than-usual runway can create an illusion that the aircraft is lower than it actually is, leading to a higher approach. 

Runway slope illusion 

• A downsloping runway can create the illusion that the aircraft is lower than it actually is, leading to a higher approach. 

• An upsloping runway can create the illusion that the aircraft is higher than it actually is, leading to a lower approach. 

diagrams and the Chart Supplement U.S. (formerly 

Airport/Facility Directory) for information on runway 

slope, terrain, and lighting. 

2.  Make frequent reference to the altimeter, especially 

during all approaches, day and night. 

3.  If possible, conduct an aerial visual inspection of 

unfamiliar airports before landing. 

4.  Use Visual Approach Slope Indicator (VASI) or 

Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) systems 

for a visual reference, or an electronic glideslope, 

whenever they are available. 

5.  Utilize the visual descent point (VDP) found on many 

nonprecision instrument approach procedure charts. 17-12 

6.  Recognize that the chances of being involved in an 

approach accident increase when an emergency or 

other activity distracts from usual procedures. 

7.  Maintain optimum proficiency in landing procedures. 

In addition to the sensory illusions due to misleading inputs to 

the vestibular system, a pilot may also encounter various visual 

illusions during flight. Illusions rank among the most common 

factors cited as contributing to fatal aviation accidents. 

Sloping cloud formations, an obscured horizon, a dark scene 

spread with ground lights and stars, and certain geometric 

patterns of ground light can create illusions of not being 

aligned correctly with the actual horizon. Various surface 

features and atmospheric conditions encountered in landing 

can create illusions of being on the wrong approach path. 

Landing errors due to these illusions can be prevented by 

anticipating them during approaches, inspecting unfamiliar 

airports before landing, using electronic glideslope or VASI 

systems when available, and maintaining proficiency in 

landing procedures. 

Motion Sickness 

Motion sickness, or airsickness, is caused by the brain 

receiving conflicting messages about the state of the body. A 

pilot may experience motion sickness during initial flights, but 

it generally goes away within the first few lessons. Anxiety 

and stress, which may be experienced at the beginning of 

flight training, can contribute to motion sickness. Symptoms 

of motion sickness include general discomfort, nausea, 

dizziness, paleness, sweating, and vomiting. 

It is important to remember that experiencing airsickness is 

no reflection on one’s ability as a pilot. If prone to motion 

sickness, let the flight instructor know, there are techniques 

that can be used to overcome this problem. For example, 

avoid lessons in turbulent conditions until becoming more 

comfortable in the aircraft or start with shorter flights and 

graduate to longer instruction periods. If symptoms of motion 

sickness are experienced during a lesson, opening fresh air 

vents, focusing on objects outside the airplane, and avoiding 

unnecessary head movements may help alleviate some of the 

discomfort. Although medications like Dramamine can prevent 

airsickness in passengers, they are not recommended while 

flying since they can cause drowsiness and other problems. 

Carbon Monoxide (CO) Poisoning 

CO is a colorless and odorless gas produced by all internal 

combustion engines. Attaching itself to the hemoglobin in 

the blood about 200 times more easily than oxygen, CO 

prevents the hemoglobin from carrying oxygen to the cells, 

resulting in hypemic hypoxia. The body requires up to 48 

hours to dispose of CO. If severe enough, the CO poisoning 

can result in death. Aircraft heater vents and defrost vents 

may provide CO a passageway into the cabin, particularly if 

the engine exhaust system has a leak or is damaged. If a strong 

odor of exhaust gases is detected, assume that CO is present. 

However, CO may be present in dangerous amounts even 

if no exhaust odor is detected. Disposable, inexpensive CO 

detectors are widely available. In the presence of CO, these 

detectors change color to alert the pilot of the presence of CO. 

Some effects of CO poisoning are headache, blurred vision, 

dizziness, drowsiness, and/or loss of muscle power. Any time 

a pilot smells exhaust odor, or any time these symptoms are 

experienced, immediate corrective action should be taken 

including turning off the heater, opening fresh air vents and 

windows, and using supplemental oxygen, if available. 

Tobacco smoke also causes CO poisoning. Smoking at 

sea level can raise the CO concentration in the blood and 

result in physiological effects similar to flying at 8,000 feet. 

Besides hypoxia, tobacco causes diseases and physiological 

debilitation that can be medically disqualifying for pilots. 

Stress 

Stress is the body’s response to physical and psychological 

demands placed upon it. The body’s reaction to stress includes 

releasing chemical hormones (such as adrenaline) into the 

blood and increasing metabolism to provide more energy 

to the muscles. Blood sugar, heart rate, respiration, blood 

pressure, and perspiration all increase. The term “stressor” 

is used to describe an element that causes an individual to 

experience stress. Examples of stressors include physical 

stress (noise or vibration), physiological stress (fatigue), and 

psychological stress (difficult work or personal situations). 

Stress falls into two broad categories: acute (short term) and 

chronic (long term). Acute stress involves an immediate 

threat that is perceived as danger. This is the type of stress that 

triggers a “fight or flight” response in an individual, whether 

the threat is real or imagined. Normally, a healthy person can 

cope with acute stress and prevent stress overload. However, 

ongoing acute stress can develop into chronic stress. 

Chronic stress can be defined as a level of stress that presents 

an intolerable burden, exceeds the ability of an individual 

to cope, and causes individual performance to fall sharply. 

Unrelenting psychological pressures, such as loneliness, 

financial worries, and relationship or work problems can 

produce a cumulative level of stress that exceeds a person’s 

ability to cope with the situation. When stress reaches these 

levels, performance falls off rapidly. Pilots experiencing 

this level of stress are not safe and should not exercise their 

airman privileges. Pilots who suspect they are suffering from 

chronic stress should consult a physician. 17-13 

Fatigue 

Fatigue is frequently associated with pilot error. Some of 

the effects of fatigue include degradation of attention and 

concentration, impaired coordination, and decreased ability 

to communicate. These factors seriously influence the 

ability to make effective decisions. Physical fatigue results 

from sleep loss, exercise, or physical work. Factors such as 

stress and prolonged performance of cognitive work result 

in mental fatigue. 

Like stress, fatigue falls into two broad categories: acute 

and chronic. Acute fatigue is short term and is a normal 

occurrence in everyday living. It is the kind of tiredness 

people feel after a period of strenuous effort, excitement, or 

lack of sleep. Rest after exertion and 8 hours of sound sleep 

ordinarily cures this condition. 

A special type of acute fatigue is skill fatigue. This type of 

fatigue has two main effects on performance: 

• Timing disruption—appearing to perform a task as 

usual, but the timing of each component is slightly off. 

This makes the pattern of the operation less smooth 

because the pilot performs each component as though it 

were separate, instead of part of an integrated activity. 

• Disruption of the perceptual field—concentrating 

attention upon movements or objects in the center of 

vision and neglecting those in the periphery. This is 

accompanied by loss of accuracy and smoothness in 

control movements. 

Acute fatigue has many causes, but the following are among 

the most important for the pilot: 

• Mild hypoxia (oxygen deficiency) 

• Physical stress 

• Psychological stress 

• Depletion of physical energy resulting from 

psychological stress 

• Sustained psychological stress 

Sustained psychological stress accelerates the glandular 

secretions that prepare the body for quick reactions during 

an emergency. These secretions make the circulatory and 

respiratory systems work harder, and the liver releases energy 

to provide the extra fuel needed for brain and muscle work. 

When this reserve energy supply is depleted, the body lapses 

into generalized and severe fatigue. 

Acute fatigue can be prevented by proper diet and adequate 

rest and sleep. A well-balanced diet prevents the body from 

needing to consume its own tissues as an energy source. 

Adequate rest maintains the body’s store of vital energy. 

Chronic fatigue, extending over a long period of time, usually 

has psychological roots, although an underlying disease is 

sometimes responsible. Continuous high-stress levels produce 

chronic fatigue. Chronic fatigue is not relieved by proper diet 

and adequate rest and sleep and usually requires treatment 

by a physician. An individual may experience this condition 

in the form of weakness, tiredness, palpitations of the heart, 

breathlessness, headaches, or irritability. Sometimes chronic 

fatigue even creates stomach or intestinal problems and 

generalized aches and pains throughout the body. When the 

condition becomes serious enough, it leads to emotional illness. 

If suffering from acute fatigue, stay on the ground. If fatigue 

occurs in the flight deck, no amount of training or experience 

can overcome the detrimental effects. Getting adequate rest 

is the only way to prevent fatigue from occurring. Avoid 

flying without a full night’s rest, after working excessive 

hours, or after an especially exhausting or stressful day. Pilots 

who suspect they are suffering from chronic fatigue should 

consult a physician. 

Exposure to Chemicals 

When conducting preflight and post-flight inspections, pilots 

must verify that the fluid levels in their aircraft meet the 

levels specified for safe operations as stated in the Pilot's 

Operating Handbook. These fluids include, but are not limited 

to hydraulic fluid, engine oil, and fuel. 

It is important that every pilot recognize the potential hazards 

of working with these fluids as well as the recommended first 

aid measures to follow should any of these fluids come in 

contact with their eyes, skin, and/or respiratory system. As 

the specific first aid measures for dealing with exposure to 

these chemicals can vary by chemical type, it is important that 

every pilot be familiar with the location and use of the Material 

Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for each chemical they encounter. 

The procedures described in the following sections are 

minimum guideline for first aid for each of the indicated 

scenarios. Ultimately, the pilot should consult the MSDS 

for first aid procedures specific to the type of chemical and 

exposure scenario. 

Hydraulic Fluid 

• Eye Contact—immediately flush the eyes with clean 

water and seek medical attention if irritation occurs. 

• Skin Contact—remove all contaminated clothing and 

thoroughly cleanse the affected areas with mild soap 

and water or a waterless hand cleaner. If irritation or 

redness develops and persists, seek medical attention. 

Should the hydraulic fluid get into or under the skin, 

or into any other part of the body, regardless of the 17-14 

appearance of the wound or its size, seek medical 

attention immediately. 

• Inhalation—if respiratory symptoms develop, move 

away from the source of exposure and into fresh air 

in a position comfortable for breathing. If symptoms 

persist, seek medical attention. 

• Ingestion—first aid is not normally required; however, 

if swallowed and symptoms develop, seek medical 

attention. 

Engine Oil 

• Eye Contact—immediately flush the eyes with clean 

water and seek medical attention if irritation occurs. 

• Skin Contact—remove all contaminated clothing and 

thoroughly cleanse the affected areas with soap and 

water. Launder contaminated clothing before reuse. 

• Inhalation—move away from the source of exposure 

and into fresh air. If respiratory irritation, dizziness, 

nausea, or unconsciousness occurs, seek immediate 

medical attention. If breathing stops, assisted 

ventilation is required via a bag-valve-mask or 

cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 

• Ingestion—seek immediate medical attention. If 

immediate medical attention is not available, contact 

a regional poison control center or emergency medical 

professional regarding the induction of vomiting or 

use of activated charcoal. Vomiting should never be 

induced to a person who is groggy or unconscious. 

Fuel 

• Eye Contact—immediately flush the eyes with 

clean water for at least 15 minutes and seek medical 

attention immediately. 

• Skin Contact—remove all contaminated clothing 

and thoroughly cleanse the affected areas with mild 

soap and water or a waterless hand cleaner. If skin 

surface is damaged, apply a clean dressing and seek 

medical attention. If irritation or redness develops, 

seek medical attention. Launder contaminated clothing 

before reuse. 

• Inhalation—move away from the source of exposure 

and into fresh air. If breathing stops, assisted 

ventilation is required via a bag-valve-mask or 

cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Once breathing 

is restored, the use of additional oxygen may be 

necessary. Seek medical attention immediately. 

• Ingestion—seek immediate medical attention. Do not 

induce vomiting or take anything by mouth as this may 

cause the material to enter the lungs and cause severe 

lung damage. Should vomiting occur, keep head below 

the hips to reduce the risks of aspiration. Monitor for 

breathing difficulties. Rinse out any material which 

enters the mouth until the taste is dissipated. 

Dehydration and  Heatstroke 

Dehydration is the term given to a critical loss of water from 

the body. Causes of dehydration are hot flight decks and 

flight lines, wind, humidity, and diuretic drinks—coffee, tea, 

alcohol, and caffeinated soft drinks. Some common signs of 

dehydration are headache, fatigue, cramps, sleepiness, and 

dizziness. 

The first noticeable effect of dehydration is fatigue, which 

in turn makes top physical and mental performance difficult, 

if not impossible. Flying for long periods in hot summer 

temperatures or at high altitudes increases the susceptibility 

to dehydration because these conditions tend to increase the 

rate of water loss from the body. 

To help prevent dehydration, drink two to four quarts of 

water every 24 hours. Since each person is physiologically 

different, this is only a guide. Most people are aware of the 

eight-glasses-a-day guide: If each glass of water is eight 

ounces, this equates to 64 ounces, which is two quarts. If 

this fluid is not replaced, fatigue progresses to dizziness, 

weakness, nausea, tingling of hands and feet, abdominal 

cramps, and extreme thirst. 

The key for pilots is to be continually aware of their condition. 

Most people become thirsty with a 1.5 quart deficit or a loss 

of 2 percent of total body weight. This level of dehydration 

triggers the “thirst mechanism.” The problem is that the thirst 

mechanism arrives too late and is turned off too easily. A 

small amount of fluid in the mouth turns this mechanism off 

and the replacement of needed body fluid is delayed. 

Other steps to prevent dehydration include: 

• Carrying a container in order to measure daily water 

intake. 

• Staying ahead—not relying on the thirst sensation as 

an alarm. If plain water is not preferred, add some 

sport drink flavoring to make it more acceptable. 

• Limiting daily intake of caffeine and alcohol (both are 

diuretics and stimulate increased production of urine). 

Heatstroke is a condition caused by any inability of the body 

to control its temperature. Onset of this condition may be 

recognized by the symptoms of dehydration, but also has 

been known to be recognized only upon complete collapse. 17-15                

> Type Beverage Typical Serving Pure Alcohol (oz) Content (oz)
> Table wine Light beer Aperitif liquor Champagne Vodka Whiskey 4.0 12.0 1.5 4.0 1.0 1.25 .48 .48 .38 .48 .50 .50 0.01–0.05% average individual appears normal (10–50 mg) 0.03–0.12%* mild euphoria, talkativeness, decreased (30–120 mg) inhibitions, decreased attention, impaired judgment, increased reaction time 0.09–0.25% emotional instability, loss of critical (90–250 mg) judgment, impairment of memory and comprehension, decreased sensory response, mild muscular incoordination 0.18–0.30% confusion, dizziness, exaggerated (180–300 mg) emotions (anger, fear, grief), impaired visual perception, decreased pain sensation, impaired balance, staggering gait, slurred speech, moderate muscular incoordination 0.27–0.40% apathy, impaired consciousness, stupor,
> (270–400 mg) significantly decreased response to
> stimulation, severe muscular incoordination, inability to stand or walk, vomiting, incontinence of urine and feces 0.35–0.50% unconsciousness, depressed or
> (350–500 mg) abolished reflexes, abnormal body
> temperature, coma, possible death from respiratory paralysis (450 mg or above) * Legal limit for motor vehicle operation in most states is 0.08 or 0.10% (80–100 mg of alcohol per dL of blood).
> Figure 17-8.

Impairment scale with alcohol use. 

To prevent these symptoms, it is recommended that an 

ample supply of water be carried and used at frequent 

intervals on any long flight, whether thirsty or not. The body 

normally absorbs water at a rate of 1.2 to 1.5 quarts per hour. 

Individuals should drink one quart per hour for severe heat 

stress conditions or one pint per hour for moderate stress 

conditions. If the aircraft has a canopy or roof window, 

wearing light-colored, porous clothing and a hat will help 

provide protection from the sun. Keeping the flight deck well 

ventilated aids in dissipating excess heat. 

Alcohol 

Alcohol impairs the efficiency of the human body. 

[Figure 17-8]  Studies have shown that consuming alcohol 

is closely linked to performance deterioration. Pilots must 

make hundreds of decisions, some of them time-critical, 

during the course of a flight. The safe outcome of any flight 

depends on the ability to make the correct decisions and take 

the appropriate actions during routine occurrences, as well 

as abnormal situations. The influence of alcohol drastically 

reduces the chances of completing a flight without incident. 

Even in small amounts, alcohol can impair judgment, 

decrease sense of responsibility, affect coordination, constrict 

visual field, diminish memory, reduce reasoning ability, and 

lower attention span. As little as one ounce of alcohol can 

decrease the speed and strength of muscular reflexes, lessen 

the efficiency of eye movements while reading, and increase 

the frequency at which errors are committed. Impairments 

in vision and hearing can occur from consuming as little as 

one drink. 

The alcohol consumed in beer and mixed drinks is ethyl 

alcohol, a central nervous system depressant. From a medical 

point of view, it acts on the body much like a general 

anesthetic. The “dose” is generally much lower and more 

slowly consumed in the case of alcohol, but the basic effects 

on the human body are similar. Alcohol is easily and quickly 

absorbed by the digestive tract. The bloodstream absorbs 

about 80 to 90 percent of the alcohol in a drink within 30 

minutes when ingested on an empty stomach. The body 

requires about 3 hours to rid itself of all the alcohol contained 

in one mixed drink or one beer. 

While experiencing a hangover, a pilot is still under the 

influence of alcohol. Although a pilot may think he or she is 

functioning normally, motor and mental response impairment 

is still present. Considerable amounts of alcohol can remain 

in the body for over 16 hours, so pilots should be cautious 

about flying too soon after drinking. 

Altitude multiplies the effects of alcohol on the brain. When 

combined with altitude, the alcohol from two drinks may have 

the same effect as three or four drinks. Alcohol interferes 

with the brain’s ability to utilize oxygen, producing a form 

of histotoxic hypoxia. The effects are rapid because alcohol 

passes quickly into the bloodstream. In addition, the brain 

is a highly vascular organ that is immediately sensitive to 

changes in the blood’s composition. For a pilot, the lower 

oxygen availability at altitude and the lower capability of 

the brain to use the oxygen that is available can add up to a 

deadly combination. 

Intoxication is determined by the amount of alcohol in the 

bloodstream. This is usually measured as a percentage by 

weight in the blood. 14 CFR part 91 requires that blood 

alcohol level be less than .04 percent and that 8 hours pass 

between drinking alcohol and piloting an aircraft. A pilot with 

a blood alcohol level of .04 percent or greater after 8 hours 

cannot fly until the blood alcohol falls below that amount. 

Even though blood alcohol may be well below .04 percent, 

a pilot cannot fly sooner than 8 hours after drinking alcohol. 17-16 

Although the regulations are quite specific, it is a good idea 

to be more conservative than the regulations. 

Drugs 

The Federal Aviation Regulations include no specific 

references to medication usage. Two regulations, though, 

are important to keep in mind. Title 14 of the CFR part 61, 

section 61.53 prohibits acting as pilot-in-command or in any 

other capacity as a required pilot flight crewmember, while 

that person: 

1.  Knows or has reason to know of any medical condition 

that would make the person unable to meet the 

requirement for the medical certificate necessary for 

the pilot operation, or 

2.  Is taking medication or receiving other treatment for 

a medical condition that results in the person being 

unable to meet the requirements for the medical 

certificate necessary for the pilot operation. 

Further, 14 CFR part 91, section 91.17 prohibits the use 

of any drug that affects the person’s faculties in any way 

contrary to safety. 

There are several thousand medications currently approved 

by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), not 

including OTC (over the counter) drugs. Virtually all 

medications have the potential for adverse side effects in 

some people. Additionally, herbal and dietary supplements, 

sport and energy boosters, and some other “natural” products 

are derived from substances often found in medications that 

could also have adverse side effects. While some individuals 

experience no side effects with a particular drug or product, 

others may be noticeably affected. The FAA regularly 

reviews FDA and other data to assure that medications found 

acceptable for aviation duties do not pose an adverse safety 

risk. Drugs that cause no apparent side effects on the ground 

can create serious problems at even relatively low altitudes. 

Even at typical general aviation altitudes, the changes in 

concentrations of atmospheric gases in the blood can enhance 

the effects of seemingly innocuous drugs that can result in 

impaired judgment, decision-making, and performance. In 

addition, fatigue, stress, dehydration, and inadequate nutrition 

can increase an airman’s susceptibility to adverse effects from 

various drugs, even if they appeared to tolerate them in the 

past. If multiple medications are being taken at the same time, 

the adverse effects can be even more pronounced. 

Another important consideration is that the medical 

condition for which a medication is prescribed may itself be 

disqualifying. The FAA will consider the condition in the 

context of risk for medical incapacitation, and the medication 

as well for cognitive impairment, and either or both could be 

found unacceptable for medical certification. 

Some of the most commonly used OTC drugs, antihistamines 

and decongestants, have the potential to cause noticeable 

adverse side effects, including drowsiness and cognitive 

deficits. The symptoms associated with common upper 

respiratory infections, including the common cold, often 

suppress a pilot’s desire to fly, and treating symptoms with 

a drug that causes adverse side effects only compounds 

the problem. Particularly, medications containing 

diphenhydramine (e.g., Benadryl) are known to cause 

drowsiness and have a prolonged half-life, meaning the drugs 

stay in one’s system for an extended time, which lengthens 

the time that side effects are present. 

Many medications, such as tranquilizers, sedatives, strong 

pain relievers, and cough suppressants, have primary 

effects that may impair judgment, memory, alertness, 

coordination, vision, and the ability to make calculations. 

[Figure 17-9]  Others, such as antihistamines, blood pressure 

drugs, muscle relaxants, and agents to control diarrhea and 

motion sickness, have side effects that may impair the same 

critical functions. Any medication that depresses the nervous 

system, such as a sedative, tranquilizer, or antihistamine, can 

make a pilot more susceptible to hypoxia. 

Painkillers are grouped into two broad categories: analgesics 

and anesthetics. Analgesics are drugs that reduce pain, 

while anesthetics are drugs that deaden pain or cause loss 

of consciousness. 

Over-the-counter analgesics, such as acetylsalicylic acid 

(aspirin), acetaminophen (Tylenol), and ibuprofen (Advil), 

have few side effects when taken in the correct dosage. 

Although some people are allergic to certain analgesics or may 

suffer from stomach irritation, flying usually is not restricted 

when taking these drugs. However, flying is almost always 

precluded while using prescription analgesics, such as drugs 

containing propoxyphene (e.g., Darvon), oxycodone (e.g., 

Percodan), meperidine (e.g., Demerol), and codeine, since 

these drugs are known to cause side effects, such as mental 

confusion, dizziness, headaches, nausea, and vision problems. 

Anesthetic drugs are commonly used for dental and surgical 

procedures. Most local anesthetics used for minor dental and 

outpatient procedures wear off within a relatively short period 

of time. The anesthetic itself may not limit flying as much 

as the actual procedure and subsequent pain. 17-17 

Figure 17-9.  Adverse affects of various drugs. 

Substance Possible Side Effects Generic Or Brand Name Treatment for 

Alcohol Nicotine Amphetamines Caffeine Antacid Antihistamines Aspirin Beer Liquor Wine Cigars Cigarettes Pipe tobacco Chewing tobacco Snuff Ritalin Obetrol Eskatrol Coffee Tea Chocolate No-Doz Alka-2 Di-Gel Maalox Coricidin Contac Dristan Dimetapp Omade Chlor-Trimeton Diphenhydramine Bayer Bufferin Alka-Seltzer N/A N/A Obesity (diet pills) Tiredness N/A Stomach acids Allergies Colds Headaches Fevers Aches Pains Impaired judgment and perception Impaired coordination and motor control Reduced reaction time Impaired sensory perception Reduced intellectual functions Reduced tolerance to G-forces Inner-ear disturbance and spatial disorientation (up to 48 hours) Central nervous system depression Sinus and respiratory system infection and irritation Impaired night vision Hypertension Carbon monoxide poisoning (from smoking) Prolonged wakefulness Nervousness Impaired vision Suppressed appetite Shakiness Excessive sweating Rapid heart rate Sleep disturbance Seriously impaired judgment Impaired judgment Reduced reaction time Sleep disturbance Increased motor activity and tremors Hypertension Irregular heart rate Rapid heart rate Body dehydration (through increased urine output) Headaches Liberations of carbon dioxide at altitude (distension may cause acute abdominal pain and may mask other medical problems) Drowsiness and dizziness (sometimes recurring) Visual disturbances (when medications also contain antispasmodic drugs) Irregular body temperature Variation in rate and depth of respiration Hypoxia and hyperventilation (two aspirin can contribute to) Nausea, ringing in ears, deafness, diarrhea, and hallucinations when taken in excessive dosages Corrosive action on the stomach lining Gastrointestinal problems Decreased clotting ability of the blood (clotting ability could be the difference between life and death in a survival situation) 

Stimulants are drugs that excite the central nervous 

system and produce an increase in alertness and activity. 

Amphetamines, caffeine, and nicotine are all forms of 

stimulants. Common uses of these drugs include appetite 

suppression, fatigue reduction, and mood elevation. Some 

of these drugs may cause a stimulant reaction, even though 

this reaction is not their primary function. In some cases, 

stimulants can produce anxiety and mood swings, both of 

which are dangerous when flying. 

Depressants are drugs that reduce the body’s functioning in 

many areas. These drugs lower blood pressure, reduce mental 

processing, and slow motor and reaction responses. There are 

several types of drugs that can cause a depressing effect on the 

body, including tranquilizers, motion sickness medication, 

some types of stomach medication, decongestants, and 

antihistamines. The most common depressant is alcohol. 17-18 

Some drugs that are classified as neither stimulants nor 

depressants have adverse effects on flying. For example, 

some antibiotics can produce dangerous side effects, such 

as balance disorders, hearing loss, nausea, and vomiting. 

While many antibiotics are safe for use while flying, the 

infection requiring the antibiotic may prohibit flying. In 

addition, unless specifically prescribed by a physician, do 

not take more than one drug at a time, and never mix drugs 

with alcohol because the effects are often unpredictable. 

The dangers of illegal drugs also are well documented. 

Certain illegal drugs can have hallucinatory effects that occur 

days or weeks after the drug is taken. Obviously, these drugs 

have no place in the aviation community. 

14 CFR prohibits pilots from performing crewmember 

duties while using any medication that affects the body in 

any way contrary to safety. The safest rule is not to fly as a 

crewmember while taking any medication, unless approved to 

do so by the FAA. If there is any doubt regarding the effects 

of any medication, consult an AME before flying. 

Prior to each and every flight, all pilots must do a proper 

physical self-assessment to ensure safety. A great mnemonic, 

covered in Chapter 2 on Aeronautical Decision-Making, 

is IMSAFE, which stands for Illness, Medication, Stress, 

Alcohol, Fatigue, and Emotion. 

For the medication component of IMSAFE, pilots need to 

ask themselves, “Am I taking any medicines that might affect 

my judgment or make me drowsy? For any new medication, 

OTC or prescribed, you should wait at least 48 hours after 

the first dose before flying to determine you do not have any 

adverse side effects that would make it unsafe to operate an 

aircraft. In addition to medication questions, pilots should 

also consider the following – 

• Do not take any unnecessary or elective medications; 

• Make sure you eat regular balanced meals; 

• Bring a snack for both you and your passengers for 

the flight; 

• Maintain good hydration - bring plenty of water; 

• Ensure adequate sleep the night prior to the flight; and 

• Stay physically fit. 

Additionally, you should wait at least five maximal dosing 

intervals, the time between recommended or prescribed 

dosing, (e.g., a dosing interval of 5 to 6 hours would require 

you to wait 30 hours) before flying after taking any medication 

that has potentially adverse side effects (e.g., sedating or 

dizziness). Observing the recommended dosing interval 

doesn’t eliminate the risk for adverse side effects because 

everyone metabolizes medications differently. However, 

five times the dosing interval is a reasonable rule of thumb. 

Altitude-Induced Decompression Sickness (DCS) 

Decompression sickness (DCS) describes a condition 

characterized by a variety of symptoms resulting from 

exposure to low barometric pressures that cause inert gases 

(mainly nitrogen), normally dissolved in body fluids and 

tissues, to come out of physical solution and form bubbles. 

Nitrogen is an inert gas normally stored throughout the 

human body (tissues and fluids) in physical solution. When 

the body is exposed to decreased barometric pressures (as in 

flying an unpressurized aircraft to altitude or during a rapid 

decompression), the nitrogen dissolved in the body comes out 

of solution. If the nitrogen is forced to leave the solution too 

rapidly, bubbles form in different areas of the body causing a 

variety of signs and symptoms. The most common symptom 

is joint pain, which is known as “the bends.”  [Figure 17-10] 

What to do when altitude-induced DCS occurs: 

• Put on oxygen mask immediately and switch the 

regulator to 100 percent oxygen. 

• Begin an emergency descent and land as soon as 

possible. Even if the symptoms disappear during 

descent, land and seek medical evaluation while 

continuing to breathe oxygen. 

• If one of the symptoms is joint pain, keep the affected 

area still; do not try to work pain out by moving the 

joint around. 

• Upon landing, seek medical assistance from an FAA 

medical officer, AME, military flight surgeon, or 

a hyperbaric medicine specialist. Be aware that a 

physician not specialized in aviation or hypobaric 

medicine may not be familiar with this type of medical 

problem. 

• Definitive medical treatment may involve the use of 

a hyperbaric chamber operated by specially-trained 

personnel. 

• Delayed signs and symptoms of altitude-induced DCS 

can occur after return to ground level regardless of 

presence during flight. 

DCS After Scuba Diving 

Scuba diving subjects the body to increased pressure, which 

allows more nitrogen to dissolve in body tissues and fluids. 

[Figure 17-11]  The reduction of atmospheric pressure that 

accompanies flying can produce physical problems for scuba 

divers. A pilot or passenger who intends to fly after scuba 

diving should allow the body sufficient time to rid itself of 

excess nitrogen absorbed during diving. If not, DCS due to 17-19 

Figure 17-11.  To avoid the bends, scuba divers must not fly for 

specific time periods following dives. 

Figure 17-10.  Signs and symptoms of altitude decompression sickness. 

DCS Type Bubble Location Signs and Symptoms (Clinical Manifestations) BENDS NEUROLOGIC Manifestations CHOKES SKIN BENDS 

Mostly large joints of the body (elbows, shoulders, hip, wrists, knees, ankles) Brain Spinal cord Peripheral nerves Lungs Skin • Localized deep pain, ranging from mild (a “niggle”) to excruciating–sometimes a dull ache, but rarely a sharp pain • Active and passive motion of the joint aggravating the pain • Pain occurring at altitude, during the descent, or many hours later • Confusion or memory loss • Headache • Spots in visual field (scotoma), tunnel vision, double vision (diplopia), or blurry vision • Unexplained extreme fatigue or behavior changes • Seizures, dizziness, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and unconsciousness • Abnormal sensations, such as burning, stinging, and tingling, around the lower chest and back • Symptoms spreading from the feet up and possibly accompanied by ascending weakness or paralysis • Girdling abdominal or chest pain • Urinary and rectal incontinence • Abnormal sensations, such as numbness, burning, stinging and tingling (paresthesia) • Muscle weakness or twitching • Burning deep chest pain (under the sternum) • Pain aggravated by breathing • Shortness of breath (dyspnea) • Dry constant cough • Itching usually around the ears, face, neck, arms, and upper torso • Sensation of tiny insects crawling over the skin • Mottled or marbled skin usually around the shoulders, upper chest, and abdomen accompanied by itching • Swelling of the skin, accompanied by tiny scar-like skin depressions (pitting edema) 

evolved gas can occur during exposure to low altitude and 

create a serious inflight emergency. 

The recommended waiting time before going to flight 

altitudes of up to 8,000 feet is at least 12 hours after diving 

that does not require controlled ascent (nondecompression 

stop diving), and at least 24 hours after diving that does 

require controlled ascent (decompression stop diving). The 

waiting time before going to flight altitudes above 8,000 

feet should be at least 24 hours after any scuba dive. These 

recommended altitudes are actual flight altitudes above 

mean sea level (MSL) and not pressurized cabin altitudes. 

This takes into consideration the risk of decompression of 

the aircraft during flight. 

## Vision in Flight 

Of all the senses, vision is the most important for safe flight. 

Most of the things perceived while flying are visual or heavily 

supplemented by vision. As remarkable and vital as it is, 

vision is subject to limitations, such as illusions and blind 

spots. The more a pilot understands about the eyes and how 

they function, the easier it is to use vision effectively and 

compensate for potential problems. 

The eye functions much like a camera. Its structure includes 

an aperture, a lens, a mechanism for focusing, and a surface 

for registering images. Light enters through the cornea at the 

front of the eyeball, travels through the lens, and falls on the 

retina. The retina contains light sensitive cells that convert 17-20  

> Figure 17-13.

Types of vision.  

> Types of Vision Types of vision used
> Photopic Mesopic Scotopic
> Light level
> High Medium/Low Low
> Technique of viewing
> Central Both Scanning
> Color perception
> Good Some None
> Receptors used
> Cones Cones/Rods Rods
> Acuity best
> 20/20 Varies 20/200
> Blind spot
> Day Day/Night Day/Night
> Figure 17-12.

The human eye.       

> The rods and cones (film) of the retina are the receptors which record the image and transmit it through the optic nerve to the brain for interpretation. Rods and cones Fovea (all cones) Lens Retina Optic nerve Optic disk (blind spot) Fovea centralis Iris The pupil (aperture) is the opening at the center of the iris. The size of the pupil is adjusted to control the amount of light entering the eye. PUPIL Light passes through the cornea (the transparent window on the front of the eye) and then through the lens to focus on the retina. CORNEA
> Rod concentration

light energy into electrical impulses that travel through nerves 

to the brain. The brain interprets the electrical signals to form 

images. There are two kinds of light-sensitive cells in the 

eyes: rods and cones.  [Figure 17-12] 

The cones are responsible for all color vision, from 

appreciating a glorious sunset to discerning the subtle shades 

in a fine painting. Cones are present throughout the retina, but 

are concentrated toward the center of the field of vision at the 

back of the retina. There is a small pit called the fovea where 

almost all the light sensing cells are cones. This is the area 

where most “looking” occurs (the center of the visual field 

where detail, color sensitivity, and resolution are highest). 

While the cones and their associated nerves are well suited 

to detecting fine detail and color in high light levels, the 

rods are better able to detect movement and provide vision 

in dim light. The rods are unable to discern color but are 

very sensitive at low-light levels. The trouble with rods is 

that a large amount of light overwhelms them, and they take 

longer to “reset” and adapt to the dark again. There are so 

many cones in the fovea that are at the very center of the 

visual field but virtually has no rods at all. So in low light, 

the middle of the visual field is not very sensitive, but farther 

from the fovea, the rods are more numerous and provide the 

major portion of night vision. 

Vision Types 

There are three types of vision: photopic, mesopic, and 

scotopic. Each type functions under different sensory stimuli 

or ambient light conditions.  [Figure 17-13] 

Photopic Vision 

Photopic vision provides the capability for seeing color and 

resolving fine detail (20/20 or better), but it functions only 

in good illumination. Photopic vision is experienced during 

daylight or when a high level of artificial illumination exists. 17-21   

> Figure 17-15. The eye’s blind spot.
> Figure 17-14. Central blind spot.
> Pupil Blind spot Optic nerve Retina Center of vision

Right LEFT 

The cones concentrated in the fovea centralis of the eye are 

primarily responsible for vision in bright light.  [Figure 17-12 ]

Because of the high light level, rhodopsin, which is a 

biological pigment of the retina that is responsible for both 

the formation of the photoreceptor cells and the first events 

in the perception of light, is bleached out causing the rod 

cells to become less effective. 

Mesopic Vision 

Mesopic vision is achieved by a combination of rods and 

cones and is experienced at dawn, dusk, and during full 

moonlight. Visual acuity steadily decreases as available light 

decreases and color perception changes because the cones 

become less effective. Mesopic viewing period is considered 

the most dangerous period for viewing. As cone sensitivity 

decreases, pilots should use off-center vision and proper 

scanning techniques to detect objects during low-light levels. 

Scotopic Vision 

Scotopic vision is experienced under low-light levels and 

the cones become ineffective, resulting in poor resolution of 

detail. Visual acuity decreases to 20/200 or less and enables 

a person to see only objects the size of or larger than the 

big “E” on visual acuity testing charts from 20 feet away. 

In other words, a person must stand at 20 feet to see what 

can normally be seen at 200 feet under daylight conditions. 

When using scotopic vision, color perception is lost and a 

night blind spot in the central field of view appears at low 

light levels when the cone-cell sensitivity is lost. 

Central Blind Spot 

The area where the optic nerve connects to the retina in the 

back of each eye is known as the optic disk. There is a total 

absence of cones and rods in this area, and consequently, 

each eye is completely blind in this spot.  [Figure 17-14] 

As a result, it is referred to as the blind spot that everyone 

has in each eye. Under normal binocular vision conditions 

(both eyes are used together), this is not a problem because 

an object cannot be in the blind spot of both eyes at the same 

time. On the other hand, where the field of vision of one eye 

is obstructed by an object (windshield divider or another 

aircraft), a visual target could fall in the blind spot of the 

other eye and remain undetected. 

Figure 17-15  provides a dramatic example of the eye’s 

blind spot. 

1.  Hold this page at an arm’s length. 

2.  Completely cover your left eye (without closing or 

pressing on it) using your hand or other flat object. 

3.  With your right eye, stare directly at the airplane on 

the left side of the picture page. In your periphery, you 

will notice the black X on the right side of the picture. 

4.  Slowly move the page closer to you while continuing 

to stare at the airplane. 17-22   

> Figure 17-16. Night vision.
> Figure 17-17. Night blind spot.
> Cones active Rods active
> Night blind spot
> Pilots must look 5°–10° off center of the object in order for the object to be seen.

5.  When the page is about 16–18 inches from you, the 

black X should disappear completely because it has 

been imaged onto the blind spot of your right eye. 

(Resist the temptation to move your right eye while 

the black X is gone or else it reappears. Keep staring 

at the airplane.) 

6.  As you continue to look at the airplane, keep moving 

the page closer to you a few more inches, and the black 

X will come back into view. 

7.  There is an interval where you are able to move the 

page a few inches backward and forward, and the black 

X will be gone. This demonstrates to you the extent 

of your blind spot. 

8.  You can try the same thing again, except this time with 

your right eye covered stare at the black X with your 

left eye. Move the page in closer and the airplane will 

disappear. 

Another way to check your blind spot is to do a similar test 

outside at night when there is a full moon. Cover your left 

eye, looking at the full moon with your right eye. Gradually 

move your right eye to the left (and maybe slightly up or 

down). Before long, all you will be able to see is the large 

halo around the full moon; the entire moon itself will seem 

to have disappeared. 

Empty-Field Myopia 

Empty-field myopia is a condition that usually occurs when 

flying above the clouds or in a haze layer that provides 

nothing specific to focus on outside the aircraft. This causes 

the eyes to relax and seek a comfortable focal distance that 

may range from 10 to 30 feet. For the pilot, this means 

looking without seeing, which is dangerous. Searching out 

and focusing on distant light sources, no matter how dim, 

helps prevent the onset of empty-field myopia. 

Night Vision 

There are many good reasons to fly at night, but pilots must 

keep in mind that the risks of night flying are different than 

during the day and often times higher.  [Figure 17-16]  Pilots 

who are cautious and educated on night-flying techniques 

can mitigate those risks and become very comfortable and 

proficient in the task. 

Night Blind Spot 

It is estimated that once fully adapted to darkness, the rods are 

10,000 times more sensitive to light than the cones, making 

them the primary receptors for night vision. Since the cones 

are concentrated near the fovea, the rods are also responsible 

for much of the peripheral vision. The concentration of cones 

in the fovea can make a night blind spot in the center of the 

field of vision. To see an object clearly at night, the pilot must 

expose the rods to the image. This can be done by looking 5° 

to 10° off center of the object to be seen. This can be tried in 

a dim light in a darkened room. When looking directly at the 

light, it dims or disappears altogether. When looking slightly 

off center, it becomes clearer and brighter. 

When looking directly at an object, the image is focused 

mainly on the fovea, where detail is best seen. At night, the 

ability to see an object in the center of the visual field is 

reduced as the cones lose much of their sensitivity and the 

rods become more sensitive. Looking off center can help 

compensate for this night blind spot. Along with the loss of 17-23  

> Figure 17-18. Scanning techniques.
> 4
> 2
> 3
> 110°

sharpness (acuity) and color at night, depth perception and 

judgment of size may be lost.  [Figure 17-17] 

Dark Adaptation 

Dark adaptation is the adjustment of the human eye to a dark 

environment. That adjustment takes longer depending on the 

amount of light in the environment that a person has just left. 

Moving from a bright room into a dark one takes longer than 

moving from a dim room and going into a dark one. 

While the cones adapt rapidly to changes in light intensities, 

the rods take much longer. Walking from bright sunlight into 

a dark movie theater is an example of this dark adaptation 

period experience. The rods can take approximately 30 

minutes to fully adapt to darkness. A bright light, however, 

can completely destroy night adaptation, leaving night 

vision severely compromised while the adaptation process 

is repeated. 

Scanning Techniques 

Scanning techniques are very important in identifying objects 

at night. To scan effectively, pilots must look from right to 

left or left to right. They should begin scanning at the greatest 

distance an object can be perceived (top) and move inward 

toward the position of the aircraft (bottom). For each stop, an 

area approximately 30° wide should be scanned. The duration 

of each stop is based on the degree of detail that is required, 

but no stop should last longer than 2 to 3 seconds. When 

moving from one viewing point to the next, pilots should 

overlap the previous field of view by 10°.  [Figure 17-18] 

Off-center viewing is another type of scan that pilots can use 

during night flying. It is a technique that requires an object be 

viewed by looking 10° above, below, or to either side of the 

object.  [Figure 17-19]  In this manner, the peripheral vision 

can maintain contact with an object. 

With off-center vision, the images of an object viewed longer 

than 2 to 3 seconds will disappear. This occurs because the 

rods reach a photochemical equilibrium that prevents any 

further response until the scene changes. This produces 

a potentially unsafe operating condition. To overcome 

this night vision limitation, pilots must be aware of the 

phenomenon and avoid viewing an object for longer than 2 

or 3 seconds. The peripheral field of vision will continue to 

pick up the object when the eyes are shifted from one off-

center point to another. 

Night Vision Protection 

Several things can be done to help with the dark adaptation 

process and to keep the eyes adapted to darkness. Some of 

the steps pilots and flight crews can take to protect their night 

vision are described in the following paragraphs. 17-24    

> Figure 17-19. Off-center viewing.
> Focal points
> X
> XXX
> X
> Once an object is detected in the peripheral field of dark-adapted vision, continued surveillance is maintained by use of “off-center” vision. Looking 10° right or left and above and below the object, viewing no longer than 2 to 3 seconds at each position.
> OBSERVER 10 degrees 10 degrees 10 degrees 10 degrees

Sunglasses 

If a night flight is scheduled, pilots and crew members should 

wear neutral density (N-15) sunglasses or equivalent filter 

lenses when exposed to bright sunlight. This precaution 

increases the rate of dark adaptation at night and improves 

night visual sensitivity. 

Oxygen Supply 

Unaided night vision depends on optimum function and 

sensitivity of the rods of the retina. Lack of oxygen to the rods 

(hypoxia) significantly reduces their sensitivity. Sharp clear 

vision (with the best being equal to 20–20 vision) requires 

significant oxygen especially at night. Without supplemental 

oxygen, an individual’s night vision declines measurably at 

pressure altitudes above 4,000 feet. As altitude increases, 

the available oxygen decreases, degrading night vision. 

Compounding the problem is fatigue, which minimizes 

physiological well being. Adding fatigue to high altitude 

exposure is a recipe for disaster. In fact, if flying at night at 

an altitude of 12,000 feet, the pilot may actually see elements 

of his or her normal vision missing or not in focus. Missing 

visual elements resemble the missing pixels in a digital image 

while unfocused vision is dim and washed out. 

For the pilot suffering the effects of hypoxic hypoxia, a simple 

descent to a lower altitude may not be sufficient to reestablish 

vision. For example, a climb from 8,000 feet to 12,000 feet for 

30 minutes does not mean a descent to 8,000 feet will rectify 

the problem. Visual acuity may not be regained for over an 

hour. Thus, it is important to remember, altitude and fatigue 

have a profound effect on a pilot’s ability to see. 

High Intensity Lighting 

If, during the flight, any high intensity lighting areas are 

encountered, attempt to turn the aircraft away and fly in the 

periphery of the lighted area. This will not expose the eyes to 

such a large amount of light all at once. If possible, plan your 

route to avoid direct over flight of built-up, brightly lit areas. 

Flightdeck Lighting 

Flightdeck lighting should be kept as low as possible so that 

the light does not monopolize night vision. After reaching 

the desired flight altitude, pilots should allow time to 

adjust to the flight conditions. This includes readjustment 

of instrument lights and orientation to outside references. 

During the adjustment period, night vision should continue 

to improve until optimum night adaptation is achieved. When 

it is necessary to read maps, charts, and checklists, use a dim 

white light flashlight and avoid shining it in your or any other 

crewmember’s eyes. 

Airfield Precautions 

Often time, pilots have no say in how airfield operations are 

handled, but listed below are some precautions that can be 

taken to make night flying safer and help protect night vision. 

• Airfield lighting should be reduced to the lowest 

usable intensity. 

• Maintenance personnel should practice light discipline 

with headlights and flashlights. 

• Position the aircraft at a part of the airfield where the 

least amount of lighting exists. 17-25  

> Figure 17-20. Self-imposed stress. HYPOGLYCEMIA HYPOGLYCEMIA HYPOGLYCEMIA HYPOGLYCEMIA

## ALCOHOL ALCOHOL ALCOHOL ALCOHOL TOBACCO TOBACCO TOBACCO TOBACCO POOR PHYSICAL CONDITION POOR PHYSICAL CONDITION POOL PHYSICAL CONDITION EXHAUSTION EXHAUSTION EXHAUSTION EXHAUSTION DRUGS DRUGS DRUGS DRUGS NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY 

• Select approach and departure routes that avoid 

highways and residential areas where illumination 

can impair night vision. 

Self-Imposed Stress 

Night flight can be more fatiguing and stressful than day 

flight, and many self- imposed stressors can limit night vision. 

Pilots can control this type of stress by knowing the factors 

that can cause self-imposed stressors. Some of these factors 

are listed in the following paragraphs.  [Figure 17-20] 

Drugs 

Drugs can seriously degrade visual acuity during the day and 

especially at night. Pilots who become ill should consult an 

aviation medical examiner (AME) or flight surgeon as to 

which drugs are appropriate to take while flying. 

Exhaustion 

Pilots who become fatigued during a night flight will not be 

mentally alert and will respond more slowly to situations 

requiring immediate action. Exhausted pilots tend to 

concentrate on one aspect of a situation without considering 

the total requirement. Their performance may become a 

safety hazard depending on the degree of fatigue and instead 

of using proper scanning techniques may get fixated on the 

instruments or stare off rather than multitask. 

Poor Physical Conditioning 

To overcome poor physical conditioning, pilots should 

participate in regular exercise programs. People who are 

physically fit become less fatigued during flight and have 

better night scanning efficiency. However, too much exercise 

in a given day may leave crew members too fatigued for 

night flying. 

Alcohol 

Alcohol is a sedative and its use impairs both coordination 

and judgment. As a result, pilots who are impaired by alcohol 

fail to apply the proper techniques of night vision. They are 

likely to stare at objects and to neglect scanning techniques. 

The amount of alcohol consumed determines the degree to 

which night vision is affected. The effects of alcohol are long 

lasting and the residual effects of alcohol can also impair 

visual scanning efficiency. 

Tobacco 

Of all the self-imposed stressors, cigarette smoking most 

decreases visual sensitivity at night. Smoking significantly 

increases the amount of carbon monoxide carried by the 

hemoglobin in red blood cells. This reduces the blood’s 

capacity to combine with oxygen, so less oxygen is carried 

in the blood. Hypoxia caused by carbon monoxide poisoning 

affects peripheral vision and dark adaptation. The results 

are the same as those for hypoxia caused by high altitude. 

Smoking 3 cigarettes in rapid succession or 20 to 30 cigarettes 

within a 24-hour period may saturate from 8 to 10 percent 

of the capacity of hemoglobin. Smokers lose 20 percent of 

their night vision capability at sea level, which is equal to a 

physiological altitude of 5,000 feet. 

Hypoglycemia and Nutritional Deficiency 

Missing or postponing meals can cause low blood sugar, 

which impairs night flight performance. Low blood sugar 

levels may result in stomach contractions, distraction, 

breakdown in habit pattern, and a shortened attention span. 

Likewise, an insufficient consumption of vitamin A may 

also impair night vision. Foods high in vitamin A include 

eggs, butter, cheese, liver, apricots, peaches, carrots, squash, 

spinach, peas, and most types of greens. High quantities of 

vitamin A do not increase night vision but a lack of vitamin 

A certainly impairs it. 

Distance Estimation and Depth Perception 

Knowledge of the mechanisms and cues affecting distance 

estimation and depth perception assist pilots in judging 

distances at night. These cues may be monocular or binocular. 

The monocular cues that aid in distance estimation and depth 

perception include motion parallax, geometric perspective, 

retinal image size, and aerial perspective. 

Motion Parallax 

Motion parallax refers to the apparent motion of stationary 

objects as viewed by an observer moving across the 

landscape. When the pilot or crewmember looks outside the 

aircraft perpendicular to the direction of travel, near objects 

appear to move backward, past, or opposite the path of 

motion; far objects seem to move in the direction of motion 

or remain fixed. The rate of apparent movement depends on 

the distance the observer is from the object. 17-26    

> Figure 17-21. Geometric perspective.
> ABC

Geometric Perspective 

An object may appear to have a different shape when viewed 

at varying distances and from different angles. Geometric 

perspective cues include linear perspective, apparent 

foreshortening, and vertical position in the field. 

• Linear perspective—parallel lines, such as runway 

lights, power lines and railroad tracks, tend to 

converge as distance from the observer increases. 

[Figure 17-21A] 

• Apparent foreshortening—the true shape of an object 

or a terrain feature appears elliptical when viewed 

from a distance.  [Figure 17-21B] 

• Vertical position in the field—objects or terrain 

features farther away from the observer appear higher 

on the horizon than those closer to the observer. 

[Figure 17-21C] 

Aerial Perspective 

The clarity of an object and the shadow cast by it are 

perceived by the brain and are cues for estimating distance. 

Subtle variations in color or shade are clearer the closer the 

observer is to an object. However, as distance increases, 

these distinctions may become blurry. The same applies to 

an object detail or texture. As a person gets farther from an 

object, its discrete details become less apparent. Another 

important fact to remember while flying at night is that every 

object casts a shadow from a light source. The direction in 

which the shadow is cast depends on the position of the light 

source. If the shadow of an object is cast toward the observer, 

the object is closer than the light source is to the observer. 

Binocular Cues 

Binocular cues of an object are dependent upon the slightly 

different viewing angle of each eye of an object. Binocular 

perception is useful only when the object is close enough to 

make an obvious difference in the viewing angle of both eyes. 

In the flight environment, most distances outside the cockpit 

are so great that binocular cues are of little, if any, value. In 

addition, binocular cues operate on a more subconscious 

level than monocular cues and are performed automatically. 

Night Vision Illusions 

There are many different types of visual illusions that 

commonly occur at night. Anticipating and maintaining 

awareness of them is usually the best way to avoid them. 

Autokinesis 

Autokinesis is caused by staring at a single point of light 

against a dark background for more than a few seconds. 

After a few moments, the light appears to move on its own. 

Apparent movement of the light source will begin in about 

8 to 10 seconds. To prevent this illusion, focus the eyes on 

objects at varying distances and avoid fixating on one source 

of light. This illusion can be eliminated or reduced by visual 

scanning, by increasing the number of lights, or by varying 

the light intensity. The most important of the three solutions 

is visual scanning. A light or lights should not be stared at 

for more than 10 seconds. 

False Horizon 

A false horizon can occur when the natural horizon is 

obscured or not readily apparent. It can be generated by 

confusing bright stars and city lights. It can also occur while 

flying toward the shore of an ocean or a large lake. Because 

of the relative darkness of the water, the lights along the 

shoreline can be mistaken for stars in the sky.  [Figure 17-22] 

Reversible Perspective Illusion 

At night, an aircraft may appear to be moving away from 

a second aircraft when it is, in fact, approaching a second 

aircraft. This illusion often occurs when an aircraft is flying 17-27  

> Figure 17-22. At night, the horizon may be hard to discern due to dark terrain and misleading light patterns on the ground.

## Apparent horizon Actual horizon 

parallel to another’s course. To determine the direction of 

flight, pilots should observe aircraft lights and their relative 

position to the horizon. If the intensity of the lights increases, 

the aircraft is approaching; if the lights dim, the aircraft is 

moving away. 

Size-Distance Illusion 

This illusion results from viewing a source of light that is 

increasing or decreasing in luminance (brightness). Pilots 

may interpret the light as approaching or retreating. 

Fascination (Fixation) 

This illusion occurs when pilots ignore orientation cues and 

fix their attention on a goal or an object. Student pilots tend to 

have this happen when they are concentrating on the aircraft 

instruments or attempting to land. They become fixated on 

one task and forget to look at what is going on around them. 

At night, this can be especially dangerous because aircraft 

ground-closure rates are difficult to determine, and there may 

be minimal time to correct the situation. 

Flicker Vertigo 

A light flickering at a rate between 4 and 20 cycles per 

second can produce unpleasant and dangerous reactions. Such 

conditions as nausea, vomiting, and vertigo may occur. On 

rare occasions, convulsions and unconsciousness may also 

occur. Proper scanning techniques at night can prevent pilots 

from getting flicker vertigo. 

Night Landing Illusions 

Landing illusions occur in many forms. Above featureless 

terrain at night, there is a natural tendency to fly a lower-

than-normal approach. Elements that cause any type of 

visual obscurities, such as rain, haze, or a dark runway 

environment, can also cause low approaches. Bright lights, 

steep surrounding terrain, and a wide runway can produce the 

illusion of being too low with a tendency to fly a higher-than-

normal approach. A set of regularly spaced lights along a road 

or highway can appear to be runway lights. Pilots have even 

mistaken the lights on moving trains as runway or approach 

lights. Bright runway or approach lighting systems can create 

the illusion that the aircraft is closer to the runway, especially 

where few lights illuminate the surrounding terrain. 

Prior to flying at night, it is best to learn and know the 

challenges of the area in which you are flying in. Study the 

area and know how to navigate your way through areas that 

may pose a problem at night. For example, many areas near 

water may be obscured by low lying clouds or fog. To help 

deal with this type of situation, it is important to have a plan 

before you leave the ground. In the daytime, fly the routes 

and passes that you will be flying at night and determine the 

minimum altitude you are willing to use at night. If weather 

prevents you from maintaining the altitude that you planned, 

make a decision early to turn 180° and land at an alternate 

airport with better weather conditions. Always consider 

safer alternatives rather than hope things will work out by 

taking a chance. 

Pilots who fly at night should strongly consider oxygen 

supplementation at altitudes and times not required by the 

FAA, especially at night when critical judgment and hand-eye 

coordination is necessary (e.g., IFR) or if he/she is a smoker 

or not perfectly healthy. 

Enhanced Night Vision Systems 

Synthetic Vision Systems (SVS) and Enhanced Flight Vision 

Systems (EFVS) are two systems that can improve the safety 

of flight at night. The technology of both is evolving rapidly 

and being used more and more.  [Figure 17-23] 17-28     

> Figure 17-25. Night time SVS system. Figure 17-24. SVS system.
> Figure 17-23. Synthetic and enhanced vision systems.
> Synthetic vision system Enhanced vision system

Synthetic Vision System 

A Synthetic Vision System (SVS) is an electronic means 

to display a synthetic vision image of the external scene 

topography to the flight crew.  [Figure 17-24]  It is not a 

real-time image like that produced by an EFVS. Unlike 

EFVS, SVS requires a terrain and obstacle database, a 

precise navigation solution, and a display. The terrain 

image is based on the use of data from a Digital Elevation 

Model (DEM) that is stored within the SVS. With SVS, the 

synthetic terrain/vision image is intended to enhance pilot 

awareness of spatial position relative to important features 

in all visibility conditions. This is particularly useful during 

critical phases of flight, such as takeoff, approach, and 

landing, where important features, such as terrain, obstacles, 

runways, and landmarks, may be depicted on the SVS 

display.  [Figure 17-25]  During approach operations, the 

obvious advantages of SVS are that the digital terrain image 

remains on the pilot’s display regardless of how poor the 

visibility is outside. 

An SVS image can be displayed on either a head-down 

display or head-up display (HUD); however, to date, SVS 

has only been certified on head-down displays. Development 

efforts to display a synthetic image on a HUD are currently 

underway as are efforts that would combine SVS with a real-

time sensor image produced by an EFVS. These systems are 

known as Combined Vision Systems. While SVS is currently 

certified as an aid to situation awareness only, the FAA 

and aviation industry are working on defining operational 

concepts and airworthiness criteria that would enable SVS 

to be used for operational credit in certain low visibility 

conditions. Other future enhancements to SVS displays could 

include integrating ADS-B to display traffic information. 

Enhanced Flight Vision System 

Enhanced Vision (EV) or Enhanced Flight Vision System 

(EFVS) is an electronic means to provide a display of 17-29 

the external scene by use of an imaging sensor, such as 

a Forward-Looking InfraRed (FLIR) or millimeter wave 

radar (MMWR). In 2004, 14 CFR part 91, section 91.175 

was amended to reflect that operators conducting straight-

in instrument approach procedures (in other than Category 

II or Category III operations) may now operate below the 

published decision height (DH) or minimum descent altitude 

(MDA) when using an approved EFVS shown on the pilot’s 

HUD. This rule change provides “operational credit” for EV 

equipage. No such credit exists for SV. 

## Chapter Summary 

This chapter provides an introduction to aeromedical factors 

relating to flight activities. More detailed information on 

the subjects discussed in this chapter is available in the 

Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) and online at www. 

faa.gov. 17-30
