Title: Polk County suspect attempts to detonate devices upon officers’ arrival

URL Source: https://www.wgow.com/2025/08/02/polk-county-suspect-attempts-to-detonate-devices-upon-officers-arrival/

Published Time: 2025-08-02T20:39:08+00:00

Markdown Content:
POLK COUNTY, Tenn. (WDEF) – On Friday, Detectives and Deputies of the Polk County Sheriff’s went to 129 Amber Way Old Fort, TN 37362 in attempt to locate Kevin Wade O’Neal.

According to the Polk County Police, O’Neal had active warrants for his arrest for threatening to kill public officials and law enforcement personnel in Polk County.

Upon arrival, Detectives and Deputies made contact with O’Neal inside the residence and placed him into custody.

Officers said that something was smoldering inside the bedroom where they had found O’Neal.

Officers observed what they believed to be an improvised explosive device inside the room and immediately evacuated the residence.

Officers with the Chattanooga Police Department Bomb Squad and Agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) responded to the scene.

During execution of a search warrant, obtained by Investigators of the Polk County Sheriff’s Office, Chattanooga PD Bomb Squad officers and agents of the ATF located fourteen improvised explosive devices inside the residence.

Through their investigation, Detectives of PCSO and Agents of the ATF found that the suspect, O’Neal, attempted to detonate the devices upon officers’ arrival and while they were attempting to apprehend him.

**O’Neal’s charges include:**

-Nine counts of Attempted First Degree Murder for the Attempted Murders of the nine Detectives and Deputies of the Polk County Sheriff’s Office, who were present during the arrest.

-Two counts of Attempted First Degree Murder for the Attempted Murders of two other persons present at the residence.

-Fourteen counts of Prohibited Weapons

-One count of Possession of Explosive Components.

O’Neal is being held at the Polk County Jail on the above listed charges, and his bond has yet to be determined.

Sheriff Steve Ross would like to thank all agencies that responded to assist during this incident and investigation. Those agencies include but are not limited to the following: West Polk Fire and Rescue, AmeriPro EMS, Tennessee Highway Patrol, the 10th Judicial District Drug Task Force, agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Chattanooga Police Department Bomb Squad, and Tennessee Department of Homeland Security.

Tags:Agents of the Bureau of Alcohol,ATF,Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco Firearms and Explosives,Chattanooga Police Department,Chattanooga Police Department Bomb Squad,Explosives,Local News,PCSO,Polk County Police,Polk County Sheriff’s Office,Tobacco
