Title: Full text of "Letters of Napoleon;"

URL Source: https://archive.org/stream/LettersOfNapoleon/LettersOfNapoleon_djvu.txt

Markdown Content:
See other formats
-----------------

LETTERS OF 

NAPOLEON 

Selected, Translated, and Edited by 
J. M. THOMPSON 

Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford 

BASIL BLACKWELL 
OXFORD 
*934 

Printed in Great Britain lor Basil Blackwell & Mott Ltd. 
by the Kemp Hall Press Ltd. in the City of Oxford 

INTRODUCTION 

i 

Letters are, upon the whole, the most truthful as well as 
the most interesting of historical documents. Both to the 
spectator of life and to the student of history there is infinite 
value in the unconsidered confessions, the fireside confi¬ 
dences of public men. The orator, impressing himself upon 
his hearers, comes to believe what he is saying, and to 
fancy himself what they take him to be. The diarist, confer¬ 
ring with himself in a hall of mirrors, poses before his own 
image, and loses even that contact with reality which 
comes from being misunderstood. The letter-writer has an 
audience of one, not himself. If he is to impose his views, it 
must be by argument, not rhetoric; for pen and ink convey 
no gesture or intonation. If he is to confess, it must be 
(approximately, at least) the truth; for every word will be 
weighed by a friendly, or perhaps a hostile critic. 

Not that all Napoleon’s letters, or even many of them, 
are of a self-revealing kind. In youth he had few confidants; 
in middle age he had little to confide. In the stress of 
business and war he soon shed the idealism of the patriot, 
the fatalism of the revolutionary, and the romanticism of the 
lover. Any sense he may once have had of the beauty, the 
pathos, or even the humour of life was coarsened by flattery 
and success. He can still declare, exhort, abuse, persuade, 
even charm; but always in the interest of a policy, and to 
gain an end. He is wise, clear-sighted, eloquent, heroic; but 
hardly ever a human being in repose. Nevertheless, Napo¬ 
leon’s letters remain, beyond anything written about him, or 
anything else he wrote or said about himself, by far his 
finest portrait. 

ii 

When he was a young man, Napoleon wrote in the rapid 
and already confused hand of the relatively rare letters 

v 

Introduction 

signed ‘Buonaparte’ or ‘Bonaparte.’ With growing age 
and work, his hand-writing became so slovenly as to be 
wellnigh illegible; whilst his signature shortened from 
‘Napoleon’ to ‘Napol.’, ‘Nap.’, ‘Np.’, and ‘N.’ Though he 
still wrote some private letters, and the more important 
military and diplomatic despatches, he habitually employed 
secretaries, and carried on the bulk of his correspondence 
by dictation. 

Napoleon had three principal secretaries—Bourrienne 
(1797-1802), Meneval (1802-13), and Fain (1806-14). All of 
them wrote Memoirs, and there is no lack of evidence as to 
how their work was done. In a rather unkind conversation 
at St. Helena, 1 Napoleon said that Bourrienne wrote a good 
hand, and was active, tireless, and patriotic, but that he was 
a gambler, whose face lit up when his master dictated any¬ 
thing dealing with big figures: he was in fact dismissed 
for becoming involved in financial speculation. His work 
was done partly at the Luxembourg, and partly at the 
Tuileries. In his Memoirs he describes Napoleon’s appear¬ 
ance, dress, and habits in minute detail. From breakfast at 
10 to dinner at 5 every hour was taken up with reading 
petitions, correcting letters, giving interviews, or attending 
meetings. There were two tables in the study at the Tuiler¬ 
ies—one for Napoleon near the fireplace, and another for 
Bourrienne near the window, through which, in summer, 
he could see the foliage of the chestnut trees in the garden. 
The chief ornament of the room was a portrait of Louis 
XIV, to the forehead of which some zealous Republican 
had fastened a tricolor cockade. 

M&ieval, who inherited Bourrienne’s place in the Tuil¬ 
eries, teJIs us more about his workshop—Napoleon’s table 
and chair of bronze gilt, finished with griffins’ heads, and 
the green taffeta settee at which he does most of his work, 
screened from the full heat of the fire. Besides Louis XIV, 
there is now a bronze equestrian statuette of Frederick the 
Great. At Saint-Cloud, where they work in the summer, 
the study is a large room lined with books; the table is to 

1 Gourgaud, i. 565. 

vi 

Introduction 

Napoleon’s own design, of hour-glass shape, so that two 
persons can easily converse across it, with space for books 
or papers at either end; and there are busts of Scipio, Caesar, 
and Hannibal, with a portrait of Charles XII of Sweden, 
subsequently displaced by Gustavus Adolphus. At first, 
Napoleon let Meneval open his letters for him; later he did 
this for himself, answered some at once, put others aside 
to be answered later, and threw the rest on die floor;—‘he 
used to call not answering the best part of his work.’ Some¬ 
times Napoleon would work alone from 2 to 5 a.m., and 
begin to dictate at 7; sometimes, when there was a press of 
business, the secretary would be summoned at 4 or 5 a.m., 
and find Napoleon waiting for him in a white dressing- 
gown, with a Madras handkerchief round his head; striding 
up and down, with his hands behind his back, and now and 
again taking a pinch of snuff, for an hour or two he would 
dictate with amazing fluency and dearness, and so rapidly 
that it was necessary to invent a kind of short-hand, and to 
fill up gaps from memory or conjecture; for he hated to be 
interrupted, or to be asked to explain. Fortunately, Meneval, 
though ‘ a mere derk, who could barely write correcdy’, 
had, his master admitted, a turn for imitating his style. 
When this early spell of dictation was over, Napoleon would 
call for sherbet and ices, perhaps have a hot bath, and go to 
bed again. After an hour’s sleep, he would be ready for the 
real work of the day. On the first opportunity Meneval 
would turn his rough draft into fair copies, whidi Napoleon 
would look through, occasionally correct—but so efficient 
was the collaboration that out of a group of 2,000 letters 
scarcely 30 would need it—and add, with a flourish of an 
overfilled goose-quill, a signature that usually ended in a 
blot. 

Fain’s account is the same. Hour after hour he sits at the 
secretary’s table, ‘as silent as another piece of furniture, 
answering if the Emperor asks a question, writing if the 
Emperor says “write,” and in the intervals addressing 
old letters or making fair copies of new ones: he must 
always be there.’ M&ieval had been there—almost unknown 

vii 

Introduction 

even to the Palace officials by sight—for eleven years, until 
he retired, worn out; Napoleon at St. Helena admitted that 
he had nearly killed him . 1 In Fain’s time the routine was, 
first, to correct and sign papers dictated the previous day; 
then to deal with fresh correspondence; then to read 
Ministers’ reports, the police news, the daily papers, and 
the contents of a red morocco case marked Gazettes Stran¬ 
gles , which really held private letters confiscated by the 
Post Office; and finally to deal with letters reserved for 
maturer consideration. Napoleon’s dictation, says Fain, 
resembled a conversation, as though his correspondent 
were in the room; the faster he talked, the faster he walked 
to and fro; it was impossible to interrupt the imaginary 
tUe-a-tite, or to break a thread of thought which had, 
from day to day, its dominant ideas, and its recurrent 
phrases. 

When Napoleon went to the front, his secretaries went 
with him, and his habits of work. In the field, wherever he 
might be, the blue and white tent was pitched, and its two 
compartments arranged—one, the study, with its folding 
table and chairs, the other the bedroom. The papers and 
books were unpacked, the maps spread out; and, the mom¬ 
ent fighting was over, dictation would begin. However far 
he was from Paris, the leather portfolios marked ‘Des¬ 
patches for the Emperor’ must come and go every day, out¬ 
stripping the fastest mail. Again, whether Napoleon travels 
in the yellow voiture de posts , or in the green-upholstered 
her line, Berthier is sure to be there; and as they jolt along, 
the Emperor goes through his order-books and muster- 
rolls, makes his decisions, and dictates his commands. At 
the first stopping-place, day or night, and the first moment 
of leisure, Berthier writes them out from his notes, and 
sends them off, with matchless method and accuracy. 

Thus, in his study, in his carriage, or in his tent, Napoleon 
lost the gaucherie which prevented success as a public 
speaker, and became the master of a quick, vigorous, and 
lucid style, at once terse and rhetorical, argumentative and 

x Las Cases, Memorial , 213. 

viii 

Introduction 

overbearing, which, in spite of its poverty of words and 
constructions, places him amongst die great letter-writers.. 

hi 

How many letters did Napoleon write? The Committee. 
of 1854 estimated them at 64,600, Taine at 70,000, Brotonne 
(in 1898) at 54,000: these figures would mean that he wrote- 
from ten to twelve a day throughout the fifteen years of his- 
rule. Sometimes this average was much exceeded. When 
Eugene became Viceroy of Italy in 1805 he received twenty- 
one letters—many of them long and important documents 
—in a single week; when, upon another occasion, Deeres- 
incurred the Emperor’s displeasure, he was punished by the 
arrival of five letters in one day. At other times, as when. 
Napoleon was travelling or campaigning, the average fell 
off: and during the fortnight before and after his second 
marriage (April, 1810), only eleven letters were des¬ 
patched . 1 

So many documents have been destroyed (for instance,, 
those lost or burnt during the retreat from Moscow), and so 
many may still be extant, but unpublished, that any estimate 
of the total number must be insecure. What here concerns us. 
is that some 41,000 have been printed in the various books 
from which the present selection has been made. 

IV 

Between 1815 and 1850 fragments of Napoleon’s corre¬ 
spondence were published in the Memoirs to which the- 
supporters of the Bourbon and Orleans regimes were so- 
addicted. The establishment of the second Empire naturally 
brought a demand that the archives of the first should be un¬ 
locked. In 1854, Napoleon HI set up a Commission ‘to col¬ 
lect, classify, and publish the correspondence of our august 
predecessor, Napoleon I, concerning the various branches- 
of public interest.’ During the next ten years this Commis¬ 
sion searched (pretty thoroughly) the French public records, 

■’■These numbers are taken from the Official Correspondence, and therefore may 
not be quite complete. 

IX 

Introduction 

-secured many copies of letters preserved in foreign archives, 
and some few from private collections; as a result, fifteen 
volumes were published, containing 13,094 documents, 
dating from 1793 to August, 1807. But there were many 
•omissions—duplicates of military orders, documents which 
the Commissioners regarded as ‘devoid of interest/ and 
letters containing allusions that might be painful to persons 
•or families still alive, or exaggerated expressions which 
(it was urged) Napoleon deliberately used to startle or to 
impress his correspondents, and which therefore did not 
fairly represent his mind. 

Even so, Napoleon III was not satisfied that that corre¬ 
spondence, as edited by the Commission, was entirely to the 
credit of his ‘august predecessor/ or entirely harmless to 
himself; and in 1864 he asked Prince Jerome Napoleon to 
become chairman of a reconstituted Commission, and to 
-.supervise the remainder of the work on more edifying lines. 
The Prince consented, on condition that two members of 
the old Commission should retire—Vaillant, because he 
differed from the new chairman on nearly every question, 
and Prosper Mdrimee, because he was a sceptic and a cynic, 
who had (for instance) wanted to publish a letter in which 
Napoleon jokingly mentioned a rumour attributing to 
himself the paternity of Mme. * * *’s baby. Saint-Beuve, 
another of the commissioners, was persuaded, rather un¬ 
willingly, to remain. 

The principles on which publication was to proceed 
were soon made known. ‘In general/ said the new editors, 
‘we have taken as our guide the simple idea that we were 
•called to publish what the Emperor would have published, 
if, surveying himself, and anticipating the verdict of history, 
he had wanted to display his person and system to pos¬ 
terity/ 1 ‘On principle I pointed out,* wrote the Prince, 
that, as the heirs 01 Napoleon, we should in the first place 
be inspired by his own wishes, and depict him in the colours 
in which he himself would have desired to appear.* It was 
further decided that Napoleon's writings at St. Helena 

1 Report in Vol. 16. 

X 

Introduction 

should be included in an additional volume, and that family 
and private letters should be published ‘whenever they 
-contained some characteristic point likely to bring out one 
-of the manifold sides of the grand personality of the 
Emperor—so mighty and so varied in its aptitudes.’ 1 

Such were the principles that ruled the publication of the 
thirty-two volumes of the Official Correspondence. The best 
commentary upon them is to be found in the work of later 
editors. Du Casse in 1887 and Lecestre in 1897 gleaned richly 
in the field abandoned by the discreet reapers. Lecestre, in 
particular, exposed the methods of the official editors. He 
showed that, out of a group of forty-two letters handed over 
from the Archives to Napoleon III personally in 1864, only 
ten had been returned; fifteen could be reconstructed from 
copies, but fifteen had completely disappeared, presumablv 
in the burning of the Tuileries in 18 71. 2 He examined and 
disproved the claim of the first Commission to have printed 
the letters unaltered. Thus, in No. 12921, Napoleon writes 
to his brother, Jerome:—‘1 thought you would be at Glo- 
gau. It is the belles of Breslau who delay you, I can’t help thinking'. 
the editors omitted the words in italics. In No. 14764 he 
writes again to Jerome, ‘Cut down your extravagances by 
half, instead of getting money from the Treasury , on account of the 
Civil List , as you have done this year’: the italicised words 
were omitted. In No. 15 741, writing to Clarke, he says, 
‘General Theodore Lameth is an abominable intriguer, 
capable of causing disorder wherever he goes; dismiss Trim 
from the army’: all this was deleted. In a number of other 
passages, personal reflexions were retained only by the 
-expedient of saying that the names given by Napoleon were 
illegible. As for letters totally excluded by the editors, 
Lecestre found 165 of them worth reprinting from the seven 
years covered by the first Commission: from the eight years 
covered by the second Commission he took more than 
1,000. In general character and interest these documents are 
in no way inferior to those printed by the official editors. 

Prince Napoleon, Napoleon and his detractors. 

2 Cf. J. B. Rye, ‘The lost and the new letters of Napoleon* (E.H.R., xiii, 473). 

xi 

Introduction 

They include (i) letters to Fouche as Minister of Police, 
ordering arrests or imprisonments, dealing with the censor¬ 
ship of the press, and instructing him to use forged papers 
for propaganda purposes, or to induce a prisoner to talk; 
(2) orders to generals for the burning of villages, shooting 
of rebels, reprisals, and the taking of hostages; (3) some very 
frank letters to Napoleon’s family, especially his brother 
Louis; (4) some more in a similar strain to or about the 
Pope; (5) suggestions of discreditable proceedings, such as 
4 cooking ’ casualty lists and army returns, ‘accidentally* 
blowing up a fort evacuated under treaty, or using torture 
to extract evidence from a spy—this last passage the editors* 
had omitted as ‘illegible/ 1 These letters give a special 
character to Lecestre’s collection: it might be called ‘The 
Indiscreet Letters of Napoleon/ 

Another curious collection of Addenda is supplied by 
Pelissier’s Le registre de Vile d’Elbe. Volume XXIX of the 
Official Correspondence includes 114 letters belonging to 
Napoleon’s residence at Elba: 33 of these, but no more, 
came from a collection of 180 made by Napoleon himself, 
and still available; the rest were omitted, apparently as 
unworthy of their author. Yet few periods in Napoleon’s 
career are more illuminating than the months during which 
he was organising a tiny island and a skeleton navy on the 
scale of a world empire. 

During the last thirty years the ransacking of archives, 
public and private, has produced some thousands more 
of Napoleonic letters, orders, decrees, notes, and other 
documents, mostly of a military origin. Some few sources, 
still untapped, are known or suspected to exist. But it is not 
likely that they will contribute anything to alter the general 
impression produced by the writings already published. 

v 

The evidential value of Napoleon’s letters has been 
generally recognised by historians and biographers of the 

1 See No. 74 in the present collection. 

xii 

Introduction 

period, and recent writers have followed the excellent 
practice of quoting them verbatim. But this has led to a 
danger against which English readers need to be warned. 
In some of these books the writers have not been over- 
scrupulous to preserve the original text and chronological 
context of their quotations; in one, at least, a translation 
from German into English, the quotations have apparently 
been re-translated from the German, with results that are 
sometimes quite misleading. Both sources of error may 
be illustrated from the English version of Emil Ludwig’s 
'Napoleon. On p. 39, part of a letter of 1795 is printed 
immediately after one of 1791, as though it belonged to the 
same circumstances; and on p. 57 a summary of a letter is 
given as a quotation from it—both are common practices of 
the author. On p. 102, Talleyrand is picturesquely described 
as ‘reading on’ from a letter dated September 19, 1797, into 
one dated August 16. On p. 204, the portfolio in which 
Meneval keeps Napoleon’s papers and ‘all the secret 
memoranda’ becomes a ‘map,’ and makes nonsense of the 
passage. 1 On p. 236,—another picturesque scene—it is 
said that ‘on his (Napoleon’s) table, as he signs the letter to 
the Shah (dated March 30), lies a letter to George III (dated 
January 2).’ On p. 337, ‘There are Popes in Hell as well as 
parsons,’ becomes ‘in the realm of shades there will be 
priests just as good as the Popes’; and the point is lost. 2 On 
p. 462, one of the best things in a fine letter to Augereau is 
spoilt by importing a journalistic cliche, ‘your seven-leagued 
boots.’ 8 So it goes on, in one ‘quotation’ after another. The 
reader can never be sure that he has Napoleon’s words, or 
even his meaning. 

VI 

Here follows a list of the principal sources, beginning 
with the Official Correspondence of 1854, from which the 
letters in the present volume have been selected. 

1 v. No. 70 in the present collection. 

*v. No. 173. 

xiii 

V. No. 280. 

Introduction 

1854-69 Correspondance de Napoleon I. Publiee pat ordte de 
l’Empereur Napoleon III. (32 vols. Paris.) Re¬ 
ferred to as Corresp. 

1855 Memoires et Correspondancepolitiques et militaires du 
roi Joseph (10 vols., Paris). [E.T. The confidential 
correspondence of Napoleon Bonaparte with 
his brother Joseph, 2 vols., 1855.] Referred to as 
Joseph. 

1887 Supplement d la Correspondance de Napoleon I*. 
Lettres curieuses omises par le comite de publica¬ 
tion. Rectifications. Ed. Baron Du Casse. (Paris.) 
Referred to as Du Casse. 

1895 NapoUon Inconnu. Par F. Masson. (2 vols. Paris.) 
Referred to as Masson. 

1897 'Lettres inedites de Napoleon I er i An. VIII-1815. 
Publiees par L. Lecestre. (2 vols. Paris.) [E.T. 
New Letters of Napoleon I, by Lady Mary Loyd, 
1898.] Referred to as Lecestre. 

1897 Le registre de l’tie d’Elbe . Lettres et ordres inddites 
de Napoleon I #r ,28 Mai, 1814—22 Fevrier, 1815. 
Publies par L. G. Pdlissier. (Paris.) Referred to as 

P^LISSIER. 

1897 Lettres , ordres et decrets de NapoUon I tr en 1812-* 
13-14 non inserts dans la ‘Correspondance.* Re- 
cueillis et publies par M. le vicomte de Grouchy. 
(Paris.) 

1898 Lettres inidites de Napoleon I’* collationnees sur 
les textes et publics par L. de Brotonne. (Paris.) 
Referred to as Brotonne i. 

1903 Dernieres lettres inedites de NapoUon I er collation¬ 
nees sur les textes et publics par L. de Brotonne. 
(2 vols* Paris.) Referred to as Brotonne ii. 

1903 Some letters of the first Napoleon. (Fisher, English 
Historical Review 13/533.) 

1908 Supplement a la correspondance de NapoUon I. L’Em- 
pereur et la Pologne. (Paris.) 

1909 Lettres de PEmpereur NapoUon du I er aout au 18 
Octobre, 1813, non inserees dans le correspon- 

xiv 

Introduction 

dance. Publiees par X ... (Paris, Nancy.) Referred 
to as X. 

1911 En marge de la Correspondance de 'Napoleon I. Pieces, 
inedites concemant la Pologne, 1801-1815. Ed. A.. 
Skalkowski. (Warsaw, Paris, Lwow.) , 

1911-12 Ordres et apostilles de Napoleon , 1799-1815. Ed. A. 
Chuquet. (4 vols. Paris.) Referred to as Chuquet L 

1912 Correspondance inedite de Napoleon I tr conservee aux 
Archives de la Guerre. Publiee par E. Picard et L. . 
Tuetey. (4 vols.) [E.T. Unpublished Correspondence- 
of Napoleon I. 3 vols. New York.] 

i 9 i 3~ i 9 Inedits NapoUoniens. Ed. A. Chuquet. (2 vols- 
Paris.) Referred to as Chuquet ii. 

1928 Lettres de Napoleon d Josiphine. Ed. L. Cerf. Re¬ 
ferred to as Cerf. 

vii 

The selection of 300 documents out of 41,000 required, 
drastic rules of rejection. Army bulletins, proclamations,, 
orders, financial matters, and military despatches have been 
ruled out almost entirely. A few ‘notes* have been admitted 
which it would have been a sin to leave out: the distinction 
between letter and note is in any case not absolute. With a 
few exceptions, letters not worth inserting in full have not 
been inserted at all. Where passages are omitted, there are 
dots: but if the dots are (as occasionally happens) Napo¬ 
leon’s own, this is explained in the note at the end of the 
letter. Generally sneaking, the intention has been to pick 
out letters illustrating every side of Napoleon’s character 
and career; the most important, the most interesting, and 
the most readable; those that a historian must have for use,, 
and those that a general reader will like to have for pleasure. 
The selector can only hope that his taste is that of other 
admirers of Napoleon as a letter-writer. 

The translator is conscious that he is not an exact French 
scholar, and that he may have missed the meaning of a word, 
or phrase here and there. But he hopes that he has succeeded. 

xv 

Introduction 

in catching (what is even more important) the moods which 
‘dictated Napoleon’s changes of style, and some of the force 
-and clearness of mind which he brought to his letter¬ 
writing, as to everything he touched. 

The editor hopes that the short notes at the end of the 
letters will explain what needs to be explained, without 
worrying the reader with unnecessary information; and that 
the List of Letters and the Indexes will enable the more 
purposeful visitor to the Napoleonic museum to find his 
way to the exhibits which interest him most. 

NOTE 

The original spelling of names has been followed , except in the 
m notes , where ordinary English usage has been adopted. 

The editor is indebted to his son , Anthony Thompson , for the 
design on the cover. 

xvi 

Lucien 

X 

THE BROTHERS 

TO NICOLO PARAVICINI (?) 

Brienne, June 25 (?) 1784. 

My Dear Uncle, 

I write to iofotm you that my dear father passed through 
Brienne on his way to Paris. He was taking Mariana to Saint- 
Cyr, in an attempt to restore her health. He arrived here on 
the 21 st, with Lucciano and the two young ladies whom you 
have seen. He left Lucciano here. He is 9 years old, and 3 
feet, 4 inches, and 6 lines tall. He is in the sixth class for 
Latin, and is going to learn all the subjects in the curricu¬ 
lum, He shows plenty of talent and good intentions. It is to 
be hoped that he will turn out well. He is a big upstanding 
boy, quick and impulsive, and he is making a good start. He 
knows French well, and has forgotten all his Italian. He will 
add a message to you at the end of my letter. I shan’t tell 
him what to say, so that you may see what he can do for 
himself. I hope he will write to you more often now than 
when he was at Autun. 

I am pretty sure my brother Joseph has not written to 
you. How could you expect him to? He only writes two 
lines to my dear father, if he writes at all—though of course 
that’s a different thing. All the same, he writes jto me often 
enough. He is in Rhetoric, and could do better than any of 
us if he cared; for the Principal told my dear father that there 
wasn’t a more talented Physicist, Rhetorician, or Philoso¬ 
pher in the whole school, or one who could produce a better 
version. As for his future profession, he has put the Church 
first, as you know; and hitherto he has persisted in his reso¬ 
lution. Now he wants to enter the King’s service. I think he 
is making a big mistake, for several reasons. 

(1) First, as my dear father points out, he is not strong 
enough to face the dangers of war. His weak health doesn’t 
allow him to bear the strain of foreign service, and so he 

b 1 

Joseph 

contemplates military life merely in the form of garrison 
duty. Certainly my brother would make an excellent 

f arrison officer: he is cheerful and good looking, the kind of 
oy who will come in for plenty of foolish flattery: in fact, 
he has the talent for getting on well in society. But what if it 
comes to fighting?—that is what my dear father is doubtful 
about. 

What warrior needs such empty gifts as these? 

How will they help him , if he he not brave? 

Were he with beauty as Adonis decked , 

Were he with Pindar’s eloquence endowed , 

And yet lacked courage , he would be despised. 

(2) He has been educated for a clerical career. It is very 
late to change his mind. The Bishop of Autun would have 
presented him to a rich living, and he was certain of a bis¬ 
hopric. How that would have helped the family! The Bishop 
' aas done all he can to make him persevere, promising that he 
will never be sorry for it. It is no good: he sticks to his de¬ 
cision. If he has a real taste for the army—which, after all, is 
the best profession in the world—and if the Great Mover of 
human affairs gave him at birth (as he gave me) a definite 
turn for the military life, then I approve of his choice. 

(3) He wants to go into the army. Very well, but into 
what branch of the service? The Marines? But he knows no 
mathematics; and it would take him two years to leam it. 
Besides, he hasn’t the health for a life at sea. If it is to be the 
Engineers, he will need four or five years to leam what is 
necessary, and at the end of that time he will still be only an 
Engineer cadet: besides, I don’t believe it is compatible with 
his frivolous character to spend the whole day at work. The 
same reason excludes the Artillery, except that he would 
only have to work 18 months to become a cadet, and an¬ 
other 18 to get his commission. No! that’s not the sort of 
thing for him either. No doubt, then, he would like to enter 
the Infantry. Very good: I understand. He wants to do 
nothing all day but parade the town. Besides, what is a 
smart young infantry officer up to, three quarters of his 
time, except misconducting himself? And that is something 

Father’s Death 

that neither my dear father, nor you, nor my mother, nor 
my dear unde the Archdeacon, can ever allow, especially as 
he has already shown some signs of extravagance and 
frivolity. We shall therefote make a last effort to get him to 
stick to the clerical career; and failing that, my dear father 
will take him back to Corsica with him, and keep an eye on 
him, and try to turn him into a lawyer. 

I end by begging you to continue your kindness towards 
me. It will be my first duty and my earnest endeavour to 
make myself worthy of it. 

I am, with profound respect. 

Your very humble and very obedient servant and nephew, 

Napol^one di Buonaparte. 

P.S.—Tear up this letter, my dear Unde; but it is to be 
hoped that, with his talents, and with the good feelings his 
education should have imparted to him, Joseph will take 
the right course, and become the mainstay of our family. Do 
what you can to make him see the advantages of this. 

[Masson, i, 79. Napoleon, aged 15 , has been five years at the Military 
School at Brienne. Lucciano is his younger brother Lucien; Mariana is 
his younger sister Maria-Anna; the two young ladies are cousins, also 
bound for Saint-Cyr; his dear uncle, the Archdeacon, is his father’s 
uncle Lucien, Archdeacon of Ajaccio.] 

2 

HIS FATHER’S DEATH 

TO HIS MOTHER 

Paris, March 28, 1785. 

My Dear Mother, 

To-day, when time has somewhat calmed the first 
transports of my grief, I hasten to assure you of the grati¬ 
tude that all your goodness to us inspires. Comfort yourself, 
mother dear; the situation requires it. We shall be doubly 
grateful and attentive to you, and feel happy, if by our 
obedience we can recompense you a little for the incalculable 
loss of your beloved husband. I end, my dear mother—my 

3 

P AO LI 

grief prevents my saying more—by begging you to calm 
your sorrow. My health is perfect, and it is my daily prayer 
that Heaven may grant you the like. Present my respects 
to Zia Gertrude, Minana Saveria, Minana Fesch, etc. 

P.S.—On March 27th, at 7 p.m., the Queen of France 
gave birth to a prince, named the Duke of Normandy. 

Your very affectionate son, 

Napoleon di Bonaparte. 

[Masson, i, iax. Zia Gertrude is his mother’s sister-in-law, Minana 
Fesch her half-sister, and Minana Saveria a servant of the Bonaparte 
family.] 

3 

THE CORSICAN PATRIOT 

TO GENERAL PAOLI 

Auxonne en Bourgogne, June 12, 1789. 

General, 

I was bom when my country was dying. Thirty thousand 
Frenchmen disgorged upon our shores, and drowning the 
throne of Liberty in a sea of blood—such was the hateful 
spectacle that offended my infant eyes. 

My cradle was surrounded, from the very day of my 
birth, by the cries of the dying, the groans of oppression, 
and the tears of despair. 

You left our isle, and took with you every hope of 
happiness. To submit was to be enslaved. Our compatriots, 
weighed down by the triple chain of soldier, lawyer, and 
tax-collector, live despised—despised by those who wield 
the power of government. Is there crueller torment a man 
of sensibility can endure? Did the unhappy Peruvian, 
perishing by the sword of some greedy Spaniard, ever feel 
such agony as this? 

Traitors to the country, vile souls corrupted by the love of 
base gain, have tried to justify themselves by scattering 
charges against the national government, and against your- 

4 

Literary Ambitions 

self. Writers take these charges for the truth, and hand them 
down to posterity. 

As I read them I am fired with zeal, and am resolved to 
scatter these mists, the offspring of ignorance. A study begun 
in France long ago, constant observations, and memories 
drawn from the portfolios of patriots, encourage me to 
hope for some success. I want to compare your government 
with that of the present day. I want to blacken with the 
pencil of infamy those who have betrayed our common 
cause. I want to call our rulers before the court of public 
opinion, to give chapter and verse for their oppression, to 
trace the secret history of their intrigues, and, if possible, to 
interest the virtuous minister who governs the State in the 
deplorable lot under which Corsica suffers so cruelly. 

If I possessed the means to live in Paris, I should doubt¬ 
less have found other ways of making our grievances heard; 
but the obligations of military service confine me to the sole 
resource of publicity. Private appeals would never reach 
their objective, or would be stifled by the clamours of 
vested interests, and end only in the ruin of their author. 

I am still young, and may be rash to undertake this: but 
I shall be upheld by my love of truth, of my country, and 
of my compatriots, and by the enthusiasm I never cease 
to derive from the prospect of an improvement in our state. 
If you. General, condescend to approve of a work which 
bears so much upon yourself, and to encourage the efforts 
of a young man whose birth you witnessed, and whose 
family were always on the right side, I dare to predict a 
favourable issue. 

I shall hope some time to be able to come to London, to 
express sentiments which owe their origin to you, and to 
converse with you about our country’s misfortunes; bur 
the distance is an obstacle. Perhaps a day will come when 
I shall be in a position to make the journey. 

Whether my book is successful or not, I am aware that it 
will raise up against me the whole battalion of French 
officials who govern our island, and whom I am attacking. 
But what matter, if it is in my country’s cause? I shall hear 

5 

RAYNAL 

the thunder of ill-will; and if the bolt falls, I shall t.ke refuge 
in my conscience, recall the rightness of my motives, and be 
encouraged to face the storm. 

Allow me, General, to offer you the respects of my 
family, and—why should I not say it?—of my fellow- 
citizens. They remember with tears the time when they had 
hopes of freedom. My mother, Mme Letizia, asks me to 
recall to your memory the old days at Corte. 

I am, General, with respect, 

Your very humble and very obedient servant, 
Napoleon Buonaparte. 

[Masson, ii, 64. Pasquale Paoli, soldier and patriot, headed the 
rebellion which freed Corsica from the Genoese in 1755. Defeated by 
the French, who purchased the island in 1769, he had now been in exile 
for twenty years. Napoleon, after a year and three-quarters’ holiday 
in Corsica, had rejoined the La F£re artillery regiment at Auxonne in 
May, 1788. Corte, forty miles north-east of Ajaccio in Corsica, had been 
the headquarters of the Paolist party during the French invasion, and 
Napoleon’s father had attended the university there.] 

4 

HISTORY OF CORSICA 

TO THE ABB£ RAYNAL 

1789 (?) 

A friend of freemen, you are interested inthe fate of your 
beloved Corsica. The character of its people destined it for 
liberty: its central position, its many harbours, and its fertile 
soil pointed to a great commercial career^ Why has it never 
had liberty or trade? Some inexplicable x fate has always 
armed its neighbours against it. It has been the prey of their 
ambition, and the victim both of their policy and of their 
prejudices^ You have seen Corsica in arms, shaking off the 
atrocious“Government of Genoa, and recovering its inde¬ 
pendence: for a moment it is alive and happy, but it falls 
again, pursued by this resistless fate into unbearable degra¬ 
dation. Such are the scenes that succeed one another, with- 

6 

Cor sica 

out break, for 2,400 years; the same vicissitudes, the same 
misfortunes; but also the same resolution, the same audacity, 
the same courage. The Romans could annex the island only 
by making it their ally. Swarms of barbarians landed there: 
they overran the fields, they burned the houses; the Corsicans 
ceased to be land-owners, but they never ceased to be men; 
they became vagrants to preserve their freedom. Corsica 
trembled before the hydra of feudalism, but only to 
study it, and to destroy. If in slavery it hugged the chains 
of Rome, it soon broke them in the name of Nature. If 
at last it bowed its head beneath the Genoese nobles, if 
for 20 years sheer force kept it subject to the tyranny of 
Versailles, yet 40 years of stubborn warfare astonished 
Europe, and confounded its foes: and you, who prophesied 
the fall of Holland, and the regeneration of France, promised 
Corsica that its Government should be restored, and the 
unjust domination of France come to an end. "Mien this 
intrepid people awoke from its slumber, and reminded 
itself that, whilst death is but a state of the soul, slavery is 
its very degradation, your prediction was fulfilled. Yes, 
fulfilled. In a moment—needless to ask why—all was 
changed. From the heart of a nation that had known no 
rulers but foreign tyrants, flashed the electric spark: an 
enlightened, generous, and powerful people remembered 
its old rights and its old strength: it willed to be free, and 
allowed us to share its freedom. It opened its bosom to us: 
we have now the same interests, the same cares: nothing 
separates us but the sea. 

Amongst the paradoxes of the French Revolution, this is 
not the least. Those who once put us to death as rebels are 
now our protectors, ami our feelings animate their minds* 
O Man, Man! how despicable in slavery! how great when 
fired with the love of freedom! Thy prejudices fade away, 
thy soul is uplifted, thy reason resumes its rule! Regenerate, 
thou art indeed the King of Nature! 

How many vicissitudes, Sir, the nations undergo! Is it 
blind chance, or is it the foresight of a higher intelligence 
that directs their lot? Forgive me, Goal But tyranny, 

7 

Washington 

oppression, and injustice devastate the world, and the 
world is thy work. Suffering and anxiety are the lot of the 
righteous, and the righteous is made in thine image!!! 
These thoughts are written upon every page of Corsican 
history; for it is the story of a constant struggle between a 
small people that wishes to be free and its neighbours who 
wish to oppress it. The former defends itself with an energy 
inspired by justice and the love of independence: the 
latter attack it by methods perfected by science and cen¬ 
turies of experience. Those have their mountains as a 
last resort: these their ships. Masters of the sea, they inter¬ 
cept the Corsican communications, retiring, returning, and 
varying their attacks at will. Thus the sea, which for all 
other nations has been the chief source of wealth and power; 
the sea, which gave rise to Tyre, Carthage, and Athens; 
the sea, which still supports England, Holland, and France 
at their climax of splendour and power—t he se a was a 
source of misfortune to my country.,Alas, that mankind is 
•not more limited"lh~”the"sublime capacity of perfection! 
It would not then, in its restless thirst for knowledge, and 
its constant use of observation, have chained to its fancy 
the fire, the ocean, and the air: it would have respected the 
barriers of nature: it would have wondered at the sheer 
'physical size of these great arms of the ocean, without 
ever an idea that they might be crossed. Corsica would 
never have known there was a continent. O happy, happy 
ignorance!! 

What a picture modem history presents! People killing 
each other for family quarrels, or murdering one another in 
the name of the Prime Mover of the universe; greedy and 
dishonest priests misleading them by the potent means of 
fear, imagination, and love of miracles! What can an 
enlightened reader find to interest him in this confused 
scene of affliction? But then a William Tell appears, and 
our hopes are centred in this avenger of the nations. The 
picture of America ravished by brigands, and by the power 
of the sword, inspires a detestation of the human race; but 
we share the labours of a Washington, we enjoy his triumphs, 

8 

Louis 

we follow his 2,000 leagues’ inarch; for his cause is that of 
the human race. Very well: the history of Corsica too 
presents a series of truths of this kind. If these islanders did 
not lack swords, they lacked a fleet to profit by their victory, 
and to secure themselves against a second attack. Thus the- 
years could not but pass in fighting. On one side a people 
strong in its steadfastness and sobriety: on the other 
powerful nations, enriched by the commerce of Europe— 
such are the actors who dispute the history of our island ... 

[Masson, ii, 127. The Abbe Raynal had been banished by Louis 
XV’s government for writing his Hisfoire philosophiqm et politique des 
... Europeens dans les deux Indes . He lived to protest against the work of 
the National Assembly in 1791.] 

5 

BROTHER LOUIS 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Auxonne, Easter Day , April 24, 1791.. 

. .. Louis has written 5 or 6 letters: Heaven only knows 
what nonsense he makes of them. 

He is working hard, learning to write French. I am. 
teaching him mathematics and geography. He is also 
reading history. He will do very well. All the women in the 
place ate in love with him. He has caught the French manner 
in miniature: he is correct and easy in society: he comes into- 
the room, bows gracefully, and makes conventional Small¬ 
talk with the seriousness and poise of a man of thirty. It is- 
not difficult to see that he will turn out the best of us four. 
True, none of us will have had such a good education. *** ' 

Perhaps you won’t find he makes very rapid progress in. 
writing; but you must remember that hitherto his master 
has only taught him how to cut his pens, and write in 
capitals. You will be better pleased with his spelling. He is a 
delightful pupil, who takes a pleasure as well as a pride in. 
his work, and is full of feeling. He has the application and. 

9 

Europ e 

the judgment of a man of forty. All he needs is knowledge. 
It’s a pity, but Fm afraid there is to be no examination. In 
that case he will have to return to Corsica, and his education 
will be utterly ruined .. .. 

[Masson, ii, 203. At the end of another visit to Corsica (February, 
1791) Napoleon had brought his brother Louis (aged 13) back with 
him to Auxonne.] 

6 

THE YOUNG JACOBIN 

TO M. NAUDIN 

Valence, July 17, 1791. 

Happy about the future of my country, and the honour 
•of my friend, I have no anxieties left but for the mother-land. 
What moments are left me during the day, I would devote 
to conversing with you on that subject. To go to sleep 
with one’s head full of great public questions, and one’s 
heart stirred by companions whom one respects, and from 
whom one is sincerely sorry to have parted, is such pleasure 
as only great Epicureans can enjoy. 

/ Will there be war? The question has been asked for 
months past. I have always said, no. Tell me what you 
think of my reasons. 

^,/Europe is divided between those sovereigns who rule 
over men, and those who rule over cattle or horses. The 
former thoroughly understand the Revolution. They are 
terrified of it. They would willingly make pecuniary sacri¬ 
fices to destroy it. But they will never dare raise the mask, 
for fear the flame may set their own houses on fire. That is 
the history of England, Holland, etc. 

As for the sovereigns who rule over horses, they cannot 
grasp the Constitution: they despise it. They think this 
chaos of incoherent ideas spells the ruin of France. Judging 
from what they say, you would suppose our brave patriots 
are going to cut each other’s throats, purge the earth with 

10 

and the Revolution 

their blood from the crimes committed against kings, and 
end by bowing their heads lower than ever beneath the 
mitred despot, the cloistered fakir, and (above all) the 
brigand whose weapon is a deed-box. Such sovereigns will 
make no move. They are waiting for the outbreak of civil 
war,which, according to themselves and their dull ministers, 
is sure to come. 

This part of the country is full of zeal and enthusiasm. A 
fortnight ago a meeting consisting of 22'societies from the 
three Departments drew up a petition asking for the King 
to be brought to trial. 

Give my kind regards to Mme Renaud and to M. and 
Hme Goy. At the dinner on July 14 I proposed the health 
of the patriots of Auxonne. This regiment is thoroughly 
sound—the men, the sergeants, and half the officers. There 
are vacancies for two captains. ... 

P.S.—The southern blood in my veins runs as swiftly as 
the Rhone. So forgive me, if you find my scrawling hand 
hard to read. 

[Masson, ii, 208. Napoleon was with his regiment at Valence during 
the summer and autumn of 1791. On June 21 the King fled from Paris, 
and was arrested at Varennes. On July 17 a petition for his deposition, 
and for the setting up of a new form of government, was presented for 
public signature on the Champ de Mars, and the petitioners were fired 
■on by the National Guard. Naudin was war commtssain at Auxonne. 
“The ‘friend’ in line 2 is Paoli.] 

7 

PARIS IN REVOLUTION 

W 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Paris, May 29, 1792. 

I reached Paris yesterday. At present I am staying at the 
same hotel as Pozzo di Borgo, Leonetti, and Peraldi, viz. 
H6tel des Patriotes Hollandais, rue Royale. But it is too 

11 

Pari s 

expensive there, so that I shall move to-day or to-morrow., 
I have only seen Pozzo di Borgo for a moment so far: we 
were formal, but friendly. 

Paris is in a state of great commotion. It is crowded with 
foreigners, and there is a great deal of discontent. For the 
last three nights people have kept their lights burning. They 
have doubled the National Guard left at the Tuileries to- 
protect the King. The troops of the royal Household are 
said to be of very bad material, and will be disbanded. 

The news from the frontiers is the same as before. We 
shall probably retire, and make it a defensive campaign. 
There is an enormous amount of desertion among the 
officers. The position is critical in every respect. 

It is not true that the National Guardsmen who receive 
pay are to wear red facings: they are to wear white like the 
rest. I have seen more than twenty different battalions,, 
and they all have white facings.... 

Keep on close terms with General Paoli. He is every- 
, thing, and can do everything. He will be all-important in a. 
future that no one in the world can predict. . . . 

I am going to the Assembly to-day for the first time. This 
Assembly doesn’t enjoy the same reputation as the Consti¬ 
tuent. It needs to, badly. ... 

[Masson, ii, 387. P0220 di Borgo (later in the Russian diplomatic, 
service), Leonetti, and Peraldi are the Corsican deputies to the Legis¬ 
lative Assembly, -which is within three months of its end. The dots, 
represent the omission of personal messages only.] 

(*) 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Paris, June 22,1792. 

M. de Lafayette has written to the Assembly, attacking 
the Jacobins. It is a strong letter, and many people think it a. 
forgery. M. de Lafayette, most of the officers in the army,, 
all sound people, the ministers, and the Paris Department 

12 

The Tuileries 

are on one side: the majority in the Assembly, the Jacobins, 
and the populace are on the other. The Jacobin attacks on 
Lafayette have passed all bounds: they describe him as a 
rascal, an assassin, and an object of pity. The Jacobins are 
lunatics, and have no common sense. The day before 
yesterday seven or eight thousand men armed with pikes, 
hatchets, swords, muskets, spits, and pointed stakes, 
marched to the Assembly to present a petition. From there 
they went on to the King’s palace. The Tuileries Garden 
was closed, and protected by 15,000 National Guards. The 
mob battered down the doors, forced an entrance into the 
palace, mounted cannon against the King’s apartments, 
rased four gates to the ground, and presented the King with 
two cockades—one white, and the other red, white and 
blue. They gave him the choice. ‘Make up your mind,’ they 
said, ‘whether you will reign here, or at Coblentz.’ The 
King showed up well. He put on the bonnet rouge: so did the 
Queen and the Prince Royal. They gave the King a drink. 
They stayed in .the palace four hours. This event has 
provided plenty of material for aristocratic harangues at 
the Feuillants’ Club. None the less, it is unconstitutional, 
and sets a very dangerous precedent. It is certainly hard 
to guess what will become of the country under the present 
stress of affairs.... 

[Masson, ii, 392. On June 16, Lafayette wrote from the front to the 
Assembly, attacking the Jacobins. On June 20 the people ‘visited* the 
Tuileries, to force the King to withdraw his veto on two government 
measures. This is the scene Napoleon describes.] 

( 3 ) 

TO LUCIEN BUONAPARTE 

Paris, July 3, 1792. 

I am sending you the proposals of the Committee for 
Public Education: nothing has been decided yet, and the 

13 

The Jacobins 

Assembly is not likely to deal with the question at such an 
inflammatory moment. Read it attentively, my dear Lucien, 
and profit by it: it is not a masterpiece, but it is a sound 
bit of work. 

Sensible men think Lafayette’s demarche necessary, yet a 
serious menace to public liberty. In times of revolution 
precedents become law; and the General has set a very 
dangerous one. The people, that is to say the lowest classes, 
are irritated, and there will undoubtedly be an outbreak— 
an outbreak of a kind likely to hasten the ruin of the 
Constitution. 

The men at the head of affairs are a poor lot. One must 
admit, upon closer acquaintance, that the people are hardly 
worth all the trouble that is taken to merit their support. 
You know the history of Ajaccio. That of Paris is exactly 
the same, though perhaps people here are pettier, viler, 
more abusive, and more censorious. You have to look 
closely before you realize that enthusiasm is still enthusi¬ 
asm, and that the French are an ancient and independent 
people. . . . Every individual is out for his own interests, 
and will forward them, if he can, by insult and outrage: 
intrigue is as underhand as ever. All this discourages 
ambition. Such is the complaint of those who are unhappy 
enough to hold important positions, especially when they 
could afford to refuse them. A quiet life, spent in the enjoy¬ 
ment of one’s own tastes and of the affection of one’s 
family—that, my dear friend, is the happiest choice, 
especially if one has an income of 4-5000 livres, and is 
between the ages of 25 and 40, when imagination torments 
one no longer, but is at rest. I send you my love, and advise 
moderation in all things. In short, if you want to live 
happily, you must agree with your neighbours. 

[Masson, ii, 396. Condorcet’s Education Bill was presented on April 
20-21. Lafayette followed up his letter of June 16 by a visit to the 
Jacobin Club on June 28. On Aug. 10 the people invaded the Tuileries 
and the King was deposed. The dots represent a defective phrase in 
the text.] 

SALICETI 

8 

HEROICS 

TO MADAME PERMON (AND SALICETl) 

Paris, June 18, 1795. 

I have never let myself be thought a dupe; and you would 
think me so, if I did not tell you that I know Saliceti has. 
been hidden in your house now for more than three weeks. 
Remember what I said to you. As long ago as the 1st 
prairial I was morally certain of it; now I am quite sure. 
You see, Saliceti, I could have returned evil for the evil you 
did me, and could have had my revenge; whereas the harm 
you did me was entirely unprovoked. Which of us is playing 
the hero now—you, or I? Yes, I might have had my 
revenge, but I chose not to. Perhaps you will say you are 
protected by your kind friend, Madame Permon. That is- 
indeed a strong argument with me. But had you been 
isolated, unarmed, and proscribed, even so I should have 
held your life sacred. Go, then, and seek undisturbed for a 
refuge in which you can recover a more patriotic state of 
mind. I shall not say a word about you, now or ever. 
Repent, and (above all) appreciate my motives as they 
deserve; for they are noble and generous. 

Madame Permon, my good wishes follow you and your 
child. You are both weak and unprotected. May Providence 
and the prayers of a friend accompany you! Be very careful,, 
and never stay in large towns. In all friendship, goodbyel 

[Corresp., i, 40. In August 1794 Napoleon, involved in the fall of 
the Robespierrists, was imprisoned for a short time near Antibes. 
Saliceti, who played some part in his imprisonment, afterwards found 
himself proscribed, and took refuge with Mme Permon, a widow with 
two children, to whom Napoleon had made an unsuccessful offer of 
marriage.] 

Friendship 

9 

BROTHER JOSEPH 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Paris, June 24, 1795. 

I will do all I can to carry out your wife’s commissions. 
Desiree is asking for a portrait of me: I will have one made.' 
If she still wants it, let her have it; if not, keep it yourself. 
I needn’t tell you, my dear friend, that, however fortune 
•treats you, you have no better friend than myself, and none 
who is fonder of you, or who more sincerely desires your 
happiness^Life is an unsubstantial dream that soon fades 
•away.Slf you are leaving home, and it is likely to be for 
sometime, send me your portrait. We have lived so many 
•years together, and in such close comradeship, that our 
two hearts have become one: you know better than anyone 
-how devoted I am to you. I experience as I write these lines 
an emotion that has not often found a place in my life. I have 
a feeling that we shall not meet for a long time. I cannot go 
•on. Goodbye, my dear friend, goodbye. 

[Corresp., i, 42. Julie and Desiree Clary were daughters of a rich silk 
•merchant of Marseilles. Joseph married Julie in 1794. Napoleon and 
Desiree grew fond of one another, but nothing came of it. In 1798 she 
•married Bemadotte, and in 1818 became Queen of Sweden.] 

IO 

PARIS LIFE 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Paris, July 12, 1795. 

. . . Here in Paris, luxury, enjoyment, and the arts are 
presuming their sway in surprising fashion. Yesterday 
Phedre’ was put on at the Opera—a benefit, pQrfornQ^ce 
\tetired actress. Though the seats cost three times as 
much as usual, the house was crowded out as early as 

16 

Fashion and Fatalism 

2 o’clock. Smart carriages and fashionably dressed people 
are seen about again: they have the air of waking up after a 
long dream, and forgetting that they ever ceased to display 
themselves. The book-shops are open again. There is a 
succession of lectures on history, chemistry, botany, astron¬ 
omy, and so forth. The place is crammed with everything 
that can distract, and make life agreeable. No one is given 
time to think. Anyhow, who could be a pessimist in this 
mental workshop, this whirlwind of activity? Women are 
everywhere—applauding the plays, reading in the book¬ 
shops, walking in the Park. The lovely creatures even 
penetrate to the professor’s study. Paris is the only place in 
the world where they deserve to steer the ship of state: the 
men are mad about them, think of nothing else, only live 
by them and for them. Give a woman six months in Paris, 
and she knows where her empire is, and what is her due. 

[Corresp., i, 44*] 

ii 

FATALISM 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Paris, August 12,1795. 

.. . Fesch seems to want to return to Corsica as soon as 
peace is declared. He is just what he always was—building 
castles in the air, and writing me 6-page letters on some 
meticulous point of speculation: the present means no more 
to him than the past: the future is all in all. 

Personally, I hardly care what happens to me. I watch life 
almost indifferently. My permanent state of mind is that of a 
soldier on the eve of battle: ^ have come to the conclusion 
that, since a chance meeting with death may end it all at any 
minute, it is stupid to worry about anything^ Everything 
disposes me to face my destiny without flincning. At this 
rate, my friend, I shall end by not stepping out of the way 
of a passing carriage. As a reasonable man I am sometimes 
astonished at this attitude; but it is a natural tendency 
c 17 

Y END & MIAIRE 

produced in me by the moral state of the country, and by 
the habit of running risks. . . . 

[Joseph, i, 141. Joseph Fesch was Napoleon’s mother’s half-brother, 
by her mother’s second marriage with Francis Fesch.] 

12 

‘WHIFF OF GRAPE-SHOT 

TO JOSEPH BUONAPARTE 

Paris, October 6, 1795, 2 a.m. 

At last it is all over. My first thought is to give you news 
of myself. The royalists, organised in Sections, were becom¬ 
ing more aggressive every day. The Convention gave orders 
that the Lepelletier Section should be disarmed. The troops 
sent to do this were repulsed. Menou, it was said, was a 
traitor. He was at once dismissed. The Convention appoin¬ 
ted Barras to command the armed forces of the Government: 
the Committees chose me as second in command. We 
disposed our troops. The enemy attacked us at the Tuileries. 
We killed a large number of them. They lulled 30 of our 
men, and wounded 60. We have disarmed the Sections, and 
all is quiet. As usual, I haven’t had a scratch. 

[Corresp., i, 72. In the troubles culminating on the ‘13th vende- 
miaire’ the Le Pelletier Section led the attack on the Convention and 
the ‘Two-thirds Decree.’ Paul Barras, afterwards the Director, was one 
of the Defence Committee of the Convention.] 

*3 

FIRST NIGHT 

TO JOSEPHINE DE BEAUHARNAIS 

Paris, December , 1795. 

I awake all filled with you. Your image, and the intoxica¬ 
ting pleasures of last night; allow my senses no rest. Sweet 

18 

Josephine 

and matchless Josephine, how strangely you work upon 
my heart! Are you angry with me? are you unhappy? are you 
upset? . . . my soul is broken with grief, and my love for 
you forbids repose. But how can I rest any more, when I 
yield to the feeling that masters my inmost self, when I quaff 
from your lips and from your heart a scorching flame? Yes! 
One night has taught me how far your portrait falls short 
of yourself! 

You start at midday: in three hours I shall see you again. 

Till then, a thousand kisses, mio do Ice amor: but give 
me none back, for they set my blood on fire. 

[Cerf, i. Josephine Tascher de la Pagerie was left a widow with two 
children, Eugene and Hortense, by the execution of her husband, 
Alexandre de Beauharnais, in 1794. Napoleon met her at Paris in 
1795. They were married on March 9, 1796.] 

14 

JOSEPHINE—SEPARATION 

TO CITIZENESS BONAPARTE 

Nice, March 31, 1796. 

Not a day passes without my loving you, not a night 
but I hold you in my arms. I cannot drink a cup of tea 
without cursing the martial ambition that separates me 
from the soul of my life. Whether I am buried in business, 
or leading my troops, or inspecting the camps, my adorable 
Josephine fills my mind, takes up all my thoughts, and 
reigns alone in my heart. If I am tom from you with the 
swiftness of the rushing Rhone, it is that I may see you again 
the sooner. If I rise to work at midnight, it is to put forward 
by a few days my darling’s arrival. And yet, in your letter 
of the 23 rd, and again of the 26th ventose, you call me vousl 
Vous yourself! Wretch! How could you ever write such a 
letter? How cold it is! And then, from the 23rd to the 
26th, four days without a word. What were you doing, 

*9 

Parting 

not to write to your husband? . . . Yes, my dear, that vous 9 
and those four days, make me regret my previous complai¬ 
sance. Curses on whoever was the cause of it! May he suffer 
every pain that I should, had I evidence and proof such as 
his. There are no such torments in Hell!—neither Furies, 
nor serpents! Vous! Vous indeed! What will it be in a fort¬ 
night’s time? .. . My soul is sad; my heart is in chains, and I 
imagine things that terrify me. ... You do not love me as 
you did; you will console yourself elsewhere. One day you 
will love me no more; tell me so, then I shall at least know 
how to deserve the misfortune.... Good-bye, my wife, my 
tormentor, my happiness, the hope and soul of my life, 
whom I love, whom I fear, the source of feelings which 
make me as gentle as Nature herself, and of impulses under 
which I am as catastrophic as a thunderbolt. I do not ask 
you to love me for ever, or to be faithful to me, but simply 
... to tell me the truth, to be entirely frank with me. The day 
on which you say to me T love you less,’ will be the last of 
my love, or of my life. Had I a heart so base as to love with¬ 
out return, I would tear it to pieces with my teeth. Jose¬ 
phine! Josephine! Do you remember what I have sometimes 
said to you—that Nature has made my soul resolute and 
strong, whilst yours she has constructed of lace and gauze? 
Do you love me no more? Forgive me, soul of my life. My 
mind is intent upon vast plans. My heart, utterly engrossed 
with you, has fears that make me miserable.... I am bored, 
because I cannot be saying ‘Josephine.’ I am waiting for you 
to write. 

Good-bye! Ah! If you love me less, it must be that you 
never loved me at all. Then were I indeed to be pitied. 

Bonaparte. 

P.S.—The war, this year, is utterly different from what 
it was. I have given the army meat, bread, and forage. My 
armed cavalry will soon be on the march. I cannot tell 
you how the men trust me. You ate my one anxiety, my 
only pleas ure in life, and my only torment. I send a kiss to 
your children. You never mentioii them. Begad! if you did, 
your letters would be half as long again', aSH'your early 

20 

Absence 

mottling visitors would lose the pleasure of your company! 
O woman!!I 

[Cerf, 5. They have been parted less than three weeks. Napoleon is 
on his way to the Italian front. The dots are his own: nothing has been 
left out.] 

*5 

JOSEPHINE, IN ABSENCE 

TO CITIZENESS BONAPARTE 

Port-Maurice, April 3, 1796. 

I have had all your letters, but none has affected me like 
the last. Darling, do you think what you are doing, when 
you write to me in such terms? Do you suppose my position 
is not so painful already, that you must pile regret upon 
regret, and reduce my soul to distraction? The way you 
write! The feelings you describe! They are flames that 
scorch my poor heart. Away from you, my one and only 
Josephine, there is no pleasure in life: away from you, the 
world is a desert in which I am all alone, without even the 
solace of expressing my feelings. You have robbed me of 
more than my heart: all my thoughts are about you alone. 
Whenever I am bored and worried with business, whenever 
I am troubled as to how things will turn out, whenever I 
am disappointed with mankind, and feel inclined to curse 
the day I was born, I put my hand to my heart: there 
throbs your likeness; I have but to look at it, and my love 
is perfect happiness, and there is pleasure in every prospect 
but that of long absence from my beloved. 

What art did you learn to captivate all my faculties, to 
absorb all my diaracter into yourself? It is a devotion, 
dearest, which will end only with my life. ‘He lived for 
Josephine’: there is my epitaph. I strive to be near you: I am 
nearly dead with desire for your presence. It is madness! 
I cannot realize that I am getting further and further away 
from you. So many regions and countries part us asunder! 

21 

Doubt 

How long it will be before you read these characters, these 
imperfect utterances of a troubled heart of which you 
are queenl Ah! wife that I adore. I cannot tell what lot 
awaits me; only, that, if it keeps me any longer away from 
you, it will be insupportable, beyond what bravery can bear. 
There was a time when I prided myself on my courage; 
and sometimes, at the sight of misfortunes that fate might 
have in store for me, I would face in imagination unheard-of 
ills, without a frown, without a feeling of surprise. But 
nowadays the mere thought that my Josephine may be 
unwell, or that she might be taken ill—above all the cruel 
possibility that she may not love me as she did, wounds my 
heart, arrests my blood, and makes me so sad and despon¬ 
dent that I am robbed even of the courage of anger and 
despair. 

Once I would tell myself that to r die without regret 
is to be safe from any harm the world'can inflict; but now 
die thought of dying without the certainty of your love is 
like the torments of Hell, the very image of utter annihila¬ 
tion. I experience all the feelings of a drowning man. 

My perfect comrade, whom fate has allotted to make life’s 
painful journey at my side! The day when I lose your heart, 
Nature will lose for me all her warmth and vegetation.. . . 
I cannot go on, dearest: my soul is so sad, my mind over¬ 
burdened, my body tired out. Men bore me. I could hate 
them all; for they separate me from my love. 

I am at Port-Maurice, near Qneille. I shall be at Albenga 
to-morrow. Both armies are on the move: we are trying to 
outwit one another. May the cleverer man win. I like 
Beaulieu: he manoeuvres well: he is a better soldier than his 
predecessor. I shall beat him, I hope, and in the grand 
manner. Don’t be worried about me. Love me as you love 
your eyes. No, that is not enough: love me as you love 
yoursejf—and not yourself only, but your thoughts, your 
mind, your life, your all. Darling, I’m raving, forgive me. 
Nature is a poor recompense for such feelings as mine, or 
for the man you love. 

Bonaparte. 

22 

Death 

Remember me very kindly to Barns, Sucy, and Mme 
Tallien: give Mme Chateau-Renard my kind regards. My 
love to Eugene and Hortense. Good-bye, good-bye. I am 
going to bed—alone: I shall sleep—without you by my side. 
Please let me go to sleep. Night after night I feel you in my 
arms: it is such a happy dream: but alas, it is not yourself! 

[Cerf,7- Beaulieu is the Austrian General whom Napoleon defeated 
at Dego a week later. ‘It is a devotion . . .’—the last word is illegible.] 

16 

DEATH 

TO CITIZENESS BONAPARTE 

Albenga, April 5, 1796. 

It is an hour after midnight. They bring me a letter. 
It is a sad one, and my soul is touched: for Chauvet is dead. 
He was our Q.M.G. You met him once or twice at Barras* 
house. I feel the need of some one to comfort me, dearest. 
My only consolation is in writing to you: the thought of you 
is the lode-star of my moral ideas: you are the confidant of 
all my troubles. What is the future? What is the past? What 
enchanted medium surrounds us, and hides from us the 
things we are most concerned to know? We live and move 
and die encompassed by miracles. Is it surprising that 
priests, astrologers, and charlatans have traded on this 
tendency, this strange weakness of ours, to parade our 
fancies, and to make them subservient to their own 
passions? 

Chauvet is dead. He was fond of me. He rendered all- 
important services to the country. His last message was that 
he was starting to join me. And it is true. I can see his shade 
before mei it wanders among the combatants; it whistles 
through the air; his soul is in the battle-smoke—it is an 
omen of my destiny. 

But it is foolish of me to mourn for a mere friend. Who 

23 

At the Front 

knows but that I may have teats to shed for a loss that is 
irreparable? Write to me, soul of my life, by every post. I 
could not live otherwise. 

I am very busy here. Beaulieu’s army is on the move. 
We are in touch with one another. I am rather tired. 
I am on horseback every day. 

Good-bye, good-bye, good-bye. I am going to bed, for I 
find comfort in sleep. It puts you by my side; I clasp you in 
my arms: but when I wake, alas! I find myself so far away 
from you. 

Remember me to Barns, Tallien, and his wife. 

[Cerf, io.] 

17 

DIFFICULTIES OF A GENERAL 

TO DIRECTOR CARNOT 

Cairo, April 16, 1796. 

I enclose a letter which I have just received, and which 
will show you that there is no more hope of my getting 
that light artillery. If the company you assigned me had 
been allowed to start—it had passed Montargis a month 
ago—I shouldn’t be in such a fix as I am. But that’s the 
sort of thing that happens, under government by clerks. 
I can’t see how it is possible for a company that I urgently 
asked for, and that you ordered to march, to be turned to 
the right-about, except by malice aforethought. No depart¬ 
ment could be more out of touch with its troops than the 
Artillery: it reckons upon regiments which simply do not 
exist. 

Another request, my deaf Director. Please order General 
CMteauneuf-Randon not to hold back the troops assigned 
to this army. The enemy are a good deal stronger than we 
thought; they fight very well, and have much more cavalry 
and artillery than I have. In spite of ■this, I am hoping to 

24 

Loyalty 

account for some of them to-day: I am making a feint 
march, with the intention of surrounding a body of 6,000- 
men, which seems to have become isolated from their main, 
army. 

What with dead, wounded, and prisoners, the enemy 
has lost, to date, over 12,000 men. You can’t imagine my 
despair, not to say exasperation, at not having a single good 
officer of engineers, upon whose eye for the ground I can 
rely; nor one of those 5 or 6 artillery officers whom you 
ordered to join me; and at finding myself without light guns 
at the very moment when I am in open country. 

[Corresp., i, 176. Cairo is the Italian village Cairo-Montenotte, north 
of Savona.] 

18 

THE DIRECTORY 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

, Headquarters, Tortona, May 6, 1796. 

I write on the return of the first messenger I sent you. I 
beg you to express to the Legislative Body the gratitude of 
the army for the complimentary decree which it has just 
passed. It is the pleasantest reward that the army could 
derive from its success. Speaking for myself, it is long since- 
anything could increase the esteem and devotion that I 
intend to show upon every occasion towards the Govern¬ 
ment and the Constitution. I saw that Government set up- 
amidst a welter of deplorable passions, whose common issue 
could only be the destruction of France and the French 
Republic: indeed, I myself was enabled, in my zeal, and by 
the turn of events, to be of some service to its early career.. 
My motto will always be to die, if need be, in its defence. 

[Corresp., i, 338. Written shortly after the Sardinian surrender afr 
Cherasco.] 

2 5 

Kellermann 

*9 

DIVIDED COMMAND 

TO CITIZEN CARNOT 

Headquarters, Lodi, May 14, 1796. 

... I am writing to the Directory about this idea of divid¬ 
ing the command, I assure you that my only thought in the 
matter is for the country. Whatever happens, you will 
always find me playing the game. I am prepared to sacrifice 
to lie Republic every idea in my head. If they try to mis¬ 
represent me to you, my reply is in my heart and in my 
-conscience. 

As it is possible that my letter to the Directory may be 
misinterpreted; and, as you have shown signs of friendship 
towards me, I am taking the step of writing to you, 
and would ask you to make such use of this letter 
as your prudence and your attachment to me may 
suggest. 

Kellermann would command the army quite as well as I 
do; for I am certain that our victories are due to the bravery 
and daring of the men. But I am convinced that to combine 
Kellermann and myself in Italy would be to court disaster. 
I cannot willingly serve alongside a man who considers 
himself the best general in Europe. In any case, I am certain 
that one bad general is better than two good ones. Fighting 
is like governing; it needs tact. 

I can be of no use to you unless you show me the same 
•confidence that you did in Paris. It is no matter to me, 
whether I fight here or elsewhere. My whole ambition is to 
•serve my country, to give the Government proof of my 
devoted attachment, and to deserve, in years to come, a 
page in our national histories. But it would go to my 
heart to sacrifice in a week two months' fatigue, pain, ana 
danger, and to find myself at a dead end. I have won some 
.glory at the start: I want to go on being worthy of you. But 

2 6 

O RIANI 

be assured that, whatever happens, nothing will alter the 
respect you inspire in all who know you. 

[Corresp., i, 421. Soon after his victory at Lodi (May 10) Napoleon 
heard from the Government that Kellermann, the victor of Valmy, 
■was to be sent out to share his command.] 

20 

PATRON OF LEARNING 

TO CITIZEN OMANI, THE ASTRONOMER 

Milan, May 24, 1796. 

Science, which dignifies the mind of men, and Art,which 
beautifies life, and transmits its great achievements to 
posterity, ought to be specially honoured by every free 
government. Every man of genius, every office-holder in 
die Republic of letters, in whatever country he may have 
been bom, is a French citizen. 

Learned men in Milan used not to enjoy the consideration 
they deserved. Hidden in their laboratories, they thought 
themselves happy if kings and priests did them no harm. 
It is not so to-day. In Italy thought has become free. There 
is no more inquisition, no more intolerance, no more 
tyranny. I invite all learned men to meet together, and to 
tell me what methods should be adopted, or what needs 
supplied, in order to give the sciences and the fine arts a 
new life and a new existence. Any of them who care to visit 
France will meet with a distinguished reception by the 
'Government. The French people sets a higher value upon 
the acquisition of a learned mathematician, a famous painter, 
■or the distinguished exponent of any branch of study, than 
upon that of the richest and most populous city in the world. 

Pray express these sentiments for me to the distinguished 
men of learning resident at Milan. 

[Corresp., i, 491. Barnabe Oriani of Milan (1752-1832) was a writer 
of books on astronomical subjects.] 

27 

Pavia 

21 

REVOLT OF PAVIA 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Headquarters, Peschiera, June i, 1796. 

. . . When quiet had been restored at Milan, I resumed 
my march on Pavia. Lannes, in command of the light 
troops, attacked Binasco, where 7 or 800 armed peasants 
appeared to be putting up a defence. He charged them, 
killed a hundred or so, and scattered the rest. I had the 
village set on fire immediately. The step was necessary, but 
the sight was none the less distressing, and I was painfully 
affected by it. But I foresaw that an even worse fate still 
threatened the town of Pavia. I therefore summoned the 
Archbishop of Milan, and sent him to convey to the in¬ 
sensate populace, on my behalf, the following proclamation. 

* Proclamation to the inhabitants of Lombardy. 

Milan , May 25, 1796. 

‘A misguided mob, without any real means of resistance, 
is committing the wildest excesses, refusing to recognise 
the Republic, and defying an army which has conquered a 
succession of kings. Such incredible folly deserves pity: 
these poor people are being misled by men who wish to 
destroy them. In accordance with the principles of the 
French nation, which makes no war on the common people, 
the General in command is anxious to leave open a door of 
repentance: but those who, within 24 hours, have not laid 
down their arms, and taken a fresh oath of obedience to 
the Republic, will be treated as rebels, and their villages 
will be burnt to the ground. Take warning by the terrible 
example of Binasco! Such will be the fate of every town and 
village that persists in the revolt. 

Bonaparte.* 

But it was in vain. I reached Pavia at day-break. The 
rebels* outposts were overwhelmed. The town seemed to 
be full of people, and in a state of defence. The castle had 
been taken, and our men were prisoners. I ordered up the 

28 

PuNISHED 

artillery, and after firing a few rounds, summoned the 
wretched inhabitants to rely upon French generosity, and 
to lay down their arms. They replied that they would never 
surrender, so long as Pavia had walls standing. General 
Dommartin accordingly drew up the 6th battalion of grena¬ 
diers in close order, axes in hand, and headed by two 
8-pounders. The gates were broken down, and the mob 
scattered in all directions, taking refuge in the cellars or on 
the roofs, and trying in vain, by throwing down tiles, to 
prevent our entry into the streets. Three times I was upon 
the point of giving orders to set the whole place on fire. 
At that moment I saw the castle garrison appear—they had 
broken their fetters, and came with eager cries to embrace 
their deliverers. I called over the names, and there was not 
a man missing. If the blood of a single Frenchman had 
been shed, I should have set up on the ruins of the place a 
column with the inscription—‘Here stood the town of 
Pavia.’ As it was, I had the Town Council shot, arrested two 
hundred people, and sent them to France as hostages. 
To-day all is absolutely quiet, and I have no doubt that 
this lesson will be an example to the people of Italy. 

[Corresp., i, 493, 536. Napoleon does not add that his troops 
'‘massacred all the armed men for some hours, and glutted their lust 
and rapacity.’ (Rose, ‘Life of Napoleon,’ i, 98.)] 

22 

MAKING WAR PAY 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Headquarters, Pistoia, June 26, 1796. 

I enclose the terms of the armistice with the Pope. 
M. d’Azara, the actual negotiator, had the impudence to 
offer us 5 millions in cash and 3 in kind. I stood out for 
40 millions, including 10 in kind. Seeing that I would not 
come down, he went to the Government Commissioners, 
and managed to worm out of them our weak point, namely 
our inability to march on Rome. After that I could only get 

*9 

Loot 

20 millions out of him, in spite of a night march on Ravenna. 
I had made it a condition all along that he should hand over 
the treasures of Our Lady of Loretto, and I thought he had 
agreed to it: but he had now changed his tune to such effect 
that I had to put up with a million under this head. This 
three-sided method of negotiation is fatal to the interests of 
the Republic: a clever man can go behind the back of one 
negotiator, and get what he wants from another. Quite 
apart from the Republic’s loss of io millions on this 
transaction, the whole affair has been disagreeable for me, 
since I have almost lost my opportunity of advancing on 
Bologna. I am consoled, however, by the knowledge that 
the results still surpass your estimates. In addition to the 
rich districts which we still occupy, I find that we have 
derived from the Papal States the following sums:— 

In Cash 

15,500,000 livres under the treaty. 

2,000,000 „ Bologna indemnity. 

1,200,000 „ from the Bologna banks. 

800,000 „ from the Bologna pawn¬ 

shops. 

2,500,000 „ the Ferrara indemnity. 

5 00,000 „ found in the Ferrara banks. 

2,000,000 „ found at Faenza, and the 

Ravenna Legation. 

In Kind 

5,500,000 livres under the treaty. 

2,000,000 „ Bologna. 

1,500,000 „ Ferrara. 

1,200,000 „ Faenza and the Ravenna 

Legation. 

Total .. 10,200,000 in kind 

24,500,000 in cash 
Grand total 34,700,000 

[Corresp., i, 685. After driving the Austrians back on Mantua, 
Napoleon turned south, occupied Bologna, and forced an armistice on 
the Papal States.] 

30 

Candour 

2 3 

GENERALS’ CHARACTERS 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Headquarters, Brescia, August 14, 1796. 

I think it worth while to give you my opinion of the 

generals serving with this army. You will see that very few 

of them are of any use to me. 

Berthier: ability, energy, courage, character; everything in 
his favour. 

Augereau: plenty of character, courage, firmness, energy;, 
is accustomed to war, popular with his men, lucky in the 
field. 

Massena: active, tireless, enterprising, grasps a situation and 
makes up his mind quicldy. 

Serurier: fights like a soldier; dislikes responsibility; firm,, 
has too poor an opinion of his men; an invalid. 

Despinoj: dull, slack, unenterprising; doesn’t understand 
war, is unpopular with his men, doesn’t use his head; in. 
other ways a man of high character, intelligence, and 
sound political principles; good for a home command. 

Sauret: good, an excellent soldier; not enough education for 
a general; unlucky. 

Abbatucci: not fit to command fifty men. 

Gamier , Meunier , Casablanca: incapable; unfit to command a. 
battalion on such an active and serious campaign. 

Macquart: a good fellow; no ability; lively. 

Gaultier: all right for a clerical job; has never seen a shot 
fired. 

Vaubois and Sahumet were on garrison duty, and have only 
just been listed for active service: I will try to form an 
opinion of them. They have done very well in the duties 
so far assigned them: but the example of General Des- 
pinoy, who did very well at Milan, and very badly at the 
head of his division, compels me to judge men by their 
actual performance. 

[Corresp., i, 890.] 

3i 

Civilians 

*4 

WAR COMMISSIONERS 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Milan, August 26, 1796. 

. . . Salva, the war commissioner, leaves the army. His 
mind is affected. He sees enemies everywhere. He crosses 
the Po, and infects everyone he meets with the fears that 
distract him. He thinks the Uhlans are at his heels. He posts 
away two days and nights; but nothing can restore his 
confidence. He writes round to everyone * Same qui pent* 
whilst he is within two leagues of Genoa. Finally he dies, 
lifter 24 hours’ violent fever; believing himself wounded, in 
his fits of delirium, by a hundred sword-cuts, and for ever 
haunted by those terrible Uhlans. Such cowardice is only 
equalled by the courage of our soldiers. And plenty of 
war commissioners have been no braver than he was. 

Such are the disadvantages of the law which insists that 
war commissioners shall be civilians, whereas they really 
need even more courage and military experience than 
officers. The courage they need is moral courage, which 
■can only be acquired by the habit of facing danger. This 
incident has convinced me how essential it is to appoint as 
war commissioners only men who have served several 
■campaigns with the troops, and have given proof of their 
courage. No man ought to belong to the French army who 
values his life more highly than the glory of the nation, 
and the good opinion of his comrades. It is revolting to hear, 
as one does every day, members of the administrative 
department admitting that they are afraid, and even boasting 
of it. . . . 

[Corresp., i, 925. Gvil commssaires had been attached to the armies 
by a decree of the Convention, April 9, 1793.] 

32 

Ecclesiastics 

*5 

CORRECTING A CARDINAL 

TO CARDINAL MATTEI 

Headquarters, Milan, September 26, 1796. 

Your character, which is a cause of congratulation to all 
who know you, induces me to allow your return to Ferrara, 
and to throw a veil of oblivion over your behaviour during 
the last month. 

I am glad to think that you did no more than forget a 
principle of whose truth your native intelligence and your 
knowledge of the Gospel must have convinced you—that 
any priest who interferes in politics ceases to deserve the 
regard due to his character. 

Go back to your diocese: put into practice the virtues 
that everyone agrees you possess: but never again meddle 
in State affairs. And be assured that the clergy, and all who 
are in the service of the church, will be under the special 
protection of the French Republic. 

[Corresp., ii, 1036. Cardinal Mattei had opposed the anti-Papal 
revolt which enabled Napoleon to include Ferrara in the Cispadane 
Republic. He represented the Pope in the negotiations at Tolentino in 
February, 1797.] 

26 

ITALIA FARA DA SE 

TO THE CITIZEN PRESIDENT OF THE CISPADANE CONGRESS 

Milan, January 1, 1797. 

I learn with the liveliest interest, from your letter of 
December 30, that the Cispadane Republics have united 
into a single state, that their emblem is a quiver, and that 
they are convinced their strength lies in unity and indivisi¬ 
bility. Unhappy Italy was long ago erased from the list of 
European powers. If Italians of to-day are fit to regain their 

Italian Liberty 

rights, and to give themselves a free government, their 
country will some day play a famous part amongst the 
powers of the world. But do not forget that, without force 
law is of no avail. Your first care ought to be for your 
military organisation. Nature has given you all you need. 
After the remarkable unanimity and prudence of your 
various deliberations, nothing is needed to attain your 
end, but battalions hardened to war, and fired with the 
sacred flame of patriotism. 

You are in a more fortunate position than the French 
people. You can achieve liberty without the Revolution 
and its crimes. You will never experience the ills which 
afflicted France before the establishment of the Constitution. 
The unity which binds together the different parts of the 
Cispadane Republic will be a permanent inspiration for the 
union of all classes of its citizens; and from this agreement 
of principles and feelings, courageously defended, will 
flow liberty, prosperity, and a republic. 

[Corresp., ii, 1349. The Gspadane Republic was formed of Modena, 
Bologna, and Ferrara.] 

2 7 

THE ARMY IN ITALY 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Milan, January 6, 1797. 

The more I probe, in my leisure moments, the irremedi¬ 
able wounds of the Italian army administration, the more I 
am convinced of the need of a quick and certain cure. 

hi the paymaster’s department the books are in a shocking 
state of disorder. Nothing is properly accounted for. The 
paymaster himself—there is good reason to think —is a 
rascal. His staff are fools. Everyone has his price. The army 
costs five times as much as it need, for the storekeepers are 
in league with the war commissioners, and make false 
returns. 

34 

French Liberators 

The leading actresses in Italy are kept by employes of 
the French army. Luxury, embe2zlement, and malversation 
are rampant. The laws cannot deal with all this. There is 
only one remedy, and it is one suggested alike by experience, 
history, and the character of republican government— 
namely a sjndicature^ or court consisting of one or three 
persons, whose authority should not last more than 3 or 5 
days, and who should have authority, during that short 
space of time, to shoot any one member of the administra¬ 
tive staff. 

If this court were sent to the armies every two years, 
the result would be that everyone would have regard for 
public opinion, and preserve a certain decency, not only in 
morals and expenditure, but also in the duties of every day. 

Marshal Berwick had a Quartermaster hung because his 
food supply gave out: and here are we, in the middle of 
Italy, where there is abundance of everything, spending 
every month five times as much as we should, and yet 
constantly going short. But don’t think I’m doing nothing 
about it, or that I’m letting the country down in this all- 
important part of my functions. Every day I have officials 
arrested. I go through their papers, examine their accounts. 
The trouble is, nobody backs me up, and the laws don’t give 
the general in command enough authority to put the fear of 
Goa into this horde of scoundrels. However, the evil is 
lessening, and what with cursing, punishing, and worrying, 
I hope things will be done a little more decently. But, as I 
said before, do think over my idea of a syndicature .... 

[Corresp., ii, 1363. Marshal Berwick, a natural son of James II, 
served with the French at the battle of the Boyne, defeated the English 
and Portuguese at Almanza in 1707, and was killed at Philippsburg in 
I734-] 

35 

V ENICE 
28 

VENICE 

TO THE MOST SERENE, THE DOGE OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE 

Headquarters, Judenburg, Aprils 1797. 

All the territory of the Most Serene Republic of Venice 
on the mainland is up in arms. On every side the rallying 
cry of the peasants you have armed is ‘Death to the French!* 
Many hundreds of soldiers of the Italian army have already 
lost their lives. It is useless for you to disown gatherings 
that you have authorised. Do you imagine that, because I 
am at the moment in the heart of Germany, I am not strong 
enough to enforce respect for the greatest nation in the 
world? Do you suppose that the legions of Italy will tolerate 
the massacre you are instigating? No, the. blood of my 
comrades in arms will be avenged, and there is not a French 
battalion but will feel its courage redoubled, and its means 
thrice what they were, when entrusted with the . noble 
mission of revenge. The Venetian Senate has repaid our 
constant generosity with the blackest treachery. 

I send this letter by the hand of my senior aide-de-camp. 
It is war or peace. Unless you take immediate steps to dis¬ 
perse these gatherings, unless you at once arrest and hand 
over to me the perpetrators of the recent assassinations, we 
are at war. There are no Turks on your frontiers;, you are 
not threatened by any foe; you have merely invented 
excuses to justify the massing of troops against my army. 
They must be disbanded within 24 hours. We are not living 
in the times of Charles VIII. If you force me, contrary to the 
express wish of the French government, to declare war, do 
not suppose that the French troops will ravage the lands of 
the innocent and unfortunate people of the mainland, as 
your armed forces have done. I shall protect them, and they 
will live to be grateful even for the crimes which obliged the 
French army to rescue them from your tyrannous rule. 

[Corbjesp., ii, 1712. Hearing of anti-French risings at Bergamo and 
Brescia, Napoleon sent Junot with orders to read this message to the 
Venetian Senate. Charles VIII of France invaded Italy in 1494-1 

36 

Genoa 

29 

LIGURIAN REPUBLIC 

TO THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT OF GENOA 

Mombello, June 16, 1797. 

I have received your letter from citizen Emmanuel 
Balbi. The first steps your Government has taken justify 
the confidence reposed in it by the people of Genoa. 

Provincial governments are in a difficult situation, and 
ought to consider nothing but the public safety, and the 
interests of the country. 

The Republic of Genoa cannot exist without commerce, 
and commerce cannot exist without credit. Under a weak 
government, or in a country divided by factions, credit is 
impossible. 

The government must be weak, the state cannot but be 
torn by factions, so long as some hundreds of the citizens 
organise an assembly of their own, take part in all the 
debates, and enjoy popularity, whilst all the time their 
motive is exaggeration, and their only aim is to destroy. 

During your provisional government, a commission 
ought to be chosen to draw up your Constitution, and the 
organic laws of your Republic. Your chief duty is to silence 
political passion, to see that the legislative Commission does 
its work undisturbed, and thus to ensure that you are not 
given trumped up laws and an ephemeral Constitution. 

Prudence and moderation are found in all countries and 
in every age, for both are based upon our physical nature: but 
they are vitally necessary to small states and commercial cities. 

Throughout the period of your provisional government, 
and up to the moment when you have laws and a stable 
constitution, act as though you were in a vessel buffeted by 
the waves: insist that every citizen goes about his own work, 
and that no pne tries to compete with the Government. 

As you do not know what your Constitution will allow 
or disallow, prohibit for the present any kind of association 
among the citizens. 

37 

Soldiers and Politicians 

Your National Guard is large and sound. If, under your 
government, the Republic loses any of its commerce or of 
its happiness, the responsibility will rest entirely upon 
yourselves. . . . 

[Corresp,, iii, 1933* In. October, 1796, Genoa had been forced to 
sign a treaty admitting a French garrison, closing its ports against 
British ships, and paying a heavy indemnity. A rising in May, 1797, was 
followed by an ultimatum, and the imposition of a further treaty 
(June 6) transforming Genoa into the Ligurian Republic.] 

30 

THE ARMY AND PARIS 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Headquarters, Milan, July 15, 1797. 

I enclose a copy of a letter I have received from General 
Clarke: you will see from it that negotiations are still 
dragging on. There can be no doubt that the Emperor 
wants to see how events go in France, and that foreign 
influence counts for more than is generally supposed in all 
these machinations. 

A great many Paris papers reach the army—especially the 
worst of them; but the result is quite contrary to what they 
intend. Indignation is rampant in the army. The men are 
asking angrily whether the only reward they are to expect, 
on their return home, for all their labours, and for their six 
years at the front, is the assassination which threatens every 
patriot. The situation gets worse every day, and I think that 
you, Citizen Directors, will soon have to take it in hand. 
. . . There is not a man here who would not sooner die 
sword in hand than be assassinated in some dark comer of 
Paris. 

For my own part, I am used to sacrificing all my private 
interests; yet I cannot be insensible to the outrageous slan¬ 
ders circulated every day, and upon every opportunity, by 
some 80 journals, whilst there is not one that gives them the 

38 

Music 

lie. I cannot be insensible to the treachery and the accumula¬ 
tion of outrages suggested in the motion printed by order of 
the Council of the Five Hundred. I see that the Clichy Club 
would like to march over my body in order to destroy the 
Republic. Are there no Republicans left in France? After 
conquering Europe, are we to be reduced to searching for 
some corner of the earth in which to end our unhappy days? 

One stroke, and you can save the Republic—save 200,000 
lives, perhaps, which stand or fall with it, and make peace 
within 24 hours. Arrest the emigres. Destroy the influence of 
foreigners. If this needs force, summon the armies. Break 
up the presses of the papers which are in English pay— 
they are more sanguinary than any Marat. 

To return to myself: I cannot go on living in this clash 
of loyalties; if no remedy can be found to cure the country’s 
ills, and to put an end to the rule of murder and to die 
influence of Louis XVIII, I must ask to be relieved of my 
command. 

I enclose the stiletto found on the Verona assassins. 

But, whatever may happen, I shall never forget the proofs 
you have constantly given of your complete confidence in me. 

[Corresp., iii, 2014. Negotiations fot peace with Austria began after 
the arrangement of an armistice in April: the Peace of Campoformio 
was not signed till October 17. General Clarke assisted Napoleon in the 
negotiations. The Clichy Club was a royalist organisation working for 
the restoration of the Bourbons. There were troubles at Verona pre¬ 
ceding the fall of Venice in May.] 

3 1 

MUSIC AND MORALS 

TO THE INSPECTORS OF THE CONSERVATOIRE DE MUSIQUE AT 

PARIS 

Headquarters, Milan, July 26, 1797. 

I have received your letter of the 16th messidor, with the 
accompanying memorandum. There are persons busy, at 

39 

Ionian Islands 

this very moment, in the different cities of Italy, copying and 
arranging all the music you ask for. 

Let me assure you that I shall take the greatest trouble 
to see that your intentions are fulfilled, and that the Conser¬ 
vatoire is enriched with any musical treasures it may lack. 

Of all the Fine Arts, music is that which most influences 
the passions, and that, therefore, which a legislator should 
do most to encourage. A few bars of moral music, composed 
by a master hand, cannot fail to affect the feelings, and 
have much more influence than a well-written book about 
morality, which convinces our reason without altering our 
habits. 

[Corresp., iii, 2042.] 

32 

OCCUPATION OF CORFU 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Headquarters, Milan, August 1,1797. 

After a successful fortnight’s voyage, the fleet which 
left Venice (composed of a number of ships of the line and 
a few frigates under the command of Captain Bourd£, 
and carrying landing forces under General Gentili) anchored 
in the roads at Corfu. Four Venetian warships, which 
happened to be there, joined forces with our fleet. 

On the 10th messidor our troops disembarked, and 
occupied the Corfu ports, in which they found 600 pieces 
of artillery, mostly of bronze. A huge crowd gathered on 
the shore to greet our troops with such cries of eagerness 
and enthusiasm as animate people who are recovering their 
freedom. 

At the head of the crowd was the ‘pope/ or religious 
chief of the district, an educated man of great age. He 
advanced towards General Gentili, and said: ‘Frenchmenl 
you will find in this island a people ignorant of those arts 
and sciences which distinguish other nations. But do not 
despise them on that account: they can still become again 

40 

Homer 

what they once were. Read this book, and learn to appre¬ 
ciate them.’ The general opened with curiosity the book 
which the ‘pope’ presented to him, and was not a little- 
surprised to find that it was the ‘Odyssey’ of Homer. 

The islands of Zante, Cephalonia, and Santa Maura have 
the same aspirations, and express the same wish and feeling 
for freedom. Every village has its tree of liberty. Every 
commune is ruled by a municipal body; and these people 
hope that, under the protection of the Great Nation, they 
will recover the sciences, the arts, and the commerce that 
they have lost under the tyranny of the oligarchs. 

According to Homer, the island of Corcyra was the 
country of the Princess Nausicaa. Citizen Arnauld, who 
enjoys a deserved reputation in belles lettres , tells me that 
he went ashore to plant the tricolor on the ruins of Ulysses’' 
palace. 

The chief of the Maniotes, a people who trace a genuine 
descent from the Spartiatae, and who occupy the peninsula 
on which Cape Matapan is situated, has sent one of his 
principal men to express to me his wish to see French, 
vessels in his port, and to be of some service to the Great 
Nation. 

[Corresp., iii, 2061. The occupation of Corfu, Cephalonia, and 
Zante (Zakynthos) followed the fall of Venice. A. V. Arnauld, the 
dramatist, met Napoleon at Mombello, and was sent to organise the 
government of the Ionian islands. Nausicaa (Homer, Odyssey, vi) was. 
the daughter of Aldnous, King of the Phaeacians. The Spartiatae were 
the ruling class in Sparta.] 

33 

ADRIATIC POLICY 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Headquarters, Milan, August 16, 1797. 

. . . The islands of Corfu, Zante, and Cephalonia matter 
more to us than all the rest of Italy put together. I believe; 
that, if we had to choose, it would be better to restore Italy 

41 

The Levant 

to the Emperor, and to keep the four islands. They are 
vital to the wealth and prosperity of our commerce. The 
Turkish Empire is breaking uj> every day. If we had these 
islands we should be in a position either to bolster it up as 
long as possible, or to take what part of it we want. It will 
not be long before we realise that, if we are effectively to 
destroy England, we must get hold of Egypt. The huge 
Ottoman Empire, perishing day by day, forces us to antici¬ 
pate events, and to take early steps for the preservation of 
our commerce in the Levant.... 

[Corresp., iii, 2103.] 

34 

AUSTRIAN NEGOTIATORS 

TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Headquarters, Passariano, September 6,1797. 

You will be astonished when you read the minutes of the 
meetings of September 3 and 4, and the declaration of the 
Emperor’s plenipotentiaries to the effect that they have no 
instructions as to the Imperial Congress. Usually, when one 
mentions German affairs to them, these gentry say it is no 
business of theirs. They conceal very unskilfully their 
desire to deprive us of the Italian fortresses, so that they 
may proceed to do what they like in the German business. 

It would be impossible to carry on important negotiations 
with a set of men less courageous, less logical, and with 
less backing from their government. 

Gallo. He’s a foreigner, and though he’s supported by 
■the Empress, he dare not oppose Thugut’s policy. 

Merveldt . Colonel of a regiment of Light Horse: brave 
enough personally, but just li]pe the rest—without a blush 
for all the nonsense they nave to talk, and the plain inconsis¬ 
tency of their proposals. When they have said, ‘Those are 
our instructions,’ they have nothing more to say. It has be¬ 
come such a farce, that I have retorted, ‘If your instmcdons 

42 

Campoformio 

told you that day was night, I suppose you would go on 

saying so!’ . 

Degdmann. A man of no weight or decision; a hypo¬ 
chondriac. 

They all have very littie to say, few resources, and no 
power of reasoning. We are constantly forcing them to 
admit that their words entirely disagree with their actions; 
but they always quote Thugut, and their instructions. Pri¬ 
vately, and after looking both ways to see that no one is 
listening, they will tell you in a whisper that Thugut is a 
tascal, and deserves to be hanged. But Thugut is the real 
King of Vienna. . . . 

In private conversation, when these gentry asked me 
whether I still thought their army formidable, I replied that 
I would give them my own view in confidence, because 
they knew better than anyone I was no Gascon, and because 
of their confidential admission that morning that the 
Emperor wished to have himself crowned King of Rome; 
and I assured them that within a fortnight of the opening of 
the campaign I should be outside Vienna, and that at my 
approach the people, who on a previous occasion had 
broken M. Thugut’s windows, would certainly seize this 
opportunity to hang him.. .. 

[Corresp., iii, 2153. Written towards the end of the Campoformio 
peace negotiations, which Napoleon transferred to Passariano on 
August 27. Baron von Thugut was the Austrian Foreign Minister.] 

35 

APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION 

TO CITIZEN THE ARCHBISHOP OF GENOA 

Headquarters, Passariano, September 10, 1797. 

I have this moment received your Pastoral Letter of 
September 5.1 could believe mysejf listening to one of the 
Twelve Apostles. St. Paul himself might have written it. 
How one respects religion when it has ministers like you! 

43 

The Gospel 

A true preacher of the Gospel, you inspire respect; you 
compel your enemies to value and admire you; you turn 
even the sceptic into a believer. 

Why should a church with such a leader as yourself have 
these wretched subalterns, unenlightened either by charity 
or peace? Their sermons breathe none of that moving 
unction which is the essential utterance of the Gospel. 
Jesus Christ died rather than defeat his enemies by other 
means than faith. But these wild-eyed reprobate priests 
preach rebellion, murder, and bloodshed. They live on rich 
men’s gold: they have sold the poor for thirty pieces of 
silver. Drive them out of your Church. Cast upon them the 
anathema and curse of Heaven. Liberty, and the sovereignty 
of the people, are the political code of the Gospel. 

I hope soon to be at Genoa: one of my greatest pleasures 
will be to see you there. A prelate like Fenelon, or the 
Archbishop of Milan, or of Ravenna, makes men love 
religion by practising all the virtues it enjoins. Heaven has 
no greater gift for a government, or for a great city. 

Pray be assured of my high esteem and consideration. 

[Corresp., iii, 2182. For the situation at Genoa, v. No. 29.] 

36 

CONSTITUTION-MAKING 

TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Headquarters, Passariano, September 19,1797. 

I have received your ‘confidential’ letter of the 11 nd 
fructidor about the mission you wish Sieyes to carry out in 
Italy. I certainly think, as you do, that his presence will be 
as necessary at Milan as it probably was in Holland, and is 
now in Paris. 

For all our pride, our thousand-and-one pamphlets, and 
our blustering airy orations, we are extremely ignorant of 
the science of political conduct. We have never yet defined 
what is meant by the executive, legislative, and judicial. 

44 

The British Constitution 

powers. Montesquieu defined them wr-ongly: not because 
that famous man was incompetent to do otherwise, but 
because—as he admitted—his work was only a kind of 
description of conditions which had once existed, or still 
existed in his day—a summary of notes made during his 
travels or his reading. His ga2e was fixed on the govern¬ 
ment of England: he defined, in general terms, the executive, 
legislature, and judiciary of that country. 

But why, in point of fact, should it be thought a function 
of the legislative power to declare war and peace, or to 
regulate me amount and character of the taxes? The English 
constitution has reasonably enough entrusted the second 
of these functions to the House of Commons; and it is a 
good arrangement, because the English constitution is 
nothing but a charter of privilege—a black picture, framed 
in gold. Since the House of Commons is the only body 
which, for better or worse, represents the nation, it is 
proper that it should have sole power to impose taxation: 
it is the only defence they have been able to devise against 
the insolent tyranny of the court party. But why, in a 
government whose whole authority emanates from the 
nation; why, where the sovereign is the people, should one 
include among the functions of the legislative power things 
which are foreign to it? There is only one thing, so far as 
I can see, that we have really defined during the last fifty 
years, and that is the sovereignty of the people. We have 
been no happier in settling what is or is not constitutional, 
than in allocating the different powers in the state. The 
French people is organised only in outline. 

The governmental power, taken in the wide sense that 
I would give it, ought to be regarded as the real representa¬ 
tive of the nation, governing in virtue of the constitutional 
charter and the organic laws. It falls naturally, it seems to 
me, into two quite distinct authorities. One of these is 
supervisory, but not executive: to this body what we nowa¬ 
days call the Executive Power would be obliged to submit 
every important measure: it would be, if I may call it so, the 
legislative side of the executive. This great body would be 

45 

S I E YE S 

in a real sense the National Council: it would control all 
that part of the administration and of the executive 
which our present constitution entrusts to the Legislative 
Power. 

Thus the governmental power would consist of two 
authorities, both nominated by the people; and one would 
be a very large body, containing only such persons as had 
already occupied some of the posts that give men experience 
in the business of government. The legislative power would 
enact all the organic laws in the first instance, and would 
have power to alter them, but not at a few days’ notice, as 
can be done now; for, once an organic law is placed upon 
the statute book, I think there should be no power to 
change it without four or five months’ debate. 

THs Legislative Power, carrying no rank in the Republic, 
closed to outside influence, hearing and seeing nothing 
of what goes on around it, would have no ambitions, 
and would not inundate us with thousands of ephemeral 
measures, whose very absurdity defeats their own ends, 
and which have turned us into a nation with 300 law books 
in folio, and not a single law. 

There you have, I think, a complete system of govern¬ 
ment, and one that finds its excuse m the present situation. 
It would really be disastrous if a nation of 30 million people, 
in this 18th century, were unable to save the country except 
by recourse to arms. Violent remedies discredit the legis¬ 
lator. He who gives men a constitution ought to consider 
beforehand how it will affect them. 

If you see Sieyes, please show him this letter. I am sure he 
will write to tell me I am wrong. But I can assure you 
that I shall be delighted if you can do anything to send to 
Italy one whose talents I so much admire, and whose 
friendship I hold particularly dear. I will help him in every 
way I can; and my hope is that, by our united efforts, we 
may give Italy a constitution more in conformity with the 
character of its people, its local conditions, and perhaps the 
principles of political science, than that which was given it 
before. It was difficult then to act otherwise. We aid not 

46 

Italian Republics 

want to try experiments at a moment when war and passion 
ran riot. 

To sum up: it is not only my private desire that Sieyes. 
should come to Italy, but my official belief also that, unless 
we give Genoa and the Cisalpine Republic a suitable 
constitution, France will get nothing out of them. Their 
legislative bodies, bribed by foreign gold, will be at the 
beck and call of Austria and Rome. It will be the story of 
Holland over again. 

This letter is neither a field-order nor a plan of campaign. 
Keep it to yourself and Sieyes. But you can make use, at 
your discretion, of what I have said about the unsuitability 
of the present Italian constitution. . . . 

[Corresp., ill, 2223. Napoleon is writing to Talleyrand. The Abbe 
Sieyes, Revolutionist Director, and maker of constitutions, was 
associated with them both two years later, in the coup d’etat of 
Brumaire, and in the Constitution of the Year VIII.] 

37 

FRANCE AND ITALY 

TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Headquarters, Passariano, October 7, 1797. 

I enclose the confidential proposals submitted to me by 
Count Cobenzl. I have expressed to him all the indignation 
that you will feel when you read them. I enclose my answer. 
It will all be settled—war or peace—in three or four days. 
I need hardly tell you that I shall do all I can to secure peace* 
considering how late in the year it is, and how litde hope 
there is of our doing anything big now. 

You don’t know the Italians. They are not worth the 
lives of 40,000 Frenchmen. Your letters show that all your 
ideas are based on a false assumption. You imagine that 
liberty can make heroes out of people as soft as they are 
superstitious, and as cowardly as they are contemptible. 
You expect me to work miracles, and I can’t. I haven’t a 

47 

Italian Character 

single Italian in my army, unless you count some 1,500 
degenerates, raked out of die gutter in various Italian towns 
and good for nodiing but looting. Don’t be imposed upon 
by a handful of Italian adventurers at Paris, and perhaps a 
Minister or two, if they tell you there are 80,000 Italians 
under arms. For all I can hear, and from what I see in the 
papers, public opinion in France has gone sadly astray, for 
some time past, about the Italians. It needs some dexterity 
and tact, all my prestige, and a severe lesson now and 
again, to make these people respect us, and to give them 
the slightest interest in the cause for which we are fighting. 

I should like you to send for the various Cisalpine 
ministers who are in Paris, and to ask them, pretty brus¬ 
quely, to let you have there and then in writing the number 
of soldiers of the Cisalpine Republic serving with the army 
in Italy. If they tell you that I have more than 1,500 with 
the army, and perhaps another 2,000 at Milan, policing 
that district, they are imposing on you, and will deserve 
anything you like to say to them. Mis-statements of that 
kind are good enough for coffee-house talk, or tub-thump¬ 
ing, but not for Government use. They give people 
wrong ideas, and may lead to the adoption of an unsuitable 
policy, productive of incalculable ills. 

I have the honour to repeat it: the Cisalpine Republicans 
will gradually become keen for liberty; gradually they will 
organise themselves; perhaps in 4 or 5 years—especially if 
they recruit among the Swiss—they will have 30,000 
passable soldiers : I say ‘perhaps,’ because it needs a clever 
statesman to teach them a taste for arms; as a nation they 
s,re thoroughly enervated, and very cowardly. 

If the negotiations don’t take a turn for the better, 
France will always be sorry for the tone it has adopted 
towards the King of Sardinia. That prince, with one of his 
infantry battalions, and one of his squadrons of cavalry, 
could beat the whole Cisalpine army. If I have never told 
the Government this in so many words, it is because I 
never imagined you would form such an opinion about the 
Italians as I find in your letters. I do all I can to kindle a 

48 

French Policy 

warlike spirit in them, but I barely succeed in keeping them 
well-disposed. Never once, since I arrived in Italy, have I 
been able to count, except in the feeblest degree, on a 
national love of liberty and equality. The good discipline of 
our army; the great respect we have all shown for religion 
—a respect carried, in the case of the priests, to the point of 
flattery; our justice; and above all the activity and prompt¬ 
ness with which we have suppressed those who were 
ill disposed, and punished those who declared against us— 
these have been die real auxiliaries of our army. Such are 
the plain facts: all that it is worth saying in proclamations, 
or in reported speeches, is romantic fiction. 

As I am hoping for a satisfactory end to the negotiations, 
I won’t go into more detail, much as I should like to clear 
up a number of points that seem to be litde understood. 
It needs prudence, wisdom, and a fair share of dexterity, 
to surmount every obstacle, and to achieve great ends. 
There is no other road to success. It is only a step from 
victory to disaster. My experience is that, in a crisis, some 
detail always decides the issue. 

If we had followed the same foreign policy as in ’93, 
we should have failed as completely as we have succeeded 
under the present contrary system: and remember that the 
resources of man-power, the methods of recruiting, and the 
outburst of enthusiasm upon which we then relied will 
never occur again. 

It is a French characteristic to take prosperity much too 
lightly. Could we but base all our operations on a sound 
policy—by which I mean simply calculating what is likely 
to happen, and when, we might remain for a long time the 
greatest nation, and the arbiter of Europe. Nay more.; we 
already hold the scales of power, and can incline them which 
way we will; indeed, I see nothing to prevent our reaching, 
in a few years’ time, if fate wills it so, results which only 
burning enthusiasm can envisage, and only a man of cool 
and reasoned constancy can attain. 

I beg you to read nothing into this letter, except my 
desire to contribute every talent I have to the success of 
e 49 

France 

my country. I write as I think: I cannot better express my 
high regard for you.;< 

[Corresp., iii, 2292. Count Ludwig Cobenzl was an Austrian 
diplomatist employed by Thugut in the final negotiations at Udine 
(September 26) that issued in the peace of Campoformio on October 
17 .] 

38 

VENICE AGAIN 

TO CITIZEN VILLETARD 

Headquarters, Treyiso, October 26,1797. 

I have received your letter of 3 brumaire. I don’t 
understand a word of it. I can’t have explained myself 
clearly. 

There is no treaty between the French Republic and the 
municipality of Venice which obliges us to sacrifice our 
interests and advantages to those of the Committee of 
Public Safety, or of anyone else there. The French Republic 
has never made it a matter of principle to fight for other 
nations. I should like to know of any philosophical or 
moral obligation to sacrifice 40,000 Frenchmen, against the 
express wishes of the nation, and the evident interests of 
the Republic. No doubt it comes easily enough to a few 
gas-bags, who only deserve the name of fools, to call for a 
universal Republic. I should like to see these gentry on a 
winter campaign. In any case, there is no such thing as a 
Venetian nation. Effeminate, corrupt, split up into as many 
divisions as there are towns, and as false as they are cowardly, 
the Italians are quite unfit for freedom. The Venetians are 
worse. If they really value liberty, and have the qualities 
necessary to win it—very well, they have never had a 
better opportunity to prove this. Let them defend it! But 
they have never had the courage to win their freedom, 
even from a few wretched oligarchs. At Zara they could not 
even put up a few days’ defence. It is likely enough that, 

50 

and Venice 

if the army had entered Germany, we should have had a 
recurrence, if not of the scenes at Verona, at least of whole¬ 
sale assassinations, which have an equally sinister effect 
upon the troops. 

Finally, the French Republic is not in a position, as people 
seem to think, to make a gift of the Venetian states. There 
is no real doubt that these states belong to France by right 
of conquest; but it is contrary to our principles to dispose 
of any people in this way. Until, therefore, the French, 
army evacuates Italy, the various governments are free to 
take whatever steps they think to the advantage of their 
own countries. 

The reason why I commissioned you to consult with the 
Committee of Public Safety about the possible evacuation of 
the French army is that they may be ready to take the 
necessary steps, both for the country as a whole, and for 
such individuals as may wish to remove into the districts 
annexed to the Cisalpine Republic, and placed under the 
protection of France. You should also have informed the 
Committee that persons who wished to follow the French 
army would be given time to sell their property, whatever 
the final fate of the country, and even if I knew it was the 
intention of the Cisalpine Republic to grant them titular 
citizenship. There your mission ends. In everything else 
they can do as they please. You have told them enough to 
show that all was not lost; that everything that happened 
was part of a vast plan; and that, if the Republican armies 
had continued to be successful against a power stimulated 
and financed by the whole Coalition, Venice might perhaps 
have been annexed to the Cisalpine Republic. But I can see 
that they are cowards. They understand nothing but run¬ 
ning away. Well, let them tun! I don’t want them... . 

[Corresp., iii, 2318. Napoleon’s treatment of Venice, culminating 
in the humiliating surrender of May 16, and its cession to Austria at 
Campoformio, had been attacked by Dumolard and other ‘gas-bags’ at 
Paris.] 

France and Sweden 
39 

FERSEN 

TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Rastadt, November 30, 1797. 

. . . All the membets of the Congress have arrived, and 
they have visited me. The King of Sweden has sent, as 
his ambassador, the Baron de Fersen. . . . When the Baron 
came to see me he displayed all the fatuous mannerisms of 
Versailles. After the usual compliments, to which neither 
of us listened, I asked him who was the King of Sweden’s 
Minister in Paris. At the moment, he replied, there was none; 
but this was due to one of those petty misunderstandings 
which are easily settled, and the small point of difference 
between the two powers had already been set right. Upon 
that, I spoke to him in these terms:— 

‘The French nation and the House of Sweden have been 
allies for some hundreds of years: they helped one another 
to wreck the ambitions of that proud dynasty which in 
past ages aimed, not without some hope of success, at 
universal empire. But there is another country, nearer 
to Sweden, and therefore more dangerous, which is a 
geographical link between the interests of the two powers, 
and the consideration of which should no less vitally 
suggest a certain attitude towards the French Republic. 
How is one, then, to explain the conduct of the Swedish 
court, which seems to go out of its way to send—whether to 
Paris, or to meet the French plenipotentiaries—agents, 
ministers, or ambassadors, who are on personal grounds 
entirely unacceptable to every French citizen? One cannot 
suppose that the King of Sweden would remain indifferent 
to the presence of a minister who had incited rebellion 
among the people of Stockholm. No, Sir, the French 
Republic will not suffer it that men who are only too well 
known for their relations with the late French court, men 
whose names may still be on the list of emigres , should come 
and outface the ministers of the greatest people on earth. 

5 * 

Invasion of England 

The French nation puts its self-respect even before its 
political interests.’ 

D urin g this speech the Baron de Fersen frequently 
changed colour. At the end he fell back on his character as 
a courtier, replied that His Majesty would take into consid¬ 
eration all that I had said, and retired. I saw him out, natur¬ 
ally, with all the usual ceremonial. He was accompanied by 
the Swedish Minister at Ratisbon, who seemed to realise 
well enough that the Swedish court would have to take my 
words to heart. 

[Corresp., iii, 2382. A Congress was held at Rastadt, in accordance 
with an article of the Treaty of Campoformio, to conclude peace be¬ 
tween France and the German States. The King of Sweden, as Duke of 
Pomerania, was represented by Count Axel Fersen, the friend (and, as 
Napoleon believed, the lover) of Marie Antoinette; he had played a 
large part in the Flight to Varennes in 1791, and had carried on a 
‘treasonable’ correspondence with her during 1792. The ‘proud 
dynasty’ is the Hapsburgs; ‘another country’ is Prussia.] 

40 

INVASION OF ENGLAND 

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORY 

Paris, February 23, 1798. 

Whatever efforts we make, it will still be many years 
before we achieve supremacy at sea. To carry out an invasion 
of England without command of the sea is as difficult and 
daring a project as has ever been undertaken. It could only 
be done by a surprise crossing—either by eluding the 
fleet that is blockading Brest and the Texel, or by landing 
in small boats, during the night, after a 7 or 8 hours’ 
passage, at some point in the counties of Kent or Sussex. 
This operation requires long nights, and therefore winter¬ 
time. It can’t be attempted later than April. Any such 
invasion by means of sloops during a calm spell in the 
summer is impracticable: the enemy would offer insuperable 
obstacles to our embarkation, and still more to our passage. 

53 

Egyptian Expedition 

Our fleet is no further advanced than it was when we 
mobilised the army of invasion, four months ago.... The 
English expedition therefore seems to me impossible until 
next year; and then it is likely to be prevented by fresh 
embarrassments on the continent. The real moment for 
preparing this invasion has passed, perhaps for ever... . 

We should therefore give up any real attempt to invade 
England, and content ourselves with the appearance of it, 
whilst devoting all our attention and resources to the 
Rhine, so as to deprive England of Hanover and Hamburg. 
It is admitted that, if we are to achieve both aims, we must 
not keep a large army at a distance from Germany. 

Or we might well make an expedition into the Levant, 
and threaten the commerce of India. 

If none of these three operations is feasible, I see no 
alternative but to make peace with England. I am confident 
that the terms Malmesbury refused would be acceptable to 
them to-day. In that case we should secure greater advan¬ 
tages for our negotiations at Rastadt. If peace were made 
with England during the Congress, we should naturally be 
in a position to make many fresh demands on the German 
Empire. 

[Corresp., iii, 24x9. On October 27,1797, Napoleon had been given 
the command of an army to invade England. During the winter he 
studied the question: this letter was the result of his investigations. 
Lord Malmesbury had represented Pitt in peace overtures in 1796 and 
* 797-3 

41 

NAVAL STRATEGY 

TO VICE-ADMIRAL BRUEYS 

Paris, April 22,1798. 

You must fit out the fleet for sea immediately. Citizen 
Ganteaume, Divisional Commander, will act as Chief of 
Staff, Citizen Casabianca will be your Flag-Commander. 

54 

Naval Tactics 

You are to distribute the other Divisional Commanders and 
officers among the various ships. 

Our 13 ships will be divided into 3 squadrons. The right 
and left squadrons will consist of 4 ships each, the centre of 
5. There will be 1 frigate and 1 corvette to each squadron. 
Rear-Admirals Blanquet du Chayla and Villeneuve will 
each be in command of a squadron. 

General Decr&s will command the convoy, and will have 
under his orders, in that capacity, the 2 vessels and 7 
brigades that he is convoying. He will have below him a 
Divisional Commander, or an experienced naval captain, 
who will be on board the ‘Dubois.’ General Deeres will also 
have under his direct orders 3 armed frigates and a number 
of fast-sailing brigs to be chosen by yourself. With these 
vessels he will scout ahead of the fleet, and everything will 
be ready for him to take command of any light squadron 
that you might decide to form by detaching vessels from 
the force. But the moment the enemy is sighted, and the 
fleet forms for battle, the only concern of General Deeres 
and of his frigates must be to look to the safety of the con¬ 
voy, and to carry out whatever orders you have given him. 

It seems to me, therefore, that the duties confided to this 
general are extremely important. Whilst on the march, he is 
going on ahead, personally verifying the reports made 
by his scouts, and transmitting accurate information to you. 
This function in itself is so important that, at sea, as on 
land, the general himself ought to be the first to observe 
the enemy. But at sea the admiral cannot leave his forces, 
because once he has done so he cannot rejoin them. 

As soon as the enemy is sighted, you will consider it the 
moment to reinforce the frigates with 2 or 3 war-ships: then 
the light squadron is constituted on recognised lines, and 
the General is in command. Finally, if the battle is fought in 
line formation, the General’s responsibilities are by no 
means lightened: he has to secure from any danger of 
disaster a convoy immensely precious to the Republic; 
and, that done, he and his frigates may still be of some use 
to the fleet. 

55 

Cairo 

This plan of mine is perhaps contrary to that generally 
adopted, but the benefits I see in it are so great that I am 
sure it will be to our advantage. It will get us out of the 
habit the navy has of entrusting the command of the 
advance guard to the captain of a mere frigate, whereas in 
fact all subsequent events turn upon the first view of the 
enemy, and the first reports. 

I am starting to-morrow night, and I hope to find the 
fleet ready when I arrive. 

[Corresp., iv, 2540. Napoleon left Paris on May 4, and the fleet 
(of nearly 400 ships) sailed from Toulon for Egypt on the 19th. The 
mixture of military and naval terms belongs to the original.] 

42 

MISANTHROPY 

TO JOSEPH 

Cairo, July 25, 1798. 

The papers will tell you about the result of the fighting, 
and the conquest of Egypt. There was enough resistance to 
add a glorious page to the military annals of the army. 
Egypt is the richest country in the world for com, tice, 
meat, and vegetables. It is as barbarous as it can be. There 
is no money, not even enough to pay the troops. I may be in 
France again in two months. Please look after my interests. 
There is plenty to worry me at home. . . . Your friendship 
means a lot to me: were I to lose it, and to see you betraying 
me, I should become a complete misanthrope. It is a melan¬ 
choly business, when all the affections of one’s heart are 
wrapped up in a single person. 

I want you to arrange to have a country place ready for 
me when I return, either in Burgundy or near Paris. I am 
counting on spending the winter there, and seeing no one. 
I am sick of society. I need solitude, isolation. My feelings 
are dried up, and I am bored with public display. I am tired 
of glory at 29; it has lost its charm; and there is nothing 

56 

Aboukir B ay 

left for me but complete egotism. I mean to keep my Paris- 
house—1 shall never give that up to anyone. I have no other 
resources. 

Good-bye, my one and only friend. I have never treated 
you unfairly, have I? You must give me credit for that, 
much as I should have liked to do so. You know what I 
mean. My love to your wife and Jerome. 

[Joseph, i, 188. Napoleon had captured Alexandria on July z, won 
the Battle of the Pyramids on the 21st, and entered Cairo on the 24th. 
But he had heard that Josephine, left behind in Paris, was being 
unfaithful to him. He soon consoled himself with Pauline Foures, the- 
wife of a lieutenant in the Chasseurs. The dots are in the original.] 

43 

A LETTER OF CONDOLENCE 

TO MADAME BRUEYS 

Headquarters, Cairo, August 19, 1798. 

Your husband was killed by a cannon-ball whilst fighting 
on board his ship. He died honourably, and without 
suffering, as every soldier would wish to die. 

Your sorrow touches me to the quick. It is a dreadful 
moment when we are parted from one we love. It shuts us 
off from the world. The body is convulsed with pain, and 
the faculties of the mind so overwhelmed that all its 
contacts with reality are cut off by a distorting dream. 
Things are such that, if there were no reason for living, it 
were better to die. But when second thoughts supervene, 
and you press your children to your heart, your nature is- 
revived by tears and tenderness, and you live for the sake 1 
of your offspring. Yes, Madame, you will weep with them, 
you will nurture their infancy, you will educate their 
youth; you will speak to them of their father and of your 
grief, of their loss and of the Republic’s. And when you 
have linked your soul to the world again through the 
mutual affection of mother and child, I want you to count 

57 

Syrian Campaign 

•as of some value my friendship, and the lively interest that 
I shall always take in the wife of my friend. Be assured that 
there are men—a minority—who can turn grief into hope, 
because they feel so intimately the troubles of the heart. 

[Corresp., iv, 3046. Admiral Brueys was in command of the French 
ileet destroyed by Nelson at Aboukir Bay on the night of August 1 
and is generally supposed to have been blown up on board his flag¬ 
ship, the ‘Orient.’] 

A 1 

CAIRO REBELS 

TO GENERAL BERTHIER 

Headquarters, Cairo, October 23, 1798. 

Instruct the officer in command of the place to decapi¬ 
tate all prisoners taken with arms in their hands. They are 
to be taken to-night to the bank of the Nile between 
Bouliq and Old Cairo; and their headless bodies are to be 
thrown into the river. 

[Corresp., v, 3527. A revolt against the French broke out in Cairo 
on October 16.] 

45 

SYRIAN CAMPAIGN 

TO GENERAL DESAIX, AT QOUS 

Headquarters, Gaza, February 27, 1799. 

I have had no letters from you for more than a month, 
though I have heard of you indirectly from the command¬ 
ants of Cairo and Beny-Soueyf. At the present moment 
we are, I suppose, nearly 300 leagues apart. 

You will have heard from the Staff of the military situa¬ 
tion here. We have crossed 70 leagues of desert—a very 
tiring business. Brackish water, often none at all. We have 
eaten dogs, donkeys, and camels. The last three days here 

58 

Slave-Trade 

there has been a terrible wind, with torrents of rain. The sky 
is overcast; the climate might be that of Paris. The lemon- 
bushes, olive-groves, and broken ground are just like the 
scenery of Languedoc: you might think yourself somewhere 
near Beziers. Cl the fort at Gaza we found more than 30 
millkrs of powder, and a great quantity of cannon-balls of 
every calibre, cases and all. We are starting to morrow on 
our march to Jaffa. The Mamelukes and Ibrahim Bey have 
fled into the mountains of Naplouse.... 

[Corresp., v, 4000. Turkey had declared war on France in Septem¬ 
ber, 1798. Napoleon left Cairo for Syria on February 10, and occupied 
Gaza on the 24th. On May 20 he began his retreat from Acre, and 
reached Cairo again on June 14.] 

46 

SLAVE-TRADE 

TO THE SULTAN OF DARFOUR 

Headquarters, Cairo, June 30, 1799. 

In the name of God the Clement and Merciful! 

There is no other god but God, and Mahomet is his 
prophet! 

To the Sultan of Darfour, Abd-el-Rahm&n, Servitor of 
the two Holy Cities, Caliph of the glorious Prophet of 
God, Master of the Worlds. 

I have received your letter; I have understood its contents. 

I was absent, when your caravan arrived, having been in 
Syria to punish and destroy our enemies. I beg you to send, 
by the first caravan,.2,000 black slaves over sixteen years of 
age, strong and vigorous: I will purchase them on my own 
account. 

Order your caravan to come at once, and not to stop on 
the way. I am giving instructions for its safe conduct 
throughout the journey. 

[Corresp., v, 4235. Darfur is a district in the Sudan, south-west of 
Khartum.] 

59 

Christians 

47 

ISRAEL IN EGYPT 

TO THE DIVAN OF CAIRO 

Headquarters, El-Rahmanyeh, July 21,179^ 

There is no other god but God, and Mahomet is his 
prophet! 

To the Divan of Cairo, Chosen amongst the Wisest, the 
most Instructed, and the most Enlightened! May the 
Salutation of the Prophet be upon them! 

I am writing you mis letter to let you know that, after 
occupying the Natroun lakes, and passing through Bahyreh, 
to punish my enemies and to restore tranquillity to that 
unhappy people, we have betaken ourselves to El Rah* 
manyeh. We have granted a general pardon to the province, • 
which is now in a state of perfect tranquillity. 

Eighty vessels, large and small, threatened to attack 
Alexandria. Though received with bombs and cannon-balls, 
they anchored at Aboukir, and are beginning to disembark. 

I am letting them do so, because my intention is to attack 
them when they have landed, to ldu all who will not sur¬ 
render, and to spare the lives of the rest, in order to bring 
them back as prisoners: it will be a fine spectacle for the city 
of Cairo. This fleet came here in the hope of co-operating 
with the Arabs and Mamelukes in looting and devastating 
Egypt, There are Russians on board, who abominate those 
who believe in the unity of God, because they accept the 
lie that there are three gods. But they will soon see that it is 
not the number of their gods that gives them strength, and 
that there is only One God, the Father of Victory, Clement 
and Merciful, Who fights always for the good, and con¬ 
founds the plans of the wicked, and Who, in His wisdom, 
ordained that I should come to Egypt, to change the face of 
the country, and to substitute for a destructive rule one of 
order and justice. He grants thereby a sign of His Omni¬ 
potence; for what the believers in three gods have never 

60 

and Moslems 

been able to do, has been done by us, who believe that One 
God alone governs nature and the universe. 

If there are any Moslems among them, they are damned, 
because they have allied themselves, contrary to the com¬ 
mand of the Prophet, with infidel and idolatrous powers. 
They have forfeited the protection that would otherwise 
have been accorded them, and they will perish in their 
sins. A Mussulman who is on board a ship flying the cross, 
and who hears daily blasphemies against the One God, is 
worse than an infidel. I would have you make these things 
known to the different Divans of Egypt, that the various 
villages may not be troubled by persons of ill intent; for 
they shall perish like Dumanhour and many others whose 
evil conduct had merited my revenge. 

May the salutation of peace be upon all members of the 
Divan! 

[Corresp., v, 4296. Napoleon defeated the Turkish expeditionary 
force at El-Ramanieh on July 25. The Divans were administrative 
Councils that he had set up in Cairo and the provinces.] 

48 

ALLOCATIONS 

TO GENERAL SONGIS, O.C. ARTILLERY 

Headquarters, Cairo, August 16, 1799. 

You should know beforehand that, in yesterday’s orders, 
the Commander-in-chief has put down the grant for army 
uniforms at double the amount actually issued. This is for 
public consumption, to make them think in Europe that our 
effectives are twice what they really are. Warn the battalions 
concerned not to count upon more than half their alloca¬ 
tions. 

[Corresp., v, 4361.] 

61 

Egypt: Occupation? 

49 

KLfiBER'S COMMAND 

TO GENERAL KLEBER 

Headquarters, Alexandria, August 22,1799, 

I enclose an order appointing you Commander-in-chief 
of the army. Fearing that the English cruiser may reappear 
at any moment, I am putting forward the date of my 
departure by two or three days. 

I am taking with me Generals Berthier, Lannes, Murat,, 
Andreossy, and Marmont, as well as Messrs. Monge and 
Berthollet. 

I enclose the English and Frankfort papers up to June 
10. You will see there that we have lost Italy, and that 
Mantua, Turin, and Tortona are besieged. I have reason to 
expect that Mantua will hold out till the end of November, 
and I am hoping to arrive in Europe before the beginning 
of October. I enclose a cypher for corresponding with the 
Government, and another for corresponding with me.. . . 

The arrival of our Brest fleet at Toulon and of the Spanish 
fleet at Cartagena puts it beyond doubt that we can transport 
to Egypt the muskets, sabres, pistols, and cast-iron fittings 
that you need—I have an accurate list of them; with recruits 
enough to make good the losses of two campaigns. The 
government itself will then inform you of its intentions;, 
and I will take steps, both in my public and private capacity, 
to keep you frequently informed of what is happening. 

Supposing that, owing to events we cannot foresee, all 
our attempts are fruitless, so that by May you have received 
no reinforcements, and no news from France; and if this 
year, in spite of all precautions, the plague reaches Egypt, 
and you lose more than 1,500 men—a serious loss, when 
added to the daily war casualties; under such circumstances 
I think you ought not to risk another season’s campaign, 
and you are authorised to conclude peace with the Ottoman 
Porte, even though the evacuation of Egypt is made a sine qua 
non , The best plan would be to postpone the carrying out of 

62 

Evacuation? 

this condition, if possible, until a general peace is signed- 

You can appreciate as well as anyone how important to 
France is the possession of Egypt. The Turkish Empire 
is in ruins all round us, and is daily crumbling away. 
A French evacuation of Egypt would be a disaster all the 
greater because we shall live to see this fine province in the 
hands of another European power. 

Your plans should also be strongly influenced by the 
news you receive of the success or failure of the Republic 
in Europe. If, before you get news of me from France, the 
Porte answers the offers of peace that I have made it, you 
should reply that you have all the powers I had, start 
negotiations, reiterate my declaration that it was never 
tie intention of France to take away Egypt from the Porte,, 
and ask the Porte to abandon the Coalition, and to give us 
trading-rights in the Black Sea, and a six months’ armistice* 
during which ratifications can be exchanged. 

Supposing the circumstances are such that you think 
you ought to conclude this treaty with the Porte, you must 
insist that it cannot be executed before it is ratified; and it 
is in accordance with international usage that there should 
always be an armistice during the interval between the 
signature of a treaty and its ratification. 

You know my views about the government of Egypt. 
Whatever you do, the Christians will always be our friends- 
But they must not be allowed to become too insolent, lest 
the Turks become as fanatical against us as against 
and thus irreconcilable. Fanaticism must be put to sleep 
until it can be destroyed. Win the good opinion of the 
sheiks at Cairo, and you have that of all Egypt, and of any 
leaders the people are likely to possess. The sheiks are, for 
our purposes, the least dangerous of all, for they are timid,, 
unwarlike, and, like all priests, inspire fanaticism without 
being fanatics themselves. .. . 

I have already repeatedly asked for a troupe of actors* 
and I shall take special trouble to send you one. This is 
very important for the army, and will be a first step towards- 
changing the customs of the country. 

63 

Kleber 

The important post you occupy as Commander-in-chief 
will enable you to use the talents nature has given you. 
Everything that happens here in Egypt is intensely inter¬ 
esting, and will have far-reaching results on commerce and 
civilisation. Great revolutions will date from this epoch. 

I am wont to find a reward for the troubles and travails 
.of this life in the opinion of posterity. I therefore abandon 
Egypt with the deepest regret. Nothing less than the 
interests and honour of my country, a feeling of duty, 
and the extraordinary happenings at home, could decide 
me to risk my way through hostile fleets to reach Europe. 
My heart and mind will be with you; your success will be 
as dear to me as any won in my own presence; and I shall 
consider any day in my life ill-employed on which I do 
nothing to help the army I leave in your charge, or to 
consolidate the magnificent edifice whose foundations have 
already been laid. 

The men I entrust to you are like children to me: they 
have always shown me, even in times of the greatest 
hardship, proofs of their affection. Carry on this tradition: 
it is due both to my special regard and affection for you, and 
to the genuine attachment I feel toward themselves. 

[Corresp., v, 4374. Napoleon had long been talking of returning 
to France. On August 2, he received through Sir Sidney Smith copies 
■of the Gazette de Frankfurt and the Courrierfrangais de Lcndreswith. news 
of the defeat of Scherer in Italy, and of Jourdan in the Rhine valley. 
He at once determined to return, and sailed on August 23.] 

5 ° 

BRUMAIRE 

TO CITIZEN BEYTZ 

Paris, November 24,1799. 

I have received your letter of 27 brumaire. Why do you 
feel distressed about a day whose results are so much to the 
.advantage of order, liberty, and enlightenment? 

64 

B RUMAIRE 

But by this time first impressions have passed, and no 
doubt you are anxious to resume the part befitting a dis¬ 
tinguished savant, which should be as alien to any spirit of 
partisanship as patriotism itself. 

I remember reading an excellent report you wrote on the 
ratification of the treaty of Campoformio, which fixed 
for ever the destinies of your own country, Belgium. No 
sensible man can suppose that the peace which Europe still 
demands can be reached by way of factions, and the disorder 
to which they lead. 

I want you all to rally round the mass of the people. 
The simple title of French citizen is worth far more than 
that of Royalist, Clichien, Jacobin, Feuillant, or any of those 
thousand-and-one denominations which have sprung, 
during the past ten years, from the spirit of faction, and 
which are hurling the nation into an abyss from which the 
time has at last come to rescue it, once and for all. 

That is the aim of all my efforts. It is that upon which is 
centred, from this moment, the regard of all thoughtful 
men, the esteem of the people, and the hope of glory. 

[Corresp., vi, 4398. Napoleon landed at Frejus on October 9, and 
reached Paris on the 16th. The coup d’etat of 18th Brumaire (November 
9-11) placed him in power. J. F. Baron de Beytz was a distinguished 
Belgian suspected of opposing Napoleon’s rise to power.] 

5 * 

LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

NOTE DICTATED TO LUCIEN BONAPARTE, MINISTER FOR HOME 

AFFAIRS 

Paris, December 25, 1799. 

If I had not to go to war, I should initiate the prosperity 
of France through the local authorities. If one is to regener¬ 
ate a nation, it is much simpler to deal with its inhabitants 
a thousand at a time than to pursue the romantic ideal of 
individual welfare. Each local body in France represents 
f 65 

The Revolution 

i,ooo inhabitants. If you work for the prosperity of 36 
thousand communities you will be working for that of 
36 million inhabitants, whilst simplifying the issue, and 
reducing the difficulties arising out of the difference in 
scale between thousands and millions. That was what 
Henri IV had in mind when he talked about providing 
everyone with a fowl for his stock-pot: it would have been 
a stupid remark otherwise. 

The Minister for Home Affairs should pay special 
attention to the following ideas: 

Before the Revolution every village belonged to its 
landlord, and to its priest. The tenant and the parishioner 
had no roads to travel by; there were no byres where 
their cows or sheep could shelter, no meadows where they 
could go to grass. But since 1790, when this common right 
of moving and grazing cattle was suddenly and quite 
properly taken out of the hands of the feudal landlord, 
each municipality has become a real person , under the pro¬ 
tection of common law, with the right of possessing, 
acquiring, and buying property, and of performing, for 
the benefit of the municipal family, every act contemplated 
in our codes. Thanks to this great national conception, 
France found herself suddenly divided into 36 thousand 
personalities, each of which was faced with the responsibili¬ 
ties of ownership —anxious to extend its property, improve its 
produce, increase its income, and so forth. 

In that change lay the germ of French prosperity. Why 
has further development been impossible? Because, whilst 
an individual owner, with a personal interest in his property, 
is always wide awake, and brings his plans to fruition, 
communal interest is inherently sleepy and unproductive; 
because individual enterprise is a matter of instinct, and 
communal enterprise a matter of public spirit—and that is 
rare. 

Consequently, since 1790, the 36 thousand local bodies 
have been like 36 thousand orphan girls. Heiresses to the 
old feudal rights, they have been neglected or defrauded 
for the past ten years by the municipal trustees of the 

66 

and the Communes 

Convention or of the Directory. A new set of mayors, 
assessors, or municipal councillors has generally meant 
nothing more than a fresh form of robbery: they have 
stolen the by-road, stolen the foot-path, stolen the timber, 
robbed the church, and filched the property of the commune\ 
and this looting is still going on under the slack municipal 
system of the Year VIII. 

If this system were to last another ten years, what would 
become of the local bodies? They would inherit nothing but 
debts, and be so bankrupt that they would be asking charity 
of the inhabitants, instead of giving them the help and 
protection that is their due. Like the family prodigal, they 
would have sold or pawned their last stick of furniture, 
and be unable to borrow a penny to live on. No one would 
venture to settle down in a community so heavily in debt 
that he would have nothing to look forward to but fees and 
taxes of all kinds—charitable contributions, donations, 
subscriptions, special collections, and so forth. The existence 
of a local authority ought to attract population: under these 
conditions it would repel it. 

It is the first duty of a Home Secretary to arrest a disease 
which would carry infection into the 36 thousand limbs of 
the great body of society. And the first thing to do, towards 
this end, is to form a clear notion of the seriousness of the 
disease, and of its symptoms. The Minister will therefore 
begin by having a general inventory made of the 3 6 thou¬ 
sand communes —this has always been wanting. . . . Local 
bodies will be divided into three classes: those which are in 
debt, those which just pay their way, and those which show 
a surplus. The second and third classes are in a minority, and 
there need be no hurry to deal with them. The point is to 
restore solvency to those which are in debt. . . . Once this 
inventory is drawn up, the Prefects and Sub-prefects will 
be warned to bring the whole force of the administration 
to bear upon the insolvent municipalities, and to get rid at 
once of any mayors or assessors who do not see eye to eye 
with them as to local improvement and regeneration. It will 
be the duty of the Prefect to visit these bodies at least twice 

67 

Local Government 

a year, and of the Sub-prefect four times a year, under 
penalty of dismissal. He will make a monthly report to the 
Minister about each municipality, stating the results of what 
he has tried to do, and what still remains to be done. 

I should like proposals for a prize for those mayors who 
have got their municipalities out of debt within 2 years: 
whereas, in the case of any municipality which is not solvent 
at the end of 5 years, the Government will nominate a 
special commission to take over its administration. (This 
will involve the drafting of a law.) 

Thus at the end of 5 years France will have only two 
classes of local bodies left—those that are working at a 
profit, and those which make both ends meet. We shall have 
expunged from the map of France the insolvent municipali¬ 
ties, whose property is falling to pieces, and becoming a 
burden on the inhabitants. 

This first levelling-up accomplished, the efforts of the 
Minister and of the municipalities will be devoted to 
securing that, by the end of a further period, the solvent 
communes rise into the class of those which show a surplus; 
so that, in 10 years’ time, this may be the only class left. 

When this is done, the movement towards national 
prosperity initiated by the efforts of 36 million individuals 
will be multiplied by the regenerative power of 36 thousand 
communal personalities, all working, under die supreme 
direction of the Government, towards the goal of progres¬ 
sive perfectibility. 

Every year the 50 mayors who have done most to rid 
their community of debt, or to manage it at a profit, will 
be summoned to Paris at the expense of the State, and 
formally presented to the three Consuls. 

A column put up at the expense of the Government, at 
the main entrance of the village or town, will perpetuate 
the name of its mayor; and posterity will read these words:— 

‘To the Guardian of the Community; from his grateful 
Country.’ 

[Corsjesp., vi, 4474. The eighty-eight departements of France proper 
in 1799 contained about 36,000 communes or municipaUies, grouped in 
400 arrondissements^ 

68 

France and England 
5 * 

PEACE PROPOSALS 

TO H.M. THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND 

Paris, December 25, 1799. 

Called by the will of the French people to hold the 
highest office in the Republic, I think it proper, upon 
assuming my functions, to inform Your Majesty of the fact 
by my own hand. 

Is there to be no end to the war which, for the past 
eight years, has desolated every quarter of the globe? Is. 
there no means by which we can come to an understanding? 
How is it that the two most enlightened nations in Europe, 
both stronger and more powerful than their safety and 
independence require, consent to sacrifice their commercial 
success, their internal prosperity, and the happiness of their 
homes, to dreams of imaginary greatness? How is it that 
they do not envisage peace as their greatest glory as well as 
their greatest need? 

Such sentiments cannot be strange to Your Majesty’s 
heart, for you rule a free nation for the sole end of making 
it happy. 

I beg Your Majesty to believe that, in broaching this 
subject, it is my sincere desire to make a practical contribu¬ 
tion, for the second time, towards the establishment of a 
general peace. I do so by a demarche that is prompt, confiden¬ 
tial, and freed from those formalities which maybe necessary 
to save the face of a weak state, but which between great 
powers become a mask of mutual trickery. 

If France and England abuse their power, they can, for 
a long time yet, stave off exhaustion; but it would be an 
international disaster; and I make bold to say that the fate of 
every civilised nation depends upon the ending of a war 
which is embroiling the whole world. 

[Corresp., vi, 4445. The Constitution of the Year VIII, under which 
Napoleon became First Consul, was promulgated on December 15.! 

69 

The Revolution Over 

53 

NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 

TO CITIZEN D’ANDIGNE 

Paris, December 30, 1755, 

I have been pleased at reading the letter from the most 
remarkable citizens of the western Departments. They show 
a disposition which does them honour, and which will, I am 
confident, be useful to the country. 

Only too much French blood lias flowed during the last 
ten years; yet there are enlightened men, in whom the senti¬ 
ment of honour still burns, who fail to use all their influence 
on behalf of a government solely concerned to re-establish 
order, justice, and true freedom—a government which 
will soon be surrounded by the trust and respect of all 
Europe, and which will soon have the glory of proclaiming, 
for a second time, that peace for which the whole world is 
crying out. 

Be sure, then, to tell your fellow-citizens that never again 
shall revolutionary laws devastate the fair soil of France, 
that the Revolution is over, that consciences will be utterly 
and absolutely free, that protection will be given equally to 
all citizens, and relieved from any taint of prejudice, and 
that, for myself, I shall appreciate and know how to reward 
any services rendered on behalf of peace and quietness.... 

[Corresp., vi, 4488. On December 27, following an armistice of 
November 24, d’Andigne, tbe Chouan leader, came to Paris, and 
discussed terms of pacification with Napoleon. On December 28 an 
amnesty was offered to all rebels who would lay down arms.] 

54 

STATUARY 

TO CITIZEN LUCIEN BONAPARTE, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Paris, February 7,1800. 

The First Consul instructs me to request you on his behalf 
to give the necessary orders for erecting, in the Great 

70 

The de Staels 

Gallery of the Tuileries, statues of Demosthenes, Alexander, 
Hannibal, Scipio, Brutus, Cicero, Cato, Caesar, Gustavus 
Adolphus, Turenne, the great Conde, Duguay-Trouin, 
Marlborough, Prince Eugene, Marshal Saxe, Washington, 
Frederick the Great, Mirabeau, Dugommier, Dampierre, 
Marceau, and Joubert. 

You are to take suitable steps to provide such of these 
statues as are no longer in existence, or are not at present 
available. 

[Corresp., vi, 4572.] 

55 

THE DE STAELS 

TO CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE 

Paris, March 19, 1800. 

M. de Stael is destitute: his wife is giving dinners and 
dances. If you are still seeing her, couldn’t you induce the 
woman to make her husband an allowance of 1,000 or 
1,200 francs a month? Or have we really reached a point 
when people can ride rough-shod, not merely over every-day 
morality, but over the most sacred of family duties, and be 
thought none the worse by decent society? They may, 
indeed, judge Mme de Stael’s conduct as though she were 
a man: but if a man had inherited M. deNecker’s fortune, 
had enjoyed for years the advantages of a famous name, 
and had then let his wife starve, while he himself lived on 
the fat of the land, he would be cut by all his friends, 

[Lecestre, i, 20. Germaine Necker, daughter of the Genevan 
banker and French minister, married Baron de Stael-Holstein in 1786, 
and was separated from him in 1798. He died in 1802.] 

71 

Papers and Posters 

56 

CENSORSHIP AND POLICE 

TO CITIZEN FOUCHE, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Paris, April 5,1800. 

The Consuls of the Republic intend that Le Bien Informe, 
Hommes Libres , and DSfenseurs de la Patrie shall cease publica¬ 
tion, unless the proprietors procure editors of good charac¬ 
ter and of incorruptible patriotism. You must insist that 
every issue of these journals is signed by a recognised editor. 

You are to instruct the Prefect of Police to take whatever 
steps are necessary: 

(1) To prevent any bill-posting on the walls of Paris, 
or any crying of papers or pamphlets without a 
police licence; 

(2) To prevent the print-dealers displaying for sale 
anything contrary to sound morals, or to the policy 
of the Government. 

The Prefect of Police is to forbid the public announcement 
of any play, unless the director of the theatre has a permit 
from the Minister for Home Affairs. 

The Consuls wish you to send them, within ten days, a 
report, 

(1) On the best way of ridding Paris of the great 
number of Italian and other foreign refugees who 
live here without any means of subsistence; 

(2) On the most appropriate measures for removing 
from the territory of the Republic those imigris who 
have returned into the Seine Department, whether or 
not they are under supervision, provided that they 
did not claim to be removed from the proscription 
list before 4 nivdse last; 

(3) On the names and addresses of some 50 persons, 
who habitually make their living out of revolutions, 
and are constantly agitating public opinion; and on 
the means of ridding Paris of these men, many of 
whom are in foreign pay, command some sort of 

l z 

Tom Paine 

following, and are at the disposal of anyone who 
will bribe them to disturb the public peace. 

Lastly, you are to inform M. Payne that the police have 
information as to his suspicious behaviour, and that on the 
first complaint he will be sent back to America, the country 
to which he belongs. 

[Corresp., vi, 4707. Joseph Fouche, ex-Oratorian and Terrorist, 
became Napoleon’s Minister of Police in 1799. ‘Tom’ Paine had been 
in prison under the Terror, and was released in November, 1794. He 
returned to' America in 1802, and died at New York in 1809.] 

• 57 

AFTER MARENGO 

TO H.M. THE EMPEROR AND KING 

Marengo, June 16, 1800. 

I have the honour of writing to Your Majesty to inform, 
you of the desire of the French people to put an end to the 
war which desolates our countries. 

English cunning has prevented my frank and simple 
demarche producing its natural effect upon Your Majesty’s 
heart. 

There has been war between us. Thousands of Frenchmen 
and Austrians are no more. . . . Thousands of bereaved 
families are praying that fathers, husbands, and sons may 
return! . . . The evil is irremediable: may it at least teach us 
to avoid anything that might prolong hostilities! The pros¬ 
pect so affects my heart that I refuse to accept the failure of 
my previous advances, and take it upon myself to write 
again to Your Majesty, to entreat you to put an end to the 
misfortunes of Europe. 

On the batde-field of Marengo, surrounded by sufferers, 
and in the midst of 15,000 dead bodies, I implore Your 
Majesty to hear the cry of humanity, and not to allow the 
offspring of two brave and powerfiil nations to slaughter 

73 

M A R E N G O 

•one another for the sake of interests of which they know 
nothing. 

It is for me to urge Your Majesty, because I am nearer to 
the scene of war, and your heart cannot be so keenly 
affected as mine. 

Your Majesty’s arms have won glory enough. You 
govern a vast number of states. What reasons, then, can 
they allege, who, in Your Majesty’s study, counsel the 
continuance of the war? 

The interests of religion, and of the Church? 

Then why do they not advise Your Majesty to make war 
on the English, the Muscovites, or the Prussians? They are 
further from the Church than we are. 

The character of the French Government, which is not 
hereditary, but simply elective? 

But the Government of the Empire is elective too. 
Besides, Your Majesty is well aware how powerless the 
whole world would be to change one jot of the French 
■determination, derived from Nature herself, to govern 
themselves as they will. Why is not Your Majesty advised 
to insist that the King of England shall suppress the Houses 
of Parliament, or the United States of America destroy their 
•Congress? 

The interests of the German Confederation? 

But Your Majesty yielded us Mayence, which a series of 
■campaigns had not put in our power, and which could have 
sustained several months of siege; the German Confedera¬ 
tion calls loudly for peace—nothing else can save it from 
utter ruin; whilst the majority of that Confederation, even 
the states of the King of England, the sole author of the 
war, are at peace with the Republic. 

An extension of Your Majesty’s territory in Italy? _ 

But the treaty of Campoformio has given Your Majesty 
the constant object of your ancestral ambitions. 

The balance of power in Europe? 

The recent campaign is sufficient proof that it is not 
.France which threatens the balance of power. Every day 
.shows that it is England—rEngland, who has so monopo- 

74 

France and Austria 

lised world-commerce and the empire of the seas that she 
can withstand single-handed the united fleets of Russia, 
Denmark, Sweden, France, Spain, and Holland. Yet Your 
Majesty, now a great commercial power, is interested in 
the independence and freedom of the seas. 

The destruction of revolutionary principles? 

If Your Majesty considers its results, you will see that 
the war itself is likely to revolutionise Europe, by increasing 
popular discontent, and swelling the national debt in 
every country. 

If you force the French people to make war, you force 
it to think of nothing and live for nothing but war; and the 
French legions are many and brave. 

If Your Majesty wishes for peace, it is as good as made: 
we have only to carry out on both sides the terms of 
Campoformio, and to remedy what seems to have been 
the chief cause of the rupture by an additional clause 
guaranteeing the lesser powers. 

Let us give peace and repose to the present generation. 
If future generations are so foolish as to fight—well, after 
a few years of war they will learn wisdom, and live at 
peace with one another. 

I could have captured the whole of Your Majesty’s 
army. I contented myself with an armistice, in the hope 
that this would be a first step towards a world-peace. That 
is' an aim which I cherish all the more, as it might be 
supposed that one nurtured and brought up on war would 
be more hardened than I am to the evils it involves. At the 
same time Your Majesty will realise that, unless this armis¬ 
tice leads to peace, it is useless, and inimical to French 
interests. 

The proposals that I think it right to make to Your 
Majesty are therefore these:— 

(1) That the armistice be extended to all the armies. 

(2) That negotiators be sent by both sides, either 
•secretly or publicly, as Your Majesty prefers, to some place 
between the Mincio and the Cniese, to agree upon means 
of guaranteeing the lesser powers, and to elucidate those 

75 

Louis XVIII 

articles of the treaty of Campoformio -which experience 
has shown to be ambiguous. 

If Your Majesty rejects these proposals, hostilities wilt 
recommence, and—you must permit me to speak frankly— 
you alone, in the eyes of the world, will be responsible for 
the war. 

I beg Your Majesty to read this letter with the feelings, 
which prompted me to write it, and to believe that, next 
to the happiness and interests of the French people, nothing 
concerns me more than the prosperity of that nation of 
soldiers whose courage and military prowess I have 
admired for the last six years. 

[Corresp., vi, 4914. Napoleon had defeated the Austrians at Marengo* 
two days before. The dots are in the text.] 

5 * 

THE BOURBONS 

TO THE COUNT DE PROVENCE 

Paris, September 7,1800. 

I have received your letter. I thank you for your kind 
remarks about myself. You must give up any hope of 
returning to France: you would have to pass over 100,000- 
dead bodies. Sacrifice your private interests to the. peace 
and happiness of France.. .. History will not forget. I am 
not untouched by the misfortunes of your family.... I will 
gladly do what I can to render your retirement pleasant and 
undisturbed. 

[Corresp., vi, 5090. The Comte de Provence, the elder of Louis XVI s. 
surviving brothers, afterwards Louis XVIII, was at this time a refugee 
in Russia. The dots are in the text.] 

76 

Suez Canal 

59 

HANOVER & EGYPT 

TO THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 

Paris, February 27, 1801. 

. . . The Marquis de Lucchesini has communicated to 
me a note from the King of Prussia, from which it appears 
that this prince has at last done what was expected of him 
by Your Majesty and all Europe in closing the Elbe and 
Weser to English shipping. Would not your Majesty 
think it well, whilst occupying Hanover until the conclusion 
of a general peace, to send M. de Sprengporten’s troops 
there? They might be joined by a French division; in which 
case I would undertake to supply them with whatever 
military equipment they might need. 

If your Majesty sees to it that the English carry on no 
trade with the northern powers, and if M. de Sprengporten’s 
troops move into Hanover, and guarantee the closing of 
the Elbe and Weser, whilst the army of reconnaissance that 
I have despatched to Bordeaux compels Portugal to shut 
her ports against England, and if those of Naples and Sicily 
are similarly closed, then the English will be completely cut 
off from Europe. . . . 

The English are attempting to land in Egypt. It is to the 
interests of all the Mediterranean powers, as well as of the 
power which controls the Black Sea, that Egypt should 
remain in French hands. The course of the Suez canal, 
which would join the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, 
has already been laid out. The work would be easy, and 
would not take long; and it might result in incalculable 
benefits to Russian commerce. If your Majesty is still of the 
opinion, so often expressed before, that part of your 
northern trade should travel by way of the south, you 
could associate yourself with this great enterprise, which 
will so deeply affect the future situation in Europe, by 
intervening at the Porte in the affairs of Egypt. 

Your Majesty will see that in the peace treaty concluded 

77 

Boys’ Schools 

between France and Austria everything has been done to 
meet Your Majesty’s wishes. . . . 

[Corresp. vii, 5417. Napoleon, having won the support of the 
Emperor Paul I by the generous return of 6,000 Russian prisoners of 
war, hoped for his support against England. General Sprengporten 
the Russian envoy, visited Paris, and on December 16-18 the Second 
Armed Neutrality was formed by the Baltic powers against England. 
In January the Tsar offered to help Napoleon. On March 23 he was 
assassinated.] 

60 

BOYS' SCHOOLS 

TO CITIZEN CHAPTAL, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Paris, June 11,1801. 

The Consuls have considered the general regulations 
that you propose to adopt for the schools affiliated to the 
. Prytanie . Some of the provisions made by these regulations 
seem to them inadequate, and in other respects capable of 
improvement. Their wish is that their comments should be 
submitted to you, not as notifying changes which must be 
made, but as suggesting points which you will doubtless 
appreciate, and, if they commend themselves to you, 
adopt. . . . 

"Police. 

The Consuls consider the Section headed ‘Police’ quite 
inadequate. They think that, in order to complete it, you 
would do well to study the regulations made for the 
Military School by the Minister of War: most of their 
provisions are appropriate to the establishments you are 
organising. These rules were drawn up to meet every 
contingency, and have worked well in practice. 

Articles zi and 30 of the Section headed ‘Police’ give the 
cadet officers the ranks of captain, lieutenant, and sub¬ 
lieutenant. It would be more suitable to substitute ‘sergeant’ 
and ‘corporal,’ The cadets would wear the badges of these 
ranks. 

78 

Curriculum 

Education. 

The Section on Education is inadequate. I have the 
honour to inform you of certain views which the Consuls- 
have expressed on this subject. 

The education given ought to fall into two main parts: 
the first, for boys under 12; the second, for boys above- 
that age. 

The lower part of the school should have the same kind 
of education throughout. It should be divided into classes- 
of 25 pupils each—a first, a second, a third, and if necessary - 
a fourth class. In the first class they should learn reading, 
writing, arithmetic, and the elements of grammar; in the 
second^ the four rules, spelling, and the principles of 
Latin; in the third, fractions, higher mathematics, and those 
parts of education which cannot be done in a year, drawing, 
dancing, and the use of arms. In addition all three classes- 
would take, up to their capacity, and in order to train their 
memory, lessons in natural history, geography, stories in 
French and Latin, the elements of ancient history, and a. 
collection of virtuous and heroic deeds calculated to inspire 
them with patriotic and moral ideals. 

The higher part of the school, consisting of boys over 
12, would naturally fall into two classes—those destined 
for a civil and those for a military career. Into which class- 
each boy is put, would be determined by the Inspector- 
general, at an inspection specially held for this purpose, 
and after hearing statements from the teachers, and any 
wishes that might be expressed by the boys’ parents. 

The pupils destined for a civil career would learn ancient 
languages, primarily Latin, and go through the full course 
of rhetoric and philosophy. They would also be taught the 
first volume of the course in mathematics. 

The pupils destined for a military career would make a 
special study of ah four volumes of the mathematical course; 
and they would learn a little astronomy, drawing, fortifica¬ 
tion, planning, etc. The most advanced pupils would be 
taught the principles of physics and chemistry, how to* 
serve a gun, and so on. 

79 

Careers 

The pupils composing each of these divisions would be 
divided into 3 or 4 classes, according to their progress. 

It would be settled every year to which class each of them 
should belong: they could then either be kept in the same 
class as before, or allowed to skip a class, if they knew too 
much or too little to be moved into the next above them. 

The regulations must prescribe exactly what subjects 
are to be taught in each class. 

It is recognised that each school must have a library of 
its own; probably 2,000 volumes would be more than 
■enough. Each library ought to have a catalogue printed in 
accordance with the regulations. 

After-career of pupils. 

This important heading is barely hinted at in Article 
54. After paying for the education and keep of the pupils 
for a number of years, the Republic cannot abandon them 
at the most critical moment of all. It must guarantee them 
employment in their chosen career. 

If they are destined for a civil career, and devote them¬ 
selves to administration, they will be placed on the adminis¬ 
trative side of the War Office, or of the Navy, or in the 
offices of ministers, prefects, etc., or in the School of Mines, 
or in the Department of Roads and Bridges. If they take up 
Jaw or medicine, they will be given studentships created for 
this purpose in schools that specialise in these subjects. 

If they are destined for a military career, they will be 
commissioned as sub-lieutenants in the infantry, or be 
allowed to sit for examinations for employment in the 
navy, artillery, or engineers. 

It will be possible to create every year 8 or 9 scholarships 
of 200 francs each, to be distributed among the different 
schools, and given to those pupils who most distinguish 
themselves. 

[Corresp., vii, 5,602. Starting from the ‘Prytanee,’ i.e., the old College 
■of Louis le Grand, Napoleon planned to reorganise secondary educa¬ 
tion on more classical, military, and utilitarian lines. A Report by 
Luden Bonaparte in 1800 was followed by another by Chaptal in 

80 

R I P A U L T 

1801. It is the latter he is here criticising. The first section, on ‘Manage¬ 
ment/ and the last, on ‘Saint-Cyr College,’ have been omitted.] 

61 

PUBLIC OPINION 

TO CITIZEN RIPAULT 

Paris, July 23, 1801. 

Citizen Ripault is to see that he is supplied every day 
with all the papers that come out, except the 11 political 
papers. He will read them carefully, make an abstract of 
everything they contain likely to affect the public point of 
view, especially with regard to religion, philosophy, and 
political opinion. He will send me this abstract between 

5 and 6 o’clock every day. 

Once every ten days he will send me an analysis of all the 
books or pamphlets which have appeared during that 
period, calling attention to any passages that might bear 
on moral questions, or interest me in a political or moral 
connexion. 

He will take pains to procure copies of all the plays 
which are produced, and to analyse them for me, with 
observations of the same character as those above men¬ 
tioned. This analysis must be made, at latest, within 48 
hours of the production of the plays. 

He is to send me every 1st and 6th day, between 5 and 

6 o’clock, a list of all the bills, posters, advertisements, etc. 
which deserve attention, as well as anything that has come 
to his knowledge, and anything that has been done or said 
in the various Institutes, literary meetings, sermons, new 
educational establishments, or fashionable trials, that might 
he of interest from a political and moral point of view. 

In consideration of thesenew duties imposed upon citizen 
Ripault, I am instructing the Minister for Home Affairs to 
pay him 500 francs a month, and I am ordering Pfister to 
give him a like amount. 

[Corresp., vii, 5647. Ripault was Napoleon’s librarian till 1807.] 

G 8l 

JEROME 

62 

JEROME goes to sea 

TO JEROME BONAPARTE 

Paris, August 16, 1801. 

I’m glad to hear you are getting used to the life of a sailor. 
There’s no better career in which to win a name for yourself. 
Go up aloft, get to know every part of the ship; and when 
you come back from your voyage, I hope to hear that you 
are as active as any powder-monkey. Don’t let anyone 
dictate your profession to you. Make up your mind that 
you are going to be a sailor. I hope you have already learnt 
to keep your watch, and box the compass. 

[LECESTRE,i,49 bis. Napoleon paid for Jerome’s education, and sent 
him to sea at 17.] 

63 

THE POPE’S DEVOTED SON 

TO HIS HOLINESS THE POPE 

Paris, August 28,1802. 

Holy Father, I have read with the greatest attention the 
letter that Your Holiness was good enough to write me, 
dated the 18th of August. I cannot but express my approval 
of Your Holiness’ intention to nominate one of my subjects 
to the Grand Mastership of Malta. 

I observe with some anxiety that Your Holiness does not 
think it proper to agree to a concordat with the Italian 
Republic. If your mind is made up on this point, I beg you 
to empower the Cardinal-Legate to regulate with me, by 
separate briefs, the various religious questions in the 
Italian Republic, so that matters may not go from bad to 
worse, but that everything may proceed in such away as to 
satisfy Your Holiness’ desires. 

82 

Cardinals 

The Cardinals I would propose to Your Holiness are the 
Archbishops of Paris and Lyon, and the Bishops of Troyes 
and Autun. The Archbishop of Paris is known to Your 
Holiness: he is fall of virtue, and though he is 93, he still 
retains his memory and his physical powers. The Arch¬ 
bishop of Lyon is a young man with fewer claims, but he is 
marked out by his high moral character, and by my special 
regard for him, as a near relation of my own. The Bishop of 
Autun is a worthy old man of 84: he suffered much under 
the Revolution, spending a long time in prison. His virtues 
have enabled him to triumph over all changes of fortune. 
It was the Bishop of Troyes who played the most decisive 
part in inducing the bishops in London to obey Your 
Holiness’ orders. He too is a very old man. He has been a. 
great success in his diocese. In learning and knowledge he 
is one of the most distinguished men the Gallican church 
has ever had. 

Your Holiness will see that I have not put forward the 
Bishop of Orleans. I will say quite frankly that I should 
like you to tell him that you will nominate him on the 
first opportunity; but I do not think it in the best interests 
of religion to give a cardinal’s hat at this moment to a man 
who has indeed been of great service to us, but who, in 
those unhappy times, took too prominent a part in the civil 
war. The government would derive more embarrassment 
than benefit, at the present moment, from his promotion. 
As, however, I gave him a sort of promise that I would 
some day ask Your Holiness to give him this appointment, 
you will be able to nominate him to the first vacancy; and it 
cannot be long coming, since three out of the four candi¬ 
dates I have put forward are over 80 years old. 

I hear from indirect sources that Your Holiness has 
experienced considerable difficulty in your relations with 
Russia. I think that, in dealing with this power, you should 
play for time as much as possible. The Emperor really pays 
no attention to requests that come to him through his 
Cabinet; so that, if Your Holiness has to answer him, it is 
better that you should do so yourself, by a brief addressed to 

83 

Missions — Sacred 

the Emperor personally, than by a note from one Cabinet to 
the other. The Emperor Alexander is fair-minded, honest 
and peaceable; his Cabinet is unprincipled, quarrelsome, and 
presumptuous. This, as Your Holiness will realise, is for 
your ears alone. 

I must inform Your Holiness that I have just induced 
the Bey of Algiers to release a large number of Om m- fa ns 
many of whom are Your Holiness" subjects: it was part of 
the satisfaction demanded from the Bey for an insult to the 
French flag. 

I have placed the Holy Sepulchre and the Syrian Chris¬ 
tians once more under French protection, as used to be the 
case with all the churches in Constantinople. I have received 
a series of appeals from the Armenian bishops and the 
persecuted Christians of Wallachia. I have written about 
them to Sultan Selim, with whom I correspond personally, 
and who seems to me anxious to do the right thing. 

I should like to rouse the China Missions to fresh activity; 
and I will not conceal it from Your Holiness that, quite 
apart from the general interests of religion, I am prompted 
by a desire to deprive the English of the management of 
these missions, which they are beginning to claim for 
themselves. 

The Elector of Bavaria asks me to help him in his 
ecclesiastical difficulties. I beg Your Holiness to tell me how 
far you are ready to go, and what you are willing to do for 
this prince. You can rest assured that I shall make use of 
what you tell me only in the cause of peace, and for the 
good of the Church. 

I remain, with filial respect. Your Holiness’ devoted son. 

[Correse., viii, 6273. Pius VII had become Pope in March, 1800. 
After long negotiations, Napoleon signed a Concordat with him on 
July 1,1801; it was publicly announced along with the Peace of Amiens 
on April 18, 1802. The Archbishop of Lyon was Napoleon’s uncle, 
Joseph Fesch, v. No. n.] 

84 

and Profane 
64 

SEBASTIANFS MISSION 

Paris, September 5, 1802. 

Citizen Sebastiani will sail to Tripoli in Barbary on the 
frigate assigned him by the Minister of Marine. 

(1) He will get the Bey to recognise the Italian Republic; 
for this purpose he will take with him specimens of Italian 
flags. 

(2) If the blockade is still in force he will offer to mediate 
an agreement between the Bey and the powers with whom 
he is at war, but without using pressure, or showing too 
much interest in these powers. 

(3) He is then to go to Alexandria, and to observe what 
vessels are in port, and whether there are any warships; 
what troops the English and Turks have there, and what is 
the condition of the defences, and of the forts. He is to 
find out all that has happened, since our departure, both 
at Alexandria and in Egypt. He is to discover the present 
condition of the Egyptians, take notes of his conversations 
with the Sheik El-Messiry, and the English and Turkish 
commandants, and send a fast brig home with information 
on all these points. 

(4) If Gyzeh is in the hands of the English, he must go 
there under English escort, break his journey frequently, 
and talk to the natives at H-Rahmanyeh, Terraneh, and 
other places, taking notes of everything. On arrival at 
Gyzeh, he will write to the Pasha; travel, with his leave, to 
Great Cairo; interview the great Sheiks El-Messiry, El- 
Cherqaouy, El-Fayoumy, etc.; take notes of their conver¬ 
sation, and of the condition of the Cairo citadel and die 
surrounding fortifications; and give everyone in the place 
pleasant impressions of myself, without compromising me 
in any way—he may say ‘that I love the people of Egypt, 
that I often talk of them, and hope for their happiness.’ 

(5) He should carry a letter from Talleyrand to the 
Pasha of Cairo, acquainting him of my desire to send a 

85 

Seb as ti a ni 

commissionef to Cairo as soon as possible, and to know 
whether all is quiet there: saying also that I take an interest 
in the happiness of Egypt, and asking whether I can contri¬ 
bute towards it by mediating with the Beys. If the Pasha 
suggests his going into Upper Egypt to interview the Beys, 
he should go; otherwise, he should stay 8 or io days at 
Cairo, and when he has seen everything, and talked to 
everybody, return. He will ask for any Frenchmen still in 
hospital, or in the Mamelukes’ hands, and bring them back 
with him, if they wish to return. He must in any case ask 
for Elias, the interpreter, and bring him back. 

He is to give notice of the arrival of a commissioner of 
foreign affairs at Cairo; and to recommend Mount Sinai to the 
care of the Pasha. 

(6) He will go to Jaffa; view the state of the walls, and 
of Palestine; discover who is in command at Jaffa, Gaza and 
Jerusalem; recommend to their care the monasteries at Jafia, 
and find out from the monks all that has been happening 
in Palestine; discover what has become of the Motoualys, 
and how Djezzar’s position has changed; and recommend 
the Christians of Nazareth to Turkish protection. 

(7) He will go to Saint-Jean d’Acre, recommend to 
Djezzar’s care the monastery at Nazareth, warn him of the 
arrival of the republican agent at Acre, and find out about 
the fortifications he has built there, visiting thempersonally, 
if it can be done without danger. If he hears that the 
Motoualys are at Tyre, he must go ashore there, and convey 
to them my desire for their happiness. 

Wherever he goes, he must say all the good he can about 
the Porte, but never utter a word that might compromise 
his own position. 

[Corresp., viii, 6308, General Sebastiani’s mission, and the publica¬ 
tion of his report in the Monlteur , on January 30,1803 (during the Peace 
■of Amiens), was much resented in England, and contributed to the 
.resumption of war the following May.] 

86 

Mullinen’s Mission 
65 

SWITZERLAND 

TO CITIZEN TALLEYRAND, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Saint-Cloud, September 23, 1802. 

Please send for Colonel Mullinen. Tell him that his letter 
has reached me, and that I have read it with close attention; 
that none of the Swiss moves have escaped me; and that 
there could be no greater outrage against French honour 
than the Soleure and Berne proclamations, which are not 
the acts and words of level-headed men, but of lunatics 
who exaggerate their selfish passions. 

Tell him that the 200 families in Berne claim sovereign 
rights, and that, whatever they may say, I have too good an 
opinion of the Swiss to suppose them willing to subject 
themselves again to family government. 

Tell him that, in any case, France has guaranteed equal 
rights in Switzerland, and that it is a country in which 
counter-revolution might indeed be attempted, but could 
never be carried through. What he says about the will of 
the people is all nonsense:—you don’t express the will of 
the people by bribing a handful of armed men to raise a riot. 
Besides, my calculations are not based simply upon what the 
Swiss people would like, but upon what is to the advantage 
of 40 million Frenchmen. . . . 

Tell him that I am now convinced of the necessity of 
definite action, and that, unless the provisions of my 
proclamation are carried out within the next few days, 
30,000 men under General Ney will cross the frontier. If 
they force me to this step, it is all up with Switzerland. 

Tell him that my primary need is for a frontier to cover 
the Franche-Comte. The first desideratum is a firm and 
setded government, friendly to France. If this cannot be 
secured, my course will be dictated by the interests of 
France. Every word in my proclamation speaks volumes: 
there is not a syllable of rhetoric in it: it expresses exactly 

87 

Switzerland 

what I mean. My policy is honest and above-board, for it 
springs from long meditation backed by force. 

Tell him that he is useless at Paris, where he can only 
mislead those he represents as to my intentions. He had 
better be off within twelve hours, reach Beme as quickly as 
he can, and report all you have said to him: for if a single 
French flag enters Switzerland, it will be a bad business for 
them. Tell him that I take sides in none of their quarrels; 
that I have no favourites; and that I have constantly com¬ 
plained of Dolder and Reding, neither of whom has 
followed my advice. 

If my intervention is accepted, and no French troops 
enter Switzerland, I consider that the end of the voyage is 
reached. It will be useless to talk of modifications, or loop¬ 
holes: I shan’t listen to a word. Colonel Mullinen can tell 
his compatriots that for tire last two years this has been a 
regular game,which it is now time to end; and that I can see 
no half-way house between a Swiss Government firmly organ¬ 
ised and friendly to Franee , and no Switzerland at all.. 

Whatever you do, insist upon his leaving Paris. There is 
nothing for him to do there: Beme is now the only place 
where he can help his fellow-countrymen. 

[CoRRESP.,viii, 63 39. In May, 1801, Napoleon imposed upon Switzer¬ 
land the Constitution ofMalmaison. During the troubles that followed, 
Reding was made Landammann (Premier) by malcontents at Beme. 
After a conference with representatives of the rival parties, Napoleon, 
by the Act of Settlement (February, 1803), gave the country a Iresh 
Constitution, one condition of which was that the Swiss Confederatioa 
should supply him with troops. Dolder was a Moderate member ot the 
Directory of 1800.] 

66 

ADVICE TO AN ARCHBISHOP 

TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF LYON 

Rouen, November 2,1802. 

I arrived at Rouen three days ago, I am very pleased 
with the people in this Department, and have reason to e 

88 

Archbishop Fesch 

satisfied with the character of the clergy, and especially of 
the Archbishop. 

It is time that you were starting for your diocese, without 
further delay. You should take with you a respectable but 
not luxurious number of servants, modelling your house¬ 
hold on the best at Lyon—those of the Prefect and the General 
commanding that district. Be careful what you do, but 
appoint as many constitutional priests as possible, and 
make certain of support from this party. You must face 
the fact that whilst this controversy about constitutionals 
and non-constitutionals is for most of the priests a matter 
of religion, their leaders regard it purely as a political 
question. In addition you must show great consideration 
and respect for the Pope, and for the virtues and (as he is 
your superior authority) the views of the Archbishop of 
Paris. 

I wish you to send me your episcopal charge before it is 
published and printed. The fact is, if you offend the constitu¬ 
tional clergy, you will excessively annoy me, and do the 
state great harm. I would much rather that you alienated 
some fanatic than that you broke with the constitutionals. 

Do not forget that, upon the stage you are going to- 
occupy, everybody will see what you do. Be austere in 
your private life, keep up a proper state in public, and give 
all your time to the duties of your office. Profess not to 
meddle in politics: if they present you petitions for me, 
reply that you are a Minister of religion, and of that alone. 
Don’t give too much rein to your enthusiasm, even for the 
management of alms-houses, or the care of the poor. 

Your first business, and one that will occupy you for 
some months, is to administer the sacraments in your 
diocese, to conciliate and to get to know your priests, and 
to organise your church. Lyon was once a great industrial 
centre, and contains a large number of priests formerly 
attached to a party in opposition to the state. Don’t employ 
these men; or, if you cannot see how to avoid employing 
some of them, let me know what the trouble is, and I will 
have them moved elsewhere, on my own initiative. Lastly* 

89 

Religious Unity 

it may be a serious error, in your delicate position, to 
underact your part; but it is the worst mistake of all to 
•overact it. Beware of your natural liveliness, and your 
readiness to take sides, and to put yourself forward. 

The Bishop of Chambery had not the necessary qualities 
for such a post. What I should really like, as your first 
move, would be for you to give your hand to one of the 
most consistent members of the refractory party—provided 
he is not too much of an extremist—and also to one of the 
most consistent members of the constitutional party, and 
to bless them and embrace them both at once, telling them 
that union and brotherhood are the foundation of all 
religion. Some striking gesture of this kind would have 
good results for religion, and benefit the state. 

As for the mere talkers, who will always be telling you 
that there is going to be a schism between the constitu¬ 
tionals and the non-constitutionals, you should reply that 
‘the things that belong to your ministry do not belong to 
theirs/ that any movement or expression of opinion likely 
to produce pride would be a sin that it is your duty to 
•denounce, and that trying to humiliate one’s neighbour 
means raking up memories of the time when he was an 
•enemy, and thereby violating the first principle of the law. 
The Archbishops and Bishops of 1802 are not the Arch¬ 
bishops and Bishops of 1789: they are those who come 
nearest to the Early Church. You know enough, and you 
have sufficient acquaintance with the doctrines and precepts 
•of Christianity, to extract rules and maxims of conduct from 
religion itself, without talking about the good of the state. 

Take what I have written to heart. It is the only way to be 
of service to religion or to the state, to win the respect and 
■confidence of all parties, and to be acceptable to myself. 

The Pope has informed me that you are to be made a 
Cardinal immediately. 

[Corresp., viii, 6408. The new Archbishop of Lyon was Fesch; v. 
TSfo. 63. The ‘constitutional 5 clergy were those who had accepted the 
■oath required of them under the Republic; the .‘non-constitutional 5 or 
“refractory 5 clergy were those who had refused it.] 

90 

Joan of Arc 
67 

JOAN OF ARC 

TO CITIZEN CHAPTAL, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Paris, February 9, 1803. 

Please write to citizen Crignon-Desormeaux, mayor 
of Orleans, to say that I approve of the resolution. The 
illustrious career of Joan of Arc proves that there is no 
miracle French genius cannot perform in face of a threat 
■against national freedom. The French nation has never 
known defeat. But our frank and loyal nature has been 
taken advantage of by clever and calculating neighbours. 
'Time after time they have sown dissension among us. Hence 
the calamities of past history, and of our own generation. 

[Lecestre, i, 58. The ‘resolution’ was a proposal by the Municipal 
Council of Orleans to put up a statue to Joan of Arc.] 

68 

REWARDS FOR CLERGY 

TO CITIZEN PORTALIS, STATE COUNCILLOR, IN CHARGE OF 
ALL MATTERS OF PUBLIC WORSHIP 

Saint-Cloud, May 12, 1803. 

Please inform the Prefect of La Vendee and the Bishop 
of La Rochelle that I wish them to distribute 150 francs to 
the 60 vicars or curates-in-charge who are best educated, 
•and best behaved, and who show the greatest attachment 
to the ■ Concordat, to religion, and to the government. 
You are to make these payments to them up to 9,000 
francs, the total of the grants, from the list of names 
supplied to you by the Bishop, and approved by the Prefect. 

Write in the same sense to the Bishop of Le Morbihan, 
■asking him to send you a list of the 100 vicars or curates-in- 
charge who have most intelligence, and most attachment 

9 * 

Natural Science 

to the Concordat and to the government: I intend to give 
each of them a bonus of 150 francs. When he sends you the 
list, you can send him the money. 

[Corresp., viii, 6738.] 

69 

THEORY OF HEAT 

TO THE COUNT DE RUMFORD, FOREIGN ASSOCIATE OF THE 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE 

Paris, September 29,1803. 

I have received your Memoir of September 15, and have 
read it with care. The roughnesses of unpolished bodies are 
like mountains by comparison with the excessively tenuous 
molecules of the calorie. Their total surface being much 
greater than that of the same body when polished, and the 
area of the surface serving as a measure for the number of 
caloric molecules given off or taken in, it follows that this 
number must be greater, and the changes of temperature 
correspondingly more rapid, in an unpolished than in a 
polished body. Such were the ideas that I had formed for 
myself, and that your Memoir has confirmed. It is only by 
a large number of experiments, carefully made, with the 
talent that you have brought to yours, and with a view to 
discovering the truth, that advances are made little by little, 
and theories arrived at which are not only simple, but also 
useful at every turn of life. 

Please believe that it is my wish, whatever the circum¬ 
stances, to give proof of the special respect I have for you. 

[Corresp., ix, 7141. Sir Benjamin Thompson, Count vonRumford* 
F.R.S. (1753-1814) was an American who made a name in various, 
countries for chemical, culinary, and philanthropic experiments. Cf. 
No. 239.] 

92 

Meneval 

70 

SECRETARIATE 

Note 

Saint-Cloud, November 1, 1803. 

Bonaparte hardly ever writes. He dictates, walking up 
and down his study, to a young man of 20, named Meneval, 
who is the only person to enter, not merely the study, but 
also the three rooms on either side of it. This young man 
succeeded Bourrienne, whom the First Consul had known 
from childhood, but whom he dismissed for allowing 
himself to get mixed up in monetary transactions. Meneval 
is the sort of man of whom much is expected. Besides, he 
would not care to be dishonest, because, if anything went 
wrong in the study, suspicion would at once fall upon him. 
Notes dealing with matters of high policy the First Consul 
does not dictate: he writes them himself. He has on his 
table a large portfolio divided into compartments—one for 
each Ministry. This portfolio, which is strongly made, is 
locked up by the First Consul alone. He keeps the only key 
to it. Every time he leaves the study it is Mdneval’s duty to 
put this portfolio away in a safe with sliding doors screwed 
to the floor under his desk. The portfolio could be removed, 
but there is no place where a thief could hide himself. 
Suspicion could fall on no one but Mdneval, or the study 
attendant, who is the only person to light the fire and tidy 
the room; and his disappearance would at once be noticed. 
This portfolio must by now contain all that the First Consul 
has written for some years past; for it is the only one that 
always travels with him, and constantly accompanies him 
from Paris to Malmaison and Saint-Cloud. All the secret 
notes on his military operations are to be found there; and, 
as the only way to destroy his authority would be to confuse 
his plans, there can be no question that the theft of this 
portfolio would throw them all into confusion. 

[Corresp., ix, 7241. Meneval succeeded Bourrienne as Napoleon’s 
secretary in 1802, and remained until 1813, when his place was taken 
by Fain. v. Introduction.] 

93 

Pauline 

PAULINE 

TO PAULINE, PRINCESS BORGHESE 

Boulogne, November n, 1803. 

I shall not be back for some days yet. But the season, 
for travelling is nearly past, and the Alps will soon be ice- . 
bound. So set off for Rome. Make yourself remarked for 
your gentleness, your politeness to everyone, and an ex¬ 
treme regard for the ladies who are friends or relations of 
your mother’s side of the family. More is expected of you 
than of anyone. Above all, conform to the customs of the 
country; never run down anything; find everything splendid; 
and don’t say, ‘We do this better in Paris.’ Show great 
attachment and respect for the Holy Father, of whom I am 
very fond, and whose simple manners make him worthy of 
the post he holds. Whatever I am told about you, nothing 
will please me more than to hear that you are good- 
tempered. The only foreigners you must never receive at 
your house, as long as we are at war with them, are the 
English—indeed, you must never allow them to be in your 
company. Love your husband, make your household happy, 
and above all don’t be frivolous or capricious. You are 24, 
and it is time you were mature and sensible. I love you, and 
shall always be pleased to hear that you are happy. 

[Brotonnje, ii, 2107. Pauline Bonaparte had accompanied her first 
husband, General Leclerc, on a military expedition to St. Domingo* 
where he died of fever on November 2, 1802. She returned to France 
with his body; and a year later married Prince Borghese. For the 
sequel, v. No. 75.] 

94 

Channel Crossing 
7 * 

ENGLISH INVASION 

« 

TO CONSUL CAMBAO&R&S 

Boulogne, November 16, 1803.. 

The Minister of Marine arrived two days ago. I have- 
spent the last three days in the camps and the port. Every¬ 
thing here is beginning to get into shape, and to move in the. 
right direction. 

From the heights of Ambleteuse I have seen the English 
coast as clearly as one can see the Calvary from the Tuileries- 
One could pick out the houses, and see people moving- 
about. The Channel is a mere ditch, and will be crossed as- 
soon as someone has the courage to attempt it. 

The Seine must be very high at Paris; it has never stopped 
raining here. We have more than 200 vessels, between. 
Saint-Malo and this place, either at anchor or sailing to join 
us. I am expecting the arrival of a division to-day. 

[Corresp., ix, 7279. Ambleteuse is on the Ftench coast, a few miles, 
north of Boulogne]. 

(*) 

TO CITIZEN CHAPTAL, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Paris, November 29, 1803.. 

I want you to get a song written, to go to the tune of the 
Chant du depart , for the invasion of England. While you 
are about it, have a number of songs written on the same- 
subject, to go to different tunes. Plenty of topical plays*. 
I know, have been produced. Make a selection of them, so* 
that they may be put on at various Paris theatres—still, 
better, at Boulogne, Bruges, and other places where the: 
army is encamped. 

[Corresp., ix, 73 3 3.] 

95 

United Irishmen 
73 

IRISH INVASION 

TO GENERAL BERTHIER, MINISTER OF WAR 

Paris, January 13, 1804. 

Send for Messrs. Emmet, Thompson, and the other 
Irish leaders, and inform them : 

(1) That I have read the enclosed memorandum with the 
•closest attention; that I cannot issue any proclamation 
before actually landing on Irish territory; but that the 
general in command of the expedition will be provided 
with sealed letters declaring my refusal to make peace 
with England unless the terms include the independence of 
Ireland—always upon condition that the invading army is 
joined by a considerable corps of United Irishmen; and that 
Ireland will be treated exactly as America was in the last 
war; 

(2) That every Irishman sailing with the French army, 
and taking part in the expedition, will be given a French 
commission: if he is captured, and treated otherwise than 
as a prisoner of war, reprisals will be practised on English 
prisoners; 

(3) That every corps formed in the name of the United 
Irishmen will be regarded as forming part of the French 
army; that, if the expedition were to fail, France would 
■support a certain number of Irish brigades, and grant 
pensions to individual Irishmen who had taken part in the 
government or administration of their country—such pen¬ 
sions to conform to those given in France, under similar 
conditions, to persons out of employment; that I should 
like to have a committee of United Irishmen formed, and 
that I see no reason why they should not issue manifestoes, 
and instruct their fellow countrymen as to the situation. 
These manifestoes could be published in the Argus , and 
■other European papers, in order to enlighten the Irish as to 
the hopes they may conceive, and the part they will have to 
play. 

96 

Torture 

If the Committee cared to draw up an account of all the 
tyrannies practised in Ireland, it would be put into the 
Momteur. 

[Corresp., ix, 7475 . This Irish invasion, in which Ganteaume was to 
command the fleet, and Augereau the army, never matured. Emmet is 
not Robert Emmet, who had been executed after an abortive rising the 
year before, but his brother Thomas, at this time in Holland. For the 
sequel, v. No. 225.] 

74 

CADOUDAL PLOT 

TO GENERAL SOULT 

La Malmaison, February 13, 1804, 8 p.m. 

For the last week we have been pursuing 40 brigands 
—Georges and his party—who landed at three different 
times between Treport and Dieppe. A third party, 20 strong, 
is still expected to land. We have arrested all those who 
might signal to them, and Savary is waiting for them at 
Biville. All the same, you must double the sentries along 
the coast, so that, if the wind prevents their landing at the 
points where we are waiting for them (though I don’t think 
this likely), they may not come ashore on the flank of your 
army. 

See to the immediate arrest of the skipper and crew of the 
fishing-boat which communicated with the English. I 
blame myself for neglecting to have them arrested at the 
time. [You must make the skipper speak. You have my 
authority to promise him pardon if he gives information; 
and, if he should seem to hesitate, you can go so far as 
to follow the usual practice with men suspected of spying, 
and squeeze his thumbs under the hammer of a musket.] 

Arrest the agent whom-sent to Boulogne on his 

•own initiative. 

Have a confidential talk with the mayor and others, and 
arrest at once anyone whom they conscientiously believe 
to be in communication with the English. 

h 97 

Cad oudal Plot 

More than 13 of this first body of brigands have been 
arrested. One party is in die forests of Gournay, Eu, Forges, 
and Lyons. Then there is that rascal Pichegru, who came to 
Paris with Georges and his brigands: we know where 
they slept on Sunday. Some even of the most prominent 
generals of the moment are implicated by the evidence of 
men we have arrested. If the evidence is confirmed, I shall 
punish them as they deserve. I thought it right to let you 
kn ow at once of my earliest suspicions, so that this may put 
you onto the scent of any plot that is afoot in your army. 

I haven’t time to write to Davout. Pass on this informa¬ 
tion to him. 

You will gather from the obscurity which prevails in one 
part of my despatch that I am not yet in a position to say 
anything for certain about the latest developments. 

The police encourage me to hope that they will lay their 
hands on Lajolais, Pichegru, and Georges to-night. 

[Corresp., ix, 7541, and Lecestre, i, 66. Georges Cadoudalplotted 
the assassination of Napoleon, and royalist risings in Brittany and 
La Vendee. One of his supporters, under sentence of death, revealed 
that Cadoudal and Pichegru were in Paris, and that a Bourbon prince 
was expected to land at Biville, near Dieppe. Pichegru was arrested on 
February 28, and Cadoudal on March 19. The passage within square 
brackets was omitted as ‘illegible* by the editors of the official Corre¬ 
spondence.] 

75 

PAULINE AGAIN 

TO CARDINAL FESCH 

La Malmaison, April 10,1804. 

I AM sending you a letter for Madame Paulette. I don’t 
believe half what you say in your letter; all the^ same it 
annoys me to think that Madame Borghese doesn’t realise 
how much her happiness depends upon behaving as the 
Romans behave, and finding compensation in the good 
report of that great city—compensation such as should be 

98 

Naval Programme 

pleasant to so aristocratic a soul. In any case, I am telling 
her my intentions as simply and precisely as possible, and 
I hope she will fall in with them. Besides, she will benefit 
by the arrival of her mother, who is the natural person to 
advise her. Tell her therefore, from me, that she is no longer 
as pretty as she was, and that in a few years’ time she will 
be much less so; whereas she can be good and respected all 
her life. Further, it is only fair that her husband should 
take advantage of his habit of living in Paris, and of the 
liberty it gives him—a liberty to which wives in this 
country are well accustomed. She ought to make a point 
of being polite to her husband’s family, and to the important 
people in Rome, and cultivate a social poise worthy of her 
rank, instead of her present ill manners, which would be 
considered bad form even in the most disreputable circles of 
Paris. 

[Corresp., ix, 7678. Cf. No. 71.] 

7 6 

NAVAL PROGRAMME 

TO REAR-ADMIRAL DECRES 

Saint-Cloud, April 28, 1804. 

I am signing a decree to-day about naval construction. 
I will listen to no objections. Go through all the orders you 
have given twice a week, and see that they are carried out. If 
special measures are needed, let me know. I shall not regard 
any excuse as valid. Under proper management I could 
build 30 ships of the line in a year, if I needed them. A 
country like France ought to produce everything we want. 
You will understand that my idea is to lay down a number 
of ships, but not at Brest, where I want no more built. My 
intention is to have 26 warships launched before vende- 
miaire. Year XIV (September, 1805); it being understood 
that their launching must primarily depend upon whether 

99 

Shipwrec k 

or not the war comes to an end between now and then. 
Work on all the 74-gun ships at Antwerp ought to begin 
at once. Antwerp must be our biggest dockyard. It is the 
only place where the French fleet can be reconstructed in a 
few years. 

By the Year XV (September, 1806) we ought to have 
100 warships. 

[Corresp., ix, 7731. Deeres was Minister for the Navy and Colonies.] 

77 

NIGHT-PIECE 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE 

Pont-de-Briques, July 21, 1804. 

Madame, and dear wife: during the four days that I have 
been away from you I have been on horseback and on the 
move all the time, without any bad effect on my health. 

M. Maret has told me of your plan to leave on Monday: 
if you travel in short stages, you will have time to reach 
the watering-place without tiring yourself. 

Last night the wind freshened, and one of our gun-boats 
in the roads dragged her anchor, and ran on the rocks off 
Boulogne. I was afraid she would be a total loss, both 
men and gear; but we succeeded in saving them all. It 
was a magnificent spectacle: the reports of alarm-guns, 
watch-fires all along the shore, the sea raging and roaring, 
and all night long the anxiety as to whether the poor 
fellows could be rescued, or would perish before our eyesl 
The soul was surrounded by the ocean, darkness, and 
Etemityl At five in the morning everything could be seen 
clearly, the crew had all been saved; and I went to bed with 
the impression of a romantic and epic dream. I was in a 
mood when I might have brooded on my loneliness. But 
I was exha usted, and soaked to the skin, and there was no 
desire left me but for sleep. 

[Corresp., ix, 7861.] 

100 

Pamphleteering 

78 

BARERE 

TO M. FOUCHg 

Aix-la-Chapelle, September 9, 1804. 

... I see that Barere has written a ‘Letter to the Army/ I 
haven’t read it; but I am sure there is no need to talk to the 
Army: it doesn’t read die idle gossip of pamphleteers; one 
word in the Orders of the Day would do more than a 
hundred volumes of Cicero and Demosthenes. One can 
encourage the troops against England without talking to 
them; and nothing could be more absurd than to write 
them a pamphlet. It suggests distrust and intrigue, and the 
army needs none of it. Tell Bar&re, whose rhetoric and 
sophistry ill accord with his big reputation, not to do any 
more writing of this kind. He is always thinking the mob 
must be roused to excitement: on the contrary, the right 
way is to guide them without their knowing it. In short, he 
is a man of little ability. If it is not too late, stop the circula¬ 
tion of his pamphlet, and don’t let it be sent to the army. 
The army is not an administrative body. The only legal 
means of communication with it is an Order of the Day. 
Everything else is factiousness and intrigue. I haven’t read 
the pamphlet. But if it is a good piece of work, the contents* 
not addressed to anyone in particular, might be inoffensive* 
and have a good effect. 

[Corresp., ix, 8001. Barere de Vieuzac, Conventional, Jacobin, and 
one of the most prominent members of the Committee of Public 
Safety, haying escaped deportation at the hands of the Thermidorians. 
by going into hiding, took advantage of the amnesty in 1799, and was 
at this time employed by Napoleon to report on the state of public 
opinion in Paris.] 

IOT 

Emigres 

79 

EMIGRES AND NUNS 

TO M. FOUCHi 

Tr&ves, October 7, 1804. 

. . . The circular letter to the Prefects of Departments 
about amnestied persons and emigres would be excellent 
only that a certain number of Prefects disregard it. It would 
have been better to ask the Prefects for the names of those 
amnestied persons who, as members of Councils or depart¬ 
mental Colleges, have the right to be present at the Corona¬ 
tion; and notes should be added giving information about 
them: then we can decide what to do. I think- there is still 
time to take this step. Government must be logical. Once 
a person is admitted to membership of the state, he must 
be given all the rights of citizenship. I am anxious that the 
Prefects should send you the lists of amnestied persons and 
imigres belonging to the Colleges, so that you may submit 
reports to me, one for each department, and so that those 
who are recognised as being sensible, harmless, and well- 
disposed, may receive permits from me, exempting them 
from supervision, and restoring their civil rights. The art 
of government consists not only in punishing the wicked, 
but also in rewarding the good. A great many of these 
imigrh , as you know, returned quite openly; consequently 
it was impossible to prevent their enjoying their political 
rights, seeing that there are amnestied persons and imigris 
in the Senate, the State Council, and other public positions. 
The general principle is to keep the whole class under 
supervision, whilst making exceptions in favour of the best 
behaved; and it is natural to include among die latter those 
who hold official positions. 

I have read carefully the report of the Prefect of Police 
on the working of the decree of 3 messidor. Year XII, 
about religious corporations. My chief object was to prevent 
the Jesuits establishing themselves in France. They assume 
all sorts of disguises. I want no ‘Hearts of Jesus/ or ‘Con- 

102 

Nuns 

fraternities of the Holy Sacrament/ or anything at all 
resembling a monastic militia. Under no pretext will I go a 
step further, or admit any ecclesiastics, except the secular 
clergy. I am equally determined to exclude convents of 
nuns; but I see no objection, under this head, to the old 
nuns ending their days in the common life, and wearing 
what habits they like indoors; but they must not admit 
novices, or wear their habits out of doors. I except the 
Sisters of Charity: I am even prepared to let them recruit 
their Order by establishing novitiates. Two precautions 
must therefore be taken in the case of nuns. First, we must 
know who they ate, and keep a careful watch on them, to 
be sure that they are not directed by priests out of commu¬ 
nion with their bishop. Any society that breaks these rules 
deserves punishment without pity. It is on the criminal high 
road, it is at the mercy of scoundrels; and there is nothing 
too bad to expect from ill-behaved spinsters. Secondly, we 
must see to it that they admit no novices. This is not so easy. 
I see, for instance, that the Sisters of Mercy at No. 5 29 rue 
de la Chaise take pupils. How is one to distinguish a pupil 
from a novice? I must have a guarantee (1) that these pupils 
do not wear religious habits, but ordinary clothes, (2) that 
they are not kept there after the age of 18. All those over the 
age of 18 ought to be sent away from these houses. They 
must be warned to leave within 6 months: otherwise they 
will see the house closed and the inmates dispersed. But it 
would be best to secure some devout and sensible ecclesi¬ 
astics, approved by the Archbishop, to visit and inspect 
these establishments; or M. Portalis can commission some 
members of the monastic underworld to perform this 
function. 

Report to me on the nuns of the congregation of the 
rue Saint-Etienne, who are said in the report to be taking 
in boarders and novices, and who have made a special 
practice of devotions to the Sacred Heart. Find out whether 
they are recognised by the Archbishop, and what novices 
they admit. Make these inquiries through a Grand Vicar, 
or in some other simple way, without alarming them. You 

103 

West Indies 

can talk to M. Portalis about them if you like. The report 
of the Prefect of Police is clear and precise: all the Prefects 
should furnish similar reports; then you can easily draw up 
orders, in accordance with the principles that I have just 
laid down. 

[Corresp., x, 8099. The emigres were those still subject to the various 
penal laws passed against Frenchmen who had fled from the country 
during the Revolution.] 

80 

WEST INDIAN EXPEDITION 

TO GENERAL LAURISTON 

Paris, December 12, 1804. 

The Ministers of War and of Marine have sent you your 
instructions. You will see that I have strengthened your 
expedition by the addition of General Reille. I need the 
frigate ‘La Muiron 5 for another service. It is already rather 
late in the season. Start at once; justify my confidence in 
you; and hoist my flag on this fine continent. If, when you 
have established a footing there, you are attacked by the 
English, and experience vicissitudes of fortune, never forget 
three things—to keep your forces together, to be up and 
doing, and to be firmly resolved to die a soldier’s death. 
These three great principles of the art of war have brought 
fortune to my side in all my operations. Death is nothing: 
but to live defeated and inglorious is to die daily. Have no 
fears for your family: devote all your energies to that part 
of my family to whose conquest you are bound. 

[Corresp., x, 8209. Lauriston in command of 3,500 men sailed 
from Toulon with Villeneuve for the West Indies on Tanuary 17. 
1805.] J 

104 

George III 
81 

‘L’EMPIRE, CEST LA PAIX’ 

TO THE KING OF ENGLAND 

Paris, January 2, 1805. 

Monsieur my Brothel; called to the throne of France by 
Providence, and by the votes of the Senate, the people, 
and the army, my first impulse is to pray for peace. France 
and England are using up their resources. They might 
indeed go on struggling for centuries. But are not their 
governments failing in the most sacred of all their duties? 
And will not their own consciences reproach them with 
so much useless and aimless bloodshed? I think it no 
dishonour to make the first advances. I have shown the 
world enough evidence, I fancy, that I shrink from nothing 
that war may bring—I see no prospect there for alarm. 
Peace is the wish of my heart, but war has never been alien 
to my idea of glory. I beg your Majesty not to reject the 
honour of being the world’s peace-maker. Do not leave this, 
pleasant task to your children! For in fact there was never a 
finer occasion or a more favourable moment to silence 
every passion, and to close the ears to every voice but that 
of humanity and common-sense. This opportunity once 
missed, what bounds could one hope to set to a war which 
all my efforts have failed to end? During the last ten years. 
Your Majesty has gained in territory and in riches more than 
the whole area of Europe. Your nation is at the zenith of 
its prosperity. What can it hope to do by war? To form 
a coalition of some of the continental powers? But the 
continent will not move, and a coalition would only 
emphasise the preponderance of France on the continent. 
To revive our internal disorders? But the times are not 
what they were. To ruin us financially? But a financial 
system based on good agriculture is indestructible. To* 
deprive France of her colonies? Colonies ate, for France, 
a matter of secondary importance; and does not Your 
Majesty already possess more than you can defend? If Your 

105 

Art Patronage 

Majesty really thinks about it, you will see that the war has 
no aim, and offers no results upon which you can count. 
"Why! what a sad prospect it is, to make men fight merely 
that they may go on fighting! The world is big enough for 
both our nations to live in, and common-sense is strong 
enough to find a means of settling all our differences, if both 
of us have a will to it. In any case, I have fulfilled what my 
heart counts a sacred and treasured duty. I beg Your 
Majesty to believe in the sincerity of the feelings which I 
have expressed, and in my desire to give Your Majesty- 
proof of it. 

[Corresp., x, 8252. Napoleon had been dedared Emperor by 
•Senatorial decree of May 18,1804, confirmed by plebisdte of November 
.27, and crowned in Notre Dame on December 2.] 

82 

IMPERIAL PICTURES 

TO M. ESTEVE, KEEPER OF THE PRIVY PURSE 

Paris, January 9, 1805. 

You are to make the following payments, on the 
Emperor’s account:— 

{Salon of Year XIII—Napoleon Museum) 

To M. Gros,for the picture ‘The Plague at Jaffa/ 
commissioned by H.M. the Empress without 
fixing the price (which ought never to have been 
done), the sum of 16,000 francs; this will not 
satisfy the feelings of the artist, in view of the francs 
fantastic price paid for Guerin’s ‘Phedre’ . . 16,000 

To M. Rigo, for the picture of the angel El-Mahdi 4,000 
To M. Serangeli, as a bonus granted him over and 

above the purchase of his diploma picture . 3,000 

(Pictures purchased at the Salon by order of HM. 
the Empress) 

106 

Turkey 

To M. Demaine, for a sea-port and a village cheap- francs 
jack ........ 2,000 

To M. Le Comte, for a landscape representing 
some knights journeying to the Holy Land . 1,800 

To M. Laurens, for a picture of a young girl at a 

•window, holding a lute ..... 1,000 

To M. Roehn, for a village fair .... 1,000 

To M. Duperreux, for a view of Eaux-Bonnes . 700 

To M. Gerard, for a sketch of the signing of the 

Concordat, priced at .... 1,200 

Total . 30,700 

M. Esteve will pay the above sum of 30,700 francs. 
[Corresp., x, 8266.] 

83 

TURKEY AND RUSSIA 

TO THE EMPEROR OF TURKEY 

Paris, January 30, 1805. 

Most Exalted, most Excellent,, most Powerful, most 
Magnanimous and Invincible Prince, Great Emperor of the 
Moslems, Sultan Selim, in whom abound all honour and 
virtue, our very dear and perfect friend; may God grant 
increase of your Greatness and Altitude, and a blessed end. 

Have you, a descendant of the great Ottomans, Emperor 
of one of the greatest empires in the world, ceased to 
teign? How is it that you allow the Russians to dictate to 
you?~You refuse to render me service for service: are you 
hlmd to your own interests in this matter ? If Russia ha? 
^,00° men at Corfu, do you suppose that they are,aimed at 
mePpTer armed ships have a way of appearing j?ff Constanti- 
nople: are you too blind to see that one day, either under 
pretext of fetching back the Russian troops at Corfu, or of.. 

107 

Russian Menace 

reinforcing them, a Russian fleet and army, with the Greeks 
on their side, will invade the capital, and your empire will 
have perished with you? Your dynasty will descend into 
the night of oblivion. The Reis-effendi is betraying you. 
Half the Divan is in Russian pay. The death of the Captain- 
pasha has deprived you of your best friend. I have warned 
you twice before: this is the third time. Dismiss your Divan, 
punish the Reis-effendi, and rule in Constantinople: other¬ 
wise it is all up with you. For myself, IJhaye tried to be 
your friend. But if you persistently refuse me the preference 
which France has always had at Constantinople, and if you 
would rather remain in slavish submission to your enemies, 
then I too shall set myself against you; and I have never 
been a feeble foe. Your Divan is taking no steps to restore 
order in Egypt and Syria: it allows Mecca and Medina to- 
be lost:" it is for ever insulting your friends, and salaaming 
to your enemies. Persia is at war. She is threatened by 
Russia. Yet, instead of helping her, the feeble Divan, or 
rather the traitors who direct it, do nothing even to inter¬ 
vene on her behalf: it is only against me that they show a 
spark of courage. That is why I am writing to you. You are 
the only friend France still has in the Seraglio, always pro¬ 
vided that my letter is allowed to reach you by men who 
have occupied all the avenues of the throne. Rouse yourself, 
Selim. Make ministers of your supporters; dismiss the 
traitors; trust yourself to your true friends, France and 
Prussia; otherwise you will destroy your country, your 
family, and your religion. The Russians are your real 
enemies, because they want to control the Black Sea, and 
cannot do it uq less they,,bavje,Constantinople; and .because 
they are of the^rfSiE religion, which is that of half your 
subjects. I await your answer, to know what I must think 
and do. If you rule no longer, if the enemies of France have 
you entirely in their power, I shall lament the blindness and 
the misguided policy of France’s most ancient ally, but I 
shall understand that the same Destiny which made you so 
great wills to destroy the empire of such as Soliman, 
Mustapha, and Selim. For upon earth everything changes 

108 

Corporation of Teachers 

and passes away: God alone wi ll never fail. Wherefore I 
pra y God that he may prolong Your Highness’s days, and 
£lfthem with all prosperity, and give you a blessed end. 

Your very dear and perfect friend, 

.. * ‘ ' ""'"Napoleon. 

Given at my Imperial Palace of the Tuileries, io pluvi6se. 
Year XIII. 

[Corresp., x, 8298. In 1804 Napoleon offered to guarantee the 
integrity of Turkey against Russia: when the Tsar crossed the Pruth in 
1805 he proposed an alliance with Prussia to prevent a Russian con¬ 
quest of the Balkans.] 

84 

A TEACHING ORDER 
Note 

Paris, February 16, 1805. 

... Perhaps the time will soon arrive for considering the 
question whether we ought not to form a corporation of 
teachers. If so, should this corporation or order be a 
religious association, whose members take a vow of chas¬ 
tity, renounce the world, and so on? There does not seem 
to be any connexion between the two ideas. 

As things are, the educational personnel consists of 
Provisors, Censors, and Professors. A teaching corporation 
could be formed if all the Provisors, Censors, and Professors 
in the Empire were under one or more chiefs, like the 
Generals, Provincials, etc., of the Jesuits; and if it were the 
rule that no one could become a Provisor or Censor 
without first being a Professor, and no one a Professor in 
the higher classes, who had not been so in the lower—if, 
in fact, there were regular stages of promotion in a teacher’s 
career, such as to encourage rivalry, and to provide, at every 
time of life, not only enough to live on, but also something 

109 

Jesuits 

to look forward to. A man who has devoted himself to- 
teaching ought not to marry until he has passed several 
stages in his career: marriage ought to be, for him as for 
other men, a distant goal that he cannot attain till he has 
secured an adequate position and income, by holding a post 
whose stipend enables him to support a family without 
abandoning his profession. If this were so, the conditions 
of the teaching profession would be the same as those of 
other civil careers. 

There would be esprit de corps among teachers. The most 
distinguished members of the corporation could be taken 
under the Emperor’s protection, and his patronage would 
raise them even higher in public esteem than the priests 
were, at a time when priesthood passed for a rank of nobility. 
Everyone knew how important the Jesuits were. It would 
not be long before the same prestige attached to the 
corporation of teachers, if people saw a man, whose educa¬ 
tion had begun in the Ijcee, picked out for his talents to 
be himself a teacher, promoted from stage to stage, and 
finding himself, before the end of his career, in the front 
ranks of state officials. 

Of all political questions this is perhaps the most impor¬ 
tant. There will be no stability in the state until there is a 
body of teachers with fixed principles. Till children are 
taught whether they ought to be Republicans or Monarch¬ 
ists, Catholics or Unbelievers, and so on, there may indeed 
be a state, but it cannot become a nation. It will rest on 
vague uncertain foundations. It will be constantly exposed 
to changes and disorders. 

[Corresp., x, 8328. The idea here outlined finally took form in the 
Imperial University set up in May, 1806, and organised by the decree 
of March, 1808. The Proviseurs and Censeurs were on the administrative 
staff of the lycees: the Professettrs were the teachers.] 

Iio 

Farmers 

85 

AGRICULTURE 

Note 

Paris, March 1, 1805* 

His Majesty has abolished the Imperial School of 
Agriculture, which could only have occasioned idle talk, 
and useless expenditure. He would like to give some real 
encouragement to agriculture. In order to do so, one must 
know the state of agriculture in the different Departments. 

It is prosperous in the Upper and Lower Rhine Depart¬ 
ment, in the North, Belgium, Pas-de-Calais, Somme, 
Aisne, Oise, Seine and Marne, Seine and Oise, and in most of 
Eure and Loire, in Lower Seine, Calvados, the Channel, and 
the Departments that were once Languedoc, in Lot, Vau- 
cluse, the Rh6ne estuary, Saone and Loire, Upper Sa6ne, 
part of C6te d’Or, and the six Departments of Piedmont. It 
will be prosperous, too, in the four new Departments of the 
Rhine, as soon as the sale of national property puts the 
land under the control of those who really cultivate it. 

It is to the other Departments, then, that we must convey 
our encouragements. In most of these Departments cultiva¬ 
tion is in the hands of labourers or metayers , who care for 
nothing beyond making their living, and who never improve 
their holdings. These are not the people to be encouraged. 
It is the rich land-owners, who do something to increase- 
the value of their property, and who are the only class to* 
think about their interests, and to be concerned f6r the 
future of themselves and of their children. 

People of this kind are not encouraged by grants of 
money, but by medals, and decorations, and eulogies 
addressed to them by or on behalf of the sovereign. Every 
Prefect must therefore get to know which land-owners 
and agriculturalists in his Department distinguish themselves, 
either by the extent and skill of their farming, or by their 
superior breeding and rearing of live-stock. Every year the- 
Minister for Home Affairs will distribute, to those who* 

hi 

S E NAT O R S 

deserve them, either a medal, or the badge of the Legion of 
Honour (as the case may be), or a letter of congratulation 
and encouragement from the Emperor. 

A certain number of foreign rams, and of specially fine 
bulls, will be distributed, as has been done already. In the 
Departments suitable for horse-breeding, prizes will be 
given to encourage the owners of good stallions. Agricul¬ 
ture, like every other art, owes its improvement to com¬ 
parison, and to good models. 

In those Departments which are still isolated from 
•educational centres, good landlords should be encouraged 
to send their sons to study the methods in use in Depart¬ 
ments where agriculture is flourishing; and they should 
be stimulated by eulogies and marks of distinction. 

Money is no use in a matter of this kind. The greedy 
•class will be coming to apply for grants, and will plead 
their useless journeys as a ground for fresh subsidies. 

[Corresp., x, 8374. Metayer: a farmer paying rent in kind.] 

86 

SENATORS ON CIRCUIT 

NOTE FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE 

Saint-Cloud, March 28, 1805. 

M. Maret is to have as many copies made of the enclosed 
Instructions as there are senatoreries. As I shall sign them 
personally, ‘We* must be put in place of ‘His Majesty/ 
M. Maret will submit them to me for signature. 

Instruction for Senators. 

Monsieur, 

His Majesty desires you to go to your senatorerie before 
the 1st prairial, to reside there continuously for 3 months, 
and to travel round all the Departments forming its 
arrondissement. The ostensible object both of your journey 
and of your residence will be to get to know the situation, 

112 

Inquest 

character, condition, and value of the property from which 
the income of your senatorerie is derived. Actually your 
most important duty will be to supply Us with trustworthy 
and positive information on any point which may interest 
the Government; and to this end, you will send Us a direct 
report, once a week, from the capital town of your 
Department. 

You will realise that complete secrecy must be observed 
as to this confidential mission. If it got about, all enlightened 
people would avoid you, honest men would refuse to have 
any communication with you, and you would have nothing 
to report but treacherous and malicious denunciations. 
At the same time, the public officials, most of whom 
deserve Our confidence, would be discredited and dis¬ 
couraged, and these special missions, which are meant to 
enlighten the Government, would be no better than an 
odious inquisition, tending to disorganise the public service. 

(1) You are to discover what is the character, conduct, 
and capacity of the public officials, both in the administrative 
and the judicial departments; 

(2) What principles the clergy hold, and how much 
influence they have; 

(3) Who die outstanding men are in each part of your 
arrondissment , in virtue of their character, wealth, opinions, 
and popular influence; and to what class of society they belong. 

You will draw up detailed returns of all information 
about persons, basing your judgments upon genuine and 
established facts, and send in these returns to Us. 

(4) You will investigate, in the different classes and 
cantons, the state of public opinion on (i) the government; 
(ii) religion; (iii) conscription; (iv) the road tax; (V) the 
incidence of indirect taxation. 

(5) You will notice whether there are any persons in 
hiding from conscription; if so, how many; and whether 
a rising of any kind is to be feared from this cause; 

How the Gendarmerie does its work; and what individual 
members of it are noticeable either for their zeal, or for 
their neglect of duty; 

1 113 

Persia 

The number and kinds of criminal offences, and whether 
they are isolated acts, or the result of public gatherings; 

What is generally thought about the institution of the 
jury, and what its effect is upon criminal trials. 

(6) You will look into the state of public education, 
both in the primary and secondary schools, and in the 
lycm\ and inquire why some of these establishments are 
successful, and some slack. You will draw up one list of 
teachers of marked ability, and another of those who have 
done nothing to deserve public confidence. 

(7) You will study the state of agriculture, commerce, 
and manufacture; and find out what individuals are dis¬ 
tinguished by intelligence or success in these different spheres. 

(8) The state of the food supply, and what is expected 
of this year’s harvest. 

(9) You will observe the conditions of the roads, and find 
out for what general or special reasons they deteriorate. 

(10) What the situation is as regards the rearing of 
horses, wool-bearing animals, and live stock of all kinds; 
and what encouragements or measures are needed to 
extend this business, and to make it more prosperous. 

You will send Us separate memoirs based on definite 
knowledge on all these subjects in succession. 

[Corresp., x, 8493. The Senate of 1799 was a body of 60-80 mem hprs 
with important constitutional functions. Nearly doubled in size under 
the Constitution of 1802, its senatus-consultes became Napoleon’s normal 
method of legislation. In 1807 it was again reduced in numbers, and 
lost all constitutional importance.] 

87 

PERSIA 

TO THE KING OF PERSIA 

Paris, March 30, 1805. 

Bonaparte, Emperor of the French, to Feth Ali, Shah 
of the Persians, Greetingl 

114 

Russia and England 

I have reason to believe that the Jinn who preside over 
the destinies of States wish me to support the efforts you are 
making to uphold the strength of your empire; for the same 
thought struck both our minds simultaneously. The agents 
who carried our letters met at Constantinople; and whilst 
your Governor of Tauris was getting into touch with my 
commissioner from Aleppo, the latter received orders from 
me to establish communications with your viziers on the 
frontiers of Turkey. 

It is right to have recourse to the inspirations of Heaven; 
for Heaven has set up princes to make the peoples happy: 
and when, from age to age, it produces a few great men, 
it lays upon them an obligation to co-operate, so that the 
harmony of their designs may give more brilliance to their 
glory, and more power to their benevolent intentions. 

How else could we view the situation? Persia is the 
noblest country in Asia: France is the premier empire of the 
West. To rule over peoples and lands spontaneously 
beautified by Nature, to enrich them with plentiful produce, 
to have control over their industrious, witty, and brave 
inhabitants—is not this the fairest of all fortunes? 

But there also exist upon the earth empires in which an 
ungracious and barren Nature grudgingly produces only 
what is necessary for the survival of their peoples. In these 
countries men are by birth restless, greedy, and envious; 
and woe to the countries favoured by Heaven, if, whilst 
loading them with benefits, it gives them not also brave 
and watchful princes, to guard them against the enterprises 
of ambitious, greedy, and miserable men! 

Tired of their deserts, the Russians trespass upon the 
fairest parts of the Ottoman Empire. The English, thrust 
away into an island which is not worth the smallest province 
of your empire, and excited by a thirst for riches, are 
establishing in India a power which grows more redoubt¬ 
able every day. Those are the states to watch and fear; not 
because they are yet powerful, but because they have the 
need, and an intense passion, to become so. I know the 
Persians: I believe that they will easily and willingly embrace 

115 

Court Mourning 

a policy that ministers both to their safety and to their 
prestige. At this very moment a foreign army of 25,000 men 
might be plundering or perhaps subduing their country. 
But once your citizens learn to manufacture munitions of 
war, and your soldiers to master the rapid and disciplined 
movement of military formation, and to support their 
vigorous attacks with salvoes of light artillery; once your 
frontiers are defended by a series of fortresses, and the 
Caspian Sea bears on its billows the flags of a Persian fleet:— 
then your subjects will be invincible, and your empire 
beyond fear of attack... . 

Written in My palace of the Tuileries, this 9th day of 
Germinal, in the year XIII, being the first of My reign. 

Napoueon. 

[Corresp.j x, 8502. cf. No. 83. Persia played a similar part to Turkey 
in Napoleon’s anti-Russian and anti-English policy. A Franco-Persian 
alliance was signed on May 4, 1807, but did not outlast the Treaty of 
Tilsit the same year.] 

88 

COURT MOURNING 

TO M. CAMBACERES 

Troyes, April 4, 1805. 

The King of Prussia has just notified me of the death of 
the Queen-dowager. The Court must therefore go into 
mourning. At Berlin they do it for 3 weeks. I don’t know 
what was done under similar circumstances at the Court of 
Versailles, but I want to follow that usage. M. Segur, who 
has written a book on the subject, is not here. But the point 
must be setded quickly, so that the mourning may be fixed 
up before my arrival at Milan. Consult the Arch-treasurer, 
and submit proposals to me as to how I ought to go into 
mourning, and how it ought to be done by the high officials, 
the Empress, the ladies of the court, etc. Look into the 
question whether it ought to include Generals and Prefects; 

116 

Jerome’s Marriage 

whether liveried servants ought to go into mourning, and, 
if so, how. I don’t think it need take you long to formulate 
a plan, since what I want to do was done 15 years ago. Draft 
it in the form of an Instruction that I can print in the 
Moniteur. As I always wear uniform, I don’t suppose I shall 
have to change my dress. When you have settled what 
mourning the Empress ought to wear, tell Mme Lavalette 
about it; then she can have the necessary clothes and 
alterations put in hand at once, so that they can be delivered 
within 24 hours. 

[Corresp., x, 8522.] 

89 

MESALLIANCE 

TO MADAME MERE 

ChAteau de Stupinigi, April 22, 1805. 

M. Jerome Bonaparte has arrived at Lisbon with the 
woman he is living with. I have ordered the prodigal son to 
travel by Perpignan, Toulouse, Grenoble, and Turin, and 
to report himself at Milan. I have told him that if he varies 
this route he will be arrested. Miss Paterson, who is living 
with him, has taken the precaution of bringing a brother 
with her. I have given orders that she is to be sent back 
to America. If she attempts to evade these orders, and 
appears either at Bordeaux or in Paris, she will be escorted 
to Amsterdam, and put on board the first ship for America. 
As for the young man himself, I shall only give him one 
interview. If he shows himself unworthy of the name he 
bears, and seems inclined to persist in his liaison ., I shall 
show him no mercy. If he shows no disposition to wipe 
out the dishonour with which he has stained my name by 
deserting the colours for a wretched woman, I shall 
utterly disown him, and perhaps make an example of him, 
to teach young officers the sanctity of military service, and 

”7 

Coronation 

the enormity of the crime they commit, if they prefer a 
female to the flag. Assuming that he comes to Milan, I want 
you to write to him. Tell him that I have been like a father to 
him. Tell him that it is his sacred duty to obey me, and that 
his only hope is to do as I command. Get his sisters to write 
too: for, once I have pronounced his sentence, I shall be 
inflexible, and his whole career will be ruined. 

[Lecestre, i, 73. Madame Mere is Letizia Bonaparte, Napoleon’s 
mother. Jerome’s naval career (y. No. 6 z) had ended in America, and 
in marriage (at 19) with a Miss Paterson of Baltimore. Napoleon made 
him give her up, and marry Catherine of Wiirttemberg, as a qualifica¬ 
tion for the Kingship of Westphalia, cf. No. 15 3.] 

90 

CORONATION 

TO M. CAMBACERES 

Milan, May 27, 1805. 

The Coronation was carried out yesterday in full state. 
The church looked very fine. The ceremony went off as well 
as it did in Paris, with the difference that the weather was 
magnificent. When I took the iron crown, and put it on 
my head, I added these words: ‘ God gives it me: woe to 
him who touches it/ I hope the prophecy will come true. 

[Corresp., x, 8796. On December 4, 1804, Napoleon was crowned 
Emperor in Paris: at Milan on May 26,1805, he was crowned King of 
Italy.] 

9 1 

PRESS AND STAGE 

TO M. FOUCHQE 

Milan, June 1,1805. 

... The attention of the papers ought to be directed 
towards attacking England—English fashions, English 

118 

Historical Drama 

customs, English literature, the English constitution. This 
is Geoffroi’s only recommendation. Voltaire did us great 
harm by his constant essays in Anglomania. 

It seems to me that the success of the tragedy The Templars 
is turning attention to that incident in French history. 
That is as it should be. But I don’t think we ought to allow 
plays on subjects of too recent a date. I see in one of the 
papers that there is talk of putting on a tragedy about 
Henri IV. That period is not distant enough to rouse no 
passions. The stage needs a touch of antiquity; and I think 
that, without interfering with the theatre too much, you 
ought to veto this particular play; but don’t make your 
intervention public. You might speak to M. Raynouard 
about it—he seems to be a clever man. Couldn’t you com¬ 
mission him to write a tragedy on the transition from the 
Valois to the Bourbons? Only, instead of being a tyrant, the 
successor would be the saviour of the nation. That is the 
kind of play in which the stage can show its new spirit: 
it would never have been allowed under the old regime. 
You have the same idea in the oratorio Saul —a great man 
succeeding a degenerate King. . . . 

[Corresp., x, 8821. J. L. Geoffroy, of the Journal des Debats (1800-14) 
was the best known critic of the day. Raynouard’s tragedy Les 
Ttmplttrs was first produced this year. 

9 * 

HINTS FOR A VICEROY 

TO PRINCE EUGENE, VICEROY OF ITALY 

Milan, June j, 1805. 

By entrusting you with the government of Our Kingdom 
of Italy, We have given you proof of the respect your 
conduct has inspired in Us. But you are still at an age when 
one does not realise the perversity of men’s hearts; I cannot 
therefore too strongly recommend to you prudence and 

IX 9 

The Young Viceroy 

circumspection. Our Italian subjects are more deceitful by 
nature than the citizens of France. The only way in which 
you can keep their respect, and serve their happiness, is 
by letting no one have your complete confidence, and by 
never telling anyone what you really think of the ministers 
and high officials of your court. Dissimulation, which 
comes naturally at a maturer age, has to be emphasised 
aad inculcated at yours. If you ever find yourself speaking 
unnecessarily, and from the heart, say to yourself, T have 
made a mistake,’ and don’t do it again. Show respect for 
the nation you govern, and show it all the more as you 
discover less grounds for it. You will come to see in time 
that there is little difference between one nation and ano¬ 
ther. The aim of your administration is the happiness of my 
Italian peoples; and the first sacrifice you will have to make 
will be to fall in with certain of their customs which you 
detest. In any position but that of Viceroy of Italy you may 
boast of being a Frenchman: but here you must forget it, 
and count yourself a failure unless the Italians believe that 
you love them. They know there is no love without respect. 
Learn their language; frequent their society; single them 
out for special attention at public functions; like what they 
like, and approve what they approve. 

The less you talk, the better: you aren’t well enough 
educated, and you haven’t enough knowledge, to take 
part in informal debates. Learn to listen, and remember 
that silence is often as effective as a display of knowledge. 
Don’t be ashamed to ask questions. Though a Viceroy, 
you are only 23; and however much people flatter you, in 
reality they all know your limitations, ana honour you less 
for what they believe you to be than for what they hope 
that you will become. 

Don’t imitate me in every respect; you need more reserve. 

Don’t preside often over the State Council; you have too- 
litde experience to do so successfully—though I see m> 
objection to your attending it, whilst an Assessor acts as 
president, from his ordinary seat. Your ignorance of Italian, 
and of legislation too, for that matter, is an excellent excuse 

120 

and his Subjects 

for staying away. Anyhow, never make a speech there: they 
would listen to you, and would not answer you back; but 
they would see at once that you aren’t competent to discuss 
business. So long as a prince holds his tongue, his power is 
incalculable; he should never talk, unless he knows he is 
the ablest man in the room. 

Don’t trust spies. They are more trouble than they are 
worth. There is never enough unrest at Milan to bother 
about, and I expect it is the same elsewhere. Your military 
police make sure of the army, and that is all you want. 

The army is the one thing you can deal with personally, 
and from your own knowledge. 

Work with your ministers twice a week—once with each 
of them separately, and once with them all together in 
Council. Half the battle will be won when your ministers 
and councillors realise that your only object in consulting 
them is to listen to reason, and to prevent yourself being 
taken by surprise. 

At public functions, and at fetes, whenever you have 
Frenchmen and foreigners together, arrange beforehand 
where they are to be, and what you are to do. It is better 
never to form a following; and you must take the greatest 
care not to expose yourself to any sort of affront. If anything 
of the kind occurs, don’t stand it. Prince, ambassador, mini¬ 
ster, general—whoever it may be, even if it is the Austrian 
or-Russian ambassador, have him arrested on the spot. On 
the other hand, such incidents are always a nuisance; and 
what matters little in my case might have troublesome 
results in yours. 

Nothing is so advisable as to treat the Italians well, and to 
get to know all their names and families. Don’t show too 
much attention to foreigners: there is nothing to gain by it. 
An ambassador will never speak well of you, because it is 
his business to speak ill. Ministers of foreign countries are, 
in plain words, accredited spies. It is as well to keep them at 
arm’s length. They always think better of those they seldom 
see than of their professed friends and benefactors. 

There is only one man here at Milan who really matters 

121 

Frenchmen in Italy 

—the Minister of Finance: he is a hard worker, and knows 
his job well. 

Although they know I am behind you, I have no doubt 
they are trying to gauge your character. See that your orders 
are carried out, particularly in the army: never allow them 
to be disobeyed. 

The public decree that I have signed defines the powers 
I am delegating to you. I am reserving for myself the most 
important of all—the power of directing your operations. 
Send me an account of your doings every day. It is only by 
degrees that you will come to understand how I look at 
everything. 

Don’t show my letters to a single soul, under any 
pretext whatsoever. It ought not be to known what I write 
to you, or even that I write at all. Keep one room to which 
no one is admitted—not even your private secretaries. 

You will find M. M£jan useful, if he doesn’t try to make 
money; and he won’t do that if he knows that you are watch¬ 
ing him, and that a single act of this kind will ruin him in my 
eyes as well as yours. He ought to be well paid, and to have 
good prospects of promotion. But in that case he must be 
available at all hours: he will be useless to you if he gets 
into the way of working only at certain hours, and amusing 
himself the rest of the day. And you will have to rebuke 
him for a tendency he shares with all Frenchmen to depre¬ 
ciate this country—all the more so as it is accompanied 
by melancholia. Frenchmen are never happy out of 
France. 

Keep my household and stables in order, and make up 
all my accounts at least once a week; this is all the more 
necessary as they have no idea how to manage things here. 

Hold a review at Milan every month. 

Cultivate the young Italians, rather than the old; the 
latter are good for nothing.... 

You have an important position, and will find it pretty 
hard work. Try to get to know the history of all the towns 
in my kingdom of Italy; visit the fortresses, and all the famous 
battlefields. It is likely enough that you will see fighting 

122 

Soldiers and Civilians 

before you are thirty, and it is a tremendous asset to know 
the lie of the land. 

One last word. Punish dishonesty ruthlessly. The expo¬ 
sure of a dishonest accountant is a victory for the govern¬ 
ment. And don’t allow any smuggling in the French army. 

[Corresp., x, 88 j 2. Eugene Beauharnaiswas appointed Viceroy of 
Italy on June 7.] 

93 

LESE-MAJESTE 

TO M. FOUCHE 

Fontainebleau, July 12, 1805. 

The baker’s apprentice who insulted a sentinel at the 
gate of the Tuileries deserves severe punishment. Drunken¬ 
ness is no excuse. He must be brought to trial. His outra¬ 
geous act is the greatest crime a civilian can commit.... 

[Corresp., xi, 8975.] 

94 

GENOESE SAILORS 

TO M. LEBRUN 

Boulogne Camp, August u, 1805. 

I was sorry to see your decree forbidding the recruitment 
of sailors at Genoa. No doubt it is a way of making your¬ 
self very popular; but it is also a serious blow to the efficiency 
of the navy. I mobilised the fleet at Genoa just in order to 
get sailors, and yet the only 3 frigates I have in the harbour 
are not manned. Why do you suppose I annexed Genoa, 
and admitted her to the many great advantages she gains 
by membership of my Empire? It was not for the money 
I can get out of her, nor for the reinforcements she provides 

123 

Genoese Sailors 

for my armies on land: my only object was to have 15,000 
more sailors. It is therefore contravening the whole spirit 
of the annexation to pass a decree disavowing naval recruit¬ 
ment. I cannot imagine anything more impolitic. If we had 
acted so in Piedmont we should not have got a single 
conscript. Genoa will never be French until it has 6,000 
men serving in my fleets. I want you, then, to set yourself 
seriously to procure sailors. Make it understood, by means 
of a circular, that this is the only way in which the Genoese 
can help me. In fact, this subject ought to be your constant 
preoccupation. I repeat it: these people will never be really 
Gallicized until I have their sailors on board my ships. 
"What do you imagine I can do with 225 lads from 12 to 
20? There are plenty such in France; it is old sailors I need. 
I can’t agree with you that professional sailors are no use 
—that they are only good for coastal trade, and are terrified 
of going to sea in a ship of war. If so, we must find some way 
of terrifying them still more. Pm afraid you have been 
influenced, in your management of this business, by the 
fear of offending the Genoese. Never mind about that. 
Whether they wish it or not, I must have them on my 
vessels; or else I shall be forced to extreme measures, 
such as putting an embargo on their coastal trade, until I 
have as many sailors as I want. You are ill informed; and 
you must think me extremely ignorant of the Genoese if I 
suppose that they will be of no use to me. Nations cannot 
be governed by weakness; it only does them harm. I am 
afraid you have been displaying more of it than is warranted 
by your character. Did you really expect to manage people 
without making yourself unpopular? What would you do in 
France, if you had to organise conscription in such Depart¬ 
ments as Calvados, or Deux-Sevres? You must realise that in 
matters of government justice demands valour as well as 
virtue. As for those who say that this measure will make the 
Genoese troublesome and discontented—I am not the sort 
of man for such talk. I know well enough what the Genoese 
are capable of. Do people think I am already so decrepit 
that they can frighten me with the Genoese? There is 

124 

J OSI 3 PHINE 

only one answer to this despatch—sailors, and again sailors. 
You know how promptly 1 make up my mind, and you will 
understand that this business is not going to make any 
difference in my friendship and respect for you. But let 
sailors be the one object of your day’s work. Dream of 
nothing but sailors. Say anything you like on my behalf, but 
say that I must have sailors. 

[Corresp., xi, 9064. On June 4, 1805, the Ligurian Republic was 
annexed to France. Napoleon left Lebrun in charge.] 

95 

PLOMBIERES WATER 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE 

Boulogne Camp, August 13, 1805. 

... I hardly ever hear of you. It’s a pity you forget your 
friends: I didn’t know before that Plombieres water has the 
same properties as the river of Lethe. 

lean fancy you drinking this Plombieres water, and say¬ 
ing, ‘Ah, Bonaparte, if I die, who will be left to love you?’ 
But that’s a long way off, isn’t it? Everything has its end— 
beauty, wit, feeling, the sun itself: but what will never end is 
the happiness that I desire, the good fortune that—who is it? 
—enjoys, and the kindness or my Josephine. If you laugh 
at me, I shall never make love to you again. 

Good-bye, darling. I made an attack on the English 
cruiser yesterday. All went well. 

[Brotonne, ii, 316. Plombieres, a health resort in the Vosges made 
famous by the meeting of Napoleon III and Cavour therein 18 j 8.] 

I2 5 

Nelson 

96 

VILLENEUVE 

W 

TO VICE-ADMIRAL DECRES 

Boulogne Camp, August 22, 1805. 

... I don’t believe Villeneuve has enough character to 
command a frigate. The man has no energy, no moral 
courage. A couple of Spanish ships are in collision: a few of 
his men fall sick: or he has two days’ head winds, is sighted 
by one of the enemy’s ships, and hears a rumour that Nelson 
has joined Calder—and at once all his plans are changed, 
though there is nothing in any of these things, taken separ¬ 
ately. To add insult to injury, he gives no details about the 
composition of his fleet, and doesn’t say a word as to what 
he is going to do or not to do. He is quite unused to war, 
and doesn’t know how to conduct it. If Nelson had joined 
Calder, and thought himself sufficiently strong, he would 
have appeared before Ferrol: that is as obvious as ABC. 
The English papers, as you know, say that Nelson has been 
at the Canaries. Under the circumstances a special messenger 
should be sent to Brest with instructions to Admiral 
Ganteaume, ordering him, if Villeneuve appears in the roads 
off Brest, not to let him enter the harbour, but to take over 
the command of the troops on board, and to fit out for a 
voyage to Boulogne. If Villeneuve has been at Cadiz, my 
intention is that, after adding to his fleet the 6 ships there, 
and taking on board 2 months’ provisions, he should sail 
into the Channel. If it is possible to reinforce himself with 
the Cartagena squadron, he should do so. I am just going 
to write my despatch to Ganteaume, and to draft my decree: 
you shall have them both in a quarter of an hour. I shall 
postpone my Cadiz despatch until the arrival of to-morrow’s 
messenger. As for the cruisers, I never heard of such lunacy 
as sending them off with less than 6 months’ provisions. 

[Corresp., xi, 9112. On March 30,1805, Villeneuve with the French 

126 

AND VlLLENEUVE 

fleet at Toulon eluded Nelson’s blockade, and reached Cadiz. Thence 
he crossed the Atlantic, and arrived at Martinique on May 13. Pursued 
by Nelson, he sailed east again, fought a small action with Calder off 
Cape Finisterre on July 22, and put into Corunna and Ferrol early in 
August. When he sailed again, it was not (as Napoleon hoped) north, 
to Brest, but south to Cadiz, which he only left to be defeated at 
Trafalgar on October 21.] 

TO VICE-ADMIRAL VlLLENEUVE 

Boulogne Camp, August 22, 1805 .. 

I hope you have arrived at Brest. Start, without losing- 
a moment, and sail up the Channel with all the ships you 
have. England is ours. We are all ready: every man is on. 
board. Appear for 24 hours, and the thing is done. 

[Corresp., xi, 9115.] 

97 

ENGLAND OR AUSTRIA ? 

TO M. TALLEYRAND 

Boulogne Camp, August 23, 1805. 

The more I reflect on the European situation, the more I 
see the urgency of taking decisive action. The fact is, I 
have nothing to hope for from the Austrian explanations.. 
Austria will reply with fine phrases, in order to gain time, 
and to prevent my doing anything this winter. This, 
winter, under the title of an armed neutrality, she will sign 
her subsidy treaty, and her act of coalition; and in April 
I shall find 100,000 Russians in Poland, paid for—horses* 
guns, and all—by England, besides 15 to 20,000 English 
at Malta, and 15,000 Russians at Corfu. Then things will 
be in a pretty pass. So I have made up my mind. 

My fleet left Ferrol on the 26th thermidor with 34. 
sail; there was no enemy in sight. If it obeys orders, joins. 

127 

England or Austria? 

the Brest fleet, and sails up the Channel, there is still time; 
England is mine. If on the other hand, my admirals hesitate, 
manoeuvre badly, and fail in their task, I have no alternative 
but to wait for the winter to get my flotilla across. It is a 
risky operation; and it would be still more so if pressure of 
time, and the political situation, obliged me to leave here 
in April. Things being so, I am off at full speed. I am striking 
camp, and replacing my fighting battalions with reserves, 
which in any case give me a formidable enough army at 
Boulogne; and there I am, on the ist of vend&niaire, in the 
middle of Germany, with 200,000 men, and another 25,000 
in the Kingdom of Naples. I march on Vienna, and refuse 
to lay down arms till I have got Naples and Venice, and 
have so augmented the Elector of Bavaria’s territory that 
I have nothing more to fear from Austria. That ought to 
keep Austria quiet for the winter. I don’t return to Paris 
till I have reached my goal. 

I thought I had better let you know my intentions, so 
that you can draw up a manifesto for me, comprising the 
official documents on die Austrian movements: they will 
show how absolutely necessary it is for me to act, unless 
I am to be guilty of the most heinous of military mistakes. 
I want you to reiterate this view in all your conversations 
with the ambassadors, and to draft a circular letter in the 
same sense for my various ministers, blaming Austria for 
the Winnin g of hostilities. Take as your text the embarka¬ 
tion of my infantry and cavalry: say that Austria chose that 
moment for ordering armies into Italy and the Tyrol. 

I am acquainting you with my plans so that you may 
orientate your department accordingly. You are not to say 
that I am replying to war by war; but that, fighting having 
actually begun, a setdement must be arrived at, and that, 
unless Austria answers me, not by words, but by recalling 
her troops to their Hungarian and Bohemian barracks, 
there is no choice left me but to repel force by force. All 
the same, as I want to gain a fortnight, take M. Otto into 
your confidence, and warn him that in a few days’ time I 
am going to send one of my aides-de-camp to Passau with 

128 

Intelligence Department 

a letter for the Elector of Bavaria, in which I shall say that, 
unless Austria evacuates the Tyrol, I am resolved to put 
myself at the head of my army, and that Germany will see 
more soldiers than it has ever seen before: but the Elector 
need not disturb himself. 

[Corresp., xi, 9,117. Napoleon had just heard (August 22) that 
Austria was still arming, and that a new coalition was forming against 
him.] 

98 

CARD CATALOGUE 

TO MARSHAL BERTHIER 

Boulogne Camp, August 28, 1805. 

I want you to have two portable boxes made, and divided 
into compartments—one for me, and die other for yourself. 
They are to be so arranged that one can find out at a glance, 
with the help of cards, the movements of all the Austrian 
troops, regiment by regiment, and battalion by battalion, 
even including detached bodies of any considerable size. 
Divide them up into as many armies as die Austrians possess, 
and keep compartments for any troops the Emperor may 
have in Hungary, or Bohemia, or the interior of his states. 
Once a fortnight you are to send me a list of the changes 
that have taken place during die previous two weeks, using 
all the available sources—not only the German and Italian 
gazettes, but also the various pieces of information that 
reach you, as well as the Minister for Foreign Adairs; for I 
want you to co-operate with him for diis purpose. The 
arrangement of the cards in the box, and the fortnightly 
account of the state of the Austrian army, must be done by 
the same person. 

P.S.—This work ought to be assigned to someone who 
gives up his whole time to it, who knows German well, 
who gets all die German gazettes, and makes all the changes 
accordingly. 

[Corresp., xi, 9148.] 

K 

129 

Ulm 

99 

PULPIT CENSORSHIP 

TO M. PORTALIS 

Saint-Cloud* September 19, 1805. 

Inform M. Robert, a priest at Bourges, of my displeasure 
at the extremely bad sermon he preached on August 15. 

[Corresp., xi, 9243-] 

100 

ULM 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE 

Elchingen Abbey, October 19, 1805. 

I am more tired, my dear Josephine, than I ought to 
have been. After being wet through every day for a week, 
and my feet frozen with cold, Tm not feeling particularly 
well: but I have stayed indoors all to-day, and it has given 
me a rest. 

I have carried out my design—destroyed the Austrian 
army by mere marching, and captured 60,000 prisoners, 
120 guns, over 90 flags, and more than 30 generals. 

I am going to advance on the Russians. It’s all up with 
them. I am pleased with my army. I have only lost 1,500 
men, of whom two thirds are slightly wounded. 

Good-bye, my Josephine. Ever so many compliments. 
Prince Charles is coming to defend Vienna. 

Massena ought to be just reaching Vicenza. The very 
moment I am happy about Italy, I will give Eug&ne some 
fighting to do. My dearest love to Hortense. 

[Corresp., xi, 9393. Mack capitulated at Ulm on October 17 with 
23-24,000 men, and his troops laid down their arms on the 20th. 
Another 1 j,ooo men had been captured in earlier engagements.] 

130 

AND AFTER 

IOI 

THREE EMPERORS 

TO THE EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA 

Linz, November 8, 1805. 

Lieutenant-General Count Gyulai has handed me the 
letter from Your Imperial Majesty. Permit me to thank Your 
Majesty for the kind expressions it conveys on my account. 
I make bold to say to Your Majesty that the enemies of our 
two nations could never have rekindled the torch of war 
unless they had misrepresented my intentions. It was the 
only course left to England in order to secure for another 
term her absolute control over the seas and commerce of 
the world. It is not for me to decide what Your Majesty 
ought to do in your present situation; but I see with some 
regret that you agree with the Emperor of Russia; for he 
has not the same interest in our quarrels as we have, nor do 
the safety and welfare of his subjects depend upon what is 
happening at the moment. For Russia this war is mere 
make-belief: for Your Majesty and myself it is one that 
absorbs all our means, all our faculties, and all our feelings. 
I can only repeat to Your Majesty what I said in great 
detail to Count Gyulai: I desire peace, and I shall think it a 
happy moment when Your Majesty attends only to the 
interests of your crown and the good of your peoples, and 
not to the wishes of a power so differently situated. I do not 
intend any reflexion on the personal character of the 
Emperor Alexander. I know too well the extent of the 
toils into which he has fallen during the last three years 
to be surprised if his most benevolent intentions pro¬ 
duce effects of an exactly opposite kind. He wanted to 
be the peace-maker and benefactor of Europe: his agents 
have made him the author and origin of dissension on 
the continent. I have often been brought into personal 
contact with the Emperor, and retain affectionate memories 
of his kindness and good qualities. He is still young; he 
will gather experience, and achieve all the good he desires 

131 

Austerlitz 

for Europe and for the human race. I hope that he will then 
do more justice to my sentiments, and to the honest friendli¬ 
ness I have shown him in all our intercourse. However, to 
confine myself to the immediate issue; are the French and 
German peoples really to be committed to all the anxieties 
and anguish of war? Count Gyulai did not consider himself 
empowered to treat for an armistice. He will tell Your 
Majesty both how willing I am to conclude one immediately, 
and also how much I fear those delays and intrigues whose 
full bitterness I have experienced in the past. Our mini¬ 
sters are so well aware of all possible points of difference 
between us that they could settle them in five minutes. But 
whatever turn may be given to these preliminaries by the 
present complex and difficult circumstances, I beg Your 
Majesty never to doubt that I am always pleased to meet 
your wishes, and that it is a matter of genuine preference 
as well as of deliberate purpose on my part to contribute to 
the happiness of your subjects and of yourself, so long as 
this is consistent with my duty towards the welfare of my 
own peoples. 

[Corresp., xi, 9464. Gyulai again represented Austria in negotiating 
the Treaty of Pressburg, a month later.] 

102 

AUSTERLITZ 

TO JOSEPH 

Austerlitz, December 3, 1805. 

... Yesterday, after several days’ manoeuvring, I fought 
a decisive battle. I routed the allied army under the personal 
command of the Emperors of Russia and Germany. The 
strength of their army was 80,000 Russians and 30,000 
Austrians. I took nearly 40,000 of them prisoner, including 
20 or so Russian generals, 40 flags, 100 guns, and all the 
standards of Russian Imperial Guard. The whole army 
covered itself with glory. 

132 

Peace with Glory 

The enemy have left at least 12 or 15,000 men on the 
field of battle. I don’t know my losses yet, but estimate 
them at 8 or 900 men killed, and twice as many wounded. A 
whole column threw itself into a lake, where most of them 
were drowned: one can still hear the cries of some of these 
unhappy men, whom it was impossible to save. The two 
Emperors are in a pretty bad position. You can have a sum¬ 
mary of this news printed; but don’t give it as an extract 
from my letter—that would be incorrect. You will get the 
'Bulletin to-morrow. Although I have slept out all this last 
week, my health is good. I nave a bed to sleep on to-night, 
in M. de Kaunitz’s handsome chateau at Austerlitz, and it is 
the first time for a week that I have put on a clean shirt. My 
guard and the Russian Emperor’s charged one another; the 
Emperor’s was overwhelmed. Prince Repnin, its com¬ 
manding officer, was captured, with part of his regiment, 
and the standards and guns of the Russian Guard. 

This morning the Emperor of Germany sent the Prince 
of Liechtenstein to ask me for an interview. Peace may 
follow quite quickly. I had fewer troops on the battlefield 
than the enemy, but I caught him in the middle of a move¬ 
ment unawares. 

[Corresp., xi, 9538. Kircheisen ( Napoleon , 336) regards the story 
of the lake (which reappears in Army Bulletin No. 30) as a legend. 
An examination of the lake a few days later revealed the bodies of 3 
men and 138 horses.] 

103 

PEACE DEMONSTRATIONS 

TO JOSEPH 

Schonbrunn, December 13, 1805. 

It was worse than useless to call so much attention to the 
news that the enemy had made overtures for peace, or to 
fire a salute. That is just the way to send public opinion 
to sleep, and to give foreigners a false idea of the situation 
in our country. Peace can’t be secured by shouting for it. 

133 

Augusta 

I didn’t even mention the word in any of my bulletins: 
there are still better reasons for not proclaiming it in the 
theatres. The word ‘peace’ means nothing. It is a particular 
kind of peace that we want—peace with glory. I can’t 
imagine anything, therefore, more unwise or more unreal 
than this performance at Paris. 

[Joseph, i, 341.] 

104 

BRIDE FOR EUGENE 

TO PRINCE EUGENE 

Munich, December 31, 1805. 

Here I am at Munich. I have arranged your marriage 
with Princess Augusta, and it has been announced in the 

E apers. The princess came to see me this morning, and I 
aa a long talk with her. She is very pretty. I am enclosing 
a portrait of her on a cup; but it doesn’t do her justice.... 

[Corresp., xi, 9636. Eugene was in Italy, and had not been consulted. 
He married Princess Augusta Amelia of Bavaria on January 13, 1806. 
For the sequel, v. Nos. 106,113.] 

105 

EMPEROR AND POPE 
(1) Direct 

TO HIS HOLINESS THE POPE 

Munich, January 7,1806. 

Most Holy Father; I am in receipt of a letter from Your 
Holiness under date November 13.1 cannot but be keenly 
affected by the fact that, when all the powers in English 
pay banded together to wage an unjust war against me, 
Your Holiness should lend your ear to ill advice, and write 

134 

Ancona 

to me in such immoderate terms. Your Holiness is perfectly 
free either to keep my minister at Rome, or to dismiss him. 
The occupation of Ancona is an immediate and necessary 
consequence of the military incompetence of the Holy See. 
It was better for Your Holiness to see that fortress in my 
hands than in those of the Turks or English. Your Holiness 
complains that, since your return from Paris, you have had 
nothing but disappointments. The reason is that all those 
who used to call themselves my friends, only because they 
feared my power, have since then taken heart from the 
strength of the coalition, and changed their tune: thus, 
since Your Holiness returned to Rome, I have met with 
nothing but refusal on your part, whatever the occasion; 
and this even in matters of the first importance for religion, 
as, for instance, the question of preventing a revival of 
Protestantism in France. I have always considered myself 
the protector of the Holy See; and it was in this capacity 
that I occupied Ancona. I have always considered myself, 
like my Valois and Bourbon predecessors, as the eldest 
son of the Church, and as the sole bearer of the sword with 
which to protect it, and to put it beyond danger of defilement 
by Greeks and Moslems. I shall continue to protect it, 
whatever the mistakes, ingratitude, and ill-will of the 
men whom these last three months have unmasked. 
They thought I was done for; but, by the success with 
which he favoured my arms, God has signally demonstrated 
his protection of my cause. So long as your Holiness 
consults the true friends of religion, and your own heart, 
I shall be your friend. I repeat; S Your Holiness wishes to 
dismiss my minister, you are free to do so; and free to 
summon, if you prefer them, the English, and the Caliph 
of Constantinople. Only, as I do not wish to expose Cardinal 
Fesch to such affronts, I shall send a layman in his place. 
Besides, Cardinal Consalvi shows him so much dislike, 
that he has never met with anything but rebuffs, whilst 
every favour has gone to my enemies. Yet, God knows, I 
have done more for religion than any other prince alive. 

Hereby I pray God, Most Holy Father, to preserve you 

^35 

Fesch and Consalvi 

for many years in the rule and government of our Holy 
Mother Church. 

Your devoted son. Emperor of the French and King of 
Italy. 

[Corresp., xi, 9655. Ancona was occupied by French troops before 
the Austrian campaign of 1805. The Pope’s protest reached Napoleon 
just before Austerlitz. This is his answer. Cardinal Consalvi was the 
Papal Secretary of State.] 

(2) Indirect 

TO CARDINAL FESCH 

Munich, January 7, 1806. 

The Pope has written to me, under date November 13 th, 
a quite ridiculous and lunatic letter: these people thought I 
was dead. I occupied Ancona because, in spite of your 
representations, nothing had been done to defend it; 
besides, things are so badly organised that, whatever had 
been done, it could never have been held against anyone. 
Make it clearly understood that I won’t stand any more 
of this nonsense, and that I won’t tolerate the presence of a 
Russian or Sardinian minister at Rome. It is my intention 
to recall you, and to replace you by a layman. As these 
imbeciles see no harm in a Protestant occupying the French 
throne, I shall send them a Protestant ambassador. Tell 
Consalvi that, if he has any care for his country, he must 
either do what I required of him, or resign his post. Tell him 
that I’m religious, but that I’m no bigot. Remind him 
that Constantine distinguished the civilian sphere from the 
military, and that I too can nominate a senator to command 
in my name in Rome. It is a nice idea, all this talk of religion, 
by those who have admitted the Russians, and rejected 
Malta, and are now trying to get rid of my minister! These 
are the people who prostitute religion. Is there any such 
thing as an apostolic nuncio in Russia? Tell Consalvi, tell 
the Pope himself if you like, that he may want to turn my 
min ister out of Rome, but that I can equally well come and 
put him back there. Can nothing be done with these 

136 

Charlemagne 

fellows except by force? They are letting religion go to ruin 
in Germany by refusing to finish the business of the Concor¬ 
dat: it is the same in Bavaria, the same in Italy. They are 
becoming the laughing-stock of courts and peoples. I have 
given them good advice, but they would never listen to it. 
I suppose they thought that the Russians and English and 
Neapolitans would have respected the Pope’s neutrality! 
For the Pope’s purposes, I am Charlemagne. Like Charle¬ 
magne, I join the crown of France with the crown of the 
Lombards. My empire, like Charlemagne’s, marches with 
the East. I therefore expect the Pope to accommodate his 
conduct to my requirements. If he behaves well, I shall 
make no outward changes: if not, I shall reduce him to the 
status of bishop of Rome. They complain of my arranging 
Italian affairs without consulting them. Do they want 
things to be as they are in Germany, where there are no 
services left, no sacraments, and no religion? Tell them that, 
unless they make an end of their present behaviour, I shall 
hold them up to all Europe as mere egoists, and shall settle 
the affairs of the church in Germany with the Arch-chancel¬ 
lor, and without them. Really, there is nothing in the worldi 
so utterly unreasonable as the Court of Rome. 

[Corresp., xi, 9656. To this the Pope replied, on March 21, that 
Napoleon was ‘Emperor of the French, and not of Rome. There is no 
Emperor of Rome/] 

106 

PATERNAL 

TO PRINCESS AUGUSTA 

Stuttgart, January 19,1806. 

Mr daughter; your letter is as nice as yourself. My feelings 
of devotion to you will only grow greater every day. I am 
sure of this, because it is such a pleasure to remember all 
your good qualities, and because I am always wanting to 
hear you tell me that you like us all, and that you are happy 
about your husband. However busy I am, there will never 

*37 

Church Press 

be anything I care about more than the means of making 
my children happy. I assure you, Augusta, I love you like 
a father, and I count on your loving me like a daughter. 
Take care of yourself on your journey, and in the new 
climate you are going to; get as much repose as you can. You 
have been rushing about all this last month: I don’t want to 
have you falling ill. I end, my daughter, by giving you a 
father’s blessing. 

[Corresp., xi, 9683. v. No. 104 above.] 

107 

CHURCH PAPERS 

TO M. FOUCHE 

Paris, February 7, 1806. 

M. Portalis has informed me that there are a number of 
Church papers, and has pointed out the awkwardness that 
might result from their editorial temper, and above all, from 
their differences of opinion about religion. It is therefore 
my intention that the Church papers shall cease separate 
publication, and be combined into a single paper, which will 
be sent to all their subscribers. As the special object of this 
paper is to be the education of the clergy, it will be called 
the Journal des cures. Its editors will be appointed by the 
cardinal-archbishop of Paris. 

[Corresp., xii, 9769.] 

108 

LITURGIOLOGY 

NOTE FOR THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORSHIP 

Paris, February 12, 1806. 

Considering how necessary it is to give a religious 
sanction to solemn occasions, whilst at the same time dimin- 

138 

Saint Napoleon 

ishing the number of festivals which distract people from 
their work, two feasts may be suggested:— 

(1) On August 15 th, the Feast of St. Napoleon, which 
would celebrate at the same time the Emperor’s birthday, 
and the ratification of the Concordat; with this festival could 
be associated acts of thanksgiving for the prosperity of the 
Empire; and one could try to give the procession, which 
would still take place on this day, a character tending to 
efface its old associations. 

(2) On the first Sunday following the day corresponding 
to the nth frimaire one could commemorate both the 
success of the Grand Army and the occasion of the Corona¬ 
tion; and one of the clergy could preach a sermon making 
special mention of local citizens who fell in the battle of 
Austerlitz. 

[CORRESP., xii, 9803.] 

109 

“BUY FRENCH” 

TO PRINCESS ELISA 

Paris, February 22, 1806. 

My Sister, I should like you to insist that no dresses are 
worn at yo\ir Court except those made of silk or batiste, 
and to prohibit cotton and muslin, so that a preference may 
be given to the products of French industry, and they may 
become fashionable. 

[Corresp., xii, 9870. Marie-Anne (Elise) Bonaparte, Napoleon’s 
sister, married Felice Badocchi in 1797: in 1805 he was made Prince of 
Lucca and Piombino.] 

139 

Berthier’s Mistress 

no 

BERTHIER 

TO MARSHAL BERTHIER 

La Malmaison, April i, 1806. 

I am sending you the Moniteur : you will see there what I 
have done for you. I only attach one condition to it, namely, 
that you get married; and that is also a condition of my 
continued friendship. Your love affair has lasted too long, 
and has become absurd. I have a right to expect that a man 
whom I have called my companion in arms, and whom 
posterity will always picture at my side, shall no longer 
abandon himself to an unprecedented weakness. I want you 
to get married, then; if you don’t, I will never see you again. 
You are fifty, I know; but you come of a race that lives till 
eighty; and those thirty years are just the time when you 
most need the amenities of married, life. 

When circumstances allow, you must go to Strasbourg, 
and thence to your principality, to see about everything 
there. It yielded 50,000 crowns to Prussia, it ought to yield 
you twice as much. You know that no one is fonder of you 
than I am: but you are also aware that no one can have my 
affection who has not first my respect. You have well 
deserved it hitherto: continue to be worthy of it by falling 
in with my plans, and becoming the root of a fine big 
family tree.... 

[CoRRESP.,xii, 10046. After the victories of 180 j Napoleon, rewarded 
Berthier, his Chief of Staff, with the Principality of Neuchatel, ceded 
by Prussia. Berthier’s mistress was M m *. de Visconti.] 

Ill 

DISCIPLINE 

TO MARSHAL BERTHIER 

La Malmaison, April 10, 1806. 

I am annoyed at your sending your brother to Paris. I 
didn’t want to see him, and I won’t receive him. Write and 

140 

and Brother 

tell him to clear out at once. The fact that he has made two 
millions in Hanover is no reason why he should give him¬ 
self such airs. If, now that he is a rich man, he thinks he can 
play fast and loose with his duties, he will soon find he is 
mistaken. I call it dishonourable for a general to leave his 
troops. As for his wife's accouchement , I can't go into details 
like that. My wife might have died at Munich or Strasbourg: 
it wouldn't have made one quarter of an hour's difference to 
my plans, or to my opinions. Don't you suppose that 
every military man in Germany—and not least yourself— 
would be only too glad to get back, and that there are 
plenty of reasons, quite apart from the needs of the service, 
why I should like to have you in Paris? But the army is 
becoming effeminate, and I refuse to make concessions. 
If General Berthier had come without your leave, he would 
have been arrested on the spot. . . . 

[Corresp., xii, 10074.] 

112 

ITALIAN BUDGET 

TO PRINCE EUGENE 

Saint-Cloud, April 14, 1806. 

I have received your letter of April 7th. It is natural 
enough that the decree of annexation should have been 
unpopular at Milan. They are always wanting impossibilities 
in that country: they would like to pay no taxes, have no 
troops, and be the greatest nation in the world—all pure 
fantasy; and sensible people are bound to agree with me. 
My policy fits the circumstances, and the needs of the 
country, because I have higher aims. The only reward that 
the army has won from unparalleled successes, or France 
from unremitting efforts, is the district of Venice. Every¬ 
thing that consolidates my system in France consolidates it 
also in Italy, and everything that France does to keep 
Venice is in the interests of my Italian crown. 

141 

Italian Budget 

As for the taxes, the answer is quite simple. Are they 
paying more there than here? It is obvious that my French 
subjects pay much heavier taxes than my subjects in Italy: 
that being so, the latter have nothing to grumble about. 
I have just started levying duties on salt, and have further 
increased French taxation. My budget is before the Legisla¬ 
tive Body: you will get it to-morrow in the Moniteur. You 
had better have it put into the papers. Then they will see 
how much the French pay. 

I am sending you the balance-sheet from the Minister of 
Finance. The z\ million francs a month to be paid me by 
my Kingdom of Italy fall far short, I can assure you, of 
meeting the expenses of my army: were Italy to be taxed to 
the extent of a third of its resources, it would certainly not be 
too much for the defence of the country. The defence of 
France absorbs half its revenues. Besides, one must look 
further ahead. Europe will change: the present hatreds will 
die down: the new countries will in time become established 
and consolidated. Then I shall reduce my army by 50 per 
cent.; I shall withdraw my troops from Italy; and my Italian 
subjects will only pay a million a month to my French 
treasury, or perhaps nothing at all. You know well enough 
that z\ millions a month won’t pay for my army, and that I 
shall be obliged to send money from France—a costly affair, 
and one that will drain my resources: for it is only fair to say 
that what the French nation has done to set up and embel¬ 
lish the throne of Italy involves the duty of maintaining a 
much stronger military establishment in that country. 

As regards the succession, it is not my custom to look to 
other people’s advice for my political opinions; and my 
Italian subjects know me too well to forget that there is 
more in my little finger than in all their heads put together. 
In Paris, where people are more enlightened than in Italy, 
they hold their tongues, and bow to the judgment of a man 
who has proved that he saw further and more clearly than 
they did. I am surprised that in Italy they are less obliging. 

[Corbesp., xii, 10097. The Italian legislature was suppressed for 
criticising this first budget.] 

142 

Domesticities 

113 

EUGENE MARRIED 

TO PRINCE EUGENE 

Saint-Cloud, April 14, 1806. 

My Son, you are working too hard; your life is too 
monotonous. It is all right for yourself, because you ought 
to regard work as a form of recreation. But you have a young- 
wife, and she is expecting a baby. I think you ought to 
manage to spend the evening with her, and to ask a few 
people in. Why don't you use the royal box at the theatre 
once a week? I think you should also keep a small stable, 
and go hunting at least once a week. I will gladly ear-mark a. 
sum in the budget for this purpose. There ought to be more 
gaiety in your home: it is needed for your wife's happiness, 
and for your own health. One can get through a lot of 
business in a short time. I live much as you do; but then I 
have an old wife, who doesn’t need me to amuse her; and 
I have more work to do. Yet I'm sure I find time for more 
amusement and dissipation than you do. A young wife needs 
to be amused, especially when situated as yours is. You were 
fond enough of enjoying yourself in the old days; you must 
cultivate those tastes again. You might not do this for 
yourself, but you really ought to do it for the Princess. I have 
just settled in at Saint-Cloud. Stephanie and the Prince of 
Baden are quite fond of one another. I spent the last two 
days with Marshal Bessieres, and we disported ourselves 
like children of fifteen. You used to be in the habit of getting 
up early: you ought to take to it again. That would not 
inconvenience the Princess, provided you went to bed 
with her at 11; even if you finished your work at 6 in the 
evening, you could still secure a 10 hours’ working day by¬ 
getting up at 6 or 7. The Cattaro affair is postponing the 
May f&es, but I think only for a month. I hope you and the 
Princess will come to Paris then. I have had the Pavilion de 
Flore made ready for you: you will be on the first floor, the 

M3 

Convicts 

Prince of Baden on the second. Tell the Princess how 
pleased people will be to see her in Paris. By that time her 
pregnancy will have taken a more settled form, and won’t 
prevent her travelling by short stages. Provided the weather 
is fine, it can do her nothing but good. 

[Corresp., xii, 10099. Soon after Eugene’s marriage Napoleon had 
arranged a match between Stephanie Beauharnais, Josephine’s niece, 
and Charles Louis Frederick, Crown Prince of Baden. The Pavilion de 
Flore was a wing of the Tuileries, occupied in 1794 by the Committee 
of Public Safety. Napoleon was 37 at this time, Bessi&res 38. The 
“Cattaro affair* arose out of the failure of Austria to hand over Cattaro, 
though included in the cession of Dalmatia by the treaty of Pressburg.j 

114 

FORCED LABOUR 

TO DEJEAN 

Saint-Cloud, April 2 5, 1806. 

A thousand Neapolitan convicts will remain at Alex¬ 
andria to work on the fortifications there; 300 are to be sent 
to Mantua, and 300 to Legnano, for the same purpose; and 
600 to Genoa, where they will embark for Corsica, to be 
employed, among other things, on repairing the roads and 
draining the marshes. The remaining 1,200 will be sent to 
Rochefort, and put at the disposition of the Bridges and 
Forests department, to work on the draining of the Roche¬ 
fort marsh-lands. Of the 4,000 Neapolitan prisoners, 2,000 
are to remain at Alexandria, to be employed on the work 
there, and the other 2,000 will be sent to Languedoc, to do 
any work needed by the Minister for Home Affairs. 

[Chuquet, i, 672. This is the sequel to Joseph’s entry into Naples 
in February.] 

144 

Arc de Triomphe 
**5 

HISTORY 

TO M. FOUCH^ 

Saint-Cloud, May 7, 1806. 

Millot has just published a fourth volume, containing all 
kin ds of ridiculous nonsense, and depreciating our victories. 
It is the height of indecency that such an ignoramus should 
write in the grand manner about contemporary events. 
Have the book suppressed. . . . 

[Corresp., xii, 10209. Millot’s Elements de rbistoire de France first 
came out in 1767.] 

116 

ARC DE TRIOMPHE 
Note 

Saint-Cloud, May 14,1806. 

The triumphal arches would be a futile and pointless 
piece of work, and I should never have had them put up, 
unless I had thought of them as a means of encouraging 
architecture. My idea is to use them to subsidise architec¬ 
ture in France for 10 years, to the tune of 200,000 francs. 
M. Denon is to present me with a plan. The Minister of the 
Interior is having another triumphal arch built in the Place 
de TEtoile. It is essential that all the designs should conform 
to the same general description. One of the first two must be 
a Marengo arch, and the other an arch of Austerlitz. I shall 
have another erected somewhere in Paris, to be the arch of 
Peace, and a fourth to be the arch of Religion. With these 
four arches I am confident that I can finance French sculp¬ 
ture for 20 years. But it is as well that M. Daru should know 
of the existence of all four arches, so that he may not put 
work into one that is only suitable for another. 

Will M. Daru please let me know on which of the arches 

*45 

L 

Saint Januarius 

the statue of Charlemagne has been placed? Will he also 
come to an agreement with M. Cretet on the subject of the 
two fountains which are to be erected, one in the Place de la 
Revolution, and the other on the site of the Bastille? They 
are of a monumental character, and ought to have statues 
and bas-reliefs: the subjects for these can be taken in the 
first instance from the Emperor’s life, and afterwards 
from the history of the Revolution, and of France. Generally 
speaking, no opportunity should be missed to humiliate 
the Russians and the English. William the Conqueror 
and Duguesdin may be given places of honour on these 
monuments. 

[Corresp., xii, 10235. The Arc de Triomphe in the Place de l’litoile 
is that through which German troops marched in 1871, and French 
in 1919, and under which is the Tomb of an Unknown Warrior.] 

117 

ORDERS 

TO JOSEPH 

Saint-Cloud, May 2 1, 1806. 

I have received your letters of May 10 and 11. I had 
thought, like you, of an Order of St. Januarius. Send me a 
note on its constitution and duties. But it seems to me a bit 
too religious; and at first sight I don’t like the idea of an 
Order attached to the Bourbons as its founders. Institutions 
of this kind ought to be newly created, and to correspond 
from the start, so far as possible, to the needs of the age. 
The mere name of St. Januarius raises a smile all over 
Europe. We ought to find something that inspires respect, 
and gives rise to imitation. The English themselves are 
just trying to start something over there on the lines of the 
Legion of Honour.... 

[Joseph, ii, 245. The miraculous liquefaction of the blood of St. 
Januarius was the chief event in the ecclesiastical year at Naples.] 

146 

Neapolitan Court 
118 

BODY-GUARD 

TO JOSEPH 

Saint-Cloud, May 31,1806. 

Don't allow any one to be in sole command of your 
Guard. Nothing could be more dangerous. Sooner or later 
you will have to revise the arrangement, and it is better not 
to start off on the wrong lines. I have told you before, and I 
tell you again, that you trust the Neapolitans too much. 
I am thinking particularly of your kitchen arrangements, 
and of your body-guard, where you are running the risk of 
poisoning or assassination. It is my deliberate desire that you 
should keep your French cooks, that you should have 
your own waiters, and that your domestic arrangements 
should provide for your being always under French 
protection. You haven't seen enough of my private 
life to know how, even in France, I am constantly under 
the eye of my oldest and most trusted soldiers. Of 
all the people you mention there isn't one I know, unless 
it’s the Duke of San Th^odoro, whose letters to the 
Queen I saw, when he was at Madrid. Whatever he may 
be like, I don’t object to your nominating him Grand 
Master of the Ceremonies. But do make sure that your 
valets, your cooks, and the sentries who sleep in your 
apartments, or who call you during the night to give you 
despatches, are Frenchmen. It should be impossible for 
anyone to enter your room at night, except your aide-de- 
camp; and he ought to sleep in the room opening into your 
bedroom. Your door should be locked on the inside; you 
ought not to open it even to your aide-de-camp, unless you 
are sure you recognise his voice; and he ought not to knock 
at your door until he has been careful to dose that of his 
own room, to make sure that he is alone, and that no one 
can follow him. 

These precautions are important: they give no trouble; 
and they inspire confidence; besides, they may really save 

147 

Estates 

your life. It is an arrangement which you ought to start at 
once, and always keep up: you don’t want to be forced to 
adopt it by particular circumstances; that is embarrassing 
both to your self-respect, and to your suite. Don’t rely too 
much upon your own experience. The Neapolitan reputa¬ 
tion has been the same always and everywhere; and you have 
to reckon with a woman who is the personification of 
crime.... 

[Joseph, ii, 260. In 1801, Naples had been forcedinto a treaty with 
France. When war broke out in 1803 it was occupied by French troops. 
The landing of an Anglo-Russian expeditionary force there in i8oj 
gave Napoleon an excuse to depose Queen Maria Carolina, the 
effective ruler, since Ferdinand IV was an imbecile. On February 13, 
1806, Joseph entered Naples at the head of a French army, as its new 
king. The reference in the last sentence is to the Queen.] 

119 

NEW NOBILITY 

TO JOSEPH 

Saint-Cloud, June 5, 1806, 11 a.m. 

The behaviour of the Roman Curia bears every mark of 
insanity. I wanted to show them at the start what they had to 
fear from me. Besides, I thought that under any circum¬ 
stances the Benevento and Ponte-Corvo enclaves could only 
be a source of trouble to your Kingdom, so I turned them 
into two Duchies—that of Benevento for Talleyrand, and 
that of Ponte-Corvo for Bemadotte. I know that they are 
poor districts: but I will give grants in aid—or rather, I will 
do so in Bemadotte’s case: Talleyrand is rich enough to do 
without. Occupy these districts, then, and do so wim troops 
in the first instance. You will realise that, if I have given 
Bemadotte the titles of Duke and Prince, it is on your 
wife’s account. There are other generals in my army who 
have served me more faithfully, and on whose attachment I 
can better rely: but I thought it proper that the brother-in- 
law of the Queen of Naples should rank high at your court. 

148 

Civil Code 

As for the other six Duchies, I shall soon be in a position to 
appoint to them. Massena and Jourdan would both be 
suitable men. Imperfections disappear in time, but titles 
that recall such victories as Fleurus or Zurich are immutable, 
and will be the first thought of those who see their children. 
When you are master of Sicily, found three more fiefs, one 
of them for Reynier—especially as I think you are putting 
him in command of the expedition; and this will be no small 
encouragement to him, if he has any doubts about my 
friendly feelings towards him. 

Tell me what titles you would like attached to the 
Duchies in your Kingdom. They are titles, and no more: 
the essential thing is the money that goes with them: 
200,000 livres a year will have to be set aside for this 
purpose. I have made it a further condition that each holder 
of a title shall keep up a house at Paris; for that is the 
centre of the whole system, and I want to have there ioo 
fortunes, which have all been built up alongside the throne, 
and which are the only estates of any size remaining in the 
country: for they are gifts by trust, whereas all others, under 
the working of the Civil Code, gradually disappear. 

Introduce the Civil Code at Naples, and at the end of a 
few years all the fortunes not attached to you will be des 
.troyed, and any that you wish to preserve will be consoli¬ 
dated. That is the great advantage of the Civil Code. If 
you don’t like the idea of divorce at Naples, I see no objec¬ 
tion to your deleting that article. I think it’s useful, all the 
same. Why should the Pope denounce the granting of 
divorce on account of impotence, or some other compelling 
cause, which has no ecclesiastical bearing? However, if you 
think necessary, change it. And you can leave the registra¬ 
tion of civil acts to the clergy. With these modifications you 
had better introduce the Civil Code. It consolidates your 
power, for by its means all wealth not in the form of gifts by 
trust disappears, and no great families remain except those 
you transform into fiefs. That is why I recommend a Civil 
Code, and why I established it. . . . 

{Joseph, ii, 274. For Bernadotte v. No. 9.] 

149 

Sebastiani’s 

120 

TURKISH EMBASSY 

TO M. DE TALLEYRAND 

Saint-Cloud, June 9, 1806. 

General Sebastiani’s instructions fall under two heads. 
One consists of information on the geographical and 
political situation of the Ottoman Empire, extracted from 
the mini sters letters; this you need not submit to me. The 
other must be his instructions proper, of which the following 
are the outlines. 

(1) My ambassador at Constantinople must endeavour 
at all times and by every available means to produce in 
the Porte a feeling of confidence and security; and to make 
them realise that I do not want any part of the empire of 
Constantinople, but that my wish is to do all I can to pacify, 
reorganise, and re-establish the whole of this formidable 
empire, which, even in its weakest moments, impinges 
upon Russia, and holds her in check. 

(2) The object of my policy all through is to make a 
triple alliance of myself, the Porte, and Persia, aimed 
inairecdy or by implication against Russia. 

(3) I want to be treated as the most favoured power. But 
I should like the influence I have lost to be regained by 
tact, subtlety, and trust, not by arrogance, force, or threats. 
I want my ambassador to be liked and trusted. I shall know 
that he has inspired confidence, and carried out his instruc¬ 
tions, every time the Porte informs him of the demands of 
Russia or England. 

(4) I shall not support any rebel against the Porte, nor 
any of my old friends in Egypt or Syria, nor any Greek. My 
policy is perfectly simple—whole-hearted alliance with the 
Porte. 

(5) I want to stand well with the Porte by the creation of 
confidence, and the expression of friendly feelings; but that 
is not enough. I want this relationship to be known in 

IjO 

Embassy 

Russia, in England, and all over Europe; every element of 
friendship in it advertised, every scrap of coolness and 
discontent concealed. 

(6) My ambassador must always be on the look-out for 
opportunities to put Russia out of favour. He must depre¬ 
ciate the strength of her army, and the courage of her 
troops, whenever and in whatever way he can. He must 
adopt a distant attitude towards the Russian legation—show 
it little attention, and treat it with disdain rather than condes¬ 
cension. Whatever the relations of Russia and France 
elsewhere, the French legation at Constantinople must be 
on cool terms with the Russian. On the other hand, once 
peace is made, it can be friendly with Austria, Prussia, and 
England. 

(7) All our negotiations ought to aim at these points: 
(1) closing the Bosphorus against the Russians, and prohibit¬ 
ing the passage of their vessels from the Mediterranean to 
the Black Sea, whether they are armed or unarmed (for it 
is an utter fraud to close the ports of a warship and call it 
a troopship); (2) forbidding any Greek to sail under the 
Russian flag; (3) fortifying or arming every position against 
the Russians; (4) subduing the Georgians, and re-establish¬ 
ing the absolute rule of the Porte over Moldavia and 
Wallachia. 

(8) I don’t want to partition the empire of Constanti¬ 
nople: even if I were offered a three-quarters share, I should 
refuse to do so. I want to strengthen and consolidate this 
great empire, and to use it, as it is, against Russia. 

[Corresp., xii, 10339. Sebastiani (v. No. 64) is being sent as 
French ambassador to Constantinople in order to form a Franco- 
Perso-Turkish alliance against Russia. In August Selim deposed the 
Russophil Hospodars of Moldavia and Wallachia, and in October a 
Russian army marched on the Danube.] 

151 

Small Men 

121 

MOUNTED SCOUTS 

NOTE 

Saint-Cloud,/#^/ 9, 1806. 

Submit a scheme for organising 4 regiments of Scouts, 
each composed of 4 squadrons 200 strong. 

The Scouts ■will be not more than 5 ft. tall, and they will 
use horses standing from 4 ft. to 4 ft. 3 J ins. at most. 

The horses will have only their fore feet shod. 

The bridles will be as simple as possible. 

They will have cushions in place of saddles; but, of course, 
the stirrups and other indispensable accessories will be 
adapted to the cushions. 

The scouts will wear uniforms—a tunic, with breeches or 
trousers, as well as a stable jacket. They will also have a 
cloak which will serve them in place of an overcoat. The 
knapsack will be as small as possible, and the weight of its 
contents will have to be cut down to 4 lbs. 

The boots will be something like those of the hussars, 
but without any ornamentation. 

The Emperor’s object in forming this new regiment, is 
to utilise small horses, and to diminish the wastage of the 
larger kinds. 

These corps will be able to do the scouting work that 
has hitherto been done by the hussars and chasseurs . It will 
be possible to increase their number very easily in any 
district, because at any time, and almost everywhere, there 
will be opportunities for procuring horses of this size, and 
in the field these corps can be remounted on horses of any 
sort. 

pnce these regiments are set on foot, men below the 
height of 5 ft., who are too small to serve in the dragoons, 
will be utilisable in the cavalry, as they are already in the 
infantry, owing to the formation of companies of voltigeurs; 
at the same time these Scouts will be comparatively 
cheap .... 

152 

and Small Horses 

It is the Emperor’s intention that the Scouts’ horses 
should be kept out in all weathers, and should graze on open 
ground, and be given no oats. It is an experiment worth 
trying, and one that offers no difficulties in France during 
8 or 9 months of the year; but for 3 or 4 months it will have 
to be modified in most parts of France, owing to the hard 
frosts, and snow-fall: and it will be indispensable, in my 
opinion, to have, on the pastures, sheds closed on 2 or 3 
sides, and to keep the horses there on dry fodder whilst 
the hard frost or snow lasts. 

The only place I know in France which is an exception to 
this is the lie de la Camargue: there the sheep and horses 
pass the whole winter in the open without shelter. 

The Emperor’s plan would be to have a fixed depot for 
each of these corps, where, in course of time, enough land 
could be bought to provide grazing. 

The He de la Camargue would be one of these 4 depots. 

Every 6 or 8 years the corps would exchange depots. 

Whilst en route , the horses would be put in stables or 
bams. 

His Imperial Majesty has been led to make these proposals 
by the considerations stated above, and also by what he saw 
in the armies of Italy and Egypt. The 22nd regiment of 
chasseurs joined the Italian army with zoo horses from 
la Camargue, purchased for 150 francs each; they only stood 
4 ft. 2 ins., and they were shod only on their fore feet. Owing 
to their training they came through all the hardships of the 
mountain campaign in Italy. They have since been tried in 
Egypt, and have shown more powers of resistance than 
omer horses. 

[Corresp., xii, 10473. The lie de la Camargue is part of the delta of 
the Rhone.] 

153 

Palm 

122 

ENEMY BOOKSELLERS 

TO MARSHAL BERTHIER 

Saint-Cloud, August 5, 1806. 

I imagine that you have arrested the Augsburg and 
Nuremberg booksellers. My intention is to bring them 
before a court-martial, and to have them shot wi thin 24 
hours. It is no ordinary crime to spread defamatory writings 
in places occupied by the French armies, and to incite the 
inhabitants against them. It is high treason. The sentence 
must declare that, since, wherever an army may be, it is 
the duty of its commander to see to its safety, such and 
such individuals, having been found guilty of trying to 
rouse the inhabitants of Suabia against the French army, 
are condemned to death. 

You will parade the guilty men in the centre of a division, 
and appoint seven colonels to be their judges. In the 
sentence, you must mention that the defamatory writings 
originally came from the booksellers Kupfer of Vienna and 
Enrich of Linz, and that they are condemned to death in 
their absence; the sentence to be carried out, if they are 
captured, wherever the French troops may happen to be. 
You are to have the sentence published all over Germany. 

[Corresp., xiii, 10597. Palm, Schoderer, and Meikle were con¬ 
demned to death by a French military court at Braunau on August 
a5,for publishing and disseminating a pamphlet deploring the French 
occupation of Germany; and Palm was shot.] 

123 

MUSTER-ROLLS 

TO THE KING OF NAPLES 

Rambouillet, August 20, 1806. 

... I advise you to take a pleasure in reading your 
muster-rolls. The splendid state of my armies is due to the 

154 

Sanhedrin 

fact that I spend an hour or two every day doing this; and 
when they send me the monthly return of my troops and 
fleets, which take up about 20 big files, I give up every other 
occupation to study them in detail, and to see what difference 
there is between one month and another. I get more enjoy¬ 
ment out of reading these returns than a young girl does 
out of reading a novel.... 

[Corresp., xiii, 10672.] 

124 

THE JEWS 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY 

Rambouillet, August 23, 1806. 

I send you some notes which will show you what 
direction I want to give to the Jewish Congress, and 
what the government representatives attached to the 
Congress have to do at the present juncture. 

Notes 

It is the first time, since Titus’ capture of Jerusalem, 
that so many enlightened men belonging to the religion of 
Moses have been able to foregather. Hitherto the Jews, 
persecuted and dispersed, have been expected to do nothing 
but receive punishment, abjure their faith,or make contracts 
or concessions equally unfavourable to their interests and 
to their beliefs. The present situation is unlike any of the 
epochs which have preceded it. The Jews are neither being 
asked to abandon their religion, nor to accept any modifica¬ 
tions contrary to the letter or spirit of Judaism. 

When they were being persecuted, or were in hiding to 
escape persecution, different kinds of doctrine and custom 
crept in. The Rabbis, indeed, claimed the right to expound 
the principles of the faith, whenever explanation was 
required. But the right of legislation, in matters of religion, 

155 

Mixed Marriage 

cannot belong to any individual; it can only be exercised 
by a General Assembly of Jews, legally and freely brought 
together, including in its body Spanish, Portuguese, 
Italian, German, ana French Jews, and thus representing the 
Jewries of more than three-quarters of Europe. 

It seems to me, therefore, that the first thin g to do is to 
constitute the Congress at present assembled in Paris into a 
Great Sanhedrin, whose decisions will rank alongside the 
Talmud as articles of faith and principles of religious 
legislation. 

This first point thus setded, all Jews, of whatever 
nationality, will be invited to send deputies to Paris, and to 
contribute their ideas to the work of the Great Sanhedrin. 
A notification, in the form of a sort of proclamation, will 
therefore be issued to every synagogue in Europe—officially, 
in the case of French synagogues. Certain questions will 
then be proposed to this gathering, and the answers given 
will be made into theological rulings or instructions, so 
that they may have the force of ecclesiastical and religious 
law, and form a second Jewish dispensation, preserving the 
essential character of that of Moses, but adapting itself to the 
present condition of the Jews, and to the customs and 
usages of the day. 

ine following questions have been propounded:— 

istQuestion. Is it lawful for Jews to marry more than one 
wife?—The answer must be a plain negative, and the present 
Congress or Great Sanhedrin must prohibit polygamy in 
Europe. 

2nd Question. Is divorce permitted by the Jewish religion? 
And is divorce invalid unless it has been pronounced by 
courts, or in virtue of laws, which take a radically different 
view from that of the French people?—The Congress 
constituted as the Great Sanhedrin must prohibit divorce, 
except in the cases provided by the Code Napoleon, and it 
cannot take place unless it has been previously granted by 
the civil authority. 

3 rdQuestion. Can a Jewess marry a Christian, or a 
Christian woman a Jew? Or does the law only allow Jews 

156 

New Jerusalem 

to marry among themselves? The Great Sanhedrin must 
declare that a religious marriage has to be preceded by a 
civil marriage, and that Jews and Jewesses can marry 
Frenchmen or Frenchwomen. The Great Sanhedrin must go 
further, and recommend such unions as a means of protec¬ 
tion for Jews, and as a proper thing for them to do. 

4th Question. Do Jews regard Frenchmen as brethren, or 
as strangers?—The Sanhedrin, after recognising, as the 
Assembly has done, that Frenchmen and Jews are brothers, 
will lay down this principle: that the Jews recognise as 
brethren the inhabitants of all countries which grant them 
not merely toleration, but also protection, and in which they 
are admitted to the enjoyment of all the privileges attached 
to political and civil status. It will recognise, in this connec¬ 
tion, the difference which exists between French and Italian 
law and that of other countries. 

tfh Question. In any case, what duties does their law 
prescribe to Jews towards Frenchmen who are not of the 
Jewish religion?—The answer to this question follows from 
what was said above. 

6th Question. Do Jews who were bom in France, and who 
have the legal status of French citizens, regard France as 
their fatherland? Is it their duty to defend it, to obey its laws, 
and to accommodate themselves to all the provisions of the 
Civil Code?—The Sanhedrin must declare mat it is the duty 
of Jews to defend France as they would defend Jerusalem, 
since they are treated in France as they would be treated in 
the Holy City; that substitution can only be allowed for 
half the number of conscripts each year, and that the rest 
must serve in person. 

~jth Question. Who nominates the Rabbis?—The Sanhedrin 
must decide by whom the Rabbis are to be nominated, and 
how they are to be organised and paid; and it must establish 
in Paris a Council of Rabbis, whose members will be 
regarded as the Superiors and Supervisors of the Jews. This 
committee will reside in Paris, and will be called the 
Rabbis’ Committee, or something of that kind. 

8 th Question. What police jurisdiction do the Rabbis 

157 

Usury 

exercise over the Jews? What kind of police magistracy do 
they recognise among themselves? 

9 th Question. Are the forms of election and jurisdiction of 
the police magistrates laid down by Jewish law, or merely 
consecrated by custom?—The Sanhedrin must draw up the 
regulations required to determine the method of election, 
the functions, the jurisdiction, etc., of the Rabbis. 

10th Question. Are there any professions prohibited by 
Jewish law? 

nth Question. Does the law forbid Jews to practise usury 
in dealing with their brethren? 

12 th Question. Does it forbid or does it allow them to 
practice usury in dealing with strangers?—The Sanhedrin 
must prohibit usury in dealing with Frenchmen, or with the 
inhabitants of any countries where Jews are allowed to 
enjoy civil rights. It will expound the Mosaic Law on these 
lines, laying it down that Jews ought to behave, in all 
places where they are citizens, as though they were in 
Jerusalem itself; that they are strangers only where they 
are persecuted or ill-treated by the law of the land; and 
that it is only in such places that illicit gain can be tolerated 
by religious legislation. When this point has been regulated 
by the Sanhedrin on these lines, we must look further into 
the matter for some means of limiting and repressing this 
habit of speculation, which is nothing but a system of fraud 
and usury. 

All this is meant simply to serve as instructions for the 
Commissioners. They will realise what is wanted, and will 
begin by looking for means to secure it, by having private 
talks with the most influential members of the Assembly. 
When they are clear in their own minds, they will go to the 
Assembly; they will say that I am pleased with the zeal 
that animates its proceedings; they will emphasise the 
uniqueness of the occasion, and explain that I am anxious 
to do all I can to prevent the rights restored to the Jewish 
people proving illusory—in a word, that I want them to 
find in France a New Jerusalem. They are then to ask for the 
formation of a committee of nine members chosen from 

158 

Prussia, 1806 

amongst the most enlightened members of the Assembly> 
with whom they can co-operate, with the hope of reaching 
important results. This Committee will report to the 
Assembly. It will begin by suggesting the formation of the 
Great Sanhedrin. 

[Corresp., xiii, 10686. The National Assembly of 1789 had given the 
Jews civic rights, but had not dealt with the consequential problems. 
The Great Sanhedrin met on February 9, 1807, but two months later 
Napoleon dissolved it, and settled the whole question by an Imperial 
edict of March 17, 1808.] 

125 

PRUSSIA—PEACE OR WAR? 

TO M. DE TALLEYRAND, PRINCE OF BENEVENTO, MINISTER FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Note on the present situation 

Saint-Cloud, September 12, 1806. 

It is not in my interest to trouble the peace of the conti¬ 
nent. Austria is not in a position to attempt anything. Russia 
and Prussia are kept apart by every kind of rivalry and 
dislike. Austria’s wounds are still unhealed. It may be 
assumed that no considerable force of Russians can appear 
in Europe just yet. They might go to some lengths to attack 
the Porte: they might keep reserves in Poland: but I don’t 
think they will again run the risk of sending 100,000 men 
into Germany. 

The idea that Prussia could take me on single-handed is 
too absurd to merit discussion. It is impossible for me to 
have a genuine alliance with any of the great European 
powers: Prussia is only my ally through fear. Her cabinet is 
so contemptible, her king so weak, and her court so domi¬ 
nated by young officers in search of adventure, that no one 
can depend upon her. She will go on acting as she has 
acted—arming to-day, disarming to-morrow; standing by, 

*59 

Disarm o r Fr ght 

■sword in hand, while the battle is fought, and then making 
terms with the conqueror. 

The fact that Prussia should be arming at this moment 
astonishes all Europe: yet the motive is the same as it has 
been at any time during the last twelve years. That being so, 
we must give her plenty of time to regain confidence, and 
to disarm again peacefully. All the same, it might so happen 
that, after arming from the fear of me, and regaining confid¬ 
ence through my kindness, Prussia might become alarmed 
•on her own account, and make alliances with the other 
European powers—flimsy alliances, no doubt, but I shall 
have to keep my eyes open. 

Two courses are open—first, to reassure Prussia, and to 
look for the easiest means to restore her previous peaceful¬ 
ness; or secondly, to do everything I can to reinforce my 
"German armies with men and arms. But these two courses 
are incompatible. If Prussia is already afraid of my army, she 
will be still more so when it is reinforced. She must therefore 
disarm in a mood of reassurance, but of reassurance touched 
with fear. That is the language she understands. That is 
the only form of appeal that really moves her. 

M. de Lucchesini’s arrival at Berlin will be an important 
move in the game. M, de Talleyrand must call his attention 
to my review of the Guard yesterday, and at Meudon 
(whence the cavalry has already marched) the day before. 
He must if possible give such a turn to the conversation as 
to induce M. de Lucchesini to ask fora letter giving positive 
assurance of the pacific intentions of the French govern¬ 
ment; and he must promise to hold back the Guard’s 
marching orders until Lucchesini’s arrival at Berlin—I 
•could not in any case give such orders without informing 
the Senate and the general public. If M. de Talleyrand 
prefers, the letter might be written, for the new minister, 
before M. de Lucchesini starts, and it might promise that 
the Emperor will take no extraordinary steps until the 
return of the messenger with the reply to Sunday’s 
interview. 

My object, in this demarche , is to change my tone. Instead 

160 

Austrian Entente 

of saying ‘Disarm or fight/ which Prussia might still find 
rather alarming, I shall say ‘Disarm, if you don’t want me to 
reinforce.’ This way of putting it is a little more reassuring: 
there is even a touch of friendliness in it. It suggests no 
hostile intention against Prussia. It makes the French moves 
dependent on the Prussian. This procedure is half encourage¬ 
ment and half threat. The first part puts fear to sleep: the 
second wakes it up ever so little. Such half-and-half mea¬ 
sures are just the medicine Prussia needs. 

[Lecestre, i, 124. Influenced by the Queen and the war party, by 
the diplomatic humiliations of 1805-6, and by the rumour that Napo¬ 
leon was contemplating a separate peace with England, Frederick 
William of Prussia mobilised his troops on August 9, 1806. Napoleon 
expressed his pacific intentions to the King (as well as to Talleyrand), 
on September 1 2 ; but on the 18th he determined to fight, and on Octo¬ 
ber 14 he defeated the Prussians at Jena and Auerstadt. Jerome, 
Marquis de Lucchesini, was the Prussian ambassador.] 

126 

AUSTRIAN ALLIANCE 

TO M. DE LA ROCHEFOUCAULD, AMBASSADOR AT THE COURT 
OF H.M. THE EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA 

Wurzburg, October 3, 1806. 

I have been at Wtirzburg since yesterday, and have had 
an opportunity for a long talk with His Royal Highness. I 
have informed him of my firm resolve, whatever the 
outcome of the present situation, to break off all ties of 
alliance that bind me to Prussia. The latest news from 
Berlin is that there may be no war after all; but I am resolved 
not to be the ally of such a changeable and despicable 
power. Doubtless I shall remain at peace with her, because 
I have no right to shed my subjects’ blood for reasons of 
no importance. But this is the point. I must have an ally 
on the continent, so as to be able to concentrate attention on 

m 161 

Eastern Question 

my fleet. Circumstances had made me the ally of Prussia; 
but that power is just the same to-day as it was in 1740, and 
has always been—without any consistency or sense of 
honour. The Emperor of Austria has commanded my 
respect, even in the midst of his reverses, and of the events 
that came between us: I believe he is a man who knows his 
mind and keeps his word. You should express yourself, 
but without misplaced emphasis, in those terms. I am too 
strong and too well situated to be afraid of anyone: all the 
same, the enormous efforts I have made are a burden upon 
my subjects. I must have one of the three powers—Russia, 
Prussia, or Austria—for an ally. Prussia, in any case, cannot 
be trusted: there remain Russia and Austria. France had a 
fine fleet once, owing to the advantages of an Austrian 
alliance. Austria, too, needs rest—a feeling which I share 
whole-heartedly. 

The kind of alliance I should like would be one founded 
upon the independence of the Ottoman Empire, a guarantee 
to respect the integrity of our states, and understandings 
which would give me a chance to concentrate on my fleet. 
The House of Austria has often hinted at such an alliance. 
Now is the ideal moment, if she knows how to take ad¬ 
vantage of it. I need add no more: I have expressed myself 
in greater detail to the Prince of Benevento, who will not 
fail to give you instructions. All I will say is that your 
mission will be accomplished when you have conveyed, 
as delicately as possible, the idea that I am not averse to a 
rapprochement with Austria. 

Don’t fail to keep an eye on Moldavia and Wallachia, so 
that you can warn me of any Russian movements against 
the Ottoman Empire. 

[Corresp.j xiii, 1093 2. The references to the fleet show that Napoleon 
has not given up his idea of an invasion of England. For the position 
in Turkey, v. No. 120.] 

Meddlesome Women 
127 

EVE OF JENA 

TO THE EMPRESS 

Gera, October 13, 1806, 1 a.m. 

I am at Gera to-day, darling. Things are going well, and 
everything is as I could wish it. I fancy that in a few days, 
God helping me, the poor King of Prussia will be in a 
terrible situation. I am sorry for him personally: he is a good 
fellow. The Queen is at Erfurt with him. If she wants a 
batde, that cruel pleasure will not be denied her. 

I am wonderfully well. I am already fatter than when I 
started, in spite of travelling 20 or 25 leagues every day, 
on horseback, in my carriage—in all kinds of ways. I go to 
bed at 8, and am up again at midnight: sometimes I remember 
that you are not in bed yet. 

AH my love. 

[Cerf, 80.] 

128 

WOMEN 

TO THE EMPRESS 

Berlin, November 6, 1806, 9 p.m. 

Thank you for your letter. You seem to be upset by the 
unkind things I say about women. It is true, there is nothing 
I dislike so much as a meddlesome woman. I am used to 
good-natured, gentle, and agreeable women, and I like them 
so. If they have ever spoilt me, it is your fault, not mine. 
Besides, I will give you an instance to show how nice I can 
be to a woman who behaves in a really dutiful and sympa¬ 
thetic way. Take Mme de Hatzfeld. When I showed her her 
husband’s letter, she said to me, with the simplicity of deep 
feeling, and in a voice broken with tears, ‘Yes, it is indeed 
his writing/ The tones in which she read it touched my 

163 

Poetry to Order 

heart. She made me feel so unhappy that I said, ‘Madam, 
you can throw that letter into the fire: I shall never be strong 
enough to punish your husband.’ She burnt die letter, and I 
thinlr she was happy. From that moment her husband was a 
free man. Two hours’ delay, and it would have been all up 
with him. That shows you that I like women who are sweet, 
simple, and dutiful. It is because they resemble you. Good¬ 
bye, my dear. I am quite well. 

[Corresp., xiii, 11191. The ‘meddlesome -woman’ is the Queen of 
Prussia, with whom Napoleon was the more angry since the discovery 
of compromising papers at Qiarlottenburg. Prince Hatzfeld, the 
Governor of Berlin, was brought before a military court on account 
of a letter he had written to an officer staying with the Queen.] 

129 

POETRY TO ORDER 

TO M. CAMBACERES 

Berlin, November 21,1806. 

... Whilst the army does all it can for the glory of the 
nation, it must be admitted that our writers are doing their 
best to dishonour it. I was reading yesterday some shocking 
bad verses sung at the opera. Really, it’s a perfect farce. 
How do you come to allow these extemporised songs at the 
opera? They’re too bad for anything but vaudeville. 
Express my displeasure to M. de Lugay. He and the Minister 
for Home Affairs might very well set about getting some 
decent stuff written; but in that case they mustn’t expect it 
to be ready for production less than three months after it 
has been commissioned. People complain that we have no 
literature: it is the fault of the Home Minister. It’s ridiculous 
to order an eclogue from a poet as one orders a muslin 
frock from the dressmaker’s.... 

[Corresp., xiii, 11287.] 

164 

Poland Arming 
130 

POLAND 

TO M. CAMBACERES 

Posen, December 1, 1806. 

I have received your letter of the 21st. You -will see, 
from to-day’s bulletin, that my troops have entered Warsaw. 
All Poland is up in arms. It is difficult to convey a proper 
idea of the national movement in this country. The Poles 
are raising regiments as fast as they can. The richest are the 
keenest. Priests, nobles, peasants—they are all of one mind. 
Poland will soon have 60,000 men under arms. The great 
nobles of the country are all men with incomes of 100- 
500,000 francs, and it is they who are meeting the cost of 
their army. Amidst all the marching and moving of this 
great host, and the excesses which accompany it, we are 
having a regular round of balls. I am going to one to¬ 
morrow given in my honour by the local gentry. I have 
held a court for the women: they have all come in from their 
country estates, and it is the first time they have appeared 
here since the partition of Poland. Everyone at all well off 
speaks French, and the peasantry love France. 

[Corresp., xiv, 11333. Napoleon refused to proclaim the indepen¬ 
dence of Poland unless they put 30,000 men in the field. By 1808 there 
were about 5,000 serving in Germany and 8,000 in Spain. 

131 

" ONLY ONE WOMAN ” 

TO THE EMPRESS 

Posen, December 2, 1806. 

To-day is the anniversary of Austerlitz. I have been to a 
town ball. It is raining. I am quite well. I love you and 
want you. My troops are at Warsaw. There his been no cold 

165 

Polish Women 

weather yet. All the Polish women here are quite French. 
There is only one woman in the world for me. Did you ever 
know her? I could describe her for you to the life: but 
unless I flattered her youwouldnot recognise yourself. And 
yet, to speak the truth, I could find nothing for you in my 
heart but pretty speeches. 

How long the nights are here, all alone! 

All my love. 

[Corresp., xiv, 11365. A month later he met Marie Walewska; v. 
No. 134.] 

132 

PROPAGANDA 

TO M. CAMBACER^S 

Posen, December 11, 1806. 

. . . Have all the bulletins of the Grand Army during 
this campaign and the last translated into Turkish and 
Arabic, and send large quantities of them to Constantinople. 
Get 6,000 copies printed. Have a short 10-page pamphlet 
produced, in good style; revise it yourself, ana call it ‘An 
old Ottoman to his brethren/ It is to be a manifesto against 
the Russians, depicting their policy and their aims. Have 
10,000 copies of this printed in the same languages. It must 
be ready within a week. Send 1,000 copies to the Viceroy, 
who will distribute them in Dalmatia; 1,000 to Marseille, 
to be given to ships sailing for the Levant; 1,000 to my mini¬ 
ster at Constantinople; 1,000 to my minister at Vienna; 
and send another 1,000 to me. When the work is written, 
see that the Turkish ambassador gets a view of it, in¬ 
directly, so as to know what he says of it, and whether it is 
well written. 

[Corresp,, xiv, 1143 4.] 

166 

Off with the Old Love 
i33 

JOSEPHINE 

TO THE EMPRESS 

Warsaw, January 25, 1807. 

I have received your letter of January 15 .1 can’t possibly 
allow a woman to undertake the journey here. The roads are 
too bad—unsafe, and deep in mud. Go back to Paris; be 
happy and cheerful; and perhaps I will come soon. Your 
remark, that you married a husband in order to live with 
him, makes me smile. I thought, in my ignorance, that the 
wife was made for the husband, and the husband for the 
country, the family, and glory. Forgive my ignorance. 
There is always something one can learn from the fine 
ladies of to-day. 

Good-bye, my dear. Remember how much it costs me 
not to let you come. Say to yourself, it shows how much he 
cares for me. 

[Cerf, 99. His real reason for not wanting her at Warsaw is seen in 
the next group of letters.] 

134 

MARIE 

TO MADAME WALEWSKA 

Warsaw, January, 1807. 
1 

I saw no one but you, I admired no one but you, I want 
no one but you. Answer me at once, and assuage the 
impatient passion of 

N. 

11 

Didn’t you like me, Madame? I had reason to hope you 
might. ... Or perhaps I was wrong. Whilst my ardour is 

167 

On with the New 

increasing, yours is slackening its pace. You are ruining my 
reposel Ah! grant a few moments’ pleasure and happiness 
to a poor heart that is only waiting to adore you. Is it so 
difficult to let me have an answer? You owe me two. 

N. 

hi 

There are times—I am passing through one now—when 
hope is as heavy as despair. What can satisfy the needs of a 
smitten heart, which longs to throw itself at your feet, but 
is held back by the weight of serious considerations, 
paralysing its keenest desires? Oh, if only you would!... No 
one but you can remove the obstacles that keep us apart. 
My friend Duroc will make it quite easy for you. 

Ah! come! come! You shall have all you ask. Your 
country will be dearer to me, once you have had pity on my 
poor heart. 

N. 

IV 

Marie, my sweet Marie, my first thought is of you, my 
first desire is to see you again. You will come again, won’t 
you? You promised you would. If you don’t, the eagle will 
fly to you! I shall see you at dinner—our friend tells me so. 
I want you to accept this bouquet: I want it to be a secret 
link, setting up a private understanding between us in the 
midst of the surrounding crowd. We shall be able to 
share our thoughts, though all the world is looking on. 
When my hand presses my heart, you will know that I am 
thinking of no one but you; ana when you press your 
bouquet, I shall have your answer back! Love me, my 
pretty one, and hold your bouquet tight! 

N. 

[Masson, *Napoleon et les femmes,* 199. Marie Walewska was the 
young wife of an old Polish noble, whom Napoleon met at a ball at 
Warsaw, and who soon became his mistress. She was with him again 
at Finkenstein the same year, at Paris in 1808 and 1810, at Vienna in 
1809: and she visited him at Elba. Their son, Count Florian Walewski, 
was bom on May n, 1810. Of these notes, 1-3 were written after the 
ball, and 4 after their first time together.] 

168 

Sabbatarianism 

135 

CONTINENTAL SUNDAY 

TO M. PORTALIS 

Osterode, March 5, 1807. 

It is contrary to divine law to prevent men, who have 
Sunday needs as well as week-day needs, working on Sun¬ 
days to earn their daily bread. The government could not en¬ 
force any such law, unless it gave free meals to those who 
would otherwise go without. Besides, the besetting sin of 
the French people is not overwork. There is nothing for the 
police or the government to do in the matter. The Holy 
Fathers themselves only prescribe Sunday rest to people in 
easy circumstances, or to those who can arrange their work 
during the week so that they need do none on Sunday. 
The proof of this is that it used to be understood in all 
Christian countries that one could work on Sunday with 
the leave of the bishop and the parson. Would it be the right 
of the bishop, or of the magistrates, to give this permission 
nowadays? In our own days we have seen troops employed 
going about the towns and countryside to make people keep 
the Tenth Day, and work on Sunday. If we aren’t careful we 
shall find ourselves driven, one of these days, to using the 
gendarmes to stop a man working on Sunday, when he must 
either work or starve. Both are examples of superstition on 
the part of the authorities—the one political, the other re¬ 
ligious. God has made it men’s duty to work, because he 
does not allow them any of the fruits of the ground unless 
they work for them. He intends them to work every day > 
because he has given them needs which revive daily. One 
must distinguish, in what the priests prescribe, between real 
laws of religion and duties which have only been invented in 
order to extend the authority of the clergy. 

It is a law of religion that Catholics should go to mass 
every Sunday; but the clergy, to extend their authority, 
ruled that no Christian may work on Sundays without 

169 

Sunday Rest 

their leave. This leave they granted or withheld at will, to 
prove their power; and one knows that in many parts it 
could be obtained by paying for it. Once more, such 
practices were superstitious, and more calculated to injure 
religion than to serve its true interests. 

Wasn’t it Bossuet who said, ‘Eat beef, and be a Chris¬ 
tian?’ The observance of the Friday fast and the Sunday rest 
is a rule of secondary and insignificant importance. The 
essential laws of the Church are, ‘Tnou shalt not hurt Society,’ 
‘Thou shalt do no ill to thy neighbour,’ and‘Thou shalt not 
misuse thy liberty.’ It is no good arguing with priests who 
insist on such rules: one can only laugh at them. I am not 
going to compel them, against their will, to grant absolu¬ 
tion: but neither am I going to let them force me to imprison 
a peasant who works for his own living, and his family’s, 
whatever day of the week it may be. 

They appeal to authority: it must then be competent to 
settle the question. I am authority; and I give my people 
permission, once and for all, not to interrupt their work. 
The more they work, the less vicious they will be. The more 
fully they provide for their necessities, the better they will 
satisfy their bodily needs, and the demands of nature. If I 
were to meddle in these matters, I should be more inclined 
to order that after church-time on Sundays the shops should 
be open, and the workmen shouldreturn to their jobs. When 
one looks at the various classes that make up society, one 
sees to what an extent the Sunday rest does more harm than 
good. One sees in how many arts and professions this 
interruption of work has disturbing effects. Society is notan 
Order of Contemplatives. Certain legislators have tried to 
turn us all into monks, and to put us under rules fit only for 
the cloister. People must eat every day. They should be 
allowed to work every day. 

M, Portalis must not forget that, once this concession is 
granted, others will be asked for. Once the government has 
been induced to intervene in matters which ate out of its 
sphere, they will try to get us back to the disastrous era of 
the ‘confession cards,’ and to those wretched times when the 

T 7° 

Dutch Titles 

cure thought he had the right to abuse every citizen who 
didn’t go to mass. 

The power of the clergy lies in preaching and confession. 
People should never be forced to church by imprisonment 
and the police. 

[Corresp., xiv, 11936. It is printed in parallel columns with Portalis’s 
letter, and headed Decision. Under the Revolutionary Calendar of 1793 
the ‘Tenth Day’ (decadi) took the place of Sunday. ‘Confession cards’ 
were the certificates of orthodoxy issued to Catholics by the Arch¬ 
bishop of Paris during the Jansenist controversies of 1747-57.] 

156 

PLAIN WORDS TO LOUIS 

TO LOUIS NAPOLEON, KING OF HOLLAND 

Osterode, March 30, 1807. 

The news I hear is so extraordinary that I cannot believe 
it is true. They tell me that you have restored to the nobles 
in your states their titles and privileges. Is it possible that 
you are so short-sighted as not to see how fatal such a step 
would be to you, to your people, to France, and to myself? 
How could you, a French prince, have violated your simplest 
vow—to maintain equality among your subjects? [I refuse 
to believe it can be true.] 

You are as good as renouncing the French throne: for a 
man who has broken his oath, a man who has robbed a 
nation of the fruit of fifteen years’ fighting, toil, and 
endeavour, would be unworthy of such a position. I have, 
too, my own just grounds of complaint. For a long time 
past you have consistently acted against my advice. This 
cannot go on. My ambassador has instructions to inform 
you in so many words that, unless you revoke this measure, 
he is under orders to leave Holland, and I have done with 
you. You are an ungrateful brother, and the advisers under 
whose influence you have fallen are a pack of c rimin als. 
Further, I tell you this plainly, since you care nothing for 

171 

French Papers 

good advice, that I will not have Frenchmen wearing your 
Order: so you can save yourself the trouble of conferring it 
on anyone. I have asked my ambassador for a copy of the act 
re-establishing nobility: if this measure is not rescinded, I 
shall look upon you as an inveterate foe. But perhaps I am 
making mountains out of mole-hills. The simple truth is,you 
have lost your head. Unless you retract this measure, look 
out for the consequences. You shall no longer be a French 
citizen, nor a prince of my blood. Haven’t you sense 
enough to see that if your claim to the Dutch throne were 
to rest on noble birth, you would be at the bottom of the 
list? Is this all I am to expect of you? At the present rate, 
the next claim to a tide will be to have fought against 
France, and to have sold ships to the English. Every local 
grandee will take up old claims to a title. Could nobody 
make you realise that you were alienating the people of 
Amsterdam—indeed, every Dutchman? An Order of nobil¬ 
ity is bearable in a military country: in a commercial one it is 
intolerable. I think better of the humblest shop-keeper in 
Amsterdam than of the highest noble in Holland. 

[Lecestre, i, 144. In revising theletterNapoleoninserted the sentence 
in square brackets, and struck out all that follows.] 

137 

THE PAPERS AGAIN 

TO M. FOUCHE 

Finkenstein, April 4,1807. 

Most of the papers are badly conducted. It may be diffi¬ 
cult to remedy this. All the same, I should like you to see 
that they never talk about the interests of the new dynasty, 
which they treat rather as though they were a party affair. 
That dingy publication, the French Courrier , can insult the 
Empire Journal as much as it likes; but they mustn’t bring me 
into the business. Both these papers follow the same plan. 
The Journal blames philosophy for all the evils of the 

172 

Gutter-press Debates 

Revolution, as though there hadn’t been civil war, oppres¬ 
sion, and persecution in every age. All this is silly enough; 
but it is quite as absurd for the Courrier to pose as my 
champion, and the defender of my cause, in the interests of 
Champfort, Diderot, and the Encyclopaedists. Is it too 
much to ask that, if they are allowed to attack each other 
with as many bad arguments as they like, they should 
at least keep off current questions? Everybody reads the 
Journal , and if it does do the government harm, we don’t 
need the Courrier to tell us all about it beforehand. I have no 
wish to start the charge of lese-majeste again: I attach no 
importance to these gutter-press debates. But I won’t let 
any paper speak of the Bourbons, or of the present dynasty, 
as the (Courrier does. Can’t it defend its case without bringing 
in the government? A man can be as atheistical as Lalande, 
as religious as Portalis, or as famous a philosopher as 
Regnaud, without being any less a supporter of the govern¬ 
ment, and a good Frenchman. Then why in the world should 
we allow the papers to go and tell these men that they are 
bad citizens? That is the kind of thing that Brothers and 
Friends does; indeed, if it said what it really thinks, you 
would find its own little set proclaimed as my only friends. 
The clergy, I suppose, and the 20 million devout Catholics, 
all belong to the ancien regime! 

The first time this paper mentions the Bourbons, or 
my interests, suppress it. As for the Journal des Debats , there 
can be no doubt that it pushes partisanship to the verge of 
persecution. The time will come when I shall take steps 
to put this paper, which is the only one that people read in 
France, into more reasonable and less impulsive hands. 
Party spirit is dead, and I can only regard it as a calamity 
that less than a dozen scoundrels, without an ounce of talent 
or genius among them, should be constantly raking up 
accusations against the most respectable men in the country. 
But my interest in the matter is purely literary. Keep the 
papers within limits: forbid them to mention either the 
Bourbons or the Napoleons. 

[Corresp., xv, 12285.] 

173 

More Like a Monk 
138 

LOUIS AGAIN 

TO THE KING OF HOLLAND 

Finkenstein, April 4,1807. 

I have received your letter of March 24. You say that 
you have 20,000 men with the Grand Army. You don’t 
really believe it? Why, there are not 10,000 of them; and 
what men! It is soldiers you must produce, not counts, 
marshals, and knights. If you go on like this, tie Dutch will 
laugh at me. 

Your government is more like that of a monk than of a 
king. Royal benevolence should be redolent of the palace, 
not of the cloister. Nothing could be worse than all these 
journeys to the Hague, unless it is this Inquiry you are 
having made all over your kingdom. A king gives orders, 
he does not ask anyone to do anything. He is supposed to 
be the fountain of power, and to have such resources that 
he need never draw on another’s purse. But all these fine 
distinctions are beyond your comprehension. 

I recall certain ideas about the re-establishment of the 
nobility, as to which I am still not at all clear. Am I to 
suppose that you have lost your head over this point, and 
forgotten your obligations to me ? Your letters are always 
talking of obedience and of respect; but it is deeds I want, 
not words. Respect and obedience consist in not going so fast 
in such important matters without my advice: for European 
opinion cannot imagine you so undutiful as to take action 
without first asking what I advise. I shall be obliged to 
disown you. I asked for the document about the re-establish¬ 
ment of the nobility. You must expect some public expres¬ 
sion of my serious displeasure. 

Don’t make any naval expedition: it is too late in the year. 
Recruit National Guards to defend your country. Pay off 
my troops. Levy plenty of national conscripts. A prince 
who gets a reputation for good nature in the first year of his 
reign, is laughed at in the second. The love that kings inspire 

174 

Than a King 

should be virile—partly an apprehensive respect, and partly 
a thirst for reputation. When a king is said to be a good 
fellow, his reign is a failure. How can a good fellow—or 
a good father, if you prefer it so—bear the burdens of 
royalty, keep malcontents in order, and either silence 
political passions, or enlist them under his own banner? 
The first thing you ought to have done—and I advised you 
to do it—was to introduce conscription. What can you 
possibly do without an army—for you can't give that name 
to a mob of deserters? How could you ever fail to see that, 
in the present state of your army, the creation of marshals 
was as unsuitable as it was absurd? The king of Naples 
hasn't got any. Do you suppose, to take an analogous case, 
that if 40 French vessels were added to 5 or 6 Dutch barques. 
Admiral Ver Huell, in his capacity as marshal, could take 
command of them? None of the smaller powers, such as 
Sweden or Bavaria, have marshals. It is much too important 
a title to give to men who never deserved it. 

You are going too fast, and refusing to take advice. I 
have offered you mine: you reply with fine compliments, 
and go on making a fool of yourself. 

Your quarrels with the Queen are becoming public 
property. If only you would keep for family life the 
fatherly and effeminate disposition you exhibit in the sphere 
of government, and apply to public affairs the severity that 
you display at home! You drill your young wife like a 
regiment of soldiers. Distrust your suite: they are all nobles, 
and the views of that class are always the exact opposite 
of public opinion. Be careful: you are already losing your 
popularity at Rotterdam and Amsterdam. The Catholics 
are beginning to fight shy of you. Why don't you give 
some of them employment? Isn't it your duty to protect 
your religion? All this shows a lack of character and deter¬ 
mination. You show too much favour to one part of 
the nation, and cold-shoulder the rest. What have your 
‘knights* done to deserve their decorations? Where are the 
wounds they received in the country's service, or the 
talents that marked them out for distinction—I don't say 

*75 

Hortense Unhappy 

all of them, but even three out of four? Many of them 
deserve well only of the English party, and are the cause of 
their country’s misfortunes. I don’t say you should penalise 
them; you want to be friends with everybody. There are 
emigres at my court too: but I don’t let them be cock of the 
walk. They may think they are going to score a point, but 
they are even further from doing so than when they were 
in exile; for I govern by system, and not by concessions. 

You have the best and worthiest wife in the world, and 
yet you are making her unhappy. Let her dance as much as 
she likes: she is just the age for it. I have a wife in the 
forties, and I write to her from the battlefield, telling her 
to go to balls. Do you expect a wife of twenty, who sees 
her life slipping away, and dreams of all she is missing, to 
live in a nunnery or in a nursery, with nothing to do but 
bath her baby? You spend too much time at home, and too 
little in your office. I wouldn’t say all this, only I am con¬ 
cerned about you. Make Hortense happy—she is the mother 
of your children. The only way is to treat her with all 
possible trust and respect. It’s a pity she is so virtuous: if 
you were married to a flirt, she would lead you by the nose. 
But she is proud to be your wife, and is pained and repelled 
by the mere idea that you may be thinking poorly of her. 
You ought to have had a wife like one I know in Paris. She 
would have brought you to heel, and tied you to her apron- 
strings. I’ve done my best. I have often talked to your 
wife about it. 

Very well, then; you can play the fool in your own 
kingdom—that’s as may be: but I can’t have you doing it 
in mine. You are offering your decorations to Tom, Dick, 
and Harry: yet I hear from numbers of people who haven’t 
a title between them. I am sorry that you should not 
realise what disrespect this shows for my interests. I am 
determined not to wear these decorations myself, and I 
won’t allow them to be worn at my court. If you ask me 
why, I answer that you have never done anything to justify 
people wearing your portrait. Again, you introduced the 
Ore ler without my permission, and you are bestowing it too 

176 

Preamble 

freely. Besides, what have they done—those people round 
you, to whom you are giving it? What have they done? 

[Corresp., xv, 12294. Louis Bonaparte had married Hortense 
Beauharnais, Josephine’s daughter, in 1802. Their eldest son, Napo- 
ieon-Charles, died in 1807. Their youngest became Napoleon III.] 

139 

DISSOLUTION OF MONASTERIES 

TO JOSEPH 

Finkenstein, April 14, 1807. 

... As you wish me to speak of what has been done at 
Naples, I must say that I was not particularly pleased with 
the preamble to the suppression of the monasteries. Docu¬ 
ments dealing with religious matters should be expressed in 
language of a religious and not of a philosophical tone. 
There lies the art of statesmanship, and it is one that an 
author or a man of letters doesn’t possess. Why speak of 
the services that the monks have rendered to science, or to 
art? It was not that which made them deserving, but the 
way they administered the consolations of religion. The 
whole preamble is philosophic, and I don’t think that is 
the issue. It is adding insult to the injury of expulsion. 
This preamble would have been all right, if it had only 
been written from a monastic point of view. It is easier to 
put up with unpleasantness from a man of one’s own way of 
thinking than from one who takes an entirely different 
point of view. What should have been said was that the 
great numbers of the monks made it difficult for them to 
subsist; that, for the credit of the state, they must have 
enough to live on, and hence the need of reform; that some 
of them must be kept for the necessary work of administr- 
ing the sacraments, and some of them be reformed, etc. 
I recommend this to you as a matter of general principle. 
I think poorly of a government whose edicts are always 
literary compositions. The thing is to give each edict the 
n i 77 

School Teaching 

style and character of the special subject to which it applies 
An educated monk who believed in the suppression of 
monasteries would not esqpress himself as you have done, 
Men put up with injury if it is not accompanied by insult 
and when die blow does not appear to have come from the 
enemies of their profession. Now it is precisely the philoso¬ 
phers and men of letters who are the enemies of the monas¬ 
tic life. Not that I am any fonder of them myself—as you 
know, I have destroyed them everywhere. . . . 

[Joseph, iii, 335.] 

140 

HIGHER EDUCATION 

REMARKS ON A SCHEME FOR ESTABLISHING A FACULTY OF 

LITERATURE AND HISTORY AT THE COLLEGE DE FRANCE 

Finkenstein, April 19,1807. 

. . . Education in the true sense of the word has a 
number of objects. One must learn to speak and write 
correctly—what is generally called grammar and belles- 
lettres. This need is met in every lycee, and every educated 
man has been through a course in rhetoric. 

After the need of correct speech and writing comes that 
of counting and measuring; and this the lycees have met by 
their mathematical classes, covering the various branches 
of arithmetic and mechanics. There follow the outlines 
of several other studies, such as chronology and geography; 
and some ideas of history are also included in the 
curriculum of the lycees. 

Thus the institution of three stages of education enables 
every well-to-do citizen to have been through his courses 
of rhetoric and mathematics, and to have acquired some 
ideas about history, geography, and chronology. A youth 
who leaves his lycee at 16 knows not only the rules of 
French, the classical writers, the construction of a speech, 

178 

For the Professions 

the forms of rhetoric, the methods of calming and exciting 
the feelings of an audience, and in fact all that is taught in a 
course of belles-lettres; he knows also the chief eras of 
history, and the geographical divisions of the world; he 
can measure and calculate; and he has a general idea of the 
most striking phenomena of nature, and of the principles 
of balance and movement in solid and fluid bodies. 

If he wishes to go to the Bar, to enter the Army or the 
Church, or to take up literature; if he intends to join one of 
the expert departments, and become a geographer, an 
engineer, or a surveyor—in all these events he has had the 
general education necessary as a ground-work for the 
advanced study that his profession requires; and it is at the 
moment of choosing a profession that an opportunity is 
given for specialization. 

Does he want to devote himself to the art of war, engi¬ 
neering, or artillery? If so, he enters the specialised school 
of mathematics, i.e., the Polytechnic. What he learns there 
is the corollary of what he learnt in his elementary studies 
of mathematics; but the knowledge so acquired has to be 
developed and applied, and he proceeds to the various 
branches of Higher Mathematics. It is no longer merely a 
matter of general education, as in the lycees t but of a science 
to be mastered. The Observatory is another specialised 
school of mathematics. 

The Natural History Museum, up to a certain point, 
may be counted in the same class, for there is a real analogy 
between the way in which different branches of knowledge 
are acquired and compared in botany and the other natural 
sciences, and it is in virtue of this that they have been 
classed among the exact and positive sciences. If it were 
possible to teach a smattering of botany, natural history, 
chemistry, and astronomy in the lycees, it could only be on 
the educational (as distinct from the scientific) level; for 
such elementary ideas would never make anyone a botanist, 
an astronomer, or a chemist. 

Are there enough specialised schools for the exact 
sciences nowadays? Has this department been treated on a 

179 

Science 

broad scale, like the rest of the educational programme? 
These are questions that the Home Secretary should be 
investigating, if it has not been done already. 

After the specialised schools of mathematics come those 
of law and medicine. These have been organised with 
special care, and need no extension. Law and medicine 
cannot avoid specialisation; for they are studied only by 
those who are going to practise the professions for which 
they are indispensable. 

Generally speaking it is not the business of the specialised 
schools to give the preliminary instruction, which, to be 
adequate, must include the elements of most branches of 
knowledge, and which, as given in the lycees^ fits young 
people, when they reach the age of discretion, to adopt one 
or other of the professions. On the contrary, it is their 
special business to teach some particular branch of know¬ 
ledge from A to Z, so as to make a well-educated young 
man useful to society in some particular profession. 

It follows that a school for advanced study is not an 
educational establishment, in the ordinary sense, but an 
establishment devoted to the instruction of men destined 
for some particular science or learned profession. 

Mathematics, physics, natural history, medicine, and 
jurisprudence are all sciences, because they involve facts, 
observation, and comparison; because the discoveries which 
they make one by one accumulate, and form a series, 
linking age with age, and extending every day the scientific 
domain; and because the facts and their relationship, the aft 
of classifying them, and the method of observing and 
comparing them, can be taught and understood. 

The Minister wishes to have schools for the advanced 
study of literature: yet if the above considerations are 
sound, it is difficult to attach any meaning to the term. 
It is intended to teach eloquence, to teach poetry. But what 
remains to be taught in these subjects, beyond what every 
young man has learnt in his rhetoric class at school? It only 
takes a month or two to understand the structure of poetry, 
or to learn how to analyse a speech. To write well in verse 

180 

Literature 

and prose constitutes eloquence; but there is nothing in this 
art which can be taught in a more advanced way than in the 
Ijcees. There one is taught to write correctly, and to know 
and appreciate the best models; one is introduced to the 
canonical literature of good taste, and set to study the 
rules of composition, whether for tragedies or comedies, 
songs or epics: but one is never taught actually to compose 
any of these things. The creative talent in literature, as in 
music and painting, is an individual gift: it belongs to those 
personal faculties whose development is perhaps fostered 
by special circumstances, or by the customs of a particular 
age. In these creations of mind and genius, the mind or 
genius arrives at its finest achievements suddenly, and by 
means known only to itself. In tragedy, comedy, and epic 
poetry we have never surpassed the Greeks; they are still 
our models: whereas in the exact sciences, which rest upon 
the observation and comparison of facts, every enlightened 
age has made fresh advances. All this is so well understood, 
that a teacher of eloquence will not waste his time explaining 
the principles of the various genres of intellectual expression: 
he might just as well teach grammar and rhetoric, a know¬ 
ledge of which has already been acquired at the Ijcees. 
Instead, he lectures, comments, quotes examples, and 
criticises model compositions; and whether it be done in an 
Athenaeum, a club, or a drawing-room, the result is no 
mote than glorified table-talk. Is that a time for criticising 
the classics? What can be said that hasn’t been said before? 
For criticising modem books, then?—the last thing anyone 
would do. There is therefore no meaning to be attached to 
a ‘school for the advanced study of literature,’ as there is to 
a club, a salon t or even an academy for teaching or lecturing. 
The whole business belongs, not to education in the proper 
sense, or to any specialised profession, but to the social 
amenities. What is needed, then, to prevent literary talent 
and genius being arrested in its development? Good class¬ 
teaching, especially in rhetoric; and this is already provided 
for in the lycies. Compare a teacher of literature with a 
teacher of mathematics. The latter will teach the rules of 

181 

Grammar 

astronomy, optics, and mechanics; he will demonstrate stone¬ 
cutting, and in fact, all those things that are not taught at 
Jycies t because the pupils are too young, and because they 
need greater maturity for the instruction appropriate to the 
profession which they may choose, but have not yet chosen. 
The teacher of literature amuses his audience, if he is witty, 
and interests it, if he is clever; but he doesn’t bring out a 
single new principle, or new idea; he lays down no positive 
rules; he tells you nothing you didn’t learn at school; and if 
he went on teaching for forty years, he would be no wiser 
himself at the end than he was at the beginning. He will 
know his authors better, and criticise them more acutely; 
but this is no more than his individual opinion; it is no sign 
or promise of progress in the literary art. 

Grammar would seem to be more suitable for advanced 
study than literature; for it is based upon wider observation 
and comparison, and it deals with the origin of sensations— 
the kinds of speech corresponding to the kinds of feeling. 
But the science of speech is still confused with that of ideas, 
and is so little understood that it has been usefully applied 
only to the treatment of mutes: the real school for the 
advanced study of grammar is the Home for the Deaf and 
Dumb. 

Thus eloquence and poetry are not appropriate material 
for advanced study, because there is nothing really positive 
about them, and because, in point of education, Corneille 
and Racine knew no more about such subjects than any 
promising boy in a rhetoric class: taste and genius cannot 
be taught. 

The specialised schools for Oriental languages, whether 
ancient or modem, are simply a special kind of lycees for the 
study of foreign languages, and are thought necessary in 
order to link our age to past ages, and our land to foreign 
lands. They are private institutions, proportionate to the 
small number of men likely to need the instruction that they 
offer. 

But there are other branches of literature which do give 
occasion, up to a certain point, for the establishment of 

182 

Geography 

schools for advanced study—namely geography and history. 

Geography, whether physical or political, has many of the 
characteristics of an exact science—abundance of facts, 
plenty of debatable issues, and frequent changes; its field 
expands with each advance of the human mind; it is enriched 
by discovery, and subject to modification by political as 
well as physical revolutions. The elements of the subject, 
learnt at school, are as nothing compared to the science as 
a whole. If at some central point, such as Paris, there existed 
a number of teachers of geography who could collect, 
compare, and sift out the scattered information on this 
subject, and if one could safely consult them for fuller 
information on geographical points, it would be well worth 
while to have such an institution. 

Instead, therefore, of any further institutions specially 
devoted to literature, one would prefer to establish 4 chairs 
in Geography—one for each quarter of the world. In these 
information bureaux (as it were) for Europe, Asia, Africa 
and America, one could lay one’s hand on the most accurate 
facts, the most definite ideas as to new discoveries and 
recent changes. Each of these professors would be a kind of 
guide-book, and their lectures would be full of usefulness 
and interest to everyone desiring or needing instruction. 

History, for similar reasons, can be classed with the 
sciences which would benefit by a school of advanced 
study. The reading of history is a science in itself. Every¬ 
thing has been said over and over again. There is such a glut 
of apocryphal histories, and so much difference exists 
between one book written at an earlier date, and another 
written at a later date, and making use of the labours and the 
ideas of previous historians, that a man who wants to look 
up the best account of some event, and plunges into a big 
historical library, loses himself in a regular maze. To know 
what remains of the ancient historians, and what has been 
lost, and to distinguish original authorities from the addi¬ 
tions made to them by good or bad commentators—this 
alone, if not a science, is at least an important subject of 
study. Thus the knowledge and selection of good historians, 

183 

History 

good memoirs, and genuine chronicles, is a real and useful 
acquisition. If, in a great capital like Paris, there were a 
school of advanced study in history, and if its first course 
were one in bibliography, a young man need no longer 
waste months in the misleading study of inadequate or 
untrustworthy authorities; he would be directed to the 
best books, and would, with less time and trouble, acquire 
a better knowledge of the subject. 

There is, besides, a part of history, namely the most 
recent periods, which cannot be learnt from books. No 
historian comes down to our own day. For every man of 
Z5 there is a period of 50 years before his birth of which no 
history has been written. This gap presents many difficulties. 
It needs hard work—work that is always imperfect, and 
often unremunerative—to link up past events with the 
present day. To do so would be an important duty of the 
professors at the advanced school. They ought to know not 
only what has happened from the beginnings of national 
life up to the point at which historians stop writing, but 
also up to the time at which they are teaching. 

There should be a number of such professors—in Roman 
history, Greek history, the history of the Empire, Church 
history, American history, and several more for the history 
of France, England, Germany, Italy, and Spain. 

History would also be divided into the various branches 
suitable for teaching. First would come the history of 
legislation. The professor of this subject would have to go 
back to the Romans, and follow on from that period, 
dealing with the reigns of the French kings in chronological 
order, down to the Consulate. Then would come the history 
of the art of war in France. The professor would expound 
the different plans of campaign adopted at various periods 
of our history, whether for invading other countries or for 
defending our own; the causes of victory and of defeat; 
with the authors and memoirs in which his facts can be 
found, and his conclusions verified. This branch of history, 
which interests everyone, and is essential for soldiers, 
would also be extremely useful to statesmen. The art of 

184 

A Literary University 

attacking and defending fortified positions can be explained 
at the specialised School of Engineering: the art of war as a 
whole can’t be expounded, because it has never yet been put 
on paper—if, indeed, it ever will be. But a chair of history 
devoted to explaining how the great commanders defended 
our frontiers in various wars could not fail to be of the 
greatest benefit. 

One might, then, consider the organisation of a sort of 
Literary University, including in this term not merely 
belles-lettres , but also history and geography—for one cannot 
think of the former without the later. This University could 
be found in the existing College de Frame; but it would have 
to consist of some 30 chairs, so well correlated that they 
formed a kind of personal office for instruction and advice, 
at which anyone who wanted to know all about a particular 
century could ask what books he ought to read and to avoid, 
and what memoirs or chronicles he ought to consult; and 
at which anyone who wished to travel in a particular country 
could obtain definite information either as to the routes he 
ought to follow, or as to the government in control of any 
district in which he might wish to pursue his researches. 

Something is surely lacking in a great state, if a young 
student cannot get competent advice on the subject he 
wishes to study, and is obliged to grope his way, wasting 
months or years in fruitless reading, whilst he searches for 
the information he really needs. 

Something is surely lacking in a great state, if, in order 
to get definite information about the situation, government, 
and present condition of any part of the globe, one has to- 
go either to the Foreign Office, which (whatever treasures 
may be buried there) only knows part of the facts, or to the 
Admiralty, which very often can’t answer all one’s questions. 

I want this University: it has been in my mind a long time, 
because I have done so much work myself, and have felt the 
need of it. I have read a lot of history, and I have often 
wasted a deal of time in useless reading, just for lack of 
direction. And I have paid enough attention to geography 
to know that there is no single man in Paris who is perfectly 

185 

Contemporary History 

up to date in the discoveries which are made every day, 
and in the ceaseless changes of that subject. Iam certain that 
the proposed institution would be a great help to education 
in general, even for the best educated people; whereas 
courses in literature would have none of these advantages 
—my experience being that they teach nothing more than 
one knows at the age of 14. . . . 

The reasons given in this Note for a Literary University, 
primarily for the teaching of history and geography, are 
not the only motives that influence me. It will be easily 
guessed that my private idea is to gather together, not 
historians of philosophy or of religion, but men who will 
write the history of events, and carry it on up to the present 
day. Our young people have more facilities for getting to 
know the Punic Wars than the American War of 178 3. They 
can more easily find out about the events of past ages than 
about things which have happened during their own 
lifetime. 

One objection is constantly raised in this connexion: it is 
said that contemporaries are bad historians. I don’t agree. 
I should, if what is meant is a satirical treatment of current 
events: I should, if it were the history of a living man, or of 
one whom the historian had known personally; for history 
must not be turned into panegyric. But it is as easy one year 
as it is a hundred years after the event to say when or under 
what circumstances a state was forced to take up arms; at 
what moment it compelled the enemy to make peace; or in 
what month such and such a fleet sailed on such and such an 
expedition, and what engagements it lost or won. It makes 
little difference whether die historian is near the facts, or far 
away from them. If he is really close to the facts he is likely 
to be all the more truthful, because he knows that his readers 
can judge of what happened in their own life-time. There is 
no inconvenience in mis, whilst there is a real advantage, 
especially for young people, who can find nobody to instruct 
them in the events of 20 or 30 years ago. For instance, 
without this type of teaching, soldiers will have to wait a 
long time before they can learn to profit by the faults which 

186 

Official Historians 

have led to defeat, or to appreciate the dispositions which 
would have prevented it. The whole Revolutionary war 
should be full of lessons: yet one often devotes long hours 
to persistent research, and fails to gather them. The reason 
is, not that there is no detailed description of the facts—for 
they have been described in all kinds of ways and in all 
kinds of places, but that it is nobody’s business to make 
research easy, and to give the guidance which is needed if it 
is to be done intelligently. 

To sum up: it would be feasible to set up at the College de 
France a big institution or school of higher study for subjects 
other than the mathematical sciences, jurisprudence, medi¬ 
cine, etc. But, if one is to make it a specialised school of 
literature, with courses of history and geography in all their 
branches, such an institution will need at least 20 or 30 
professors. 

[Corresp., xv, 12416. This belongs to the period between the 
inauguration and the organisation of Napoleon’s Imperial University.] 

141 

HISTORY AND CRITICISM 

REMARKS ON THE HOME SECRETARY’S REPORTS ABOUT THE 
ENCOURAGEMENT OF LITERATURE 

Finkenstein, April 19, 1807. 

The Emperor has received three Reports dealing with 
the encouragement of literature. The first report includes a 
draft decree under six heads. The first of these heads deals 
with the establishment of two or more Official Historians. 

France has had official historians: but the truth is, they 
did nothing either for France or for history. Racine was 
official historian under Louis XIV, but none of his work 
has lived. We haven’t many good historians, and they don’t 
include the present holders of the title which it is proposed 
to re-establish. Such an institution might, indeed, he of 

187 

Poet Laureate 

some use; but it would not ptoduce historians. Above all 
we must avoid the phrase ‘official historians.’ If it be agreed 
that a historian is a judge, and one who expresses the 
verdict of posterity, then he must possess so many qualities, 
and so many perfections, that it is difficult to believe that 
good history can ever be produced to order. What can be 
expected of sensible men, with some degree of talent, is 
historical memoirs based on scholarly research, and con¬ 
taining original material, with critical remarks designed 
to throw light upon the events of history. If these researches, 
documents, and materials are embodied in a good narrative, 
the work will have many points of likeness to history; yet 
its author will not be a historian in our sense of the word. 

The second head of the draft decree has the effect of 
instituting Poets Laureate or Poets Caesarian. The object 
of this is clear enough—it is to create posts for our poets. 
But the institution ought to harmonise better with our 
habits; in particular it must give no occasion for ridicule, 
such as Frenchmen seize so maliciously. It is really easier to 
imagine the creation of official historians; because in ap¬ 
pointing historians, though one leaves them free either to 
praise or to blame, one does at least impose upon them the 
necessity of speaking the truth. But will official poets be 
allowed to write satires on the court to which they are 
attached? Or will it be their duty to eulogise it? In either 
case it is not obvious what is the use of employing them. 
Poetry is the child of society. It is only as society remodels 
itself on lines of public peace and private happiness that it 
can teach its poets that good taste, and that grace and 
perfection of style, which are the ornament of literature and 
art. Besides, poetic production carries so many rewards with 
it that there is no need for the state to intervene. Whether 
a poet writes a tragedy or a comedy, an opera or a farce, an 
elegy or a romance, he is rewarded by the praises of his 
admirers, and the support of the public whom he interests 
or entertains. The Institute too provides a means of rivalry; 
the poet who gains a place in it becomes a public character. 
Did Corneille ever receive any particular marks of court 

188 

Richelieu and Corneille 

favour? Did those that Racine received inspire his master¬ 
pieces? Was the flight of his genius restricted by his failure 
to receive others? Generally speaking, no form of creation 
which is merely a matter of taste, and which all the world 
can attempt, needs official encouragement. 

However, if there were any way of paying a distinguished 
compliment to some contemporary poet, whilst being 
careful not to make him ridiculous, I should raise no objec¬ 
tion. For instance, why not attach certain poets to the 
Theatre Fran^ais, and give them honorary titles, carrying 
stipends, and the right to be consulted about the plays 
produced? There would be little to object to in such an 
arrangement. They have it at the Opera. But in this case it 
would need to be instituted in a specially flattering and 
solemn manner. This would give us a means of awarding 
distinctions to certain authors. But it would be a mistake to 
think that this is the way to produce poets. What does the 
art of government consist in, whether for sovereigns or 
ministers? It consists in advertising anything well done. 
Decrees are not enough: one must take some definite action 
about it. For instance, several good odes have been pub¬ 
lished. Why not call public attention to their authors? Why 
not give them that confidence in themselves which would 
encourage them, stimulate their efforts, and lead to their 
producing still better work? If Italy has had so many good 
poets, it is because she possessed such a number of petty 
courts, so many idle and rival societies. Besides, in this 
range of ideas it often happens that one man who becomes 
famous enables another to become famous after him per¬ 
haps Racine and Boileau would not be held in such esteem 
if the fame of Corneille had not preceded them. Perhaps 
Laharpe, Marmontel, and other highly commendable 
authors owed their enterprise^ if not their talents, to the 
successful example of Voltaire. Cardinal de Richelieu’s 
criticism of Le Cid was undoubtedly beneficial: it still wins 
approval. His action in the matter has, indeed, been 
attributed to motives of the lowest kind—perhaps rightly, 
but very possibly not; for might one not suppose that the 

189 

Official Criticism 

mini ster intended public discussion to stimulate a movement 
for the purification of French taste and the French tongue? 

Our journalistic critics might contribute to the same end, 
if they were not inspired, sometimes by hatred, more often 
by a satirical turn of mind, and always by a desire to enter¬ 
tain idle readers, rather than to edify the serious public. 
Is it desirable that Frenchmen should learn to speak their 
language elegantly, and to acquire a liking for discussions 
about the improvement of taste and style? If so, let the 
Minister get the Second Class of the Institute to criticise 
one of the best books issued in the last 20 years. The public 
will become interested in this work, and perhaps even take 
sides for and against the criticism—never mind which: its 
attention will be directed to these interesting debates; it will 
talk about grammar and poetry; literary taste will be educa¬ 
ted and perfected; and the original purpose will be achieved. 
If it be well understood beforehand that the choice of a 
particular book for enlightened and kindly criticism is a 
proof that it deserves the approval of men*of taste; if it is by 
the Emperor’s own request that the Institute criticises (let us 
say) the Abbe Delille’s Georgies (not as a translation from the 
Latin, but as a masterpiece of French language, poetiy, and 
taste), or the finest canto of Esmenard’s Navigation , or 
Lebrun’s best odes, or even (to show how impartial it is) 
the most beautiful piece of verse from the pen of Fontanes, 
it may be that the author who is criticised will be a little hurt 
at first, but he will soon see that the choice of his work is a 
form of commendation; whilst the general public, the 
spectators of this useful contest, will be interested, edified, 
and formed into a school of taste. This is one of the most 
important duties the Institute can undertake. Such a system 
of criticism, once begun in the formal way I have described, 
will soon be desiderated by the authors who find themselves 
honoured by it. A new tragedy is produced, and is a success 
on the stage; it will lack only one ingredient of fame—that 
the Minister should ask the Institute, on the Emperor’s 
behalf, to report on it by the rules of dramatic art, taste, afld 
style. Such is the only real criticism—an honourable criti- 

190 

The Moniteur 

cism, quite different from that exercised by our mountebank 
magazines, in which contemporary authors are treated, not 
with serious criticism, but with sarcasms which are inten¬ 
tionally dishonest or malicious, and which have no bearing 
either on art or taste. The only reason for putting up 
with a form of criticism which does more harm than good, 
and for doing nothing to remedy such an abuse, is the fear 
that government intervention may produce even worse 
results, or that excesses of criticism which hurt an author’s 
self-esteem may be better for literature than uncritical 
admiration. But, once a system of intelligent criticism has 
been set up, it will be possible to prohibit the present 
method, or at least to correct its abuses. The Institute is a 
splendid weapon for the Minister: if he uses it properly, it 
will do all that the Government requires. . .. 

The Minister’s second Report deals with the establish¬ 
ment of a literary paper. It seems useless to do this, for 
there are too many papers already, people only read them 
for amusement, and the more sarcastic a literary criticism 
is, the more amusing they find it. In a state like France 
there must of course be one paper, such as the Moniteur, 
and this must be made to pay. There is no reason why its 
back page should not be given up to articles or literary 
criticism, written by men selected by the Minister. The 
Moniteur is expensive; but plenty of people read it without 
subscribing to it, or combine to take it in; it is copied 
by the provincial papers, it is translated into the foreign 
press. The part of the Moniteur set aside for literature ought 
to be quite distinct from the rest, in view of the serious 
subjects of which the latter is full. Both ideas—the Emperor’s 
and the Minister’s—would thus be combined in the one 
paper; for it would include critical articles such as might 
appear in a specialised literary review, as well as more 
serious and detailed criticisms asked for by the Minister 
from the Institute at the Emperor’s request. 

One cannot ignore the further advantages of this second 
idea. There are at the moment great differences of opinion 
about literature. In order to escape from this anarchy we 

191 

The Institute 

must purify tradition and good taste, and give them back 
their rights. There could be no better means of doing this 
than the serious criticism of good books by a body contain¬ 
ing all the distinguished talents still available, and bound to 
obey a superior authority, whose choice would in itself be 
proof that the book was popular, and evidence that it was 
approved. This criticism need not be applied to more than 
4 or 5 publications a year: it would then have immense, and 
indeed decisive effects. There is no better way of learning 
to speak our language than to read the criticism on Le 
Cid , or Voltaire’s comments on Corneille. There is there¬ 
fore nothing new in the idea underlying the present 
proposals; but we have wandered so far from the right path, 
that an institution designed to bring us back to it would 
have the attraction of novelty, as well as the interest attach¬ 
ing to a good debate, and the advantage of raising high- 
class work out of the common rut. 

The Institute will raise no objection to our demands. It 
is obliged by its constitution to do anything the Home 
Minister asks of it; and the Minister, writing to it in the 
Emperor’s name, and in accordance with the present 
Remarks, will simply inform it that, such and such a work 
having deservedly won public attention, it is worth while 
to enquire what faults the author may have committed 
against the canons of art and the genius of the French 
tongue, and to prevent the corruption of taste and language 
by vices of thought and expression which may have crept 
in under cover of an elegant style.... 

[Corresp., xv, 12415. Delille (1738-1813) was a poet of Nature; 
Lebrun (Odes republicaines, 1795) and Fontanes (1757-1821), members 
of a literary circle influencing Chateaubriand. Cardinal de Richelieu 
took part in the controversy aroused by Corneille’s Le Cid , and com¬ 
pelled the Academy to publish a criticism of it (1638). J. E. Esmenard’s 
Navigation, a poem in 8 cantos, came out in 1805.] 

Irish Catholi cs 
142 

PRESS CAMPAIGN 

TO M. FOUCHE, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Finkenstein, April 21, 1807. 

I want you to get up a great agitation, especially in the 
provincial press of Brittany, Vendee, Piedmont, and Belgium, 
against the persecutions which the Irish Catholics are 
suffering at the hands of the Anglican church. For this 
purpose you must collect all the features that represent the 
persecution in its strongest colours. I will get M. Portalis to 
make private arrangements with some of the bishops, so 
that, when these newspaper articles have had time to produce 
their effect, intercessions may be offered for the stoppage of 
the persecutions. But the whole affair must be managed 
very tactfully, from the government side. You must make 
use of the papers without their suspecting the end we have 
in view. The editors of the Journal de Vampire are the very 
people for the job. You must make people realise the 
cruelties and indignities committed by England against the 
Irish Catholics, whom they have been massacring in St. 
Bartholomew’s Eve fashion for the last hundred years. 
Don’t talk of ‘Protestants’; say ‘the Anglican Church’: for 
there are Protestants in France, but there are no Anglicans. 

[Lecestre, i, 150. Daniel O’Connell’s agitation for Catholic right in 
Ireland began in 1805.] 

143 

JEALOUSY 

TO THE EMPRESS 

Finkenstein (?), May 10,1807. 

I have received your letter. I don’t understand what you 
say about my lady correspondents. There is only one person 
I love, and that’s my little Josephine. She’s kind, she’s 
o 193 

Josephine Jealous 

capricious, she easily takes offence. Her quarrels are as 
graceful as everything she does; for she is always adorable, 
except when she is jealous, and then she becomes a regular 
little devil. But to return to these ladies of yours. If I were 
to waste my time on any of them, you can be sure they 
would have to be as pretty as rose-buds. Does that fit the 
ladies you mean? 

I want you never to dine with people who have not dined 
with me. Keep to the same list for your private parties. 
Never invite ambassadors or foreigners to Malmaison: I 
should be angry with you, if you did. And don’t let yourself 
be imposed upon by people whom I don’t know, and who 
wouldn’t come to see you if I were there. 

Good-bye, my dear. All my love. 

[Cerf, i i8 . Mme Walewska was at Finkenstein.] 

144 

A GIRLS’ SCHOOL 
Note 

Finkenstein, May 15,1807. 

The buildings at Ecouen ought to be as handsome, and 
the curriculum as simple as possible. Beware of following 
,the example of the mstitution at Saint-Cyr, where vast 
sums were spent, and the girls abominably educated. 

The first problem that needs your attention is the 
employment and distribution of time. What are the girls 
brought up at Ecouen going to be taught? You must 
begin tgith religion in all its strictness. Don’t allow any 
compromise on ihis^pBtflfr Religion is an all-important 
matter in a public school for girls. Whatever people may 
say, it is the mother’s surest safeguard, and the husband’s. 
What we ask of education is not that girls should think, but 
that they should believe. The weakness of women’s^brains, 
the instability their ideas, the; place th ey will fil l insocietv. 

194 

Girls’ School 

their,.need for perpetual resignation, and for an easy and 
generous type of charity—all this can only be met by reli¬ 
gion, and by religion of a gentle and charitable kind. I did 
not lay special stress on religious observances at Fontaine¬ 
bleau: and in the lycees I only prescribed the necessary 
minimum. At Ecouen matters must be entirely different. 
Nearly all the exact knowledge taught there must be that 
of the Gospel. I want the place to produce, not women of 
charm, but women of virtue: they must be attractive 
because they have high principles and warm hearts, not 
because they are witty or amusing. We must therefore have, 
as headmaster at Ecouen, a man of ability, good character, 
and a sufficient age; and every day the pupils must have 
regular prayers, hear mass, and learn the catechism. This is 
the part of their education with which most care must be 
taken. 

In addition the girls must be taught writing, arithmetic, 
and elementary French, so that they may know how to spell; 
and they ought to learn a litde history and geography: but 
care must be taken not to let them see any Latin, or other 
foreign languages. The elder girls can be taught a little 
botany, and be taken through an easy course of physics or 
natural history. But that too has certain embarrassments. 
The teaching of physics must be limited to what is necessary 
to prevent gross ignorance and silly superstition, and must 
confine itself to the facts, and not indulge in reasoning 
which direcdy or indirecdy touches on first causes. 

You must go into the question whether all girls who have 
reached a certain class should be given a dress allowance. 
They could then practise economy, calculate prices, and 
keep their own accounts. 

But the main thing is to keep them all occupied, for three- 
quarters of the year, working with their hands. They must 
learn to make stockings, shirts, and embroidery, and to do 
all kinds of women’s work. These young girls should be 
regarded as belonging to provincial families with incomes 
of 15-18,000 livres, and as unable to bring their husbands a 
dowry of more than 12-15,000 francs; and they should be 

*95 

Sewing and Housekeeping 

treated accordingly. That is why one realises that manual 
labour in the home cannot be ignored. 

I don’t know whether it is possible to give them some 
idea of medicine and pharmacology, at any rate that kind of 
medical knowledge commonly required for nursing invalids. 
It would be a good thing, too, if they knew something 
about the work done in the Housekeeper’s room. I should 
like every girl who leaves Ecouen, and finds herself at the 
head of a small household, to know how to make her own 
frocks, mend her husband’s things, make clothes for her 
babies, provide her little family with such occasional 
delicacies as can be afforded by a provincial housekeeper, 
nurse her husband and children when they are ill, and know 
in these matters, because she has been taught it beforehand, 
what invalids have learnt by experience. All this is so simple 
and obvious that it does not require much consideration. 

The girls ought to wear uniform. Choose quite common 
material, but a good pattern of frock. In mat respect I 
don’t think the present fashions can be improved upon. 
But of course they must have long sleeves, and such other 
modifications as health and modesty require. 

As for their food, it can’t be too simple: some soup, 
some boiled beef, and a small entree —that’s plenty. 

I wouldn’t dare insist on the pupils cooking their own 
meals, as I did at Fontainebleau: there would be too much 
opposition to it. But they might be made to dish up their 
own dessert, and any special food given them for a treat, or 
on holidays. And if I let them off cooking, I insist on their 
doing the baking. The advantage of all this is that they are 
given practice in everything they are likely to be called on 
to do, and that their time is normally filled up with sensible 
and useful occupations. 

The girls ought to furnish their own rooms, make their 
own chemises, stockings, and frocks, and do their own hair. 
I attach a great importance to all this. I want to make these 
young persons into useful women, and I am sure that in that 
way I shall make them attractive wives. I don’t want to 
aim at making them attractive: the only result would be to 

196 

Dancing and Deportment 

turn them into leaders of fashion. Making your own clothes 
teaches you how to hold yourself: afterwards it becomes a 
habit to do it gracefully. 

Dancing is necessary for the health of the pupils; but it 
must be a cheerful sort of dancing, not the kind they 
indulge in at the opera. They may have music too, but only 
vocal music. 

You can take as your model, up to a point, the school at 
Compiegne. At Ecouen, as at Compiegne, you must have 
mistresses to teach sewing, cutting out, embroidery, etc., 
as well as the parts of pharmacology and household manage¬ 
ment I mentioned above. 

If I am told that this institution will not be particularly 
popular, I reply that I don’t want it to be: for in my opinion 
the best education of all is that which a mother gives her 
daughters; and my principal object is to do something for 
those girls who have lost their mothers, and whose people 
are too poor to bring them up properly. In fact, if wealthy 
members of the Legion of Honour are too snobbish to let 
their daughters go to Ecouen, whilst poor parents are glad 
to send them there, and if these young persons return to 
their country homes with the reputation of making good 
wives, I shall have done absolutely all I want: I shall be 
confident that the institution has every chance of winning a 
high and solid reputation. 

This is a matter in which we must risk a little ridicule. 
I am not bringing up shop assistants, or chambermaids, or 
housekeepers, but wives—wives suitable for poor andhumble 
homes. Among the poor it is the mother who looks after 
the whole house. 

With the single exception of the Headmaster, all men must 
be excluded from the school. No man must ever enter 
within its walls, under any pretext whatsoever. Even the 
gardening must be done by women. My intention is that, 
in this respect, the establishment should be as strictly 
ruled as a convent. The Headmistress herself must not be 
allowed to receive men, except in the parlour; and if it is 
impossible to exclude the girl’s relations in cases of serious 

T 97 

Only Women 

illness, at least they must only be admitted by special 
permission of the Gtand Chancellor of the Legion of 
Honour. 

I have no time to write more about this establishment. 
It is more original than Compiegne, as I view it; and 
Compiegne is unlike anything of its kind before. 

I need hardly say that the only women employed in the 
school must be elderly spinsters, or widows without 
children; that they must be entirely under the control of the 
Headmistress; and that they must never receive men, or go 
outside the walls of the school. 

It would, no doubt, be equally superfluous to remark that 
nothing is worse, or more open to censure, thantEeldea of 
letting young girls appear on the stage, or stimulating 
rivalry among them by allowing them to take places in form. 
It is good for men, who may have to make speeches, and 
who, having to master so many subjects, need the support 
and stimulus of competition. But in the case of yOung girls, 
competition should be banned: we don’t want to rouse their 
pagSigfisr o £tQ .give, play to the vanity which is one of the 
liv^estinstincts of their sex. Light punishments, and a 
of praise from the Headmistress to those who do well, 
seem to me all that is needed. I can’t think it has a good effect 
,to distinguish the girls by different coloured ribbons, unless 
‘{the object is merely to classify them by age; otherwise it 
jmight establish a kind of precedence among them. 

[Corresp., xv, 12585.] 

145 

POST-HASTE 

TO THE EMPRESS 

Dresden,/#/)/ 18, 1807, midday. 

My dear; I got to Dresden yesterday at 5 p.m., feeling 
very well, though I had been 100 hours on the road without 
leaving my carriage. I am staying here with the King of 

198 

Electoral Colleges 

Saxony, with whom I am well pleased. So you see I am 
more than halfway back to you. One of these fine nights I 
may turn up at Saint-Cloud in the role of the jealous 
husband; I give you fair warning. Good-bye, my dear. It 
will be a great pleasure to see you. All my love. 

[Corresp.j xv, 12912. He is on his way back from Tilsit.] 

146 

TITLES FOR ELECTORS 

TO M. CAMBACERES 

Saint-Cloud, August 12, 1807, 2 p.m. 

I want you to bring me this evening, at 8 o’clock, the 
proposed senatus-consulte about the Tribunate, and the 
draft of the decree on Titles. I also want you to read 
through the enclosed memorandum, and to bring it back 
this evening with any remarks you have to make upon it. 

Memorandum 

Nowadays the Electoral Colleges of the Departments are 
the connecting links between the government and the 
people. If a necessity arose for dismissing the Legislative 
Body, it would be for them to elect the elements of which 
the new legislature would be composed. True, they carry 
out this duty in conjunction with the Colleges of the 
arrondissements ; but it is none the less certain mat, if they 
chose good men, the Senate could nominate from among 
their candidates, and it would not matter if the Colleges 
of the arrondissements chose badly. 

Thus there exists in the state a large body of persons 
nominated by the choice of the people, selected from 
amongst men of property, appointed for life, and having an 
important influence upon public order; and it would be 
entirely consistent with our general scheme of government 

199 

Hereditary Titles 

if membership of an Electoral College carried with it the 
qualification to hold a title. If this were so, all past or present 
Chairmen of Colleges might be given a title; but it would 
be a purely personal one, and would become hereditary 
only when permission was obtained to establish an entailed 
estate bringing in 10-20,000 livres a year. Members of 
Colleges who could prove possession of a freehold with a 
net revenue of not less than 10,000 francs, and who had held 
their office for more than six years, could petition the 
Emperor for a hereditary title, with every likelihood of 
obtaining it. 

Amongst other advantages, this institution would attach 
more prestige to membership of the Electoral Colleges, and 
would distinguish between fortunes made by legitimate 
means, and of some standing, from fortunes of recent 
origin, derived from business or speculation. 

Distinctions of this kind, so bestowed, would be very 
generally coveted, because it is only human nature to want 
to leave to one’s children some memorial of the reputation 
one has enjoyed, as well as an adequate and honourable 
fortune. 

It won’t be so easy to become a member of a College, 
because there are not more than 300 members to a Depart¬ 
ment; so that a man might not reach the position till he 
was already pretty old, and his career might be over before 
the end of the necessary six years. 

To sum up: the sovereign bestows titles, or allows the 
establishment of entails, in the case of citizens who have 
distinguished themselves by public spirit and important 
services. He is the sole judge, and no private considerations 
can set limits to his freedom of action. As for other citizens, 
who do not combine these qualifications to such an eminent 
degree, the sovereign can bestow the same favour on them 
too, but they must necessarily be marked out by their 
wealth, since they are among the principal tax-payers; they 
must have obtained the votes of their fellow-citizens, since 
the members of the Colleges are nominated by the cantonal 
assemblies; and they must have occupied for some time a 

200 

Copenhagen 

position in the public eye, as one of the conditions is that 
they shall have held their office for more than six years. 

To these general considerations it may be added that this 
scheme is the only means by which the old nobility can be 
completely rooted out. The titles of Duke, Marquis, and 
Baron are reappearing: coats of arms and liveries are 
coming into use again. It was easy to foresee that, unless 
one replaced these old customs by new institutions, they 
would soon begin all over again. In any case, what public 
inconvenience can be caused by creating a new currency 
in which to reward services and success, to add prestige to 
popular election, and to make it understood that military 
distinctions are not the only kind, and that, if the army is 
the most brilliant career, it does not make .us forget honour¬ 
able and useful work in other spheres? ... 

[CORRESP., XV, 13020.] 

147 

COPENHAGEN 

TO THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 

Saint-Cloud, August 28, 1807. 

I wrote to Your Majesty a few days ago on the Copenhagen 
affair. I have at this moment received letters of August 21st 
from which I learn that the city is formally invested. I am 
deeply incensed at this horrible crime, and I feel a great 
desire to make the English Government sorry for it. It 
seems to me that what we ought to do is first of all to force 
Sweden to declare war on England, and then to compel 
Austria to dismiss the English ambassador from Vienna, 
and to shut the port of Trieste against English commerce* 
If Your Majesty agrees with these views, it will only be 
necessary to send instructions to your minister at Vienna: 
then our two ambassadors will combine to ask for an 
interview with the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
and will do their utmost to persuade him that it is in the 

201 

Lyon Silk 

interests of all the powers to break off communications with 
a people that tramples the most sacred rights of humanity- 
under foot. If, at the end of several talks, the Austrian 
court still refuses to act, they will declare that they have 
orders to leave Vienna, unless the English Minister has 
himself quitted the city before a certain date. I am assuming 
that Austria will not face a war with both our states at 
once; if she did, she would soon be sorry for it. 

As for Sweden, I cannot conceive how her present sove¬ 
reign can remain indifferent to what is happening at Copen¬ 
hagen. The only possible explanation lies in that prince’s 
character. In any case it is difficult for him to remain neutral. 
If he sides with the English, I fancy Your Majesty has told 
me that you have treaty obligations to help Denmark. I 
shall certainly give her all the help I can; and the Danish 
army in Norway could make a diversion while Your Majesty 
attacks Sweden. 

[Corresp., xy, 13086. In consequence of information from Tilsit 
as to Napoleon’s designs on the neutrality of Denmark, the British 
Government proposed a defensive alliance with that country, and the 
temporary surrender of its fleet. Denmark refusing, English troops 
landed near Copenhagen, in August, 1807, and on September z an 
English fleet bombarded the city.] 

148 

LOCAL INDUSTRIES 

NOTE FOR M. CRETET, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Saint-Cloud, September 2,1807. 

The Minister is requested to write to the syndics of 
Lyon, and to inform them that the local factories are not 
doing their work in such a way as to maintain their reputa¬ 
tion. The green hangings edged in rose and gold tissue, 
which were put up in His Majesty’s study at Saint-Cloud 
not much more than a year ago, have already worn out. 
The syndics are to visit the manufacturer, find out where 

202 

CentenaRIES 

the fault lies in the method of manufacture, and make a 
report to be submitted to His Majesty personally. Foreigners 
who see quite modem decorations in such a state are bound 
to form a very bad impression of the Lyon factories. 

[CORRESP., xvi, 13100.] 

149 

INSULT TO THE ARMY 

TO MARSHAL BERTHIER, PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL, MAJOR- 
GENERAL OF THE GRAND ARMY 

Rambouillet, September 7, 1807. 

You must be sure to inform Marshal Soult, by special 
messenger, of the incident at Konigsberg, where two actors, 
appearing on the stage as French officers, were hissed by the 
audience. You will tell Marshal Soult that I have demanded 
satisfaction from the King of Prussia for this insult, and 
that I have required that the two chief culprits shall be shot. 
Marshal Soult is to inform the officer opposite him of the 
base and despicable character of the outrage of which I 
have had to complain, and of the explicit terms in which I 
have demanded satisfaction. 

[Lecestre, i, 172.] 

150 

CENTENARIES 

TO M. CRETET, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Fontainebleau, October a, 1807. 

Please inform the Prefect of Troyes of my displeasure, 
because, without your permission, he has authorised a kind 
of fete that they want to have in honour of Thibaut, Comte 
de Champagne. It is absurd to go and revive, centuries 
afterwards, the memory of men who never had any out¬ 
standing merits. 

203 

Agnes Sorel 

Find out from the Prefect of Tours what this monument 
is that they want to put up to Agnes Sorel. It seems to me 
most unsuitable. If I remember aright, Agnes Sorel was a 
king’s mistress, and has little title to fame except the poem 
La Lucelle. Write to the Prefect and tell him that I am not 
going to allow any such monument.... 

[Corresp.j xvi, 13207. Thibault, Count of Champagne, became King 
of Navarre in 1234. Agnes Sorel was Charles VII’s mistress, and plays 
a large part in Voltaire’s Li Puce Jit.] 

PORTUGAL 

TO CHARLES IV, KING OF SPAIN 

Fontainebleau, October 12, 1807. 

At a moment when Holland, the various states of the 
Confederation of the Rhine, Your Majesty, the Emperor of 
Russia, and I are united in an attempt to exclude the English 
from the continent, and to exact all possible vengeance for 
the crime that they have just committed against Denmark, 
Portugal offers the spectacle of a power that has been in the 
English pay for sixteen years. In Lisbon England has 
possessed an inexhaustible spring of wealth, and a constant 
resource, both as a port of call, and as a base for naval expedi¬ 
tions. It is time that Porto and Lisbon were closed against 
her. I calculate that before November 1st the army under 
General Junot’s command will be at Burgos, along with 
Your Majesty’s army, and that we shall be in a position to 
occupy Lisbon and Portugal in force. I will arrange with 
Your Majesty to dispose of this country in whatever way is 
convenient to you: in any case it shall be placed under your 
suzerainty, as you appear to desire. We cannot secure peace 
except by isolating England from the continent, and by 
shutting every European port against her commerce. I count 
on Your Majesty’s energetic co-operation in this particular; 

204 

Lisbon 

for England must be forced to make peace, if tranquillity is 
to be restored to the world. 

[Corresp., xvi, 13243* For ‘the crime committed against Denmark,* 
v. No. 147. On July 19 (before the Copenhagen affair) Napoleon had 
demanded the closing of all Portuguese harbours against British ships, 
the seizure of British subjects and property, and the breaking off of 
relations with England. The Prince Regent of Portugal—ruling for the 
Queen, who was insane—refused the second of these demands. On 
October 12, Napoleon ordered troops at Bayonne under Junot to 
march into Spain.] 

152 

OCCUPATION OF LISBON 

TO GENERAL JUNOT, O.C. THE ADVANCE GUARD OF THE 

GIRONDE 

Fontainebleau, November 12, 1807. 

I have received your letter of November 3. You will have 
leamt from two despatches I sent you by special messenger 
what my intentions are as regards your march on Portugal. 
They fit in well enough with the plans of which you inform 
me. It is my hope that in any case you will seize the Portu¬ 
guese fleet. I enclose a list of the naval officers who are 
under orders to join you. 

If (as I expect) the Portuguese do not oppose your entry, 
this is how you should proceed: occupy the harbour, encamp 
your troops in good positions, seize the fleet, hoist the 
French flag, put zoo infantrymen on board every vessel, 
and distribute among the fleet the naval officers I am sending 
you. I am giving orders to the Minister of Marine to des¬ 
patch as quickly as possible a battalion of naval gunners, 
to man the ships. You must at once arm such vessels as are 
fit for it, keep the crews on board at full strength, and 
provision them, so that I may have 7 or 8 batdeships ready 
to sail anywhere. 

The moment you have taken possession of the fleet and 

205 

Deportation 

fortresses, you must proceed to disarm the Portuguese troops. 

Inform the Prince Regent that he must go to France; and 
try to induce him to do so willingly. Assign him officers 
whose overt instructions are to escort him, but whose real 
duty will be to keep him prisoner. Tell me when you reach 
Lisbon, and wait there for my orders. Treat all claimants to 
the throne in the same way, and send them off, without 
troublesome restrictions, to Bayonne. If there are any Swiss 
soldiers, incorporate them in your Swiss regiments, and 
send the officers to Paris, to be placed in my Swiss regi¬ 
ments, if I have room for them. 

Deport some of the most prominent men, and those 
most likely to give you trouble, under instructions to go to 
Paris. They ought all to wait at Bayonne for further orders. 

You can go so far as to mobilise a body of 5-6,000 
officers and men from the Portuguese army, and to send 
them off towards France in columns of 1,000 strong, telling 
them that I am taking them into my service. Make them 
take the oath; draft a few French officers among them; and 
give new names to their regiments; and I really will take 
them into my service. By this means you will get rid of a 
crowd of undesirables. Be careful to send them off by 
different routes. 

The Portuguese taxes must be collected in my name. 
M. Herman is to be Administrator-general of finance. I am 
giving orders to the Minister of the Public Treasury to send 
you a Collector of Taxes, who will be under his orders. 

I need not advise you to give no occasion for complaints: 
it is for you to set an example of impartiality that everyone 
can imitate. Above all take care to provide for the payment 
of the army. The proceeds of prize-money, jewellery, and 
shops containing English goods will go, half to the Privy 
Purse, and half to the army; the latter half will enable the 
generals and chiefs of staff to be content with their pay. 

English goods are to be confiscated, individual English¬ 
men arrested and sent to France, and English property, 
such as houses, vineyards, estates, etc., sequestrated in my 
name. 

206 

Confiscation 

One thing I insist upon; you must be as correct in your 
conduct as I should be myself, and set an example of abso¬ 
lute incorruptibility. It is better to have a fortune you have 
won by your merits, and that you can openly avow comes 
from me, than one made by illegitimate and disgraceful 
means. Portugal is not a country in which you are likely to 
win much military renown: so you must acquire the reputa¬ 
tion of an honest and blameless administrator. And, to do 
that, you must set a good example. 

Your chief of staff is an unscrupulous man: he took a lot 
of money at Fulde. Insist upon his observing a strict rule, 
and make it known that if there is any thieving, I shall 
punish it. 

Hoist the French flag at Lisbon, and hold on there. 

Your army must be paid to the last penny. The pay of 
generals, colonels, and commandants should be on the 
scale of the Grand Army, but not more. 

All objects of value that you capture are to be packed in 
cases and sent to the bank. Their exact destination will be 
the one I gave in my letter. 

[Corresp., xvi, 1335 x. On Junot’s approach, the Prince Regent fled 
with the Portuguese fleet to Brazil. Junot occupied Lisbon, and 
remained there till defeated at Vimiero in August, 1808. F.A. Herman 
was a diplomatist trained under Louis XVI.] 

M3 

WESTPHALIA 

TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA 

Fontainebleau, November 15, 1807. 

I enclose the Constitution for your Kingdom. It embo¬ 
dies the conditions on which I renounce all my rights of 
conquest, and all the claims 1 have acquired over your 
state. You must faithfully observe it. I am concerned for the 
happiness of your subjects, not only as it affects your 
reputation, and my own, but also for its influence on the 
whole European situation. Don’t listen to those who say 

207 

Westphalia 

that your subjects are so accustomed to slavery that they will 
feel no gratitude for the benefits you give them. There is 
more intelligence in the Kingdom of Westphalia than they 
would have you believe; and your throne will never be 
firmly established except upon the trust and affection of the 
common people. What German opinion impatiently de¬ 
mands is that men of no rank, but of marked ability, shall 
have an equal claim upon your favour and your employ¬ 
ment, and that every trace of serfdom, or of a feudal 
hierarchy between the sovereign and the lowest class of his 
subjects, shall be done away. The benefits of the Code 
Napoleon, public trial, and the introduction of juries, will 
be the leading features of your government. And to tell you 
the truth, I count more upon their effects, for the extension 
and consolidation of your rule, than upon the most resound¬ 
ing victories. I want your subjects to enjoy a degree of 
liberty, equality, and prosperity hitherto unknown to the 
German people. I want this liberal regime to produce, one 
way or another, changes which will be of the utmost benefit 
to the system of the Confederation, and to the strength of 
your monarchy. Such a method of government will be a 
stronger barrier between you and Prussia than the Elbe, the 
fortresses, and the protection of France. What people will 
want to return under the arbitrary Prussian rule, once it has 
tasted the benefits of a wise and liberal administration? In 
Germany, as in France, Italy, and Spain, people long for 
equality and liberalism. I have been managing the affairs of 
Europe long enough now to know that the burden of the 
privileged classes was resented everywhere. Rule constitu¬ 
tionally. Even if reason, and the enlightenment of the age, 
were not sufficient cause, it would be good policy for one 
in your position; and you will find mat the backing of 
public opinion gives you a great natural advantage over the 
absolute Kings who are your neighbours. 

[Corresp., xvi, 13361. Jerdme, at the age of 22, deprived of Miss 
Paterson (v. No. 89) and betrothed on October 22,1807, to Princess 
Catharine of Wurttemberg, arrived at Cassel as King of the newly 
■created state of Westphalia on December 10. For the sequel p. No. 157.] 

208 

Madame de Stael 
154 

PRUSSIAN MANNERS 

TO MARSHAL VICTOR, GOVERNOR OF BERLIN 

Venice, December 6, 1807. 

I have received your letter informing me that Prince 
Augustus of Prussia is misbehaving himself at Berlin. I am 
not surprised to hear it. He is a good-for-nothing. He has 
been wasting his time at Coppet, making love to M me de 
Stael, and can have picked up nothing but bad principles 
there. We can't let it go on. Tell him that the first time he 
opens his mouth you will arrest him, and shut him up in a 
castle, and send M me de Stael there too, to console him! A 
Prussian prince is the greatest bore in the world! 

[Brotonne, i, 227.] 

155 

LUCIEN’S DAUGHTER 

TO JOSEPH 

Milan, December 17, 1807. 

I saw Lucien at Mantua, and had several hours' talk with 
him. No doubt he has told you in what state of mind he left 
me. His ideas, and his way of expressing them, are so unlike 
my own, that I found it difficult to understand what he 
wanted; but I think he told me he wished to send his eldest 
daughter to Paris, to be with her grandmother. If this is still 
his inclination, I should like to be informed of it without 
delay; and the young person must reach Paris during Janu¬ 
ary, whether Lucien escorts her himself, or whether he 
leaves it to a governess to bring her to Madame’s. Lucien 
seemed to me to be swayed by contrary feelings, and to be 
too weak to make up his mind. I exhausted all the means I 
knew—and, after all, he is still quite a young man—to make 
him devote his talents once more to myself, and to the 

209 

p 

L U C I E N 

country. If he wants to send me his daughter, she must start 
without delay, and, in consideration or my taking her, he 
must send me a declaration putting her entirely at my 
disposal. For there is not a moment to lose; events hurry 
on, and my destiny must be fulfilled. If he changes his 
mind, then, too, I must be told about it at once; for I shall 
have to make some other arrangement. 

Tell Lucien that I am touched by his trouble, and by what 
he told me of his feelings; but that I am all the more sorry 
that he won’t be reasonable, or contribute to his own peace 
of mind as well as to mine. . . . 

[Joseph, iv, 80. Lucien, unlike Jerome, refused to give up his second 
wife, Alexandrine de Bleschamp (1803) for a throne (that of Portugal), 
in spite of pressure from ‘Madame’ (his mother), and the rest of the 
family . This interview took place on December 13. By his first 
marriage with Christine Boyer (1794) Lucien had two daughters. 
Charlotte, the elder, was now 12.! 

156 

SWEDEN AND INDIA 

TO ALEXANDER I, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 

Paris, February 2, 1808. 

General Savary has just arrived, and I have spent two 
whole hours with him talking about Your Majesty. Every¬ 
thing he said touched my heart; I cannot lose a moment in 
thanking you for all the kindness that you have shown him, 
and that you are extending to my ambassador. 

Your Majesty will have seen the latest speeches in the 
English Parliament, and its decision to carry on the war to 
the bitter end. This being so, I am writing direct to Caulain- 
court. IF Your Majesty will condescend to have a talk with 
him, he will explain my views. Nothing but measures on a 
really large scale will now enable us to secure peace, and to 
carry out our common designs. Your Majesty ought to 

210 

Franco-Russian Army 

enlarge and strengthen your army. All the help and assis¬ 
tance at my disposal will be freely given you; I have no 
feeling of jealousy towards Russia; my only desire is for her 
prosperity, her glory, and the further extension of her 
frontiers. Will Your Majesty graciously listen to the 
advice of one who claims to be honestly and affectionately 
attached to you? Your need is to remove the Swedes further 
from your capital. Extend your frontiers as far as you like 
in their direction. I am ready to help you in this with all the 
means in my power. 

A Russo-French army of 50,000 men, including perhaps a 
few Austrians, marching via Constantinople into Asia, 
would no sooner appear on the Euphrates, than it would 
put England into a panic, and make her beg for mercy from 
the Continental powers. I am within striking distance in 
Dalmatia, Your Majesty on the Danube. Within a month of 
our plans being made this army could be at the Bosphorus. 
The blow would be felt in India, and England would col¬ 
lapse. I should refuse no preliminary stipulations that would 
enable me to achieve so great a result. But the reciprocal 
interests of our States must be balanced and combined. This 
can only be done in an interview with Your Majesty, especi¬ 
ally if it is preceded by frank discussions between Roman- 
zof and Caulaincourt, and by the despatch to Paris of some¬ 
one who is really in our confidence. M. de Tolstoi is a fine 
fellow, but he is full of prejudices and distrust where France 
is concerned, and he is far from understanding the full sig¬ 
nificance of what happened at Tilsit, or the new orientation 
given to the world by the dose friendship between Your 
Majesty and myself. The whole thing could be derided, and 
the agreement signed, before March 15. By May 1 our army 
could be in Asia, and Your Majesty’s troops at Stockholm. 
Then the English, threatened in India, and expelled from 
the Levant, will be crushed under the weight of the events 
with which the atmosphere would be charged. Your 
Majesty and I should, no doubt, have preferred the pleasures 
of peace, and a life spent in the midst of out vast empires, 
regenerating them and making them happy by the arts and 

211 

The Tilsit Touch 

blessings of good government. This the enemies of the 
world will not allow: they must aggrandise themselves at 
our expense. Prudence and policy therefore dictate that we 
should do as destiny demands, and go whither we are led by 
the irresistible march of events. If we do so, this doud of 
pygmy powers, whose only interest is to see whether the 
events of to-day can be parallelled in die newspaper accounts 
of the eighteenth century, will accommodate themselves to 
the movement imposed by Your Majesty and myself; whilst 
the Russian people will be grateful for the glory, the 
wealth, and the fortunes flowing from these great events. 

Thus, in a few lines, I tell Your Majesty my inmost 
thoughts. What was done at Tilsit will rule the destiny of 
the world. Perhaps a touch of cowardice on Your Majesty's 
part, as well as on my own, led us to ptefer a certain and 
immediate benefit to a better and more perfect setdement: 
but, since England will not have it so, let us recognise that 
the moment has come for great changes and great events. 

[Corresp., xvi, Appendix (i). Hearing at the end of January, 1808, 
that England is determined to go on fighting, and counting on the 
Tsar’s anger at the bombardment of Copenhagen (v. No. 147), 
Napoleon revives his plan for an attack on India. If the Tsar will 
co-operate, he may annex Finland (‘remove the Swedes further from 
your capital’) and even part of Turkey (‘ I should refuse no preliminary 
stipulations’): but ‘the reciprocal interests of our States must be 
balanced,’ i.e., Napoleon wants Silesia. General Savary is Napoleon’s 
aide-de-camp, sent to St. Petersburg to negotiate for an alliance: 
Count Peter Tolstoi is die Tsar’s representative at Paris.] 

M7 

JEROME and his ministers 

TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA 

Paris, March 6, 1B08. 

I have read your letter to Beugnot. I fancy I told you 
that you could keep Beugnot and Simeon as long as you 

212 

King Jerome 

want them: but is it absurd to make them take an oath. 
No sober-minded Frenchman, who seriously considered 
the results of such an act, would do so. I pardon their 
taking the oath only because I cannot believe they did 
so ex animo. If it is an oath of fidelity to your person, that 
is already contained in the oath of fidelity to mine taken 
by every Frenchman. If it is an oath taken as a subject of 
Westphalia, you are asking something that would be refused 
by the humblest drummer-boy in my army. No such oath 
has been taken by the Senators or State Councillors em¬ 
ployed at Naples. Frenchmen employed in the King’s house¬ 
hold have sworn fidelity to him as a French prince. And 
even supposing these reasons were not enough, this is 
not the moment, when you are surrounded by foes and 
foreigners, to ask of men who might be useful to you the 
criminal act of renouncing their fatherland. I have seldom 
seen anyone with so little sense of proportion as yourself. 
You know nothing, yet you never take advice. You decide 
nothing by reason, everything by impulse and passion. I 
have no wish to correspond with you more than is indis¬ 
pensable for matters involving foreign courts; for there 
you put yourself forward, and publish your disagreements 
with me to all Europe: and that I am hardly disposed to 
allow. As for your financial and home affairs, I repeat, as 
I said before, that nothing you do squares either with my 
opinions or with my experience: if you go on as you are 
doing you will get nowhere. All the same, I should be 
obliged if you would practice a little less pomp and ostenta¬ 
tion in dimarches whose consequences you fail to appreciate. 
Nothing could be more absurd than the audience you gave 
to the Jews. Nothing could be worse than your parody of 
the French Moniteur. I have undertaken to reform the Jews; 
but I have made no attempt to attract more of them into 
my states. Far from it. I have been careful to do nothing 
suggesting a good opinion of the most despicable race in 
the world. 

P.S.—My dear fellow. I’m very fond of you, but you’re 
a mere babe. Keep Simeon and Beugnot for at least a year 

213 

Wanted a King 

longer, oath or no oath. Then we shall see what we shall 
see! 

[Lecestre, i, 237. The P.S. was added in Napoleon’s own hand. 
Counts Beugnot (afterwards Imperial Commissioner in the Duchy of 
Berg) and Simeon had introduced the Napoleonic regime into West¬ 
phalia.] 

158 

THE SPANISH THRONE 

TO LOUIS NAPOLEON, KING OF HOLLAND 

Saint-Cloud, March 27, 1808, 7 p.m. 

The King of Spain has abdicated. The Prince of the 
Peace has been put in prison. An insurrection has broken 
out at Madrid. Whilst all this was happening, my troops were 
40 leagues away from the capital; but the Grand Duke of 
Berg should have entered it with 40,000 men on the 23rd. 
The people have been loud in their appeals to me through¬ 
out me crisis. Convinced as I am that I shall never secure 
lasting peace with England until I set the whole of Europe 
in motion, I have determined to put a French prince on the 
throne of Spain. The Dutch climate doesn’t suit you. 
Holland can never rise again from its ashes. Whether there 
is peace or not, it hasn’t the means to defend itself in this 
whirlwind of a world. Things being so, I am thinking of 
you for the throne of Spain. There you will be sovereign 
of a generous nation of 11 million souls, and of important 
colonies over-seas. Given economy and energy, Spain might 
have 60,000 men under arms, ana 50 warships in its ports. 
Tell me in so many words what you think of this plan. 
You understand that it is still only in the air, and that, 
though I have 100,000 men in Spain, the circumstances may 
be such that I can go straight ahead, and get it all done 
in a fortnight, or such that I may have to proceed slowly, 
and only reach my hidden objective at the end of several 
months’ operations. Give me a plain answer. If I appoint 
you King of Spain, do you accept? Can I count on you? 

214 

for Spain 

As your messenger might come too late to find me in Paris, 
and might then have to follow me across Spain, and be 
liable to mischances that cannot be provided against, give 
me your answer in one of these two forms:—‘I have received 
your letter of such and such a date: my answer is “yes” 
and then I shall count upon your doing what I wish: or 
“no”: which will mean that you do not accept my proposal. 
You can follow this up with a letter explaining your views 
and wishes in detail; and this you had better address under 
cover to your wife in Paris. If I am there, she will forward it 
to me; if not, she will send it back to you. Don’t take anyone 
into your confidence, and don’t mention the subject of this 
letter to a single soul. A thing like this must be done, 
before one admits to having thought of doing it. 

[Corresp., xvi. Appendix (3). Charles IV became King of Spain in 
1788. His Queen, Maria Luisa of Parma, took, as one of her lovers, 
Manuel de Godoy of the Royal Guard, and made him chief minister 
and generalissimo. He was called ‘Prince of the Peace’ from the con¬ 
clusion of the Peace of Basle in 1795. Ferdinand, the heir to the throne, 
was on bad terms both with his mother and with her lover.On March 
19, 1808, as the result of a popular rising at Aranjuez, Godoy was 
dismissed, and Charles IV abdicated in favour of his son, who became 
Ferdinand VII. On March 23, Murat (the Grand Duke of Berg), 
entered Madrid.] 

*59 

OFFICIAL HISTORY 

NOTE FOR M. CRETET, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Bordeaux, April 12, 1808. 

His Majesty disapproves of the principles laid down in 
the Minister’s note. They were true 20 years ago; they will 
be true 60 years hence; but they are not true to-day. Velly 
is the only author who has written anything like a detailed 
history of France. President Henault’s Chronological Summary 
is a good old classic. It would be well worth while to bring 
them both up to date. Velly ends with Henri IV, and the 

215 

History Ancient 

other historians don’t go beyond Louis XIV. Everything 
depends upon the spirit in which the continuations are 
written. Young people can hardly avoid accepting whatever 
version of the facts is presented to them. To fob them off 
with nothing but memoirs is to provide them with a store 
of future errors. His Majesty has ordered the Minister of 
Police to see to the continuation of Millot: he wishes the 
two Ministers to co-operate in arranging for continuations 
of Velly and President Henault. The work must be entrusted 
not merely to authors of real ability, but also—and this is 
even more important—to adherents of the Government, 
who will present the facts from their right angle, and lay 
the foundations of healthy education, taking up the old 
historians at the point where they stop, and carrying on the 
history up to the Year VIII. 

His Majesty regards expense as of no consideration. It is 
indeed his intention that the Minister should make it known 
that no study is more likely to merit the Emperor’s protec¬ 
tion than that of history. 

Every line of the history must bring out the effects of the 
influence of the Court of Rome, of the e confession cards,’ 
of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, of the absurd 
marriage of Louis XIV to Madame de Maintenon, and so on. 
The weakness through which the Valois kings fell from 
their throne ought to rouse the same feelings as that 
through which the Bourbons let the reins of government 
slip from their hands. Justice should be done to Henri IV, 
Louis XU!, Louis XIV, and Louis XV, but without flattery. 
The September massacres and the horrors of the Revolution 
should be painted with the same brush as the Inquisition, and 
the massacres of the Sixteen. La speaking of the Revolution, 
care must be taken to avoid reaction of any kind. Nobody 
could oppose the Revolution. The blame for it belongs 
neither to the victims, nor to the survivors. No single power 
could have changed conditions or prevented happenings 
which were the natural outcome of circumstances. 

Attention should be called to the constant financial 
disorders, the chaotic state of the provincial assemblies, 

216 

and Modern 

the pretentious of the parkments , and the lack of adminis¬ 
trative method and energy, which made the patch-work 
France of those days, with its disunity of law and govern¬ 
ment, more like a congeries of twenty kingdoms than a 
single state; and thus, when the reader comes to the epoch 
that enjoys the benefits of one law, one land, and one govern¬ 
ment, he will breathe again. Realising how weak the 
government always was under Louis XVI, Louis XV, and 
even Louis XIV, he will feel bound to support the work 
we have recently accomplished, and the supremacy we have 
achieved. So too, the knowledge that we have re-established 
Catholic worship and the Catholic altars should inspire 
apprehension lest the peace that France now enjoys be 
destroyed by some ambitious Confessor, or some foreign 
priest. 

No work could be more important. Every passion and 
party in the country can produce reams or misleading 
literature: but a work like Velly, or like Henault’s Summary y 
requires more than one continuator. Once this book 
appears, well edited, and written with a right tendency, 
no one will either want to write or have the patience to 
write another, especially when its composition, far from 
being favoured, is discouraged by the police. 

If the view expressed in the Minister’s note were adopted, 
it would mean abandoning this important work to private 
enterprise, and to publishers’ speculations—a bad plan, 
the result of which could only be disastrous. 

If any individual historian offers his services, the one 
question to ask is whether he possesses the necessary talents, 
and is a man of good sense, and whether we can rely upon 
his researches and writings being directed by sound 
opinions. 

[Corresp., xvi, 13735. Henault’s Abrege (1744), Velly’s Histoire de 
France (1755), and Millot’s Elements de I } Histoire de France (1767) were 
the most popular old-fashioned histories of France in the eighteenth 
century.] 

217 

Spanis h Kings 
160 

SPANISH COURT 

TO M. TALLEYRAND, PRINCE OF BENEVENTO, VICE-GRAND 

ELECTOR 

Bayonne, May i, 1808. 

I have received your letter of April 27. The Spanish 
minister has written a quite ridiculous letter to Champagny 
complaining of the statement in the papers that King Charles 
was forced to abdicate. Tell him that he ought to have read 
the Moniteur; that I have seen King Charles and the Queen, 
and that they gave their sons a very bad reception: that for 
several hours they went in fear of their lives, and that if the 
King had not signed his abdication they would have been 
assassinated. Make the same statement to the assembled 
ambassadors, and add that the King has been much surprised 
that the foreign ministers at Madrid should have recognised 
the new king; that the French minister, representing the 
only power in a position to control his affairs, has not 
recognised him; that when this minister asked the King 
whether his abdication had been voluntary, he replied: ‘That 
is a subject which I am keeping for a letter to my brother 
the Emperor of the French’; that this hint was enough for 
M. de Beauhamais, who had the good sense not to recognise 
Ferdinand VII; that the King’s life, and the Queen’s, were 
only saved at the price of abdication: and that die following 
day he made his daughter, the Queen of Etruria, write to 
the Grand Duke of Berg; hence the document diat appeared 
in the Moniteur. 

The Prince of the Asturias is a brute, a bad lot, and an 
enemy of France. You can imagine that, with my experience 
of managing men, his 24 years quite failed to impress me; 
indeed my mind is so clear about him that nothing less than 
a long war would induce me to recognise him as King of 
Spain. Further than that, I notified him that, as King Charles 
was on the French frontier, I could not have any more 
dealings with him. In pursuance of this attitude I arrested 

218 

G O D O Y 

his messengers, and found on them letters full of venomous 
hatred against the French, whom he repeatedly described as 
‘these damned Frenchmen/ 

The Prince of the Peace is here. King Charles is a fine 
fellow. I don’t know whether it is his position or circum¬ 
stances, but he has the air of an honest and good-natured 
old man. The story of the Queen’s infatuation is written 
on her face: there is no need to say more. The affair passes 
imagination. They are both dining with me to-day. The 
Prince of the Peace looks rather like a bull: there is some¬ 
thing of Darn about him. He is beginning to recover his 
nerves after the unparalleled barbarity with which he was 
treated. It is as well that the untrue imputations against 
him have been withdrawn; but it is inevitable that he should 
still be treated with veiled contempt. 

[Corresp., xvii, 13 777. The Prince of the Asturias is Ferdinand VII, 
■whose accession (v. No. 158) Napoleon refused to recognise, since he 
intended the throne for one of his own family.] 

l6l 

ENTERTAINING SPANISH PRINCES 

TO M. DE TALLEYRAND, PRINCE OF BENEVENTO, VICE-GRAND 

ELECTOR 

Bayonne, May 9, 1808. 

The Prince of the Asturias, his uncle the Infant Don 
Antonio, and his brother the Infant Don Carlos leave here 
on Wednesday, spend Friday and Saturday at Bordeaux, and 
will be at Valen$ay on Tuesday. I want you to be there by 
Monday evening. My chamberlain Toumon is posting 
there, to get everything ready for their reception. Arrange 
for the provision of table and bed-linen, and all that is 
needed for the kitchen. They will have eight or ten persons 
in attendance on them, and as many, or perhaps twice as 
many servants. I am ordering the General who is acting as 

219 

Pleasures and Spies 

Senior Inspector of the Paris Gendarmerie to go there, and 
to organise the police service. 

I want these princes to be received without public 
ceremonial, but decently and attentively. You must do all 
you can to keep them amused. If there is a theatre at Valen¬ 
cy, and you could arrange for some actors to come there, 
it wouldn’t be a bad idea. Then you could get M me 
Talleyrand to come, with four or five other women. If the 
Prince of the Asturias were to form an attachment to some 
good-looking woman, whom one could depend upon, so 
much the better: it would give us an additional means of 
watching him; and I am particularly anxious that he should 
commit no political indiscretions: that is why I want him to 
be occupied and amused. If I were vindictive I should shut 
him up at Bitche, or in a fortress of some kind. But as he has 
thrown himself on my mercy, and promised to do nothing 
without my orders, and as everything in Spain is going well, 
I have decided to send him to this country place, and to 
surround him with pleasures and spies. The arrangement 
need only last during May and a part of June: by that time 
the situation in Spain will have declared itself, and I shall 
be able to tell what to do. Your own part in the business is 
honourable enough. To entertain and amuse three illustrious 
personages is thoroughly in character with your nation and 
with your rank. Eight or ten days spent in their company 
will acquaint you with their thoughts, and help me to 
decide what I ought to do. . . . 

[Lecestre, i, 278.] 

162 

SHIP-BUILDING 

TO REAR-ADMIRAL DECRES, MINISTER OF MARINE 

Bayonne, May 22, 1808. 

I have received your letter of the 18th, referring to the 
Spanish-American expedition. The Spaniards are despatch¬ 
ing from Cadiz every ship they can. If the French took the 

220 

Ship-building 

trouble to fit out expeditions in their ports, it would, I 
suppose, only result in giving the alarm? Nonsense! Your 
one business is to despatch ships from Bordeaux, Bayonne, 
and every available port. I can’t give orders to a minister as 
I should to an ordinary official: when I give a minister an 
order, I leave it to him to find means to carry it out. 
However, you need not send an expedition to America. 
Nor, by the way, need you compare me with God. The way 
you put it is so extraordinary, and shows so little respect 
for me, that I can’t believe you thought what you were 
saying. I am sorry for your judgment. . . . But I will say 
no more about it. Send me lists, with plenty of details, 
showing me how far the work has gone, to what classes the 
vessels under construction belong, and what I can get 
built; for it seems that if I want a single schooner to sail I 
shall have to design it myself! If I had a sensible minister at 
the head of my navy, there would have been 40 vessels 
at sea by this time—brigs, corvettes, scouts, schooners, 
two-masted sloops, lateen-rigged ships, and the rest; and 
if all 40 had been captured, at any rate the minister would 
have done his duty. As it is, only 3 vessels have sailed, and 
it was I who despatched them. One must be something of a 
fool, after that, to think there is nothing superior to one’s 
own ideas but miracles, and the mind of God!... 

[Corresp., xvii, 13960. This concerns Napoleon’s scheme for a 
Franco-Spanish expedition against Egypt, in connexion -with the attack 
on India outlined in No. 156.] 

163 

SPANISH APOLOGIA 

TO ALEXANDER I, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 

Bayonne, July 8,1808. 

I send Your Majesty the Constitution just passed by the 
Spanish Junta. Disorder in this country had reached a degree 

221 

Spain: Official 

difficult to imagine. Compelled to intervene in its affairs, I 
have been led by the irresistible force of events to a system 
which guarantees both the happiness of Spain and the tran¬ 
quillity of my own states. In her new situation Spain will 
really be less dependent on me than she was before; but I 
shall derive this advantage, that, when she finds herself nor¬ 
mally situated, and with nothing to fear on land, she will use 
all her resources to rebuild her navy. I have reason to be 
satisfied with all the people of rank, fortune, or education. 
Only the monks, who occupy half the land, and who foresee 
that the new regime means the destruction of abuses, as 
well as the many agents of the Inquisition, who are appre¬ 
hensive that their occupation will soon be gone, are still 
agitating the country. I am well aware that my action in 
Spain will open a vast ground for discussion. People will 
fail to make allowances for the circumstances, or for the 
facts of the situation: they will allege that the whole thing 
was a premeditated plot. But in fact, if I had thought of 
nothing but the interests of France, it would have been quite 
simple to extend my southern frontiers at the expense of 
Spanish territory; for everyone knows that ties of blood go 
for little in calculations of policy, and are null and void at 
the end of 20 years. Philip V went to war with his grand¬ 
father. The addition to France of such a province as Cata¬ 
lonia or Navarre would have been a greater increase of her 
power than the change which has just taken place, and which 
in fact benefits no country but Spain herself.... 

[Corresp., xvii, 14170. On June 11 the Spanish authorities at 
Madrid, under military pressure, recognised Joseph as King of 
Spain: but the Juntas of Asturias (May 25) and of Seville (June 6) had 
already declared war on the French: and soon the whole country was 
in revolt. Philip’s ‘grandfather* should be his father-in-law, the 
Duke of Savoy.] 

222 

The Best Books 

164 

JEROME’S DEBTS 

TO JEROME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA 

Bayonne,/^ 16, 1808. 

You owe the bank two millions. You allow your notes to 
be repudiated. It is thoroughly dishonest of you. I will not 
be let down like this. You must sell your diamonds and your 
plate. There must be an end to the mad extravagance 
which already makes you the laughing-stock of Europe,, 
and will end by rousing the indignation of your subjects. 
Sell your furniture, sell your horses, sell your jewellery, and 
pay your debts. Honour is the best currency. It is bad form 
to leave your debts unpaid, whilst everyone can see the kind 
of presents you give. The luxury you indulge in bewilders 
ana shocks your subjects. You are young and light-headed, 
and care nothing for the value of money—and that at a time 
when your people are suffering from the after-effects of war. 

[Lecestre, i, 318.] 

165 

HUNDRED BEST BOOKS 

TO M. BARBIER, THE EMPEROR’S LIBRARIAN 

Bayonne, July 17, 1808. 

The Emperor wishes to provide himself with a portable 
library of 1,000 volumes, in small 12 0 size, and good type. 
His Majesty’s intention is to have works specially printed 
for his own use, and without margins, so as not to waste 
space. The volumes should contain 5 or 600 pages each, 
and should be bound with loose backs, so that they open 
flat, and in the thinnest possible boards. This library would 
be composed of about 40 volumes on religion, 40 of epics, 
40 of plays, 60 of poetry, 100 of novels, and 60 of history. 
The balance, up to 1,000, would be made up with historical 
memoirs of all ages. 

223 

Select Authors 

The religious works would be the Old and New Testa¬ 
ments in the best translations: a selection of the Epistles and 
other most important works of the Church Fathers; the 
Koran; some mythology: select treatises on the sects which 
have had most historical influence, such as the Arians, 
Calvinists, Reformed bodies, etc.; and a history of the 
Church, if there is room for it within the thousand volumes. 

The Epics should be Homer, Lucan, Tasso, Tilemaque i 
the Henriade , etc. 

The Tragedies: of Corneille, only the plays that have 
stood the test of time; Racine; but leave out the Freres 
ennemis , Alexandre , and the Flaideurs; of Crebillon, only 
Fhadamiste , and Atree et Thyeste; and what has survived of 
Voltaire. 

History: put in some good books on chronology, and the 
chief ancient authorities—sufficient for a detailed history 
of France. You can include under the head of history 
Machiavelli’s Discours sur Tite-Lipe, the Esprit des hois , the 
Grandeur des Romains , and whatever is worth keeping of 
Voltaire’s historical writings. 

Novels: Rousseau’s Confessions , and Nouvelle Hiloise. 
There is no need to mention the masterpieces of Fielding, 
Richardson, Lesage, etc., which are of course included. 
The Contes of Voltaire. 

Note. —Don’t put in Rousseau’s Emile > or the whole 
crowd of letters, memoirs, speeches, and useless treatises 
that he wrote. The same remark applies to Voltaire. 

The Emperor wishes to have a descriptive catalogue of 
the library, with notes pointing out the best books, together 
with a memorandum saying what would be the cost of 
printing and binding these 1,000 volumes, what proportion 
of an author’s works each volume would contain, what 
each volume would weigh, how many boxes of what size 
would be needed to hold them all, and how much space 
they would take up. 

The Emperor would also like M. Barbier to collaborate 
with one of our best geographers in editing memoirs on the 
campaigns which have been fought on the Euphrates and 

224 

Pillars of Hercules 

against the Parthians, from that of Crassus down to the 
18th century, including those of Antony, Trajan, Julian, 
etc.; and in marking, on maps of a convenient size, the route 
followed by each army, with the names (both ancient and 
modern) of the districts and principal towns, remarks on the 
geography of the country, and historical narratives of each 
expedition drawn from orginal sources. 

[Corresp., xvii, 14207. For second thoughts on this library, cf. 
No. 183.] 

166 

THE WAR IN SPAIN 

TO JOSEPH NAPOLEON, KING OF SPAIN 

Bordeaux, July 31, 1808, 11 p.m. 

I have received your letters of the 24th, 25 th, and 26th. 
I don’t like the tone of that of the 24th. There is no question 
of dying, but of fighting and winning. You are fighting: you 
will win. In Spain I shall find the Pillars of Hercules, but 
not the limits of my power. In all my military life I have 
never come across anything so despicable as these Spanish 
bands and troops. In any case troops and reinforcements of 
every kind are coming to your aid. You have a third more 
forces than you need, if only they are managed with proper 
efficiency. Apart from Moncey, with his disgraceful retreat 
and his cowardly council of war, I am very pleased with my 
troops. Savary has a good head and heart: he has made 
mistakes in strategy, because he is unaccustomed to supreme 
command: all the same, he is superior to anyone that you 
have. Caulaincourt has done splendidly at Cuenca. The 
town has been looted—by right of war, since it defended 
itself against capture. 

Russia has recognised you: the letter was sent to M. 
Strogonoff. When I reach Paris I shall no doubt hear that 
Austria has done the same. As a King your position may be 
painful: as a general it is brilliant. There is only one thing 

Q 225 

BAYLE N 

to fear: take care you don’t destroy the spirit of the atmv 
by refusing to allow retaliation upon the Spaniards. It is 
impossible to show consideration towards brigands who 
murder my wounded, and commit every kind of outrage. 
It is only natural to treat them—I have said so before, and 
I say it again—as the army does. . . . 

[Lecestre, i, 333. Joseph was ‘recognised’ as King of Spain. 
After suppressing the revolt of May 2 at Madrid, Moncey was sent with 
7,000 men to capture Valencia. After two attempts, he withdrew, with 
a loss of 1,000 men. Napoleon had not yet heard of the disaster at 
Baylen on July 23.] 

167 

BAYLEN AND SPANDAU 

TO MARSHAL SOULT, SECOND IN COMMAND OF THE GRAND 
ARMY, AT STETTIN 

Saint-Cloud, August 15 ^ 1808. 

Dupont has utterly disgraced himself and my arms. He 
conducted his operations at the end of July like a fool and 
a coward, and completely lost his head. He has upset all 
my plans in Spain. But the harm done is nothing to the 
dishonour. The details of the affair, which I prefer to keep 
to myself, would make your blood boil. One of these days 
they shall be published, and the honour of our aims shall 
be avenged. 

I believe the agreement for the evacuation of Prussia 
will be signed to-morrow, or the day after. The evacuation 
itself will be carried out towards the end of October. I 
think it would be as well if you were to blow up Spandau; 
but you must do it secretly, and do it soon, so that there 
may be no excuse for claiming compensation. You will want 
some miners; and you must get the whole job done in five 
days, before Berlin gets wind of it. You can say, if you like, 
that a magazine blew up, or that the explosion was due to 
powder stored in the cellars. I am keeping the forts at 

226 

Congress Dances 

Glogau, Stettin, and Custrin until the indemnities are paid, 
and the situation clears up. 

[Lecestre, i, 341- The capitulation of General Dupont’s army to the 
Spaniards at Baylen on July 23—Napoleon heard of it on August 2— 
was a serious blow to French prestige. By an agreement signed on 
September 8 Prussia paid a heavy indemnity, reduced her forces, 
and promised help against Austria, in return for a partial withdrawal 
of the French army of occupation.] 

168 

ERFURT 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE 

Erfurt, October 9, 1808. 

Thank you for your letter, my dear. I am glad to see 
you are well. I have just been hunting on the batdefield of 
Jena. We lunched on the spot where I slept out, the night 
before the battle. I have been to a ball at Weimar. The 
Emperor Alexander dances, but I don’t. Forty is forty. My 
health is really excellent, in spite of a few small ailments. 
Good-bye, my dear. All my love. Hoping to see you soon. 

[Corresp., xvii, 14366. Napoleon entered Erfurt, for a conference 
with the Tsar, on September 27. On October 6 he went to Weimar 
for a battue and a ball.] 

169 

TEMPLE OF JANUS 

TO PRINCE CAMBACERES, ARCH-CHANCELLOR OF THE EMPIRE 

Aranda, November z6 y 1808. 

... I have put up a monument at the Madeleine in honour 
of the Grand Army. The Legislature ought to erect on the 
heights of Montmartre a sort of Temple of Janus, with 
an inscription to the effect that ‘This temple was erected 
by the Departmental Deputies of the Legislature, and by 

227 

Stein 

the members of the Electoral Colleges of the French 
Empire, etc/ The temple should be used for the first 
solemn declarations of peace, and for the distribution of 
decennial prizes. It would be a kind of Temple of Janus. It 
can hardly cost less than 30 or 40 millions. The Legislature 
must petition me to ask for a law by which each member 
of the Electoral Colleges (there are 30 or 40,000 of them) 
is invited to subscribe 1,000 or 3,000 francs, according to 
his means, to be paid in 5 annual instalments. By this 
means 30 or 40 millions will be available in the course of 
5 years; the money will be employed to hurry on the work; 
and we shall make this Temple one of the finest buildings 
in the whole world. It will not inconvenience the Electors, 
for they are rich men: and anyhow they can spread their 
payments over 5 years, and give only 1,000 francs instead 
of 3,000, if they cannot afford more. I will pass on the 
petition to the State Council, and they will draft a law. 
The subscription-list will be opened at once, and work will 
begin next year. 

[Corresp., xviii, 145 IO.] 

170 

STEIN 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Madrid, December 16, 1808. 

Forward the annexed order to all my ministers attached 
to the Princes of the Confederation of the Rhine, and 
inform them that Stein is still intriguing with the English 
in his fantastic plots against the Confederation. Request 
the Prince of Nassau to sequestrate his property. Inform 
the Prussian Court that my ministers will not visit Berlin 
unless Stein is banished from that capital, and from Prussia. 
But that is not enough. You are to write to the Prussian 
minister, demanding that the fellow be handed over as a 
traitor, and as an agent employed by the English to embroil 

228 

Brighter Paris 

the two courts. Speak strongly in this sense to the Prussian 
minister in Paris. Instruct my consul at Konigsberg to speak 
to the King about it. Give them to understand that, if Stein 
falls into French hands, he will be shot. 

[Lecestre, i, 385. The news of Baylen (v. No. 167) encouraged the 
Prussian patriots. A compromising letter by their leader, Stein (August 
15) reached Napoleon. Nassau was Stein’s native place.] 

171 

WATER-WORKS 

TO M. CRETET, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Madrid, December 21, 1808. 

I see from the papers that you have laid the foundation- 
stone of the fountain on the site of the Bastille. I assume 
that the elephant will stand in the centre of a huge basin 
filled with water; that it will be a handsome beast, and big 
enough for people to be able to get inside the howdah on its 
back. I want to show how the ancients fixed these howdahs , 
and what elephants were used for. Send me the design for 
this fountain. Have plans drawn for another fountain 
representing a handsome galley with 3 banks of oars, e.g., 
that of Demetrius, of the same dimensions as a classical 
trireme. It could be put up in the middle of a public square, 
or some such place, with jets of water playing all round it, 
to add to the beauty of the capital. You understand that in 
constructing these two fountains the architects must not be 
content with their own researches; they must conform to 
the views of learned men and antiquarians, so that the 
elephant and the galley may give exact reproductions of the 
way in which they were used by the ancients. 

My intention is to make use of the water from the Ourcq 
to' embellish die Tuileries garden with streams and cascades, 
and the Champs-Elys^es and its surroundings with big sheets 
of water, as large as the Tuileries garden, on which we can 
have boats of every variety. 

[Corresp., xviii, 14599.] 

229 

Papal Candles 
ijz 

THE RISING GENERATION 

TO COUNT FOUCHJ 2 , MINISTER OF POLICE 

Benavente, December 31,1808. 

I am informed that some of the emigre families are refusing 
to let their children enlist, and are keeping them in un¬ 
desirable and culpable idleness. .There is no denying that 
the rich old families -which do not owe their origin to my 
regime are definitely opposed to it. I want you to draw up a 
list of ten of the leading families in each Department, and 
fifty in Paris, showing the age, income, and profession of 
each of their members. I intend to issue a decree by which 
all the young people belonging to these families between the 
ages of 16 and 18 shall be sent to the Military School at 
Saint-Cyr. If any one objects, there is no answer to make, 
except that I wish it so. That generation must not be allowed 
to suffer for the petty hatreds and passions of this.... 

[Lecestre, i, 386. ‘I wish it so/ Napoleon uses the old royal phrase, 
tnon bon plaisir\ 

*73 

CANDLEMAS 

to count de champagny, minister for foreign affairs 

Benavente, January 1, 1809. 

It is the Pope’s custom to present candles to the various 
powers. You are to write to my agent at Rome, saying that 
I refuse to have any. The King of Spain doesn’t want them 
any more than I do. Write to Naples and Holland saying 
that they are to refuse them too. It would be improper to 
accept them, because the Pope had the insolence not to give 
any last year. This is how I want the affair conducted. My 
chargi d'affaires will make it known that on Candlemas day 

230 

Progress 

I am accepting candles blessed by my cure, and that the value 
of such things does not depend upon purple and power. 
There are probably Popes in Hell, as well as parsons, so 
that a candle blessed by my cure is just as likely to be holy as 
one blessed by the Pope. I refuse to accept the Pope’s 
presentation candles, and all the princes in my family are 
to do the same as I do. 

[Corresp., xviii, 14633-] 

m 

THEN AND NOW 

TO COUNT FOUCHE, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Valladolid, January 13, 1809. 

Now that we are in 1809, I think it would be useful to 
have some articles written, in good style, contrasting the 
misfortunes from which France was suffering in 1709 with 
the prosperous state of the Empire in 1809. The comparison 
should be worked out under several heads—territory and 
population, internal welfare, international prestige, finance, 
etc. You have got men competent to write 5 or 6 good 
articles on this very important subject, and to give public 
opinion a lead in the right direction. Louis XIV spent his 
time building Versailles, and a number of hunting-lodges. 
We spend our time improving Paris, from its water-supply 
to its palaces, from its markets to the Temple of Victory, 
and the Stock Exchange. Everything wanted doing, and 
everything is being done. 

Starting from that point, one could go on to speak of the 
perfection and simplicity that we have given to our institu¬ 
tions, and the tranquil flow of ideas that characterises 1809. 
In 1709 the edict of Nantes had been revoked, and the 
Protestants were being persecuted; Marshal Villars was 
wasting his generalship on civil war in the Cevennes, and 
Pdre Lachaise tyrannised over the conscience of the old 
King. In 1809 the altars have been set up again, and we 

231 

Corunna 

tolerate differences in religion. Under the head of morals, it 
could be pointed out that bishops no longer frequent houses 
of ill repute, or the ante-chambers of the rich, but stay at 
home in their dioceses. There is material for some splendid 
articles here. But we don't want to undertake a long work 
that would never be finished. We might have an article once 
a month, and all of them under the same title, *1709 and 
1809/ 

[Corresp., xviii, 14695. The Edict of Nantes was revoked by 
Louis XIV in 168 j. In 1703, Marshal Villars was recalled from a 
successful campaign in Germany to put down a rising of the Camisards 
in the Cevennes. The Jesuit P£reLa Chaise was Louis XIV’s confessor 
from 1674 to 1709.] 

*75 

MOORE'S RETREAT 

TO REAR-ADMIRAL COUNT DECRES, MINISTER OF MARINE 

Paris, January 29,1809. 

It is my intention that you shall give orders for the 
firing of a salvo of 30 guns on all coasts where there are 
British cruisers, and particularly in the neighbourhood of 
Boulogne, to celebrate our victory over the English, and 
their expulsion from Spain. You are also to order flags to 
be flown in the manner sailors usually employ on such 
occasions. Repeat these orders on the Mediterranean coast, 
and to all my fleets. Make a short announcement to the 
effect that an army of 36-40,000 English, under the command 
of Generals Moore and Baird, reinforced by a Spanish army, 
has been pursued with the sword in its back for 50 leagues; 
that we have killed 2,000 of their men, and captured 7,000, 
with their field-hospitals and baggage-train; that they 
hjpughed more than 6,000 of their own horses; and that 
they were forced to desert the Spaniards under La Romana, 
who have perished to a man. 

[Corresp., xviii, 14757. Sir John Moore, after an advance towards 
Madrid, had to retreat with 20,000 men to Corunna, Napoleon started 

232 

Church Finance 

in pursuit with 25,000 men, on December 22. On January 1, as the 
result of letters from Paris, he handed over the command to Soult and 
Ney, and soon after left for France. On January 17 the British forces 
embarked at Corunna with a loss of 6,000 men. La Romana’s forces 
were only dispersed: within 2 months the Spaniards had 100,000 men 
in the field.] 

176 

PEW RENTS 

TO COUNT MARET, MINISTER SECRETARY OF STATE 

Paris, Febrmrj 17, 1809. 

M. Maret is to refer the enclosed Charge to a Committee 
consisting of State-Minister Regnaud and State-Counsellors 
Treilhard and Portalis, with instructions to let me have a 
report on it at to-morrow’s meeting of the State Council. 

(1) Have the bishops any right to publish Charges 
without rhyme or reason, whenever they like, and to 
criticise the Government policy, apropos of some question 
about eating eggs in Lent? 

(2) Have they any right to levy taxes in this country, and 
to abuse the credulity and confidence of the common people 
by selling them dispensations from fasting, cash down? 

(3) Have they any right to take advantage of conscien¬ 
tious scruples they themselves evoke, in order to make a 
profit out of dispensations, and even to take money out of 
the Empire, and send it to Rome? 

(4) Have they any right to sell sittings to the highest 
bidder, so that poor people cannot go to Church? Ought 
chairs to be charged for and places priced like seats at a 
theatre? 

The Committee will draft a decree to remedy these 
abuses, and will present it to me to-morrow at the Stale 
Council. My intention is that taxes shall not be raised by any 
authority but that of the law; a tax levied on conscience is 
as real as a tax levied on land. My intention is that there shall 
be no charge for entrance into a church—all my subjects 

233 

Prayer and the Popes 

have a right to be there; that dispensations from fasting 
shall be obtainable free of charge; that marriage licences 
shall cost nothing; that, in order to make these measures 
effective, all payments under the head of alms shall be 
properly audited, either by the Church-wardens or by the 
Prefect; and finally, that no Charges shall be given except 
upon the initiative of the Minister of Public Worship, and 
none published unless previously approved by him. .Anyone 
opposing these measures will be liable to punishment. 

[Corresp., xviii, 1478 j.] 

177 

INTERCESSION 

TO M. BIGOT DE PREAMENEU, MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORSHIP 

Paris, March 3,1809. 

Inform me why the Archbishop of Aix has ordered nine 
days’ intercession for the illness of Queen Louise, and why 
the general public should be told to pray for anyone without 
the permission of the Government. 

[Lecestre, i, 417. Queen Louise is the ex-Queen of Spain, at this 
time living in Provence.] 

178 

PAPAL HISTORY 

TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICEROY OF ITALY 

Paris, March 3, 1809. 

Cesarotti has left a history of the Papacy. See what this 
work is like, and if its purpose is to make known the harm 
the Popes have done to religion and to Christianity, have it 
printed at once. 

[Corresp., xviii, 14842. Melchiore Cesarotti, translator of Ossian, 
and admirer of Napoleon, died November 3, 1808. His works include 
I prim Pontifice in 6 vols.] 

*34 

Circumstances alter Cases 
*79 

SARAGOSSA 

TO JOSEPH 

Rambouillet, March n, 1809. 

I have been reading an article in the Madrid Gazette 
describing the capture of Saragossa. The miter praises the 
defenders of the town—no doubt in order to encourage 
those of Valencia and Seville. A singular policy indeed! 
I’ll wager there’s not a Frenchman who doesn’t utterly 
despise the defenders of Saragossa. People who allow 
themselves to say such things are more dangerous to us 
than the rebels themselves. I’m quite sure O’ffarill didn’t 
mean any harm by it; but it is the second time that this 
has happened. In an earlier proclamation he referred to 
Saguntum—a most unsuitable comparison. 

[Joseph, vi, 73. Saragossa, garrisoned by Palafox and remnants of the 
Spanish army defeated in 1808, held out against 45,000 French till 
February 21; 50,000 of its inhabitants fell in its defence. Saguntum, 
near Valencia, was besieged by Hannibal in 219 b.c., and made a 
heroic resistance for eight months. General Gonzalo O’Farill had been 
Spanish Minister in Prussia (1804) and Commander of a Spanish force 
in Italy (1805-7).] 

180 

GAMBLING SALOONS 

TO ELISA, GRAND DUCHESS OF TUSCANY 

Paris, April 6,1809. 

My Sister; take care that no one starts any kind of 
gambling-saloon at Florence. I don’t allow them at Turin, 
or anywhere in the Empire. They set a bad example, and 
ruin family life. The only place where I tolerate them is 
Paris; partly because in this huge city it would be impossible 
to suppress them; and partly because they are made use of 
by the police. But my intention is that they shall not exist 
in any other part of my Empire. 

[Corresp., xviii, 15024. Tuscany, under the title of the Kingdom of 
Etruria, was given to Napoleon’s sister, Elisa, early in 1809.] 

235 

Empire 

181 

TEMPORAL POWER 

TO COUNT DE CHAMPAGNY, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Schonbrunn, May 17, 1809. 

The Emperor intends to communicate the enclosed 
decrees made by His Majesty, on the subject of the Papal 
States, to the Senate between June 5 and 10, accompanied 
by a report from the Minister for Foreign Affairs. 

His Majesty wishes this report to develop the motives 
laid down in the preamble; to prove that, when Charle¬ 
magne made the Popes temporal sovereigns, he meant them 
to remain vassals of the Empire; that nowadays, far from 
regarding themselves as vassals of the Empire, they refuse 
to belong to it at all; that the motive of Charlemagne’s 
generosity to the Popes was the good of Christianity, and 
mat now they are becoming allies of the Protestants, and of 
the enemies of Christ; and that one of the minor disadvan¬ 
tages resulting from this disposition is the sight of the 
head of the Catholic religion negotiating with Protestants, 
whereas according to the laws of the church, he ought to 
avoid them and excommunicate them (there is a prayer 
to that effect in use at Rome). 

The French armies at Naples and in north Italy ate cut 
off from each other by the Papal States. His Majesty*s first 
idea was to leave the Pope his temporal power, as Charle¬ 
magne did; whilst requiring him, as a sovereign, and in the 
interests of the whole peninsula, to contract an offensive 
and defensive alliance with the Kingdoms of Naples and 
Italy. The Pope refused. This meant that His Majesty would 
have to stand by whilst the English placed themselves 
between the armies of Naples and Italy, cut their communi¬ 
cations, and made Rome the headquarters of their con¬ 
spiracies, and an asylum for the brigands whom His 
Majesty*s enemies organise (if they do not actually disgorge 
them) on Neapolitan territory. Under these circumstances 
the only possible course was to occupy Rome with troops. 

236 

and Papa cy 

This measure, though indispensable, excited endless 
protests and lasting enmity on the part of the Head of 
religion against the most powerful prince in Christendom. 
But it was not as the Head of religion that the Pope set 
himself up against measures of precaution on the part of a 
Catholic nation; it was as a temporal sovereign; and before 
long it was seen that, influenced by enemies of the Roman 
church, the spiritual power was supporting the temporal 
power. This became a source of anxiety and dissension in 
the very heart of His Majesty’s vast domains. 

There is only one way in which His Majesty can put an 
end to debates so contrary to the welfare of religion and 
of the Empire; and that is to revoke the Donation of 
Charlemagne, and to reduce the Popes to their proper rank, 
by safeguarding the spiritual power from the passions that 
control the temporal power. Jesus Christ, though bom of 
the seed of David, refused to be a king. For centuries none 
of the founders of our religion were kings. There is no 
learned doctor and no candid historian who does not agree 
that the temporal power of the Popes is fatal to religion. 
If for so many years the internal history of France was 
marked by religious dissension, the cause lay, not in the 
spiritual, but in the temporal claims of the Papacy. If great 
nations broke away from the church, the cause still lay in 
Rome’s abuse of her power. When Julius sent his armies 
to cut off Charles YIH’s retreat, he did so in the interests of 
the Pope, not as pontiff but as prince. It was this confusion 
of the two powers, this support that each gave the other to 
forward their common usurpations, which forced our 
ancestors to establish the liberties of the Gallican church, 
and which obliges us to separate the two powers. 

The method commonly employed in the last century to 
bring the Popes to reason was to occupy Avignon. At 
Rome the interests of the Church—interests which ought to 
be beyond change, or any worldly consideration—were 
constantly sacrificed for the sake of temporal gains. The 
influence of the Pope, as Head of Christendom, ought to be 
equal in all parts of the Christian world; though it ought to 

237 

Temporal and Spiritual 

vary according to circumstances, and the policies of the 
various states. Spiritual affairs should never be hampered 
by personal interest. But how can it be otherwise, when the 
interests of the Pope as sovereign and the Pope as pontiff 
disagree? Jesus Christ said e My Kingdom is not of this 
world’; and by that doctrine he condemned for ever any 
intermingling of religious interests and worldly affairs. 

It is as much for the welfare of religion as it is for that 
of the French, German, and Italian peoples, that His Majesty 
should put an end to this farce of the Temporal Power, this 
feeble relic of the pretensions of people such as Gregory, 
etc., who claimed to rule over kings, to confer crowns, and 
to direct affairs on earth as well as affairs in heaven. It is all 
very well for the Popes, in the absence of Councils, to 
manage matters ecclesiastical, so long as they don’t interfere 
with the liberties of the Gallican church—but they should 
have nothing to do with armies, or with the policing of 
states. If they are the successors of Jesus Christ, they cannot 
exercise any rule but that which they hold from him; and his 
Kingdom was not of this world. 

Unless His Majesty takes this step—and no one else is 
strong enough to do so—Europe will be left to harvest 
a whole crop of discords and debate. Posterity will praise 
him for restoring Catholic worship and the Catholic 
altars; but it would equally blame him, were he to abandon 
Europe—that is, the great bulk of Christendom—to the 
influence of this fantastic confusion of powers, fatal both to 
religion and to the peace of the Empire. It is an obstacle 
which can be overcome only by separating the temporal and 
spiritual authorities, and by declaring the incorporation of 
the Papal States in the French Empire. 

[Corresp., six, 15218. Two months later Pius VII was arrested by 
General Radet, taken from Rome to Grenoble, and subsequently 
interned at Savona, v. No. 216.] 

238 

Floating Colonies 
182 

FREEDOM OF THE SEAS 

TO GENERAL ARMSTRONG, MINISTER OF THE UNITED STATES 

OF AMERICA 

Schonbrunn, May 18, 1809. 

M. de Champagny, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, has 
submitted to H.M. the Emperor and King various letters 
from His Excellency the Minister of the United States of 
America. He has been instructed to make the following 
answer. 

The seas belong to all nations. Every vessel, so long as it 
sails under some national flag, and is recognised and 
acknowledged by that nation, ought to be as free on the 
high seas as in its own home ports. The flag flown at die 
mast-head of a merchantman should be as fully respected 
as the flag that flies on a village church-tower. 

In the event of war between two maritime powers, 
neutrals ought not to submit to laws passed by either 
side. It should be understood that every ship is protected by 
its flag, and that any power violating it thereby declares war 
on the power to which it belongs. To insult a merchant 
vessel carrying the flag of another power is equivalent to 
invading a village or colony belonging to that power. His 
Majesty hereby declares that he regards the ships of all 
nations as floating colonies, and as part of their national 
territory. It follows from this principle that the sovereignty 
and independence of any nation can claim protection from 
neighbouring powers. If a French citizen were to be insulted 
in an American port or colony, the government of the 
United States would not disclaim responsibility. Similarly 
the government of the United States ought to be held re¬ 
sponsible for any violation of French property on board 
an American vessel, or floating colony. Otherwise, this 
government proving itself unable to guarantee the integrity 
of its rights, and the liberty of its flag. His Majesty is bound 
to consider American vessels as denationalised, and no 

239 

Armed Neutrality 

longer belonging to the United States, and therefore as 
liable to examination, the imposition of dues, and other 
arbitrary acts, without any violation of national rights. 

Nevertheless, as soon as the government of the United 
States gives orders that its merchant vessels are to be armed 
so as to resist England’s unfair attacks, and to uphold 
American law and sovereignty against England’s refusal 
to recognise the great principle that the goods ate covered 
by the flag, and against her unjustifiable claim to impose 
her law upon neutral shipping. His Majesty will be ready to 
recognise and treat the United States as a neutral power. 

[Corresp., xix, 15227. During the winter of 1807-8 the British 
Government issued a number of Orders in Council designed to pass 
neutral shipping through British ports, and to use it for exporting 
British goods to the Continent; whilst it reimposed the right of 
searching neutral vessels. On December 23, 1807, the United States 
passed an Embargo Act, with the professed intention of upholding 
■*freedom of the seas.’ But in February, 1809, this had to be rescinded. 
General John Armstrong was American ambassador to France, 
1804-10.] 

183 

TRAVELLING LIBRARY 

TO M. BARBIER 

SCHONBRUNN, June 12, 1809. 

The Emperor feels every day the need of having a 
travelling library of historical works. His Majesty would 
like to make up the number of volumes in this library to 
3,000, and they should all be of 18 0 size, like those of the 
Dauphin’s 18 0 collection, with 4-500 pages to the volume, 
■and printed in good Didot type on thin vellum paper. The 
12 0 size takes up too much room; besides, nearly all the 
books printed in that size are in poor editions. The 3,000 
volumes would be packed in 30 cases, containing 3 rows of 
33 volumes each. The collection would have a general title, 
and a consecutive system of numbering, independent of die 

240 

Travelling Library 

titles of the separate works. It could be divided into 5 or 6 
groups:— 

(1) Chronology and universal history. 

(2) Ancient history: (a) original authorities, and (b) modern 

works. 

(3) History of the Medieval Empire: (a) original authorities, 

and (b) modern works. 

(4) History in general, and in particular—e.g. Voltaire’s 

Essai. 

(5) Modem history of the European States:—France, Italy, 

etc. 

The collection should include Strabo, Danville’s maps 
of the ancient world, the Bible, and some history of the 
Church. 

This is only an outline of 5 or 6 groups, which would 
have to be examined, and carefully filled up. 

A certain number of literary men, people of taste, would 
be commissioned to review these editions, correct them, 
and suppress everything useless in them, such as editorial 
notes, etc., and all quotations in Greek or Latin, keeping 
only the French translation; but a few Italian works, of 
which no translation exists, could be left in the original 
language. 

The Emperor begs M. Barbier to draw up a plan for this 
library, and to let him know what is the best and cheapest 
way of producing these 3,000 volumes. 

When the 3,000 volumes of history are ready, they could 
be followed by 3,000 more on Natural History, Travels, 
Literature, etc. It would be easy enough to collect most of 
them, for plenty of these works are published in 18 0 size. 

M. Barbier is also requested to send a list of these works, 
with clear and detailed notes on the whole proposal, and 
as to the literary men who might be set to do the work, 
together with some idea as to the time, expense, etc., in¬ 
volved. 

[Fain, Memoirs, 71. cf. No. 165.] 

R 

*41 

God of Hosts 
184 

WAGRAM 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE 

Ebersdorf, July 7, 1809,5 a .m. 

I am sending you a line with the good news of the 
victories of Enzersdorf, which I won on the 5 th, and of 
Wagram, which I won on the 6th. 

The enemy is flying in disorder, and everything is pro¬ 
ceeding according to plan. 

Eugene is well. 

Prince Aldobrandini has been wounded, but only slightly. 
Bessieres was hit by a bullet in the fleshy part of the thigh: 
the wound is a trifling one. La Salle has been killed. My 
losses are high; but the victory is decisive and complete. 

We have taken more than roo guns, 12 flags, and a 
number of prisoners. 

I am sun-burnt. 

Good-bye, my dear. I send you my love. Many kind 
regards to Hortense. 

[Corresp., xix, 15491.] 

185 

ENCYCLICAL 

TO THE FRENCH BISHOPS 

Imperial Camp at Znaym, July 13, 1809. 

The victories of Enzersdorf and Wagram, in which the 
God of Hosts so evidently protected the French arms, ought 
to excite the liveliest gratitude in the hearts of Our people, 
It is therefore Our intention that upon the receipt of these 
present you should co-operate with the proper authorities 
to assemble Our people in the churches, and to address 
heaven with acts of thanksgiving, and prayers agreeable to 
the sentiments which We feel. 

242 

Two Sword s 

Our Lord Jesus Christ, though born of the seed of 
David, wished for no temporal rule; on the contrary, he 
enjoined obedience to Caesar in the regulation of worldly 
affairs. He was inspired with one great aim, and one only 
—the redemption and salvation of souls. As "We inherit 
Caesar’s power, so We are resolved to maintain the indepen¬ 
dence of Our throne, and the integrity of Our rights. We 
shall persevere in the great work of re-establishing religion. 
We shall surround the ministers of religion with the favour 
which We alone can give them. We shall listen to their 
voice in everything bearing on the spiritual life, and the 
regulation of the conscience. 

Amidst the cares of the camp, amidst the alarms and 
anxieties of war, it has given Us special pleasure to acquaint 
you with these Our feelings, in order that We may bring 
into discredit those works of weakness and ignorance, of 
mischief or of madness, by which attempts are being made 
to sow trouble and disorder in Our provinces. We shall not 
be turned aside from the great goal towards which We are 
travelling, and which We have already in part happily 
attained—the re-establishment of the altars of Our religion 
—by the attempt to make Us believe that its principles are 
incompatible with the independence of thrones or of nations, 
as has been asserted by the Greeks, the English, the Protes¬ 
tants, and the Calvinists. God has enlightened Us sufficiently 
to avoid such errors: such fears find no place in Our heart, 
or in the hearts of Our subjects. We know that those who 
would make the eternal interests of the conscience and 
spiritual affairs depend upon a temporal and perishable 
order are alien alike to the charity, mind, and religion of 
him who said, ‘My kingdom is not of this world.* 

[CoRRESP., xix, 15518.] 

*43 

J£r6me as General 
186 

AT THE FRONT 

TO JER6ME NAPOLEON, KING OF WESTPHALIA 

SCHONBRUNN, July 17, 1809. 

I have seen an Army Order of yours which makes you 
the laughing-stock of Germany, Austria, and France. Have 
you no friend at your side to tell you a few home truths? 
You are a king, and the Emperor’s brother; but those are 
no qualifications for war. In war one must begin as a soldier, 
continue as a soldier, and end as a soldier. No ministers, 
no foreign attaches, no ceremonial. War means bivouacing 
at the head of the army, spending days and nights on horse¬ 
back, and marching with the advance guard, to get the 
news—otherwise one had better stay behind in the women’s 
quarters. 

You go to war like a Persian Satrap. Good God! did 
I teach you such methods?—I, who, with an army of 
200,000 men, march at the head of my skirmishers, and do 
not even let Champagny come with me, but leave him 
behind at Munich or Vienna? 

What has been the result? Everyone complains of you, 
Kienmayer, with his 20,000 men, despises you, and your 
absurd pretensions: he has concealed his movements from 
you, and fallen upon Junot. This would never have hap¬ 
pened if you had been with your advance guard, and had 
given your orders from that position. Then you would 
nave known what he was doing, and could have pursued 
him, either along his line of retreat, or by way of Bohemia. 
You have plenty of ambition, some intelligence, and a few 
good qualities; but they are spoilt by silliness, and gross 
conceit; and you have no knowledge of the world. Mean¬ 
while, unless an armistice has been declared, Kienmayer 
will have put Junot out of action, and turned upon you. 

Stop making a fool of yourself. Send the foreign attaches 
back to CasseL Do without your procession of luggage- 
carts: cut down your dinners to one table. Go to war like 

244 

Walcheren Expedition 

any young soldier who wants to win honour and glory. 
Try to deserve the rank you have reached, and the esteem 
of France and Europe, who are watching everything you 
do. And, for Heaven’s sake, have the sense to write and 
speak as becomes your rank! 

[Lecestre, i, 479. Baron von Kienmayer, commanding the Austrian 
troops in Saxony, defeated Junot near Gefrees on July 8: Jerome 
escaped defeat by abandoning Dresden and retiring to Cassel.] 

187 

FLUSHING AND TALA VERA 

TO COUNT FOUCHE, MINISTER OF POLICE 

SCHONBRUNN, August 22, 1809. 

I have received your letter of the 16th. You say that you 
are afraid Flushing may be bombarded into surrender. You 
needn’t be alarmed. Flushing is impregnable, so long as its 
food holds out; and it has enough for 6 months. It is 
impregnable, because to reach it one must cross a moat filled 
with water; whilst as a last resort the dykes can be cut, and 
the whole island inundated. If Flushing falls within 6 
months, every general, colonel, and officer defending the 
place ought to be arrested and put on trial. I don’t believe 
that Rammekens will be taken either. I don’t know the fort; 
but as the dykes can be cut in case of need, it ought not to 
fall. Tell everyone you write to, and everyone you meet, 
that Flushing can’t be taken, short of cowardice on the part 
of its officers. Besides, I am confident that it won’t be, and 
that the English will withdraw without capturing it. I 
haven’t the slightest fear on that score. Bombs are no use, 
absolutely none. They will demolish a few houses, but that 
has never caused a town to surrender. 

Whilst the English are wasting their time on the Scheldt, 
in Spain Lord Wellesley has been beaten, surrounded, and 
utterly routed. He is trying to save himself by headlong 
flight in the middle of the hot season. When he retired from 

*45 

Talavera 

Talavera, he surrendered to the care of the Duke of Belluno 
5,000 sick and wounded English, whom he was forced to 
leave behind him. At last English blood is being shed! It is 
the best omen that peace is at length approaching. Un¬ 
doubtedly if matters had been better managed in Spain, 
not a single Englishman would have escaped. But anyhow 
they have been beaten—6,000 killed, 8,000 taken prisoners. 
Make these ideas the subject of articles in the papers; point 
out the folly of ministers who expose 30,000 English, in the 
heart of Spain, to the attacks of 120,000 French—the finest 
troops in the world, whilst at the same time they send 
20,000 more to run their heads against a stone wall in the 
Dutch marshes, where their efforts have no effect but to 
excite the zeal of the national guards. Make people see the 
stupidity of this policy of scattering their forces. To pack 
in small parcels has always been the hall-mark of a fool. 

[Lecestre, i, j 13. Flushing had already fallen (August 15). But 
otherwise the Walcheren expedition was a failure, and the survivors 
of the 40,000 men landed in July, 1809, were withdrawn. At Talavera 
17,000 British troops, with little help from 35,000 Spaniards, forced 
30,000 French to retire with a loss of 7,000 men. The British losses 
were 5,000.] 

188 

TALAVERA: SECOND THOUGHTS 

TO GENERAL CLARKE 

SCHQNBRUNN, August Z% 1809. 

. . .You will see that, according to the despatches of 
Wellesley, the English General, we lost 20 guns and 3 
flags at Talavera. Inform the King of my surprise, and 
General Jourdan of my displeasure, that, instead of being 
told the real state of affairs, I am sent republican romances, 
the kind of history they write for schoolboys. Tell them I 
want to know what gunners abandoned their pieces, and 
which infantry divisions let the enemy capture their flags. 
Allow the King to infer from your letter that I was sorry to 

246 

Paper War 

see the Order of the Day, in which he told the men that they 
had won the battle: it’s fatal to the troops. And tell him that 
I must have true information, with the number of men 
killed and wounded in each corps, the number of guns and 
hags lost, etc. They start engagements in Spain without 
preparation, or knowledge of war; and on the day of battle 
they carry on without plan, or combination, or energy. 
Write to General Sebastiani, saying that the King has sent 
me his report; that it is not the kind of report any soldier 
should make, when giving an account of what has happened, 
and of the present situation; that it seems to me a highly 
coloured version; that I should have liked him to say what 
he really thinks, and to give a true and detailed description 
of the affair; in a word, I ought to be told the truth,—it is 
essential for the efficiency of the army. Make them realise, 
one and all, how much it discredits the Government to 
conceal information which can be picked up from every 
soldier who writes home from the front, and who is 
tempted by such concealment to believe all the enemy's 
false reports. 

[Joseph, vi, 375.] 

189 

PAPER MONEY WAR 

TO COUNT FOUCHE, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Schonbrunn, September 6,1809. 

Maret is sending you specimens of all the different kinds 
of bank-note current here. I enclose a decree dealing with 
this matter. I want you to organise the printing or these 
bank-notes in all denominations up to a total sum of 100 
millions. You will require a press capable of turning out 10 
millions a month. It is by means or paper money that the 
House of Austria has financed the war against me, and it 
might do so again. That being so, it must be my policy in 
peace-time as well as in time of war to depreciate this 

247 

Dissolution 

paper issue, and to force Austria back onto a metal currency. 
That will inevitably compel her to reduce her army, and to 
cut down the mad expenditure by which she has compro¬ 
mised the safety of my states. I want this operation carried 
out secretly, and with an air of mystery; though my object 
is much more a political one than anything that might be 

G ained by financial speculation. It is in fact an object of the 
rst importance. There is no hope of peace in Europe so 
long as Austria can obtain loans of 3 or 400 millions on the 
security of her paper money. 

Send me an intelligent and tactful agent, who can collect 
on the spot, while I am still here, all the information 
necessary to try this experiment on the big scale which I 
intend, and which will make it so effective. 

[Lecestre, i, j 20.] 

190 

MONKS 

TO COUNT GAUDIN, MINISTER OF FINANCE 

Schonbrunn, September 26, 1809. 

I have received your report of the 12th about the way to 
deal with the monks in the states of Rome. This is my idea, 
for Rome as well as for Piedmont, Parma, and Tuscany— 
to suppress all monks indiscriminately, and to order that, 
as from the day of publication of the forthcoming decree, 
they shall be obliged to quit their habits and their houses 
—begging friars, public teachers, all of them, to whatever 
class they belong, so that not a single monk remains either 
in Italy or in France. Their houses and goods must be sold, 
leaving only the monks of Mont Cenis, Mont Gen&vre, and 
Mont Saint-Bemard, and those on the Appennines, in the 
Carthusian monastery at Florence, and in a few other 
privileged places. 

Draft a decree on these lines for Tuscany, Parma, and 
Piedmont, so that I may deal with the question here at the 

248 

of Monasteries 

same time as the other work that I am going to take in hand 
in Paris. And there’s an end of the whole question. I never 
want to see a monk’s habit or a monastery again. Half¬ 
hearted measures only strengthen their position. Unless we 
destroy these ridiculous institutions at one blow, we shall 
see them springing up again. I would not send the monks 
home, but attach them to parish priests, chapters, and 
collegiate establishments, so that they may have work to 
do in the church. 

But these comprehensive changes must be part of my 
forthcoming work at Paris, when peace has been made, 
and when I have strong garrisons in Florence, Parma, and 
Rome. Until then, nothing can be done; except that the 
Consulta can use police orders to send back foreign monks 
to France, Germany, Spain, and Naples, and so get rid 
of them from Rome; but this musft be done by special 
action in each case, not under a general rule. I don’t think 
there is anything else to do, except to take every precaution 
for the proper supervision of tne monks, and to wait for 
the conclusion of peace. 

[Corresp., xix, 15 863.] 

191 

SOULT IN DISGRACE 

TO MARSHAL SOULT, DUKE OF DALMATIA, COMMANDING THE 
ARMY IN PORTUGAL 

Schonbrunn, September 26,1809. 

I am displeased with your conduct. The cause of my 
displeasure is the following paragraph in the circular issued 
by your Chief of Staff: ‘The Duke of Dalmatia would be 
asked to take the reins of government, to represent the 
sovereign, and to invest himself with all the attributes of 
supreme authority; the people promising with an oath to 
be faithful to him, and to support and defend him at the 
cost of their lives and fortunes against every opponent, 

249 

S O U L T 

even against the insurgents in other provinces, until the 
submission of the whole Kingdom. . . .’ If you had claimed 
supreme power for yourself proprio motu ,, it would have been 
such a crime as to oblige me to consider you guilty of 
Use-majesty and of a culpable attack on my authority. How 
could you have forgotten that the power you exercised 
over the Portuguese sprang from the command I entrusted 
to you, and not from the play of passions and intrigue? 
How could a man of your ability have supposed that I 
should ever allow you to exercise any authority not derived 
from me? Your action shows a forgetfulness of principles, 
and a failure to realise my character, or the point of view of 
a proud nation, which I cannot reconcile with my opinion 
of you. It is due to false moves of this kind that discontent 
has increased, and that you have been supposed to be 
working, not for me, or for France, but for yourself. You 
have undermined your own authority; for it would be 
difficult to say, after this circular of yours, whether any 
Frenchman could be blamed for ceasing to obey your 
orders. ... 

In spite of all this, after hesitating for a long time as to 
what course I should adopt, my affection for you, and the 
memory of your services to me at Austerlitz, and on other 
occasions, have decided my mind. I shall overlook what has 
happened; I hope it will be a warning to you; and I entrust 
you with a major-generalship in my Spanish army. As the 
King has no experience of war, I wish you to be responsible 
for what happens until I arrive. I want to enter Lisbon 
myself as soon as possible. 

[Corresp., xix, 15871. This refers to Soult’s occupation of Oporto, 
where he assumed ‘quasi-regal state’ and ‘dreamed of becoming “King 
of Northern Lusitania.” ’ (Cambridge Modern History, ix, 450.)] 

250 

Roman Emperors 
192 

IMPERIAL TITLES 

NOTE, ON THE PROPOSED INSCRIPTIONS FOR THE ARC DE 

TRIOMPHE 

Schonbrunn, October 3, 1809. 

The Institute proposes to give the Emperor the titles of 
Augustus and Germanicus. Augustus only fought one battle— 
Actium. Germanicus may have appealed to the Romans 
through his misfortunes; but the only famous thing he did 
was to write some very mediocre memoirs. 

I can see nothing to envy in what we know about the 
Roman Emperors. It ought to be one of the principal 
endeavours of the Institute, and of men of letters generally, 
to show what a difference there is between their history and 
ours. What a terrible memory for future generations was 
that of Tiberius, of Caligula, of Nero, of Domitian, and of 
all those princes who ruled by no laws of legitimacy, or 
rules of succession, and who, for what reasons it is needless 
to specify, committed so many crimes, and burdened Rome 
with such a weight of misfortunes! 

The only man who distinguished himself by his character, 
and by many illustrious deeds—and he was not an Emperor 
—was Caesar. If the Emperor desired any title, it would be 
that of Caesar. But the name has been dishonoured (if that 
is possible) by so many petty princes, that it is no longer 
associated with the memory or the great Caesar, but with 
that of a mob of German princelings, as feeble as they 
were ignorant, not one of whom is familiar to the present 
generation. 

The Emperor’s title is 'Emperor of the French. He does not 
want any name carrying alien associations—neither Augustus 
nor Germanicus , nor Caesar. 

The inscriptions ought to be written in French. The 
Romans sometimes used Greek for their inscriptions, but 
that was only a relic of the Greek influence upon Roman 
arts and sciences. French is the most cultivated of all 

2JI 

Home Missions 

modem tongues: it is more widely spread, and more 
exactly known, than the dead languages. Nobody, then, 
wants any other language to be used for these inscriptions. 

[Corresp., xix, 15894. Germanicus Caesar, nephew of the Emperor 
Tiberius, helped him in his wars against the Germans (a.d. n-12). His 
subsequent successes in Germany made him a popular hero, but 
roused Tiberius’s jealousy: he was transferred to the East, and died 
there in a.d. 19, perhaps poisoned by order of Piso, the Governor of 
Syria.] 

193 

MISSIONARIES 

TO CARDINAL FESCH, ARCHBISHOP OF LYON 

Schonbrunn, October 8, 1809. 

I have received your letter of September 30. I never 
balance the relative value of spiritual and temporal interests. 
If the Foreign Missions think it to their advantage to put 
themselves under English protection, I shall be glad to see 
them do so, for England is in a better position to protect 
their holy endeavours than I am. Let them put aside all 
thoughts of France, and fix their eyes on their heavenly 
fatherland. 

As regards Home Missions, I have been told that they 
do harm. In any case, my parochial clergy are too fine 
a set of men for me to need these fanatics, about whose 
principles I know nothing. No cause is dearer to me than 
the interests of my people. For their sake I have resolved 
to prohibit these vagrant missions in my provinces; all 
the more so, since my states, widened, as they have been, 
by the succour of divine Providence, include churches that 
hold various views as to their relations with the spiritual 
authority, and because some of these missionaries have been 
educated at Rome in anti-Gallican principles, and derive 
their ideas of duty from the lessons on pride and the 
maxims of usurpation that are current in the Roman curia. 
My decision on this point is irrevocable: it remains for my 

252 

Tyrolese Campaign 

clergy to conform to it. I don’t share the fear you hint at, 
because it is the duty of my clergy to obey me, and because, 
the first day they tried to stray from the path of duty, the 
Holy Spirit would cease to be with them. 

[Corresp., xix, 15918.] 

194 

BAVARIAN TROOPS 

TO GENERAL DE WREDE, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE 
BAVARIAN TROOPS 

Schonbrunn, October 8, 1809. 

I am displeased with the Bavarian troops. Instead of 
fighting, they get up charges and plots against their com¬ 
mander. I have just brought General Stengel before a court 
of inquiry for evacuating Golfing. Why didn’t he die there? 
No one has any right to evacuate a position without orders 
from the Commander-in-chief. The Bavarian troops have 
become demoralised. Show my letter to Deroy, and tell me 
whether the Bavarians want to win my good or my bad 
opinion. When troops are demoralised, it is for their Com¬ 
manders and officers to restore their morale, or to die in 
the attempt. There have been instances of cowardice, such 
as allowing oneself to be taken prisoner in the passes, 
rather than secure the retreat, which for the honour of the 
Bavarian army ought to be denounced and punished. 

At the front there is no such person as a prince. Possibly 
the Prince Royal has good cause to complain of the Duke of 
Dantzig; but that is not a question of military honour. His 
duty was to march on the enemy, who had insulted the 
Bavarian flag, and attacked him outside Saltzburg. I had 
thoughts of addressing an Order to your army; but it would 
have remained on record against you, and I prefer to write 
privately to you, for I have a regard for your ability and 
courage. Speak to your comrades, see that they are not 
disgraced. I will have no one objecting to me with ‘if,’ or 

253 

Moral Advantage 

‘but/ or ‘because/ I have been a soldier all my life. You 
must either conquer or die. I could wish that, at the first 
sign of attack, the Prince had visited his outposts, and 
restored the morale of his division. Make such use of this 
letter as you think fit. I know that you are as fond of the 
Prince as I am. 

[Lecestre, i, 536. The reference is to the failure of the Franco- 
Bavarian troops to suppress Hofer’s rebellion in the Tyrol in the sum¬ 
mer and autumn of 1809. The Bavarians were under Wrede and Deroy.] 

195 

ALL’S FAIR IN WAR 

TO GENERAL CLARKE, COUNT OF HUNEBOURG, MINISTER 

FOR WAR 

Schonbrunn, October 10, 1809. 

Please write to the King of Spain, and make him under¬ 
stand that nothing is more contrary to military usage than 
to publish the strength of one’s army, either in Orders and 
Proclamations, or in the Gazette; that, supposing there were 
any reason for talking of one’s forces, one ought to exagger¬ 
ate them, and to make them appear redoubtable by doubling 
or trebling their number; whereas, in speaking of the enemy, 
one ought to represent his numbers as a half or a third of 
what they really are—for everything is moral in war; that 
the King abandoned this principle when he said that he 
only had 40,000 men, and published the fact that the enemy 
had 120,000; that it is merely discouraging the French troops 
to tell them that the enemy are in immense numbers, whilst 
it gives the enemy a poor opinion of the French if they are 
represented as being very few; (in a word) that by publishing 
his weakness all over Spain he is giving the enemy a moral 
advantage, and throwing away his own; for it is only human 
nature to believe that in the long run the smaller force will 
be beaten by the bigger. 

The most experienced soldiers take cate, on the day of 

254 

Brutus 

battle, to estimate the number of men in the enemy army, 
and natural instinct generally leads them to over-estimate 
the number of those they can see. But if one is so unwise as to* 
let such ideas get about, or to give currency to exaggerated 
estimates of the enemy’s forces, the trouble of it is that 
every cavalry colonel who goes on a reconnaissance sees 
an army-corps, and every scout-captain half a dozen 
battalions. ... I repeat it: in war, the morale and opinions 
of the army are more than half the battle. Great com¬ 
manders always take care to give it out that their own troops 
are in overwhelming numbers, and to induce the enemy 
to believe it, whilst to their own army they represent the 
enemy as hopelessly inferior. It is the first time I have ever 
known a general understate the number of his own men 
and overstate that of the enemy. 

[Corresp., xix, 15933.] 

196 

ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION 

TO COUNT FOUCHE, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Schonbrunn, October 12,1809. 

To-day, during parade, a young man of 17, the son of a. 
Lutheran minister at Erfurt, tried to approach me. He was 
arrested by the officers: suspicion was excited by his 
appearance of anxiety: he was searched, and was found to 
be in possession of a dagger. I had him brought before me, 
and the wretched young fellow, who seemed to be quite 
well educated, told me that he intended to assassinate me 
in order to rid Austria of the presence of the French. I 
found no traces of religious or political fanaticism in him. 
He didn’t seem to understand that Brutus was a murderer. 
The fit of exaltation into which he had worked himself 
prevented my discovering any more. He will be questioned 
when he is cold and hungry, but possibly nothing will come 
of it. He will be tried by a military court. 

*55 

GALLICANISM 

I wanted to tell you of this incident, so that it may not be 
regarded as mote serious than it appears to be. I hope it 
will not get about: if thete were any question of that it 
would be necessary to have the fellow certified as insane. 
Unless you hear it talked about, keep the matter strictly to 
yourself. The incident caused no scandal on parade; I never 
even noticed it myself. 

P.S.—I repeat it again, and you must clearly understand: 
not a word is to be said about this affair. 

[Corresp., xix, 15935. Friedrich Staps was the son of a Naumburg 
pastor. He was tried by a military court, and shot on the 16th.] 

x 97 

CHURCH POLICY 

CIRCULAR LETTER TO THE BISHOPS 

Fontainebleau, November 6, 1809. 

... We consider it necessary for the good of Our peoples 
and the political interests of Our Crown to govern directly 
that part of the Empire which Charlemagne, Our august 
predecessor, thought fit to entrust to the bishops of Rome 
as fiefs held for the promotion of the faith, and not of 
lieresy. 

We hold Our throne from God, and We are accountable 
to him alone for Our actions. Whatever We have done. We 
have done both for the glory and welfare of Our peoples 
and in the best interests of religion—religion, which owes 
its lasting power to the simplicity, charity, and truth of the 
faith, and not to institutions foreign to it, which Jesus 
Christ could have established, but refused to do so. 

When, on the battlefield of Marengo, We resolved to 
■erect the altars that Our fathers overthrew. We had no 
intention of recognising those monstrous claims, those 
claims contrary to all the principles of religion, which We 
given its enemies a handle for calumny, engendered so 
many evils, and caused the shedding of so much blood— 

256 

Miss Paterson 

those claims which were made by such men as Gregory VII 
and Julius II. Our intention was to re-establish the doctrine 
that the School of Paris, the Sorbonne, and the French 
clergy took as the basis of their teaching, notably in the 
Declarations of 1682. This is the doctrine that We received 
from our ancestors, that We intended to re-establish, and 
that We wish to maintain. 

We shall look with pity upon those who, imbued with 
false teaching, fail to recognise Jesus Christ’s command to 
‘render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s/ and his 
refusal to let conscience and spiritual interests be deter¬ 
mined by worldly considerations. What a man has done, a 
man can undo; what God has done is immutable. 

[Lecestre, i, 544. Napoleon struck out this passage in revision.] 

198 

MISS PATERSON 

TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Paris, December 9, 1809. 

Write to General Thureau to the effect that I authorise 
him to allow M lle Paterson all the funds she needs for her 
support, whilst reserving the right to setde her future out 
of hand. Tell him that I have no concern in the matter 
except my personal interest in this young lady; but that, if 
she were to misconduct herself so far as to marry an 
Englishman, my interest in her affairs would end, and I 
should consider that she had renounced the views which 
she expressed in her letter, and which were the sole origin 
of my interest in her. 

[Ducasse, 126. cf. No. 89, The Pope had refused to dissolve her 
marriage with Jerome. Napoleon thereupon did so by an Imperial 
edict.] 

257 

s 

Josephine Divorced 
199 

DIVORCE 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE (AT LA MALMAISON) 

Trianon, December 19, 1809, ~j p.m. 

I have received your letter, dear. Savary tells me that you 
are always crying. That is a pity, I hope you have been able 
to §0 for a walk to-day. I sent you some game from my hunt. 
I will come and see you when you tell me that you are being 
sensible, and that your courage is winning the day. 

To-morrow I am busy with the ministers all day. 

Good-bye, my dear; I am unhappy to-day too. I want to 
hear that you are satisfied, and to know that you are recover¬ 
ing your balance. Sleep well. 

[Corresp., xx, 16068. Divorce had been thought of for some years. 
On November 30, 1809, Napoleon told Josephine the Deed of 
Separation must be signed on December 15. This was done, and on 
the 16th she left the Tuileries for the last time.] 

200 

ANNEXATION OF HOLLAND 

TO LOUIS NAPOLEON, KING OF HOLLAND 

Trianon, December 21, 1809. 

I am in receipt of Your Majesty’s letter. Your Majesty 
wishes me to make known my intentions as to Holland. I 
will do so frankly. 

When Your Majesty ascended the throne of Holland, 
part of the Dutch people desired reunion with France. 
The respect for this brave nation which I had derived from 
my knowledge of its history led me to wish that it should 
retain its name and its independence. I therefore drew up 
with my own hand the constitution which was to be the 
basis of your Majesty’s throne, and I placed you upon it. I 

258 

Louis a Dutchman 

hoped that, as you had shared my education, so you would 
show that affection for France which the nation has a right 
to expect of all its sons, and particularly of its princes. I 
hoped that, schooled in my policy, you would realise that 
Holland, once conquered by my peoples, must rely, for 
its independence, upon their generosity; that with no re¬ 
sources, no allies, and no army, Holland could and inevit¬ 
ably would be conquered, the moment it set itself in direct 
opposition to France; that your policy must therefore be 
the same as mine, and that Holland was bound by treaty 
to France. I therefore hoped that, in placing upon the 
Dutch throne a prince of my own blood, I had found the 
happy mean which harmonised the interests of the two 
states, and united them in a common policy, and a common 
hatred of England; and I was proud of having given 
Holland the settlement that suited her case, as I had already 
done, by my Act of Mediation, in Switzerland. 

But it was not long before I perceived that I was nursing 
a vain illusion. All my hopes have been deceived. The 
moment Your Majesty ascended the throne of Holland, you 
forgot that you were a Frenchman; ever since, you live 
tortured your sensitive conscience, and stretched your 
reason to breaking-point, in the endeavour to persuade 
yourself that you are a Dutchman. Those Dutchmen who 
were sympathetic to France have been persecuted and 
passed over; promotion has come to those who were in the 
service of England. Frenchmen, from officers to private 
soldiers, have been slighted and dismissed, and I have had 
the mortification of seeing the French name in Holland, 
under a prince of my own blood, exposed to every kind of 
affront. True, I have learnt to hold the honour and reputa¬ 
tion of that name so near my heart, and to carry them so 
high on the bayonets of my soldiers, that it is beyond the 
power of Holland, or of any individual in the world, to cast 
a slur upon them, unavenged. 

Your Majesty’s public speeches are full of deplorable 
tendencies. France only appears there in parenthesis. Instead 
of setting an example of forgetting the past, they constantly 

*59 

French Case 

recall it, thereby fostering the hidden animosities and 
passions of the enemies of France. After all, what have the 
Dutch to complain of ? Were they not conquered by our 
arms? Do they not owe their independence to the chivalry 
of my peoples? Ought they not to bless the generosity of 
France, which has consistently opened its canals and its 
customs-houses to their commerce?—France, which has 
derived nothing from its conquest, save the duty of pro¬ 
tecting the conquered—France, which, from that day to 
this, has made no use of its power but to consolidate Dutch 
independence? What justification, then, is there for Your 
Majesty’s line of conduct, which is at once insulting to the 
French nation, and offensive to myself? Do not mistake me. 
I stand by my predecessors. I identify myself with all French 
history, from Clovis to the Committee of Public Safety. 
Any reflexion upon the governments that preceded me, 
however light-hearted, I take as a personal insult to myself. 
I am aware that it has become the fashion, in certain circles, 
to cry me up, and to cry France down. But he who loves 
not France cannot love me; and he who speaks evil of my 
peoples, I regard as my greatest enemy. 

Had I no other cause of complaint than the disrepute into 
which the French name has fallen in Holland, my royal right 
would authorise me to declare war on a neighbouring 
sovereign in whose state insults are permitted against my 
peoples. I have taken no such step. But Your Majesty has a 
mistaken idea of my character, based on false notions of my 
kindness, and of my feelings towards you. You have broken 
all the treaties you made with me. You have disarmed your 
fleets, dismissed your sailors, and disorganised your armies; 
so that Holland finds herself without armed forces on land 
or sea.—as^ though merchants, clerks, and stores of mer¬ 
chandise could make a great power! A wealthy society— 
perhaps: but every king has money, and ships, and the 
means of recruitment. 

That, however, is not the whole count. Your Majesty 
took advantage of my momentary embarrassment on the 
continent to allow a resumption of relations between Hol- 

260 

against Holland 

land and England, and to violate the rules of the blockade, 
the only means by which the latter power can be effectively 
damaged. I showed my displeasure at this conduct by 
forbidding your presence in France; and I made you realise 
that, without any recourse to arms, I could put you in an 
even more critical position than if I had declared war, by 
closing the Rhine, Weser, Scheldt, and Meuse to Dutch 
trade, and thus destroying you by isolation. This move 
caused a sensation in Holland: Your Majesty appealed to 
my generosity and my feelings as a brother, and promised 
to alter your behaviour. I thought the warning would be 
sufficient, and removed the blockade. But soon Your 
Majesty returned to your old policy:—I was at Vienna then, 
and had a weight of war on my hands. Any American ship 
refused at a French port, and presenting itself at a Dutch 
one. Your Majesty allowed in. Once more I was obliged to 
dose my customs against Dutch trade. One could hardly 
make a dedaration of hostilities in more authentic terms: to 
all intents and purposes we were at war. 

In my speech to the Legislative Body I hinted at my 
dislike of this situation; and I shall not conceal from you 
that it is my intention to reunite Holland to France terri¬ 
torially: that is the most dangerous blow I can aim at Eng¬ 
land, and it frees me from the insults that the ringleaders of 
your Cabinet are constantly heaping on me. The long and 
short of it is, that the estuary of the Rhine and Meuse ought 
to bdong to me. It is a fundamental principle in France that 
our natural frontier westwards is the valley route of the Rhine. 
Your Majesty writes to me in your letter of the 17th that 
you are sure you can prevent any commerce between 
Holland and England: that you can provide funds, fleets, 
and armies; that you will reaffirm die principles of the 
constitution by refusing privileges to the nobility, and by 
getting rid of the marshals—a caricature of a rank, and 
quite incongruous in a second-dass power; and finally, that 
you will confiscate the stores of colonial merchandise, and 
all goods that have come in American vessels, which ought 
never to have been admitted to your ports. My belief is 

261 

Ultimatum 

that Your Majesty is making promises which you cannot 
fulfil, and that the reunion of Holland to France is only 
deferred. I admit that I have now nothing to gain by 
reuniting to France the districts on the right bank of the 
Rhine, any more than the Grand Duchy of Berg, or the 
Hanseatic towns. I can therefore leave Holland the right 
bank of the Rhine, and I am ready to cancel the customs 
embargo already ordered, whenever the treaties, in their 
present or in any revised form, are duly observed. 

Here are my conditions: 

(i) Prohibition of all commerce or communication with 

England. 

(ii) Provision of a fleet of 14 ships of the line, 7 frigates, and 

7 brigs or corvettes, all fully armed and equipped. 

(iii) A land army of 25,000 men. 

(iv) Suppression of the marshals. 

(v) Abolition of all sham privileges of nobility, contrary to 

the constitution given and guaranteed by me. 

Your Majesty may negotiate on this basis with the Due 
de Cadore, tnrough the agency of your minister. But I assure 
you that the first time a packet boat or vessel of any kind is 
admitted into a Dutch port, I shall re-establish the customs 
blockade, and that the first time any insult is offered to my 
flag, I shall arrest by force of arms the Dutch officer who 
allows himself to insult my eagle, and hang him at the mast¬ 
head. Your Majesty will find in me a brother, if I find in 
you a Frenchman. But if you forget the feelings that attach 
us both to our fatherland, you must not take it ill of me if 
I also forget those by which nature has attached us to one 
another. 

To sum up: the reunion of Holland to France is in the 
best interests alike of France, Holland, and the continent, 
for nothing will do England so much harm. This reunion 
may be brought about either by agreement or by force. I 
have enough grievances against Holland to justify a 
declaration of war. Nevertheless I intend to put no diffi¬ 
culties in the way of an arrangement under which I shall get 

262 

Continental System 

the Rhine frontier, and Holland will undertake to carry out 
the above stipulations. 

[Lecestre, i, 5 5 5- Louis was at this time in Paris: he returned to 
Holland in April, 1810, and for a time conformed to Napoleon’s 
demands, but on July i abdicated and left the country. On July 9 it was 
annexed to France.] 

201 

CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, MINISTER FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Paris, January 10, 1810. 

I enclose a report from the Minister of Finance, and 
another from the Minister for Home Affairs, upon the 
important subject of our present relations with America. 
I want you to make me a report on the history of our rela¬ 
tions with the United States since the treaty of Mortefon- 
taine, and to annex to it French translations of all the 
original documents mentioned by the two ministers.. . . 

All the steps I have taken, as I have often remarked 
before, are mere acts of reprisal. I don’t recognise any of the 
English claims with regard to the neutrals—what they call 
their maritime code. The English themselves have never 
pretended that I recognise it. Such a claim would have been 
pointless, since the code is entirely directed against France. 
At the same time the English claims have been no more 
admitted, or admitted omy in part, by America and the 
northern powers. The maritime laws of England, previous 
to the last few years, were tyrannical, but not quite intoler¬ 
able. But recently the English have completely altered the 
situation by arrogating to themselves the right to declare 
that all the ports of a country, and the whole coastline of an 
empire, are in a state of blockade. This means that, with 
respect to the blockaded country, England prohibits all com¬ 
merce, and refuses to recognise any neutrals. I have said 

263 

America 

nothing of the influence England claimed to exetcise over 
the neutrals: my Berlin decree was only a reply to the new 
extension she gave to the right of blockade; and even the 
Berlin decree cannot be considered as more than a maritime, 
certainly not as a continental blockade; witness the way in 
which it was carried out. I regard it simply as a kind of pro¬ 
test—as one act of violence answering another. It was 
really applied only to Hamburg, the Weser, and the conti¬ 
nental coastline, and declarations were made to the neutrals 
to the effect that its operation would not be extended to 
the high seas. So far, little harm had been done; neutral 
ships still entered our ports. But the British Orders in 
Council necessitated my Milan decree, and thenceforward 
there were no neutrals. That decree had only one object, 
namely to protect myself and the neutrals against the 
intolerable right that England claimed to levy navigation 
dues upon the commerce and shipping of all nations—a 
claim which treated the high seas as I might treat the Seine, 
the Scheldt, or the Rhine. This meant an embargo on all 
commerce; and in opposing it, all thought of consequences 
had to be thrown to the winds. I was told to-day that the 
English are relaxing their regulations, and no longer impose 
a tax on shipping: let me know whether there is really an 
Order to this effect: even if there is not, let me know whether 
it is true in fact. Once I were sure that England is not going 
to levy navigation dues, I could relax my regulations in 
many respects. 

I should not be unwilling to sign a treaty with America, 
by which she undertook (i) never, under any pretext, to 
allow England to levy dues on her commerce or shipping; 
(2) never to allow England to prevent her trading with 
France on the ground of a right of blockade, or any other 
pretext, it being understood that certain points might be 
blockaded, but not a whole empire; and (3) never to admit 
that, in order to reach France, her vessels must first call at 
some port in British territory. Granted these three condi¬ 
tions, I should be willing to declare, on my side, (1) that my 
warships and privateers will not exercise the right of search 

264 

Russian Princesses 

with respect to American ships, except so far as is necessary 
to make sure that they are really American, and do not 
belong to an enemy nation, (2) that American ships will be 
received in my ports, and will not be expected to pay more 
than the ordinary dues, always provided that they come 
direct from the United States, from another French port, 
from a country allied to France, or from a neutral; for I 
refuse to admit American ships coming from English 
ports. . . . 

[Corresp., xx, 16127. cf. No. 182. The Non-Intercourse Act of 
March, 1809, limited the prohibition of American trade (by the 
Embargo Act of 1807) to England and France, but enforced it more 
strictly. This was Napoleon’s first reaction to it. For the sequel, v. No. 
209.] 

202 

RIVAL BRIDES 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, MINISTER FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Paris, February 6, 1810. 

Despatch a messenger before 6 o’clock this evening to the 
Duke of Vicenza. Inform him that a council was held a few 
days ago, and that opinion was divided between the Russian 
and Austrian princesses; that it is the same in the country, 
especially on the ground of religion; for even the people 
who attach least importance to religion can’t reconcile 
themselves to the idea of not seeing the Empress attend 
church functions at the Emperor’s side; that the presence 
of a Russian ‘pope’ constitutes an even greater difficulty, 
and that the Emperor would be making a serious admission 
of inferiority if he agreed to recognise the presence of a 
‘pope’ at the Tuileries. You are to add that these lines were 
already written when the messenger of the 21st arrived, 
and that you interrupted your letter to decipher the des¬ 
patches he carried; that in these despatches the Emperor 
points out that Princess Anne is not yet regular in her 

265 

Russian or Austrian? 

monthly periods; that girls sometimes have to wait two 
years after the first signs of nubility before they are really 
fit to marry; and that it would upset the Emperor’s plans 
if he had to wait 3 years for a child. But that is not all. 
The 10 days’ time limit expired on the 16th, and on the 21st 
the Emperor was still without an answer. His Majesty 
cannot understand how it is that, when the Empress- 
Mother has given her consent, and Princess Catherine 
herself is inclined to the match, a definite answer cannot be 
given. These delays contrast unfavourably with the keen 
and dutiful attitude of Austria. His Majesty, having no time 
to lose, is holding a council to-morrow to end this state 
of uncertainty. There was, indeed, at Erfurt, some question 
of the Princess Anne, but His Majesty now regards himself 
as effectively released, not indeed from any formal under¬ 
taking (for there was none), but from an honourable 
understanding based on his friendship for the Emperor 
Alexander, by the failure, after a whole month’s delay, to 
reply to a simple question, and by the inconsistency between 
Romanzof’s remarks. 

[Corresp., xx, 16210. In 1807, two years before his separation from 
Josephine (v. No. 199), Napoleon had considered a list of marriage¬ 
able princesses. At Erfurt, in 1808, he sounded the Tsar about marriage 
to his sister, Katherina Pavlova: but in April, 1809, the Empress- 
Dowager, who disliked Napoleon, married her to the Duke of Holstein- 
Gottorp-Oldenburg. He then asked for her younger sister, Anna 
Pavlova, aged 14: but within a fortnight of this letter he is found 
offering his hand to Marie Louise of Austria, v. No. 204.] 

203 

IMPERIAL BALLET 

TO M. DE REMUSAT, PREFECT OF THE PALACE 

Paris, February 13, 1810. 

As the opera ‘The death of Abel’ has been rehearsed, I 
consent to its being played. But it must be understood that 

266 

Historical Ballets 

in future no opera may be given without my order. If the old 
management have passed on my permission in writing to 
die new, it is all right, but not otherwise. The late manage¬ 
ment asked my approval not only when they accepted a 
work submitted to them, but also when they chose one for 
presentation. Generally speaking, I am opposed to staging 
any subject drawn from Holy Scripture: such things should 
be left to the Church. The Chamberlain responsible for 
public performances will at once notify authors to this 
effect, so that they may turn their attention to other subjects. 
The ballet ‘Vertumnus and Pomona’ is a cold and tasteless 
allegory. The ballet ‘The Rape of the Sabine Women’ is 
based on history: that is more what we want. Mythological 
and historical ballets may be given, but never allegorical 
ones. I wish to have four ballets produced this year. If 
M. Gardel is not capable of doing this, try to find another 
producer. In addition to ‘The Death of Abel,’I should like 
a second historical ballet, but one more appropriate to 
modem conditions than ‘The Rape of the Sabine Women.’ 

[Lecestre, ii, 579. Pierre Gardel was ballet-master at the Opera, 
1787-1828.] 

204 

COURTSHIP 

» 

TO THE ARCH-DUCHESS MARIE LOUISE OF AUSTRIA 

Rambouillet, February 23, 1810. 

My Cousin: the brilliant qualities with which it is adorned 
have inspired Us with the desire to serve and honour your 
person. Whilst addressing Ourselves to the Emperor your 
father, and begging him to entrust Us with Your Imperial 
Highness’s happiness, may we hope that Y.I.H. will share 
the sentiments that prompt Us to take this step? May we 
flatter Ourselves that Y.I.H. will not be swayed solely by 
the duty of obedience to your parents? Whatever litde 
partiality for Us Y.I.H. may feel, it is Our wish to cultivate 

267 

Marie Louise 

with so much care, and to make it Our endeavour so con¬ 
stantly to please you in every way, that We are confident of 
succeeding some day in becoming acceptable to you. That 
is the goal at which We hope to arrive, and for the sake of 
which We beg Y.I.H. to favour Our suit. 

[Corresp., xx, 16288. Napoleon’s Austrian marriage was talked of 
in the autumn of 1809, but up to January, 1810, Marie Louise had not 
been consulted. The marriage by proxy took place at Vienna on March 
11.] 

205 

MARRIAGE 

TO FRANCIS II, EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA 

Compiegne, March 29, 1810. 

My Brother and Father-in-law; Your Majesty’s daughter 
has now been here two days. She fulfils all my expectations, 
and for two days now I have not failed to give her, and to 
receive from her, proofs of the tender sentiments which 
unite us. We suit one another perfectly, I shall make her 
happy, and I shall owe my own happiness to Your Majesty. 
Let me thank you, then, for the fine present you have given 
me, and may a father’s heart rejoice in the assurance of a 
beloved child’s happiness. 

We leave to-morrow for Saint-Cloud, and we shall 
celebrate the ceremony of our marriage at the Tuileries on 
April 2nd. Your Majesty must never doubt my sentiments 
of esteem and high consideration, least of all the tender 
affection with which I have promised to regard you. 

[Corresp., xx, 16561. Napoleon went to meet Marie Louise at 
Courcelles on March 28, rode in her carriage to Compiegne, and 
exercised his marital rights the same night, without waiting for the 
civil and ecclesiastical marriage ceremonies, which took place at Saint- 
Cloud and the Tuileries on April 1-2.] 

268 

Wedding Guests 
206 

THE ‘BLACK CARDINALS’ 

TO COUNT BIGOT DE PR&AMENEU, MINISTER OF PUBLIC 

WORSHIP 

Paris, April 5, 1810. 

The Minister of Public Worship will send for the thirteen 
cardinals who, without any excuse on the score of health, 
failed to attend the ceremony of the religious marriage. 
He will have them all brought together in his house, and 
he will inform them as follows:—that after discussing in 
secret meetings whether they ought to attend, and in spite 
of the fact that the majority voted in favour of doing so, 
they failed to attend His Majesty’s religious marriage; that 
these assemblies should not have taken place without His 
Majesty’s leave, and were therefore acts of rebellion; that, 
in the Pope’s absence, they are null and void, and have no 
jurisdiction; and that even if they had any, the minority 
ought to obey the majority; that His Majesty sees in this 
conduct of theirs the same rebellious spirit that they have 
displayed for the last ten years—the same that obliged His 
Majesty to occupy Rome, the same that led them to induce 
the Pope to thunder out an excommunication which will 
seem as laughable to posterity as it does at the present day; 
that hitherto His Majesty has despised their manoeuvres, 
and put a charitable interpretation on them, trying to 
persuade himself that they had no ill intentions; but that 
this time they have gone too far, and shown, both by their 
speeches at their secret meetings, and by their criminal 
proceedings, that they are doing their best to disturb the 
peace of the Empire, to scatter the germs of civil war, and to 
sow discord among mankind; that it is high time they 
remembered that Iris Majesty holds the sword with which 
to strike down bad priests and traitors to the State; and that 
whilst His Majesty postpones his decision as to their persons, 
he will at the same time deal with their status as cardinals 
and priests, for these qualities are deemed non-existent in 

269 

Postscript to Louis 

persons falling under the blade of the law. Whether he 
considers he ought to put the cardinals on their trial ^ or 
whether he has other intentions—in either case, His Majesty 
has charged his minister to make the above communication 
to them, and no more. The general impression He wishes to 
be left by the speech is that, if they are brought to trial, there 
are no ecclesiastical courts in France, and there is nothing 
to prevent their being convicted—both trial and conviction 
emanating from the Imperial will. They must also under¬ 
stand that the reason why they are forbidden to dress as 
priests or cardinals is that they are already considered to be 
in detention under a charge. 

[Lecestre, ii, 601. Sixteen Cardinals failed to attend Napoleon’s 
ecclesiastical marriage on April z —thirteen of these without excuse. 
He removed them from their functions and interned them for three 
years in various French towns.] 

207 

LAST LETTER TO LOUIS 

TO LOUIS NAPOLEON, KING OF HOLLAND 

Lille, May 23,1810. 

At the very moment when you are professing the best 
possible intentions, I hear that my ambassador’s servants 
have been assaulted. My intention is that those who are 
guilty of this crime against myself shall be handed over to 
me, so that the punishment I inflict on them may serve as 
an example. M. Serurier has described the way in which 
you behaved at the interview with the ambassadors. After 
hearing his account, I want no Dutch ambassador here. 
Admiral Verhuell has orders to leave Paris within 24 hours. 
I am tired of protestations and fine phrases: it is time that I 
were told plainly whether you wish to be the bane of 
Holland, and to make your follies the ruin of the country. 
I will not have you sending a minister to Austria. I will 
not have you dismissing the Frenchmen in your service. 

270 

Wellesley 

I shall no longer keep an ambassador in Holland. The 
Secretary of the Legation, who is now there as charge 
d'affaires, will communicate my wishes to you. I am not going 
to expose an ambassador to further insults of this kind: 
I shall only have a charge d’affaires. It was the Russian 
ambassador, I suppose, whose master placed you on the 
throne, and it is natural enough that you should follow his 
advice? Don’t write to me any more of your usual fine 
phrases. You have given me nothing else now for three 
years: and every moment proves how false they are. 
p.S.—I will never write to you again as long as I live. 
[Lecestre, ii, 618. v. No. zoo. The postscript is in Napoleon’s own 
hand.] 

208 

fouche dismissed 

TO M. FOUCHE, DUKE OF OTRANTO 

Saint-Cloud, June 3, 1810. 

I have received your letter of June 2. I am aware of all 
the services you have done me, and I believe in your 
attachment to my person, and your zeal in my service; 
nevertheless I should be failing in my duty to myself if I 
allowed you to remain in office. The position of Minister 
of Police demands absolute and entire confidence; and that 
confidence can no longer exist, since you have already, in 
certain important circumstances, endangered my peace, and 
that of the state, by conduct which is not excused in my 
eyes by the correctness of your motives. 

Negotiations with England have begun. Conferences 
with Lord Wellesley have taken place. He knew that you 
were only speaking for yourself, when he ought to have 
believed that you were speaking for me. The result has 
been a complete upset of my international policy, and (if 
I were to overlook your conduct) a reflection upon my 
character which I cannot and will not endure. 

Your singular conception of the duties of a Police 

271 

Fouch6 

Minister cannot be reconciled with the good of the state. 
Though I have no doubt of your attachment, or of your 
fidelity, yet I am obliged to be constantly on the watch: it 
tires me out, and I cannot be tied down to it. This super¬ 
vision is necessitated by the number of things you do on 
your own responsibility, without finding out whether they 
square with my plans or intentions, or whether they may 
not be contrary to the whole trend of my policy. 

I wanted to tell you myself my reasons for depriving 
you of the Ministry of Police. I can see no hope that you 
are likely to change your way of doing things, because, for 
some years past, neither signal examples nor repeated 
statements of my displeasure have produced any effect, 
and because you are so sure of the purity of your motives 
that you refuse to recognise that the path to Hell is paved 
with good intentions. In spite of all, my confidence in your 
talents and your fidelity is unimpaired, and I am only 
anxious to find an opportunity to prove the one, and to 
employ the others in my service. 

[Corresp., xx, 16529. Napoleon’s suspicions of Fouch6, who had 
long been intriguing against him, came to a head in April, when he 
was discovered carrying on private negotiations with England about 
the annexation of Holland. He was dismissed, and retired to his 
senatorerie of Provence.] 

209 

AMERICA AND THE BLOCKADE 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, MINISTER FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Saint-Cloud, August 2, 1810. 

1 1 send you the outline of a Note for M. Armstrong. The 
simpler it is the better. 

Proposed Note to the Minister of the United States 

Sir: I have submitted to His Majesty the Emperor and 
King ihe United States Gazette that you sent me, containing 

272 

Embargo 

the Act of Congress of May i. His Majesty could have 
wished that he were officially notified of Acts of the 
United States of possible interest to France. It was only 
unofficially and a long time afterwards that he knew of the 
Embargo and Non-Intercourse Acts. Grave inconveniences 
result, which would not be the case if your Excellency gave 
us official notice of such Acts. 

His Majesty approved of the general embargo that the 
United States laid upon shipping, because, although this 
measure was contrary to the interests of France, it contained 
nothing prejudicial to her honour. As a result, France lost 
her colonies of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and Cayenne; but 
she did not complain about this, for she regarded it as a 
voluntary sacrifice to the principle that drove the Americans 
to impose the embargo, namely that it is better to close the 
sea against one’s own ships than to recognise the right of 
another power to tyrannise over it. 

Subsequently an Act of March i took off the embargo, 
and replaced it by a hostile measure. In this Act, which was 
not known in France till long afterwards, it was provided 
that every French vessel arriving in the United States should 
be confiscated. Upon this, law had to give way to reprisals. 
The proper and inevitable reply was the sequestration of all 
American vessels in French ports. 

Now Congress takes another step. It rescinds the Act 
of March i, opens American ports to French commerce, 
and undertakes to resist any power that refuses to recog¬ 
nise the rights of neutrals. In this new situation I am author¬ 
ised to inform you that the Berlin and Milan decrees are 
rescinded, and that, as from November ist next, they will 
cease to be effective, provided that, as a consequence of this 
step, the English withdraw their Orders in Council, and the 
new blockade principles that they have tried to establish; 
or, alternatively, that the United States, in conformity 
with the Act which you, Sir, have just communicated to me, 
force the English to respect their rights. 

It is with peculiar gratification that I acquaint you with 
this resolve on the part of the Emperor. His Majesty loves 

t 273 

France First 

the Americans, and regards their commercial prosperity 
as favourable to his policy. The independence of America 
is one of France’s chief titles to fame; at a later date the 
Emperor took pleasure in aggrandising the United States; 
and whatever die circumstances, he will always consider 
anything that increases the prosperity of that country, and 
ensures its happiness, as associated with his interests and 
his dearest affections. 

[Corresp., xxi, 16743. cf. No. 182. For the Non-Intercourse Act of 
March 1, v. No. 201. In May, Napoleon had published the Rambouillet 
decree, ordering the seizure and sale of all American ships. Soon after¬ 
wards he heard of the temporary lifting of the American embargo by 
a law of May 1.] 

210 

‘FRANCE FIRST’ 

TO PRINCE EUGENE, VICEROY OF ITALY 

Saint-Cloud, August 23, 1810. 

I have received your letter of August 14. All the raw 
silk from the Kingdom of Italy goes to England, for there 
are no silk factories in Germany. It is therefore quite natural 
that I should wish to divert it from this route to the advan¬ 
tage of my French manufacturers: otherwise my silk fac¬ 
tories, one of the chief supports of French commerce, would 
suffer substantial losses. I cannot agree with your observa¬ 
tions. My principle is France first. You must never lose 
sight of the fact that, if English commerce is supreme on the 
high seas, it is due to her sea power: it is therefore to be 
expected that, as France is the strongest land power, she 
should claim commercial supremacy on the continent: it is 
indeed our only hope. And isn’t it better for Italy to come 
to the help of France, in such an important matter as this, 
than to be covered with Customs Houses? For it would be 
short-sighted not to recognise that Italy owes her indepen¬ 
dence to France; that it was won by French blood and 

2 74 

Italian Silk 

French victories; that it must not be misused; and that 
nothing could be more unreasonable than to start calculating 
what commercial advantages France gets out of it. 

Piedmont and Parma produce silk too; and there also I 
have prohibited its export to any country except France. 
Why should Piedmont be treated in one way, and the 
Kingdom of Italy in another? If any discrimination were 
made, it should be in favour of Piedmont; for, whilst the 
Venetians fought against France, the Piedmontese came to 
her aid, taking sides against their own king. But never 
mind about all that. I understand Italian affairs better than 
anyone else. It is no use for Italy to make plans that leave 
French prosperity out of account; she must face the fact 
that the interests of the two countries hang together. Above 
all, she must be careful not to give France any reason for 
annexing her; for if it paid France to do this, who could 
stop her? So make this your motto too —France first. 

If I were to lose a great battle, a million men—nay, two 
million men of my old France would flock to my banners, 
and every purse in the country would be opened for me; 
but my Kingdom of Italy would desert me. I find it odd, 
then, that there should be any unwillingness to help the 
French manufacturers in what is only another way of 
damaging the English. There is plenty of silk in the Three 
Legations, plenty in the district of Novara. What has Italy 
done to deserve these additions of 700,000 and 400,000 
souls? How can she expect me to let these annexations 
result in opposition to my will? French commodities pay 
half dues on entering Italy; they ought not to pay any¬ 
thing at all.. . . 

[Corresp., xxi, 16824. Between 1806 (the Berlin decree) and 1810, 
the value of silk exports from Italy had sunk from 14^ to 10 million 
lines. The result of Napoleon’s measures to concentrate these exports 
on France was that their amount fell from 5 22 kilos in 1810 to 259 kilos 
in 1811 (first six months in both cases). And the figures for 1812 show 
that the exports to Germany and Switzerland (which Napoleon regards 
as bound for England) still exceeded those to France,] 

*75 

Clean Prisons 

211 

PRISON REFORM 

NOTE FOR THE MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Saint-Cloud, September 5, 1810. 

The Emperor desires the Minister for Home Affairs to 
set to work with all possible energy on the prisons. The 
subject has been under debate so long that those who are 
engaged upon it ought to have their ideas cut and dried. 

The Constituent Assembly laid down principles which 
won general approval. What were its proposals? How much 
of its scheme ought we to adopt? What parts ought we to 
modify or to reject? Those are the points I want you to 
look into. 

What we want to aim at, in general, is that the prisoners 
should be healthy, and the prisons clean, and that those who 
have been sentenced should be kept apart from those who 
have only been charged. In carrying out these reforms it 
seems reasonable to adopt the same procedure as with the 
work-houses. The Emperor will ear-mark for this purpose 
a large part of the communal contributions to the Sinking 
Fund; and the balance will come from the Departments. 

The Emperor desires the Minister for Home Affairs to 
submit a general report next Wednesday, together with a 
detailed plan for the management of the prisons in one 
or in a number of Departments. 

[Corresp., xxi, 16868.] 

212 

DUTCH OPINION 

TO PRINCE LEBRUN, ARCH-TREASURER OF THE EMPIRE, 
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL OF THE EMPEROR IN HOLLAND 

Paris, September 25, 1810. 

You speak to me of the grievances of the Amsterdam folk, 
of their anxieties, and of their discontent. Do these Dutch- 

276 

Holland Annexed 

men really take me for a Grand Pensionary Barnevelt? I 
can make nothing of such talk. I shall do what suits the 
interests of my Empire. I despise the clamour of madmen 
who think they know my interests better than I know them 
myself. Really, one would think you do not know me. At 
this rate you will soon have forgotten all about me. I did not 
take over the Government of Holland in order to consult 
the common people of Amsterdam, or to do what other 
people want. The French nation has been wise enough, at 
various times, to rely upon my judgment—you know that as 
well as anyone. My hope is that the Dutch will come to 
have the same opinion of me. When a contrary opinion is 
expressed in your presence, you ought to use language 
befitting my Lieutenant-General: ‘The Emperor/ you should 
say, ‘does what is best for the welfare of his Empire; and 
when he has made up his mind, he brooks no opposition/ 
The tall talk that you think so convincing merely makes me 
sad—all the more so, when I am living here in the midst of 
the most enlightened people in the country, and consulting 
their interests at every turn. I hope this is the last time 
that such talk will be heard in your presence. 

[Lecestre, ii, 684. After Louis’ abdication, Holland was annexed to 
France, and administered by Lebrun, formerly Third Consul, as 
Lieutenant-General. John of Barnevelt, Dutch liberator from Spain, 
was executed for his part in the Arminian controversy, 1619.] 

2x3 

POCKET BATTLESHIPS 

TO REAR-ADMIRAL COUNT DECRES, MINISTER OF MARINE 

Fontainebleau, October 12, 1810. 

A vessel drawing 194 feet can get out of the Texel. I 
want you to propound the following problem to 10 of the 
best engineers, beginning with San& 

To produce designs for a vessel as powerfully armed as a 

*77 

Pocket Battleships 

74-gunner, with a draught, when fully loaded, of 19J feet, 
and capable of as high a speed as possible. 

If there were any chance of getting a vessel as fast as our 
74-gunners, all other considerations could go by the board. 

(1) It will be enough if this ship can only carry 3 months’ 
provisions instead of the usual 6, and 3 months’ supply of 
water in place of 4J. 

(2) If it is really necessary, the calibre of the guns can be 
changed to that of the English guns. 

(3) Again, if it is really necessary, these ships can carry 
bronze guns, which weigh much less. 

You are to submit the engineers’ report to me personally, 

[Corresp., xxi, 17034. The Texel is the north-western, outlet of the 
Zuyder Zee.] 

214 

RUSSIA AND THE BLOCKADE 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, MINISTER FOR 
FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Fontainebleau, November 4, 1810. 

Draft an answer that I can send to M. Kourakine. It 
must be very polite, and very mild, but must not fail to 
contain certain home truths that it is good for Russia to 
hear. You are to say that I have seen his note; that I have 
derived lively satisfaction from the assurance he gives me 
that the Emperor of Russia is resolved to do all the harm 
he can to English commerce; that it depends upon Russia 
whether peace is concluded, or the war goes on; that, if she 
makes a serious effort to stop the trade in colonial goods, 
England will make peace before the year is out; but that, 
to speak plainly, Russian policy has hitherto followed a 
directly opposite line. The one and sufficient proof of this is 
that the colonial goods shown at the last Leipzig fair were 
brought there by 700 carts that came from Russia; that 
nowadays the whole trade in colonial goods is carried on 

278 

Russia and the Blockade 

by Russia; and that the 1,200 vessels -which the English 
convoyed up the Baltic with 20 warships, disguised under 
the Swedish, Portuguese, Spanish, and American flags, 
unloaded part of their cargoes in Russian ports. You are 
therefore to say that, if Russia wants peace with England, 
she has the means within her grasp: she has only to confiscate 
•all the vessels arriving under British convoy, and to join 
France in requiring Sweden to confiscate the immense 
quantities of merchandise that the English have discharged 
at Goteborg under all kinds of flags. As to the objection 
that, though willing to make war on England, we don’t 
want to make war on neutrals, you should point out that 
this idea is based on a fallacy; that the English dislike 
and disallow neutrality; that they refuse to let American 
ships sail, unless they carry British goods, and trade on 
Britain’s account; that all the certificates signed by French 
consuls, and the other papers carried by these ships, are 
forged; that in fact there are no neutrals nowadays, because 
the English won’t allow it, and stop every ship not carrying 
for themselves; and that thus all vessels arriving at a 
Russian port with so-called American papers really 
come from England. Tell him that these facts are too 
obvious to be ignored; that it lies with Russia whether we 
have peace or war, and that she is as deeply concerned as 
France in the issue; that if we are prepared to dose the con¬ 
tinent against the English, there will be peace; but that there 
can be none, so long as we consent to regard all the ships 
arriving with papers signed by French consuls and the lie 
as trading in any other interests than those of England; and 
that, so long as English and Colonial goods enter Prussia 
and Germany by way of Russia, and have to be stopped on 
the frontiers, it is quite dear that Russia is making no proper 
effort to do harm to England. 

[Corresp., xxi, 17099. In October a large convoy of ‘neutral* ships 
carrying British goods entered the Baltic. As a result of Napoleon’s 
threats, many of them were seized by Prussia, Sweden, and Russia. 
But an ukase of December 31 admitted Colonial goods to Russian 
ports, and during 1811 the Tsar gradually abandoned the blockade.] 

279 

Pope and Concordat 
215 

GALLICANISM 

TO COUNT BIGOT DE PR&AMENEU, MINISTER OF PUBLIC 

WORSHIP 

Paris, January 5, 1811. 

I am sending you a memoir which has been submitted to 
me. Tell me what you think of the idea of sounding the 
bishops before calling a National Council. It seems to me 
that it would be a good plan for you to draw up a statement 
on the question, and to ask the opinion of certain bishops 
about it. This statement should deal with the Pope’s refusal 
to give canonical institution, his bull of excommunication, 
his departure from Rome, the freedom that he enjoyed at 
Savona, and the way he abused it, the letters he wrote to 
Cardinal Fesch (copies of these should be annexed), showing 
his irritable and outrageous temper, and his letters to Car¬ 
dinal Maury, and to the Grande Vicaire of Astros. The first 
persons to be asked their opinion should be the archbishops 
of Paris, Lyon, Tours, Malines, Toulouse, Turin, and Bor¬ 
deaux; then some of the bishops—the strongest of them: the 
rest could be consulted later. Ask them to send you within 
a week reasoned replies to the following questions: 

1st question .—Has the Pope any right to excommunicate 
ruling sovereigns and their ministers for temporal reasons? 
What steps ought to be taken to deal with this excommuni¬ 
cation, the news of which has been broadcast by malevolent 
persons, and has given rise to rumours in the country? 
What attitude can be adopted? What do the rules of the 
Gallican church prescribe? 

2nd question .—The Pope has violated the Concordat by 
refusing to give canonical institution to all bishops nomin¬ 
ated by the government. The Emperor will not expose the 
dignity of his crown to insults of this kind. In these circum¬ 
stances, what means does church history suggest for secur¬ 
ing the canonical institution of bishops? 

280 

Captivity 

yd question .—When His Majesty, with the best inten¬ 
tions, agreed that the bishops he had nominated should 
administer their dioceses as vicaires capitulaires , had the Pope 
any right to forbid the Chapters to bestow the necessary 
powers upon them, to carry on a clandestine correspondence 
in this country, to preach rebellion against authority, and 
to substitute bis arbitrary will for the privileges of the 
Chapters? 

4 tb question. —Finally, what is it best to do, under the 
circumstances, to bring to an end a state of vacillation so 
prejudicial to the liberty of the nation, the dignity of the 
throne, and the good of the church—a church which 
suffers from the sovereign’s anticipation of trouble due to 
the greedy and ill-tempered attitude of the Pope? 

[Corresp., xxi, 17268. In order to end his struggle-with the Pope, 
Napoleon, in June, 1811, summoned a Council of bishops with a view 
to founding an independent ‘Gallican Church.’ For the sequel, v. 
No. 218.3 

216 

BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 

TO PRINCE BORGHESE, GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE TRANS¬ 
ALPINE DEPARTMENTS 

Paris, January 6, 1811. 

The Pope has taken advantage of the liberty I allowed 
him at Savona to sow rebellion and disorder amongst my 
subjects. 

I had done no more than arrange that [until the impor¬ 
tant question of canonical institution is decided] the bishops 
I had nominated should function as vicaires capitulaires in the 
name of their Chapters: this is in accordance with church 
tradition, and follows the precedent laid down by Louis XIV 
and other European sovereigns. Nevertheless the Pope 
[inspired by a characteristic love of disorder] has been 
obstinate and treacherous enough to send to the Chapters 
at Paris, Florence, and Asti briefs contrary to the laws of the 

281 

Savona 

Empire [and of the rest of Europe, since the various 
■sovereigns felt the need of protecting themselves against 
the moody manoeuvres of the Popes, and therefore prohibi¬ 
ted any such communications without their permission. 
The Pope is all the more to blame in this matter, because 
even ultramontane opinion denies his right to influence a 
■Chapter's decisions during the vacancy of a see. More 
particularly is it an attack upon the liberties of the Gallican 
Church]. 

As I intend to safeguard my subjects against the insane 
anger of this ignorant and irascible old man, I order you to 
inform him here and now that he is forbidden to hold 
communication with any church, or with any of my subjects: 
and that any infringement of this rule on either side will be 
punished. 

You are to remove from the Pope's household any 
suspicious individuals, leaving only those who are necessary 
for his service; and you are to allow him no visitors, who¬ 
ever they may be. Take steps to increase the garrison at 
Savona. Confiscate all the Pope's papers, books, and docu¬ 
ments, and have them sent to Paris. If the Pope behaves 
unreasonably, shut him up in the citadel at Savona: but be 
sure to supply it beforehand with food, and all other 
necessaries. 

Take steps to carry out these orders. It will be the business 
of the Prefect or of some other official to notify the Pope 
[in writing], and to inform him [that I no longer recognise 
him as Pope, and] that a person who preaches rebellion, and 
whose soul is full of the gall of bitterness, can no longer 
express the will of the Church. 

You realise the importance of these measures. I have 
sent to Savona an officer of the gendarmerie; and you can 
easily get 300 or so veteran gendarmes from the Legion to 
carry out these orders. [There must be no more half- 
measures.] Since nothing will make the Pope see sense, he 
must be shown that I am strong enough to depose a Pope, 
as my predecessors have done before me. 

The business of dealing with the Pope's papers needs 

182 

Ex-Service Men 

tact. You must not leave him any paper, pens, ink, or 
■writing materials. Let him have a few French servants; but 
remove any who are untrustworthy. You can refuse ad¬ 
mission to members of his suite at your discretion. 

[LECESTRE,ii,747. The Pope had now been eighteen months virtually 
in prison, but still refused investiture to the bishops nominated by 
Napoleon. The bracketed passages were struck out in revision.] 

21 ? 

EX-SERVICE MEN 

TO GENERAL COUNT ANDREOSSY, PRESIDENT OF THE WAR 
COMMITTEE OF THE STATE COUNCIL 

Paris, January 27, 1811. 

Call a meeting of the War Committee, and draft a 
measure to provide for discharged and wounded soldiers, 
by giving them preference in appointments to such ad¬ 
ministrative posts in the Forestry, Post Office, Tobacco, 
Taxation, ana in fact all departments, as can profitably be 
held by discharged officers and men. It is unfair, and 
contrary to my intention, to give such posts to people who 
have done nothing. I rely upon the zeal and intelligence of 
the Committee to propose a suitable scheme. 

[Corresp., xxi, 173 01.] 

218 

GALLICAN CHURCH 

TO THE ECCLESIASTICAL COMMITTEE 

Paris, March 16, 1811. 

I have received and read with close attention your letter 
of March 5. You tell me that the clergy of France, steeped 
in the holy doctrine of the Gospel, would regard with 
indignation any attack upon the authority of the pontiff. 

283 

Pope 

The Pope has attacked my authority, by excommunica¬ 
ting my ministers, my armies, and almost all my empire, 
and that merely in defence of his temporal claims. Neverthe¬ 
less, in the present state of the Catholic Church, in which the 
teaching or those who sacrifice the bishops to the wishes 
and interests of the Roman Curia has won the day, what 
means are there by which I can secure my throne from 
such attacks? Is there any canonical procedure for punishing 
a Pope who preaches sedition and civil war? 

The Pope has not merely attacked my authority: he has 
attacked the authority and welfare of the churches within 
the Empire, not only by allowing the destruction of the 
German Church, and by refusing to institute my bishops, 
but also by his subsequent instructions to the Chapters not 
to bestow the powers of vicaires capitulaires upon the persons 
I had nominated to their sees. 

Before that, he had done all he could to impair the 
affection and obedience of my subjects, by instituting on 
his own authority the Archbishop of Malines, ana by 
making no mention of my wishes when he instituted the 
bishop of Montauban. 

Bulls and letters, printed by the Pope’s orders, have been 
distributed all over Christendom. It is no credit to the 
Pope if such crimes as those of Clement, Ravaillac, and 
Damiens have not been repeated. If he could have his way, 
I should be deserted, as Philip the Tall was, by my subjects 
and my soldiers. I can only conclude that, if the thunders of 
Rome have had so little effect, I owe it to the enlightenment 
of the age, or perhaps to the depreciation of religion in the 
public mind all over Europe. 

I am aware that one should render unto God the things 
that are God’s. ,But the Pope is not God. When one sees 
the Papacy constantly disturbing Christendom, and turning 
it upside down, in the interests of the petty state of Rome 
—a sovereignty no bigger than a duchy, one can only 
deplore the condition of the Catholic Church, compromised 
for such miserable ends. 

The present age takes us back to the times of Charle- 

284 

or Council? 

magne. All the kingdoms, principalities, and duchies which 
formed themselves into republics out of the fragments of 
his empire have been regenerated under our laws. The 
church of my Empire is the church of the West, if not the 
church of universal Christendom. 

I have made up my mind to call a Western Council, to 
which I shall summon the bishops of Italy and Germany, 
and which will draw up regulations, as desired by a great 
number of bishops, for a general system of discipline, so 
that my Empire may be one in morals as it is one in faith. 

I wish to be informed: 

(i) What is the procedure for summoning this Council. 
(2) What subjects it should deal with, in order to bring to 
an end once for all these scandalous contests between the 
spiritual and temporal powers, which are so fatal to religion 
—for they alone are responsible for the schism of the 
Greek Church, the English Churches, and those of the 
Northern Powers, and to find means to protect my Empire 
from the hostility and hatred of the Roman Curia, which 
will otherwise persecute my descendants, as it did those 
of Charlemagne, until it has driven the Empire into schism, 
expelled the French from Italy, and re-established the 
temporal sovereignty of the Popes—a sovereignty that 
cannot exist henceforward without the destruction of the 
Empire. The Concordat I should prefer to regard as no 
longer existent, and I cannot accept the modified form in 
which you submit it. A reciprocal contract is null and void 
as soon as it is broken by either of the parties to it. The 
Pope has violated the Concordat for the last 4 years, just 
as he previously broke the contract that he made with my 
Kingdom of Italy, to the deep indignation of my Italian 
church. 

Under these circumstances, the clause providing for the 
institution of bishops by the metropolitans, if the Pope 
fails to act, does not guarantee my successors against further 
possible quarrels with the Papal See. 

[Corresp., xxi, 17478. After two abortive Ecclesiastical Commis¬ 
sions in 1809 and January, 1811 (v. No. 215), Napoleon summoned a 

285 

Beet-Sugar 

third Council of French and Italian bishops on June 17, 1811, in order 
to coerce the Pope. This too refused his suggestions, and was dissolved. 
Philip ‘the Tall* (/<? Long) was King of France 1316-22. Clementj 
Ravaillac, and Damiens, were the assassins of Henri IH, Henri IV 
and Louis XV. 

219 

BEET-SUGAR 

NOTE FOR THE MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Paris, March 18, 1811. 

The Minister for Home Affairs is to make a report, to 
be sent to the State Council, explaining the advantages of 
manufacturing sugar from beet. He will suggest all the 
steps that should be taken to encourage the cultivation of 
sugar-beet, either by showing that, even if the customs 
duty on colonial goods is changeable, it will not be changed 
for the next 5 years, or by anticipating the time when it 
may be possible to prohibit all imports of sugar from the 
colonies, or by suggesting some other means of attaining 
the same end. 

The Minister will report to-morrow on a convenient 
place, for making a large scale experiment, and for establish¬ 
ing a school of instruction in the manufacture of beet- 
sugar. This institution could probably be established at the 
Rambouillet farm, where some useful tests have already been 
made. It would be a good thing to send for the director of 
the farm, and to ask nis advice. 

Finally, the Minister is to submit, before next Sunday, 
the draft of a circular to the Prefects, explaining the govern¬ 
ment policy. In this circular he will give notice of the 
intention to maintain the tariffs on colonial goods, and 
even to prohibit entirely the importation of foreign sugar. 
He will assign to each Department its share of the 70,000 
arpents to be given up to beet cultivation in order to provide 
all the sugar needed for French consumption. He will 
enlist the Prefects* support in encouraging land-owners to 

286 

Ki ng o f Rome 

take up the cultivation of beet, and will show them, on 
land set aside for this purpose, what they have to do. He* 
will persuade farmers in the tobacco-growing Departments 
that it is profitable to grow beet instead. He will give them 
to understand, in general terms, that the cultivation of beet 
improves the ground, and that the waste products of the 
sugar-factory make an excellent food for cattle. He will 
show what outlay produces what returns, and how beet- 
cultivation, even on a small scale, can deprive foreigners of 
the kind of tribute they now get from France. A well- 
written circular on these lines will prove quite clearly the- 
incalculable advantages of a scheme which we want to 
commend to all sensible men. 

[Corresp., xxi, 17485. This letter was followed a week later by a 
decree setting aside 80,000 acres for the planting of beet, and founding ) 
6 schools for teaching the manufacture of beet-sugar,] 

220 

SON AND HEIR 

TO THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE 

Paris, March 22, 1811.. 

My dear, I have received your letter; thank you for it. 
My son is a big healthy child. I trust he will do well. He 
has my chest, my mouth, and my eyes. I trust he will fulfil 
his destiny. 

I am still very pleased with Eugene: he has never given. 
me an hour’s anxiety. 

[Corresp., xxi, 17499. Marie Louise’s son, the ‘King of Rome/ was. 
born on March 20.] 

287 

Russia 

221 

RUSSIA—PEACE OR WAR? 

TO FREDERICK, KING OF WURTTEMBERG 

Paris, April 2, 1811. 

... I hope and believe, as Your Majesty does, that 
Russia will not declare war. But she has built 20 fortresses 
since the end of last year; at this moment she is forming 
15 new regiments; the divisions from Finland and Sweden 
are marching towards the frontiers of the Grand Duchy; 
and so are 4 divisions of her army in Moldavia. It is deeds, 
not words, that show the real intentions of a government. 
Why withdraw troops so useful to Russia in her war 
with the Turks? Why create new regiments at a moment 
of penury, when they have no money, and a big war on 
hand, and no means of meeting expenses but by a paper 
currency? These are the plain facts. For the last 6 months, 
the Emperor Alexander has been fed on fables. They have 
persuaded him that I demanded the forces of the Confedera¬ 
tion, and the details he gave on this point show that he is 
already listening to what our enemies say. The ukase on 
commerce—not that he could ever have carried it out— 
shows that his whole attitude has changed; there is some¬ 
thing about it friendly to England, ana hostile to France; 
whereas at one time the Emperor was the only person in 
Russia who backed the alliance against England. . . . 

I attach no importance to Your Majesty’s relations with 
Russia, any more than I do to the attitude of the Imperial 
court. In the dealings of one great nation with another, 
facts say more than words, and public opinion holds the 
helm. The King of Prussia drifted into war while it was still 
at a distance; he would have stopped it, when he had lost 
the power to do so; and he wept before Jena, because he 
had a presentiment of what would happen. It was the same 
with the Emperor of Austria; he allowed the arming of the 
Jartdwehr, and it was no sooner armed than it dragged him 

288 

Drifting into War 

into war. I am inclined to think that the same thing will 
happen to the Emperor Alexander. He has already com¬ 
pletely abandoned his point of view at Tilsit, and Russia 
is the source of all the talk about war. If the Emperor wants 
war, public opinion backs him up: if, without wanting war, 
he yet fails to stop the movement towards it, he will be 
dragged into it next year against his will; and war will come 
about, though I don’t want it, neither does he, and though it 
is equally against the interests of France and of Russia. I 
have seen this happen so often before that my experience 
of the past reveals the future. It is all like a scene at die 
opera, with the English in the wings. If anything can save 
the situation, it will be the straightforward language I have 
used to Russia.... 

Finally, Your Majesty cannot suppose that I, of all 
people, desire war. Why should I? To set Poland on its feet 
again? I could have done that after Tilsit, or after Vienna, 
or this very yearl I am too good a tactician to have missed 
such easy opportunities. It was simply that I didn’t want to 
do so. The fact is, I have the war in Spain and Portugal 
on my hands—a war which covers an area larger than 
France, and absorbs a quantity of men and material: I can¬ 
not possibly want another war. And yet I have raised 
120,000 men this year, and shall be raising another 120,000 
next year; I am forming new regiments, and remounting my 
cavalry and artillery; and all because I am suspicious of 
Russian intentions, and believe that she is working for an 
outbreak of war in 1812. My extraordinary expenditure this 
year amounts to 100 millions: does Your Majesty suppose I 
am doing it to amuse myself? But if I have no wish for war, 
and if I am still less anxious to play the part of a Polish 
Don Quixote, I have at least no right to ask that Russia 
should stand by her alliance; and I must be able to prevent 
her finishing the Turkish war (which will probably be this 
summer), and then coming to me and saying, T am throwing 
over our arrangement, and making peace with England.’ 
The Emperor might just as well declare war on me. For, 
unless I am the first to break with Russia, the English will 

u 289 

Royal Baptism 

begin by turning her alliance into neutrality, and end by 
turning her neutrality into war. . . . 

[Corresp., xxii, 175 J3.] 

222 

ROYAL BAPTISM 

TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, MINISTER FOR HOME 

AFFAIRS 

Paris, April 13, 1811. 

I have fixed June 2 for the baptism of the King of 
Rome. It will be celebrated in the metropolitan church of 
N6tre Dame at Paris, where the Empress and I shall attend 
in state to take part in the ceremony, and to render thanks 
to God for the birth of our son. After the ceremony at 
N6tre Dame I shall dine at the Town Hall of my good city 
of Paris, and watch a display of fire-works. The same day 
the Te Deum will be sung throughout the Empire. I desire 
all the fetes and rejoicings to take place simultaneously, and 
according to the programme you have submitted to me; I 
therefore wish you to send instructions to the mayors of 
the communes, fixing the amount they are allowed to spend 
on these f£tes. Let me also have the list of the marriages that 
could be arranged for in all the principal towns, by provid¬ 
ing dowries for poor and orphan girls, and by mating 
them with discharged soldiers. I want you also to invite 
the mayors of approved towns to the baptism; each mayor 
to be accompanied by two deputies chosen from the leading 
members of the General Council. Make each of them an 
allowance for travelling expenses, on a scale which will 
enable them to keep up a proper appearance during their 
stay in Paris, and to put their servants into the livery of 
the towns they represent. 

[Corresp., xxii, 17604.] 

290 

U NEMPLOYMENT 
223 

WORK FOR THE UNEMPLOYED 

TO GENERAL LACUEE, COUNT OF CESSAC, MINISTER IN CHARGE 
OF WAR ADMINISTRATION 

Saint-Cloud, May 2, 1811. 

There ate a number of unemployed hat-makers, bonnet- 
makers, cobblers, tailors, and saddlers in Paris. I should like 
you to take steps to arrange for the manufacture of shoes 
at the rate of 500 a day, on the understanding that employ¬ 
ment is given to 1,000 cobblers, and that no ready-made 
shoes are included in the number supplied: that will mean 
15,000 pairs a month. You must take whatever precautions 
are necessary to ensure that the shoes are well made. 

I should like to manufacture in the same way 250 shakos 
a day, about 30 saddles, and a certain number of complete 
outfits, care being taken that new workmen are always 
employed. 

As there are still other workmen out of employment, 
see whether it would be feasible to manufacture 100 or so 
baggage-carts: but be sure that they are of good workman¬ 
ship; and we ought to be able to get them as cheaply as at 
Sampigny. 

[Corresp., xrii, 17684.] 

224 

PREFECT AND PUBLIC 

TO PRINCE LEBRUN, ARCH-TREASURER OF THE EMPIRE, THE 
EMPEROR’S LIEUTENANT-GENERAL IN HOLLAND 

Saint-Cloud, May 3, 1811. 

. . . The Prefect at Emden is a very weak man. I shall 
wait for the report that Count Real is sending me before 
making up my mind about him. But my intention is that the 
500 men composing the crowd which beat the Prefect shall 

291 

Holland and Ireland 

all be removed to France, to work in my ports. Write in 
this sense to State-Counsellor Real. I will stand no nonsense 
about this. The Prefect is my representative. Those who 
stood by while he was assaulted are all guilty. I suppose I 
ought to be grateful because the two towns let themselves 
be disarmed when the troops arrived? As for those of the 
offenders who got away, their houses must be burnt down, 
their families arrested, their property confiscated, and they 
themselves condemned to death by court martial for failing 
to appear. A number of the worst offenders are to be shot. 
Send a copy of this letter to State-Counsellor Rdal. It needs 
bloodshed and chastisement to wash out such an insult to 
the government. 

[Lecestre, ii, 804.] 

225 

IRELAND AGAIN 

TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, MINISTER FOR WAR 

Saint-Cloud, July 4,1811. 

I want you to send for O’Connor and the other Irishmen 
in Paris, and to see if you can revive a party in Ireland, 
At the present moment I have 25 war-ships off the Scheldt, 
and 9 in the Texel. I am very much inclined to send an 
expedition of 3,000 men and 4,000 horses to Ireland in 
October, if I can be sure of finding support there, and if 
England goes on reducing her garrisons to send troops to 
Portugal. You can easily understand that my control of the 
Scheldt and Texel, coinciding with the English disarma¬ 
ment, provides an unique opportunity. 

I will agree to any terms the Irish like. It is a matter of 
immense importance. I want to have a plan, and to know 
what I can expect from it, within a fortnight. There is 
nothing to prevent my sailing out of the Scheldt; and, as the 
British haven’t a man in England, they will be forced to 

292 

Spies and Assassins 

recall their troops from the Peninsula, which will take them 
2 or 3 months. We shall have time to establish ourselves in 
the country before they arrive. 

[Corresp., xxii, 17875. Arthur O’Connor, a member of the ‘United 
Irishmen,’ was despatched from Scotland to France in 1803, and made 
a general by Napoleon in 1804.] 

226 

SPIES PUNISHED 

TO GENERAL COUNT HULLIN, GOVERNOR OF THE CHATEAU DE 

VINCENNES 

Saint-Cloud, July 25, 1811 . 

I have received the sentence passed on Cifenti and Sassi 
della Tosa. Have Cifenti executed—he is a wretched spy. 
In Sassi’s case, I agree to a commutation of his sentence. 
But you are to have him taken to the place of execution, 
and you must not produce the reprieve until Cifenti has 
been executed, and it is Sassi’s turn to mount the scaffold. 
I want him to see with his own eyes how a crime like his is 
punished. 

[Lecestre, ii, 841.] 

227 

ENGLISH ASSASSINS 

NOTE FOR THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Rambouillet, August 8, 1811. 

I am sending M. the Duke of Bassano, for insertion in 
the papers, an article which says that the gang of assassins 
organised by Lord Wellesley and Mr. Perceval to get rid of 

293 

Imperial 

the enemies of England has already made an attempt on the 
life of the King of Denmark. Fortunately it failed. Publish 
the story, but don’t mention that the assassin was a Swedish 
officer. 

[Brotonne, i, 871. Spencer Perceval was Prime Minister from 1809 
to 1812: Lord Wellesley was Foreign Secretary.] 

228 

WARDROBE 

TO GENERAL DUROC, DUKE OF FRIULI, GRAND MARSHAL OF 

THE PALACE 

Saint-Cloud, August 19,1811. 

Inform Count Remusat that he is to have nothing more 
to do with my Wardrobe, and that I have deprived him of 
the title of Master of the Wardrobe. You are to carry on his 
functions until I find a substitute for him. I send you this 
year’s estimate for my Wardrobe that I have drawn up, 
and an order to Count Estfcve to pay the 16,000 francs I 
owe. I don’t want to charge this sum to the annual account. 
The estimate needs no revision; it is the same as that which 
I drew up at the beginning of the year. The Treasurer will 
pay the 16,000 francs from my private purse. 

Have an inventory made or my things: see that they are 
there, and check them off. I think one could still save 
something on the estimate. See that the tailor arranges to 
send in no bad work, and not to exceed his estimates. 
Whenever any new clothes are delivered, bring them to me 
yourself, so mat I may see whether they fit me properly: 
if they do, I will have them. Regularise all this, so that^ 
when I appoint a Master of the Wardrobe, he will find his 
duties cut and dried. I fancy Count Remusat was not 
appointed by decree; but if he was, you are to submit a 
decree for his dismissal. 

294 

Uniforms 

'Estimate for the Emperor’s Wardrobe. 

Uniforms and Great-coats. 

i Grenadier’s tail-coat on January ist with' 
epaulettes, etc. .... 

i Chasseur’s tail-coat on April ist with epau¬ 
lettes, etc. 

i Grenadier’s tail-coat on July ist, with epau¬ 
lettes, etc. 

1 Chasseur’s tail-coat on October 17, with 
epaulettes, etc. 

(Each tail-coat will have to last 3 years.) 

2 Hunting coats: one for riding, in the Saint- 

Hubert style, the other for shooting, on 
August ist. 

(These coats will have to last 3 years.) 

1 Civilian coat on November ist (to last 3 years.) 

2 Frock-coats: one grey, and the other another 

colour. 

(They will be supplied on October ist 
every year, and will have to last 3 years.) 

francs. 

at 360 
each = 
1,440 

860 

200 

400 

Waist-coats and Breeches. 

48 pairs of breeches and white waist-coats at 80 

francs .3,840 

(They are to be supplied every week, and 
must last 3 years.) 

Dressing-gowns , Pantaloons , and Vests. 

2 dressing-gowns, one quilted, on May ist, 
and one of swansdown, on October 1 st . 500 

2 pairs of pantaloons, one quilted and one of 
wool, supplied in the same way . . 60 

(The dressing-gowns and pantaloons will 
have to last 3 years.) 

48 flannel vests (one a week) at 30 francs . . 1,440 

(The vests will have to last 3 years.) 

295 

Scent and Slimming 

Body-linen. fmcs . 

4 dozen shirts (a dozen a week) . . . 2,880 

4 dozen handkerchiefs ( a dozen a week) . 576 

2 dozen cravats (one a fortnight) ... 720 

1 dozen black collars (one a month) which must 

last a year ...... 96 

2 dozen towels (a dozen a fortnight) . . 200 

6 Madras night-caps (one every 2 months) to 

last 3 years.144 

2 dozen pairs of silk stockings at 18 francs (one 
pair a fortnight) . . . . 432 

2 dozen pairs of socks (one pair a fortnight) . 43 2 

(All this linen, except the black collars and 
the night-caps, will have to last 6 years.) 

Footwear. 

24 pairs of shoes (one pair a fortnight, which 
must last 2 years) . . . . 312 

6 pairs of boots, to last 2 years . . . 600 

Headwear. 

4 hats a year, supplied with the tail-coats . 

Miscellaneous. 

Scents, slimming mixture, eau de Cologne, etc. . 

Washing the linen and silk stockings 
Various expenses. Nothing to be spent with¬ 
out His Majesty’s approval 

Total.“ 

[Corresp., xxii, 18051.] 

296 

Stephanie Married 
229 

A WIFE’S DUTY 

TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN 

AFFAIRS 

Saint-Cloud, August 24, 1811. 

Princess Stephanie has no fight to like Mannheim: it is 
her duty to be where her husband is. She has no right to 
prefer dining at 5: it is her duty to dine when her husband 
does. She ought to do what he wants and to be where he is, 
instead of running away from him. Far from encouraging 
the Princess in these petty acts of rebellion, Baron de 
Moustier ought to get her lady-in-waiting to give her 
my advice. The Princess ought to use all the care and 
coquettishness she can to please her husband, not the little 
she has displayed hitherto. It is her duty; it is also in her 
own interest. . . . 

[Corresp., xxii, 18078. For Princess Stephanie v. No. 113. C. E. 
Marquis de Moustier (1779-1830) was plenipotentiary at Wiirttemberg, 
1813-20.] 

230 

HOSTAGES 

TO GENERAL SAVARY, DUKE OF ROVIGO, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Compiegne, September 12, 1811. 

Have the wife of the pilot Gallet, who is in the English 
service, arrested, and write to him saying that, unless he 
either returns to France, or goes to live in a neutral country 
under conditions guaranteeing that he is not in English 
pay, she and her children will be put in prison, in solitary 
confinement, and fed on bread and water. Apply the same 
measure to the wives and families of all pilots in the 
English service. Present me with a decree to this effect, 
and have an inquiry made as to the pilots who are on board 
enemy ships. 

[Lecestre, ii, 873.] 

297 

Two Empresses 
231 

JOSEPHINE’S EXTRAVAGANCE 

TO COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY 

Wesel, November 1, 1811. 

The Crown Treasury has advanced a sum of several 
hundred thousand francs owed by M. Pierlot to the Empress 
Josephine and Queen Hortense. Please let me know when 
the settlement of M. Pierlot’s affairs will enable this amount 
to be repaid to the Crown Treasury. 

It would be a good plan if you would privately send for 
the Empress Josephine’s steward, and make him under¬ 
stand that not a penny will be paid him except upon proof 
that he has no outstanding debts. I will stand no nonsense 
about this. The steward’s own property must be the 
guarantee of his good faith. You will therefore notify 
him that, as from January 1st next, no payment will be 
made to you, or to the Crown Treasury, except upon 
his certification, secured upon his own property, that 
there are no debts. 

I am informed that the expenditure on the Empress’s 
household is hopelessly extravagant. See the steward about 
this. Find out what the position is as regards payments in 
cash. It is absurd that, in place of the saving of 2 millions 
that the Empress was to have made, there should still be 
debts unpaid. You should have no difficulty in getting the 
steward to tell you about all this, and in making him see 
that he himself might be in a very awkward situation. 

Arrange for a personal interview with the Empress 
Josephine. Make her understand that I hope her establish¬ 
ment will be managed more economically, and that, if it is 
not, she will incur my extreme displeasure. The Empress 
Louise has only x 00,000 crowns; she pays her bills every 
week: and she goes without frocks, and stints herself in 
various ways, rather than run into debt. 

It is therefore my intention that, as from January 1st 
next, not a penny more shall be paid on account of the 

298 

English Prisoners 

Empress Josephine’s establishment, except upon a certificate 
from her steward saying that there are no debts. Look into 
the accounts for 1811, and the estimate of expenditure for 
1812. The latter ought not to exceed 1 million. If too many 
horses are being kept, some must be got rid of. The Em¬ 
press has children and grandchildren. She ought to be 
saving up, so as to be able to help them, instead of running 
up bills. 

You must not make any more payments to Queen 
Hortense, either under the head of ‘apanage’ or of ‘timber’, 
without asking me first. Have a talk with her steward too. 
Tell him her establishment must be properly managed; not 
only must there be no debts, but also all expenditure must 
be carefully regulated. 

[Lecestre, ii, 891.] 

232 

ENGLISH PRISONERS 

TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE 

Saint-Cloud, November 12, 1811. 

Whilst I was crossing the river at Givet, a detachment of 
English prisoners was at work repairing a pontoon bridge. 
I noticed particularly the keenness and activity of 8 or 10 of 
these men, who jumped into a small boat to help get the 
bridge into position. Order a list to be made of the 10 men 
who distinguished themselves most in this affair: see that 
each of them is given a new suit of clothes, 5 napoleons , and a 
passport for Morlaix, where they will be referred to the 
Transport Office, with an account of the reason for their 
liberation. Inform the Minister of Marine, whom this 
correspondence also concerns. There must be no favourit¬ 
ism: preference must be given to the men who behaved 
best. There is also at Morlaix an English minister who came 
to ask my leave for a 3 months’ visit to England. Let him 
have it. He could be put in charge of the rest. Finally I 

299 

Agenda 

am sending you a petition sent me under similar circum¬ 
stances by an English woman: send me a report on what she 
wants. 

[Corresp., xxiii, 18250.] 

233 

HOME OFFICE AGENDA 

TO THE COUNT OF MONTALIVET, MINISTER FOR HOME 

AFFAIRS 

Saint-Cloud, November 15, 1811. 

I am going to hold a Council for Home Affairs once a 
week from November to February—14 meetings in all. 
The first subject to be dealt with will be questions of com¬ 
merce and manufactures. Then we will take the different 
departments of your Ministry, in order. Three meetings can 
be devoted to the business of Roads and Bridges, and Public 
Works; three, at intervals of a fortnight, will deal with the 
balance-sheet of the city of Paris, and of towns with 
revenues of over a million a year, and with the auditing of 
deposit companies’ accounts; two, also a fortnight apart, 
with mineral-water works, prisons, and work-houses; one, 
with departmental indebtedness, and the budgeting for the 
1 per cent, tax, both fixed and variable; that will leave other 
meetings to deal with new appointments to prefectures, and 
mayoralties of the approvea towns, with mines, libraries, 
public education, sciences and arts, and the other subjects 
that fall under your department. Please let me have a report 
on the allocation and order of the subjects to be dealt with 
at these meetings. The accounts for 1810-1811 will be 
examined, so that, if the grants allowed are inadequate, they 
can be supplemented wherever necessary, taking each head 
in turn. After dealing with the accounts of each branch of 
the administration, we will consider the relevant legislation, 
and propose whatever charges may contribute towards 

300 

Gambling Saloons 

ultimate perfection in every department. The minutes of 
these council-meetings, taken as a whole, should provide 
both a summary of the financial position, and a statement of 
the grounds for the changes and improvements carried out. 
The upshot of all these reports will be (i) a statement of the 
actual expenses for 1810, (a) an approximate statement of 
the expenses for 1811, and (3) the budget for 1812. 
[Corresp., xxiii, 18262.] 

234 

CASINOS 

TO COUNT MOLLIEN, MINISTER OF THE PUBLIC TREASURY 

Saint-Cloud, November 20, 1811. 

I want you to make certain very confidential inquiries, 
and to see if you can’t suggest some ideas to me for regula¬ 
ting the management of gambling. The body that has the 
contract for gambling in Paris appears to possess a ‘bank’ of 
from 11 to 1,200,000 francs. After meeting all expenses, 
and paying over 3 or 4 millions to the ponce account, it 
makes a profit estimated at 100-150 per cent., i.e.a return 
of 2 or 3 millions on a capital of 1,200,000 francs. It is 
reckoned, I believe, that the bankers’ gross earnings are 
7 or 8 millions. It seems to me utterly absurd to allow to a 
concern which has made an immense fortune an annual 
bonus of 1,800,000 francs. There was a time when a sum of 
1,200,000 francs—now an everyday affair—would have 
been thought worth consideration. 

It would be as well, then, to find out how the machinery 
of this gambling concern works, and to see if it couldn’t 
be exploited by a company, either for the benefit of the 
hospitals, or to provide a reserve supply of grain for the 
city of Paris. 

There is a man named Davelouis who has gone into the 
whole matter: it is worth hearing what he has to say, 
though you needn’t believe all his assertions. He can tell 

301 

Grand Duchess 

you who ate the people involved in the business. But you 
must proceed secretly and tactfully, because the police are 
very touchy on the subject, and regard gambling as a 
profitable undertaking that many of the minister’s agents 
are willing to exploit for their benefit. 

[Corresp., xxiii, 18271.] 

235 

COURT CIRCULAR 

TO GENERAL SAVARY, DUKE OF ROVIGO, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Paris, December 17, 1811. 

The Tuscan papers give detailed accounts of what the 
Grand Duchess is doing; and too often the Paris papers, 
naturally enough, copy them. You must instruct the 
director of police to prevent this rubbish being printed. 
The less the Grand Duchess is talked about, the better. It 
must at any rate be something worth talking about, and 
care must be taken that nothing indiscreet gets into the 
press. I read in a recent article that some French crew 
shouted ‘Vive Elisa! Vive l’Empdreur!’ What stuff! I shall 
hold the director of police personally responsible if anything 
so unsuitable appears again. The Grand Duchess may know 
no thin g about this: but if the articles came from her 
secretaries, get someone in Paris to drop her a hint that 
she is making herself ridiculous. Europe doesn’t care a 
hang what the Grand Duchess is doing. Sovereigns let the 
papers print their doings, not because they like it, but to 
prevent stupid rumours. The papers are allowed to say that 
the Emperor went hunting yesterday, and so forth, because, 
if the public did not hear him talked about, they would invent 
all kinds of rumours. Besides, it is a matter of great interest 
what Sovereigns are doing; but as to what Grand Duchesses 
are doing—who cares? 

[Lecestre, ii, 915. The Grand Duchess of Tuscany, since 1809, was 
Napoleon’s eldest sister, Marie-Anne (Elise). Her husband, Felice 
Baciocchi (y. No. 109) remained Prince of Lucca and Piombino.] 

302 

Espionage 

236 

BOOKS ON RUSSIA 

TO M. BARBIER, THE EMPEROR’S LIBRARIAN 

Paris, December 19, 1811. 

Will M. Barbier please send me, for His Majesty, a few 
good books—those that are best worth consulting—on the 
topography of Russia, and especially of Lithuania— 
marshes, rivers, forests, roads, etc.? 

By order of the Emperor, 
Meneval. 

His Majesty also wishes to have the most detailed 
account there is in French of Charles XIFs campaigns in 
Poland and Russia. A few works on military operations in 
those parts would be equally useful. 

[Corresp., xxiii, 18348. Charles XIFs Russian campaign of 1708-9 
anticipated the line of Napoleon’s march on Moscow, and ended, 
largely owing to a hard winter, in the disaster of Poltawa.] 

237 

ESPIONAGE 

TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN 

AFFAIRS 

Paris, December 20, 1811. 

Write in cypher to Baron Bignon and tell him that, in 
the event of war, I intend to attach him to my Headquarters’ 
staff, and to put him at the head of the secret police, with 
the duties of spying in the enemy army, translating inter¬ 
cepted letters and documents, collecting prisoners’ reports, 
etc.; that it is therefore necessary that he should begin to-day 
organising an efficient service of secret police; and that he 
ought to secure two Poles who speak Russian well (they 
should be soldiers, who have seen some service, intelligent 
and trustworthy men, one knowing Lithuania, the other 

303 

New Year’s Gifts 

Volhynia, Podolia, and the Ukraine), and a third who speaks 
German and has a good knowledge of Livonia and Cout- 
land. It will be the duty of these three officers to interview 
prisoners. They ought to be able to speak Polish, Russian 
and German like natives. They will have under their ordets 
a dozen carefully selected agents, who will be paid for any 
reports they make. They too ought to be equally competent 
to give information as to the country through which the 
army is likely to pass. 

I want Baron Bignon to set to work at once on this 
important organisation. As a first step, the three heads of 
the correspondence department ought to have agents on the 
roads from Petersburg to Vilna, Petersburg to Riga, and 
Riga to Memel; on the roads to Kiev; and on the three 
toads which run from Bucharest to Petersburg, Moscow, 
and Grodno; they ought to send other agents to Riga, 
Dinaburg, Pinsk in the marshes, and Grodno, with instruc¬ 
tions to give daily information as to the state of the fortifica¬ 
tions. If die reports are satisfactory I shall not mind spending 
12,000 francs a month on this. During the war rewards of 
various kinds will be given to those who furnish information 
of occasional value. There are Poles who know the fortifica¬ 
tions well, and who can tell us, at these various places, in 
what condition they are. 

[Corresp., xxiii, 18350. Napoleon had determined on war with 
Russia some months before the presentation of the Russian ultimatum 
on April 27,1812.] 

238 

IMPERIAL PORCELAIN 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CADORE, INTENDANT- 
GENERAL OF THE CROWN 

Paris, December 31, 1811. 

I have just seen the set of porcelain sent to the Empress 
as a present for New Year’s Day. It is very ugly. See that 

304 

Rum ford Soup 

it is prettier another year. Have a breakfast set made, in 
which every cup has portraits of the Empress and of the 
six princesses—my sisters and sisters-in-law. Make another 
set with portraits of the Empress’s ladies-in-waiting. 

[CoRRESP., xxiii, 18405.] 

239 

SOUP-KITCHENS 

NOTE DICTATED AT A MINISTERIAL COUNCIL 

Paris, March 11, 1812. 

His Majesty is informed that an opportunity is given for 
helping the indigent classes, by the use of Rumford soup. 
He notices that Rumford soup requires no flour. There is an 
undeniable shortage of flour in France. It would be advis¬ 
able to order the Prefects and local authorities to set up 
plenty of Rumford soup-kitchens everywhere, not merely 
for the free distribution, but also for the sale of soup. 
They ought to start first in the Paris Communes and 
suburbs, notably at Saint-Denis. The Ministers of Home 
Affairs and of Trade must see to the carrying out of these 
arrangements. The Home Minister will write to all the 
Prefects, and inform them that the Emperor has been sorry 
to see how, in districts where bread is very dear, and where 
there is a shortage of food, they have taken no steps to 
establish Rumford soup-kitchens under the control of 
contractors who could sell to the public. He must give 
figures showing that this soup is as cheap and as nutritious 
as the same amount of bread; so that, in times of poverty, 
it affords the people as good a means of nourishment as 
bread at the same price. He is to issue instructions as to the 
best method of building and managing soup-kitchens. 

Later the soup could be sold at half-price. At Saint-Denis 
and in the Paris suburbs it would be best for the Prefect 
to have the soup-kitchens managed by contractors, and to 

3°5 

x 

Poor Relief 

advertise them; and in Paris the plan for selling soup could 
be introduced quite independently of free distribution. A 
workman who is pretty well off might be ashamed to accept 
it as charity, and yet might be very glad to buy it cheap for 
the benefit of his family. It is better for the general public 
that it should be sold than that it should be given away; for 
there must be a limit to free distribution, whereas in districts 
where com is dear there would be plenty of scope for cheap 
selling. 

The Government might go further, and help towards 
setting up the kitchens, and seeing that the soup is as good 
and cheap as possible. 

The Emperor adds to these observations the following 
questions: 

How can we raise io millions to meet the needs of the 
poor—that is, at the rate of z millions a month from April 
to August? The only available source seems to be the 
revenue of the Communes. . . . 

Once money is found, how can it be best employed, so 
that it may not become a source of abuse, and do more 
harm than good? These io millions ought to be employed 
for the relief of the poor, to compensate them for the rise 
in the price of corn. We must therefore find out in which 
Departments the price is highest, and where there is most 
suffering, and then settle the division of the money among 
the Departments, and the procedure for distributing it. 

We had best follow the precedent set by Paris, where 
they have distributed 30,000 lbs of bread, and 40,000 
bowls of Rumford soup. We may fairly boast nowadays 
that not a single inhabitant of Paris suffers from lack of 
food.... 

[Corresp., xxiii, 18568. For Rumford, v. No. 69.] 

306 

School Fare 
240 

PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM 

TO THE DUKE OF FELTRE 

Saint-Cloud, April 3, 1812. 

I hear all kinds of complaints about the school at Saint- 
Germain. They have had the bad effect of preventing rich 
families sending their children there. I am assured that the 
boys are given bad bread, and not enough to eat; that they 
are worked too hard, and are taught nothing, except 
military training. Report to me on the way this school is 
conducted. The bread ought to be the best obtainable, there 
should be plenty of food, and the education ought to be 
better than that at La Fleche, with a homely atmosphere, 
and a wide curriculum. The boys ought to learn drawing, 
mathematics, history, geography, and literature. This school 
is not fulfilling my expectations. It is meant to receive the 
children of the richest families in France: instead, it is 
driving them away. It has a thoroughly bad reputation. 

[Chuquet, ii, 574. Saint-Germain was one of the schools set up as 
a result of Chaptal’s Report: v. No. 60.] 

241 

ABDUCTING THE POPE 

TO PRINCE BORGHESE, GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE TRANS¬ 
ALPINE DEPARTMENTS 

Dresden, May 21, 1812. 

... I have just heard that there are English vessels off 
Savona, and I think that the Pope must be put in a safe 
place. You are therefore to order the Prefect and the officer 
in command of the gendarmerie to send the Pope and his 

3°7 

Abducting a Pope 

people away in two good carriages. The Pope will have 
his doctor in the carriage with him. Precautions must be 
taken to see that he passes through Turin by night, that 
he only stops at Mont Cenis, that he goes through Chambery 
and Lyon by night, and that he is taken in this way to 
Fontainebleau, where orders have been given for his recep¬ 
tion. I rely in this matter upon your prudence, and that of 
the officer commanding the gendarmes . Make sure that the 
Pope has a good carriage, and that all proper precautions 
are taken. The Pope must not travel dressed as a bishop, 
but only as a priest, so that he may not be recognised 
anywhere en route , except at Mont Cenis. Unless something 
unforeseen occurs, this matter is not so urgent that you 
might not send for the Prefect of Montenotte, and arrange 
the Pope’s departure with him beforehand. 

Send on the enclosed letter to the Duke of Lodi. I am 
writing to tell him to send the Archbishop of Edessa to 
meet you at Turin. When he arrives there, inform him on 
my behalf that you have an errand for him; and as soon 
as you hear that the Pope is one stage on the road beyond 
Turin, send the Archbishop to join him. He is to get into 
the Pope’s carriage, and to accompany him the rest of the 
way. Explain to this prelate that the European situation, and 
the presence of the English off Savona, made the Pope’s 
residence there dangerous; that he must be placed in the 
centre of the Empire; that he will be received at Fontaine¬ 
bleau by the bishops of the deputation; that he will occupy 
the same rooms there as he had before; that he will see the 
French cardinals, etc. 

You must collaborate with the Minister of Police in 
carrying out these measures. I wish the greatest secrecy to 
be observed. 

[Corresp., xxiii, 18710. Napoleon was afraid that, during his 
absence on the Russian campaign, the English might try to abduct the 
Pope from Savona. Pius nearly died on the journey.] 

308 

Russian Campaign 
242 

NURSERY NEWS 

TO THE COUNTESS DE MONTESQUIOU, GOVERNESS OF THE 
CHILDREN OF FRANCE 

Konigsberg, June 16, 1812. 

I have received your letter of June 6th. I can assure you 
of my satisfaction at the care you take of the King. I hope 
to hear from you soon that he has cut his last four teeth. I 
have arranged to pay the nurse all you asked: you can 
inform her of this. 

[Corresp., xxiii, 1880Z.] 

243 

PUTTING RUSSIA IN THE WRONG 

TO ALEXANDER, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 

Vilna, July 1, 1812. 

I have received Your Majesty’s letter. The war which 
set our states at issue was brought to an end by the treaty 
of Tilsit. I attended the conference on the Niemen resolved 
not to make peace until I had secured all the advantages 
offered by my situation. Accordingly I refused to meet the 
King of Prussia there. Your Majesty said to me, T will 
act as second in your duel with England/ This remark 
altered everything: its corollary was the treaty of Tilsit. 
At a later date Your Majesty desired that certain modifica¬ 
tions should be made in the treaty: you wished to keep 
Moldavia and Wallachia, and to extend your frontier to the 
Danube. You negotiated; and this important modification 
of the treaty of Tilsit, with all the advantages it carried for 
Your Majesty, followed from the Convention of Erfurt. 
Apparently, about the middle of 1810, Your Majesty wished 
for fresh modifications in the treaty of Tilsit. There were 

309 

Casus Belli 

two ways of arriving at this result—negotiation or war. 
Negotiation had succeeded at Erfurt: why did Your Majesty 
this time adopt a different method? You armed on a large 
scale, you refused to negotiate, and you seemed disinclined 
to press for modifications of the treaty of Tilsit, unless 
surrounded by your armies. The relations established be¬ 
tween our two powers, after so many incidents and so much 
bloodshed, were broken off, and war became imminent. 

I also armed, but 6 months after Your Majesty had done so. 

I have not raised a single battalion, or drawn one million out 
of my Treasury for war expenses, without giving notice of 
the fact to Your Majesty and Your Majesty’s ambassadors. 

I have missed no opportunity of explaining my intentions. 
Your Majesty issued to all Europe a kind of manifesto 
that the powers generally do not make unless they are about 
to fight, and have nothing more to expect from negotiation. 
I made no reply. Your Majesty was the first to mobilise 
your armies, and to threaten my frontiers. Your Majesty 
was the first to start for the front. Your Majesty, after 
18 months’ constant refusal to explain your intentions, 
finally forwarded, through your minister, a demand for 
the evacuation of Prussia, as a previous condition of such an 
explanation. A few days later this minister repeated your 
demand three times, and asked for his passports. From that 
moment. Your Majesty and I were at war.... I realised then 
that the lot was cast, and that this affair, like so many otheis, 
had been decided by that invisible Providence, whose rights 
and overruling power I never deny. I marched on the 
Niemen, profoundly convinced that I had done all I could 
to spare mankind these fresh misfortunes, whilst satisfying 
my own reputation, the honour of my people, and the 
sanctity of treaties. 

There, Sire, is an account of my conduct. Doubtless 
Your Majesty will have much to say; but you should 
remind yourself that for 18 months you refused to give any 
explanation of your proceedings; that you subsequently 
refused to assent to any agreement unless I first evacuated 
territory belonging to my allies; by which means you 

310 

Ratio Ultima Regum 

hoped to deprive Prussia of the independence you were 
apparently guaranteeing, whilst at the same time you re¬ 
minded me of the Caudine Forks. I deplored the ill-will of 
those who could give Your Majesty such advice. Never 
before, under any circumstances, had Russia been allowed 
to use such language to France: it is the sort of language the 
Empress Catherine might have used to the last kings of 
Poland. 

We are at war, then. God himself cannot undo what has 
been done. But my ears will ever be open to negotiations 
for peace; and as soon as Your Majesty is willing to free 
yourself from men who are enemies of your family, your 
honour, and your Empire, you will find in me the same 
feelings of sincere friendship as before. The day will come 
when Your Majesty will admit that, if you had not changed 
your policy at the end of 1810, and if you had loyally 
negotiated for modifications in the treaty of Tilsit—a course 
which would have involved no change, your reign would 
have been one of the most famous in Russian history. 
Following a period of reiterated and resounding disasters, 
Your Majesty had by wise statesmanship healed the wounds 
of your state, and added to your Empire such huge pro¬ 
vinces as Finland and the delta of the Danube. I too should 
have gained much. The Spanish business would have ended 
in 1811, and England would probably have made peace at 
the same time. Your Majesty has shown a lack of persever¬ 
ance, of trustfulness, and (if I may say so) of sincerity. You 
have spoilt all your prospects. .. . 

If Your Majesty wishes to end hostilities, you will find 
me ready to do so. If Your Majesty is determined to carry 
on, and would like to draw up an agreement on liberal 
lines, such as that men in hospital shall not be regarded 
as prisoners (then neither side need evacuate in a hurry— 
always a cause of heavy losses), or such as a fortnightly 
exchange of prisoners, rank for rank, according to a rota 
of exchange, or any other stipulations that the rules of war 
commonly allow between civilised nations; then Your 
Majesty will find me ready for anything. Even if, in spite 

311 

The N iemen 

of hostilities having broken out. Your Majesty wishes to 
keep up direct communications with me, that also could be 
provided for, and regulated in the agreement. 

It only remains for me to end by begging Your Majesty 
to believe that, in spite of my pain at the turn you have 
given to your policy, with its lamentable results upon our 
lives and those of our peoples, my private feelings towards 
you remain unaffected by these events, and that, if fortune 
once more favours my arms, you will find me as I was at 
Tilsit and Erfurt, full of friendliness and esteem for your 
good and great qualities, and anxious only to prove it. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 18878. Napoleon had crossed the Niemen on June 
24, and entered Vilna on the 28th. Here he met General Balashov, 
the Tsar’s aide-de-camp, who had been sent to discover his intentions, 
and to say that Alexander would not parley so long as French troops 
were on Russian soil. This letter was Napoleon’s reply. The 'Caudine 
Forks’: Furculae Caudinae , a narrow pass on the road from Capua to 
Beneventum, where a Roman army surrendered to the Samnites in 
321 B.C.] 

244 

OPENING MOVES 

TO JEROME NAP0L320N 

Vilna, July 14, 1812. 

The messenger you sent from Grodno yesterday at 4 p.m. 
has arrived. I was looking forward to his coming with 
pleasurable anticipation, thinking you would have sent the 
Major-General news of Bagration’s army, of the direction 
taken by Poniatowski in his pursuit, and of movements in. 
Volhynia, Imagine my astonishment on hearing that he 
had received nothing but a complaint about a general! I can 
only express my displeasure at the scanty information you 
send me. I know neither the number of Bagration’s divi¬ 
sions, nor their names, nor the position he occupied, nor 
the particulars of your captures at Grodno, nor what you 

312 

Smolensk 

are now doing. I have five or six columns on the move to 
cut off Bagration’s retreat. I assume that you cannot so far 
have neglected your duty as not to have been pursuing him 
since yesterday. I hope, at any rate, that Prince Poniatowski 
has pursued him with the whole of the fifth corps. My 
operations are held up for lack of information from Grodno. 
I have had no news since the 30th. Not a word from your 
Chief of Staff. Not a word from Poniatowski. It is impos¬ 
sible to carry on war in this fashion. You think and talk of 
nothing but trifles. I am distressed to see how paltry all your 
interests are. If General Vandamme has been guilty of 
embezzlement, you were quite right to send him to the 
rear; but the matter is of such minor importance at the 
moment that I am sorry you did not send me, by your 
messenger, information which would have been useful to 
me, and particulars as to your position. 

I don’t know why Prince Poniatowski doesn’t write to 
the Major-General twice a day. I told him to. 

P.S.—You are compromising the whole success of the 
campaign on the right flank. It is impossible to carry on war 
in this fashion. 

[LECESTRE,ii,932. Napoleon’s opening move was designed to isolate 
Bagration’s army on the Russian left, and defeat it in detail: but 
Jerome, in command of the French right (including 3 5,000 Poles under 
Poniatowski, and some 15,000 Hessians and Westphalians under 
Vandamme) moved so slowly that Bagration had time to retreat, and 
rejoin the main Russian army.] 

*45 

SMOLENSK 

TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN 

AFFAIRS 

Smolensk, August 18,1812. 

I have this moment come in. The heat is intense, and 
there is a lot of dust, which we find rather trying. The 

313 

Indiscipline 

enemy’s whole army was here: it was under orders to fight, 
but dared not. We have captured Smolensk without the 
loss of a man. It is a very big town, with walls, and pretty 
good fortifications. We killed 3 or 4,000 of the enemy, 
wounded thrice as many, and found plenty of guns here. 
According to all accounts, a number of their divisional 
generals were killed. The Russian army is marching towards 
Moscow, in a very discouraged and discontented state. 
Schwarzenberg and Reynier have won a joint victory over 
the Russians. 

Note :—His Majesty went to bed directly after dictating 
this letter, and as the messenger was starting at once, it was 
sent to the Duke of Bassano unsigned. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19098. Napoleon’s first attack on Smolensk (August 
16) failed; a second, the following day, was successful. ‘Without the 
loss of a man’—actually the French lost 8-9,000 men to the Russians’ 
6,000.] 

246 

FORAGING 

TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL AND WAGRAM, MAJOR- 
GENERAL IN THE GRAND ARMY 

Ghjatsk, September 3, 1812. 

Write to the generals in command of the army corps, 
and tell them that we are losing numbers of men every day, 
owing to the disorderly way in which foraging is conducted; 
that it is a matter of urgency that they should concert 
measures with the various corps commanders for ending a 
state of things which threatens to be fatal to the army; 
that the enemy is taking several hundred prisoners a day; 
that the soldiers must be forbidden, under the severest 
penalties, to leave the line of march, and that food must 
be procured in accordance with the army regulations about 
foraging—that is, by army corps when the whole army is 
together, and by divisions when it is subdivided; that a 

3i4 

Borodino 

general or officer of high rank must be in command of the 
foraging, and that there must be a sufficient force to protect 
the foraging parties against the peasants and Cossacks; 
that, so far as possible, when foragers come across inhabi¬ 
tants, they are to requisition whatever they can provide, 
but not to do any more harm to the country; and finally that 
this matter is so important that I count on the zeal of the 
generals and corps commanders in my service to take any 
measures that will end the disorders in question. You must 
write to the King of Naples, who is in command of the 
cavalry, that it is indispensable for the cavalry to give 
adequate protection to foragers, and to secure the detach¬ 
ments on this duty from the attacks of Cossacks and enemy 
cavalry. You will advise the Prince of Eckmiihl not to 
advance more than two leagues ahead of the column of 
march: make him realise that this is an important safeguard 
against foraging too near the enemy. Finally you must 
inform the Duke of Elchingen that he is losing more men 
a day than if a battle were in progress; that foraging must 
therefore be better regulated, and less straggling allowed. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19176. Four days before the batde of Borodino.] 

*47 

BORODINO 

TO FRANCIS I, EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA 

Mojaisk, September 9, 1812. 

I hasten to announce to Your Imperial Majesty the 
happy issue of the battle of the Moskova, which took place 
on September 7, at the village of Borodino. Knowing the 
personal interest that Your Majesty is good enough to take 
in me, I thought I ought to announce this memorable event 
to you by my own hand, and to tell you that I am in good 
health. I reckon the enemy’s losses at 40-50,000 men: he 
had between 120 and 130,000 men engaged. I lost from 8 

3*5 

Moscow 

to 10,000 killed or wounded. I took 60 guns, and a great 
number of prisoners. My advance guard is 6 leagues 
beyond the battlefield. . . . 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19183. Napoleon’s losses are believed to have been 
28,000.] 

248 

MOSCOW 

TO ALEXANDER I, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA 

Moscow, September 20, 1812. 

.. . The proud and beautiful city of Moscow is no more. 
Rostoptchine has had it burnt. Four hundred incendiaries 
were arrested in the very act: they all declared that they set 
fire to the place by order of the Governor and the Director 
of Police. They have been shot. Three houses out of every 
four have been burnt down: only a quarter remain. Such a 
deed is as useless as it is atrocious. Was it intended to 
deprive us of provisions? They were in cellars that the 
fire could not reach. Besides, what a trifling object for 
which to destroy the work of centuries, and one of the 
most lovely cities in the world! It is a plan which has been 
pursued ever since Smolensk, and which has reduced 
600,000 families to beggary. The fire-pumps in the city had 
been broken, or taken away, and some of the arms in the 
arsenal given to criminals, so that we had to fire several 
rounds of shot at the Kremlin to dislodge them. Humanity, 
as well as the interests of Your Majesty and of this great 
city, required that it should be put under my care, when 
it was abandoned by the Russian army: the administrative 
staff, magistrates, and civil guards should have been left 
behind. Such was the course followed at Vienna on two 
occasions, at Berlin, and at Madrid. We did the same when 
Souvarof entered Milan. Fites are an incentive to looting, 
by which the soldiery hope to save something from the 
fla mes. If I supposed such things could have been done by 

316 

Retreat 

Your Majesty’s orders, I should not be writing this letter; 
but I cannot possibly believe that, with your principles, your 
feelings, and your ideas of what is right, you can have 
authorised excesses so unworthy of a great sovereign and a 
great nation.... 

I made war on Your Majesty without any hostile feelings. 
A single letter from you, before or after the last battle, 
would have stopped my advance, and I would willingly 
have surrendered the advantage of occupying Moscow. If 
Your Majesty still retains some part of your old feelings 
for me, you will take this letter in good part. In any case 
you cannot but agree that I was right in reporting what is 
happening at Moscow. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19213. ‘Souvarof entered Madrid’ in die text, but 
Milan (in June, 1799) must have been intended. There is good reason 
to believe that some of the fires that destroyed Moscow, if not all, 
were due to French and Polish soldiers looting the city.] 

249 

RETREAT 

TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN 

AFFAIRS 

Doubrovna, November 18, 1812. 

I haven’t had a courier for 5 days. I understand that the 
enemy were at Minsk on the 16th. Where was Prince 
Schwartzenberg that day? I have no information on the 
point. The Duke of Belluno had still made no move on the 
16th. 

Since my last despatch, our position has grown worse. 
Almost all our horses—30,000 of them—have perished as 
the result of the cold —16 degrees of frost. We have had to 
burn more than 300 guns, and a huge number of ammunition 
wagons. The cold weather has gready increased the number 
of stragglers. The Cossacks have taken advantage of our 
complete lack of cavalry, and almost complete lack of 

3i7 

The Beresina 

artillery, to harass us, and to cut our communications, so 
that I am anxious about Marshal Ney, who stayed behind, 
with 3,000 men, to blow up Smolensk. Otherwise, given a 
few days’ rest, some good food, (above all) horses, and a 
supply of artillery, we shall still make good. The enemy have 
one thing we lack—they are accustomed to moving on ice; 
and in winter this gives them an immense advantage over 
us. A gun or an ammunition-wagon that we cannot drag 
out of an insignificant ravine without losing 12 or 15 horses, 
and 12 or 15 hours, they can haul up, by using sledges and 
other apparatus made for the purpose, as rapidly as though 
there were no ice at all. 

Publish news of us in Paris. See what artillery we can 
procure at Kovno and Vilna, and write to Dantzig, 
telling them to fit out whatever artillery-wagons and 
transport material may be there, and to send them to us. 
See what there is at Modlin, too, and in the forts of the 
Grand Duchy. 

[Lecestre, ii, 935. This was just a month after leaving Moscow.] 

250 

THE BERESINA 

TO M. MARET, DUKE OF BASSANO, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN 

AFFAIRS 

ZaNIVKI, RIGHT BANK OF THE BERESINA, NEAR ZEMBINE, 

November 29, 1812. 

I have received your letter of November 25. You say 
nothing about France, and give me no news from Spain, 
though it is a fortnight since I received any information, or 
any messages, and I am completely in the dark. 

I am marching on Vilekla. It would be as well for 
Wrede and others to concentrate there, in order to make 
sure of the old bridges, and to construct a new one: have 
the necessary tools and materials ready. 

318 

V ILNA 

We had a very hot action yesterday -with Admiral 
Tchitchakof and Wittgenstein. We beat the former, who 
attacked ns along the right bank on the Borisof road, and 
checked the latter, who was trying to seize the bridges over 
the Beresina. We took 6,000 prisoners: but we are much 
distressed at the loss of a brigade 3,000 strong under 
General Partouneaux, which took the wrong road, lost its 
way, and has apparently been captured. We have had no 
news of it for two days. The Duke of Reggio and a number 
of generals have been wounded. 

The army is strong in numbers, but terribly disorganised. 
It would take a fortnight to reconstitute the regiments, and 
where is a fortnight to come from? The disorganisation is 
due to cold and privations. We shall soon be at Vilna: shall 
we be able to hold out there? Yes, if we can do so for a week; 
but if we are attacked during the first week, it is doubtful 
whether we could stay there. Food, food, food! Without it, 
there is no limit to the horrors this undisciplined mass of 
men may bring upon the town. Perhaps the army will not 
rally until it is behind the Niemen. Things being in this 
pass, I may think it necessary for France, the Empire, and 
even the army, that I should be in Paris. Give me your 
advice. 

There must have been a number of messengers captured. 
If you haven’t had news of me since the nth, write to 
Paris. 

I am particularly anxious that there should be no foreign 
agents at Vilna. The army is not for exhibition purposes at 
the moment. Get rid of any who are there: for instance, 
you might tell them that you are going, and that I am going, 
to Warsaw, and direct them to follow us there, naming a 
day for their departure. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19362. On. November 26-9, Napoleon crossed the 
Beresina by extemporised bridges (the bridge on the Borisof road 
having been destroyed), but at the cost of some 30,000 men, largely 
wounded and stragglers. On December 5 be left the remnant of his 
army behind, and returned post-haste to Paris, which he reached on 
the 18th.] 

319 

State and Church 
251 

A NEW WAY WITH THE POPE 

TO POPE PIUS VII 

Paris, December 29, 1812. 

Most Holy Father: I hasten to send Yonr Holiness an 
officer of my Household to express my satisfaction at what 
I have heard from the Bishop of Nantes as to the good state 
of your health; for I was very much alarmed for a moment, 
this summer, by the news that you were seriously indisposed. 
The fact that Your Holiness is now staying at Fontainebleau 
will give us an opportunity of meeting; and I am most 
anxious to assure you that, in spite of all that has happened, 
my personal regard for you is unchanged. Perhaps we shall 
arrive at the goal we so much desire, and put an end to all 
the issues between State and Church. For my own part, I 
am strongly inclined to do so, and the matter will entirely 
depend upon Your Holiness. In any case I beg you to believe 
that the feelings of high esteem and perfect consideration 
that I have towards you are independent both of circum¬ 
stances and of events. 

I pray God, Most Holy Father, that he will preserve you 
for many years, so that you may have the glory of re¬ 
establishing the government of the Church, and may for 
long enjoy and reap the benefit of your work. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19404. Written ten days after Napoleon’s return 
from Moscow.] 

252 

RUSSIA: OFFICIAL 

TO FREDERICK VI, KING OF DENMARK AND NORWAY 

Paris, January j, 1813. 

A letter from my minister, dated December 22, informs 
me that Your Majesty never received my reply to the 

320 

CA SUALTIES 

letter you wrote me, which I received at Moscow, and 
answered two days later. My minister has sent me a number 
of Russian bulletins. I must tell Your Majesty that they are 
entirely untrue. The enemy was consistently defeated, and 
never captured a single flag or a single gun. On November 
7 the cold became unusually severe, and all the roads were 
impassable: between the 7th and the 16th, we lost 30,000 
horses. Part of our baggage-train and artillery broke down, 
and had to be abandoned. Our soldiers, unaccustomed to 
protect themselves against such cold, could not endure 
from 18 to 27 degrees of frost. They deserted their ranks to 
find shelter for the night, and, as there was no cavalry left 
to protect them, many thousands in course of time fell into 
the hands of the enemy’s light troops. General Sanson, who 
was not Chief of Staff, but head of the topographical 
department at Headquarters, was captured by some 
Cossacks as he was retiring from a position. The same thing 
happened to other officers, but it was when they were 
isolated from the army. My losses are real, but the enemy 
can take no credit for them. My army has suffered much, 
and is still suffering: the disaster will end when the cold 
ends. 

I have raised horses from every available source, in 
addition to those which, thanks to Your Majesty, have just 
arrived from Holstein and Jutland. I shall march in the 
spring with an army considerably larger than the Grand 
Army was at the opening of the last campaign. I am giving 
Your Majesty these details to save you from the false reports 
which are being so cunningly disseminated.. . . 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19424. ‘Of some 600,000 who had matched into 
Russia, hardly more than 100,000 came back.... According to Russian 
reports, after the enemy had been driven out, the various provinces 
buried or burnt 430,707 men and 230,677 animals. . . The numbers 
include both sides.*—Kircheisen, ‘Napoleon,* p. 587.] 

Y 

321 

Next Camp aign 

253 

MURAT 

TO JOACHIM NAPOLEON, KING OF THE TWO SICILIES 

Fontainebleau, January 26, 1813. 

I am not going to tell you how displeased I am with your 
conduct, which has been diametrically opposed to your 
duties. It is due to your weak character, as usual. You are a 
good soldier on the battlefield, but off it you have no energy, 
and no character. Take warning by an act of treachery, which 
I attribute to fear, and give your best wits to my service. I 
am counting upon you—upon your remorse and your 
promises of amendment. If it were not so, you would be 
sorry for it. I don’t imagine you are one of those who 
think the lion is dead. If you did, you would be badly out 
in your reckoning. Since you left Vilna, you have done me 
all the harm you could—but we will say no more about that. 
The title of King has turned your head: if you want to keep 
it, behave yourself, and be careful what you say. 

[Brotonne, 1 , 103 3 . Murat, left in charge of the army when Napoleon 
returned to Paris, himself deserted it, and came home.] 

254 

ECONOMY 

NOTE DICTATED TO THE GRAND MARSHAL OF THE PALACE 

Paris, February 23, 1813. 

I intend to adopt a totally different plan as regards my 
baggage-train from that which I followed in the last 
campaign. I wish to have a much smaller suite, a reduced 
kitchen staff, and less plate—the bare necessities; not merely 
to save trouble, but also to set a good example. Both at the 
front, and on the march, the meals, including my own, will 
consist of soup, boiled beef, a roast, and vegetables, without 
any dessert. In the big towns they can do as they like. 

322 

New Army 

Give me a list of what I had on the last campaign, and 
of what is proposed for this. 

I don’t want to take any pages: they are no use to me; 
though I might perhaps take those belonging to the hunt 
who are over 24, and sufficiently accustomed to fatigue to 
be useful. 

Cut down the number of canteens to the same scale: have 
2 beds in place of 4, 2 tents instead of 4, and furniture to 
correspond. 

[Corresp., xxiv, 19608.] 

2 55 

BAD OFFICERS 

TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, MINISTER OF WAR 

Erfurt, April 27, 1813. 

I have just been inspecting the 37th Light Infantry. It 
would be impossible to see a finer body of men—or a worse 
set of officers. If your department had deliberately set itself 
to appoint the most incompetent officers in France, it could 
not have succeeded better: their men laugh at them. In 
point of fact they have all been drafted from the colonial 
battalions, the Dutch service, or the National Guard of the 
Pyrenees and the Scheldt; and most of the captains have 
never seen a shot fired. Every day makes me more discon¬ 
tented with the work of your committee in what is the most 
important part of the service—organisation. I had rather 
you wasted none of your time on police matters: devote it 
all to organising the atmy. I shall have to dismiss all these 
officers, and send them home. 

You are also sending me young people straight from 
school, who have never been to Saint-Cyr, and consequently 
know nothing; and you are actually posting them to new 
regiments. It’s impossible to do things worse than this 
committee of yours does. I ordered you to put a responsible 

323 

DAV O UT 

general officer at its head. I regard its work as the most im¬ 
portant in your ministry, and you give it the least attention. 

I also gave you orders, before I left, to send on to Mayence 
the 88 officers from Spain; but you have done nothing of the 
sort, nor have you even sent a list of them to the Prince of 
Neuchatel, the Duke of Valmy, or myself. I badly need 
these officers: there is a big gap without them: it would 
not have been much trouble to send me the list. I don’t know 
where these men were sent, or where they are now, or what 
they are doing. 

[Corresp., xxv, 1991 5. Napoleon spent the winter of 1812-13 
reorganising his forces. By the end of April he had mobilised a new 
army of some 225,000 men. It was mainly French, but of poorer 
quality than ever before.] 

256 

PUNISHING HAMBURG 

TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL, MAJOR-GENERAL OF THE 
GRAND ARMY 

Waldheim, May 7, 1813. 

. . .The Prince of Eckmiihl must move at once on 
Hamburg, occupy the town, and order General Vandamme 
into Mecklenburg. Here are his instructions. 

He is to arrest summarily all citizens of Hamburg who 
have served as ‘ Senators of Hamburg.’ He is to court- 
martial the five chief culprits among them, and have them 
shot. The rest he will send to France, under strong escort, 
in order that they may be incarcerated in a state prison. 
He must sequestrate their property, and declare it confisca¬ 
ted: their houses, landed property, and so forth will fall into 
the crown domains. He is to disarm the whole town, shoot 
the officers of the Hanseatic Legion, and dispatch to Fiance 
all who have enlisted in that regiment, in order that they 

324 

AT HAMB URG 

may be sent to the galleys. As soon as the troops arrive at 
Schwerin, and without any warning, he must try to seize 
the Prince and his family, and send them to France for 
state imprisonment; for these dukes have been traitors to 
the Confederation. Their ministers will be treated in the 
same way.... 

He is to draw up a list of 5 00 persons for proscription out 
of the 32nd military division, choosing the richest and 
worst-behaved. He will arrest them, and sequestrate their 
property, which will pass into the crown domains. This 
step is particularly necessary at Oldenburg. 

He is to impose an indemnity of 50 millions on the towns 
of Hamburg and Liibeck, and to take steps for the assess¬ 
ment and prompt payment of this sum. 

Everywhere he must disarm the countryside, arrest the 
gendarmes, artillerymen, coastguards, officers, soldiers, and 
officials: all have served against us, and therefore all are 
traitors. Their property is to be confiscated. Above all, he 
must not forget the Hamburg families who have behaved 
badly, and who are ill-disposed. The properties must be 
alienated: otherwise one can never be sure of the country. 

Hamburg must be put in a state of defence, the gates be 
provided with draw-bridges, cannon placed on the ramparts, 
the parapets heightened, and a citadel established on the 
Hamburg side, so that 4-5,000 men may be safe there from 
any attack by the people within or the enemy without. . .. 
All these measures are obligatory. The Governor may not 
modify them in any particular. He is to declare that they are 
enforced by my express order, and to carry them out with 
such prudence as time and place require. Every individual 
known to have taken a leading part in the revolt must be 
shot or sent to the galleys... . 

[Lecestre, ii, 1001. A Russian army under Tettenborn had entered 
Hamburg on March 18. On June 1 the place was retaken with Franco- 
Danish forces by Vandamme, under orders from Davout (the Prince 
of Eckmiihl), and the latter carried out some of the punitive 
measures here described.] 

3*5 

Bautzen 

*57 

APPEAL TO AUSTRIA 

TO FRANCIS I, EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA 

Dresden, May 17, 1813. 

I am deeply touched by what Yout Majesty says in your 
letter about your interest in me. I deserve it only for my 
very sincere feelings about yourself. If Your Majesty is at 
all concerned for my happiness, you will help me to preserve 
my honour. I have made up my mind to die, if need be, at 
the head of all honourable Frenchmen, rather than become 
the laughing-stock of the English, or allow my enemies to 
triumph over me. Let Your Majesty think of the future. Do 
not throw away the fruit of three years’ friendship, or renew 
the intrigues of the past, which plunged Europe into wars 
and convulsions whose issue might have no end. Do not 
sacrifice for meagre motives the happiness of our generation, 
and of your own life; do not sacrifice the real interest of 
your subjects, and (why should I not say it?) of a member of 
your family who is sincerely attached to you. For Your 
Majesty must never doubt my affection. 

[Corresp., xxv, 20018. Written the day before Napoleon left 
Dresden to fight and win the battle of Wurschen or Bautzen on the 
2oth-2ist. On the 15 th and 16th he had had long conversations with 
General Bubna, who had stated, on behalf of Metternich, the Austrian 
terms for non-intervention.] 

258 

ARMISTICE 

TO EUGENE NAPOLEON, VICEROY OF ITALY 

Neumarkt, June 2, 1813. 

I sent you a special messenger yesterday; I am sending 
a second to-day, and I will send a third as soon as the armis¬ 
tice is signed. I do not mind telling you that what has 

326 

Armistice 

induced me to arrest my victorious course is the arming of 
Austria, and the desire to gain time for your army to en¬ 
camp at Laybach, whilst I have two armies, one camped on 
the Regnitz and the other at Pima. There is no end to the 
insolence of Austria. In honeyed, almost sentimental 
phrases, she proposes to deprive me of Dalmatia, Istria, 
and perhaps even more territory, right up to the Isonzo. 
She would like to break up the Bavarian frontier, recover 
the left bank of the Inn, and take back the part of Galicia 
which she gave up by the peace of Vienna. These people are 
mad, and hopelessly out in their reckoning. No court could 
be more treacherous. If one were to give them what they 
ask now, they would soon be wanting Italy and Germany. 
Assuredly they will get nothing from me. 

After the armistice is signed, I shall move my headquar¬ 
ters to Glogau, and immediately afterwards take up my 
personal residence near Dresden, so as to be within closer 
touch with my states of Italy and France. It will then be as 
well to establish messengers between Milan and Dresden 
via Verona, so that you can communicate with me, and 
receive my orders as promptly as possible. I expect the 
armistice to last till August ist, and I hope that early in 
July you will be able to encamp at Laybach with 50,000 
men and 100 guns. It is necessary that you should do so, 
in order to influence the negotiations, if indeed (which I 
rather doubt) any good comes of them; certainly nothing 
will, unless through the threat of your army advancing on 
Vienna, together with the position of the Mayence army on 
the Regnitz and at the camp at Pima, which I mean to 
reconnoitre for myself. When Austria sees these three 
armies ready to attack her, she will begin to realise the 
ridiculous folly of her demands. 

[Corresp., xxv, 20071. On June 4, after several days* negotiations, 
an armistice was arranged between Napoleon and the Allies, to last 
till July 20.] 

Propriety 

259 

THANKSGIVING SERVICES 

TO PRINCE CAMBACER&S, ARCH-CHANCELLOR OF THE EMPIRE 

Haynau, June 7, 1813. 

I disapprove of the Empress going to Ndtre Dame. 
Unless these great functions are rare, tney become cheap. 
If the Empress were to attend the thanksgiving for the 
victory of Wurschen, she would have to do the same for 
every other victory. Just as it was a good move to do so for 
the victory of Ltitzen, which was unexpected, and changed 
our whole position, so in the present case it would be 
useless. It requires uncommon tact to deal with people like 
the Parisians. 

Neither do I approve of the failure to sing the Te Deum> 
because it was Whitsun Day. I wish the Te Deum to be sung 
as a general rule on the Sunday next following the reception 
of the news of a victory. To postpone it is extremely 
inconvenient. War is full of uncertainty. It would be absurd 
to sing the Te Deum for a victory, if, meanwhile, news had 
come of a defeat. 

[Corresp., xxv, 20094. On May 20-1 Napoleon won an expensive 
victory at Wurschen or Bautzen.] 

260 

PROPRIETY 

TO MARIE-LOUISE, EMPRESS-QUEEN AND REGENT 

Haynau, June 7, 1813. 

Madame and darling; I have got the letter in which you 
tell me that you received the Arch-Chancellor while you 
were in bed. It is my intention that you shall not, under 
any circumstances, or on any pretext, receive anyone while 
you are in bed. It is improper until over the age of thirty. 

[Corresp., xxv, 20093.] 

328 

Peace 

261 

PLAY-ACTING 

TO PRINCE CAMBACiRES, ARCH-CHANCELLOR OF THE EMPIRE 

Bunzlau, June 8, 1813. 

The Groom of the Royal Household ought to have 
written to Count Remusat, asking for some actors for 
Dresden. I want this matter to be well advertised in Paris: 
it is bound to have a good effect in London and in Spain, 
if it makes them believe that we are amusing ourselves at 
Dresden. It is not a good time of year for theatre-going; 
so don’t send more than six or seven actors at most: but 
they should be carefully chosen, and capable of playing six 
or seven pieces. Arrange for them to travel without 
publicity, and without causing trouble en route. But that is 
no reason why you should not have inquiries made at Paris 
on the assumption that the whole company is starting off, 
and allow plenty of gossip on the subject. The actors will be 
chosen either by Rdmusat, or by the Comedie Fran^aise, or 
by Feydeau. If we can’t get good actors, the whole idea had 
better be dropped. 

[CORRESP., XXV, 20105.] 

262 

THE PEACE-LOVER 

TO PRINCE CAMBACERES, ARCH-CHANCELLOR OF THE EMPIRE 

Dresden,/^ 18, 1813. 

In his ‘Police Notes’ (which are generally most satisfac¬ 
tory, thanks to the details they contain, and the evidence of 
his zeal that they afford) the Minister of Police seems to be 
trying to make me out a peace-lover. This can lead to 
nothing; and it does me harm, because it might suggest 
that I am not really what he claims. I do want peace; but 
not a dishonourable peace, nor one which will force me 
within three months to take up arms again. I know better 

329 

Duvoisin 

than the Minister my financial situation, and the state of the 
Empire: there is nothing he can tell me under those heads. 
Make him understand the impropriety of his remarks. I am 
not given to boasting. I don’t make war my business in life. 
No one is fonder of peace than I am. But I regard the 
conclusion of peace as a serious undertaking; I want it to 
be lasting; and I must consider the situation of my Empire 
as a whole. Nothing else will influence my deliberations. 

[Lecestre, ii, 1020.] 

263 

OBITUARY 

TO COUNT BIGOT DE PREAMENEU, MINISTER OF PUBLIC 

WORSHIP 

Dresden, July 17, 1813. 

The Bishop of Nantes was the most enlightened priest in 
the Empire, and the most distinguished doctor at the 
Sorbonne: he bears comparison with any of those bishops 
who are the chief pride of the Gallican church. No one 
was more imbued with the true spirit of the Gospel. No one 
knew better how to respect the prerogatives of the crown, 
and to distinguish the rights of the Church from the 
monstrous abuses and the foolish and insane teachings of 
the Roman curia—teachings which are merely ridiculous 
nowadays, but which in the ages of ignorance caused so 
much schism and bloodshed. If all bishops and theologians 
had understood the spirit of religion as well as he did, and 
had possessed as much enlightenment and good faith, 
Luther, Calvin, and Henry VIII would never have been 
schismatics, and the whole world would still be Catholic. 
I desire that a monument be put up to the memory of this 
worthy prelate in Nantes cathedral, the cost to be defrayed 
by Our Imperial Treasury. 

[Corresp., xxv, 20278. Duvoisin, the bishop of Nantes, was Marie- 
Louise's confessor. Napoleon at St. Helena described him as the best 
and most learned churchman he had known—the only one who might 
have converted him—‘but I knew too much history for that/] 

330 

VlTTORIA 

264 

THE END IN SPAIN 

TO GENERAL SAVARY, DUKE OF ROVIGO, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Dresden,//^ 20, 1813. 

I think I told you that I am quite determined that the 
King of Spain shall not come to Paris, or anywhere near it. 
He must stop at Morfontaine. If he were to come to Paris 
or to Saint-Cloud, you would have to take steps to arrest 
him—he must be under no illusion on this point. My inten¬ 
tion is that he shall be seen by no member of my household, 
or high official, or minister, or sectional president of the 
State Council or Senate. In short, he is to preserve a 
complete incognito till my arrival. He is to receive no one 
except his wife, Madame, his family, a few of his Spanish 
friends, and Roederer; and in any case without calling 
special attention to the fact. Our misfortunes in Spain, as 
you will have seen from the English papers, are all the 
more serious because they are absurd: that is how the 
English themselves look at it. They are no dishonour to 
the army. The army in Spain had no general, and a super¬ 
numerary King. Ultimately (I admit) I am myself to blame. 
If I had sent the Duke of Dalmatia to Valladolid to take 
over the command there—the idea did occur to me just as 
I was leaving Paris—this would never have happened.. . . 

[Lecestre, ii, 1056. On June 21 Wellington defeated the French at 
Vittoria. Napoleon deprived Joseph and Jourdan of their commands, 
and sent Soult (the Duke of Dalmatia) to take charge. For the sequel, 
cp. No. 272.] 

331 

Te Deum and Fireworks 
265 

EMPIRE DAY 

TO THE PRINCE OF NEUCHATEL, MAJOR-GENERAL OF THE 

GRAND ARMY 

Mayence, July 31, 1813. 

Inform the Marshals, the Commanders-in-chief, the 
Governors of Dresden and Magdeburg, the Commandant 
of Wurtzburg, etc., that, under the special circumstances, the 
Emperor’s Day will be kept on August 10. To this end I 
order that a bonus of 20 sous be given to every N.C.O. 
and man in the ranks. The Marshals are to take steps to 
have this bonus paid on the 9th. It will go towards the 
cost of a dinner to celebrate the day:—the troops will be 
allowed double rations of bread, rice, brandy, and meat. 

I wish the Marshals to order each divisional general to 
entertain separately all the officers of his division: where a 
Marshal is attached to a division he will do so himself. To 
meet this, I am allowing, over and above the double 
rations, six francs a head. This sum will be paid en bloc to 
the Marshal, who will distribute it to the divisional generals. 

I also wish the Te Deum to be sung in every camp; and 
in the evening there are to be grand illuminations, and a 
display of fireworks. In fact, I want each Marshal to do 
everything appropriate to celebrate a day that Frenchmen 
hold so dear, bom to encourage the men, and to impress 
our allies. The allied troops will receive the same bonus as 
the rest. 

It will look best if the officers dine in the open air, and 
at the same time as the men. Each toast will be followed 
by a salvo of 100 guns. In the allied countries invitations 
are to be sent to the local authorities and leading residents. 
Even in enemy countries the authorities are to be invited, 
and those of the principal inhabitants whose conduct has 
been satisfactory. Wherever possible, the generals will give 
a ball. 

At Dresden the Imperial Guard will give a dance for the 

332 

JUNOT AND BESSIERES 

whole town. In the evening there will be manoeuvres, and 
instead of blank cartridges, the troops will let off fireworks, 
which will be more effective.... 

[Lecestre, ii, 1065.] 

266 

JUNOT 

TO GENERAL SAVARY 

Dresden, August 7, 1813. 

I have received your letter of August 2. It really pains 
me to read what you say about poor Junot. I lost my good 
opinion of him during the last campaign; but never my 
attachment to him. Now I can respect him again, for I see 
that his timidity was a result of illness. I approve of all you 
propose. See the Arch-chancellor—I am writing to him. 
There should be no difficulty in getting the girls into 
Ecouen—though you don’t tell me how old they are. 

Speak to the Arch-chancellor about the Duchess of 
Istria also, and see what ought to be done to put her affairs 
in order. I want to help her too. 

[Lecestre, ii, 1090. Junot had been sent home in disgrace after the 
failure at Smolensk in August, 1812, and had gone out of his mind. The 
Duchess of Istria had been left a widow by the death of Marshal Bes- 
sieres at Liitzen on May 1.] 

267 

JUVENILIA 

TO THE COUNTESS DE MONTESQUIOU 

Dresden, August 14,1813. 

I have received your letter and the King’s of the 9th. 
I think that the King writes poetry very well, and that it 
expresses sound sentiments. I rely upon the Empress to 
see that he is given some toys. 

[X 181. The King of Rome was 2 years j months old.] 

333 

New Levies 
268 

CONSCRIPTION 

NOTE FOR THE MINISTER FOR WAR 

Dresden, September 27, 1813. 

The Minister of War will make a report to introduce the 
proposed semtus-consulte on conscription. 

He will say that we are asking for 200,000 men merely to 
impress Europe, and that the conscription for 1815 will not 
really be enforced until the following year. As regards the 
120,000 men from the older classes, they are scarcely one- 
seventh of those still available, of whom there are more 
than 900,000: 120,000 are enough for the moment; but if 
mote were needed later on, the number would have to be 
doubled; even so, the rest of the 900,000 who have not been 
called up must hold themselves in readiness to join up, if 
circumstances require it. 

The Minister will say: 

That the Emperor has given Austria no cause for com¬ 
plaint, as indeed is shown by the Austrian manifesto; that 
he refused to negotiate at Prague, because war was already 
determined; that the choice between peace and war did not 
turn upon one province more or less, but upon the powers 
of Europe, who, in their jealousy of France, saw and seized 
what they thought was a good opportunity to show their 
resentment; that the enemies of French renown listened to 
nothing but the inner voice of hatred; and that, whilst 
there are doubtless some sensible men amongst them who 
condemn the war, there are just as many who talk of nothing 
but the devastation of our lands. 

That England, as Europe is aware, has rejected every 
proposal of peace, and that she will not listen to anything 
until she is in a position to dictate the secret terms she wishes 
to impose upon us, to dose the mouth of the Scheldt, and 
to forbid our having more than 30 men-of-war. What 
Frenchman would purchase peace at such a price? 

334 

Foreign Jealousy 

That Russia has shown herself an implacable foe; that she 
has used her influence to stop all negotiations; and that,, 
having brought upon herself, in a war that she provoked* 
the misfortunes which have befallen her provinces, and 
having, by her own admission, kindled the fees of Moscow 
with her own hand, she now hopes to avenge evils which 
were of her own making, and to carry the incendiary’s 
torch into the cities of the Empire, and perhaps, if she is 
blind enough to conceive such a hope, to Paris itself. 

That the allies never intended peace at the Congress of 
Prague, and that they did not risk presenting an ultimatum, 
because their claims were so extravagant that they dared not 
acknowledge them. 

That the question of peace or war did not depend on the 
cession of the Duchy of Warsaw, or of the Illyrian pro¬ 
vinces, or of any part of our territory, the loss of which 
would not be fatal to the power of our Empire, but upon 
the jealousy of the powers, the hatred of the secret societies,, 
and the passions fomented by English cunning. 

That, in order to defeat designs conceived by foreign 
jealousy and hatred, there is need of sacrifices—sacrifices 
of men and of money; that when a power with a population 
of 5 millions has put 200,000 men in the field, an empire of 
60 millions should be capable of the sacrifices demanded of 
it; that these sacrifices are a sure means of keeping the war 
far from our own frontiers, of preserving the integrity of 
the Empire, and of making our enemies regret their rash 
designs; that it is the only way (why should I not say it?) in 
which die country can show itself worthy of a sovereign 
who acknowledges neither fatigue nor danger, if he can 
secure the welfare of his subjects, and the honour of his- 
Empire; that it is a great opportunity, challenging the 
French people to display the whole range of their finest 
feelings; and that the Senate, the highest body in the state, 
will set them an example. 

That no one can fail to see that the sacrifices required 
by such a crisis are a small matter compared to those that 
would be necessary, if a failure to respond now meant that 

335 

The Work of England 

in the long run we should have to provide for the needs 
of a war in the heart of the Empire. 

That this war, which is arming almost the whole of the 
present generation, is the work of England; that, were this , 
power once to renounce its implacable jealousy, it would 
end; and that the Emperor is ready to make any concessions, 
and has publicly announced his willingness to do so, in 
order to obtain that peace at sea, and freedom of commerce, 
without which France could not exist—without which, in¬ 
deed, France would have to forego her independence, and 
submit to any restrictions England might choose to place 
upon her navigation, or any commercial treaty she might 
care to impose; in a word, to become tributary to England, 
and to work for her like the Hindus. 

That, since so many enemies are united against us by 
passions of jealousy and hatred, every Frenchman must feel 
the need to resort to arms in order to defend our allies, to 
save our territory from war, and to give fresh proofs of his 
love of his Emperor, his country, and his honour. 

That the subjects of the Kingdom of Italy will be no less 
forward than those of France, and that our enemies , designs 
will be overthrown by the devotion of 60 million men. 

[CORRESP., xxvi, 2064J.] 

269 

FLAGS 

TO GENERAL CLARKE, DUKE OF FELTRE, MINISTER OF WAR 

Mayence, November 3, 1813. 

I am ordering the Major-General to send you 16 flags 
taken at the battles of Wachau, Leipzig, and Hanau. I 
■enclose a letter to the Empress on this subject. My intention 
is that you should carry these flags through the streets of 
Paris, and present them to the Empress, sitting in the 
Throne Room, according to etiquette, in the proper place 
for the Regent, and surrounded by the Senate and other 

336 

Flag Day 

authorities. You will read her my letter, and add a few 
complimentary remarks to the effect that these flags are 
evidence of the courage of the French troops, and of the 
successes they have won in three battles. I believe that there 
are only 16 flags; the other 4 were lost. 

When the Empress has replied to your speech, you will 
have the flags taken to the Invalides. On this occasion I 
want you also to carry about 100 flags, 6 of them English, 
which were captured in Spain. They are to be carried with¬ 
out special ceremony; but you will give orders that the 6 
English flags taken at Albuera are to be ceremonially 
restored to the Invalides. As for the 16 flags, you must put 
up a marble tablet in the Invalides with this inscription: 
‘Flags captured at the battles of Wachau, Leipzig, and 
Hanau,’ and add my letter to the Empress. The 40 flags I 
captured at the battle of Dresden were unluckily left 
behind in that town. 

You have known for a long time what I think of these 
military functions; but at the present moment I fancy they 
will be useful. I needn’t tell you that each flag must be 
carried by an officer on horse-back, and that the procession 
must be in full parade order. As I have no time to write to 
the Arch-chancellor, show him my letter, and arrange 
with him to make this ceremony as magnificent as possible. 

[Corresp., xxvi, 20854. The battle of Dresden was in August: the 
affair at Wachau preceded the ‘battle of the nations’ at Leipzig in 
October: the fighting at Hanau was during the retreat to the Rhine.] 

270 

LOUIS AGAIN 

TO MADAME MERE 

Mayence, November 6, 1813. 

Madame, and dearest Mother; I hear by telegraph that 
Louis has arrived at your house. I send you a copy of his 
letter to me. 

If he has come as a French prince, to stand by the throne, 
z 337 

Louis — Last Phase 

I am ready to welcome him, and to forget the past. I taught 
him when he was a child; I overwhelmed him with kind¬ 
nesses: he has repaid me by libelling me in every Court in 
Europe. But I will forgive him once more; as you know, I 
am not accustomed to nurse grievances. If, on the other 
hand—and his letter makes me fear this—he has come to 
ask for the restoration of Holland, he will force me to the 
painful necessity (i) of taking proceedings against him, and 
(2) of doing so irretrievably; for I shall be obliged to 
summon him through the Arch-chancellor, and in the 
presence of the Vice-Grand Elector, the President of the 
Senate, the Grand Judge, and the Family Secretary; and if 
he refuses to recognise the laws of the Empire, he will find 
himself declared a rebel. 

It is ungenerous on his part to cause me fresh embarrass¬ 
ment, and to oblige me to proceed against him, at a moment 
when I have so much on hand, and when my heart needs 
consolation rather than fresh causes of anxiety. Holland is 
French, and will remain so. It has become so by a constitu¬ 
tional law, and no power on earth can take it away again. 
So if Louis still has that bee in his bonnet, I appeal to you 
to spare me the pain of having to arrest him as a rebel. 
Get him to leave Paris. Let him go and live quietly and 
unostentatiously in some out-of-the-way place in Italy. He 
used to be in Switzerland: why did he ever leave it? 

In spite of the evidence he has given me of his hatred, 
I can’t believe he is so bad a man, and so unkind a parent, 
as to wish to force on me the additional unpleasantness of 
prosecuting him at a moment when all Europe has risen 
against me, and my heart is bruised by so many anxieties. 

I end by repeating that, if (after all) he has come simply 
as a French prince to support the throne at its moment of 
peril, and to defend the interests of his country, his family, 
and his children, then I forgive his past offences, and shall 
not speak of them again; and I shall welcome him, in the 
memory, not of his conduct during the last ten years, but of 
the affection I had for him when he was a child. 

[Lecestre, ii, 1097. "Telegraph” means semaphore] 

338 

Frankfort 

271 

TOWARDS TERMS 

TO GENERAL CAULAINCOURT, DUKE OF VICENZA, MINISTER 
FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Paris, January 4, 1814. 

... I think it is doubtful whether the Allies are honest, or 
whether ^England desires peace. I desire pe^ce, but it must be 
substantial and honourable, A France without her natural 
frontiers, without Ostend, and without Antwerp, would 
lose touch with the other states of Europe. The natural 
frontiers were recognised by England and all the powers 
at Frankfort. The French conquests up to the Rhine and the 
Alps do not balance all the territory that Austria, Russia, 
and Prussia have acquired in Poland and Finland, and that 
England has overrun in Asia. Austria will be influenced by 
English policy, and by the resentment of the Russian Em¬ 
peror. I accepted the principles proposed at Frankfort; but 
it is unlikely that they represented the Allies* real ideas; they 
were only a mask. Once negotiations are allowed to be in¬ 
fluenced by changes in the military situation, a system is 
admitted whose results cannot be foreseen. 

You must keep your eyes and ears open. It is not certain 
that you will be received at Headquarters; for the Russians 
and English would like to exclude beforehand every 
opportunity of explanation or conciliation with the Emperor 
of Austria. You must try to find out what the Allies* views 
are, and give me daily reports of what you discover, so as 
to make it possible for me to give you instructions: at 
present I should not know on what to base them. Do they 
want to reduce France to her ancient frontiers? It would be 
an insult. They are vastly mistaken if they suppose the 
misfortunes of war reconcile us to such a peace as that. In 
six months* time there would not be a man in France who 
failed to feel the indignity of such terms, or to reproach a 
government which had been so cowardly as to accept them. 

Italy is intact, and the Viceroy has a fine army. Before the 

339 

Metternich 

week is out, I shall have mobilised forces enough to fight 
any number of battles, even without waiting for the arrival 
of my troops from Spain. The damage done by the Cossacks 
will drive the countryside to arms, and double our forces. 
If the nation stands by me, the enemy is marching to his 
destruction. If fortune betrays me, I have made up my 
mind what to do. I am not wedded to the throne. I will not 
dishonour my nation or myself by signing a shameful peace. 

You must find out what Metternich wants. It is not in 
Austria's interest to push matters to extremes. One more 
step, and she will lose her leadership. 

In the present state of affairs I cannot give you any 
orders. Confine yourself for the moment to keeping your 
ears open, and telling me what you hear. I am just off to 
the front. We shall be so near each other that your first 
reports will not be too late to act upon. Send me frequent 
messengers. 

[Corresp., xxvii, 21062. The Allies had paid no attention to Napo¬ 
leon’s proposals for peace during the battle of Leipzig, October 17, 
but on November 9, at Frankfort, on Metternich’s suggestion, they 
offered terms which would give France her ‘natural frontiers’ of the 
Rhine, the Alps, and the Pyrenees, and leave her in possession of 
Savoy, Nice, and Belgium; and Napoleon after a long delay replied 
that he was willing to negotiate. But by that time the Allies had 
changed their minds, and both sides prepared for a fresh campaign. 
On December 1 the Allies decided to cross the Rhine, and on January 
25 Napoleon left Paris to meet them in the field.] 

272 

JOSEPH'S CHOICE 

TO KING JOSEPH 

Paris, January 7, 1814. 

I have received your letter. It is too clever for my present 
situation. The point can be put in a nut-shell. France is 
invaded. All Europe is in arms against her, but more par¬ 
ticularly against me. You are no longer King of Spain. But 

340 

Joseph 

your abdication is of no use to me. I don’t want the Spanish 
throne myself. I don’t want to give it to anyone else. I will 
have nothing more to do with the affairs of that country, 
beyond keeping the peace there, and freeing my army for 
other ends. 

What are your intentions? Will you, as a French prince, 
come and stand by the throne? You may then count on my 
friendship, and on your appanage; and you will be my subject, 
ranking as a prince of the blood. In that case you must do 
as I do, declare yourself openly, write me a short letter for 
publication, be at home to all my ministers, show that you 
are devoted to me and to the King of Rome, and favour the 
proposed Regency of the Empress. 

Perhaps you can’t do this. Perhaps you haven’t enough 
good sense. In that case you must retire 40 leagues from 
Paris, to some house in the provinces, as inconspicuously as 
you can. If my life is spared, you will live there undisturbed. 
If I die, you will be arrested, perhaps put to death. You 
will be useless to myself, to my family, to your daughters, 
and to France: but you will be doing me no harm, and you 
will be out of my way. Choose quickly, and decide which 
you will do. All questions of sentiment at such a moment 
are idle and dangerous. 

[Lecestre, ii, 1123. After Vittoria (v. No. 264) Joseph fled on horse¬ 
back to St. Jean de Luz. He answered this appeal, came to Paris, and 
was adviser to Marie Louise as Regent during the summer of 1814.] 

273 

INVASION 

TO GENERAL CAULAINCOURT, DUKE OF VICENZA, THE 
EMPEROR’S PLENIPOTENTIARY AT THE CONGRESS OF 
chAtillon 

Piney, 'February 2, 1814. 

. . . The enemy’s troops are behaving abominably. All 
the inhabitants are taking refuge in the woods. There are no 

34i 

Invasion 

peasantry to be found in the villages. The enemy eat up 
everything, seize all the horses and cattle, and all the 
clothes they can find, even the poor rags of the peasants; 
they beat everyone, women as well as men, and commit 
rapes galore. I have seen this state of things with my own 
eyes. You can readily understand how anxious I am to 
rescue my subjects as promptly as possible from this really 
horrible state of misery and suffering. It ought also to give 
our enemies something to think about: for the French are 
not a patient people; they are naturally courageous; and I 
soon expect to see them organising themselves for guerilla 
warfare. You must draw a vigorous picture of the enemy’s 
excesses. Towns like Brienne, with 2,000 inhabitants, 
haven’t a soul left in them! 

[Corresp., xxvii, 21168. After receiving Napoleon’s letter of January 
4th (v. No. 271) Caulaincourt wrote to the Allies complaining that 
no Peace Congress had been summoned to carry out the intentions 
expressed at Frankfort. It was then agreed that negotiations should be 
begun at Chatillon, where, on February 7, the Allies stated their terms, 
viz., that France should give up Belgium, Savoy, and Nice, and retire 
from the Rhine to the frontier of 1791. Meanwhile the invasion of 
France went on.] 

*74 

PARIS IN WAR-TIME 

TO PRINCE CAMBACERES, ARCH-CHANCELLOR OF THE EMPIRE 

Nogent, February 7, 1814. 

I have received your letter of the 6th. I see that, instead 
of keeping up the Empress’s spirits, you are discouraging 
her. Why do you lose your head so? What is the meaning 
of these Miserere*s, these Forty Hours’ intercessions in the 
Chapel Royal? Is all Paris going mad? The Minister of 
Police, instead of informing himself as to the enemy’s 
movements, talks and acts like a fool. I don’t understand 
why he hasn’t got agents all over France, to keep him 
properly informed, by messengers, as to what is going on. 
Speak to him about it. It is much more worth his attention. 
[Corresp., xxvii, 21197.] 

342 

Desertion 

*75 

DESERTERS 

TO GENERAL SAYARY, DUKE OF ROVIGO, MINISTER OF POLICE 

Les Gr£s, February 7, 1814, morning. 

It seems necessary to take steps to prevent soldiers 
deserting from the army, and becoming marauders. The 
gendarmes. National Guards, and civil agents ought to be 
employed on this job. I have announced in an Army Order 
that every tenth deserter will be shot. The police have been 
useless to me in this connexion. They might have done a 
lot for us during the past year. Since we crossed the Rhine 
more than 40,000 men have deserted, and nothing has been 
done about it. 

[Brotonne, i, 1317.] 

276 

COMMISSARIAT 

TO M. DAURE, QUARTERMASTER-COMMISSIONER 

Nogent, February 8, 1814. 

The army is dying of hunger: all your reports that it is 
being properly fed are pure moonshine. Twelve men have 
been starved to death, though every place on the road has 
been given over to fire and sword to extract food. And yet, 
if I am to believe your reports, the army is being properly 
fed. The Duke of Belluno has no provisions; General 
Gerard has none; the cavalry of the Guard are dying of 
hunger. It’s twice as bad—though there’s no remedy for it 
—when you hoodwink the authorities, and fancy all is well. 
It would have been easy enough to give every man a 
pound of rice at Troyes, with meat to follow. There is no 
way of putting a stop to the scandal, since those responsible 
for the business deceive themselves, as well as the Head¬ 
quarters Staff. Let me have returns of the amount of rice in 

343 

Atrocities 

the different army corps, and let me know the situation this 
evening; but let it be an accurate report—don’t double the 
figures of the stock in hand. Let me know how much can 
be expected from the depots. If bread fails, we shall have to 
distribute flour to the troops. 

Send General Gerard, who is acting as rear-guard, a con¬ 
voy of carts loaded with hay and flour: he will be able to 
bake bread at Pont-sur-Seine and the neighbouring villages, 
and feed his troops. 

[Corresp., xxvii, 21214.] 

277 

ATROCITIES 

TO COUNT DE MONTALIVET, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS 

Troyes, February 16, 1814. 

I could not be more displeased than I am at the feeble 
efforts made to rouse the patriotic feelings of the country. 
It cannot be done by verses and odes: it needs facts—plain 
and true details. It’s a perfectly simple matter. I don’t mean 
articles written in Paris, or anything to deceive the public; 
but merely that everyone should be able to read what the 
enemy is doing. Such articles are as effective at Amiens, 
or LiUe, or Arras, or anywhere in the Empire, as they are in 
Paris. The Minister of Public Worship ought to be asking 
for letters from the Bishops, Canons, and parish clergy; 
the Home Minister, from the Prefects ana Mayors; the 
Finance Minister, from those of his staff who have remained 
at their posts during the foreign occupation; the Postmaster- 
general, from his directors and postmasters; the Lord 
Chief Justice, from Emperor’s Counsel, Judges, J.P.’s, not¬ 
aries public, and so on. They should be asked what they 
have seen and heard. We don’t want any fanciful pictures; 
these letters should be printed just as they come in. Towns 
occupied by the enemy ought to send deputations to Paris 
to describe what they have seen and heard, and what has 

344 

Propaganda 

happened in their own locality; and reporters must be 
present to take down what they say. Usually full names 
should be given. The total effect of all these narratives will 
be to produce anger and indignation; and then each indivi¬ 
dual will feel himself bound to take steps to defend himself 
rather than see his wife or his daughter violated, or find 
himself beaten, robbed, looted, and heaped with every sort 
of outrage. But my orders are no longer obeyed. You are 
$11 cleverer than I am. You are for ever opposing me, with 
your ‘buts’, and ‘ifs,’ and Tors.’ And so the time for action 
has almost gone by: these articles ought to have been pub¬ 
lished at the very moment the things happened. We ought 
to give all the names indiscriminately. We ought to specify 
the Prince of Wtirttemberg, if he has behaved badly. They 
should all be unmasked. Even royal remarks should be 
quoted. I can’t write to all my ministers; have this letter 
circulated among them. But for the timidity of ministers, 
who are always afraid of calling attention to the administra¬ 
tion, the whole of France would by this time be under arms. 
They ought to collect quantities of letters every day— 
letters from every part of France, letters written by middle- 
class citizens, landed gentry, and men of business: they 
ought to have them printed, names and all, and let the 
public know everything. 

[Corresp., xxvii, 213 7 J.] 

278 

FORLORN HOPE 

TO JOSEPH 

Nangis, February 18,1814. 

The Prince of Schwartzemberg has at last given signs of 
life; he has just sent an envoy asking for a suspension of 
arms. Could anything be more cowardly! Time after time he 
has refused, in most insulting terms, to grant any kind of 
armistice or suspension of arms, or even to receive my 

345 

Forlorn Hope 

envoys—after the capitulation of Dantzig, for instance, and 
of Dresden; an outrage almost unparalleled in history. 
And now, at the first set-back, these wretches fall on their 
knees! Luckily the Prince of Schwartzemberg’s officer was 
refused admission. I have only received his letter, which I 
shall answer at my leisure. I shall never grant an armistice 
until they have cleared out of my territory. 

Judging from what I hear, the Allies’ position is entirely 
altered. A few days ago the Emperor of Russia broke off 
negotiations, because he wished to impose on France worse 
conditions than the old frontiers. Now he wants to reopen 
them; and I have hopes that I shall soon secure a peace on 
the lines of the Frankfort proposals—the minimum that I 
can honourably accept. Before the beginning of my cam¬ 
paign, I offered to sign terms on the basis of the old frontiers , 
provided that the Allies held up their advance at once . This 
proposal was made by the Duke of Vicenza on the 8th. 
They replied in the negative, saying that they would not 
stop hostilities at the signing of the preliminaries, but only 
when all the articles of peace were signed. They have been 
punished for this incredible answer; and yesterday, the 17th, 
they themselves demanded an armistice! 

As you can imagine, when I saw myself on the eve of a 
battle, in which I had made up my mind to conquer or to 
perish, and in which retreat would have meant the capture 
of my capital, I was ready to consent to anything to avoid so 
great a risk. It was only right to sacrifice my pride to my 
family and to my people. But now that the Allies have 
refused this, now that the opportunity for a decisive batde 
has passed, and everything turns once more upon ordinary 
warfare, in which Paris is no longer threatened, and in 
which the conditions are all in my favour, it is due to the 
interests of the Empire and to my own prestige to negotiate 
for a genuine peace. If I had signed on the basis of the old 
frontiers, I should have gone to war again wi thin 2 years, 
and should have told the nation that it was not a peace that I 
had signed, but a capitulation. I cpuldn’t say that, as things 
are now; for fortune has turned again in my favour, and I 

346 

Frontiers 

can dictate my own terms. The enemy is in a very different 
position to what he was at the time of the Frankfort 
proposals: it is pretty certain that he will get very few of his 
men back across the frontiers. His cavalry is thoroughly 
exhausted and discouraged; his infantry is tired of marching 
and counter-marching: in a word, he is utterly disheartened. 
I hope, therefore, to be able to make such a peace as any 
reasonable man could wish; and the Frankfort proposals are 
the limit of my desires. 

Give it out that the enemy is in difficulties, and has asked 
for an armistice, or a suspension of arms; and that this is 
absurd, because it would deprive me of the advantages my 
manoeuvres have won. Acid that this only shows how 
completely the enemy is demoralised. Don’t print this, but 
see mat everyone talks about it. 

[Joseph, x, 133. The negotiations at Chatillon (t>. No. 273) were 
resumed on February 18. When both sides were at the point of agreeing 
to the ‘limits of 1791,’ a temporary success of Napoleon at Montereau, 
and the Allies’ request for an armistice, led him to stand out for the 
'natural frontiers/] 

279 

PUBLICITY 

TO M. DE CHAMPAGNY, DUKE OF CAD0RE 

Surville, February 19, 1814. 

The Empress has sent me a very interesting portrait of 
the King of Rome in Polish costume, saying his prayers. If 
only he were wearing the uniform of the National Guard, 
I should like to have the picture engraved, under the title, 
“I pray to God for my father and for France/ We might have 
another edition printed in Polish dress. If this little engrav¬ 
ing could be produced within 48 hours, and put on sale, 
it would have an excellent effect. ... 

[Brotonne, ii, 2264.] 

347 

Augereau 

280 

NAPOLEON OF NAVARRE 

TO MARSHAL AUGEREAU, DUKE OF CASTIGLIONE, IN COMMAND 
OF THE ARMY AT LYON 

Nogent, Februarj 21,1814. 

The Minister of War has shown me the letter you wrote 
to him on the 16th. It has pained me bitterly. What! You 
were not yet on the march, six hours after receiving the 
first troops from Spain! Six hours’ rest was plenty for them. 

I won the fight at Nangis with a brigade of dragoons from 
Spain which had not unsaddled since it left Bayonne. The 
six battalions of the Nimes division, you say, are short of 
uniforms and equipment, and are untrained: that is a poor 
reason for Augereau to give! I have annihilated 80,000 of 
the enemy with conscript battalions which had no cartridge- 
pouches, and uniforms in rags! The National Guardsmen, 
you say, are pitiable. I have 4,000 here, from Angers and 
Brittany, with civilian hats, no cartridge-pouches, and 
wooden shoes; but they have good muskets, and I have 
drafted a fair proportion into the army. You go on to say 
that you have no money: and where, pray, do you expect 
to get any? You can’t have any, until we have recaptured our 
own receipts from the enemy. You are short of transport- 
animals? Commandeer them from any source you like. You 
have no food-depots? That is really too ridiculous. I order 
you to start within 12 hours of the receipt of this letter, so 
as to take part in the campaign. If you are still Augereau of 
Castiglione, you may keep the command: if your 60 years 
lie heavy on you, give it up, and hand it over to your 
senior General Officer. The country is threatened, and in 
danger. It can be saved—but only by daring and devotion, 
not by idle temporising. You must have got a nucleus of 
over 6,000 picked troops. That is more than I have; yet I 
have destroyed 3 armies, taken 40,000 prisoners, captured 
200 guns, and thrice saved Paris. The enemy is in flight all 
round me towards Troyes. Be the first on the field. It is 

348 

Peace Proposals 

no question, now, of the kind of conduct which has served 
during the last few years: you will want your old boots, 
and the resolution that carried you to victory in ’93. When 
Frenchmen see your plume leading the line, and yourself 
the first to face musket-fire, you will be able to do with 
them what you will!... 

[Corresp., xxvii, 21343. For a discussion of Augereau’s exploits at 
Castiglione (July 30-August 5, 1796) v. Rose, ‘Life of Napoleon/ 
1, 108 f.] 

281 

APPEAL TO AUSTRIA 

TO FRANCIS I, EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA 
Headquarters, Nogent-sur-Seine, February 21,1814. 

I did all I could to avoid the batde which has taken place. 
Fortune favoured me: I destroyed the Russo-Prussian army 
under General Bliicher, and subsequently the Prussian 
army under General Kleist. The present state of things, 
whatever preconceived ideas your Headquarters may have 
about it, is this:—my army has more infantry, cavalry, and 
artillery than your Majesty’s; and if the certainty of this 
fact were necessary to make up your Majesty’s mind, I 
should have no difficulty in demonstrating it to any man of 
sound judgment, such as Prince Schwarzenberg, Count 
Bubna, or Prince Mettemich. I think it my duty to write 
to Your Majesty, because this struggle between a French 
army and one that is predominantly Austrian seems to me 
as contrary to your interests as it is to mine. If fortune 
betrays my hopes, Your Majesty’s position will be even 
more embarrassing. If I defeat your army, how will you 
retreat from France, whose population is exasperated to 
excess by the crimes of all kinds committed by the Cossacks 
and Russians? 

Things being so, I propose to Your Majesty that peace 
should be signed, without delay, upon the principles laid 

349 

Bu RKE* S D REAM 

down by yourself at Frankfort, and adopted by myself and 
the French people as the utmost we can concede. I will go 
further, and say that these principles alone can re-establish 
the equilibrium of Europe. If any other conditions could 
have been imposed upon France, peace would not have 
lasted long. 

The Allied plenipotentiaries at Chatillon presented a 
note whose contents, were they known in France, would 
excite a fever of indignation. It was the realisation of 
Burke’s dream, who wished to erase France from the map 
of Europe. There is not a Frenchman alive who would 
not rather die than submit to terms that would make us 
slaves of England, and strike France off the list of the 
powers. Such terms can be no part of Your Majesty’s 
intentions: certainly they are not in the interests of your 
monarchy. England may wish to destroy Antwerp, and 
to place a permanent obstacle in the way of any restora¬ 
tion of the French navy. But you. Sire—what interest have 
you in the annihilation of the French navy? By the principles 
laid down at Frankfort, Your Majesty also becomes a 
maritime power. Do you wish your flag to be violated and 
outraged by England, as has constantly happened before? 
What could Your Majesty stand to gain by putting the 
Belgians under the yoke of a Protestant prince, whose son 
is destined to mount the English throne? 

In any case such hopes and designs are beyond the powers 
of the coalition. Even were I to lose the forthcoming battle 
against Your Majesty’s troops, I have the means to fight 
two more before you are at Paris; and were Paris taken, the 
rest of France would never support the yoke prepared for 
her in a treaty dictated, apparently, by English politicians. 
The nation’s death-agony would double its energy and 
power. 

I will never give up Antwerp and Belgium. A peace on the 
lines of Frankfort can be honestly enforced, and will enable 
France to turn all her attention to rebuilding her fleet, and 
re-establishing her commerce. Nothing else can. If Your 
Majesty persists in sacrificing your own interests to the 

350 

Frankfort Terms 

selfish policy of England, or the resentment of Russia; 
if you will not lay down arms except upon the frightful 
conditions proposed at the Congress; then Providence and 
the genius of France will be on our side. 

The Emperor Alexander has no reason for thirsting for 
revenge. Before I entered Moscow, I offered to make peace; 
at Moscow I did all I could to extinguish a conflagration 
that his own orders had kindled. 

Finally, there are 200,000 men under arms in Paris; 
they have learnt from Russian deeds the value of Russian 
promises, and they know the fate that is in store for them. 

I beg Your Majesty to avoid the hazard of a battle. I 
beg you to make peace—to make it at once, and to base it 
on the proclamation published by Prince Schwarzenberg, 
the declaration of the Allied Powers dated December 1st, 
and inserted in the Journal de Francfort , and the terms 
offered by Prince Metternich, Count Nesselrode, and Lord 
Aberdeen to Baron Saint-Aignan—terms which I accepted 
then and accept still, though the Allies’ position is very 
different from what it was, and though, impartially con¬ 
sidered, the chances are now on my side. 

May I be allowed to say that, in spite of all that Your 
Majesty has done against me since the invasion of my 
territory, and in spite of your forgetfulness of the ties that 
unite us, and of the relations of common interest that 
should subsist between our states, I preserve the same 
feeling towards you, and cannot view with indifference the 
personal unhappiness and the international disasters which 
would ensue, were you to refuse these overtures; whereas 
by a single word you could stop the whole war, end the 
whole quarrel, and restore to the world, especially the 
world of Europe, a durable peace? Had I been coward 
enough to accept the terms proposed by the Russian and 
English ministers, Your Majesty should have dissuaded me; 
for you knew that no peace can be durable which dishonours 
and degrades 30 million men. 

One word from Your Majesty would end the war, 
secure the happiness of Austria and of Europe, safeguard 

35i 

National Guard 

you against the fickleness of fortune, and put an end to the 
miseries of a people which is the victim of no ordinary ills, 
hut of the crimes of desert Tartars, scarcely deserving the 
name of men. 

Your Majesty will hardly ask why I address myself to 
you. I cannot turn to the English, whose aim is the destruc¬ 
tion of my navy, nor to the Emperor Alexander, whose 
only feelings about me are those of vengeance and passion. 
I can only address myself to Your Majesty—you, who were 
once my ally, who, both for the size of your army and for 
the grandeur of your Empire, are considered the pre¬ 
dominant power in the Coalition, and who, after all, 
whatever the sentiments of the moment, have French 
blood in your veins. 

[Corresp., xxvii, 21344. For the circumstances cf. No. 278. Napoleon 
takes advantage of the Allies’ discouragement to press Austria to make 
a separate peace. On the 27th the Emperor refused to do so.] 

282 

SOVEREIGNTY 

TO JOSEPH 

Reims, March 14, 1814. 

I have received your letter of March 12 .1 am sorry you 
told the Duke of Conegliano what I wrote to you. I don’t 
like all this tittle-tattle. If it were part of my plan to put the 
Duke elsewhere, all the pratders in Paris would not prevent 
my doing so. The National Guard in Paris is part of the 
French people, and I will be master everywhere in France, as 
long as I have a breath in my body. Your character is 
quite different from mine. You like flattering people, and 
felling in with their ideas: I like people to please me, and to 
fell in with mine. I am master to-day, every bit as much as 
at Austeditz. Don’t let anyone flatter the National Guard. 
Refuse to allow Regnaud, or anyone else, to become its 
advocate. I suppose they do admit that there is a difference 

352 

Elba 

between the times of Lafayette, when the people was sove¬ 
reign, and the present moment, when I am? I have decreed 
that 12 battalions of the mass levy are to be raised in Paris. 
This measure must not be held up on any pretext whatso¬ 
ever. I am writing to the Ministers of Home Affairs and 
Police to the same effect. If the people once see us doing 
what they like, instead of what is good for them, they will 
obviously imagine that they are the sovereign, and will have 
a very poor op,inion of those who govern them. 

[Joseph, x, 198. General Moncey (the Duke of Conegliano) com¬ 
manded the National Guard in the defence of Paris against the Allies 
on March 29-30.] 

283 

EXILE 

TO GENERAL COUNT DALESME, COMMANDANT OF THE ISLAND 

OF ELBA 

Frejus, April 27, 1814. 

Circumstances having led me to renounce the French 
throne, sacrificing my rights to the welfare and interests of 
my country, I have reserved for myself the sovereignty and 
proprietorship of the island of Elba, with the fortresses of 
Porto-Ferrajo and Porto-Longone; and the powers have 
agreed to this arrangement. I am therefore sending General 
Drouot, so that you may make over the island to him 
without delay, with its stores of food and ammunition, and 
all the properties belonging to my Imperial Domain. 
Announce this new order of things to the inhabitants, and 
tell them that I have chosen the island for my residence 
because I know the kindness of their character and the 
excellence of their climate. They will always be an object 
of liveliest interest to me. 

[Corresp., xxvii, 21563. By the treaty concluded at Fontainebleau on 
April ii, Napoleon was given the island of Elba during his lifetinoe as 
a sovereign principality. He left Paris on the 20th, and reached Elba 
on May 3.] 

aa 353 

Naval Estimates 
284 

ELBAN NAVY 

(i) NOTE FOR GENERAL DROUOT 

Elba, May 28, 1814. 

The fleet must be organised on the lines I laid down. No 
dining allowances will be given. The brig ‘Inconstant* will 
have the same crew as the schooner. M. Taillade will be in 
command of this vessel, but without any increase of pay. 

The 18 marines of My Guard who are here will be counted 
on the strength of the Navy. As we no longer have the 
‘Light Woman/ M. Rich will be put in command of one of 
the feluccas belonging to the mine. The command of the 
other will be given to M. Camavali, the chief coxswain. 
He will therefore be included on the strength, filling one of 
the posts already created. Representations must be made as 
to the forwarding of the mine vessels here as soon as pos¬ 
sible. Their crews can continue to serve them. I need these 
two vessels at once. They will be named the ‘Fly* and the 
‘Bee.* 

(2) TO GRAND MARSHAL BERTRAND 

Elba, June 14, 1814. 

The naval Budget should include a heading for ‘Upkeep 
of vessels.* The provisional grant under this head will be 
600 francs, assigned as follows:— 

For a copper compass for My cutter 50 francs 
For cushions, tapestry, curtains, etc. 450 francs 
For greasing the ‘Caroline/ painting 
the cutters, and other necessary 

expenses.ioo francs 

Give orders that My cutter has all the necessary work done 
on it before the end of the week. 

354 

Garden and Stables 

(3) TO GENERAL DROTJOT 

Longone, September 9, 1814. 

Give orders that when the sailors of My Guard go on 
board My cutters, they are always to take with them their 
sabres, muskets, and two clips of cartridges in their cartridge- 
cases. Racks must be fitted in the cutters to hold these 
weapons. 

[P^LISSIER, pp. 1, 9, IIO.] 

285 

ELBAN BUDGET 

TO GRAND MARSHAL BERTRAND 

Elba, October 15, 1814. 

I have received your report on Supplementary Expendi¬ 
ture for the month of September. 

Gardens. Reprimand the gardener for employing three 
men all the month on a garden the size of my hand, and 
11 grenadiers for loading up a few cartfuls of earth. I 
disapprove of the proposed expenditure on turf during 
October: I would rather have grass seed. The gardener must 
bargain with the grenadiers to load earth at so much a cubic 
metre, and use just enough carts to keep them constantly 
employed. I don’t think this ought to cost more than 80 
francs. Similarly the O.C. Engineers must bargain with the 
grenadiers for the excavation of the gardens. I estimate the 
cost at 400 francs. I therefore allow 480 francs for the 
Supplementary Estimates for the gardens during October. 

Stables . I can’t allow more than 600 francs a month. It’s 
impossible to do things on the same scale in this country as 
in Paris. Chauvin and the deputy-chamberlain must agree, 
and arrange matters accordingly. They can have the 
shoeing done on account, and it certainly won’t cost more 
than 200 francs a month. They can treat the other expenses 
in the same way, provided they keep within the limit of 

355 

Return from Elba 

600 francs. I can’t give more than 150 francs for the side¬ 
saddle. 

Stores. This account is in a great muddle. The ordinary 
expenditure should suffice for a watchman (whom I don’t 
see put down), 2 or 3 women in permanent employment, 
and a valet who can also do upholstering. I should like 
this last, if possible, to be the man who came with Madame. 
Conti, who supplied the furniture, ought not to be em¬ 
ployed any more in the Stores. Have a separate account 
made for all the items under the head of ‘carriage of Princess 
Pauline’s things’. I refuse to pay the 280 francs demanded 
by the Stores department for petty cash. I can only allow 
40 francs. Have an estimate made out for the ordinary 
expenditure of the Stores during October, as well as one for 
Supplementary Expenditure. As Saint-Martin and the Prin¬ 
cess’s apartment are being furnished, the Supplementary 
Estimates for October are likeiy to be higher than in other 
months: my provisional estimate is 800 francs. Make out a 
list of the proper charges for carriage from the fleet at 
Longone to the citadel at Merciana and to La Madone, and 
from the fleet to the palace of Porto-Ferrajo. The Stores 
department will conform to this tariff; but it must be 
strictly forbidden to employ the carrier for any transport 
work that can be done by our own vehicles. 

[PAlissier, p. 159.] 

286 

THE LAST OF ELBA 

TO GENERAL COUNT BERTRAND, GRAND MARSHAL OF THE 

PALACE 

Paris, March 23, 1815. 

Send Bemotti post-haste to the Isle of Elba. Entrust him 
with news for the island. He must sail from Toulon. Write 
to Lapi telling him to run up the tricolour. 

Recover from Elba any of my things that are worth 

356 

Congress of Vienna 

sending. I am anxious to have my Cotsican horse, if it is not 
ill, and can be sent back. The canary travelling-carriage, the 
big carriage, and two of the state coaches, are worth the 
trouble of returning, as well as my underwear. I am present¬ 
ing my library to the town, along with my house: the house 
will do for a casino, but the library must be left in it. 

[Corresp., xxviii, 21696. Napoleon left Elba on February 26, landed 
in France on March 1, and reached Paris on the 20th. Lapi was a native 
of Elba whom he appointed Governor of the island in his absence.] 

287 

PAPER WAR 

TO GENERAL CAULAINCOURT, DUKE OF VICENZA, MINISTER 
FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

Paris, March 28,1815. 

I want you to instruct Bignon to write a history of the 
Congress of Vienna. One could print in an Appendix all 
the documents, with appropriate extracts from Talleyrand's 
despatches. Such a work would be useful, as showing 
foreign greed and injustice. But until it is written we can’t 
really tell whether it is suitable for publication. 

I also think it very important to have a history written 
of all the treaties during my reign, such as those of Campo- 
formio, Luneville, Amiens, Pressburg, Tilsit, and Vienna, 
as well as the whole Bayonne affair, with the original docu¬ 
ments, my letters, and the sovereigns’ replies. This work 
seems to me to be of essential importance for the history of 
the nation, and for its glory ana mine, since these events 
need to be presented in their proper light.... 

Find me a competent man, who could be entrusted with 
this work. 

It is necessary that you should send daily articles to the 
Moniteur, dated from different countries, to let people know 
what is happening; for instance, the dispute between 

357 

Murat 

Sweden and Denmark over Pomerania; the differences 
between Saxony, Bavaria, and the Prince of Orange, who 
refuses to give up his family estates in Germany; and so on. 
Public curiosity can thus be fed upon articles edited from 
a proper point of view, so as to bring to light the greediness 
of the powers. 

[Corresp., xxviii, 21739.] 

288 

DA CAPO 

TO JOACHIM NAPOLEON, KING OF NAPLES 

Paris, March 29, 1815. 

... It is my sincere desire, as you can imagine, to keep the 
peace, especially as Your Majesty’s future depends upon it. 
But if we were forced to take up arms again, I should 
reckon myself perfectly ready from that moment to face 
whatever may happen; for the unanimity with which 
Frenchmen are gathering round me convinces me that the 
whole nation is prepared to give me its energetic support. 
France is ready to make any sacrifice in order to reject once 
for all the hateful and degrading regime from which it 
has just been delivered; ana all parties agree in desiring a 
government which can give them powerful protection. I 
can thus face the future without alarm. My confidence is 
increased by Your Majesty’s support. If your attachment to 
me has not changed, it will be a pleasure to me to give you 
fresh proofs that you can always count on my friendship. 

[Brotonne, i, 1379. In May, 1814, after unsuccessful hostilities 
against the Austrians in S. Italy, Murat had fled to Corsica. In 181 j he 
tried to regain Naples, but was captured and shot (October 13).] 

358 

European Peace 
289 

CIRCULAR LETTER 

TO THE SOVEREIGNS OF EUROPE 

Paris, April 4, 1815. 

Monsieur, my Brother, 

You will have learnt, during the course of the last month, 
of my landing again in France, of my entry into Paris, and 
of the departure of the Bourbon family. Your Majesty must 
by now be aware of the real nature of these events. They 
are the work of an irresistible power, of the unanimous will 
of a great nation conscious of its duties and of its rights. 
A dynasty forcibly reimposed upon the French people was 
no longer suitable for it: the Bourbons refused to associate 
themselves with the national feelings or the national 
customs; and France was forced to abandon them. The 
popular voice called for a liberator. The expectation which 
had decided me to make the supreme sacrifice was in vain. 
I returned; and from the place where my foot first touched 
the shore I was carried by the affection of my subjects into 
the bosom of my capital. 

My first and heartfelt anxiety is to repay so much affection 
by the maintenance of an honourable peace. The re-establish¬ 
ment of the Imperial throne was necessary for the happiness 
of Frenchmen: my dearest hope is that it may also secure 
repose for the whole of Europe. Each national flag in turn 
has had its gleam of glory: often enough, by some turn of 
fortune, great victories have been followed by great defeats. 
To-day a finer arena offers itself to the sovereigns of Europe, 
and I am the first to descend into it. I have provided the 
world in the past with a programme of great contests: it 
will please me better in future to acknowledge no rivalry 
but that of the advocates of peace, and no combat but a 
crusade for the felicity of mankind. It is France’s pleasure 
to make a frank avowal of this noble ideal. Jealous of her 
independence, she will always base her policy, upon an 
unqualified respect for the independence of other peoples. 

359 

Waterloo 

If Your Majesty’s personal sentiments—as I confidently 
trust—are the same, there is assurance of a widespread and 
long continued repose; and justice, seated on the confines 
of the various states, will be competent to guard their 
frontiers. I eagerly embrace this opportunity to repeat the 
sentiments of sincere esteem and perfect friendship with 
which I remain, 

Monsieur my Brother, 

Your good Brother, 

Napoleon. 

[Corresp., xxviii, 21769.] 

290 

AFTER WATERLOO 1 

TO KING JOSEPH 

Philippeville; June 19, 1815. 

... All is not lost. I suppose that, when I reassemble my 
forces, I shall have 150,000 men. The fediris and national 
guards (such as are fit to fight) will provide 100,000 men, 
and the regimental depots another 50,000.1 shall thus have 
300,000 soldiers ready at once to bring against the enemy. 
I will use carriage-horses to drag the guns; raise 100,000 
men by conscription; arm them with muskets taken from 
royalists, and from national guards unfit for service; 
organise a mass levy in Dauphine, the Lyon district. 
Burgundy, Lorraine, Champagne; and overwhelm the foe. 
But people must help me, and not deafen me with advice. 
I am just off to Laon. I am sure to find somebody there. I 
have heard nothing of Grouchy. If he has not been captured, 
as I rather fear, that will give me 50,000 men within 3 days 
—plenty to keep the enemy occupied, and to give Paris and 
France time to do their duty. The Austrians are slow mar¬ 
chers: the Prussians are afraid of the peasantry, and dare not 
advance too far. There is still time to retrieve the situation. 
Write and tell me how the Chamber has been affected by 

360 

America? 

tliis disastrous skirmish. I trust the deputies will realise that 
it is their duty at this crisis to stand by me, and to help me 
to save France. Prepare them to give me worthy support. 
Above all, steadfastness and courage! 

[Lecestre, li, 1225. Written during the retreat, the day after Waterloo. 
Napoleon reached Paris on the 21st.] 

291 

THE NEXT PHASE? 

TO M. BARBIER, THE EMPEROR’S LIBRARIAN 

Paris, June 25,1815. 

The Grand Marshal begs M. Barbier to be so good as to 
bring to La Malmaison to-morrow: 

(1) The list of 10,000 books and engravings, such as those 
of Denon’s travels and the Egyptian Commission, of which 
the Emperor had several thousand copies; 

(2) Some works on America; 

(3) A detailed bibliography of everything that has been 
printed about the Emperor during his various campaigns. 

The Emperor’s travelling library must be brought up to 
date. It ought to include the books carried on each campaign, 
and to be supplemented by a number of works on the United 
States. 

The Grand Library must contain a complete set of the 
Moniteur , the best encyclopaedia there is, and the best 
dictionaries. 

This library should be consigned to some American 
house, which will forward it via Havre to America. 

[Corresp., xxviii, 22064. Two fast frigates were at Rochefort, ready 
to take Napoleon to America. On the 29th he left Paris, and was at 
Rochefort on July 3. But instead of accompanying Joseph, who 
reached America, he waited till the ijth, and then rowed out to the 
Belleropbon , and ‘put himself under the protection of British law.’] 

361 

England 

iyz 

THEMISTOCLES 

TO THE PRINCE REGENT OF ENGLAND 

Ile d’Aix, July 14, 1815. 

Your Royal Highness: victimised by the factions which 
divide my country, and by the hostility of the European 
powers, I have ended my political career; and I come, as 
Themistocles did, to claim a seat by the hearth of the 
British people. I put myself under the protection of British 
law—a protection which I claim from Your Royal Highness, 
as the strongest, the stubbomest, and the most generous of 
my foes. 

Napoleon. 

[Corresp., xxviii, 42066. Themistocles, ostracised from Athens in 
472 b.c., and pursued from Corcyra to Epirus, obtained the protection 
of Admetus, King of the Molossians.] 

3 62 

g* H 0\ O M N rn K->VO * t"00 « CN H rfn Tfr v>SO 00 on 

xj' HWHhHHH* "MM "mNMNNNNUN 

% 

£ 

, rj 

ctf 
V 

to "Xt 
Jj to 

rti *V( -5. 

O J 5 

V 4 r£3 

’53 o* 

+J u 

s»*a 
^0 » 
Su '3 
5 
o>-l 

8 -fl S 

g CO g » 

hSSS 

w £> 

P'S 

a 

PQ 

.q a 
-a o 
o -a 
u s 

cd -=! 
>—s Q 

°.s 

a *9 

Sfi 

bp 

_ .j 3 
§ P a< 

. (5 rt 

45 8 ”‘8* * 

"S 

« ° gtj 
ffippfSfe 

.. «_orr! o^o o n • 

S3 I s1 S® S’^+! 

fL|C/ 3 MQfiHQPHP^i 

in 

(4 

PQ 

H 

b* 

9 

8 

& 

** 

K 

I 

i) 

OJ rt 

§1 

"1 ^ ^ ^ ^ p _ 

_ to to O Er* CO 3 W 

t? aa^^A 

1) <u 

a I-I § 

H o A« O a eo 

•*■8022 

pqpL ,<3 

a. 

<u 

>■. 

H 

o 

+J 

(J 

u 

n 

"SQ S‘§Q 
S d S -p « 
i 3 S< 3 <§a 

j1||. 

I 

N M W 

ill 

•—><i •“» 

n'^ c M 3 I °° 2 

N nN ^ w N„ M 

.*9 -j 
^cPti w « Sh R 
£-§< 5 QS< 

«n <^V3 'O t "t hxo 

H N HJ N 

&* S'* 

«3 « »d * 

*5 ** * h— j 

I 

t) - OS H 

oo oo oo « Os 

n ^ n * r- 

N 

n OS a 
«i r*» •> 

Os •> 

r-» " 

so 

« « Os 
»» * 

I 

H N tft ^ V3 h» 

500 os o m n 

^r> -<o- t^vo r^oo oso h n 

3 6 3 

H N CA 
ef\ *r\ 

^\D r^OO GN o 

W\ efN ec* c<\ ^ 

G\ o 

v>y> 

P-i 

SO CN^ >_ V3 h'O'O O C\ _ O N ON - 

•m ' 1 4 • 4 ‘IlMsg Ji 

00 

* * * G\ 

* •* A !“■* 

os 

CS « 
r-~ *> 

I 

*«S Sj" V>\0 

N N N N 

Cr^S S' O m N ’'I' "oSO t>.oo GS O M N m-. 

S S'S. i"~ 

'T ^ st- Sj- 

364 

£0 w n o\o S « n j'v'O ” £ 

JS y^vovovDVO f"- I^Sr'I'-M^oooo 

v-n h-00 W ft N »A ^ ^ 
OOOOOO CN CNCN ON CS 

^ 52 o 

I’cJ 3 

a w b. 

g&go 

> o 

'So* 
w $ 5P a 
3 d 01 a o 

OJ cu y J 3 

Jj vi 

.8 « fi B.s’a 3 

+3 *Vi *j3 ^Jfcd jy w i^i o 

3 u d'^ a a a ii “ 
S o jS*a S^pd 
^ 2 pq ^ a, 2 c /3 H u <1 H 

a, « 'S § 

& 8 s-§ 

CLl _, O > .2 

H m « W « 3 

O W T3 E 

g o'§0 - w *" ' 

>" 2 s Jf-s 

o "w ^ a p* <3 
3 £-g S 2 ^ ■ 

l 2 9 3 o r o 
ffi PQ Ph h ~>t~ l co 1 

< JA *-> 

_, CJ 

°! 

w y^XI t>, rt <u 

iu o O C Ci 2 c 
13 *£ a S* O « ■£: 
*g no «* §5 Jo u 2 
oo ^ '—tpsj H co Ph 

r* 

M O 
O W 

H pj 
(U ^ 

a, u h 

d T) rt 

w .. o* 

*v 

y y 
.■rs si «t 

jy ,S *Q 

fi'U ,i<f S m H ^ M s w 0,2 s uh W 2 w « 

O rl « *7 Jr* 2 O O rd 0 rd jq ft ^ v *C O 53 

3 ffl oO *^3 hJ ►—iti* P u P U p 2 »^»P ^ U p«< p4 

I ill 

m »n 
d s 

o o Og 
Ob 0 U & 

l(§,sliS 3 £ 

\£l N ^ w 
M N N N 

i- 5 Th - 

■■% rt « rt a !> 

vo oo »o m S' 

OnS * 

On h h \o 

«. .-sa aifrg i-fr? „& . 5 ^ t?s,& 

ZQ * "td r*H 1 —i CO Pd I—, I—,<! "(/J "JZJ pt, Sr*} tO !<5 

h £ 

l |N ft ^ A 

a O ft ft ft ft O 

+ 00 * •* ft *1 QQ 

«ft A * * 4* 

<3 ‘S. ^ £L ^ fl *'“' V0 • v, °° °\0 H N V.NO l".00 ON o ** *t 

v^NO VO NO NO NO VO NO NO NJJ NO fi. f*. pi. 

3<>5 

2« 

IP 

^^^2 2 2 2 2 2 °° — ^ M 

2 s ^ «^vo 
m2 * N N 

m H MW 

Ht a 8 

S J 7 gpa y 

^ CtJ ^ JH >H 

d 

« V, 

o .a 

a cu 

W W _, 

O « i-H W W )»| 

3 &«■« o w S 

q « tj o T3 

'HtiutSo 

9 J <rg.13 $p 

. H .3 O 3 

co 

& 

B 

£ 

3 

& 

o 

H 

co 

o 

a ' 

*3:8 

il^-a-gll 

O O O J£ o § 
U ffl co Et< Q t-fc 

en a 

| 

U ° a o s 

J3fl£& 

•9 

-8 J-B 

j,« « 

t) W rO 

2 d 'y g mu a ia 

-= u -fl S-g'SI'S §lU 

‘isJsJiiiajys 

t 

2i 

ss 

Pi 

<U O 

3 a 
_ crT 3 
'S’d & 
gp? J 

pi o CJ 
.UtjT M 

g> 

■§_§4-« 

oo Ph <q H p-, 

na 

3 

a 

<50 

* 

c/5 P-i H co 

os 

N 

*S N?h 

*J> . 1-1 w 

O eo 
H N 

n N 

N ^N H 

,1 

kH 

1 §*g| jl'its «' g 

2 ^£<5 Aco OQ^ 

N OS O NO 

5o| 
Gh S 

ft ^ 

* 

. o 
‘ 00 

HOO O tN 
N ws N 

=a 

p- _ 

N W 

^ s 

•ft (4 
H m 

<*b 

5*3 3 

•—i<! 

366 

Year Day Where written To whom written Subject 

ft 

N 

w 

C\ o h N vo ftoo 

N rr* 2 rr» rr» *r» m* Rwvwv'O 
H H MH 4 HH 4 M H W 

gv o 

H 

Tf'd* tt 

VO ft 00 

5 ^ ^ ’'t 

ru 

■S 

4-» 

CO 

<i 

H 

O 

cl* 

51 

O M 

£ 

3 ng a Q 
a a fl u 

a eg ° .tj 

ffejjj: 

> ft U(^PH<1 

<u 
0* 
a e 
w| 

8 « 

*3 

e a 

•M 'V 

I if 
2W 
a w 

rrt O 
T 3 ft 

(U <u 

y -a 

o ’ 0 , 

ft pq I 

gna o H. 

Illtli. 

«'S +2 ar oj s 

j ja'-a a r« fr 1 
@*3 8 8 8$ 8 

> h PQ ft >-> 

<u 
ft 
flJ 0 

a ft _ 
tub 52 *S 

Jr£ S3 

3 

s £3 cd 

3 tj.{ 

o * 

RS 3 o oP 3 i) 
pq H ft <j ft ft W pq 

<u 

a 

•n*<U 

" bo 

3 

ft 

«<» *Q 

•rr* 3 

<U p , 

•-pw O & 

Qftd^ 

I 

I 

o 

pq 

*«.g 

B S 

co ft 

a 

o 

‘I 

nfl 

3 

6 

*a 

CO 

N rr» 00 CV —. rfN ^ 

N N N M £V00 ^ JV 

bO 

■3 

„&tj 6 Si 

mOZO 

^ « Ov ft N N H g J 

w H ^ —, 

' di I 5 ft •* ** 

'ft " "<J " * 

S' s 

^ ^ t H H 
H N «A 

ft 

2 *'iij *» 

" "S " 

V 

„ C 
s 3 

VO ftoo CnO h 

Ov CV Ov Cs o o 

****** 

Nrr\ rj- 

O O O 0 

-VO ft CO CV O H N rr\ \t* v^VO p. oo rtv 

nOOOOmwmmihihwhmm 

3<>7 

60 O N t 

var ^ 

fX, tH M W 

6^ Cv M rT| V$* V*N 
S K"> vnVO VO 2 VO VO 

vo r-~ 
;vo VO 

CV IH 

?vo 

o h- r- it « & „ 3 t 

«? 

►>. Q 
w w 3 

w -y T 3 
P (O 
± OJd 

a ^ §a 
JS'S’f' v $ 
j i 

3 ° d ^ S 

oi •§ _, 

«3 a 

Oirt § 

g*- 
■a -I *8 
B g £ 

Q ° Sb^ 8 

§£St§*iH|l, 

^.gplJJdl 

o 

o 

•3 

41*215 

s£! 3 ." 

•CO 

0$ 

e 

5 

ft 

o 

H 

CO 

f Iflffflf. 

£ §S.(8^|p§J, 

olS «•§ 

llll : 

frd 

,Jd 

S «J rt T 3 

'•3 

a sj> 
£££ 

£ 

■St TJ 
•ti 3 
s o 

* 0 

$* 

Is 

V? 5 

CO 

*3 

/a 

; o 

ja 

a 

<3 

"0 

g§> 

'll 

o 

ft 

<u 

T» 

« o 

"S 

CO 

* 6 

ft 

»v cv 

* 

-VO M 

I * 

> 

.* o 

'£ 

.8 

■fl 

h ti 

« o 
* 00 

t 

'i 

■"t a\ „ m 

t 

'■< 

O x-v 
H H 

£ 

5 

N N « 

a s ? 5 H £a ? 

368 

Jsi 0 ^ §s o o o' ; o o o' o' '^' ca cn o h 

* M M " 8 8 "S S S 2 "S S a S 3 S S 2 

«^V© h- 
N N <s » 
N N N 

CO 

„ N 00 
°° M N N 

q £ » 

Cl 

-» VH So 

►->< co 

► 

5 | 

i-- 

o 

00 

vo r> 

S 

V^NO J>CO C\ o H N NN Nf v-*VO r^OO ON O W N «N ^ w-iVO h-00 ON 
TV , T'^vt^iAirtWNV\«r»«rsii^i^ i/nVQ VO NO NO NO VO NO VO VD VO 
HMMHIHHI-tHHMMIHMt-IMMHMHHMMMtHHt 

BB 

369 

Si 00 C\ O H N «i t VO C\0 N 

?l NN*c» j «fi to wi 5 NV » tn wv •rt- •* 

0., nnn "nnnn n "nnnn 

£ ja 8 
^ S 3 

>> to a 

§> If 13 

?I , ’ 3 'S 8 sJ' 8 < - %uh 
gJgSJ&^JJS-i^ssl 
£o£q as (Si^g <(?££; 4 !j 2 

U MU NL) O 

g-s.s-af«'S\g-8 

§ r §3 s.§1|l| 

—i&H U Pin U C/0 Ofe ^ 

n-t 

-UJ j-l 

<o g 

w 

a 

a c 

0 

.TJ 

o a 
jo a 

_S3 CO 

|ra 

l> fSj 

„ . a .{9 :0 

8 8 8 J s-a 

8 b £« 
ft Er^o 

j.a-s 

/? s a.S a 

b oo Cs 

^ O „ „ o X 

^ 00 *> »00 •» 

H M 

\o r^oo N ^ ^ ^ N VO 

HMW ^ ^ <N N n 

"2 jji J« >-> fcvQ ft 

! £l *$£ * *1 «!* • 

2 t? j£* IT* Jf IC^P J^oo C\ o h n tfi Tf w-»vo r-»oo ov o h n ^ ^ 
WhE'D'C'E'D'E'E' ^°° »»»OOOOOOMMM ^ 5 iC\S^ 

370 

<3° JP'S' SvITvo VO v£"“ 'o' ?L SI'S. * O - -v VO 

a, -NX** * «'S'S 'S'g E-Ers-K-tr ! G'^'S“ =» 

*-i oi 

8*3 

u P 

5| 

<!<J 

rt .^ u ’uil 
^ J 3 tuo^s a 
*H i2.2^ U 

<U in 4 h “ 

Oh 3 « 4J ^ 

<u 

T3 

C4 

04 

u 

O 

„ 3 

t> t) 

GO XI 

W 4J 

g'2 * 

to C to 

*9 ;<a 

NU O U 

1*8 a 

gs t s 

£<! ?< 

'S 

PS 

04 

u 

CO 0 

,fi<3 

rj P *lj U 

E o 8 j3 

53 |ia 

$§*3 *8 

S oa «.a 5 

Oj3 04 w a 

•2 g u»a 

PhQphi^ O 

f si 

0 a s 

■Su’Sij 

•a-g a §> 

O > rt 3 

•Rg J ? 
O t 3 jj 

C4 W cS o 

W$0« 

03 

B 

s 

1-1 

ft, 

o 

H 

oo 

8v 

•S^ 

o^- 3 * 
04 13 03 

SS" 

4> 

03 

a 

<3 

8»*J 

pq « «3 

,a 

^•’n to 

u £ irg s a -a'.; 5-a - y a -SLii c'B a s o 41 c «s 

n r 5 S§oqJ IJiL^igjaS’E'SSi&.S'STlts 

o 

■<L) co -i_» 

3 

V 

3 

u 
, P 

a 
o 

y <« P 

r §'Sl 

I 

Ph 

pelUfS 

P 

cd 

<0 

p—4 

03 

o 

a 

'« a 

t< .o 
Pi Pp 

Ph 

°a 

i! 

H'O ovov- gvo yyg'-.S' 

. £> i> . . s-S - ..S^ 

•zp • -oo; 

OS 

O n ^ 

N 

so 

M CftllMA 

N N 

VO 00 

N rj- vs VO jv, 

- * . N *S 

t) O O « .is 

■$ : ozh : =J * 

'C''~> £r“® S£ 8 « ?! IT ^ £><» os o h n «s st- wvo r^oo os 

C\ G\ 0 \ Q\ GV ^OOOOO rtrtrt/ ' LjLJtJ ‘-‘ L -'“ - . : . T* w ’ 

OS OS OS OS OS O 
MMtHtHMNNNN 

O O O O 
<4NN<4NC4N<4 

W M tH M 

<4 N N N <4 N 

37 i 

Sn r-»oo o w 

^ oo oo G\ ON 
N N N N 

tS *r\ 
GN On 
N N 

Nj- 1^. OOONOHNNN 

CN CN S ON CN o o o o 

NN H N m efi ift to 

„ ^ w-v r-. CN 

« o o o so 

**N MN MN MN 

C/3 

B 

P-i 

O 

b* 

(73 

<5 

Jti o 
g >N 
p o 
r, *—h u 

* Onjrl 
0 

JJ, fl 8 3 

•n 8J 9 A . 

o <u +3 P no 

9 * fr * P 

■gw: 

C 13 

O P O tP & 

(73 pej pfii 

60 

w 

4J 

a 

<u 

o 

§> 

oi 

T3 

K 

CO 

& 

£ 

to -P 

Nsjs 

-g Hr* 85 

9 8^1*1 

£ c /3 w ^ <j 

I - - 
3 § §> 

M « <5J 

<0 O ,n 

”-§J 

I 

CO rt fr»r 

fi' .9 jo O 

to «) O 

a fra a d 

lull 

co , 

U J* 
P O 

o o 

Ufq 

a o 

o a. 

4-> jr* 

SO O 

co ^ 

■—4 J* CO , 

g 8 §*5 £ 

811“! rH 

fr&ff 3 SIS, 

Wi§cS(2<i2(So 

3 

“I 

14r| j|4f§3§'l3s! 

u d" 8 

SiP'IrfrtpSpoif* 0dUdt>y«2US|S!i2 

dj^asuos^adtSswmgdS-oluB^ 

§•% t? 
£ 15.3 

3 
O 

’3 
O S' 

co <U 
O 4-j 

*&§ 

Ifei H 

pq So 3 

3Tjj a 

o 

I 

I 

css 

& .a . 

4-> 

<U TJ 

a p 
*3.3 
s o 0 

rQ 4 ^ 

a a 

i3c 

00 

a 

'§«T3 

2 ju 

(73 

3 

Ph 

h N 

00 CN N}- N 

4-3 t> 

.fro 

2 H 2 N(AO H H 
” " ^ H H N wn rj ^ . 

« « « 8 ...3 ^ ja'g 

w '£ H Nf- 
M W 

£ *2 

A A ^ 

^ 2 ji s s'S’ it's tr ,l 2 fr ° w N *n ^ wvo t^oo on o w n «n Nf 

cC) NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNcS«SNN«SNNNN 

372 

§n ''*■ <^vo r--oo o 

Q. fT; tTi rr, rfi fA tA in 

*r\ '<l-'0 
N N N 

*A IA IA 

00 
! N 

CN 

M 

0 W H rA 
lA >A IA (A 
tA »A lA ia 

■^•vo 

CO 

rt 

§ 

8 

ft 

t 

Ills 

§ s 8 s 

a o o ^ 

w m pql^ 

I 

S 

sgwH 

ilaee 

•S 

5 

o« 

W >> 
C rt 

,5 q 

>T3 

7 ^ -c bo”v 

Mo 0.5 tK^H 

a 4 j u fcn s^-rt y 

&y s'i-^lji'lllf 

w »-t a o SN> . 

Oi’<^H0fPfH0F-'W ^ l , ~*U E 

!«) O 3 o 2 

seise! 

3 

O 

'3 

XT 

d 

o 

s 

o « y y »h s 

3W|„|.ti| 

2.3 SPi| I 

pqBWU^U 

■• >..u 
« ^,2 

o ? ^ r □ « 
M £ 8 & O « 
pq co PQ co 0 U 

€J 

s a m 

3 * 

^ §•*•* | ga 

g -§.t. 3 . 8 -§- 6 .s 

t§s p j o 3 o 9 3 

^ coOl^SQNOf 

3 

rt 

£ 

ja 

v 

a 

|«|„ 

1 it 

, 3 *2 iS *73 <U 3 

3 0 
rt <J 
*j3 ^ 

. <3 CO 

"§ « 

Sq 

3 a) 

si’s 

£8 

2Q 

00 (A0\ 0 00 Cn 

H 

^ tJb-y 

Q 3 fr 

<i CO 

fe M 

, M A 

N 12 ‘ 

N H N 

£ 
t o 

h Z 

^ vaV3 «a N N ^ 

** rl N ^ h-H 

a jo* d cljf « S - 

"P42, "£<|S "£ " 

* *• r*- 

H h>n N A 

H t| A 

s3 a 

t*> 
-> 3 

*< 

•M t> 
.0,0 
: Uly 

CO 2, 

«AtV5 SCO 0\0 H N ATI ^ u-v\D r-A.00 ON O M N r^OO <£v 

Xf > tt , 'T**Xf’Tj*«^>ir%ir%v-\v->w«-\w-vV-\w^ v^sSO SOVOVOVOVDVOVpvp 
MNNNNNNNNNNNNNNMNNMNflflNN** 

373 

h" Gs O Hi N «r\ 
<3^ to NS xj* St 

«Mfi mif\ if\ >f\ 

S $ t®2. S' n ns M- 

£ VO r-00 OS o H « 

^ ^ « >h <^s so so so 

•<V KMIMTI ffv ^ 

oi 

a 

§ .. 

z fi 

^ a 

60 rK « a 
* 3 43 o C « 

CO O. c /5 H 

3 & t>3 % 

hS s?-a 

. a 
fro 

&■ 

I’I4'§II > S 

§J 3 ^ 1 ! S3 « 9 

o b § g a s sjg s *§ J*S 6 5 

i-1H i-tH fr(Qu<ltLipHj2J<!wWpQ 

d 

-Q 

_ t\. 

O <U 

o 

W »T-l d OJ 

t 

<U -C Oh a 

H (J ii o 

S^lf 

_ _ 1 JJ « 1 

. frjs-S'S.S.S 

1 Ph Q U <5 ]H H 

•’SSlaSge 

a <3 £<3(3 <8 5(3 

O T< T) 

* a o g o g 
s>s S 4 ! Bfi |1 
-§SAqq^(3| 

(J 4J S W 4J ih jj 

I.* k.g.<5fLM|B. 

>s'rf 

£M Sig^S*. 

CO CO 

* S .Ss 
'*§ 'Si t9 

I 

' o^'l 

•^Wfi 

i 

<u 
Oh 
Qh , 

'3 rt « 
PhOhH 

. * 

Q | 

N S' S 00 so OO Os H 

Tf S' HI HI M N 

S *' r « «•»««««« 

4 *£. . 

Ss ws St 

§ HI M * 

» 69 * 

Hi I"-._ 

n» 

IN 

CS HS 

MS 00 Os 
N N N 

h 43 
u 

H M HiH n ij VH 

sg A*I*J § fr o rt 

S<j 2 £,c 8 oS 

% a 

M 

H 

3 

P J? ^ JO Vs VO S '00 OS o hi N ws St 
f ^ ^ S* n rs |s fv fs 00 00 00 00 00 

NNNNNNNNNNNNNNN 

_ vs SO S' 00 os O M N 
nOO 00 00 X CO CS CS OS 

nnnnnnnn 

374 

A 

INDEX OF NAMES 

Abbatucci, 31 
Abd-el-Rahm&n, 59 
Aberdeen, 351 
Aboukir Bay, j8 
Acre, 86 
Admetus, 36a 
Ajaccio, 6, 14 
Albenga, 22 
Albuera, 337 
Alcinous, 41 
Aldobrandini, 242 
Aleppo, 115 
Alexander, 71 

Alexander I, Tsar, 84, 131, 212, 227, 
278, 289-90, 309-12, 346, 3ji 
Alexandre de Beauhamais, 19 
Alexandria, 57, 144 
Algiers, Bey of, 84-5 
Almanza, 35 
Ambleteuse, 95 
Amiens, 86, 344, 357 
Amsterdam, 117, 17J, 276-7 
Ancona, 135-6 
Andr6ossy, 62 
Angers, 348 
Anne, Princess, 265 
Antibes, 15 
Antonio, Don, 219 
Antony, 225 
Antwerp, 100, 339, 350 
Aranjuez, 215 
Armstrong, 272 
Amauld, 41 
Arras, 344 
Asti, 281 
Astros, 280 
Athens, 8, 362 
Auerstadt, 161 
Augereau, 31, 97, 348 
Augsburg, 154 
Augusta, 134,138,143 
Augustus, 251 
Augustus, Prince, 209 
Austerlitz, 133, 136, 139, 165, 352 
Auxonne, 6,10 

B 

Baciocchi, 139, 302 
Bagration, 312 

Baird, 232 
Balashov, 312 
Balbi, 37 
Baltic, 279 

Barbier, 224, 241, 303,361 
Barfcre, 101 
Bamevelt, 277 
Barras, 18, 23-4 
Basle, 215 
Bastille, 229 
Bautzen, 326, 328 
Bavaria, Elector of, 84 
Baylen, 226-7, 22 9 
Bayonne, 205-6, 221, 357 
Beaulieu, 22, 24 
Benevento, 148 
Beny-Soueyf, 58 
Beresina, 319 
Berg, 262 

Berlin, n6, 160-1, 226, 264, 273, 316 
Bemadotte, 16, 148 
Berne, 88 
Bemotti, 356 

Bertbier, P. of Neuchitel, 31, 62,140 
Berthollet, 62 
Berwick, 35 

Bessi£res, D. of Istria, 143, 242, 333 
Beugnot, 212 
Beytz, 65 
B6ziers, 59 
Bignon, 303, 357 
Biville, 97 
Black Sea, 77 
Blanquet du Chayla, 55 
Bleschamp, 210 
Blucher, 349 
Boileau, 189 
Bologna, 34 
Bordeaux, 117, 221 
Borghese, 94 
Bonsof, 319 
Borodino, 315 
Bosphorus 151, 211 
Bossuut, 170 
Boul&q, 58 

Boulogne, 95, 97,126,128, 232 
Bourde, 40 
Bourges, 130 
Bourrienne, 92 
Boyer, 210 
Boyne, 35 

375 

Index of Names 

Brest, 53, 99, 126-7 
Brienne, 342 
Brueys, 57 
Bruges, 95 
Brutus, 71, 255 
Bubna, 326, 349 
Bucharest, 304 
Burgos, 204 

C 

Cadiz, 126, 220 
Cadoudal, 97 
Caesar, 71, 243, 251, 257 
Cairo, 57-8, 63, 85 
Cairo-Montenotte, 25 
Calder, 126 
Caligula, 251 
Calvin, 243, 330 
Camisards, 232 

Campoformio, 39, 43, 74-6, 357 
Canaries, 126 
Carlos, Don, 219 
Camavali, 354 
Cartagena, 62, 126 
Carthage, 8 
Casabianca, 31, 54 
Cassel, 208, 244-5 
Castiglione, 348-9 
Catherine die Great, 311 
Catherine of Wurttemberg, 118, 208 
Catherine of Russia, 266 
Cato, 71 
Cattaro, 143-4 
Caudine Forks, 312 
Caulaincourt, D. of Vicenza, 210, 225, 
265, 342, 346 
Cavour, 125 
Cayenne, 273 
Cephalonia, 41 
Cdsarotti, 234 
Cevennes, 231 
Chambery, 308 

Champagny, D.of Cadore, 239,244,262 
Champfort, 173 
Champs-Flysees, 229 
Chaptal, 80, 307 

Charlemagne, 137, 146, 236, 256, 284 
Charles IV of Spain, 214-5, 218-9 
Charles VH of France, 204 
Charles VUI of France, 36 
Charles XII of Sweden, 303 
Charles, P. of Lorraine, 130 
Charles, P. of Baden, 143-4 
Charles P. of Bavaria, 253 
Charlotte Bonaparte, 210 

Charlottenburg, 164 
Chateaubriand, 192 
Chateauneuf-Randon, 24 
Chateau-Renard, 23 
Chatillon, 342, 347, 350 
Chauvet, 23 
Chauvin, 355 
Cherasco, 25 
Chiese, 74 
Cicero, 71, 101 
Cifenti, 293 
Clarke, 38 
Clary, 16 
C 16 ment, 284 
Clichy Club, 39, 65 
Clovis, 260 
Cobentzl, 47 
Coblentz, 13 
Compifcgne, 197-8 
Concordat, 280, 285 
Condd, 71 
Consalvi, 135-6 
Constantine, 136 
Constantinople, 150-1, 166 
Conti, 356 

Copenhagen, 201-2, 205, 212 

Coppet, 200 

Corcyra, 362 

Corfu, 40-1, 107, 127 

Corneille, 182, 188, 224 

Corsica, 4, 6, 144, 348 

Corte, 6 

Corunna, 232-3 

Crassus, 225 

Crebillon, 224 

Cretet, 146 

Crignon-Ddsormeaux, 91 
Cuenca, 225 
Ciistrin, 227 

D 

Damiens, 282 
Dampierre, 71 
d’Andign6, 70 
Dantzig, 318, 346 
Danube, 151, 211, 311 
Danville, 241 
Darfur, 59 
Darn, 145, 219 
David, 237 
Davelouis, 301 

Davant, P. of Eckmiihl, 98, 324-5 
d’Azara, 29 
Deeres, 55, 100 

376 

Index of Names 

Degelmann, 42 
Delille, 190 
Demarre, 107 
Demetrius, 229 
Demosthenes, 71, xoi 
Denon, 145 
Deroy, 253 
Despinoy, 31 
de Stael, 71, 209 
Diderot, 173 
Dieppe, 97 
Dinaburg, 304 
Djezzar, 86 
Dolder, 87 
Domitian, 251 
Dommartin, 29 
Don Quixote, 287 

Dresden, 198, 245, 327, 329, 332, 337, 
346 

Dugommier, 71 
Duguay-Trouin, 71 
Duguesclin, 146 
Dumanhour, 61 
Dumolard, 51 
Duperreux, 107 
Dupont, 226-7 
Duroc, 168 
Duvoisin, 330 

F 

Fain, 92 
F&nelon, 44 

Ferdinand VII of Spain, 215, 218-9 
Ferrara, 33-4 
Ferrol, 126-7 
Fersen, 52 

Fesch, 17-8, 84, 90, 13 J, 280 
Feth Ali, Shah of Persia, 114 
Feuillants, 13, 65 
Feydeau, 329 
Finisterre, 127 
Finkcnstein, 168, 194 
Fleurus, 149 
Florence, 248-9, 281 
Flushing, 245-0 
Fontainebleau, 195-6, 320 
Fontanes, 190 
Forges, 98 

Fouch£, D. of Otranto, 73, 272 
Fourfcs, 57' 

Francis I, of Austria, 349 
Frankfort, 339-40, 342, 346-7. 3 J° 
Frederick VI, of Denmark, 294,320 
Frederick, William III, of Prussia, 
161, 163, 203, 288, 309 
Fr6jus, 65 

G 

E 

Gallo, 42 

Eaux-Bonnes, 107 

Ganteaume, 54, 97, 126 

Fcouen, 194-7, 332 

Gardel, 267 

Elba, 168, 353, 356 

Gamier, 31 

Elbe, 77, 208 

Gaultier, 31 

El-Cherquaouy, 83 

Gaza, 59, 86 

Elias, 86 

Gefrees, 245 

Elise Bonaparte, G. D. of Tuscany, 

Genoa, 37, 123, 144 

I 39 > 2 35 » 3 02 

Gentili, 40 

El-Fayoumy, 85 

Geoffroy, 119 

El-Messiry, 85 

G6ra, 103 

Embargo Act, 265, 273 

G6rard, 107, 343 

Emden, 291 

Germanicus, 251 

Emmet, 96 

Givet, 299 

Encyclopaedists, 173 

Glogau, 227, 327 

Enrich, 154 

Godoy, 215, 219 

Enzersdorf, 242 

Golling, 253 

Epirus, 362 

Gdteburg, 279 

Erfurt, 163, 255, 266, 309 

Goumay, 98 

Esmenard, 190 

Goy, 11 

Esteve, 107, 294 

Gregory VII, 257 

Etruria, Q. of, 218 

Grenoble, 117 

Eu, 98 

Grodno, 304, 312-3 

Eugfene Beauhamais, 19,119,130,134, 

Gros, 106 

143, 166, 242, 287 

Grouchy, 360 

377 

Index of Names 

Guadeloupe, 273 
Guerin, 106 
Gustavus Adolphus, 71 
Gyulai, 131 

Hamburg, 264, 324-3 
Hanau, 336 
Hannibal, 71 

Hanseatic towns, 262 ; legion, 324 

Hatzfeld, 163 

Havre, 361 

Hinault, 21 j 

Henri HI of France, 286 

Henri IV of France, 66, 119, 215, 286 

Henry VIII of England, 330 

Herman, 206 

Hindus, 336 

Hofer, 234 

Holstein, D. of, 266 

Homer, 40, 224 

Hortense Beauharnais, 19, 130,175-7, 
242, 298 

Ibrahim Bey, 39 
Inn, :} 27 
Inquisition, 222 
Invalides, 337 
Isonzo, 327 

Jacobins, 13, 65 
Jaffa, J9, 86,106 
Janus, 227-8 
Jena, 161, 227 

Jerome Bonaparte, 57, 82, 117, 208, 
210, 257, 313 
Jerusalem, 86, 153, 157-8 
Jesuits, 102,110 

Jesus Christ, 44, 237-8, 243, 257 
Joan of Arc, 91 

Joseph Bonaparte, 1/, 16, 144, 222, 
* 54 » 331 , 341 , 361 

Josephine, 19/, 125, 130, 193, 257,298 

Joiibert, 71 

jourdan, 64, 149, 331 

Julian, 225 

Julius II, 237 

Junot, 36, 204, 244, 333 

Kaunitz, 133 
Kellermann, 26 

Khartum, 59 
Kief, 304 
Kienmayer, 244 
Kleber, 12 
Kleist, 349 
Konigsberg, 203 
Kourakine, 278 
Kovno, 318 
Kremlin, 316 
Kupfer, 154 

La Camargne, 133 
Lachaise, 231 
Lafayette, 12, 14 
La Fl&che, 307 
Laharpe, 189 
Lajolais, 98 
Lalande, 173 
La Madone, 356 
Lannes, 28, 62 
Laon, 360 
Lapi, 356 
La Romana, 232 
La Salle, 242 
Laurens, 107 
Lauriston, 104 
Lavalette, 117 
Lavbach, 327 

Lebrun, D. of Piacenza, 125 
Lebrun-Pindare, 190, 192 
Leclerc, 94 

Lefebvre, D. of Dantzig, 253 
Legations, Three, 275 
Legnano, 144 
Leipzig, 278, 336, 240 
Leonetti, 11-2 
Le Pelletier, 18 
Lesage, 224 
Lethe, 125 

Leitzia Bonaparte, 6, 118, 209, 337 

Lille, 344 
Linz, 154 

Lisbon, 117, 204, 207 
Lodi, 27 

London, 5, 83, 329 

Louis Bonaparte, 9, 177, 262, 277 

Louis XIQ, 216 

Louis XIV, 187, 216-7, 231, 281 

Louis XV, 216-7, 286 

Louis XVI, n, 13, 217 

Louis XVHI, 39, 76 

Louise, Q. of Prussia, 161, 163-4 

Lucan, 224 

Index of Names 

Luipay, 164 
Lucca, 139, 302 
Lucchesini, 77, 160 
Lucien, Archdeacon, 2 
Luden Bonaparte, z, 80, 209 
Lun<£viUe, 357 
Luther, 330 
Liitzen, 328, 333 
Lyon, 89, 203, 308 

M 

Machiavelli, 224 

Mack, 130 

Macquart, 31 

Madeleine, 227 

Madrid, 147, 214, 226, 316-7 

Mahomet, 60 

Maintenon, 216 

Malmaison, 93, 194, 361 

Malmesbury, 34 

Malta, 82, 136 

Maniotes, 41 

Mannheim, 297 

Mantua, 62, 144, 209 

Marat, 39 

Marceau, 71 

Marengo, 73, 256 

Maret, D. of Bassano, 100, 112, 233, 
2 93»314 

Mana-Anna Bonaparte, 1 
Maria-Carolina, Q. of Naples, 148 
Maria-Luisa, Q. of Spain, 215, 218-9, 
234 

Marie-Antoinette, 4,13, 53 
Marie-Louise, 266,268, 287, 290, 330, 
34i 

Marlborough, 71 
Marmont, 62 
Marmontel, 189 
Marseille, 166 
Martinique, 127, 273 
Mass6na, 31, 130, 149 
Matapan, 41 
Mattei, 32 
Maury, 280 
Mayence, 74, 324, 327 
Mecca, 108 
Mecklemburg, 324 
Medina, 108 
Meikle, 154 
M6jan, 122 
Memel, 304 
M6neval, 93, 303 
Menou, 18 
Merciana, 3 j6 

Mervelot, 42 
Mettemich, 326, 340, 351 
Meunier, 31 
Meuse, 261 

Milan, 28, 44, 116-7, * 2I > 1 4 1 > 264, 

2 73 > 3 i6 ~7 
Millot, 145, 216 
Minana Fesch, 4 
Minana Saveria, 4 
Mincio, 74 
Minsk, 317 
Mirabeau, 71 
Modena, 34 
Modlin, 318 
Molossians, 362 

Moncey, D. of Conegliano, 225, 352-3 
Monge, 62 
Mont-Cenis, 248, 308 
Montenotte, 308 
Montereau, 347 
Montesquieu, 45 
Mont-Gen&vre, 248 
Montmartre, 227 
Mont-Saint-Bemard, 248 
Moore, 232 
Morlaix, 299 
Mortefontaine, 263, 331 
Moscow, 303-4, 314, 316-7, 320-1* 
335 

Moses, 155-6 
Moskova, 315 
Motoualys, 86 
Moustier, 297 
Mullinen, 87 
Munich, 141, 244 

Murat, G.D. of Berg, K. of Naples, 
62, 214, 218, 315, 322, 358 
Mustapha, 108 

N 

Nangis, 348 
Nantes, 216, 231 

Naples, 128, 144, 146, 148, 236, 358 

Naplouse, 59 

Napoleon ill, 125, 177 

Napoleon Charles, 177 

Nassau, P. of, 228 

National Guard, 11-3, 343, 348, 352 

Naudin, 11 

Naumburg, 256 

Nausicaa, 41 

Nazareth, 86 

Necker, 71 

Nelson, 58, 126 

Nero, 251 

Index of Names 

Nesselrode, 351 
Neuch&tel, 140 
Ney, 87, 318 
Niemen, 310, 312, 3x9 
Nunes, 348 

Non-Intercourse Act, 265, 273 
Normandy, D. of, 4 
Novara, 275 
Nuremberg, 154 

O 

O’Connell, 193 
O’Connor, 292 
O’Farill, 235 
Oldenburg, 325 
Oneille, 22 
Oporto, 204, 250 
Orange, P. of, 358 
Orders in Council, 240, 273 
Oriani, 27 
Orleans, 91 
Ossian, 234 
Ostend, 339 
Otto, 128 

Oudtnot, D. of Reggio, 319 

P 

Paine, 73 
Palafox, 235 
Palm, xj4 
Paoli, 6, 11-2 

Paris, 5, 12, 14, 16, 38, 44, 56, 59, 72, 
78, 88, 94-j, 99, 143, 149, 156, 167, 
183-5, 206, 209, 2x1, 230, 235, 249, 
257, 263, 281, 290, 292, 301, 305-6, 
318-9, 331, 335, 338, 342, 346, 348, 
350, 360-1 
Parma, 248-9, 275 
Passariano, 43 
Paterson, 117, 208, 257 
Pauline Bonaparte, 94, 98 
Pavia, 28 
Peraldi, 11-2 
Perceval, 293 
Permon, 15 
Perpignan, 117 
Pfister, 81 
Fbaeacians, 41 
Philip le Bel, 286 
Philip le Long, 284, 286 
Philip V of Spain, 222 
Philipsburg, 35 
Pichegru, 98 
Piedmont, 248, 275 

Pierlot, 298 
Pinsk, 304 
Piombino, 139, 302 
Pima, 327 
Piso, 252 
Pitt, 54 
Pius VI, 29 

Pius VII, 84, 149, 230, 257, 280-6, 307 

Flombiferes, 125 

Poniatowski, 312 

Foltawa, 303 

Fonte-Corvo, 148 

Font-sur-Seine, 344 

Fortalis, 103, 138, 170, 173, 193, 233 

Port-Maurice, 22 

Porto-Ferrajo, 353 

Porto-Longone, 353 

Portugal, P. Regent of, 205-6 

Pozzo di Borgo, 11-2 

Prague, 334-5 

Pressburg, 132, 357 

Pruth, 109 

R 

Racine, 182, 187, 189, 224 
Radet, 238 

Rambouillet decree, 274; farm, 286 
Rammekens, 245 
Rastadt, 53 
Ratisbon, 53 
Raynal, 9 
Raynouard, 119 
Ravaillac, 284 
R6al, 291 
Reding, 87 

Regnaud, 173, 233, 352 
Regnitz, 327 
Reille, 104 
Rlmusat, 294, 329 
Renaud, II 
Repnin, 133 
Reynier, 149, 314 
Rhine, 261, 264, 340, 343 
Rhone, 153 
Rich, 354 
Richardson, 224 
Richelieu, 189 
Riga, 304 
Rigo, xo6 
Ripault, 81 
Robert, 130 
Robespierrists, 15 
Rochefort, 144, 361 
Roederer, 331 
Rochn, X07 

380 

Index of Names 

Romanzof, 2x1 

Rome, 7, 94, 98,136-7, 236-8, 248 
Rome, K. of, 287, 290, 309, 333, 341, 
547 J 

Rotterdam, 175 
Rousseau, 224 
Rumford, 92, 303 

S 

Saguntum, 235 

Sahuguet, 31 

Saint-Aignan, 351 

St. Bartholomew’s Eve, 193 

Saint-Cloud, 93,199, 202, 268, 331 

Saint-Cyr,8i, 230, 323 

Saint-Denis, 305 

St. Domingo, 94 

Saint-Germain, 307 

St. Helena, 330 

St. Januarius, 146 

St. Jean de Luz, 341 

Saint-Martin, 350 

St. Napoleon, 139 

St. Paul, 43 

St. Petersburg, 212, 304 

Saliced, 15 

Salva, 32 

Sampigny, 29 

Sand, 277 

Sanson, 321 

Santa Maura, 41 

San Thdodoro, 147 

Saragossa, 233 

Sardinia, K. of, 48 

Sassi, 293 

Sauret, 31 

Savary, 210, 223 

Savona, 23, *38, 280-2, 308 

Savoy, D. of, 222 

Saxe, Marshal, 71 

Saxony, KL. of, 198 

Scheldt, 243, 261, 264, 292, 334 

Scherer, 64 

Schoderer, 154 

Schwartzenberg, 3x4, 3x7, 343 

Schwerin, 325 

Scipio, 71 

Sebasdani, 85,150, 247 
Sdgur, 116 

Seine, 95, 264 , 

Sdirn, Sultan of Turkey, 84, X07, 151 
SerangeU, 106 
Serurier, 31, 270 
Seville, 235 
Sidyds, 4< 

Simdon, 212 
Sinai, 86 
Smith, 64 

Smolensk, 314, 316, 318 
Soliman, 108 
Sorbonne, 237 
Sold, 204 

Soult, D. of Dalmada, 203, 249, 331 

Souvarof, 316 

Spandau, 226 

Spardatae, 41 

Sprengporten, 77 

Stagl-Holstein, 71 

Staps, 236 

Stein, 228 

Stengel, 233 

Stdphanie Beauhamais, 243, 297 

Stettin, 227 

Stockholm, 211 

Strabo, 241 

Strasbourg, 140-1 

Strogonoff, 223 

Sucy, 23 

Suez Canal, 77 

Sweden, K. of, 34 

T 

Taillade, 334 
Talavera, 246 

Talleyrand, P. of Beneyento, 47, 83, 
148, 160, 162, 220 
Tallien, 23-4 
Tartars, 352 
Tasso, 224 
Tchitchakof, 319 
Tell, 8 

Tettenbom, 325 

Texel, 53, 278, 292 

Themistodes, 362 

Thibaut, 203 

Thompson, 96 

Thugut, 42 

Thureau, 257 

Tiberius, 192, 231 

Tilsit, 116, 2ix—2, 289, 309-12, 337 

Titus, 155 

Tolendno, 33 

Tolstoi, 211 

Tortona, 62 

Toulon, 56, 62,127, 336 
Toulouse, 117 
Toumon, 219 
Tours, 204 
Trafalgar, 127 
Trajan, 225 

381 

Index of Names 

Treilhard, 233 
Treport, 97 
Trieste, 201 
Troyes, 203, 343, 348 
Tuileries, 12-3, 95, 116, 123, 144, 
268 

Turenne, 71 

Turin, 62, 117, 23 j, 308 

Tyre, 8, 86 

U 

Udine, 50 
Uhlans, 32 
Ulm, 130 
Ulysses, 41 
United Irishmen, 293 

V 

Valengay, 220 
Valencia, 226, 235 
Valmy, 27 

Vandamme, 313, 324 
Varennes, 33 
Vaubois, 31 
Velly, 213 

Venice, 36, 50-1, 128, 141, 273 
Ver Huell, 175, 270 
Verona, 39, 50 
Versailles, 7, 52, 231 
Vicenza, 130 

Victor, D. of Belluno, 246, 317, 343 
Vienna, 128, 130, 154, 166, 168, 
201-2, 244, 261, 268, 316, 327 
Vienna, Congress of, 337 

Vilekia, 318 
Villars, 231 

Villeneuve, 33, 104, 126 
Vilna, 304, 312, 318-9 
1, Vimiero, 207 
Visconti, 140 
Vittoria, 331, 341 
Voltaire, 119, 189, 204, 224 
Vosges, 123 

W 

Wachau, 336 
Wagram, 242 
Walcheren, 246 

Walewska, Marie, 166, 168, 194 
Walewski, 168 
Warsaw, 163, r68, 319 
Washington, 8, 71 
Weimar, 227 
Wellesley, 271, 

Wellington, 245-6, 331 
Weser, 77, 261, 264 
William the Conqueror, 146 
Wittgenstein, 319 
Wrede, 254, 318 
Wurschen, 326, 328 
Wurzburg, 161 

Z 

Zante, 41 
Zara, 50 
Zia Gertrude, 4 
Zurich, 149 
Zuyder Zee, 278 

38 2 

A SHORT INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

(The references are to the number of the letter , not of the page). 

Art, 54, 82,116,171, 258 
Austerlitz campaign, 97-105 

Church and religion, 25, 35, 47, < 56 , 99,107-8,135,139,176-7,190,193,197,215, 
218, 259, 263 

Continental system, 182, 201, 209-10, 214 

Education, 1, 5, 60, 84,140, 144, 240 
Egyptian campaign, 41-9 
Elba, 283-6 

England, and its invasion, 52, 81,116,147,156,187, 201,227, 232,292 

Family, 1, 2,5, 9, 62, 71, 75, 89,136,138,155, 157-8,164,207, 220, 242, 267,270, 
272, 279 

Government, 26, 29, 36,51,53, 92,153, 233, 282 

History, 4, 67, 115,141,159,174. x 7 8 , l 9 2 

Invasion of England, 40, 72-3, 96-7, 225 
Italian campaign, 17-34 

Josephine, 13-16, 95, 128,131,133,143, I 45 > x 99 » 220 » 2 3 x 

Literature, 129,141,165,183 

Military, 23-4, 48,98,123, 186,195, 254-5, 275-6, 280 
Moscow campaign, 244-50 
Music, 31, 72 

Naval, 41,62, 76, 94, 96,162,182, 213, 284. 

Papacy, 63, 105,173,178, 181, 216, 241, 251 
Personal, 6, 8, 11,16, 42, 7 °» 77 . 228, 2 35 
Press, 56, 61, 91,107,122,137,142 

Revolution, 6-12 . 

Ruthlessness, 21, 28, 44, 74, 93, i 49 > x 79 > 22 4 > 22 ®» 2 3 °» 2 5 6 

Spain, 151-2,158, 160-1,163, 166-7,175, t 79 » 187-8,191, 264 
Stage, 91, 203, 261 

Women, 55,71, 75 ,89, x ° 4 > ^06, 110-1, 113, 128, 134, i 55 > x 9 8 ,202&04-5,229,231, 
260
