Title: 

URL Source: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CDOC-109sdoc28/pdf/CDOC-109sdoc28.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 07 Oct 2024 18:18:14 GMT

Markdown Content:
> (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 1 ] TRIBUTES TO HON. LINCOLN D. CHAFEE 

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line) Lincoln D. Chafee U.S. SENATOR FROM RHODE ISLAND TRIBUTES IN THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES 

> UNUMEPLURIBUS

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE congress.#15 (Trim Line) (Trim Line) 

Lincoln D. Chafee 

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE 33203.001 (Trim Line) (Trim Line) U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : 2007 S. D OC. 109–28 Tributes Delivered in Congress Lincoln D. Chafee United States Senator 1999–2007 

# ÷

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line) 

Compiled under the direction of the Joint Committee on Printing 

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line) [ iii ] CONTENTS Page Biography .................................................................................................. vProceedings in the Senate: Tributes by Senators: Alexander, Lamar, of Tennessee ............................................... 5Allen, George, of Virginia .......................................................... 6Bunning, Jim, of Kentucky ....................................................... 22 Byrd, Robert C., of West Virginia ............................................. 8Clinton, Hillary Rodham, of New York .................................... 15 Collins, Susan M., of Maine ...................................................... 23 Conrad, Kent, of North Dakota ................................................. 14 DeWine, Mike, of Ohio ............................................................... 16 Dodd, Christopher J., of Connecticut ....................................... 17 Dole, Elizabeth, of North Carolina ........................................... 24 Durbin, Richard, of Illinois ........................................................ 7Feingold, Russell D., of Wisconsin ............................................ 10 Frist, William H., of Tennessee ................................................ 23 Hagel, Chuck, of Nebraska ........................................................ 3Hatch, Orrin G., of Utah ........................................................... 18 Hutchison, Kay Bailey, of Texas ............................................... 22 Kyl, Jon, of Arizona ................................................................... 16 Landrieu, Mary L., of Louisiana ............................................... 15 Levin, Carl, of Michigan ............................................................ 19 Mikulski, Barbara A., of Maryland .......................................... 16 Nelson, Bill, of Florida ............................................................... 6Reed, Jack, of Rhode Island ...................................................... 4Salazar, Ken, of Colorado .......................................................... 3, 7 Snowe, Olympia J., of Maine .................................................... 20 Stevens, Ted, of Alaska ............................................................. 23 Warner, John, of Virginia .......................................................... 11          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6687 Sfmt 6687 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line) [ v ] Biography Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE represented Rhode Island with dignity, integrity, and compassion and was an unwavering advocate for Rhode Island ’s interests in the U.S. Senate. He believes firmly in the bedrock Republican principles of per-sonal freedom, individual responsibility, fiscal discipline, and a common sense approach to foreign policy. Senator C HAFEE emerged as a leader on environmental issues and foreign pol-icy, and has promoted sensible economic and energy policies. Senator CHAFEE fought to raise air quality standards, strengthen our homeland security, and ensure that Rhode Is-land got its fair share of Federal funding. With 20 years of experience in Rhode Island politics and a reputation for tak-ing on the tough issues, L INCOLN CHAFEE demonstrated that great work is accomplished when our leaders have the cour-age to govern from the center. Born in Providence, RI, on March 26, 1953, LINCOLN CHAFEE attended Warwick Public Schools and Phillips Ando-ver Academy. He earned a degree in classics from Brown University in 1975. While there, he was captain of the wres-tling team and received the Francis M. Driscoll Award for leadership, scholarship, and athletics. Senator C HAFEE credits his independence, his traditional Republican beliefs, and his focus on getting results to the lessons he was taught by his parents, the late Senator John H. Chafee and his mother Virginia. Growing up in the Ocean State, he learned from his fellow Rhode Islanders values such as honesty, hard work, and respect for people of all backgrounds. He established a reputation as the most electorally suc-cessful leader in the State GOP. After working as a black-smith at harness race tracks in the United States and Can-ada and in manufacturing management, C HAFEE entered pol-itics in 1985 as a delegate to the Rhode Island Constitutional Convention. A year later he was elected to the first of two successive terms on the Warwick City Council. In November 1992, L INCOLN CHAFEE became the first Re-publican elected mayor of Warwick in 32 years. As mayor, he was praised for his fair-minded and sensible approach to          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ vi ] government. Believing that the best solutions come from lis-tening to all sides of an issue, CHAFEE worked with col-leagues in both parties to promote open space development, raise the city ’s bond rating, and improve Warwick ’s schools. Voters embraced his prudent fiscal management, emphasis on environmental protection, and positive vision, re-electing him to the post in 1994, 1996, and 1998. C HAFEE was ap-pointed by Governor Lincoln Almond in November 1999 to fill the unexpired Senate term of his late father. In Novem-ber 2000, he was overwhelmingly elected to the U.S. Senate. A fierce deficit hawk and traditional Republican, Senator C HAFEE led the fight to promote responsible government spending, while supporting the end to the marriage tax pen-alty and an increase in the per child tax credit. In addition to easing tax burdens, he promoted business growth in Rhode Island and throughout the Nation. Because of his work in championing economic development and job growth, the United States Chamber of Commerce awarded him the 

‘‘ Spirit of Enterprise ’’ award. L INCOLN CHAFEE ’s efforts to promote fiscal responsibility through a pay-as-you-go ap-proach to the Federal budget and to cut unnecessary govern-ment spending have brought him further praise. His plan to secure our economic future is simple —any tax cut or in-crease in government spending must be accompanied by an equal spending cut or revenue increase. This will put a stop to the dangerous deficit spending that will only increase the tax burden on future generations. For his work, the bipar-tisan Concord Coalition named C HAFEE the most fiscally con-servative Member of the Senate. From his key seat on the Senate Committee on Environ-ment and Public Works, C HAFEE secured more than $1 bil-lion in Federal funding for Rhode Island to significantly en-hance its transportation network, improve the safety of its roadways for commuters, and bring good paying construction jobs to the State. These transportation funds allowed for the construction of projects such as the Warwick Station and the Apponaug Bypass, enabling long-delayed improvements to the Warren and Pawtucket Bridges, and providing vital funding to tear down the former Jamestown Bridge. As a member of the Environment and Public Works Com-mittee and as chairman of the Subcommittee on Fish, Wild-life and Water, Senator C HAFEE demonstrated that environ-mental protection is compatible with economic growth. He fought to strengthen air and water quality standards and to make polluters pay to clean up their industrial waste rather          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ vii ] than relying on taxpayer funds. Senator CHAFEE ’s ‘‘ Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act, ’’ was a unique program that combined business develop-ment with environmental advocacy. Locally this legislation provided more than $6 million to clean up and redevelop con-taminated land at the former Louttit Laundry site in Provi-dence ’s West End, at Johnson and Wales ’ Harborside Cam-pus, and at other sites. Senator C HAFEE received numerous honors for his dedication to environmental causes including the Environmental Business Council of New England ’s Envi-ronmental Leadership Award, the National Brownfield Asso-ciation Leadership Award, and the National Wetlands Inven-tory Congressional Conservation Award. Senator C HAFEE was committed to laying the groundwork so that our legacy to our children will be one of prosperity and promise. As Senator, C HAFEE led the way to expand ac-cess to health care and to encourage research on the causes of and cures for diseases such as cancer and heart disease. He voted again and again to increase funding for the Na-tional Institute of Health ’s research into cures for diseases such as Parkinson ’s and Alzheimer ’s and has funded local projects at Brown University, the University of Rhode Is-land, and other institutions. For his work on behalf of health care and medical research, the Rhode Island Breast Cancer Coalition honored Senator C HAFEE for his leadership; he has also received the ‘‘ Leading Light of Long Term Care ’’ award for working to preserve quality nursing home care. Senator CHAFEE applied the same forward-looking ap-proach to his work in crafting our Nation ’s foreign policy. Re-spected for his broad and sensible views on foreign affairs, C HAFEE worked tirelessly to promote a rational and judicious approach to international relations as a member of the Sen-ate Committee on Foreign Relations and as chairman of the Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. He was a firm voice on issues ranging from the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan; to the need for humanitarian intervention in Liberia; to reaffirming America ’s commitment to the Road Map for Peace between Israel and Palestine. He remained equally committed to ensuring that our national defense re-mained strong. As a member of the Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs, the Senator was instru-mental in securing funding to strengthen and protect Rhode Island ’s cities, towns, and ports. A devoted conservationist, Senator C HAFEE enjoys all out-door activity. He is particularly fond of skiing, spending time          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ viii ] with his family, and trail riding on his horse Trapper. The Senator and his wife Stephanie are the proud parents of three children —Louisa, Caleb and Thea. 

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line) TRIBUTES TO LINCOLN D. CHAFEE 

VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line) [ 3 ] Proceedings in the Senate MONDAY , November 13, 2006 

Mr. SALAZAR. . . . I will say this as well. In the days ahead, we will hear many things about some of our col-leagues, some of whom are newcomers to our institution, the U.S. Senate, and some of them who are leaving. For me, it is a sad day that Senator C HAFEE and Senator DeWine, who were members of the Gang of 14, will not be around to be a part of that future bipartisan coalition that we are going to have to have in the Senate. But I hope, on the side of both the Democrats and the Republicans, that there is a great number of Members of the Senate on both sides of the aisle who will come together to address those significant issues that face us as a country. . . . T UESDAY , December 5, 2006 

Mr. HAGEL. Mr. President . . . As we recognize, it is a dis-tinct privilege and high honor to serve our country in any ca-pacity, and certainly none higher than in uniform. But it is especially important that we recognize those who have given years of their lives, sacrificing their families, their own time, to help make a better world for all of us. I know of no capac-ity in which we serve our country that has given those who have had this rare opportunity to serve in the Senate any-thing more noble than trying to shape a better world from this Senate. These individuals who will leave the Senate, some on their own terms, some on the terms of the election, but, nonethe-less, in their own specific way have contributed a great deal to this country. I take a few minutes to recognize each. . . . Senator L INC CHAFEE . Senator C HAFEE comes from a long line of public servants from the State of Rhode Island. The name ‘‘ Chafee ’’ is a famous name in this institution. His fa-ther John Chafee was one of the great Senators in this Sen-         

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 4 ] ate in the 20th century. L INC picked up where his father left off. I had the opportunity to serve with Senator C HAFEE on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. We sat next to each other for many years. He had a keen ability to cut through the fog, the nonsense, the superficial, the obsequious, and get to the real issues. We will miss that ability. We will miss that laser. I am sorry to see Senator C HAFEE leave. He will continue to serve his country in many areas as he has done before his service in the Senate. . . . Mr. President, in conclusion, it is not easy to put one ’s self on the firing line and offer one ’s self as a candidate for any office. It takes a certain amount of courage and, I suspect, a little dose of insanity. But nonetheless individuals who be-lieve deeply enough to commit themselves to a cause greater than their own self-interests need to be recognized. Having nothing to do with me or you or any one individual, but it is the essence of our country, it is the very fabric of our de-mocracy that makes it all work and probably gives rise to, more than any one reason, why we have been such a success-ful nation for over 200 years —because people from all walks of life, in every community, in every State, offer themselves for office. Whether it is a mayor, a Governor, city council-man, county official, a sheriff, these individuals deserve rec-ognition. We all make mistakes. That is who we are. But in the end, it is not unlike what Teddy Roosevelt once referred to in his magnificent quote about the man in the arena. And it is the man and the woman in the arena who change our lives. It makes a better world that shapes history, that defines our destiny. And for these individuals who will no longer have that opportunity to serve our country in the Senate, we wish them well, we thank them, and we tell them we are proud of them and their families and wish them Godspeed. Mr. President, I thank you for the time and yield the floor. WEDNESDAY , December 6, 2006 

Mr. REED. Mr. President, this is an opportunity to recog-nize the service of several of our colleagues who are depart-ing from the Senate. To Senator Jeffords, Senator Frist, Sen-ator DeWine, Senator Talent, Senator Santorum, Senator Burns, and Senator Allen, let me express my appreciation for their service to their States and their service to the Nation          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 5 ] and wish them well. I particularly want to comment, though, on three colleagues with whom I have had the privilege of working very closely. . . . Let me also recognize my colleague from Rhode Island, Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE . Senator C HAFEE is an individual both with character and sincere devotion to our State and Nation, an honest, decent man who is always respectful, thoughtful, and fair-minded. He is someone with whom we are all proud to have served. He is someone in this House respected for his integrity and for his determination. He came to the Senate upon the passing of his father, Sen-ator John H. Chafee, and picked up that tradition of service from his father. He was a great model to emulate, and Sen-ator L INCOLN CHAFEE has done that. Like his father, he has concerned himself with issues of the environment through service on the Environment and Public Works Committee. He sought to improve our Nation ’s water and air quality standards. His pivotal work to provide for the cleanup and redevelopment of brownfields is a commitment and accom-plishment that I think will be recognized for many years to come. He has also tried to preserve our State of Rhode Island ’sindustrial, natural, and cultural history, and he has done it persistently. Let me applaud him for his dedicated service and wish him and his family well in the days ahead. . . . To all my colleagues who served and conclude their serv-ice, let me once again express deep appreciation for their friendship and for their service to the Nation. I yield the floor. Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, we are coming to the end of the session and 10 of our colleagues are retiring. I want to say a word about them . . . Or Senator L INC CHAFEE , also retiring, was a wrestler in college. He spent several years in the United States and Canada as a professional blacksmith before he got into poli-tics. . . . When the most recent class of Senators was sworn into of-fice nearly 2 years ago, in the gallery were three women. One was the grandmother of Barack Obama. She was from Kenya. One was the mother of Senator Salazar, a 10th gen-eration American. One was the mother of Mel Martinez, the new Republican National Committee chairman, who, with her husband, put her son on an airplane when he was 14 years old and sent him from Cuba to the United States, not knowing if she would ever see him again.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 6 ] In a way, each one of us who is here is an accident. None of us knew we would be here. Each of us is privileged to serve, and one of the greatest privileges is to serve with our colleagues. We will miss them and we are grateful for their service. I yield the floor. Mr. ALLEN. Mr. President, as the time for my departure from the Senate draws near, on behalf of the greatest bless-ing in my life, my wife Susan, and on behalf of myself, I thank all of my colleagues for their many courtesies and friendships that have been forged during the past 6 years. I offer a few concluding reflections about our time here to-gether, as well as about the future of our Republic. . . . Mr. NELSON of Florida. Mr. President, I see others who wish to speak, and I will make a couple of brief comments. In the comments of the Senator from Virginia [Mr. Allen], his final couple of comments recalled for me a statement made in the closing of the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, when on the back of the chair of the presiding officer was a sunburst. Someone opined in that Constitu-tional Convention: Dr. Franklin, is that a rising sun or is it a setting sun? And Franklin ventured to say that with the birth of the new Nation, with the creation of the new Con-stitution, that he thought it was a rising sun. Indeed, it is that hope of which the Senator from Virginia has just spoken that motivates this Senator from Florida to get up and go to work every day, and to look at this Nation ’schallenges, not as a Democratic problem or a Republican problem, but as an American problem, that needs to be solved in an American way instead of a partisan way. We have had far too much partisanship over the last sev-eral years across this land, and, indeed, in this Chamber itself. And of the Senators who are leaving this Chamber, I think they represent the very best of America, and on occa-sion have risen in a bipartisan way. It has been this Sen-ator ’s great privilege to work with these Senators: Allen of Virginia, Burns of Montana, C HAFEE of Rhode Island, Day-ton of Minnesota, DeWine of Ohio, Frist of Tennessee, Jef-fords of Vermont, Santorum of Pennsylvania, Sarbanes of Maryland, Talent of Missouri. As the Good Book in Ecclesiastes says: There is a time to be born and a time to die. There is a time to get up, and a time to go to bed. There is a time for a beginning, and there is a time of ending.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 7 ] For these Senators who are leaving, it is clearly not an ending. It is an ending of this chapter in their lives, but this Senator from Florida wanted to come and express his appre-ciation for their public service, to admonish those where ad-monishment is needed when this Chamber, indeed, this Gov-ernment, has gotten too partisan, but to express this Sen-ator ’s appreciation for the quiet moments of friendship and reflection and respect in working together, which is the glue that makes this Government run. Whether you call it bipartisanship, whether you call it friendship, whether you call it mutual respect, whatever you call it, the way you govern a nation as large and as com-plicated and as diverse as our Nation is —as the Good Book says: Come, let us reason together —that is what this Sen-ator tries to be about. And that is what this Senator will try to continue to do in the new dawn of a new Congress. So I wanted to come and express my appreciation for those Sen-ators who will not be here, for the great public service they have rendered. Mr. President, I am truly grateful for their personal friendship and for their public service. I yield the floor. Mr. DURBIN. . . . Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE , a quiet voice of moderation from the State of Rhode Island, followed in the footsteps of his great father, John Chafee, with whom I was honored to serve. Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE time and again would stand independently and express his views and his conscience. He was the only Republican of the 23 Senators who voted against the Iraqi war resolution. . . . I wish all of my colleagues who are retiring well as they begin the next chapters of their careers. Mr. SALAZAR. Mr. President, I rise today to bid farewell to several of my friends here in Washington. Too often we get caught up here in the back-and-forth of politics and lose sight of the contributions of those with whom we work every day. It is only at moments such as these, at the end of a cycle, that we have a moment to reflect on the contributions of our colleagues. And while we may not always see eye to eye, this Senate is losing several admirable contributors who have made many sacrifices to serve our democracy. . . . A number of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle will be departing in January, as well. There is our colleague from Virginia, Senator Allen, who wears, in my opinion, the second best pair of boots in the Senate. There is Senator          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 8 ] Santorum of Pennsylvania, whose passion is admirable and whose energy is always enviable. Also leaving us is my col-league in the centrist Gang of 14 that helped bring this Sen-ate back from the abyss; Senator DeWine of Ohio, who will head back to the Buckeye State with my respect and admira-tion; and my friend Senator Talent from Missouri, with whom I spent many hours in the Agriculture Committee working to level the playing field for America ’s farmers and ranchers. We will miss Senator C HAFEE of Rhode Island ’sindependence and his clear voice for fiscal discipline in Washington. And we will miss Senator Burns of Montana, who shares my passion for rural America and who is headed home to Big Sky Country, back to the Rockies that I know we both miss so much. . . . America, when held to its finest ideals, is more than a place on the globe or a work in progress. It is the inspiration to those around the world and here at home to seek out ex-cellence within themselves and their beliefs. It has been a pleasure to work alongside each of these gentlemen, who have helped me as I have found my way, sometimes literally, through the halls of the Senate, in the pursuit of these great-er ideals that we all share: security, prosperity, and an America that we leave better than when we arrived. These ideals will resonate here long after we all are gone and an-other generation stands in our place making the decisions of its day. Mr. BYRD. Mr. President, in his Pulitzer Prize winning book, ‘‘ Profiles in Courage, ’’ Senator John F. Kennedy extolled the virtues of political courage. ‘‘ Surely, in the United States of America, where brother once fought broth-er, ’’ Senator Kennedy wrote, ‘‘ we do not judge a man ’s brav-ery under fire by examining the banner under which he fought. ’’ 

For 7 years I have watched and admired the courage of Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE , who sits on the other side of the aisle, and who will be leaving us at the end of the 109th Congress. I have watched and admired his firm stands against his own political party, the Senate leadership, and the Presi-dential administration as he followed the dictates of his con-science. ‘‘ A man does what he must, ’’ wrote Senator Ken-nedy, ‘‘ in spite of personal consequences, in spite of obstacles and dangers and pressures —and that is the basis of all human morality. ’’ This was the basis of Senator C HAFEE ’stenure in the Senate.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 9 ] Senator C HAFEE was appointed to the Senate in 1999 upon the death of his father, the beloved and respected Senator John Chafee. He immediately proved himself to be, to use an old cliche, a ‘‘ chip off the old block. ’’ Senator LINCOLN CHAFEE proved himself to be a Senator of immense integrity, great dignity, and high principle. And, like his father, he proved himself a Senator of incredible courage. He was the first Senate Republican to oppose the Bush tax cuts in 2001. He was a Senator who helped preserve the Senate as the institution that was planned and handed down to us by the Framers of our Constitution, and all the great lawmakers who served in this Chamber before us. Senator C HAFEE was one of the seven Republicans who composed the so-called Gang of 14 that was ready to block the majority leader ’s use of the ‘‘ nuclear option ’’ that would have destroyed the U.S. Senate as a unique and sacred institution by curtailing the ability of the minority to filibuster. I, of course, will always remember, admire, and appreciate Senator CHAFEE as the only Senate Republican to vote against the Iraqi war resolution. He was one of the immortal 23 Members of this Chamber who stood against popular opinion, stood up to the President of the United States, and threw himself against the forces of war in voting against the resolution to launch an unprecedented military assault on Iraq. If only there had been more Senators like him, we would not find ourselves in a bloody quagmire in Iraq. In voting against the war resolution, Senator C HAFEE was determined not to hand over to President Bush, or any Presi-dent, the power to declare war. That power, according to our Constitution, belongs to the Congress. With his firm belief in our constitutional doctrines of the separation of powers and checks and balances, Senator C HAFEE opposed many of the worst provisions of President Bush ’s efforts to create an all powerful Department of Homeland Security. He opposed, for example, the administration ’s plan to reduce the civil service protections and dissolve the collective bargaining rights of Federal employees in the newly created agency. Although he will soon be leaving Congress, there is abright side. Senator C HAFEE will now have more time to spend with his wife Stephanie and their three children and to ride his horse Trapper. I wish all of them happiness and success in their future endeavors, and many happy hours in the saddle. . . .          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 10 ] Mr. FEINGOLD. . . . Mr. President, today I wish to thank LINCOLN CHAFEE for his 7 years of service in the Senate and to recognize the many contributions he has made during his time in this body. Senator C HAFEE is a soft-spoken man, but he has not been afraid to take courageous stands, even when that meant standing alone in his own party. From the mo-ment he arrived in the Senate, it was clear that Senator C HAFEE would not only honor his father ’s outstanding legacy but that he would become a respected leader in his own right. Working with him on so many issues over the last several years, I have come to know Senator C HAFEE well and to ap-preciate just how dedicated he is to serving the people of Rhode Island and the people of this great Nation. I don ’t know anyone in this body more committed to fiscal responsibility than LINCOLN CHAFEE . He is absolutely as tough as they come on that issue, and he was tireless about holding Congress ’s feet to the fire. On pay-as-you-go legisla-tion, on the congressional pay raise, and on so many issues, Senator C HAFEE demanded that Congress take fiscal respon-sibility seriously when it counted and not simply pay lip service to the issue when it is convenient. It has been a pleasure to work with him on this issue, and I am grateful for his efforts. Senator C HAFEE has been a strong supporter of campaign finance reform and of environmental protection and con-servation, and I appreciate his work on those critical issues. Before I close, I also want to recognize Senator C HAFEE ’svote against the war in Iraq, which is one of the most coura-geous votes I have seen cast during my time here in the Sen-ate. That was a hard vote for many Members of this body, but to be the only Member of his party to oppose the war must have been especially difficult. But, as always, Senator CHAFEE did what he thought was right, and we have seen just how right he was to vote against this war, which has been so harmful to our national security. With every vote he has cast and every position he has taken, Senator C HAFEE has conducted himself with the ut-most integrity and earned his colleagues ’ utmost respect. While he and I certainly haven ’t agreed on every issue, I al-ways appreciate his thoughtful approach to our work here and his strong commitment to the highest ideals in public service. I know that the work he has done here has made a lasting mark on our Nation for many years to come. I will          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 11 ] miss serving with him in the Senate, and I wish him all the best. . . . THURSDAY , December 7, 2006 

Mr. WARNER. Mr. President, I have had the privilege of being here for the 28th year beginning shortly. I calculated not long ago that I have served with 261 individuals. I am not about to try and review all of the many magnificent friendships I am privileged to have through these years. In-deed, if one looks at the rewards, of which there are many serving in this historic institution, the Senate, it is the per-sonal bonds, the friendships that we so firmly cement and that will last a lifetime as a consequence of our duties of serving the United States of America and in our respective States. We are called ‘‘ United States ’’ Senators. I often believe it is the first obligation, our Nation, the Republic for which it stands. . . . I would also like to pay tribute to nine other U.S. Senators who will retire from the Senate in the coming days. . . . Now, I would like to take a few moments to salute our ma-jority leader, Senator Frist, as well as Senators CHAFEE ,Burns, Santorum, DeWine, Jeffords, Talent, and Dayton. Each and every one of these U.S. Senators has served his State and his country with great distinction. Without a doubt, I could speak at-length in honor of each of these outstanding individuals. In light of time constraints, however, and the fact that so many of my colleagues wish to similarly pay tribute, I shall endeavor to keep my remarks brief. . . . Now, I will speak a few words about our colleague L IN -COLN CHAFEE . I have known the Chafee family for many years, and count the late John Chafee and his wife Virginia as my dearest friends. The year was 1969, this country was engulfed in a war in Vietnam, and I was privileged to be asked to serve as Under Secretary of the Navy. I was told that the Secretary of the Navy, who would be my boss one step up, would be a man named John Chafee, former Governor of the State of Rhode Island. I will never forget. We both served in the Marines, at dif-ferent times. He was a captain and I was a captain in the Marine Corps Reserve, and we met on a cold day in Feb-         

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 12 ] ruary outside the Pentagon, shook hands, and walked up-stairs. And there we were greeted by the Commandant of the Marine Corps and the Chief of Naval Operations. Chafee turned to me, and he said: You know, the Navy and the Marine Corps constitute almost a million uniformed men and women. It was that large in the height of the war in Vietnam. And he said: Here we are, a couple of lowly cap-tains, and now it is our responsibility. Let ’s square our jaws and stick out our chins, get this job done, and provide the leadership that these men and women of the Armed Forces so richly deserve. John Chafee was an absolute teacher and mentor of mine in every way during those years we worked together in the Department of Defense. He would take his trip to Vietnam. I would stay back and man the store. He would return, and I would take my trip. We had problems throughout the world. It was in the middle of the cold war with the Soviet Union. John Chafee was a magnificent man. He had been Governor of the State of Rhode Island three times, and he was a magnificent leader of the men and women of the Armed Forces. He decided that he was going to move on and consider running for the Senate, and resigned, and I succeeded him then as Secretary. But I never lost the feeling that he was right there, should I need him to help carry out my duties. And then, as luck and good fortune would have it, he came to the Senate, and not too many years thereafter I came to the Senate and once again joined him. I will never forget my first day in the Senate he came up to me and said: Do you remember I was Secretary and you were Under Secretary? I said: Yes, sir. He said: Well, that ’sthe way it ’s going to be here for a while. You listen to what I say and what I do, and I will give you some advice as we go along. That was the kind of man he was. I never heard him speak a harsh word about any other colleague. But he achieved his special niche in this institution through his ab-solute love for the environment as well as the men and women of the Armed Forces. Those were the two things on which he worked. And as luck would have it, his son came to join us, and he has so many of those magnificent at-tributes of his father and his mother. An absolutely magnifi-cent human being, his mother, and all his family, as a mat-ter of fact.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 13 ] It is my honor to share with my colleagues some of the im-portant accomplishments of L INCOLN CHAFEE during his 7 years as a Member of this body, and to personally express my appreciation for his service to our country. Senator L INC CHAFEE came to the Senate from local gov-ernment serving on the city council and later as mayor of Warwick. I believe it is this experience of leading a major city that solidified his commitment to fiscal responsibility. In his service in the Senate he was steadfast in his belief to re-store controls on the Federal budget and to promote respon-sible Government spending. We were privileged to serve together on the Committee on Environment and Public Works where he quickly became a skilled legislator. He successfully authored legislation to stimulate the redevelopment of brownfield areas previously contaminated by hazardous waste, that plague our urban areas. This law is already producing results in improving neighborhoods and bringing new industries back to urban areas. Senator C HAFEE was also a leading voice in fostering bi-partisanship in the Senate, and was an active member of our informal group of Senators known as the Gang of 14. We were a group of seven Republicans and seven Democrats, but we had no formal standing in the Senate. We would meet regularly to share our thoughts on judicial nominees pending on the Senate calendar to ensure that the Senate could con-tinue its responsibilities under article II, section 2, of the U.S. Constitution —the advice and consent clause. Senator C HAFEE was an integral part of this effort which allowed candid and respectful discussions of the qualifications of in-dividuals to serve in the Federal judiciary and prevented the continued use of party-led filibusters on judicial nominees except in extraordinary circumstances. LINC CHAFEE will be remembered in this institution for his independence. We all fight to try to maintain that independ-ence. We are respectful of our party leadership. We are re-spectful of our party affiliations. We know the demands of our State. But there are times when we feel we must act and make decisions that reflect our own innermost feelings of independence, and L INCOLN CHAFEE will be remembered for that. As Senator C HAFEE prepares to depart the Senate, I thank him for his meaningful contributions to the Senate, and wish him, his wife Stephanie, and his children, Louisa, Caleb and Thea, ‘‘ fair winds and following seas. ’’ . . .          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 14 ] In conclusion, over the years I have served with each of these 10 Senators, each has not only been a trusted col-league, each has also been my friend. I will miss serving with each of them in the Senate but know that each will con-tinue in public service in some capacity. I wish each and every one of them well in the years ahead. Mr. President, I see a number of colleagues here anxious to speak, and I have taken generously of the time the Pre-siding Officer has allowed me to speak. I yield the floor. Mr. CONRAD. . . . Mr. President, I would like to pay trib-ute to Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE . Senator C HAFEE has served the people of Rhode Island well. He has distinguished him-self in a number of important policy areas, including strengthening environmental protections and strengthening our national security. I most appreciated his efforts to promote fiscal responsi-bility. Senator C HAFEE has been steadfastly committed to sound government budget policies. While he supported eas-ing tax burdens for families by ending the marriage tax pen-alty and increasing the child tax credit, he had the courage to oppose irresponsible, budget-busting measures that, while politically popular, have resulted in huge fiscal deficits and an unsustainable increase in the Federal debt. Senator C HAFEE has also been an unwavering supporter of reinstating pay-as-you-go constraints on the Federal budget first implemented by President Bush ’s father in 1990. Under those rules, any tax cut or increase in Government spending must be accompanied by an equal spending cut or revenue increase. I also appreciated Senator C HAFEE ’s commitment to bipar-tisanship. He understands that reaching across the aisle and working together more often than not results in better deci-sions and better, longer lasting policy solutions. His efforts were not always appreciated by those in charge over the last couple of years. But those of us who worked closely with him know his commitment is genuine and his word is good. I was pleased to welcome Senator C HAFEE to the Senate in 1999 when he was appointed to fill the seat of his late fa-ther. I had the pleasure of working often with John Chafee. We were both members of the Senate Finance Committee. I was not surprised to find that the son, like his father, was tough but fair-minded and a man of strong principle. Senator C HAFEE brought a unique set of skills to the Sen-ate. A native Rhode Islander, he earned a B.A. in classics          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 15 ] from Brown University and was captain of the wrestling team. Instead of following immediately in his father ’s foot-steps, however, he initially worked as a blacksmith at har-ness racetracks in the United States and Canada and later in manufacturing management. These experiences gave him a great deal of respect for working people and helped him build a strong sense of independence and plain old common sense. It is also clear that Senator C HAFEE never forgets his other important job. As a father of three school-aged children, he often reminds his colleagues to consider the impact of our de-cisions on the next generation. Whether he is working to pre-serve fragile wetlands in his beloved home State, helping strengthen our homeland security, or preventing massive debts from accruing, he talks often about our responsibility to our children. Senator C HAFEE has served the State of Rhode Island with integrity and compassion. He will be missed. . . . Mrs. CLINTON. . . . Finally, I also wish the very best to my Republican colleagues who will leave the Senate at the conclusion of this Congress. The Senate, at its best, is a body that promotes bipartisanship, deliberation, and cooperation, and the dedication to shared values. It has been a privilege to work with my departing colleagues on the other side of the aisle. F RIDAY , December 8, 2006 

Ms. LANDRIEU. Mr. President, I have a few more min-utes before the 10:30 vote, and I take this time to say a few words about some of my colleagues who are retiring. We had a good bit of time yesterday devoted to their tremendous con-tributions, and as each of us, the 100 of us, do know each other pretty well, I have come to the floor to say a few things about several of the colleagues I have had the distinct pleas-ure of working with very closely. . . . Mr. President, Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE of Rhode Island has been an independent voice for his State and the issues he believes in, regardless of partisan consideration. He will be missed by all of us. . . . To all of our retiring Members, I say thank you. Thank you for your efforts on behalf of my State when you were needed and thank you for your service to America.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 16 ] Mr. KYL. Mr. President, I also will say a word about a couple of my colleagues who are leaving, and I will be brief. . . . Finally, L INCOLN CHAFEE . Although I mentioned Repub-licans in this list, I certainly don ’t want to forget, of course, Paul Sarbanes, who will be leaving at the end of this year, and others in the House of Representatives with whom I served as well. I know we all move on at some time and that none of us is irreplaceable. But by the same token, these col-leagues of ours who will be leaving will be missed and they will be remembered for their great service to the Senate, to their States, and to the United States of America. I yield the floor. Mr. D EWINE. . . . I appreciate all the help Finance Com-mittee Chairman Chuck Grassley has given me —a dear friend —especially when it came to passing my bills to im-prove the foster care and adoption system. I have worked with many Members of the Senate on this very important issue, foster care and adoption, including Senators Jay Rockefeller, Mary Landrieu, Larry Craig, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, John Chafee, Jesse Helms, Bill Roth, Jim Jef-fords, Dan Coats. They all shared a passion for foster care children. They all shared a passion for the adoption issue. . . . Last year, I was extremely proud to be one of 14 bipar-tisan Members of this great body who decided to work to-gether to break what had become a gridlock in the Senate over judicial nominations. In the grand tradition of the Sen-ate, individuals from both political parties came together that time to solve a problem which threatened not only the judicial nomination process but was threatening to shut the Senate down completely. I want to thank my friends with whom I was proud to stand in that effort: John McCain, John Warner, Lindsey Graham, Olympia Snowe, Susan Col-lins, L INCOLN CHAFEE , Joe Lieberman, Senator Byrd, Ben Nelson, Mary Landrieu, Daniel Inouye, Mark Pryor, and Ken Salazar. They got it done. . . . Mr. President, I want to wish the best to all of my fellow Senators who were defeated this fall or who are retiring this year —Senators Frist, Santorum, Talent, Burns, Allen, CHAFEE , Dayton, and Jeffords. They are all good people and all good friends. I wish them well. . . . Ms. MIKULSKI. Mr. President, I want to say something about my departing colleagues on the other side of the aisle.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 17 ] To my colleague from Rhode Island, I thank the Senator. In all actions it has been a tone of civility. We have always sought common ground. I express my gratitude for the Sen-ator ’s service to Rhode Island. . . . A lot is said about changing the tone, but when we hit the right tone we also hit some pretty high notes. I thank my colleagues and wish them well and Godspeed until we meet again. Mr. DODD. . . . Mr. President, today I pay tribute to my departing colleagues who have, for a time, lent their talents, their convictions, and their hard work to this distinguished body. I may have had my disagreements with them, but the end of a term is a time for seeing colleagues not simply as politicians, but as partners who have ‘‘ toiled, and wrought, and thought with me. ’’ Each, in his own way, was distinctive; and each, in his own way, will be sorely missed. . . . Next, I would like to send my best wishes to Senator L IN -COLN CHAFEE . Senator C HAFEE and I have a fair bit in com-mon: we are both lifelong New Englanders, and we both had Senators for fathers. After completing his undergraduate studies at Brown University, and while many of his col-leagues were busy studying law or political science, L INCOLN C HAFEE studied horseshoeing. I imagine he is the only mod-ern Senator to have worked as a professional farrier for 7 years. And while Senator C HAFEE eventually took up the family business and went into politics, he has always re-tained the humility and good humor that so often come to those who spend time working with their hands. Senator C HAFEE was a popular mayor of Warwick, RI, and on the death of his father, Senator John Chafee, was ap-pointed to fill out the remainder of the term. He was elected in his own right in 2000, and has served a total of 7 years in the upper House, cementing a reputation as an inde-pendent thinker and one of his State ’s most popular politi-cians. I especially enjoyed serving alongside Senator C HAFEE on the Foreign Relations Committee. He was a welcome travel partner. On trips to Latin America, it was always reassuring to have a familiar New England accent at my side. On a more serious note, I have come to respect Senator C HAFEE ’scourage and principle, especially on the matter of John Bolton ’s nomination as U.N. Ambassador. Senator C HAFEE spoke out in favor of competent diplomatic representation at the United Nations. Because of his efforts, we are closer to          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 18 ] the day when our representative at the world body will work to win respect from the world, not alienation. On that issue and many others, Senator CHAFEE was never afraid to put his beliefs ahead of party pressure. He has voted to support stem cell research and a responsible exit strategy in Iraq; and his strong environmental record, including opposition to oil drilling in the Alaska National Wildlife Reserve, has earned him the endorsement of promi-nent conservationist groups. We will miss his independent mind and his true Yankee spirit. I wish all the best to Senator C HAFEE and his wife, Stephanie. . . . Mr. HATCH. . . . Mr. President, I am grateful for the op-portunity to take a few moments to recognize the service and devotion to the U.S. Senate by my colleague and friend, Sen-ator L INCOLN CHAFEE of Rhode Island. A true Rhode Islander, L INCOLN CHAFEE was born in Prov-idence, attended a Warwick public school, and earned a de-gree from Brown University, where he captained the wres-tling team. As an avid horse enthusiast, he attended the horseshoeing school at Montana State University and worked as a blacksmith at harness racetracks in the United States and Canada, but only a handful of years slipped by before he returned to his home in Rhode Island. LINCOLN then entered politics in 1985 as a delegate to the Rhode Island Constitutional Convention. A year later he was elected to the first of two successive terms on the Warwick City Council. In November 1992, L INCOLN became the first Republican elected mayor of Warwick in 32 years —and, with his positive vision, he so won over the hearts and minds of voters that he was reelected for another three terms in a re-liably Democratic city. He held the mayoral post until ap-pointed by Governor L INCOLN Almond in November 1999 to fill the unexpired Senate term of his late father, John Chafee. In November 2000, he was overwhelmingly elected to the U.S. Senate. As I, L INCOLN has a great interest in policy that affects the health of our Nation ’s people, and I am proud to have had the honor of working with him on a number of initia-tives that made Americans healthier. I admire L INCOLN for taking a stand on stem cell research. He has supported important legislation and joined a bipar-tisan group of colleagues in calling on President Bush to ex-pand the Federal policy on embryonic stem cell research. Senator C HAFEE and I share similar views on this issue: he          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 19 ] is opposed to any cloning with the intention of creating a human life but strongly supports legislation that would allow stem cell researchers to use excess embryos which were cre-ated for in vitro fertilization purposes and would otherwise be discarded. I respect and appreciate his courage to stand up for his convictions in the face of such a controversial issue. LINCOLN has been a champion for breast cancer research since his arrival in the Senate in 1999. I am pleased to be an original cosponsor of his Breast Cancer and Environ-mental Research Act, which would make Federal grants available for the development and operation of eight national centers that would conduct research on how environmental factors may contribute to the causes of breast cancer. In rec-ognition of his outstanding leadership in this arena, L INCOLN has been honored by the National Breast Cancer Coalition and also presented with the Avon Foundation Pink Ribbon Crusader Award. Senator C HAFEE has been a leader in the fight to reauthor-ize and maintain adequate funding for the State Children ’sHealth Insurance Program —also called CHIP. I worked very closely with his father to write that law in 1997. I recognize that L INCOLN is also dedicated to the goal of this program, which is to provide health insurance to low-income, unin-sured children, and I thank him for his diligent efforts. We have worked tirelessly to ensure that funding continues to make the program available for these children. Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE is a great man, a loyal Rhode Is-lander, and a great American. I thank and commend him for all his selfless work. His contributions have made his State and the whole country significantly better than before his ar-rival in Washington. We will all miss his presence here in the U.S. Senate, but I doubt we have seen the last of L IN -COLN CHAFEE in the way of public service. I wish him and his family health, happiness, and the best of luck in all fu-ture endeavors. . . . Mr. LEVIN. . . . Mr. President, as this session of Congress comes to a close, I want to take a moment to pay tribute to my friend L INCOLN CHAFEE .Following in the footsteps of his late father, John, Senator CHAFEE has been a voice of moderation and civility in the Senate. In a time of increasing partisanship, Senator CHAFEE has been a bridge between the parties and to an ear-lier era of less divisive politics. He votes his conviction and his conscience, not just a party line.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 20 ] Senator C HAFEE ’s legacy will be defined by his leadership on environmental protection and fiscal responsibility. On both, he has had a forward-looking approach, grounded in common sense, for which our grandchildren will be grateful. Senator C HAFEE has been a true champion for conserva-tion, fighting for clean air, clean water, and a healthier envi-ronment. He has been willing to stand up to the administra-tion when he believes it is wrong, including opposing the ad-ministration ’s energy bill, its weak regulations on mercury, and drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. For the past several years, Senator C HAFEE has led an effort with Senator Jeffords and me to fully fund the EPA Brownfields Program, which would accelerate the cleanup and redevelop-ment of brownfield sites, protecting human health, and cre-ating jobs. Senator CHAFEE is a member of the Senate ’sSmart Growth Task Force, which promotes growth and de-velopment that protects the environment and preserves crit-ical habitats. LINCOLN CHAFEE has also been a strong voice for fiscal dis-cipline. He has repeatedly opposed reckless tax cuts and sup-ported pay-as-you-go budget rules to bring the budget back into balance. The bipartisan Concord Coalition has recog-nized him for his fiscal responsibility. L INCOLN CHAFEE has also been an important voice on for-eign affairs. He took a courageous stand in 2002 as the lone Republican to vote against the Iraq war authorization, and he has served well as the chairman of the Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Subcommittee of the Foreign Relations Committee. I want to close by noting that L INCOLN CHAFEE remains widely respected and admired in Rhode Island, as well as among his colleagues on both sides of the aisle in the Senate. His father would have been very proud of how well L INCOLN C HAFEE has served the people of Rhode Island. I thank him for his service to our country and wish him and his wife Stephanie all the best. . . . Ms. SNOWE. . . . Mr. President, I rise today to pay tribute to my great friend, Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE , a public serv-ant who exemplifies the idea that superior governance de-pends on people of good will working for the common good —

together. He epitomizes the New England pragmatism in government that sees not weakness but strength in reaching across the aisle to build consensus and make the system work for those it was formed to serve.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 21 ] When I consider Senator C HAFEE ’s tenure, I cannot help but think how he has so successfully forged his own pathway and legacy of exceptional service in the U.S. Senate, while honoring the formidable contributions of his extraordinary father, John Chafee. Senator CHAFEE has brought level-headed leadership on myriad issues critical to our progress as a people, always with vigilant and careful attention to his beloved Ocean State of Rhode Island. He has been a stalwart colleague and friend in our mutual cause to revitalize and advance the political center, in our concerted effort to answer the challenges facing our Nation by producing not rancor but results, not acrimony but accord. His loss not only diminishes the Senate but is also a loss for the country because we need more voices seeking to craft compromise and consensus to forge solutions, not fewer. LINC CHAFEE was not only a political neighbor of mine in the center of the political spectrum —where most Americans consider themselves —but he has been a next-door neighbor in my hallway in the Russell Senate Building, a corridor also appropriately occupied by my good friend Senator Mike DeWine, who also epitomized the finest ideals of public serv-ice. So I will profoundly miss seeing them not only in the Senate but also simply walking down the hall outside my of-fice. They were a constant reminder of what is best and most noble about public office. LINC and I worked hand-in-glove on issues of fiscal re-straint and accountability by calling for and advocating the implementation of the pay-as-you-go approach to the Federal budget. And I believe it is instructive that he is rightly con-sidered a champion of the environment, even as he cham-pioned economic growth. But that is L INC —for him, issues that may seem mutually exclusive to those with intractable dogmas could coexist naturally in his vision of a world not so easily or appropriately cast in hues of black and white. In-deed, Senator C HAFEE ’s fight to strengthen air and water quality standards continues to resonate, a battle he has waged with innovation and resolve by combining business development with environmental advocacy. Unflagging in his dedication to the precepts of personal re-sponsibility and freedom, fiscal accountability, and serving the public interest, L INCOLN CHAFEE has, with honor and distinction, brought intelligence, vigor, and courage to the U.S. Senate from debates about foreign policy and homeland security to marshaling health care efforts to confront breast cancer and long-term care.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 22 ] Whether serving as captain of his university wrestling team, working as a blacksmith at harness race tracks, or serving the highest ideals of public service, L INCOLN CHAFEE has demonstrated an independence, resiliency, and strength of purpose that has made him a credit to this institution and an example for his country. I wish Senator C HAFEE , his wife Stephanie, and their chil-dren all the best for the future. . . . Mr. BUNNING. Mr. President, I would like to pay tribute to the Republican Members of the Senate who will not be re-turning in the 110th Congress. Senators George Allen; Conrad Burns; LINCOLN CHAFEE ; Mike DeWine; Dr. Bill Frist; Rick Santorum; and Jim Talent have served their con-stituents with honor and distinction during their tenure here in the U.S. Senate. All care very deeply for this great Nation and I hope they will have continued success in their future endeavors. . . . Majority leader Bill Frist has run the Senate through dif-ficult and trying times and he has done it well. Senator Mike DeWine, my neighbor to the north, has represented the Buckeye State with great distinction and has committed over 30 years of his life to public service. Senator George Allen represented the Commonwealth of Virginia in the U.S. Sen-ate for 6 years, and he worked closely with me to make America safer by helping usher through important legisla-tion to arm cargo pilots. Senator Jim Talent has had a great career in Congress and wrote the blueprint to the welfare re-form bill of 1996. And Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE has contin-ued the proud legacy set forth by his father and my friend, Senator John Chafee. Mr. President, I would like to again commend all of our de-parting Republican Senators. I am proud of what they ac-complished here in the U.S. Senate. They will all be missed, and I wish all of them the very best. Mrs. HUTCHISON. . . . Mr. President, it is no coincidence that Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE ’s home State has an 11-foot-tall statue called the Independent Man standing atop the State House in Providence, RI. In fact, Senator C HAFEE has referred to this statue as his inspiration, as it represents Rhode Island ’s founding principles of political and religious freedom. Senator C HAFEE has done an admirable job following in the footsteps of his father, Senator John Chafee.          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 23 ] During his time in the Senate, Senator C HAFEE has been committed to environmental issues as a champion for im-proved air and water quality. Senator C HAFEE has remained steadfast in his beliefs and a powerful voice for Rhode Island. . . . UNANIMOUS CONSENT AGREEMENT —TRIBUTES TO RETIRING SENATORS Mr. FRIST. I ask unanimous consent that the tributes to retiring Senators be printed as a Senate document and that Senators be permitted to submit tributes until December 27, 2006. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so or-dered. WEDNESDAY , December 27, 2006 

Mr. STEVENS. . . . Mr. President, I have known Senator LINCOLN CHAFEE and his family for a long time. I met his father, our former colleague, Senator John Chafee, while standing in line to register for Harvard Law School in 1947. L INCOLN ’s uncle, Zachariah Chafee, was one of my law pro-fessors at Harvard. John and I served together in the Senate for more than 20 years. When John passed away in 1999, L INCOLN chose to con-tinue his family ’s tradition of excellence in public service. Senator C HAFEE and I have not always agreed on the issues, but I have always respected the courage of his convictions and his firm commitment to his ideals. Senator C HAFEE , it ’s been my good fortune to serve along-side you and your father for nearly 30 years. It ’s hard to imagine this Chamber without a member of your family. We will miss your spirit and dedication. . . . Ms. COLLINS. Mr. President, L INCOLN CHAFEE came to the Senate in 1999 under the most difficult of circumstances. He had just lost his beloved father, and was being asked to fill the shoes of one of the most noble and principled Mem-bers ever to serve in this Chamber. He rose to that chal-lenge, and I have been honored to work alongside him. Like the illustrious Senator John Chafee, Senator L INCOLN C HAFEE came from a political tradition I am proud to share —that of the New England moderate. This tradition stands for a strong defense of freedom and for fiscal respon-         

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 24 ] sibility, for government that is unobtrusive in people ’s lives when it can be, yet compassionate and involved when it must be. LINCOLN CHAFEE was a quiet voice of moderation, but spoke with a strong voice, a voice of conviction and integrity, on such issues of critical importance to our Nation as envi-ronmental protection and energy independence. When, in spring 2005, the very fabric of the Senate was threatened by a bitter impasse over the issue of judicial filibusters, I was proud to join Senator C HAFEE in the so-called Gang of 14 that forged a productive, bipartisan solution. I had the opportunity to work closely with L INC in the 109th Congress when he joined the Homeland Security Com-mittee. The committee brought about great progress during that Congress with successful legislation on port security, chemical security, and rebuilding our Nation ’s emergency management structure after the catastrophic Government re-sponse to Hurricane Katrina. Linc ’s steady, thoughtful, and informed approach to the issues greatly aided these endeav-ors. I was especially impressed by Linc ’s understanding that true homeland security begins at home. As the 2006 hurri-cane season approached, and as we were still struggling to overcome the failures of Government in the 2005 season, he called for and organized a homeland security field hearing in Rhode Island so his colleagues could better appreciate the daunting challenges faced by our first responders in coastal States and communities. That hands-on approach, devoid of pretense and directed toward results, exemplifies L INCOLN C HAFEE ’s approach to government. I know that the father would be proud of the son. And I know that all Americans join me in thanking LINCOLN CHAFEE for 7 years of outstanding service, and in wishing him the very best in the years to come. . . . MONDAY , January 8, 2007 

Mrs. DOLE. Mr. President, it is an honor indeed to pay tribute to a number of fine individuals who I am fortunate to call not just my colleagues, but also dear friends: Senators Bill Frist, George Allen, Conrad Burns, L INCOLN CHAFEE ,Mike DeWine, Rick Santorum and Jim Talent. . . .          

> VerDate jan 13 2004 13:52 Aug 29, 2007 Jkt 033203 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 6688 Sfmt 6688 C:\DOCS\BYEBYE\BYEBYE06\33203.TXT CRS1 PsN: SKAYNE (Trim Line) (Trim Line)

[ 25 ] Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE also will be greatly missed in this Chamber. L INC served the people of Rhode Island with the utmost honor, integrity and compassion. I have great respect for L INC CHAFEE for his commitment to the principles of personal freedom, individual responsi-bility and fiscal discipline. Well-known for his reputation as a fierce deficit hawk, he has been a vocal advocate for re-sponsible Government spending, and a strong supporter of abolishing the marriage tax penalty and increasing the child tax credit. L INC also took a very active interest in promoting the health care of women and children. L INCOLN CHAFEE also has been tirelessly dedicated to im-proving his home State. As a member of the Senate Com-mittee on Environment and Public Works, he secured more than $1 billion in Federal funding for Rhode Island ’s infra-structure, including the Warwick Station project and the de-velopment of the East Providence shoreline. And as chair-man of the Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife and Water, he worked diligently to protect air and water quality in his State. L INC was a principled, independent Member, adamant about doing what he believed was right for the families he represented. Throughout his Senate career, he demonstrated a willingness to listen to all sides of an issue and work with members of both political parties. He is a man who speaks his mind, votes his conscience, and treats others with the dignity and respect they deserve. L INC is a refreshing politician, a diligent public servant, and a devoted family man to his wife Stephanie and their three children. It goes without saying that my colleagues in the Senate —and the people of Rhode Island —will greatly miss Senator L INCOLN CHAFEE . . . . As these men —Bill Frist, George Allen, Conrad Burns, L INCOLN CHAFEE , Mike DeWine, Rick Santorum and Jim Talent —conclude their service in the U.S. Senate, let me say that I am so proud to have worked with individuals of such character, strength, and intellect. Our Nation is grateful for their many contributions. And as they each will undoubtedly continue to contribute to our country ’s greatness, their lead-ership and vision will be missed here in the U.S. Senate.
