Title: How do you get rid of under-eye bags for good?

URL Source: https://docteur-bernard-hayot.com/en/how-do-you-get-rid-of-under-eye-bags-for-good/

Published Time: 2020-09-11T08:53:08

Markdown Content:
What characterizes an under-eye bag?
------------------------------------

Under-eye bags are characterized by swelling of the lower eyelid. There are two types of bags: bags caused by swelling due to lymphatic edema (malar bags) and bags caused by fat accumulation. Surgical treatment is the only effective and definitive option for getting rid of them.

What causes under-eye bags?
---------------------------

Puffiness can be ephemeral, appearing on waking in the morning due to an accumulation of lymph in the lower eyelid. This causes swelling, which generally subsides in the first few hours of the day. They can sometimes last longer in the presence of circulation problems.

They can also become permanent as a result of skin aging. Intra-orbital fat protects the eye from the bone contour. With age and the loss of tissue elasticity, this fat can become externalized and move under the muscle of the lower eyelid. As a result, the eyes appear less defined, the skin sags and loses its firmness, forming bags under the eyes.

Puffiness can also be caused by external factors, such as allergies, stings or wounds, in which case it is temporary.

Bags are not dark circles! Dark circles are caused by a problem with blood circulation or skin thinning, which is responsible for the change in skin color under the eyes.

Poor lifestyle habits (alcohol, smoking, lack of sleep…) can encourage the development of pockets and their long-term establishment. They tend to become progressively more pronounced with age.

Surgical treatment of under-eye bags
------------------------------------

There are several treatments for under-eye bags. However, surgery is a particularly effective option. Surgical treatment varies according to the type of bags.

For fatty pockets, transconjunctival surgery is recommended. This allows total removal of fat pockets through the conjunctiva without removing any skin, so as not to transform the look. Healing results in a much harder septum and scar membrane, completely preventing recurrence and the emergence of new pockets of fat.

Malar pockets are more difficult to treat, as they are not fat pockets but lymphatic edema. They can be reduced, but not completely removed. The recommended method is the sub-palpebral lift, which tightens the orbicularis muscle of the lower eyelid, combined with a micro-lipostructure of the dark circles.

Other surgical and medical procedures to harmonize the eyes
-----------------------------------------------------------

Other surgical techniques and aesthetic medicine are also available to rejuvenate the eyes in a harmonious way:

*   Botox injections: to smooth wrinkles on the forehead and around the eyes;
*   Hyaluronic acid injections: to restore volume to the upper third of the face;
*   fractional laser: for its tensing effect on fine lines and wrinkles;
*   tensor threads: to redefine the oval of the face and lift sagging eyebrows.
